 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2022 / Ashadha, 1944 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
117 
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
THE MEDIATION BILL, 2021 
 
VOLUME II 
 
MEMORANDA SUBMITTED BY INDIVIDUALS/EXPERTS/INSTITUTIONS 
 
(Presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 13th July, 2022) 
(Forwarded to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 13th July, 2022) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21st July, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21st July, 2022) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-MAIL: rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in  
WEBSITE: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
 

LIST OF INSTITUTIONS AND INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE SUBMITTED 
WRITTEN COMMENTS ON THE MEDIATION BILL, 2021 
 
Sr. 
No. 
Topic Pages 
I. REPRESENTATIVES OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY  
 1. PHD Chamber of Commerce & Industry 1 
 2. Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM) 16 
 3. Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) 24 
 4. Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry (FICCI) 42 
 5. The Federation of Telangana Chamber of Commerce and Industry 45 
 6. Centre for Mediation and Conciliation (CMC), Bombay Chamber of 
Commerce & Industry 
49 
II. ACADEMIC INSTITUTIONS  
 7. National Law University (NLU) Delhi 67 
 8. School of Law, UPES, Dehradun 76 
III. MEDIATION ORGANIZATIONS/ INSTITUTIONS/ OTHER 
RESEARCH INSTITUTIONS 
 
 9. Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy, Delhi 84 
 10.  A Society for Alternative Dispute Resolution Mediators, Arbitrators, 
&Advocates (AMIKA), Hyderabad.  
96 
 11.  Asia Pacific Centre for Arbitration and   Mediation (APCAM), New 
Delhi. 
113 
 12.  IMC International ADR Centre, Mumbai. 142 
 13.  Bangalore International Mediation Arbitration & Conciliation Centre 
(BIMACC), Bengaluru. 
147 
 14.  The Institute of Company Secretaries of India, New Delhi. 160 
 15.  CAMP Arbitration and Mediation Practice Pvt. Ltd. 172 
 16.  PRS Legislative Research, New Delhi. 178 
 17.  AARNA LAW, Bengaluru. 194 
 18.  SAMVAD Partners, Bengaluru.  200 
 19.  DAKSH, Bengaluru 210 
IV. MEDIATION EXPERTS  
 20.  Shri J.P. Sengh, Sr. Advocate & Mediation Expert 216 

 21.  Dr. Aman Hingorani, Advocate & Mediation Expert 219 
 22.  Justice (Retd.) M.L. Mehta 230 
 23.  Dr. Renu Raj, International Mediation Expert 298 
 24.  Shri Sriram Panchu, Sr. Advocate and Mediation Expert 307 
 25.  Ms. Chitra Narayan, Mediation Expert 379 
 26.  Shri A. J. Jawad, Mediation Expert 406 
 27.  Ms. Geeta Luthra, Sr. Advocate 410 
V. CONCERNED CITIZEN  
 28.  Adv. P. G.Suresh, Mediator and Trainer, Advocate, High Court of 
Kerala, "Amicus Associates", APM Buildings, Ernakulam North Railway 
Station Road, Ernakulam District, Cochin- 18, Kerala. 
421 
 29.  Dr. C Thilakanandan, former Principal, Government Law College, 
Kozhikode, Kerala. 
441 
 30.  Shri Sanjeev Ahuja, Mediator. Resolution Professional, Strategy 
Advisor, Team Missing Bridge. 
455 
 31.  Shri Yogesh Kumar Gupta, Advocate, BABA NIWAS, H.NO -30, Baram 
Baba Gali,(Old Lakhan Gali),Cinema Road, Hardoi, U.P-241001. 
459 
 32.  Ms. Mamta Binani and Shri G Sriram, Practicing Company Secretary, 
No.2, 25th Street, Thillai Ganga Nagar, Nanganallur, Chennai-600061. 
465 
 33.  Shri Subir Kumar, MCIArb, Founder, SDS Advocates, No.155, 
15thFloor,  Maker Chamber-III, Nariman Point, Mumbai-400021. 
   473 
 34.  Shri Vikram Singh, Mediator. Advocate. Golfer. Peacemaker, C 17 
Anand Niketan, Benito Juarez Marg, New Delhi -110021. 
475 
 35.  Ms. Vaishnavi Jayakumar, Co-founder, Disablity Rights Activist, "The 
Banyan". 
479 
VI. JUDGES OF HIGH COURTS  
 36. Hon'ble Chief Justice Dipankar Dutta, Bombay High Court 484 
 37. Hon’ble Justice D. Bharatha Chakravarthy, Madras High Court 504 
VII. BAR COUNCIL/ASSOCIATIONS  
 38. The Bar Council of India 518 
 39. The Bar Council of Tamil Nadu & Puducherry 528 
 40. Supreme Court Bar Association 533 
 41. Bombay Bar Association 536 
 42. Sikkim High Court Bar Association 539 

 43. Orissa High Court Bar Association  540 
 44. Tamil Nadu Advocates' Association 541 
 45. Tamil Nadu Senior Advocates Forum 574 
 46. Women Lawyers' Association, Tamil Nadu 578 
VIII. MEDIATION CENTRES ATTACHED WITH COURTS  
 47. Mediation and Conciliation Project Committee, Supreme Court of India 580 
 48. Delhi High Court Mediation and Conciliation Centre (SAMADHAAN) 589 
 49. Tamil Nadu Mediation and Conciliation Centre, Madras High Court 639 
 50. Kerala State Mediation and Conciliation Centre, High Court of Kerala 643 
 51. Arbitration and Conciliation Centre, Bengaluru, High Court of Karnataka 671 
IX. CLAUSE-WISE RESPONSE OF DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 
TO  THE COMMENTS RECEIVED FROM THE VARIOUS 
STAKEHOLDERS 
672 
 

 1 
PHD CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY 
 
The Mediation Bill 2021 
Bill No. XLIII of 2021 
 
I. SHORT NOTE BY MR. SUDHANSHU BATRA, SENIOR ADVOCATE & 
MEDIATOR 
 
  
Point 1. 
 
Section 2 (1) and Section 3 (f) read as under : 
 
2. (1) Subject to sub -section (2), this Act shall apply where mediation is conducted in  
India, and— 
(i) all or both parties habitually reside in or are incorporated in or have their place 
of business in India; or 
(ii) the mediation agreement provides that any dispute shall be resolved in  accordance 
with the provisions of this Act; or 
(iii) there is an international mediation. 
 
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
 
(f) "international mediation" means mediation undertaken under this Act and relates to 
a commercial dispute arising out of a legal relationship, contractual or  otherwise, 
under any law for the time being in force in India, and where at least one of  the 
parties, is— 
(i) an individual who is a national of, or habitually resides in, any country  other than 
India; or 
(ii) a body corporate including a Limited Liability Partnership of any nature,  with its 
place of business outside India; or 
(iii) an association or body of individuals whose place of business is outside India; or 
(iv) the Government of a foreign country; 
 
Concern : These provisions exclude s the applicability of the Bill to  non-commercial 
international mediation. Disputes, where any one of the party resides in any country 
other than India and is of non -commercial nature cannot be mediated in view of either 
section 2 or section 3 of the Bill.  
 
The Bill should be consistent with the requirements of Singapore Convention in 
respect of commercial international mediation  since India is a signatory to the said 
convention.  
 
Point 2  
 
Section 7 (1) reads as under : 
1

 2 
 
7. (1) A mediation under this Act shall not be conducted for resolution of any dispute  
or matter contained in the indicative list under the First Schedule: 
 
Provided that nothing contained herein shall prevent any court, if deemed appropriate, 
from referring any dispute to mediation relating to compoundable offences or 
matrimonial offences connected with or arising out of civil proceedings between the 
parties: 
 
Provided further that the outcome of such mediation shall not be deemed to be a 
judgement or decree of court referred to in sub -section (2) of section 28, and shall be 
further considered by the court in accordance with the law for the time being in force. 
 
Concern : The indicative list excludes certain disputes which have otherwise been 
successfully resolved through the existing mechanism of Mediation.  
 
Besides the above concern, the following provision of section 7 needs to be suitably 
amended for the following reasons: 
 
The first proviso excludes non compoundable of fence such as Sect ion 498A IPC , 
which are otherwise quashed upon s ettlement between the parti es to the dispute, in 
exercise of the powers of the court under secti on. 482 Cr.P.C. or Article 226 of the 
Constitution of Indian.  
 
The second proviso renders the  outcome of mediation as unenforceable and is vague 
inasmuch as it simply leaves it to be considered by the court.  This will make the 
settlements which are legally tenable unenforceable, in certain cases. 
 
Point 3 
 
Section 23 (1) reads as under : 
 
23. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the mediator, mediation service 
provider, the parties and participants in the mediation shall keep confidential the 
following matters relating to the mediation proceedings, namely:— 
(i) acknowledgements, opinion s, suggestions, promises, proposals, apologies  and 
admissions made during the mediation; 
(ii) acceptance of, or willingness to, accept proposals made or exchanged in the 
mediation; 
(iii) documents prepared solely for the conduct of mediation or in relation thereto. 
 
Concern : Confidentiality of proceedings in relation to (i) to (iii) of the above section, 
have been made applicable. In fact it should be made applicable to anything that 
transpires between the partis during the mediation process, as confidential. For 
instance, by qualifying documents “prepared solely for the conduct of mediation or in 
relation thereto”, as confidential, but those already in the power and possession of the 
2

 3 
parties and disclosed in private session to the mediator  as not begin confidential, is 
likely to create ambiguity and /or debatable.   
 
Point 4 
 
Section 24 reads as under : 
 
24. (1) No mediator or participant in the mediation, including experts and advisers 
engaged for the purpose of the mediation and persons involved  in the administration 
of the mediation, shall at any time be permitted, or compelled to disclose to any court 
or tribunal, or  in any adjudicatory proceedings, by whatever description, any 
communication in mediation, or to state the contents or conditions of any document or 
nature or conduct of parties during  mediation including the content of negotiations or 
offers or counter offers with which they 
have become acquainted during the mediation: 
 
Provided that nothing in this section and section 23 shall protect from  disclosure, 
information sought or provided to prove or dispute a claim or complaint of  
professional misconduct of mediator or malpractice based on conduct occurring during 
the mediation. 
 
(2) There shall be no privilege or confidentiality that will attach to— 
(a) a threat or statement of a plan to commit an offence punishable under any law 
for the time being in force; 
(b) information relating to domestic violence or child abuse; and 
(c) statements made during a mediation showing a significant imminent threat to 
public health or safety. 
 
Concern : Although section 23 makes information as defined in the said provi sion as 
confidential but through section 24, the bill takes away the said aspect of 
confidentiality. Firstly, t he  proviso permits disclosure in the guise of “proving” or 
“disputing” the claim or complaint thereby takes away confidentiality altogether.  
 
Sub section (2) of the above provision, also makes the information relating to 
domestic violence or child abuse commonly expressed b y parties non confidential. 
This is likely to break the faith of the parties in the mediation process.  Further, the 
phrase “public health or safety” is vague and will lead to multiplicity of litigation. 
 
It would be in the interest of the mediation process to delete the proviso to sub section 
(1) and sub section(2) completely. 
 
Point 5 
 
Section 29 (2) runs as under : 
 
3

 4 
29 (2) A mediated settlement agreement may be challenged only on all or any of the  
following grounds, namely:— 
(i) fraud; 
(ii) corruption; 
(iii) impersonation; 
(iv) where the mediation was conducted in disputes or matters not fit for mediation  
under section 7. 
 
Concern : There is no need to provide for grounds to challenge a mediated settlement 
agreement. Fraud vitiates everything. In case, there is a settlement as a result of fraud, 
then by the operation of law such settlement  shall be unenforceable . Therefore, to 
make fraud a ground for challenging a settlement agreement is likely to increase 
litigation of mediated settlement rather than putting to an end the disputes between the 
parties. Thus in case of fraud, t he party can seek remedy under the general law. 
Further, fraud subsumes corruption and impersonation , the said provisions. The said 
grounds too become redundant . In case this provision is retained, it is likely to 
encourage parties to make allegations to invoke the said provision  
 
Point 6 
 
34. (1) The Council shall consist of the following members, namely:— 
(a) a person of ability, integrity and standing having adequate knowledge and  
professional experience or shown capacity in dealing with problems relating to law,  
alternate dispute resolution, public affairs or administration to be appointed by the  
Central Government—Chairperson; 
(b) a person having knowledge and experience in law related to mediation or  alternate 
dispute resolution mechanisms, to be appointed by the Central  Government—Full-
Time Member; 
(c) an eminent person having experience in research or teaching in the field of  
mediation and alternate dispute resolution laws, to be appointed by the Central 
Government—Full-Time Member; 
(d) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Leg al Affairs, Ministry 
of Law and Justice or his representative not below the rank of Joint  Secretary—
Member, ex officio; 
(e) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Expenditure,  Ministry 
of Finance or his representative not below the rank of Joint Secretary— 
Member, ex officio; 
(f) Chief Executive Officer—Member-Secretary, ex officio; and 
(g) one representative of a recognised body of commerce and industry, chosen  by the 
Central Government—Part-Time Member. 
 
Concern : Every member, except the Government officials, must be a trained 
mediator so as to be conversant with practical aspects of mediation. 
 
 
 
4

 5 
Point 7 
 
Section 44 (5) pertaining to community mediation reads as under : 
 
(5) The following persons may be included in the panel referred to in  sub-section 
(4)— 
(a) persons of standing and integrity who are respectable in the community; 
(b) any local person whose contribution to the society has been recognised; 
(c) representative of area or resident welfare associations; and 
(d) any other person deemed appropriate. 
 
Concern : Every member must be a trained mediator so as to be conversant with 
practical aspects of mediation. 
 
Point 8 
 
Section 45 (4) reads as under : 
 
(4) Any settlement agreement arrived at under this Chap ter shall be for the purpose of  
maintaining the peace, harmony and tranquility amongst the residents or families of 
any area  or locality but shall not be enforceable as a judgment or decree of a civil 
court. 
 
Concern : Since the settlement agreement in community mediation is not enforceable 
as a decree of the civil court, it has no sanctity in law and defeats the very purpose of 
community mediations. 
 
Point 9 
 
First Schedule reads as under : 
 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 7) 
DISPUTES OR MATTERS NOT FIT FOR MEDIATION 
 
1. Disputes which by virtue of any law for the time being in force may not be 
submitted for mediation. 
2. Disputes involving allegations of serious and specific fraud, fabrication of 
documents, forgery, impersonation, coercion. 
3. Disputes relating to claims against minors, deities; persons with intellectual  
disabilities, under paragraph 2 of the Schedule and person with disability having high 
support needs [as defined in clause (t) of section 2] of the Rights of Persons w ith 
Disabilities Act, 2016 (49 of 2016); persons with mental illness as defined in clause 
(s) of sub -section (1) of section 2 of the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 (10 of 2017); 
persons of unsound mind, in  relation to whom proceedings are to be conducted unde r 
5

 6 
Order XXXII of the Code of Civil  Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908); and suits for 
declaration of title against Government; declaration having effect of right in rem. 
4. Disputes involving prosecution for criminal offences. 
5. Settlement of matters which are prohibited being in conflict with public policy or is  
opposed to basic notions of morality or justice or under any law for the time being in 
force. 
6. Complaints or proceedings, initiated before any statutory authority or body in  
relation to registration, di scipline, misconduct of any practitioner, or other registered  
professional, such as legal practitioner, medical practitioner, dentist, architect, 
chartered accountant, or in relation to any other profession of whatever description, 
which is regulated under any law for the time being in force. 
7. Disputes which have the effect on rights of a third party who are not a party to the  
mediation proceedings. 
8. Any proceeding in relation to any subject-matter, falling within any enactment, over 
which the Tribunal constituted under the National Green Tribunals Act, 2010 (19 of 
2010) has jurisdiction. 
9. Any dispute relating to levy, collection, penalties or offences, in relation to any 
direct or indirect tax or refunds, enacted by any State legislature or Parliament. 
10. Any investigation, inquiry or proceeding, under the Competition Act, 2002  (12 of 
2003), including proceedings before the Director General, under that Act; proceedings  
before t he Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, under the Telecom Regulatory 
Authority of India Act, 1997 (24 of 1997) or Telecom Disputes Settlement and 
Appellate Tribunal established under section 14 of that Act. 
11. Proceedings before appropriate Commissions, and the Appellate Tribunal for 
Electricity, under the Electricity Act, 2003 (36 of 2003). 
12. Proceedings before the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board, and appeals  
therefrom before the Appellate Tribunal under the Petroleum and Natural Gas 
Regulatory Board Act, 2006 (19 of 2006). 
13. Proceedings before the Securities and Exchange Board of India, and the Securities  
Appellate Tribunal, under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 
of 1992). 
14. Land acquisition and determination of compensation under land acquisition laws,  
or any provision of law providing for land acquisition. 
15. Any other subject-matter of dispute which may be notified by the Central 
Government. 
 
Concern : As regards Item 2, mere allegation in a civil matter of serious and specific 
fraud, fabrication of documents, forgery, impersonation, coercion will make the matter 
unfit for mediation.  There are a number of cases, where the allegations are made 
which cannot be proved or are compounded by the courts in exercise of the inherent 
powers of the court to quash such proceedings. In case such matters can’t be mediated, 
settlements cannot be affected creating hindrances in settlements of the real disputes 
between the parties.  
 
As regards Item 3, the law permits litigation qua minors, disabled, mentally ill persons 
etc. through a guardian ad litem or next friend, and so all disputes relating to claims 
6

 7 
against them need not be made unfit for mediation.  The courts should be empowered 
to allow such settlements which are not adverse to the interest of the minors and / or 
disabled persons.  
 
As regards Item 4, no distinction has been made between compoundable and non -
compoundable offences. The courts have in a number of cases quashed even no n-
compoundable cases by exercising its inherent powers, Moreover, the proviso to 
Section 7 is contradictory or at least creates an ambiguity/inconsistency. 
 
As regards Item 6, many complaints or proceedings a gainst chartered accountants, 
architects, lawyers etc., stem from civil or commercial transactions. There is no reason 
to treat such complaints or proceedings as unfit for mediation. 
 
As regards Items 8 to 14, the discretion to set aside such proceedings, should be left 
with the court or tribunal and therefore such matters, in the facts and circumstances of 
the case,  should be permitted to be referred to mediation. 
 
Point 10 
 
Section 56 (1) and the Second Schedule read as under : 
 
56. (1) Subject to the enactments mentioned in the Second Schedule,  the provisions of 
this Act shall have overriding effect for conduct of mediation or conciliation 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, and any instrument having force of law. 
 
SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 56) 
 
1. The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947). 
2. The Brahmaputra Board Act, 1980 (46 of 1980). 
3. The Cine-Workers and Cinema Theatre Workers (Regulation of Employment) 
Act, 1981 (50 of 1981). 
4. The Family Courts Act, 1984 (66 of 1984). 
5. The Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987). 
6. The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizen Act, 2007 (56 of 
2007). 
7. The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and 
Redressal) Act, 2013 (14 of 2013). 
8. The Finance Act, 20l6 (28 of 2016). 
9. The Industrial Relations Code, 2020 (35 of 2020). 
 
Concern : Item 1, 4, 6 and 7 of the Second Schedule should be deleted. 
 
*** 
 
7

 8 
 
 
II. NOTE BY MRS. LALIT MOHINI BHAT, ADVOCATE AND 
MEDIATOR 
 
 
Mediation is a service being provided to the disputing parties. The disputing 
parties may or may not have gone to the court, essentially the parties will retain the 
right to solve the problems by mutual consent. Therefore, choice and consent are part 
of the Mediation process from the beginning to the end. 
 
There should not be undue focus on the technicalities of the process, rigid 
timelines, linking the location of Mediation with the Court Jurisdiction, etc. If one 
keeps in mind the process of Mediation, the policy of the Legislature should be to 
enable parties to fully realize the idea of an assisted settlement. Therefore, issues such 
as Jurisdiction, Registration, Mandatory Pre -Litigation, etc. as mentioned in the Bill 
will only limit the process of Mediation and render it counterproductive. The draft 
Mediation Bill in my opinion should focus on standards and qualifications which 
Mediators should possess, the kind of institutions which can create such standards 
both for Mediators and Mediation Institutions and facilitate training as well as 
assimilation of a ll kinds of professionals. These must not just include Retired Judges 
and Lawyers, but also other professionals like Chartered Accountants, Engineers, 
Human Resources Experts, Educational Administrators, Psychologists, etc. This is 
essential to ensure that Mediation as a movement is achieved at the grassroot level.  
 
Point No.1 
 
Section 6: Pre litigation Mediation 
 
6. (1)  Subject to other provisions of this Act, whether any mediation agreement exists or not, any 
party before filing any suit or proceedings of civil or commercial nature in any court, shall take steps 
to settle the disputes by pre-litigation mediation in accordance with the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that pre-litigation mediation in matters of commercial disputes of Specified Value shal l be 
undertaken in accordance with the provisions of section 12A of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015, 
and the rules made thereunder.  
8

 9 
(2)  The provisions, of sub -section (1) shall be applicable to the tribunals notified by the Central 
Government or a State Government, as the case may be. (3)  For the purposes, of sub -sections 
(1) and (2), unless otherwise agreed upon by the parties, a mediator,—  
(i)  registered with the Council;  
(ii)  empanelled by a court annexed mediation centre;  
(iii)  empanelled by an Authority constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987; and  
 (iv)  empanelled by a mediation service provider recognised under this Act, 
  shall conduct pre-litigation mediation.  
(4)  For conducting pre-litigation mediation under clauses ( ii) and (iii) of sub -section (3), a party 
may request any person designated for this purpose by the High Courts, or an Authority constituted 
under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, as the case may be.  
(5)  The courts and an Authority constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, shall 
maintain a panel of mediators for the purposes of pre-litigation mediation.  
(6)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections (1) and (2) and the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988, when an application for compensation arising out of an accident is made before the Claims 
Tribunal, if the settlement as provided for in section 149 of that Act is not arrived at between the 
parties, the Claims Tribunal shall refer the parties for mediation to a mediator or media tion service 
provider under this Act.  
(7)  Where the parties arrive at a settlement agreement under sub -section (6), it shall be placed 
before the Claims Tribunal for its consideration.  
(8)  If the parties do not reach to settlement agreement under sub -section (6), a failure report 
prepared by the mediator shall be forwarded to the Claims Tribunal, which has referred the matter 
for mediation, for adjudication. 
 
CONCERNS  
 
a. It mandates Pre Litigation Mediation as a condition for filing any civil suit, etc. 
This element of compulsion goes against one of the fundamental tenets of Mediation 
i.e. Party’s Consent, Autonomy and Informed Choice. Statutorily mandated process in 
all likelihood will result in failure in many cases.  
b. Another concern with Pre Litigation Mediation is that the Party wishing to file a 
suit would have to ensure service of notice on the other party, if they experience the 
service of summons by the process of C ourt then it is to be taken as a precedent. The 
very act of informing the other party to participate in Mediation would be time 
9

 10 
consuming, going beyond the period prescribed by Section 20 of the Bill. Therefore 
this will result in undue delay.  
 
 
Point No.2 
 
Section 7: Disputes or matters not fit for mediation  
 
7. (1)  A mediation under this Act shall not be conducted for resolution of any dispute or matter 
contained in the indicative list under the First Schedule: 
  Provided that nothing contained herein shall prevent any court, if deemed appropriate, from 
referring any dispute to mediation relating to compoundable offences or matrimonial offences 
connected with or arising out of civil proceedings between the parties:  
Provided further that the outcome of such mediation shall not be deemed to be a judgement 
or decree of court referred to in sub -section (2) of section 28, and shall be further considered by the 
court in accordance with the law for the time being in force.  
(2)  If the Central Government is sa tisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by 
notification, amend the First Schedule. 
 
COMMENT 
 
This Section is essential and should not be disturbed. Several matters in regard 
to which there cannot be settlement based on an agreement through a private process 
(such as tax disputes, disputes before regulatory bodies concerning telecom, 
electricity, c ompetition, environment, etc have to be excluded from the purview of 
Mediation). For example, when a large company or corporation is sued for causing 
Pollution, there cannot be a settlement between a private litigant and the company 
because the issues conc ern general public interest and may affect the interest of lakhs 
of people.  
 
 
Point No.3 
 
Section 10: Appointment of mediator  
 
(4)  Upon receiving application under sub-section (3), the mediation service provider shall, within 
a period of 7 days, appoint  
1. (i)  the mediator as agreed by the parties; or  
10

 11 
2. (ii)  the mediator from the panel maintained by it, in  
case the parties are unable to reach agreement as to the appointment of mediator or mediator agreed 
by the parties refuses to act as a mediator.  
 
(5)  Where the mediator is appointed under clause (i) of sub section (4), the mediation service 
provider shall seek acceptance of appoint ment from the person so appointed as mediator within 7 
days of the appointment.  
(6)  The person appointed under clause (i) of sub section (4) shall communicate his willingness 
within 7 days from the date of receipt of notice of such appointment under sub-section (5).  
 
CONCERNS 
 
a. The timelines prescribed for appointment of Mediator and Communication of 
acceptance are unrealistic and short.  
 
 
Point No.4 
 
Section 15: Territorial Jurisdiction  
 
15.  The Mediation under this Act shall take place within the territorial jurisdiction of the Court or 
Tribunal of competent jurisdiction to decide the subject matter of dispute.  
Provided that on the mutual consent of the parties mediation proceedings can be c onducted at any 
place outside the territorial jurisdiction referred to in this section. 
 
CONCERNS 
 
a. The idea of linking the Mediation Process with territorial Jurisdiction restricts 
the process itself. It is possible for the parties to a dispute to arrive at a settlement 
anywhere regardless of where the original agreement is executed or the place where 
the dispute arose. By the same analogy the Mediation can take place anywhere. 
Therefore the concept of territorial Jurisdiction of a Court should not be a constraining 
concern.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
11

 12 
Point No.5 
 
Mediated Settlement Agreement 
 
22. (1)  A mediated settlement agreement means and includes an agreement in writing between some 
or all of the parties resulting from mediation, settling some or all of the disputes between such 
parties, and authenticated by the mediator:  
Provided that the terms o f the mediated settlement agreement may extend beyond the 
disputes referred to mediation.  
Explanation.—A mediated settlement agreement which is void under the Indian Contract Act, 
1872, shall not be deemed to be lawful settlement agreement within the mean ing of mediated 
settlement agreement.  
(2)  Where a mediated settlement agreement is reached between the parties in regard to all or 
some of the disputes, the same shall be reduced in writing and signed by the parties.  
(3)  Subject to the provisions of se ctions 26 and 27, the mediated settlement agreement so 
signed—  
(i)  in case of institutional mediation, shall be submitted to the mediator, who shall, after 
authenticating the same and forward it with a covering letter signed by him, to the mediation serv ice 
provider and also provide a copy to the parties;  
(ii)  in all other cases, shall be submitted to the mediator who shall, after authenticating 
the settlement agreement, provide a copy to all the parties.  
(4)  Subject to provisions of sections 26 and 2 7, where no agreement is arrived at between the 
parties, within the time period as provided under section 21, or where, the mediator is of the view 
that no settlement is possible,—  
(i) the mediator shall submit a failure report to this effect to the mediation service provider in 
writing in case of institutional mediation;  
(ii) in all other cases, the mediator shall prepare a failure report to this effect and provide a 
signed copy to all the parties:  
Provided that the report referred under this sub -section shall not disclose the cause of failure 
of the parties to reach a settlement, or any other matter or thing referring to their conduct, during 
mediation.  
(5)  The parties, may, at any tim e during the mediation process, make an agreement with respect 
to any of the disputes which is the subject matter of mediation.  
(6)  Any mediated settlement agreement under this section shall also include a settlement 
agreement resulting from online mediation and duly signed by the parties by way of secure electronic 
signature or otherwise and authenticated by the mediator in the like manner.  
12

 13 
(7)  For the purposes of record, mediated settlement agreement arrived at between the parties, 
other than those ar rived in a court or tribunal referred mediation or award of Lok Adalat or final 
award of Permanent Lok Adalat under section 21 or section 22E of the Legal Services Authorities 
Act, 1987, shall be registered with an Authority constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 
1987, in such manner as may be specified and such Authority shall issue a unique registration 
number to such settlements:  
Provided that the mediated settlement agreement under this section shall be registered with 
such Authority sit uated within the territorial jurisdiction of the court or tribunal of competent 
jurisdiction to decide the subject matter of dispute:  
Provided further that such registration shall not be mandatory till the time regulations under 
this sub-section are made.  
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that nothing contained in this sub -
section shall affect the rights of parties to enforce the mediated settlement agreement under section 
28 or challenge the same as provided under section 29.  
(8)  For the purposes of registration of mediated settlement agreement, in matters other than 
commercial disputes, wherein mediation is not conducted by a mediation service provider, the 
presence of parties to the mediated settlement agreement or their authoris ed representative shall be 
mandatory before the Authority referred to in sub-section (7).  
(9)  The registration referred to in sub -section (7) shall be made by the parties, mediator or 
mediation service provider within a period of one hundred and eighty days from the date of receipt of 
authorlicated copy of mediated settlement agreement:  
Provided that mediated settlement agreement may be allowed to be registered after the expiry 
of period of one hundred and eighty days on payment of such fee as may be spe cified in consultation 
with the Authority referred to in sub-section (7). 
 
CONCERNS 
 
a. The requirement of Registration of all Mediated Settlements by the concerned 
local District legal Services Authority is an unrealistic exercise. It imposes extremely 
difficult tasks on the District Legal Services Authority, which is already given the 
responsibility of administering legal aid, advice, various schemes, etc. by the national 
Legal Services Authority (NALSA) and State Legal services Authority.  
b. The requirement o f a compulsory registration of Mediated settlements is also 
contrary to the principles of confidentiality.  
 
 
13

 14 
Point No.6 
 
CHAPTER X- PART II COMMUNITY MEDIATION 
 
CONCERNS 
 
Sections 4 4 and 4 5, which deal with Community Mediation, should be completely 
deleted. This Part is at complete odds with the other provisions of the Bill because: 
a. It designates certain individuals as a part of the Mediation Process, regardless of 
whether they are qualified, trained or accredited.  
b. These provisions presuppose that the settlement arrived through such facilitators 
(as mentioned in Section 44(5), i.e. persons of standing and integrity who are 
respected in the community,  any local person including a state awardee  whose 
contribution to the society has been recognised by the State, A representative of an 
area/resident welfare associations, any other person deemed appropriate) would have 
the aptitude, patience and experience of acting in a neutral and unbiased manner . An 
agreement arrived at through Community Mediation may not be the result of a 
voluntary decision of both the parties but be the outcome of an imposed or handed 
down judgment.  
c. As a result, the designation of specific persons as Community Mediators 
without proper training, qualification, experience and certificate as mandated is 
contrary to the ethos of Mediation.  
 
Point No. 7 
 
International Mediation 
 
Section 2(1)(iii) of The Mediation Bill 2021, Bill No. XLIII of 2021 (hereinafter 
referred to as the Draft Bill) states as under: 
 
“2.(1) Subject to sub -section (2), this Act shall apply where mediation is 
conducted in India, and— 
(iii) there is an international mediation.” 
 
 
 
14

 15 
CONCERN: 
 
 
 
On 07 th August, 2019, India signed the United Nations Convention on International 
Settlement Agreements Resulting f rom Mediation (hereinafter referred to as “the Singapore 
Convention”) but still India has not ratified the same. As of 1 st February 2022, the 
Convention has 55 signatories, of which only nine States have ratified the Convention.  
 
The aforesaid Section clearly, makes the international mediations governable by the 
Draft Bill. The Draft Bill further mentions the international mediation under Section 
3(f) wherein it defines the internati onal mediation. Section 40(b) of the Draft Bill 
impresses upon the Mediation Council to endeavour to develop India to be a robust 
centre for domestic and international mediation. As such, the intent to include the 
international mediation under the present bill is very much apparent . However, the 
Draft Bill fails to state the law and the procedure to be followed in case of 
international mediations. Although, India has not ratified the Singapore Convention 
yet, the law pertaining to the International Mediatio n ought to be in consonance and 
on the lines of the Singapore Convention.  
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
 
1. That a Chapter dealing with the “International Mediation” be added in the Draft Bill; 
2. The aforesaid chapter on “International Mediation” must be in consonance with the 
Singapore Convention except in a case where the reservations  as provided under Article 8 of 
the Convention are warranted; 
3. The Bill must contain specific provision recognizing its effort to bring the law to 
effect the Singapore Convention. 
 
*** 
15

  
 
    ASSOCHAM Preliminary Comments / Suggestions on Mediation Bill, 2021 submitted to the   
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law & Justice 
Sl. No.  Chapter/ Act and 
Clause / Section 
( Please refer 
Mediation Bill) 
Proposed Amendment / Comment/ Suggestion  Comments/ rationale and references, if any 
1 Domestic Mediation The first part of the Bill discusses and highlights 
domestic mediation and its applicability, procedure, 
and reach in India. Part I also provides for online 
mediation with statutory recognition. 
 
2 Chapter II 
Section 2-3 
 
Discusses the scope and definition of concepts and 
terms conferred in the Act. Further, the extension of 
the Act to international mediations makes it possible 
to settle international disputes as well. 
 
3 Chapter III 
Section 4-9 
 
 
Deals with the process of  Mediation . Under this 
chapter the Act empowers the court to refer the 
parties to mediation distinguishing the matters that 
shall not qualify for mediation. The Act also 
stipulates the provision for interim relief to a party 
before the commencement of or during the 
continuation of mediation proceedings under this 
Part. 
 
Comment– This chapter provides necessary 
importance, legality, and validity to the 
mediation agreements by way of mandatory 
prerequisites. However, providing for an 
interim relief during the pendency of mediation 
is pending, may hinder the spirit of mediation, 
as such much  caution is required while 
incorporating and implementing such a 
provision. 
 
 
4 Chapter IV 
Section 10-14 
 
This chapter enlightens the procedures to be 
followed for the appointment of the mediator and the 
duties of the mediator. It is pertinent to note that it 
provides that the mediator can be appointed from 
Comments – giving preference to the parties for 
appointment of mediator themselves shall make 
the process smooth,  less expensive and less 
strenuous. However, the qualification of the 
 
16

any nationality  and the parties to the  dispute are 
given the liberty to appoint the mediator as per their 
choice. 
 
mediator must be provided in the Act or the 
Rules framed thereunder, without which the 
quality of the mediation may get compromised. 
5 Chapters V 
 
Section 15-27 
 
Discusses about setting territorial jurisdiction, date of 
commencement, etc. for the benefit of the parties. 
These provisions renders code of civil procedure and 
Indian Evidence Act inapplicable to mediation. The 
time limit for completion of mediation is 90 days, 
which can be further extended to 90 days with the 
consent of the parties. The mediation settlement 
agreement is also made app licable to  online 
mediation settlements. 
 
Comments – Setting a fixed timeline for 
concluding the process shall emerge as a major 
boon to its earnestness. Steps like onli ne 
mediation shall render the mediation more 
viable for the stakeholders. 
 Chapter V {Mediation 
Proceedings} 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stay of Court Proceedings 
(1)  Where any party to a mediation agreement , as 
provided under Section 5,  institutes any 
proceedings before a court against any other party 
to that agreement in respect of any matter which is 
the subject of that agreement, any party to that 
agreement may apply to that court to stay the 
proceedings so far as the proceedings relate to that 
matter.  
(2) The court hearing the application may make an 
order, upon such terms or conditions as the court 
thinks fit, staying the proceedings so far as the 
proceedings relate to the matter.  
(3) The court may, in making an order under 
subsection (2),  make such interim or 
supplementary orders as the court thinks fit for the 
purpose of preserving the rights of the parties. 
For the purposes of this section, a reference to a party 
includes a reference to any person claiming through or 
under a party. 
The Purpose to insert this Section under the Chapter 
of Mediation Proceedings for the reasons mentioned 
hereunder- 
1. That when the dispute arising from the 
agreement, and thereby agreement provides a 
mechanism to resolve the dispute, it is 
pertinent to mention th at if one of the parties 
approaches the court in reference to the 
dispute already acknowledged in the 
agreement and the same is referred to 
mediation then the aggrieved party shall 
approach the court to stay the proceedings. 
And thereafter court shall dete rmine the 
conditions on which the stay has to be granted 
therefore, the purpose to execute a mediation 
agreement will get infructuous. 
2. The proposed amendment will certainly resist 
any parallel proceedings before the court and 
Mediation under this Act.  
Reference to Singapore Mediation Act,  
 Chapter V {Mediation 
Proceeding} 
Suitable Amendment as schedule addition to in the form of 
schedule hereof the bill may be considered in relation to 
the Insolvency Bankruptcy Code, 2016 
 
The Purpose to insert this Section under the Chapter 
of Mediation Proceedings for the reasons mentioned 
hereunder- 
 17

 
 
1. There are large number of petitions are being 
filed before NCLT and it has been observed 
that no settlement is permitted or encouraged 
by the Hon’ble NCLT and due  to which it 
becomes difficult for the parties to settle. In 
furtherance to the afore, no mechanism is 
available for mediation under the IBC, 2017. 
2. In order to eradicate unnecessary litigation 
under IBC and it will in general adequacy to 
encourage Mediatio n between the parties in 
the proceedings before the IBC. 
During the initiation or before the admission of 
petition under section 7 or section 9 of IBC invariably 
parties seek multiple adjournments before NCLT 
citing some Mediation or Settlement under way.  
In the given situation considering the IBC as time 
bound process though beginning from the admission 
in order to stricter mechanism if any party seeks 
settlement or cite settlement as mediation 
Adjudicating Authority should not give indefinite 
time and by making it a time bound process of sixty 
days for such mediation.   
 Chapter V {Mediation 
Proceeding} 
Mediation to be referred in the proceedings initiated under 
Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016 ― 
Subject to the other provisions of this Act, any proceedings 
initiated under Real Estate (Regulation and Development) 
Act, 2016, the Adjudicating Authority may refer the 
Parties to Mediation in the circumstances wherein it may 
be presumed that there is a scope of settlement between the 
parties.  
The Purpose to insert this Section under the Chapter 
of Mediation Proceedings for the reasons mentioned 
hereunder- 
1. The RERA Act, does not provide any 
mechanism to resolve the dispute between the 
Builder and home buyer and thereby It has 
been observed that the parties entering into a 
settlement agreement which has no safeguard 
for the parties to project the same as decree or 
judgement However, in this present bill, there 
is an attempt to provide a safeguard to the 
Settlement Agreement as provided under 
Section 28 which propound that the said 
agreement will construed as Decree or 
Judgment.  
The Present Bill eloquently provides a mechanism to 
conduct a mediation proceeding and however, in rise 
of the innumerable complaints in the RERA, the 
18

requirement of settlement becomes essential 
therefore, this bill provides a detailed mechanism to 
adjudicate the mediation proceeding.    
6 Chapter VI 
Section 28-31 
 
This chapter addresses the status of the settlement 
agreement. The agreement can be challenged on 
grounds of fraud, corruption, gross impropriety, or 
impersonation within a period of 3 months. It also 
excludes the limitation period during the mediation. 
 
Comments – Exclusion of period of mediation 
from the limitation period prescribed may 
emerge as a major boon for diverting the 
pendency from  litigation to mediation.  
However, providing the grounds of fraud, 
impropriety or impersonation would be highly 
inappropriate while the parties themselves with 
their consent and free will would enter the 
settlement. 
7 Chapter VII 
Section 32 
 
This chapter states that online mediation shall take 
place in accordance with the provisions of 
the information technology Act . However, both the 
mediators and the parties under the chapter are duty-
bound to maintain autonomy as well as 
confidentiality. 
 
Comments –  Online mode of mediation is the 
need of the hour , However, the issue of 
territorial jurisdiction shall be discussed by way 
of incorporating appropriate rules. 
8 Chapter VIII 
Section 33-40 
 
Establishment of the mediation council of India by 
the central government with head office in Delhi. 
This chapter discusses the composition of the 
mediation council of India, the functions to be 
performed by them, and the process and grounds 
for impeachment. 
.  
Comments – The establishment of a council shall 
make the mediation process more disciplined 
and responsible.  However, putting so much 
regulations over mediation may ultimately lead 
to failure of the main purpose of mediation 
9 Chapter IX 
Section 41-43 
 
Discusses the recognition of the mediation service 
provider and mediation institutes and their 
function. 
 
Comments – From a more or less and 
unorganized field, Mediation is now a complete 
organizational process with the involvement of 
the service providers and institutes. However, 
the functions of the institutes may need to be 
regulated at a micro -level with subst antial 
infrastructural inputs. 
19

10 Chapter X 
Section 44-45 
Community 
mediation 
 
The act provides for community mediation which is 
likely to affect the peace, harmony, and tranquillity 
amongst the residents or families of any area or 
locality. It also provides for the procedure to be 
adopted for community mediation.  
 
11 International 
settlement 
agreements 
 
This part is dedicated towards international 
commercial settlement and Enforcement 
of international commercial settlement 
agreements resulting from mediation. 
By enabling the enforcement of international 
settlement agreements, a major boost is sought to 
establish the reliability and versatility of the Indian 
Justice dispensation system. 
 
   
 
 
SECTION SPECIFIC 
 
 Section 2 {Definitions} 
– inclusion of definition 
under Section 2 
Conflict Of Interest – the conflict of interest should be clearly 
defined in the Act itself, as definition in the Mediator shall not 
constitute pecuniary or any other interest in the subject matter 
of Mediation.  
1. The definition of the Conflict of interest in 
reference to the Mediation proceeding are 
essential to embrace the independence or 
impartiality of the Mediator.  
2. This will avoid unnecessary frivolous 
objection and litigation despite (consent) 
during the proceeding of mediation or 
subsequently. 
12  Section 3(E)  
  
 Introduces the Institutional Mediation   
 13  Section 2(F)  Introduces the International Mediation but does not 
provide the basic requirements of international 
mediation  
 Definition/meaning of international mediation 
is not clear.  
 14  Section 3(H)  definition of mediator, but no qualification is 
prescribed. 
 Without a definite/fixed qualification of the 
mediator there is every likelihood of chaos in 
the whole process of appointment 
 15 Section 3 K  Introduces The Mediation Institute- This would 
expedite the process of mediation.  
The Constitution of institute must be 
mentioned in the Rules in detail. 
20

16 Section 3 L Mediation Service Provider must Be Recognised By 
Council.  
However, the commercial organisations such as 
ASSOCHAM which is having independent 
AICADR council which is in lines of 
UNCITRAL Model shall be recognised under 
institutional mediation. 
17 Section 3 P widened the definition of participants  
18 Section 5 mediation agreement must be in writing either in 
the form of agreement or a clause in the agreement. 
It must be available to the parties to voluntarily 
agree for mediation 
19 Section 6 makes it mandatory to go for pre litigation 
mediation. 
It must not be mandatory act but a voluntary 
act on behalf of the parties 
20 Section  7 clarify the matter on which the mediation can take 
place. indicative 
 
21 Section 8 Is akin to section 9 of arbitration act- it can be 
drafted like section 9 of arbitration act to bring some 
kind of seriousness to the mediation 
 
22 Section 10 Appointment of the mediator is prescribed 
.However no qualification is prescribed. 
 
COMMENTS:-under section 10, the bill provides that 
qualification, experience, and accreditation of the 
foreign, as well as domestic mediator, would be 
determined by the council.  the same should be 
decided in consultation with the judiciary or a body 
of specialized individuals. the same shall instill more 
faith in the parties towards the appointed expert. 
additionally, mediation shall become a viable career 
option for young professionals in the sector.  
On the contrary, not mentioning the 
qualification may create chaos in  the process of 
appointment and also may invite the bias 
decision by the council.  
 
23 Section 11 criteria for empanelment must be given in the act. it should have a mention about the all existing 
trained mediators 
24 Section 20(1) makes mandatory to attend at least first two session 
of mediation. 
Making it mandatory would go against the 
constitution of India 
25 Section 21 stipulates a period of 180 days for completion of 
mediation. 
 
This would lead to delay in the process of 
mediation. 
21

26 Section 22 introduces the resolution of some of the disputes if 
not all  
 
comments:- section 22 talks about 
confidentiality to be maintained by the parties to 
the dispute as well as the mediator.However, the 
draft does not provide for any punishment/ 
liability or the consequences which shall be 
imposed on one who wilfully infringes the said 
section, thereby defeating the primary objective 
of the act of maintaining confidentiality. 
26 Section 28 such agreements shall be final and binding on  the 
parties and persons claiming under them and shall be 
enforceable in the same manner as judgements or 
decrees passed by a court. 
 
 
27 Section 29 one provision may be added (v) where the mediated 
settlement becomes unenforceable or inexecutable, 
should be ground for challenging the settlement 
comments:-  under section 29, an application for 
challenging the mediated settlement agreement may 
not be made after three months have elapsed from 
the date on which the party making that applic ation 
has received the copy of mediated settlement 
agreement under section 21(3) of this act. provided 
that if the court is satisfied that the applicant was 
prevented by “sufficient cause” from making the 
application within the said period of three months it 
may entertain the application within a further period 
of thirty days, but not thereafter.the term “sufficient 
cause” for the delay in filing the challenge to the 
settlement agreement is ambiguous;  
it is suggestible that the draft should include 
specific and clear grounds under which the 
settlement agreement can be challenged even 
after three months. 
 
28 Section 29(2) section 29(2) lays down four grounds of fraud, 
corruption, gross impropriety, and impersonation. 
 
If the same is allowed , the whole purpose of 
mediation would fail. 
 
22

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Bill proposes amendments to the following legislations – 
i. Indian Contract Act, 1872 – Exception 1 to Section 28 (Agreements in restraint of legal proceedings) has been modified to 
include resolution of a dispute by mediation along with arbitration. 
ii. Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – Part III of the Act covering conciliation (Sections 61 to 81) has been substituted with 
one section which states that any reference to resolution of disputes through conciliation under any law in force shall be 
construed to mean a reference to mediation under the Mediation Act, 2021. 
iii. Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 – Section 89 has been modified to include a reference to the Mediation Act, 2021 and to provide 
for the interchangeable use of the terms 'conciliation' and 'mediation'. 
Appropriate amendments have also been proposed to the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 and the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 
to include references to the Mediation Act, 2021. 
---------------------------------------XXXX--------------------------------------------------- 
 
23

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 18 
 
 
 
 
CII Views on Draft Mediation Bill, 2021 
The Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) greatly acknowledge the contribution made by the Ministry of Law and Justice  for promoting, 
encouraging and facilitating mediation in the country 
CII greatly appreciate and welcome the Mediation Bill, 2021 (Bill No. XLIII of 2021) (“Bill”) as Alternate Dispute Redressal (ADR) offers an 
informal, simple, non-adversarial approach to resolve several types of disputes including civil, commercial and family disputes etc. The Bill is a 
welcome step as it intends to promote institutional mediation for resolution of disputes, enforce mediated settlement agreements, provide for a 
body for registration of mediators, to encourage community mediation and to make online mediation as an acceptable and cost-effective 
process and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
CII has engaged with relevant stakeholders on the various aspects of the Mediation framework outlined in the Bill. Post consultation and deep 
deliberations, CII submit the comments received from the industry for your kind consideration. 
Sr. 
No. 
Bill Provision Comments Suggested amendment 
1.  Section 4 states: 
““Mediation” means a process, 
whether referred to by the expression 
mediation, pre -litigation mediation,  
online mediation, conciliation or an 
expression of similar import, whereby 
parties request a third person or 
persons (“the mediator”) to assist 
them in their attempt to reach an 
amicable settlement of the dispute. 
 
 
Conceptual difference  between mediation 
and conciliation: 
 
The definition of mediation in Section 4 of the 
Bill includes “conciliation”. The inclusion of 
‘conciliation’ within the definition of mediation is 
problematic since the concepts of mediation 
and conciliation are fundamentally different 
(See Annexure-A). In conciliation, the 
conciliator plays a far more proactive role and 
is empower ed to propose settlement terms 
[Section 67(4) of the Arbitration Act]. Section 
Suggested Amendment No. 1: 
Deletion of Section 61 and the Sixth 
Schedule and deletion of the word 
“conciliation” from Section 4 as under-. 
 
““Mediation” means a process, whether 
referred to by the expression mediation, pre -
litigation mediation, online mediation, 
conciliation or an expression of similar 
import, whereby parties r equest a third 
person or persons (“the mediator”) to assist 
them in their attempt to reach an amicable 
24

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 18 
 
Further, Section 61 states: 
“The Arbitr ation and Conciliation Act, 
1996 shall be amended in the manner 
specified in the Sixth Schedule.” 
 
Sixth Schedule states: 
“In the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996 (26 of 1996),— 
(a)  in section 43D,— 
(i) in sub -section (1), the words 
"mediation, conciliation" shall be 
omitted; 
(ii) in sub -section (2), in clauses (e), 
(f) and (i), the words "and conciliation" 
wherever they occur shall be omitted; 
 
(b) for sections 61 to 81, the following 
sections shall be substituted, 
namely:—―61.  Reference of 
conciliation in enactments. — (1) Any 
provision, in any other enactment for 
the time being in force, providing for 
resolution of disputes through 
conciliation in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act,  shall be 
construed as reference to mediation 
as provi ded for under the Mediation 
Act, 2021. 
(2) The Conciliation as provided for 
under this Act or the code of Civil 
18 and 19 of the Bill do not contemplate such 
powers.  
 
The Bill, under Section 61 r/w the Sixth 
Schedule, further seeks to do away with the 
provisions on conciliation in the Ar bitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 (“ Arbitration Act ”), 
while the Bill itself does not have separate 
provisions for conciliation. Instead, the Bill 
attempts to include conciliation within definition 
of mediation, which is misplaced. This would 
have the c onsequence of removing the 
concept of conciliation under Indian law.  
 
In some disputes, parties may prefer 
conciliation as opposed to or on the failure of 
mediation. The removal of conciliation 
provisions infringes on the principle of party 
autonomy whereby parties are free to choose 
their preferred medium of ADR. 
 
 
The Mediation Bill requires pre -litigation 
mediation for all disputes (other than limited 
exceptions). This by implication includes 
disputes with government companies and the 
government.  
 
From an ease of doing business perspective, it 
would be good to have a clear provision in the 
settlement of the dispute. 
 
Alternatively, Suggested Amendment No. 
2: 
Retain Section 4, Section 61 and the Sixth 
Schedule but incorporate provisions of Part 
III of the Arbitration Act in the Mediation Bill 
so as to retain the distinction between 
mediation and conciliation. 
25

                                                                                                         Page 3 of 18 
 
procedure shall be construed as 
mediation as defined in the Mediation 
Act, 2021. 
 
62. Saving.- Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 61,   any 
conciliation proceeding initiated  in 
pursuance of sections 61 to 81 of this 
Act as in force  before the 
commencement of the Mediation Act, 
2021, shall be continued as such as if 
the Mediation Act, 2021  had not been 
enacted.”. 
 
Mediation Act, 2021 which extends the 
mandate of pre -litigation mediation to 
government disputes specifically. Use of 
mediation for dispute resolution of government 
disputes ties in with the goals set out in the 
National Litigation Policy. It is important for the 
Government to formulate a framework to effect 
this mandate of the Mediation law. 
 
 
2.  Section 5(5) of the Bill states: 
“The parties may agree to submit to 
mediation any dispute arising between 
them under an agreement whether 
entered prior to arising of dispute or 
subsequent thereto.” 
Repeats Section 5(1): 
 
The contents of Section 5(5) are covered 
under Section 5(1) which states “…to submit to 
mediation all or certain disputes which have 
arisen or which may arise…”. 
Deletion of Section 5(5) and proposed 
amendment to Section 5(1) as under: 
 
“(1) A mediation agreement shall be in 
writing, whether executed prior to arising 
of dispute or subsequent thereto,  by or 
between parties and anyone claiming 
through them, to submit  to mediation all or 
certain disputes which have arisen or which 
may arise between the parties.  
 
 
3.  Section 8(1) states:  
“If exceptional circumstances exist, a 
party may, before the commencement 
of, or during the continuation of, 
Exceptional circumstances is vague: 
 
The expression “ exceptional circumstances 
exist” is vague and open to various subjective 
Proposed amendment to Section 8(1): 
 “If exceptional circumstances exist,  a party 
may, before the commencement of, or during 
the continuation of, mediation proceedings 
26

                                                                                                         Page 4 of 18 
 
mediation proceedings under this Act, 
file suit or appropriate proceedings 
before a court or tribunal having 
competent jurisdiction for seeking 
urgent interim relief.” 
interpretations. The retention of this expression 
carries the risk of courts adopting 
unreasonable/arbitrary/non-uniform standards 
and declining interim relief in fit cases. 
 
Harmonisation with Section 9 of the 
Arbitration Act: 
 
Section 8(1) of the Bill may be harmonised and 
made uniform with Section 9 of the Arbitration 
Act to the extent possible. As a result, Section 
8(1) may: 
i. Be available after execution of the 
Mediated Settlement Agreement but 
before it is enfor ced. This would ensure 
that parties do not take advantage of 
mediation process and dispose of amount 
or subject matter of the dispute even after 
the Mediation Settlement has been 
executed. 
ii. Instead of mentioning a broad phrase like 
‘If exceptional circumsta nces exist ’, 
stipulate the various types of interim 
measures that may be obtained. This 
would remove any doubts as to the power 
of courts. This would also clarify what 
case the parties must make out for the 
grant of interim relief since the parameters 
under Section 9 of the Arbitration Act are 
well settled. 
under this Act or at any time af ter the 
execution of the Mediated Settlement 
Agreement but before it is enforced in 
accordance with Section 28 , file suit or 
appropriate proceedings before a Court or 
Tribunal having competent jurisdiction for 
seeking urgent interim relief, including: 
(a) the preservation, interim custody 
or sale of any goods which are the 
subject-matter of the dispute; 
(b) securing the amount in dispute in 
the mediation 
(c) the detention, preservation or 
inspection of any property or thing 
which is the subject matter of the 
dispute in  mediation, or as to 
which any question may arise 
therein and authorising for any of 
the aforesaid purposes any person 
to enter upon any land or building 
in the possession of any party, or 
authorising any samples to be 
taken or any observation to be 
made, or experiment to be tried, 
which may be necessary or 
expedient for the purpose of 
obtaining full information or 
evidence; 
(d) interim injunction or the 
appointment of a receiver; and 
27

                                                                                                         Page 5 of 18 
 
 
 
 
(e) such other interim measure of 
protection as may appear to the 
Court to be just and convenient,  
and the Court shall have the same 
power for making orders as it has for 
the purpose of, and in relation to, any 
proceedings before it.” 
 
4.  Section 8(2) states: 
“The court or tribunal shall after 
granting or rejecting urgent interim 
relief, as the case may be, refer the 
parties to undertake mediation to 
resolve the dispute, if deemed 
appropriate.” 
 
Deletion of the words “ if deemed 
appropriate”: 
 
The words “ if deemed appropriate ” give 
discretion to the court or tribunal to refer the 
parties for mediation after granting or rejecting 
urgent interim relief. Parties must undertake 
mediation after grant or rejection of urgent 
interim relief and the same must not be left to 
the discretion of the court or tribunal. Retaining 
the words “if deemed appropriate” runs the risk 
of defeating the objective of Section 6(1) of the 
Bill (Pre-litigation mediation). 
 
Section 8(2) may be amended as: 
“The court or tribunal shall after granting or 
rejecting urgent interim relief, as the case 
may be, refer the parties to undertake 
mediation to resolve the dispute, if deemed 
appropriate.” 
 
 
5.  Proviso to Section 10(1) states: 
“Provided that mediator of any foreign 
nationality shall possess such 
qualification, experience and 
accreditation as may be specified.” 
 
 
Opposed to party autonomy: 
 
Section 10(1) is contrary to the cardinal 
principle of party autonomy. Parties to a 
collaborative ADR process such as mediation 
may be permitted to choose any mediator of 
foreign nationality without being unduly fettered 
by the qualifications that may be specified.  
Deletion of Proviso to Section 10(1).   
28

                                                                                                         Page 6 of 18 
 
 
No rationale for such a provision: 
 
Such a provision is neither required nor 
accompanied by any rationale. No similar 
provision exists in the Arbitration Act. In fact, 
the Eighth Schedule, which stated 
qualifications for arbitrators, was omitte d from 
the Arbitration Act after being criticised for its 
narrow ambit.   
 
6.  Section 11 states: 
“The mediation service provider shall, 
while appointing any person from the 
panel of mediators maintained by it, 
consider his suitability and the 
preference of the parties for resolving 
the dispute.” 
Mediation Service Provider not to be bound 
by the parties’ views: 
 
It may be clarified that the Mediation Service 
provider will not be bound by the views of the 
parties while appointing a mediator from its 
panel.  
 
 
Proposed amendment to Section 11: 
“The mediation service provider shall, while 
appointing any person from the panel of 
mediators maintained by it, consider his 
suitability and the preference of the parties, 
without being bound by such preference, 
for resolving dispute.” 
7.  Section 12(2) states: 
“During the mediation, the mediator 
shall, without delay, disclose to the 
parties in writing any conflict of 
interest, referred to in sub -section (1), 
that has newly arisen or has 
come to his knowledge.” 
Time limit for disclosure: 
 
The use of the expression “ without delay ” is 
vague and subjective and may be interpreted 
differently by mediators. Therefore, it is 
recommended that a time limit (e.g., thirty 
days) may be specified to ensure that no 
conflicts of interest are disclosed belatedly.  
Proposed amendment to Section 12(2): 
“During the mediation, the mediator shall, 
without delay, and in any case not later 
than thirty days from the date on which 
circumstances that constitute conflict of 
interest may arise,  disclose to the parties in 
writing any conflict of interest, re ferred to in 
sub-section (1), that has newly arisen or has 
come to his knowledge.” 
 
29

                                                                                                         Page 7 of 18 
 
8.  Section 12(3) states: 
“Upon disclosure under sub -section 
(1) or sub-section (2), the parties have 
the option to waive any objection if all 
of them express in writing, which shall 
be construed as the consent of 
parties.” 
 
Section 12(4) states: 
“Upon disclosure under sub -section 
(1) or  sub-section (2), if either party 
desires to replace the mediator, then, 
in case of:-  
(i) institutional mediation, such party 
shall apply to the mediation 
service provider for termination of 
the mandate of mediator; 
(ii) mediation  other than institutional 
mediation, such party  shall 
terminate the mandate of 
mediato.r” 
 
Time Limit for challenge: 
 
As per Section 12(4) of the Mediation  Bill, a 
party may apply for termination of the mandate 
of the mediator upon disclosure of justifiable 
doubts as to his/h er independence or 
impartiality or a conflict of interest.  
 
As it stands, there exists no time limit for 
making an application for ter mination of the 
mandate of the mediator. A time limit (e.g., 
thirty days) can be set for the parties to object 
to the appointment of the Mediator after 
becoming aware of circumstances under 
Section 12(1) and 12(2) of the Bill. This would 
ensure that challe nges are not raised 
belatedly.  
 
Such time limits are envisaged even in 
international institutional mediation rules. For 
example, Article 5(3) of the ICC Mediation 
Rules, 2014 states:  
“…The Centre shall provide such information 
to the parties in writing a nd shall fix a time 
limit for any comments from them.” 
 
Application to courts under Section 
12(4)(ii): 
 
Further, while Section 12(4)(i) of the Mediation 
Proposed amendment to Section 12(4): 
“Upon disclosure under sub -section (1) or 
sub-section (2) if either party desires to 
replace the Mediator within thirty days 
thereof, then in case of:-  
(i) institutional mediation, such party shall 
apply to the mediation service provider 
for termination of the mandate of 
mediator; 
(ii) mediation other than institutional 
mediation, such party shall terminate 
the mandate of mediator apply to the 
court or tribunal of competent 
jurisdiction.” 
 
30

                                                                                                         Page 8 of 18 
 
Bill permits a party in an institutional mediation 
to apply to the mediation service provider for 
termination of the mediator’s mandate, Section 
12(4)(ii) provides that in mediation other than 
institutional mediation, a party desiring 
replacement of the mediator shall terminate the 
mandate of mediator. The unilateral power 
under Section 12(4)(ii) can lead to parties 
abusing their power by terminating the 
mandates of mediators to frustrate the 
mediation. Therefore, it is advised that Section 
12(4)(ii) be ame nded such that parties in 
mediation other than institutional mediations 
must apply to courts  or tribunals of competent 
jurisdiction for termination of the mediator’s 
mandate. 
 
 
9.  Section 13 states: 
“A mediation service provider may 
terminate the mandate of a mediator 
upon-  
… 
(ii) the receipt of information about the 
mediator being involved in a matter of 
conflict of interest from participants or 
any other person; or” 
The procedure used by the mediation 
service provider must be uniform and 
specified by law: 
 
For reference purposes, unde r the Arbitration 
Act, either the arbitral tribunal or the court 
decides a challenge to the appointment of an 
arbitrator. Under the Bill, since neither of these 
concepts are envisaged for institutional 
mediation,  detailed procedure   needs to be 
prescribed for deciding the  termination of a  
mediator appointed in an institutional 
Proposed amendment to Section 13: 
 
“A mediation service provider may , in 
accordance with the procedure specified 
by the Council under clause (n) of Section 
40, terminate the mandate of a mediator 
upon-  
… 
(ii) the receipt of information about the 
mediator being involved in a matter of conflict 
of interest from participants  or any other 
person; or” 
31

                                                                                                         Page 9 of 18 
 
mediation.  Under this procedure, a committee 
needs to constituted within the mediation 
service provider, comprising persons who are 
competent and qualified to  decide the 
termination of the mediator.  
 
Any other person to be deleted: 
 
The use of the expression “ or any other 
person” opens the possibility of interference in 
the mediation by non-parties to the  mediation.  
ADR processes , including mediation,  are 
inherently private and this interference by third 
parties ought not to be permitted.  
 
10.  New Provision Corresponding amendment to Section 40: 
 
Pursuant to the amendment suggested to 
Section 13, a new clause may be added to 
Section 40 ( Duties and Functions of the 
Council) to empower the Mediation Council of 
India to prescribe a detailed procedure for 
deciding the termination of a mediator 
appointed in an institutional mediation.  
Clause (n) may be inserted in Section 40: 
 
“40. The Council shall—  
…. 
(n) provide for procedure for termination 
of mandate of the mediator by the 
mediation service provider under Section 
13, as also the composition of the 
committee of the mediation service 
provider constituted to decide such  
termination. 
….” 
 
11.  Section 22(7) states: 
“(7) For the purposes of record, 
mediated settlement agreement 
arrived at between the parties, other 
The registration requirement may be done 
deleted: 
 
Section 22(7) r/w Section 22(9) of the Bill 
Deletion of Section 22(7) and Section 22(9). 
32

                                                                                                         Page 10 of 18 
 
than those arrived in a court or 
tribunal referred mediation or award 
of Lok Adalat or final award of 
Permanent Lok Adalat under section 
21 or section 22E of the Legal 
Services Authorities Act, 1987, shall 
be registered with an Authority 
constituted under the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987, in such manner 
as may be specified and such 
Authority shall issue a unique 
registration number to suc h 
settlements:” 
 
Further, Section 22(9) states: 
“(9) The registration referred to in sub-
section (7) shall be made by the 
parties, mediator or mediation service 
provider within a period of one 
hundred and eighty days from the 
date of receipt of authorlicated copy of 
mediated settlement agreement:” 
 
imposes an onerous obligation upon  parties, 
mediator or mediation service provider to 
register the mediate d settlement agreement. 
This is also in conflict with the confidentiality 
obligation in Section 23 of the Bill. In any case, 
there are no consequences for such non -
registration provided in the Bill. 
12.  New Provision Appeal provision: 
 
A new provision may be inserted to provide 
that parties may prefer one appeal against 
orders. 
 
A new provision on the lines of Section 37 of 
the Arbitration Act may be inserted as under: 
 
“Appealable orders.  
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
any other law for the time being in force, 
an appeal shall lie only from the following 
33

                                                                                                         Page 11 of 18 
 
orders (and from no others) to the Court 
authorised by law to hear appeals from 
original decrees of the Court passing the 
order, or from an order  of the Tribunal 
passing the order, namely: 
a. Refusing or granting interim relief 
under Section 8 of the Act; 
b. Refusing reference to mediation 
under Section 9 of the Act; and 
c. Accepting or dismissing the 
challenge to the mediated settlement 
agreement under Sec tion 29 of the 
Act.  
 
(2) No second appeal shall lie from an 
order passed in appeal under this section, 
but nothing in this section shall affect or 
take away any right to appeal to the 
Supreme Court.” 
 
13.  Chapter X- Community Mediation 
 
Key provisions are missing from Chapter X: 
 
Several key provisions from other chapters of 
the Bill do not find mention in Chapter X of the 
Bill dealing with community mediation. This will 
make community mediation less effective. 
 
List of such key provisions is as follows: 
i. Section 5 (Mediation Agreement); 
ii. Section 7 (Cases not fit for 
Chapter X  of the Bill may be amended to 
incorporate the applicable provisions of other 
chapters by reference as under by inserting a 
new provision, being Section 44(6):  
“The provisions of  the other chapters of 
the Act , to the extent that they are 
applicable and not inconsistent therewith, 
shall apply mutatis mutandis to this 
Chapter X”  
34

                                                                                                         Page 12 of 18 
 
mediation); 
iii. Section 8 (Interim relief by Court or 
Tribunal); 
iv. Section 9 (Power of Court or 
Tribunal to refer parties to 
mediation); 
v. Section 12 (Conflict of Interest and 
Disclosure); 
vi. Section 15 (Territorial Jurisdiction to 
undertake mediation); 
vii. Section 16 (Commencement of 
mediation); 
viii. Section 17 (Conduct of mediation); 
ix. Section 18 (Role of Mediator); 
x. Section 19 ( Role of Mediator in 
other proceedings); 
xi. Section 20 (Withdrawal by parties 
from mediation); 
xii. Section 2 1 (Time-limit for 
completion of mediation); 
xiii. Section 2 2- (Mediated Settlement 
Agreement); 
xiv. Section 23 (Confidentiality); 
xv. Section 2 4 (Admissibility, Privilege 
against Disclosure); 
xvi. Section 2 5 (Termination of 
Mediation); 
xvii. Section 26 (Court annexed 
mediation); 
xviii. Section 27 (Mediation by Lok Adalat 
35

                                                                                                         Page 13 of 18 
 
and Permanent Lok Adalat); 
xix. Section 28 (Status of Mediated 
Settlement Agreement); 
xx. Section 29 (Challenge to Mediated 
Settlement Agreement);  
xxi. Section 30 (Costs); 
xxii. Section 31 (Limitation); 
xxiii. Section 32 (Online mediation); 
 
14.  Section 44(3) states: 
“In order to facilitate settlement of a 
dispute for which an application has 
been received under sub -section ( 2), 
the concerned Authority constituted 
under the Legal Services Authorities 
Act, 1987 or the District Magistrate or 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate, as the case 
may be, shall constitute panel of three 
mediators.” 
The Legal Services Authority, DM or SDM 
may determine suitability for mediation: 
 
Upon receiving an application for community 
mediation, the concerned Authority constituted 
under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, 
District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional Magistrate 
may first determine whether the dispute is fit to 
be submitted for mediation  and then constitute 
the panel.  
Proposed amendment to Section 44(3): 
“In order to facilitate settlement of a dispute 
for which an application has been received 
under sub -section (2), the concerned 
Authority co nstituted under the Legal 
Services Authorities Act, 1987 or the District 
Magistrate or Sub -Divisional Magistrate, as 
the case may be, shall  after determining 
that the community dispute is fit to be 
resolved by mediation  constitute panel of 
three mediators.”  
 
15.  Section 45(4) states: 
Any settlement agreement arrived at 
under this Chapter shall be for the 
purpose of maintaining the peace, 
harmony and tranquillity amongst the 
residents or families of any area 
or locality but shall not be enforceable 
as a judgment or decree of a civil 
court. 
Settlement agreements arising from 
community mediation should be 
enforceable: 
 
Section 45(4) of the Mediation Bill provides 
that any settlement agreement arrived at under 
this Chapter shall be for the purpose of 
maintaining the peace, harmony and 
tranquillity amongst the residents or families of 
Deletion of Section 45(4). 
36

                                                                                                         Page 14 of 18 
 
any area or locality but shall not be 
enforceable as a judgment or decree of a civil 
court. Without an enforceable character, such 
settlement agreements will not be effective and 
therefore, this provision may be deleted. 
 
16.  Section 53(2)(b) states: 
“(2) In particular, and without 
prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such regulations 
may make provision for–– 
…. 
(b) qualification, experience and 
accreditation for mediators of foreign 
nationality under  the proviso to sub -
section (1) of section 10.” 
 
Deletion of  Section 53(2)(b): 
 
For the reasons stated above, we have 
suggested deletion of the Proviso to Section 
10(1). Correspondingly , Section 5 3(2)(b) may 
be deleted. 
Deletion of Section 53(2)(b). 
17.  United Nations Convention on 
International Settlement 
Agreements Resulting from 
Mediation (“Singapore 
Convention”) 
 
India became a signatory to the 
Singapore Convention on 7 August 
2019 but has not ratified the 
Singapore Convention yet. 
Singapore Convention to be ratified: 
 
The Singapore Convention  establishes a 
harmonized legal framework for the right to 
invoke international mediated settlement 
agreements as well as for their enforcement. 
 
Part III of the Draft Bill dated 29 October 2021 
(“Draft Bill ”) set out various provisions that 
gave effect to  the Singapore Convention. 
These included: 
i. Definition of mediated settlement 
agreement to which the Singapore 
India to ratify the Singapore Convention at 
the earliest so that provisions of Part III of the 
Draft Bill may be reinstated in the Bill.  
37

                                                                                                         Page 15 of 18 
 
 
 
Framework for Mediating Government Disputes 
 
Settlements often become difficult due to reluctance of government officers to take a  commercial approach to business disputes. Fear of 
retributive action haunts the  government officials. To be mediation ready, the Government may consider the  following framework of 
recommendations to empower government officials and enable decision making: 
 
Towards Effective Participation 
 
 Government to notify a clear list of subject heads and kinds of cases that may try mediation before going into arbitration or litigation. 
 
 Government to issue specific direction to departments and  government companies with large number of cases pending to encourage 
mediation as preferred form of dispute resolution. 
 
 Government to encourage departments and government companies to open a window of mediation for all ongoing arbitrations. 
Failing mediation, parties can revert to arbitration proceedings for remaining unresolved issues, if any. 
 
 Government to identify mediation service providers with robust codes of conduct and process rules to mediate government disputes. 
 
Convention applied; 
ii. Enforceability of such mediated 
settlement agreements; 
iii. Conditions for enforcement  of such 
mediated settlement agreements; 
 
Part III of the Draft Bill has been deleted from 
the text of the current version of the Bill as 
India has not yet ratified the Singapore 
Convention.  
 
38

                                                                                                         Page 16 of 18 
 
 Government to identify a panel of independent subject matter experts for expert opinion required during mediations of government 
disputes. 
 
Enabling Decision-Making 
 
 Threshold based Decision-Making - Departmental graded system with pecuniary limits empowering officials trained in mediation 
(Presenting Officer) to take decision to mediate and/or settle. 
 
 Collective Decision – A departmental decision matrix (Dept. Committee) for  collective decision by committee (trained in mediation) to 
mediate and/or settle.  Prior evaluation by Dept. Committee and confidential indication to Presenting  Officer(s) of range / terms of 
settlement. Ability of Presenting Officers to consult Dept. Committee as negotiations progress to recalibrate the range/terms. 
 
 Participation at the Mediation - Government to outline criteria for each department on who will participate in a mediation. Appointment 
of nodal officer  in every department. This criterion will at the very least identify (a) Minimum  Officer level at every department with 
decision making power (b) minimum officer level from the management side of the project who would have a good understanding of the 
dispute. Representatives along with Legal counsel to participate in at least one (1) session with the mediator and the other side. 
 
 Secretarial Oversight  – Decision to settle to be vetted by a high -level committee  (HLC). The HLC to have judicial (retired/sitting 
Supreme Court and High Court  Judges) and administrative representation (trained in mediation). HLC can accept/reject the proposal 
of the Presenting Officers 
 
Protection for Good-faith Actions 
 
 Good faith Exception – Good faith exception applicable to all bonafide decisions taken by Presenting Officers in line with the framework 
and in conjunction with the Dept. Committee and HLC. 
 
 Absolute Immunity – Absolute immunity to Presenting Officer(s), Dept. Committee and HLC for any settlement decision other than 
where there is evidence of bribe being given or disproportionate assets of participants to the mediation. 
 
 Prior Sanction – Previous sanction of independent committee (IC) necessary for any prosecution relating to a settlement decision. Each 
government department to constitute an IC with retired judicial, administrative and subject matter representation. 
 
 Limitation Period for Scrutiny – Any scrutiny to be initiated and completed within 
12 months of a settlement decision. This is to ensure that the circumstances/ecosystem in which decisions were taken are largely 
39

                                                                                                         Page 17 of 18 
 
similar to the circumstances in which the scrutiny is conducted. 
The edifice of Mediation stands on the pillars of confidentiality, party autonomy and  time and cost effectiveness. All attempts to be made to 
preserve these precepts. Strict timelines to be prescribed and adhered to at all stages of implementing the framework. 
 
i. Specific mediation training to be organized to ensure mediation readiness of all participants of the framework (including Presenting 
Officers, Dept. Committee, HLC and IC). 
ii. Government to engage in extensive training and awareness programs for officers and departmental representatives. The training 
programs may cover 
(a) understanding of interest-based negotiation process; (b) role of each participant in the process (c) the benefit of the process for 
their department (d) some skill sets to participate effectively in a mediation. 
iii. Government to implement pilot programs to establish proof of concept and viability of mediation for government disputes. 
iv. Central and State Governments to promulgate policies and protocols to effectively use mediation for resolving government disputes. 
Government companies to establish internal processes for implementation. 
v. Government to mandatorily include mediation clauses in all government contracts and tenders. 
vi. Government to encourage institutional mediation for resolution of governmental disputes. 
  
40

                                                                                                         Page 18 of 18 
 
ANNEXURE – A 
 
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN CONCILIATION AND MEDIATION  
 
 Conciliation Mediation 
1.  Conciliator plays more proactive role and is empowered to propose 
settlement terms as per Section 67(4) of the Arbitration Act. 
Conciliator can propose potential solutions to the parties to resolve 
the dispute as an expert in the domain.  
Mediator cannot p ropose settlement terms to the parties. 
Section 18 and 19 of the Bill do not confer such power to the 
mediator. No advisory role is played by the Mediator.  
 
2.  Conciliator is more proactive and interventionist and plays role of 
evaluator and intervener.  
Mediator plays the role of a facilitator.  
3.  Under Section 65(1) and 65(2) of the Arbitration Act, Conciliator 
may request each party to submit a brief written statement 
describing the general nature of the dispute and the points at issue. 
Conciliator may a lso request each party to submit a further written 
statement of its position and the facts and grounds in support 
thereof, supplemented by any documents and other evidence that 
such party deems appropriate. 
There is no provision of submitting written state ments in 
mediation.  
4.  Under Section 67(2) of the Arbitration Act, the conciliator shall be 
guided by principles of objectivity, fairness and justice, considering, 
among other things, the rights and obligations of the parties , the 
usages of the trade concerned and the circumstances surrounding 
the dispute, including any previous business practices between the 
parties. 
Under Section 18(1) of the Bill, Mediator shall attempt to 
facilitate voluntary resolution of the dispute by the parties and 
communicate the view of each party to the other to the extent 
agreed to by them, assist them in identifying issues, reducing 
misunderstandings, clarifying priorities, exploring areas of 
compromise and generating options in an attempt to resolve 
the dispute expeditiou sly, emphasising that it is the 
responsibility of the parties to take decision regarding their 
claims. Mediator is not required to be guided by the rights 
and obligations of the parties.  
 
41

 
 
Note on Mediation Bill 2021 
The Salient Features and Gaps of The Mediation Bill 2021 
The Mediation Bill , 2021  was introduced in Rajya Sabha on December 20, 2021 
where parties attempt to settle their dispute (outside courts) with the assistance of an 
independent third person (mediator).  The Bill seeks to promote mediation (including online 
mediation) and provide for enforcement of settlement agreements resulting from mediation.   
Salient features of the Bill include: 
1. Applicability: The Bill will apply to mediation proceedings  conducted in India 
where: 
 
(i) all parties reside in, are incorporated in, or have their place of business in 
India,  
(ii) the mediation agreement states that mediation will be as per this Bill, or  
(iii) there is an international mediation (i.e., mediation related to a commercial 
dispute where at least one party is a foreign government, a foreign 
national/resident, or an entity with its place of business outside India).  In 
these cases, if the central or state government is a party, the Bill will only 
apply to: (a) commercial disputes, and (b) other disputes as notified by such 
government. 
 
2. Pre-litigation mediation: In case of civil or commercial disputes, a person must try 
to settle the dispute by mediation before approaching any court or certain tribunals as 
notified.  Even if the parties fail to reach a settlement through pre-litigation mediation, 
the court or tribunal may at any stage of the proceedings refer the parties to mediation 
if they request for the same. 
 
3. Disputes not fit for mediation: Disputes not fit for mediation include those:  
(i) relating to claims against minors or persons of unsound mind,  
(ii) involving prosecution for criminal offences,  
(iii) affecting the rights of third parties, and  
(iv) relating to levy or collection of taxes.   
           The central government may amend this list of disputes. 
4. Mediation process:  Mediation proceedings will be confidential.  A party may 
withdraw from mediation after the first two mediation sessions.  The mediation 
process must be completed within 1 80 days (even if the parties fail to arrive at an 
agreement), which may be extended by another 180 days by the parties.  In case of 
court annexed mediation (i.e., mediation conducted at a mediation centre established 
by any court or tribunal), the process must be conducted in accordance with directions 
or rules framed by the Supreme Court or High Courts. 
 
5. Mediators: Mediators only assist the parties to settle their dispute and cannot impose 
a settlement on them.  Mediators may be appointed by:  
(i) the parties by agreement, or  
42

(ii) a mediation service provider (an institution administering 
mediation).  Mediators must disclose any conflict of interest that may raise 
doubts on their independence.  Parties may then choose to replace the 
mediator. 
 
6. Mediation Council of India: The central government will establish the Mediation 
Council of India.  The Council will consist of a chairperson, two full -time members 
(with experience in mediation or ADR), three ex -officio members (including 
Secretaries in the Ministries of Law and Justice and Finance), and one part-
time member (from an industry body).  Functions of the Council include:  
(i) registration of mediators, and  
(ii) recognising mediation service providers and mediation institutes 
(providing training, education and certification of mediators). 
 
7. Mediated settlement agreement: Agreements resulting from mediation must be 
in writing, signed by the parties and authenticated by the mediator.  Such agreements 
will be final, binding, and enforceable in the same manner as court judgments (except 
agreements arrived at after community mediation).  Mediated settlement agreements 
(besides those arrived at in court referred mediation or by Lok Adalat or Permanent 
Lok Adalat) may be challenged only on grounds of: (i) fraud, (ii) corr uption, (iii) 
impersonation, or (iv) relating to disputes not fit for mediation. 
 
8. Community mediation : Community mediation may be attempted to resolve 
disputes likely to affect the peace and harmony amongst residents of a locality.  It will 
be conducted by a panel of three mediators (may include persons of standing in the 
community, and representatives of RWAs). 
 
9. Interface with other laws:  The Bill will override other laws on mediation (except 
certain laws such as the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, and the Industrial 
Relations Code, 2020).  The Bill also makes consequential amendments in certain laws 
(such as the Indian Contract Act, 1872, and the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996).  
Gaps and Suggestions 
Despite formulating cogent pro visions that majorly tackle the immediate concerns 
surrounding the mediation process in the country, there are some factors that need in -depth 
deliberation. 
Following suggestions can be incorporated in the bill to eliminate ambiguities and establish a 
well-rounded framework to guide mediation processes. 
1. Under Section 22:  talks about confidentiality to be maintained by the parties to the 
dispute as well as the mediator.  However, the draft does not provide for any 
punishment / liability or the consequences which shall be imposed on one who wilfully 
infringes the said sectio n, thereby defeating the primary objective of the act of 
maintaining confidentiality. 
2. Under section 29 : an application for challenging the mediated settlement 
agreement may not be made after three months have elapsed from the date on which 
the party making that application has received the copy of mediated settlement 
agreement under section 21(3) of this Ac t. Provided that if the Court is satisfied that 
the applicant was prevented by “sufficient cause”  from making the application 
within the said period of three months it may entertain the application within a further 
period of thirty days, but not thereafter. The term “sufficient cause” for the delay in 
filing the challenge to the settlement agreement is ambiguous; therefore, it is 
43

suggestible that the draft should include specific and clear grounds under which the 
settlement agreement can be challenged even after three months. 
3. Under section 10: the bill provides that qualification, experience, and accreditation 
of the foreign, as well as domestic mediator, would be determined by the council. The 
same should be decided in consultation with the judiciary or a b ody of specialized 
individuals. Additionally, mediation shall become a viable career option for young 
professionals in the sector. 
 
4.  Vagueness: A few provisions under the said Bill suffer from vagueness and require 
clarity. For example: 
 
a) Explanation 1 to sub -section (1) of Section 2 states that “ if a party has more 
than one place of business, the place of business is that which has the 
closest relationship to the mediation agreement.” The said explanation 
has been loosely worded and is vag ue in nature. The Bill does not clarify the 
contours of the term ‘closest relationship to the mediation agreement’. Such 
confusion can purport and give rise to numerous other litigations. 
 
b) Even though the Bill has appreciably provided a list of disputes which may not be 
fit to be subject to a mediation proceeding, there is a compelling need to add certain 
tests, guidelines or criteria that may be adopted, in order to ascertain if the disputes 
are fit for subjecting it to mediation. Furthermore, there is an inconsistency 
plaguing the terminology used in  Under Section 7 of the Bill  which provides 
for the substantive provision relating to cases not fit for mediation, and Schedule 
II of the Bill provides the list of disputes not fit for mediation. Section 7 states 
“that mediation under this Part shall not be conducted for resolution 
of any dispute…”, whereas Schedule II provides that it contains a list of 
“disputes which may not be fit for resolution through mediation under 
Part 1.” 
 
c) The Bill provides that a domestic mediated settlement may be challenged on the 
ground of ’gross impropriety’, without making any endeavour to define the term 
or specify its contours. The lack of clarity may provide big freedom to the parties to 
resist the enforcement of a settlement agreement by bringing any and all challenges 
under the ground of ‘gross impropriety’. 
 
Conclusion 
 In conclusion, the bill does have its fair share of positive aspects. It is indeed a step in the right 
direction in terms of the recognition and promotion of mediation. The incorporation of law on 
mediation would not only help to build m ore confidence and trust in the mediation process, 
but also make it easier for businesses and commercial entities to resolve disputes in India. 
Additionally, the drafting committee must address the gaps and concerns mentioned above, 
with a view to making s ure that when the Mediation Act is enacted, it contains clear and 
elaborate provisions that facilitate, in a practical sense, the ADR mechanism of mediation 
 
 
44

 
FTCCI/2021-22/293        February 10, 2022 
Shri Goutam Kumar, 
Deputy Secretary 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
NEW DELHI. 
 
Respected Sir, 
 
SUBMISSIONS OF THE FEDERATION OF TELANGANA CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE AND 
INDUSTRY ON THE MEDIATION BILL, 2021  
Sr. No.  Comment  Recommendation  
-  
 
India is a signatory to the  United 
Nations Convention on 
international Settlement 
Agreements Resulting from 
Mediation (“Singapore 
Convention”). The earlier draft of 
the Mediation Bill published for 
public consultation incorpor ated 
provisions pertaining to the same. 
However, there were challenges 
with the language of those 
provisions.  
 
Instead of deleting the entire 
chapter on the Singapore 
Convention, Committee could have 
included a modified Part 2 in this 
draft. 
 
Including a Part 2 in the Act that 
deals with international mediated 
settlement agreements  under the 
Singapore Convention. The base 
draft could either be the Model Law 
or India could look at how the other 
9 countries who have ratified the 
Singapore Conven tion have 
incorporated the provisions of the 
Singapore Convention in their law.  
 
Section 2 (s) The term “Tribunal” is used in the Definition of “Tribunal” to be 
45

Tribunal 
 
Bill but has not been defined. The  
earlier draft of the Mediation Bill 
that was published for public 
consultation incorporated a 
definition. 
reinstated. 
Section 4 A mediator needs to be neutral and 
should not have the ability to 
impose (directly or indirectly) a 
solution upon the parties. This 
needs to be clearly specified. 
Reference can be taken from the 
Singapore Convention which 
stipulates that the  
the mediator to be “ lacking the 
authority to impose a solution 
upon the parties to the dispute.”  
 
Section 4 to be amended to state 
that the mediator be “ lacking the 
authority to impose a solution 
upon the parties to the dispute.” 
Section 7 read 
with First 
Schedule (Cases 
not fit for 
mediation) 
It is not uncommon that Parties 
may criminal allegations against 
each other in an otherwise 
seemingly civil dispute. In a real 
estate dispute, Parties allege fraud, 
criminal breach of trust, etc.  
 
Even in the matters that are 
pending before the various 
regulators (as specified in the First 
Schedule) not all of them would 
pertaining to issues of non -
compliance of law and could also 
include private party disputes. E.g. 
a shareholder can file a complai nt 
before SEBI for a delay in the 
Company not recording a transfer 
of shares. SEBI can exercise 
powers under the Companies Act, 
2013 as well. Parties should be 
free to mediate on such matters  
 
 
There should be no restriction on 
mediating of matters in the  First 
Schedule with the prior consent of 
the relevant regulator or to the 
extent the mediation is permitted in 
the underlying legislation.   
Section 22 (7) 
(Registration) 
An arbitration award does not 
require registration. It is not clear 
as to why a pro cess like mediation 
which is voluntary and has party 
autonomy has a stipulation for 
registration. One of the advantages 
of mediation is the fact that the 
Parties can keep the entire process 
confidential.  
 
Registration creates an 
This provision to be deleted.  
46

unnecessary procedural for mality 
that the parties in a dispute would 
need to comply with. The 
confidentiality of the parties is also 
a concern. 
 
Section 28 
(Enforcement) 
Section 28 (2) states that a 
mediated settlement agreement is 
enforceable as if it were a 
judgment or decree passed by a 
court.  
 
Per Section 3 (a) (ii) of the 
Singapore Convention places 
restrictions on enforcement of 
certain types of mediated 
settlement agreements when are 
enforceable as a judgment of a 
court.  
 
 
Section 28 to be amended to 
provide an exclusion to international 
mediated settlement agreements so 
that they can be enforced under the 
Singapore Convention (whether in 
India or overseas)  
 
Section 29 (3) It is not uncommon that the terms 
of a mediated se ttlement 
agreement includes performance 
obligations that would continue for 
months or even years.  
 
If the parties to a mediated 
settlement agreement discover a 
fraud or corruption or even 
impersonation during the course of 
performance of the obligations 
under the mediated settlement 
agreement, they would lose the 
right to challenge the terms of the 
mediated settlement agreement 
since the limitation period would 
have expired.  
 
 
Section 29 (3) to be amended to 
state that the limitation period, in the 
case o f fraud, impersonation or 
corruption would be calculated from 
the date on which a party became 
aware of the same.  
 
 
Section 34 
(Council) 
The constitution of the Council 
does not provide for regional 
representation of mediators.  
 
Further, there should al so be a 
requirement that all the Council 
members be trained in mediation.  
 
The provision be amended to 
include a requirement of training for 
all Council members. 
 
It is suggested that the Country be 
divided into 4 -5 Zones and the 
Council include 1 mediator from 
each Zone. Within a Zone, there be 
equal opportunity for all States to 
have a mediator nominee by turns. 
The mediator nominee of a State to 
47

be selected by th e State 
Government in consultation with the 
Chief Justice of the relevant State. 
 
New provision The Bill is silent on mediators 
immunity.  
To be included. Rule 22 of the 
Mediation and Conciliation Rules, 
2004 of the Delhi High Court to be 
incorporated can  be the base for 
such provision. 
 
Sir, we request your good self to consider the above recommendations and amend the 
Mediation Bill, 2021 suitably. 
 
Look forward for your positive consideration.  
 
 
Yours sincerely,  
 
 
K. Bhasker Reddy  
President, FTCCI 
48

Mediation Bill,2021
Suggestions and Comments
Centre for Mediation and Conciliation (CMC) is an initiative of Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry
49

Centre for Mediation and Conciliation (CMC) is an initiative of Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry
At the outset, we would like to thank the esteemed members of the honorable Parliamentary Standing
Committee for giving us the opportunity to provide our suggestions to the draft of the Mediation Bill, 2021
(“Mediation Bill”). 
 
The suggestions that are being presented today is the collective effort of members of the Centre for Mediation
and Conciliation (“CMC”). The members of CMC come from diverse backgrounds and include mediators,
lawyers, representatives of the industry, etc. Some of our members are part of other mediation organizations,
such as Mediators India and they have brought the collective wisdom of their respective organizations, while
putting together the views of CMC with respect to the Mediation Bill.
 
The suggestions being presented today are limited to key issues that we feel need to be addressed in the
Mediation Bill. The changes to the draft Mediation Bill have been prepared by Mediators India, with inputs
from several of the members of CMC and therefore CMC endorses the said draft Mediation Bill. 
50

Centre for Mediation and Conciliation (CMC) is an initiative of Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry
OVERVIEW OF
THE
CONCERNS
THAT WE
WOULD LIKE
TO ADDRESS
Constitution of the Mediation Council;
First Schedule (Excluded Matters);
Singapore Convention;
Period for Challenge;
Jurisdiction;
Registration;
Termination, Immunity and Being called as a Witness;
Mediator to lack authority to impose;
Second Schedule (read with Section 56) - overriding effect;
Amendment to other legislations (including Schedule 7, 8 and 9);
Online Mediation;
Community Mediation;
Procedural delays
51

Centre for Mediation and Conciliation (CMC) is an initiative of Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry
MEDIATION
COUNCIL
All the members of the Council should be knowledgeable in mediation
and should understand the issues and concerns pertaining to mediation.
This does not come through in the Mediation Bill. 
Further, the term should be long enough to ensure continuity and short
enough to ensure that there are no legacy issues. 
Suggestion: We suggest that the Council comprise of 9 (nine) members
that includes 3 mediators. Further, we suggest that the Chairperson be
appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the Chief
Justice of India and the mediator members be appointed by the Chief
Justice of India. 
Additionally, we suggest that the term of the members be reduced to 3
(three) years.
52

Centre for Mediation and Conciliation (CMC) is an initiative of Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry
FIRST
SCHEDULE
Limitation of the powers of the Court to refer matters to mediation – In the current legal landscape, the Court has
the power and discretion to refer any matter to mediation, depending on the facts and circumstances. However,
the Mediation Bill empowers the Courts to do so only in compoundable matters. 
Parties tend to forum shop and criminal allegations and allegations of fraud, coercion etc are common even in
civil / commercial disputes. Matters such as cheque bouncing, matrimonial matters (dowry harassment ),
corporate-criminal matters (e.g. oppression mismanagement), civil-criminal matters (family disputes) would all
be excluded from mediation if the First Schedule is not amended.  
Suggestion: Parties be able to mediate on matters that are compoundable without requiring permission of the
court. 
For other matters, the Bill to (i) enable an authority before whom a dispute is pending to refer the matter for
mediation, either suo moto or upon joint application by the parties; and (ii) provide that any such mediated
settlement agreement would need to be confirmed by the court and such court to have the power to strike
down the mediated settlement agreement if the same is against public policy or is violative of the law. 
Rights of a third party are provided for in the First Schedule. It is important that the rights of third parties (who
are not mediating parties) are safeguarded.
Suggestion: A separate provision be incorporated for the same in Section 22 (5) and Section 28 and it be
deleted from the First Schedule.
53

Centre for Mediation and Conciliation (CMC) is an initiative of Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry
ENFORCEABILITY
OF MEDIATED
SETTLEMENT
AGREEMENTS,
WHERE
MEDIATION
PROCEEDINGS
TAKE PLACE
OUTSIDE INDIA
The draft Mediation Bill, 2021 (“Mediation Bill”) only deals with mediations that
are conducted in India. It does not apply to mediations that take place outside of
India, but need to be enforced in India.  
India is a signatory to the United Nations Convention on International Settlement
Agreements Resulting from Mediation (“Singapore Convention”) but is yet to ratify
the same. To enable India to ratify the Singapore Convention and ensure that
international mediated settlement agreements are enforceable under the Singapore
Convention, India needs to have a law that would provide for such enforceability. 
Suggestion: While some countries such as Singapore have two legislations (one
for domestic mediation) and the other for enforceability of international mediated
settlement agreements under the Singapore Convention, it is suggested that there
be one legislation that deals with both (i) domestic mediation and enforceability of
domestic mediated settlement agreements; and (ii) enforceability of mediated
settlement agreements outside India (which includes both Convention and non-
Convention Countries).
54

Centre for Mediation and Conciliation (CMC) is an initiative of Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry
ENFORCEABILITY OF
INTERNATIONAL
COMMERCIAL MEDIATED
SETTLEMENT
AGREEMENTS FOR
MEDIATIONS
CONDUCTED IN INDIA, 
UNDER THE SINGAPORE
CONVENTION, 
IN A MEMBER STATE
COUNTRY
Section 28 (2) - a mediated settlement agreement is enforceable as if it were a
judgment or decree passed by a court. This would also be applicable to
international commercial mediation that take place in India. 
Section 3 (a) (ii) of the Singapore Convention - the Singapore Convention does
not apply to settlement agreements concluded during court proceedings that are
enforceable as a judgment in the State of that court. 
Parties should not lose the benefit of the Singapore Convention only because the
mediated settlement agreement is construed to be a judgment of a court in India.  
Suggestion: It would be advisable that the legislation enables parties to a
international commercial mediation that was conducted in India to have the
same enforced under the Singapore Convention before the courts of other
member countries, else India will lose out on being a hub for such mediations.
55

Centre for Mediation and Conciliation (CMC) is an initiative of Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry
PERIOD OF
CHALLENGE
Section 29 (3) The period of limitation for challenge is 90 days (or the extension of 90 days) from the date of
receipt of the mediated settlement agreement and not the actual cause of action. 
A mediated settlement agreement does not always include a one time payment / performance obligation. Very
often, the obligations are spread over a period of time. 
Further, the mediated settlement agreement may be based on certain confirmations/ representations/ statements
made by the parties. 
There appears to be an assumption that any fraud, corruption, gross impropriety or impersonation would come to
the knowledge of the parties within such limited period. 
Per Section 19 of the Indian Contract Act, when consent to an agreement is caused by coercion, fraud or
misrepresentation, it becomes voidable at the option of the party whose consent was so caused. 
The Supreme Court, in Mohd. Noorul Hoda v. Bibi Raifunnisa and Others (1996) 7 SCC 767 Prem Singh v.
Birbal, AIR 2006 SC 3608, Mohinder Singh Verma v. J P S Verma, 2015 AIR(CC) 3043 – Limitation period to
be computed for cancellation of a transaction on the ground of coercion, under influence or fraud to be computed
under Article 59 of the Limitation Act (i.e. 3 years from the date of knowledge)
Suggestion: The limitation period to be computed from the date on which a party becomes aware of the fraud,
corruption, gross impropriety or impersonation. Further, the limitation period to be reconciled with those as
provided under the Limitation Act. 
56

Centre for Mediation and Conciliation (CMC) is an initiative of Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry
JURISDICTION
Parties are free to choose the choice of law as well as jurisdiction that would govern
disputes with respect to contracts that they execute. 
In the case of online mediation, jurisdiction would would also determine whether it
is a domestic mediation or an international mediation. 
Further, disputes are not always under the exclusive territorial jurisdiction of any
one court and in some disputes (e.g. infringement, there could be more than one
territorial jurisdiction). 
Section 15 should not dilute the freedom and flexibility of the parties, especially
where the parties have contractually agreed on the jurisdiction. Even in online
mediation, the choice of jurisdiction as contractually agreed should be honoured. 
Suggestion: Section 15 to be modified to retain the flexibility of the parties to
determine the jurisdiction for the purpose of resolution of disputes. 
57

Centre for Mediation and Conciliation (CMC) is an initiative of Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry
REGISTRATION
By creating a requirement for registration of all mediated settlement agreements, an
unwarranted layer of bureaucracy and formality is being introduced. It is not clear if such
registration would be at an additional cost to the parties (such as registration fees) and what
would be the consequence of non-registration, since the legislation states that it does not
impact the enforceability. 
It may be noted that under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 neither an arbitration
award nor a conciliation award require any registration. 
Suggestion: All provisions pertaining to registration to be deleted. The Mediation Bill
already includes creation of an electronic depository. In the alternate, one of more
depositories can be created, where a mediated settlement agreement can be voluntarily and
without any compulsion be electronically uploaded at the discretion of the Parties. A
mediation institute/mediation service provider possessing prescribed infrastructure could
also be recognized as a depository. A unique depository number can be created, which
would be shared only with the Parties and the mediator. 
Adequate provisions to safeguard the confidentiality of the mediated settlement agreement
and the process would need to be implemented as well. 
58

Centre for Mediation and Conciliation (CMC) is an initiative of Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry
TERMINATION;
IMMUNITY AND
BEING A
WITNESS
Termination: Section 13 – Mediation is a voluntary process. A party is free to
terminate the mediation at any time and the parties are free to change the mediator
by mutual agreement. 
Suggestion: Therefore, the justification of ground for termination of a mediator
or the need for giving a mediator a fair hearing is not required. 
Immunity: The immunity provisions for a mediator are not adequate. 
Suggestion: A provision similar to that set out in the Mediation and Conciliation
Rules, 2004 of the Delhi High Court to be incorporated. 
Mediator as a witness: Per Section 19 (2) of the Mediation Bill, the parties can
mutually agree to require a mediator to be a witness in legal proceedings. The
mediation proceedings are confidential and there could be third party rights, which
may get impacted if a mediator is to be called upon as a witness. 
Suggestion: This provision is to be deleted. A mediator should not be called as a
witness under any circumstance, even with the consent of the parties. 
59

Centre for Mediation and Conciliation (CMC) is an initiative of Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry
MEDIATOR TO
LACK
AUTHORITY TO
IMPOSE
A mediator needs to be neutral and should not have the ability to impose
(directly or indirectly) a solution upon the parties. The Singapore
Convention requires the mediator to be “lacking the authority to impose a
solution upon the parties to the dispute.” This is a fundamental
requirement of mediation.
However, these words are absent in the definition of mediation under the
draft Bill. 
Suggestion: To keep the sanctity of the process of mediation and ensure
that a settlement is truly voluntary, the words as used in the Singapore
Convention to be included in the definition of mediation in the draft
Bill as well. 
60

Centre for Mediation and Conciliation (CMC) is an initiative of Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry
SECOND
SCHEDULE
(OVERRIDING
EFFECT) 
Section 56 - Subject to the enactments mentioned in the Second Schedule, the Mediation Bill to have an overriding effect for
conduct of mediation or conciliation. Central Government can amend the Second Schedule.
Section 56 only deals overriding effect for conduct of the mediation or conciliation and does not deal with any provisions for
enforceability of any mediated settlement agreements pursuant to such mediation or conciliation. 
The legislations in the Second Schedule are (i) The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947; (ii) The Brahmaputra Board Act, 1980;
(iii) The Cine-Workers and Cinema Theatre Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1981; (iv) The Family Courts Act,
1984; (v) The Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987; (vi) The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizen Act,
2007; (vii) The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013; (viii) The
Finance Act, 20l6; and The Industrial Relations Code, 2020.
Not all of the above legislations have provisions for conduct of mediation or conciliation. 
Suggestion: The legislations as mentioned above are reviewed to ensure that adequate provisions for (i) conduct of
mediation or conciliation are provided; and (ii) enforceability of mediated settlement agreements are captured. By way of
illustration, while the The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013
provides for the Internal Committee to resolve a sexual harassment complaint by conciliation if so requested by the victim,
it does not provide for any mechanism on how such conciliation shall be conducted (including whether or not, the
Internal Committee can act as conciliators or does it need to be before a neutral third party). The said legislation also does
not specify the implications of a breach of any settlement agreement. 
Further, Section 56 (1) to be revised to be amended to include enforceability of a settlement agreement to also be as per
the Mediation Bill. 
61

Centre for Mediation and Conciliation (CMC) is an initiative of Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry
AMENDMENT
TO OTHER
LEGISLATIONS
(SEVENTH,
EIGHTH AND
NINETH
SCHEDULE)
Seventh Schedule (MSME Act) - Para 2 of the Seventh Schedule enables the Facilitation Council to either mediate the dispute itself or
refer the same to a service provider. Further, if mediation fails, then per Para 4, the Facilitation Council has the power to arbitrate the
matter as well. Suggestion: The same body who mediates should not be entitled to arbitrate as well since they would have access to
privileged information during the course of mediation. 
Eighth Schedule (Companies Act) - Per Section 6, a party before filing any suit or proceedings of civil or commercial nature in any
court, shall take steps to settle the disputes by pre-litigation mediation. While, the Mediation Bill stipulates that such pre-litigation
mediation for commercial disputes of Specified Value would be undertaken in accordance with the provisions of section 12A of the
Commercial Courts Act, 2015, it states that Section 6 would be applicable to only those tribunals that are notified by the Central
Government or a State Government, as the case may be.
The Mediation Bill, therefore does not contemplate application of Section 6 to matters before the NCLT/NCLAT unless the same is
specifically notified. Per the Eighth Schedule, a party may seek reference of a matter to mediation or the NCLT/NCLAT may refer the
matter for mediation. 
In a private mediation, the fees of the mediator would be as mutually agreed to between the parties. Suggestion: Therefore, where
there is a reference to mediation of a matter pending before the NCLT/NCLAT, the fees payable should be as mutually agreed
between the Parties and the mediator. 
Ninth Schedule (Commercial Courts Act) - The provisions of the Ninth Schedule limits the options of the parties to choose mediators.
This is also in conflict with the provisions of Section 6 (3). Suggestion: The choice of the parties with respect to choice of mediators
with respect to commercial mediation to be as specified in Section 6 (3). 
Others - The Mediation Bill does not make any amendments to the provisions of the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act,
2016 (“RERA”). Section 32 (g) of RERA requires the authority to take measures to facilitate amicable conciliation of disputes
between the promoters and the allottees through dispute settlement forums set up by the consumer or promoter associations. No such
mechanism has been provided, though some States have formed conciliation forums for such purpose. Suggestion: It is suggested that
the enforceability of the settlement agreements pursuant to such conciliation be enforceable as per the provisions of the Mediation
Bill.
62

Centre for Mediation and Conciliation (CMC) is an initiative of Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry
ONLINE
MEDIATION
Mediation is versatile and flexible and is also very informal. Mediation can be entire in
physical mode or entirely remote (including online (video), text based (email, chat, etc),
telephonic (audio calls)) or hybrid. 
Prescribing or over-prescribing the modalities and mechanisms that can be used for
online mediation could take away the flexibility that is available with the parties in
structuring the manner and process of mediation. By way of illustration: While a
mediator may use encrypted electronic email, the parties may not (and they may not
even be aware of what encrypted electronic email is). Even with video calls, access
would depend on device as well as bandwidth. 
Suggestion: Section 32 (2) be deleted and Section 32 (1) be limited to being an enabler
without specifying the manner or mode of online mediation. 
63

Centre for Mediation and Conciliation (CMC) is an initiative of Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry
COMMUNITY
MEDIATION
Mediated Settlement Agreements arising out of community mediation also need to be enforceable.
While, it may not be practical or sound for them to be measured with the same yardstick as civil or
commercial mediations and be enforceable as a decree of the court, the Mediation Bill could allow
the parties to approach the court to confirm the terms of the mediated settlement agreement and
upon such confirmation, the mediated settlement agreement would be enforceable. 
Further, the Mediation Bill stipulates that community mediation can be undertaken only by 3
mediators who are empaneled by the Authority constituted under the Legal Services Authorities
Act, 1987 or the District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional Magistrate. This takes away the right of the
community members to appoint mediators of their choice in a community dispute. 
Further, grass-root mediation processes sometimes involves a larger number of people sitting as
mediators. By limiting the number to 3, the community cultural / customary / freedom and
flexibility is also limited. 
Suggestion: The provisions of Chapter IX to be amended to (i) give the community members the
choice of the mediators to be appointed; (ii) remove any limit on the number of mediators that
may be appointed; and (iii) a mediated settlement agreement in a community mediation to be
confirmed by a court for it to be enforceable as a judgment or decree of the court.  
64

Centre for Mediation and Conciliation (CMC) is an initiative of Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry
PROCEDURAL
DELAYS
While the intent of the Mediation Bill is noble, procedural
delays in (i) referring a matter to pre-litigation mediation;
(ii) appointment of a mediator, where the parties request the
court to nominate a mediator; (iii) consent or confirmation
of the court in confirming any mediated settlement
agreement, would defeat the purpose of mediation and
frustrate the parties. 
Suggestion: The Mediation Bill to provide for timelines
within which a court is to dispose matters pertaining to
mediation.
65

Centre for Mediation and Conciliation (CMC) is an initiative of Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry
QUESTIONS?
 THANK YOU!
66

1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS ON  
THE 
DRAFT MEDIATION BILL 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by  
 
 
 
 
 
CENTRE FOR ALTERNATE DISPUTE RESOLUTION 
(CADR) 
NATIONAL LAW UNIVERSITY DELHI 
 
 
 
 
MARCH 22, 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
67

2 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENT 
 
 
1. Introduction              3 
 
2. Part I             4-6 
         
- General Comments 
 
3. Part II             7-9 
- Specific Comments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68

3 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
The Centre for ADR of the National Law University Delhi would like to express our heartfelt 
gratitude for the Parliamentary Committee on the Draft Bill to seek our comments on the Bill. 
 
We are also very thankful to the Committee for accepting most of the suggestions which we had 
sent earlier in November 2021. 
 
However, we have few concerns with the current Bill which we are submitting for your perusal. 
 
In Part I, we submit few general comments on the Bill and in Part II we have provided section wise 
comments for the committee to consider.  
 
The Honourable Vice Chancellor, Prof. (Dr.) S.K.D. Rao has convened a Faculty Seminar t o 
discuss the Mediation Bill.  The Directors from different Research Centres of NLU Delhi, involved 
in cutting edge research in niche areas, participated in the seminar and gave their valuable 
suggestions/comments on the Mediation Bill.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
69

4 
 
PART I 
 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
 
 
I. Mandatory Pre-litigation Mediation 
1. It may be deleted because 
a. Implementation of mandatory Pre-litigation mediation will put lot of pressure on the 
finances of the State.  
b. Most of the countries provide for pre-litigation mediation in certain categories of 
disputes not in all civil cases. 
c. It will add to the time and cost of litigation (if it is not offered free of cost). 
d. It is difficult to have both/all the parties to participate in mediation at the pre-litigation 
stage. 
2. If it has to be retained than 
a. There must be specification of types of disputes or pecuniary limits for cases to go for 
mandatory pre-litigation mediation. 
b. This provision can be introduced for a limited period of time. 
c. There should be an active role of lawyers in these pre-litigation processes like in Italy. 
d. We may instead of this, adopt few of the Pre-Action Protocols of England which can 
serve the purpose of cutting down time and cost of litigation. Mediation can be one of 
these Protocols.  
e. We can instead introduce Pre-Litigation Judicial Settlement Conference or Pre-Trial 
Conference. 
3. In case we delete pre -litigation mediation, than the Bill provides for Agreement to Mediate 
which is good step but we can also provide for stay of court proceedings in case of breach of 
an agreement to mediate like Section 8 of Singapore Mediation Act 2018.  
 
II. Confidentiality 
1. The mandatory requirement of registration and electronic depository of mediated settlement 
agreement is against the basic quality of mediation. None of the mediation laws, 
internationally, provide for mandatory registration or depository of settlement agreement. 
2. Even if it has to be there than 
a. It can be subject to party autonomy. 
b. It can be specified that the registration will be similar to Wills and Power of Attorneys 
under the Registration Act. 
III. Exclusion of Disputes involving Government Bodies 
70

5 
 
1. Under Section 2 (2) of the Bill, there is an exclusion of cases where government is a party. 
This is a cause of concer n for us as government is the biggest litigator in our country and so 
like Singapore Mediation Act 2017 under section 5, the Act should be binding on government 
too. We feel there is no harm in giving a chance to mediation for settling disputes in which 
government is a party.  
IV. Exclusion of Court – Annexed Mediation and certain other mediations 
1. The Act does  not create incentives to partie s to opt for private mediations  as there are very 
significant differences if parties go  for private mediation and they undergo court annexed 
mediation programs. 
2. Exclusion of court -annexed mediation and mediation under the Legal Service Authority Act 
does not serve the purpose of bringing a uniform law governing the practice of mediation.  
3. Excluding court-annexed mediation would mean that mediation would continue to govern by 
different rules of different High Courts. For development of any system, there is a need of 
bringing uniformity. Also, the Rules of High Court governing mediation require serious 
reconsideration due to huge gap between the actual practice of mediation in Court -Annexed 
Mediation Centres and the provisions of the Rules1. 
4. We can even include few matters related to tax, traffic challans, section 138 Negotiable 
Instruments Act, etc under Sec 6 and Sec. 7. 
 
V. Role of Legal Services Authority 
1. The purpose of creating Legal Service Authorities was completely different and the Bill has given 
the addition responsibility of administering mediation also to LSA. There is a need of some level 
of expertise which will be required for administering mediation services, if the country wants to 
maintain the quality of mediation services. Also, when the Bill recognises the Mediation Service 
Providers and also court annexed mediation Centre, etc., than there is no need of creating 
multiplicity of authorities to implement the mandate of the Act.  
2. We may promote state funded mediation services like Delhi Dispute Resolution Society to 
administer mediation services. 
VI. List of Exclusions  
1. Exclusions are very widely worded. There is a scope of litigation on the issue o f exclusions which 
is not the purpose of the Bill. For promoting use of mediation, the exclusions should be less and 
clearly stated.  
2. There is a cause of concern as at what stage and who will decide whether the dispute comes under 
prohibited category or not, is it the mediator or the Mediation Service Provider or the court. 
 
VII. International Commercial Mediation (ICM)  
1. Definition of the word “commercial” is different from the Singapore Conve ntion. Recently, 
few High Courts have passed some very contradictory judgments on the meaning of “commercial” 
(Investment disputes are not considered to be commercial disputes)2.  
                                                           
1 Ruhi Paul, “Need to Re – Look into the Rules Governing Mediation”,  M.D.U, Vol. XIX, July 2017, ISSN:2230-746X 
2 UOI v. Vodafone group PLC, CS (OS) 383/2017 DHC   
71

6 
 
2. List of exclusions: The Act only provides for International Commercial Mediation. Online dispute 
resolution has worked wonderfully with consumer disputes. All of these disputes are excluded 
currently under the Bill whereas these kinds of international disputes - including personal disputes, 
disputes related to employment, succession, marriage and custody - often settled easily.  
3. The Bill does not provide for enforcement of International mediated settlement agreement.   
 
VIII. Grounds Of Challenge 
 
1. No need of grounds of challenging the settlement agreement like Section 96  CPC provides no 
right of appeal against a consent decree. Agreement entered under section 89 will be final but 
agreement entered under Mediation Act can be challenged. 
2.  We need to clearly define accountability/duties of parties, how mediator has to conduc t the 
process, Mediator’s privilege, etc to avoid challenges in the court, else there will be lot of scope of 
judicial interpretation which will dilute the purpose of mediation as an alternative to courts and 
give rise to satellite litigation.  
3. Fraud as a ground has been a ground of litigation in arbitration matters also3. Internationally, fraud 
cannot vitiate the arbitration agreement unless it is very specific and serious. So, we need to 
clarify what types of fraud would be a ground for challenge of settlement agreements.  
4. The Bill doesn’t provide for automatic stay (or no stay) of the enforcement of mediated settlement 
agreement in case of a challenge.  
IX. Community Mediation 
1. The long title of the Bill says that the Bill provides for enforcement of mediated settlement 
agreement but the same is not the case in community mediation. 
X. Consumer Mediation 
1. Under Section 38 of the Consumer Protection Act, the maximum time for disposal of a 
consumer complaint is 5 months. The Bill will increase the time of disposal of complaints. 
2. Under Rule 7 of Consumer Protection ( Consumer Dispu tes Redressal Commissions) Rules 
2020, the maximum fee is Rs. 7500. The cost may also increase under the Bill.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
3 A. Ayyasamy v. A. Paramasivam and Ors. (2016), Avitel Post Studioz Limited and Ors. v. HSBC PI Holdings (Mauritius) Limited 
and Ors. (2020), Ameet Lalchand Shah v. Rishabh Enterprises (2018), Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading Corporation (2021), etc.   
72

7 
 
PART II 
 
SPECIFIC COMMENTS 
 
 
 
SECTION WISE COMMENTS 
 
 
1. Section 2(2) – Disputes in which government is a party should be included (like Singapore Mediation 
Act) with some exclusions (if needed). 
 
2. Section 3(f)  -  International mediation ma y be commercial as well as non -commercial (discussed 
above) as the Preamble to the Bill talks about mediation which is commercial or otherwise. Though 
the Singapore Convention only talks about commercial mediation but that doesn’t mean that we can 
not include other types in our law. 
 
3. Section 6 – May be deleted or amended (as discussed in General Comments). 
 
4. Section 7 – If we refer to Schedule I,  
a. Instead of Entry 1, we can just have list of disputes which are excluded. 
b. in view of entry no.1 we can do away with entry no.5 (which has words like public policy, 
morality, etc) as it has already been a source of lot of litigation and repeated amendments 
under section 34/48 of the Arbitration Act of India.  
c. In respect of entry 3, it is no needed to be completely excluded from mediation but we could 
add that such agreements have to be submitted to the court for approval and court has to 
ensure the best interest of the legally incapable person as is done under Order XXXII CPC. 
d. Entry 7 doesnot make any sense as in mediation, all the parties which have some interest are 
considered to be party to the dispute and we do not have necessary party like in litigation. 
Even the definition of party in the Bill is wide enough.  
 
5. Section 8 – There should be some time limit within which to commence mediation process after the 
interim relief is granted by the court/tribunal like section 9 of the Arbitration Act. 
 
6. Section 9  (1) – Under Section 89 CPC, the consent of parties is not needed for referring them to 
mediation. 
 
7. Section 10 (1)  – There can be a provi sion that in case sole mediator in International Mediation, the  
mediator may be of national other than the nationality of the parties to ensure neutrality. 
 
8. Section 13 (ii) - there is no need to allow “any other person” to be able to challenge the mandate of a 
mediator. 
 
9. Section 20(1) - Making 2 sessions mandatory is against the philosophy of mediation and it will just 
add up to the litigation time. 
- This may be needed for pre-  
 
10. Section 21- There is no need of blanket rule of 6 months’ time for mediation for all types of cases. We 
may say that maximum time is six months within which mediation has to be completed.  
73

8 
 
 
11. Section 21(2) – both clauses talk about 180 days. So, we think there is a typographical er ror in clause 
2. 
 
12. Section 22 – Neither the Singapore Convention nor the Singapore Mediation Act 2017 provides for 
mandatory registration of settlement agreement.  This is against the confidential nature of the 
proceedings. It should be depending upon the w ill of the parties whether they want to register the 
agreement or not. 
 
13. Section 22 (3)  – The phrase “failure report” may be deleted and instead it may be provided that the 
mediator may send the case back as not settled.  
 
14. Section 22 (8) – Is not clear. 
 
15. Section 26  – There is no need to exclude court annexed mediation from the Bill due to reasons 
discussed above in general comments section. 
 
16. Section 26(4) - It was never mandatory to submit the agreement to the court under Section 89 CPC in 
view of the confidentiality of the process. It was depending upon the will of the parties and if parties 
choose to submit the agreement than under Order XXIII CPC court could pass a consent decree.  
 
17. Section 29 (2)  - The ground of impersonation is vague and it is not clear what sort of and whose 
impersonation is being required here. Anyways, it can be included in fraud also. Also, the ground of 
fraud is also very vague and it can be main ground for challenging the agreements. The grounds are 
not in sync with the Mediation Convention or the Singapore Mediation Act. 
 
18. Section 29 (3)  – Time period is too short in cases of fraud as sometimes fraud is discovered much 
later. Even under Section 17 of the Limitation Act, time period start from the date of discovery of 
fraud or mistake or the date when parties could have discovered it. So, some such clause should be 
added here also. 
 
19. Section 30 – The fee should not be left at the d iscretion of parties as it can lead to exploitation in 
cases of imbalance of power between parties. 
 
20. Section 32 – There is a need to reframe the section as it is not clearly drafted. The language of the 
previous Bill was still better. 
 
21. Section 34  – For eli gibility for the Council, expertise in Mediation should be mentioned as if 
experience in ADR is the criteria than experts in Arbitration will be selected as ADR in India still 
mean arbitration whereas Arbitration and Mediation is completely different from each other. 
 
22. Section 40  – Neither the Mediation Convention nor the Singapore Mediation Act provides for 
electronic depository of mediated settlement agreements. In view of confidentiality of the process, 
there is no need of making registration and digital depository mandatory. These should be voluntary 
and only for the purpose of enforcement of the settlement. Even most of the Arbitral Institutions 
doesn’t publish the arbitral awards.   
 
23. Section 44 (2)  – Instead of DM and SDM, community mediation can be adm inistered by mediation 
service providers or govt. mediation services like Delhi Dispute Resolution Society of Delhi. The 
74

9 
 
SDM and DM may refer such disputes to mediation but they may not be the appropriate authority to 
administer mediation services.  
 
24. Section 44 (5) – It should be mandatory for these lay people to undergo mediation training programs 
before they could act as mediators. 
 
25. Section 45  – There is no need of having a panel of three mediators for all types of community 
disputes as having more mediators will make it less cost and time efficient.  
 
26. Schedule V – We should not use mediation and conciliation as the purpose of this Bill is to put an end 
to the confusion between mediation and conciliation. 
 
Submitted by Centre for ADR  
 
 
 
 
Prof. (Dr.) Ruhi Paul  
(Director, Centre for ADR, NLU Delhi) 
**** 
 
 
 75

 
SCHOOL OF LAW 
14.02.2022 
To, 
Shri. Goutam Kumar 
Deputy Secretary 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
New Delhi – 110001 
rs-memocpers@sansad.nic.in 
 
Reference: Press Communique dated 28th January 2022 with the subject 
Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice examining “The Mediation Bill 
2021” 
 
Dear Sir, 
 
Greetings from UPES School of Law.  We are a recognised Center for Legal Education 
under the UPES University situated in the State of Uttarakhand.  Pursuant to the 
aforesaid public invitation to submit comments on the proposed “The Mediation Bill 
2021”, our Alternate Dispute R esolution Society of the Law School would like to 
submit its views on the proposed Bill on behalf of School of Law, UPES, Dehradun. 
 
Comments in Annexure  1 are s ubmitted for kind consideration of the Hon’ble 
Members of the Parliamentary Standing Committee .  Undersigned is  a trained 
mediator from ICADR and has been instrumental in launching the 40 Hours mediation 
training for commercial med iators while working at IICA.  More than hundred 
commercial mediators were trained many of which got empanelled under Section 442 
of the Companies Act.  It would be my pleasure to appear before the Hon ’ble 
Committee as a witness to present my views on the Mediation Bill. 
 
Thanking you for your kind consideration 
 
Sincerely 
 
Dr. Vijay Kumar Singh 
Professor & Dean 
School of Law, UPES Dehradun 
vksingh@ddn.upes.ac.in / vrsingh.vk@gmail.com 
9891500707 
  
76

ANNEXURE 1 
 
At the outset, we would like to complement the Government for bringing in this much 
awaited Mediation Bill to be considered by the stakeholders.  Mediatio n is emerging 
as one of the imp ortant dispute resolution mechanism which provides for a win -win 
solution for the parties at loggerhead.  It provides for a treatment of dispute not at 
superficial level but goes deep into the iceberg to find out the warring interests and 
addresses the core of the dispute through a trained mediator. 
 
The Bill has been well drafted to support institutional mediation and calls for 
appreciation, however, as it is said, there is always a scope of improvement, the 
Parliamentary Committee may like to consider and deliberate upon the following 
inputs: 
 
Clause Proposed Comments 
2(2) 
(2) The provisions of sub -
section ( 1) shall not apply 
wherein one of the parties to 
the dispute is the Central 
Government or a State 
Government, or agencies, 
public bodies,  corporations 
and local bodies, including 
entities controlled or owned 
by such Government,  except 
where the matter pertains to a 
commercial dispute: 
Provided that nothing shall 
prevent the Central 
Government or a State 
Government from  notifying, 
such kind o f dispute, as it 
deems appropriate for such 
Government, for resolution  
through mediation under this 
Act, wherein such 
Government, or agencies, 
public bodies,  corporations 
and local bodies including 
entities controlled or owned 
by them, is a party. 
Govt. is considered to be the biggest 
litigant in the country .  Courts have 
several times highlighted this issue to 
the e xtent that the  Chief Justice of 
Calcutta High Court had said “90% of 
the litigation against the government 
could be avoided if the government 
functionary gave relief to the litigant at 
the stage of notice instead of dragging 
the litigation on.”  Ministry of Law and 
Justice 2017 report shows 46% of the 
cases entering judicial system are 
coming from the Govt. 
 
The exclusion of this law wherein one of 
the parties to the dispute is the Central 
Govt., State Govt. etc. will be antithesis 
to the avowed objective of promoting 
mediation in dispute resolution.  While 
the proviso provides for Govt. notifying 
the cases which would be appropriate for 
mediation.  Ideally, the negative list 
shall be provided (as listed under First 
Schedule) and all other matters shall be 
available for resolution through 
mediation. 
 
In fact  Government Departments must 
understand the virtues of this form of 
dispute resolution and promote it in its  
National Litigation Policy (rather it 
should be renamed as National Dispute 
Resolution Policy) 
 
4 
4. Mediation shall be a 
process, whether referred to 
by the expression mediation,  
Using mediation and conciliation 
together may be confusing.  These are 
terms with different purport.  In Para 12 
77

pre-litigation mediation, 
online mediation, community 
mediation, conciliation or an 
expression of similar import, 
whereby party or parties, 
request a third person referred 
to as mediator or  mediation 
service provider to assist them 
in their attempt to reach an 
amicable settlement of  a 
dispute. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 18 – Role of a 
mediator  
18. (1) The mediator shall 
attempt to facilitate … 
exploring areas of 
compromise and generating 
options in an attempt to 
resolve the dispute 
expeditiously…" 
 
of the  Afcons decision actually a 
reference is drawn to Black’s Law 
Dictionary to say that ‘it is (mediation) 
also a synonym of the term conciliation’; 
however, it may be noted that the focus 
of the discussion in that para is not 
difference between mediation and 
conciliation.  The focus is as to the 
difference between ‘judicial settlement’ 
and ‘mediation’.   However, I feel 
nothing prevents a conciliator to adopt 
mediation as a technique.   Conciliation 
is separately addressed in para  35 
of Afcons decision.  In fact, according 
to Justice R.V. Raveendra n who 
wrote Afcons, there is a difference 
between mediation and conciliation in a 
degree of professional training, i.e. 
“where the conciliator is a professional 
trained in the art of medi ation (as 
contrasted from a layman, friend, 
relative, well -wisher, or social worker 
acting as a conciliator), the process of 
conciliation is referred to as 
mediation.  In cases where the third 
party assisting the parties to arrive at a 
settlement is not a trained professional 
mediator, the process is referred to as 
conciliation” [(2007) 4 SCC J23] 
 
Supreme Court in its Training Manual 
on Mediation has also differentiated 
between the terms. 
 
Role of the mediator may not include 
generating options in an attempt to 
resolve the dispute.  The evaluative role 
of the mediator is limited to guiding the 
parties towards the options which parties 
generate unlike conciliation wherein the 
conciliator may propose solutions. 
 
2(1), 
3(f)  International Mediation 
India has not yet ratified the United 
Nations Convention on International 
Settlement Agreements R esulting from 
Mediation – Singapore Convention 
 
Clause 10 – a person of any nationality 
may be appointed as a mediator … will 
there be any requirement of reciprocity 
as it is with the law professionals. 
 
Some more guidance is needed on this. 
78

15 
Seat of Mediation : Territorial 
jurisdiction to undertake 
mediation 
One of the major issues in arbitration 
related to the ‘seat’ and ‘venue’ of 
arbitration.   The conduct of mediation 
(seat) shall be made territory neutral and 
statute shall not suggest that mediation 
shall be conducted within the territorial 
jurisdiction of the c ourt or tribunal of 
competent jurisdiction to decide the 
subject matter of the dispute.  The 
question of seat of mediation shall only 
be made relevant at the stage of 
registration of ‘mediated settlement 
agreement’. Refer 22(7) covers the same 
20(2) 
Mandatory mediation 
(2) Where any party fails to 
attend the first two mediation 
sessions without any  
reasonable cause which 
resulted in the failure of 
mediation, the court or 
tribunal, in subsequent  
litigation on the same subject 
matter between the parties, 
may take the said conduct of 
such party into consideration 
and impose such costs as 
deems fit. 
Shall be reviewed especially some 
guidance on grounds on which such 
costs may be imposed and how much 
costs? 
excessive discretion may be subject to 
misuse or challenge before courts 
 
Moreover the whole concept of 
mandatory mediation needs a review 
22 
(3) Subject to the provisions 
of sections 26 and 27, the 
mediated settlement 
agreement so signed— 
(i) in case of institutional 
mediation, shall be submitted 
to the mediator, who  shall, 
after authenticating the same 
and forward it with a covering 
letter signed by him,  to the 
mediation service provider 
and also provide a copy to the 
parties; 
(ii) in all other cases, shall be 
submitted to the mediator who 
shall, after  authenticating the 
settlement agreement, provide 
a copy to all the parties 
It shall be clarified who would submit to 
the mediator… parties? Or the mediator 
shall submit the mediated settlement 
agreement to the institutio nal mediation 
service provider… 
 
Construction needs a review 
22(7) 
(9) The registration referred to 
in sub -section ( 7) shall be 
made by the parties, mediator  
or mediation service provider 
within a period of one hundred 
and eighty days from the date  
of receipt of authorlicated 
A typo … shall read “authenticated 
copy” 
79

copy of mediated settlement 
agreement: 
24(1)  
Provided that nothing in this 
section and section 23 shall 
protect from  disclosure, 
information sought or 
provided to prove or dispute a 
claim or complaint of  
professional misconduct of 
mediator or malpractice based 
on conduct occurring during 
the mediation 
However, such disclosure shall also be 
kept confidential by the Committee 
examining the professional misconduct 
and not made public 
23 Confidentiality 
Confidentiality forms a very important 
element for the practice of mediation. 
Narrowing the constr uct of 
confidentiality with specifying the 
matters which requires to be kept 
confidential in section 23 (1) may not be 
desirable.  Just a statement that the 
whole mediation proceedings shall be 
kept confidential will be sufficient 
 
24 
(2) There shall be no privilege 
or confidentiality that will 
attach to— 
(a) a threat or statement of a 
plan to commit an offence 
punishable under any law  for 
the time being in force; 
(b) information relating to 
domestic violence or child 
abuse; and 
(c) statements made during a 
mediation showing a 
significant imminent threat to  
public health or safety. 
Will there be a duty upon the mediator 
to disclose such information made in 
clause (2) of 24  
 
Reference 126 of the Evidence Act 
29 
Challenge to mediation 
(2) A mediated settlement 
agreement may be challenged only 
on all or any of the following 
grounds, namely:— 
(i) fraud; 
(ii) corruption; 
(iii) impersonation; 
(iv) where the mediation was 
conducted in disputes or matters not 
fit for mediation under section 7. 
(3) An application for challenging 
the mediated settlement agreement 
shall not be made after ninety days 
have elapsed from the date on 
which the party making that 
application has received the copy 
of mediated settlement agreement 
under sub-section (3) of section 22 
The limitation of 90 days from the date 
on which the party making that 
application has received the copy of 
mediated settlement agreement shall be 
from the date on which the party making 
the application discovers that the 
mediated settlement agreement has been 
obtained through fraud, or by corruption 
or impersonation. 
 
It is not necessary that these grounds 
gets found out within 90 days. 
80

33 
33. ( 1) The Central 
Government shall, by 
notification, establish for the 
purposes of this Act, a Council 
to be known as the Mediation 
Council of India to perform 
the duties and  discharge the 
functions under this Act 
The mediation council shall be a 
professional body and adequate 
representation of professional mediators 
on the governing body of the Council 
 
Is there a necessity to have secretary, 
GOI department of expenditure ministry 
of finance? 
 
The Council shall have professional 
Advisory Boards to function in specified 
areas like recognition of mediation 
service providers / mediation institutes 
etc. on the lines of IBBI 
 
40 
Duties and Functions of the 
Council 
 
Advocacy as a specific 
duty/function  
Advocacy and building a culture of pre-
mediation for dispute resolution shall 
specifically be mentioned like the 
Competition Act 
 
example – Section 49(3) of the 
Competition Act – Competition 
Advocacy 
(3) The Commission shall take suitable 
measures 23 [***] for the promotion of 
competition advocacy, creating 
awareness and imparting training about 
competition issues. "(1) In formulating a 
policy on competition (including review 
of laws related to competition), the 
Central Government may make a 
reference to the Commission for its 
opinion on possible effect of such policy 
on competition and on receipt of such a 
reference, the Commission shall, within 
sixty days of making such reference, 
give its opinion to the Central 
Government, which may thereafter 
formulate the policy as it deems fit.". 
 
42 Mediation Service Providers - 
Functions 
These entities would also act as Self-
Regulatory Organisations and would 
bring in competition in providing service 
of mediation. 
 
There shall be a registration mechanism 
of Mediation S ervice Provider on the 
lines of Insolvency Professional 
Agencies under the IBC 2016 
 
44 Community Mediation  
The proposed Bill has not looked at the 
integration with the Gram Nyayalayas 
Act of 2008.  Mediation would be very 
81

useful in resolving disputes at the village 
level and would greatly contribute in 
bringing community harmony.  Shall be 
looked into. 
 
 Bringing members of Bar 
Council of India on Board  
In UK, because of the Court of Appeal 
judgment in  Halsey v Milton Keyne s 
[2004] EWCA (Civ) 576, legal advisers 
must ensure that they not only know 
about mediation but that they are able to 
and do advise their clients before and 
during litigation (including arbitration) 
whether to use mediation and, if so, 
when to do so. Equally legal advisers 
must be able to protect their clients (and 
themselves!) against an adv erse cost 
order or suit if they decide not to try to 
resolve the dispute by mediation.  I 
believe the major role in promoting 
mediation lies with the lawyers and 
judges. We need more champions of 
mediation in the Bar and Bench. 
 
Bar Council has already extended the 
support in mandating Mediation as a 
full-fledged course for lawyers.   There 
shall be a formal integration by way of 
including a member of Bar Council in 
the proposed Mediation Council. 
 
 
Financial Memorandum 
 
10. It is estimated that the 
proposed law whe n passed 
would entail an expenditure of 
approximately twenty -one 
crores one lakh fifteen 
thousand thirty -six rupees in 
the first year,  twenty crores 
ninety-nine lakhs nine 
thousand forty in the second 
year, twenty-three crores 
sixteen lakhs seven thousand 
one hundred ninety-four in the 
third year of establishment of  
Council as initial 
establishment expenses, 
including salaries and 
allowances and other  
remuneration of Chairperson, 
Full-Time Member, Part -
Time Member and its officers 
and other employees. 
Whether the machinery established 
under the Mediation Law is supposed to 
be self-sufficient after 3 years ... if yes, 
statement to that effect 
 
82

 
Mediation is a “swachh dispute resolution” mechanism, in terms of providing a win -
win solution and eradication of the root cause of dispute with a reasonably comple te 
satisfaction to the parties. The key stakeholders of justice delivery system (majority of 
lawyers and ju dges) have a great role in holding back mediation in India other than 
the consumer’s lack of awareness. This is evident from the surveys which have shown 
that still majority of the legal practitioners would treat mediation, conciliation, 
arbitrations into the same class irrespective of their differences and peculiarities. Thus, 
virtues of mediation remain  unexplained to the disputants.  It is a violation of one of 
the six consumer rights, i.e. right to choose which can only be exercised by information 
and knowledge about mediation. This is just like a supermarket in which the cheaper 
items are kept higher on the shelf so that it does not immediately catch attention of the 
buyer; the best brands and products are kept in the middle to the eye -level.  In the 
justice delivery supermarket, the options of dispute resolution are presented 
accordingly as arbitration on the middle of the shelf, followed by litigation and 
conciliation and mediation somewhere lying in the sack which only comes out when 
the consumer asks for it1. 
 
 
 
Prof. (Dr.) Vijay Kumar Singh 
                                                           
1 JOINT SESSION with Dr. Vijay Kumar Singh, 
https://indianmediationlaw.wordpress.com/2018/08/06/joint-session-with-dr-vijay-
kumar-singh/ 
83

                                                                                                                       
 Private and Confidential- Not for circulation 
1 
To, 
Mr. Goutam Kumar                                 23-02-2022 
Deputy Secretary 
Committee Section (PPG) 
Department-related to Parliamentary Standing Committee on  
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Parliament of India 
 
Dear Mr. Kumar 
 
Subject: Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy’s comments on the Mediation Bill, 2021. 
 
With reference to your email dated 11 February, 2022, I am pleased to share with you Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy’s comments on the Mediation 
Bill, 2021. I would like to than k you for the opportunity to share our recommendations on this important Bill, that will shape the mediation 
landscape in our country for the years to come.  
 
Over the years, the Justice, Access and Lowering Delays in India (JALDI) Initiative at Vidhi has been actively engaging with the issue of promoting 
mediation in India and has published reports and papers on the same.  
 
We have gone through the Bill thoroughly and before commenting on specific provisions, have outlined the principles which hav e guided our 
recommendations. We hope that the Standing Committee will find our suggestions useful. 
 
I would also like to express our willingness to appear before the Standing Committee for tendering oral evidence.   
 
I look forward to hearing from you. 
 
Warm regards, 
 
Deepika Kinhal 
Team Lead, JALDI and Senior Resident Fellow 
Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy 
 
84

                                                                                                                       
 Private and Confidential- Not for circulation 
2 
Vidhi’s Comments on Mediation Bill, 2021 
 
Mediation is a time and cost -effective mode of dispute resolution which needs to be encouraged and promoted. The Mediation Bill, 2021  
(hereinafter ‘Bill’) is a timely step in this direction. We hope that our recommendations will help make this Bill more effective and help achieve its 
stated objectives. 
 
We are guided by the following key principles in commenting on the Bill: 
 
1. Clarity: Clarity in the law means that the letter of the law conveys its intended meaning and the intent of the provisions are implementable. 
For instance, clear definitions for terms like “mediation”, “domestic mediation” and “international mediation” will help reduce ambiguity in 
the application of the legislation. Further, clarity in the process for pre-litigation mediation (hereinafter ‘PLM’) will ensure easier adoption 
and implementation. 
 
2. Confidentiality: Confidentiality is a cornerstone of all mediation proceedings and outcomes. This needs to be prominently reflected across 
all provisions and under no circumstances can confidentiality be diluted.  
 
3. Party Autonomy: Ensuring that parties have full autonomy to determine the course of mediation proceedings pertaining to their dispute is 
crucial to the success of mediation as a dispute resolution mechanism.  
 
4. Consistency: There should be consistency within the provisions of the Bill and with other related legislations. The law should harmonise 
any conflicts with already existing legislations.  
 
5. Compliance with International Treaties:  It is important for any domestic law such as the Bill to conform  to the requirements placed on 
India by virtue of being a signatory to an international convention. Since India is a party to the United Nations Convention on International 
Settlement Agreements Resulting from Mediation, 2018 (hereinafter ‘Singapore Convention on Mediation’), the provisions of the Bill should 
be consistent with the Singapore Convention on Mediation. 
 
 
 
 
85

                                                                                                                       
 Private and Confidential- Not for circulation 
3 
 
Specific Suggestions on the Mediation Bill, 2021 
Clause Issue Recommendations  Suggested text 
2. Application  In this clause, defining the terms 
“habitual resident” or “place of 
business” will bring greater clarity. 
The term “place of business” is a 
subject of high controversy in 
international taxation.  
The terms “habitual resident” or “place of 
business” can be defined as per t he 
definitions provided under the Foreign 
Exchange Management Act, 1999 (FEMA) 
which clearly defines a person resident in 
India and a person resident outside India.  
This shall also resolve the new problem of 
companies incorporated in International 
Finance Service Centres of India (IFSC) 
which are technically incorporated in India 
but enjoy the privilege of a person resident 
outside India under FEMA. 
Section 2(v) of FEMA defines “person 
resident in India” while section 2(w) 
defines “person resident outside India”.  
Instead of "habitual resident" the term 
"person resident in India" as defined in 
Section 2(v) of FEMA should be used. 
The new clause would thus read: “(1) 
Subject to sub -section (2), this Act shall 
apply where mediation is conducted in 
India, and— 
(i) all or both parties are persons resident 
in India or are incorporated in or have 
their business in India; or 
(ii) the mediation agreement provides 
that any dispute shall be resolved in 
accordance with the provisions of this 
Act; or  
(iii) there is an international mediation. 
Explanation I: “Place of business” will 
have the same meaning as Section 2(85) 
of the Goods and Services Act, 2017. 
Explanation I: “Person resident in India” 
will have the same meaning as Section 
2(v) of the Foreign Exchange 
Management Act, 1999.” 
86

                                                                                                                       
 Private and Confidential- Not for circulation 
4 
3. Definitions 
(f) 
This clause defines "international 
mediation" as “mediation undertaken 
under this Act and relates to a 
commercial dispute arising out of a 
legal relationship, contractual or 
otherwise, under any law for the time 
being in force in India, and where at 
least one of the parties, is— 
(i) an individual who is a national of, or 
habitually resides in, any country 
other than India; or 
(ii) a body corporate including a 
Limited Liability Partnership of any 
nature, with its p lace of business 
outside India; or 
(iii) an association or body of 
individuals whose place of business is 
outside India; or  
(iv) the Government of a foreign 
country.”  
 
By limiting the definition of 
international mediation to only 
commercial disputes, the Bill creates a 
grey area for international disputes of 
non-commercial nature.  For instance, 
custody disputes where one parent is 
resident in a foreign country or non -
commercial disputes that have arisen 
under a foreign law.  
There is a need to clarify wh at would 
happen to international disputes that are 
of a non -commercial nature. Further, like 
clause 2, this clause also uses the terms 
“place of business” and “habitually resides” 
without clearly defining what they mean. 
By defining and replacing these ter ms as 
suggested above, the possibility of 
litigation on the exact meaning of these 
terms could be limited.   
Clause 3(f): “international mediation” 
means mediation undertaken under this 
Act and arising out of a legal relationship, 
contractual or otherwise,  under any law 
for the time being in force in India, and 
where at least one of the parties, is— 
(i) an individual who is a national of, or 
habitually resides in, any country other 
than India; or 
(ii) a body corporate including a Limited 
Liability Partnership of any nature, with 
its place of business outside India; or 
(iii) an association or body of individuals 
whose place of business is outside India; 
or  
(iv) the Government of a foreign 
country.”   
87

                                                                                                                       
 Private and Confidential- Not for circulation 
5 
3. Definitions 
(l) 
According to this clause, "mediation 
service provider" means a body or 
organisation that provides for the 
conduct of mediation under this Act 
and rules and regulations made 
thereunder, and are recognised by the 
Council. 
 
There is a grammatical error in thi s 
clause. 
Replace “are” with “is”. "mediation service provider" means a 
body or organisation that provides for the 
conduct of mediation under this Act and 
rules and regulations made thereunder, 
and is recognised by the Council.  
4. Mediation The definitio n of Mediation used in 
the Bill is “a process, whether referred 
to by the expression mediation, pre -
litigation mediation, online mediation, 
community mediation, conciliation or 
an expression of similar import, 
whereby party or parties, request a 
third pers on referred to as mediator 
or mediation service provider to assist 
them in their attempt to reach an 
amicable settlement of a dispute.” 
 
This definition does not correspond to 
the definition under the Singapore 
Convention. The definition under the 
Singapore Convention clearly 
specifies that the mediator lacks the 
authority to impose a solution upon 
the parties to the dispute. This should 
The definition of Mediation under Article 
2(3) of the Singapore Convention should 
be used after suitable modification (if 
required) for the Indian context. Since 
India is a signatory to the Convention 
dated 20 December, 2018, and the 
definition of mediation under it is an 
internationally recognised definition, it 
would be better to adopt that definition.  
“Mediation” means a process, whether 
referred to by the expression mediation, 
pre-litigation mediation, online 
mediation, community mediation, 
conciliation or an expression of similar 
import, whereby 
parties attempt to reach an amicable 
settlement of their dispute with the 
assistance of a third person or persons 
(“the mediator”) lacking the authority to 
impose a solution upon the parties to the 
dispute.  
88

                                                                                                                       
 Private and Confidential- Not for circulation 
6 
be reflected in the definition of 
mediation in the Draft Bill to 
emphasise the principle of party 
autonomy.  
6. Pre - 
Litigation 
Mediation 
(PLM) 
This clause provides for mandatory 
PLM before filing any suit or 
proceedings of civil or commercial 
nature in any 
court. There are a number of issues 
with this provision. The push for 
mandatory PLM for “any suit or 
proceedings of civil or commercial 
nature in any 
court” would require a lot of capacity 
building of mediators and mediation 
service providers. At present, this 
capacity does not exist to make 
mediation mandatory for all such 
disputes.  
 
The clause does not provide for 
parties to opt -out of PLM even if 
there is a valid reason for it. This runs 
the risk of parties participating in PLM 
as a mechanical exercise thereby 
wasting the limited resources 
currently available for mediation.   
 
1. Mandatory mediation should be 
introduced with a “soft” approach. 
2. The Bill should clearly state that 
parties ca n opt -out of PLM after 
the first session in this clause. 
While  clause 20(1) provides for 
opting-out of mediation any time 
after the first two mediation 
sessions, it does not specifically 
deal with the constraints involved 
at the pre -litigation stage. The 
option to opt out immediately after 
the first two sessions could make 
parties voluntarily participate in 
PLM. The opt-out provision should 
form a part of clause 6. 
3. Making mediation mandatory 
before approaching the courts for 
relief is beset with certain 
challenges that should be 
accounted for. For instance, 
capacity building of mediators and 
mediation institutions is extremely 
important before mediation is 
made mandatory in India.  
4. Mandatory PLM should be 
introduced in a phased manner 
Clause 6(1): “Subje ct to other provisions 
of this Act, whether any mediation 
agreement exists or not, any party before 
filing cases identified in Schedule _, on 
the basis of rules made in this regard by 
the Council and the Central Government 
from time to time, shall take ste ps to 
settle the disputes by pre -litigation 
mediation in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act:”  
89

                                                                                                                       
 Private and Confidential- Not for circulation 
7 
Further, there is no clarity on the 
types of disputes that can be the 
subject of mandatory PLM making 
this an impractical proposition given 
the lack of trained mediators to cater 
to all varieties of cases that could be 
subjected to PLM. 
instead of introducing  it with 
immediate effect for all civil and 
commercial disputes. As a starting 
point, the challenges faced in 
implementing PLM under the 
Commercial Courts Act, 2015 
should be studied before 
mandating it across other case 
categories. 
5. The Bill should provide  a list of 
types of disputes that can be 
subject to mandatory PLM in a 
Schedule. 
6. Access to justice concerns that 
arise in case of mandatory 
mediation need to be addressed, 
especially in cases where the 
parties are unwilling to mediate.  
7. Disputes or 
matters not fit 
for mediation.  
There is a spelling error in the second 
proviso of this clause. 
Replace “judgement” with “judgment”.  The second proviso will thus read: 
“Provided further that the outcome of 
such mediation shall not be deemed to be 
a judgment or decree of court referred to 
in sub-section (2) of section 28, and shall 
be further considered by the court in 
accordance with the law for the time 
being in force.”  
8. Interim relief 
by Court or 
Tribunal 
This clause deals with urgent interim 
relief measures and sub -clause (2) 
says, “The court or tribunal shall after 
granting or rejecting urgent interim 
The expression “if deemed appropriate” 
should be deleted. 
Sub-clause (2): “The court or tribunal shall 
after granting or r ejecting urgent interim 
relief, as the case may be, refer the 
90

                                                                                                                       
 Private and Confidential- Not for circulation 
8 
relief, as the case may be, refer the 
parties to undertake mediation to 
resolve the dispute, if deemed 
appropriate.”  
 
The expression “if deemed 
appropriate” is unnecessary since 
opting out of mediation is an option 
vested in the parties. 
parties to undertake mediation to resolve 
the dispute.” 
14. 
Replacement 
of mediator 
The time period for appointment of a 
new mediator in both ad -hoc and 
institutional mediation is the same - 7 
days since termination of the previous 
mediator.  
 
Given the practical constraints in 
appointing mediators in ad -hoc 
mediation, the time period for 
appointment of a new mediator may 
be extended to 14 days which may be 
extended to 30 days upon written 
agreement between the parties. 
Under clause 14(ii), extend the time-period 
for appointment of new mediator from 7 
day to 14 days, extendable to 30 days 
upon written agreement between the 
parties. 
“14. Upon termination of the mandate of 
mediator— 
(i) in case of mediation other than 
institutional mediation under clause (ii) of 
sub-section (4) of section 12, the parties 
may, by mutual consent, appoint another 
mediator within a period of 7 days from 
such termination; and 
(ii) under section 13, the media tion 
service provider shall appoint another 
mediator from the panel maintained by it 
within   14 days, extendable to 30 days 
upon written agreement between the 
parties, from such termination.”  
15. Territorial 
jurisdiction to 
undertake 
mediation.  
The cla use deals with territorial 
jurisdiction to undertake mediation 
and provides that “Every mediation 
under this Act shall be undertaken 
within the territorial jurisdiction of the 
court or tribunal of competent 
The clause should start by saying that “on 
the mutual consent of the parties, 
mediation proceedings can be conducted 
at any place”. It can then add the point 
about territorial ju risdiction in case the 
parties fail to agree on a place. The 
“15. On the mutual consent of the parties, 
mediation proceedings can be conducted 
at any place outside the terr itorial 
jurisdiction of the court or tribunal, or by 
way of online mediation. 
91

                                                                                                                       
 Private and Confidential- Not for circulation 
9 
jurisdiction to decide the subject 
matter of dispute: 
Provided that on the mutual consent 
of the parties, mediation may be 
conducted at 
any place outside the territorial 
jurisdiction of the court or tribunal, or 
by way of online mediation.” 
 
If the goal is to provide parties the 
freedom to mediate wherev er they 
please, the first part of this clause 
seems to restrict this freedom. 
provision should place primacy on 
providing freedom and flexibility to the 
parties. 
If the parties fail to agree on a place, the 
mediation under this Act shall take place 
within the territorial jurisdiction of the 
Court or Tribunal of competent 
jurisdiction to d ecide the subject matter 
of dispute.” 
20. Withdrawal 
by parties from 
mediation.  
There is a grammatical error in this 
clause.  
Add it after as in 20(2). “20. (1) A party may withdraw from 
mediation at any time after the first two 
mediation 
sessions. 
(2) Where any party fails to attend the 
first two mediation sessions without any 
reasonable cause which resulted in the 
failure of mediation, the court or tribunal, 
in subsequent litigation on the same 
subject matter between the parties, may 
take the said conduct of such party into 
consideration and impose such costs as it 
deems fit.”  
21. Time -limit 
for completion 
of mediation 
The clause deals with the time limit 
for completion of mediation. It 
provides, “(1) Notwithstanding 
Extension of a mediation beyond 180 days 
with the consent of the parties must be 
permitted.  
“20. (1)   Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, mediation under this Act 
92

                                                                                                                       
 Private and Confidential- Not for circulation 
10 
anything contained i n any other law 
for the time being in force, mediation 
under this Act shall be completed 
within a period of one hundred and 
eighty days from the date fixed for the 
first appearance before the mediator. 
(2) The period for mediation 
mentioned under sub-clause (1) may 
be extended for a further period as 
agreed by the parties, but not 
exceeding one hundred and eighty 
days. 
 
There may be some complex cases 
where mediation may require more 
than 360 days and the parties should 
have the freedom to determin e the 
same.  Therefore, the period should 
be extendable as long as the parties to 
the mediation consent to it. This 
principle of party autonomy is not 
reflected in this clause.  
shall be completed within a period of one 
hundred and eighty days from the date 
fixed for the first appearance before the 
mediator. 
(2) The period for mediation prescribed 
under sub -section (1) may be extended 
for a further period with the consent of 
parties.”  
22. Mediated 
Settlement 
Agreement 
This clause deals with Mediated 
Settlement Agreement. The 
expression “authenticat ed by the 
mediator” in clause 22(1) is not 
defined.  
Further, clause 22(4) addresses only 
situations of no agreement and no 
settlement. It is important to also 
1. The expression “authenticated by 
the mediator” in clause 22(1) 
should be clearly defined to explain 
what would constitute 
authentication by the mediator.  
2. Situations of partial agreement or 
partial settlement should also be 
addressed by clause 22(4).  
The text for this clause would have to be 
determined through further 
consultations. 
 
Replace “authorlicated” with 
“authenticated” in clause 22(9). 
93

                                                                                                                       
 Private and Confidential- Not for circulation 
11 
address situations of partial 
agreement or partial settlement. 
There is a typographical error in  
clause 22(9) wherein “authenticated” 
is written as “authorlicated”. 
24. 
Admissibility 
and privilege 
against 
disclosure.  
This provision does not mention 
parties to a mediation.  
The word “party” should be added after 
“mediator or participant” in clause 24(1). 
“23. (1) No mediator, party or participant 
in the mediation, including experts and 
advisers engaged for the purpose of the 
mediation and persons involved in the 
administration of the mediation, shall at 
any time be permitted, or compelled to 
disclose to any court or tribunal, or 
in any adjudicatory proceedings, by 
whatever description, any 
communication in mediation, or to state 
the contents or conditions of any 
document or nature or conduct of parties 
during mediation including the content of 
negotiations or offers or counter offers 
with which they have become acquainted 
during the mediation...” 
29. Challenge 
to mediated 
settlement 
agreement 
This clause deals with challenges to 
mediated settlement agreements. 
However, incapacity has not been 
included as one of the grounds for 
challenge.   
Incapacity should also be added as a 
ground for challenge unde r clause 29(2) 
since incapacity is fatal to any agreement. 
29(2) A mediated settlement agreement 
may be challenged only on all or any of 
the 
following grounds, namely:— 
(i) fraud; 
(ii) corruption; 
(iii) impersonation; 
94

                                                                                                                       
 Private and Confidential- Not for circulation 
12 
(iv) where the mediation was conducted 
in disputes or matters not fit for 
mediation under section 7; or 
(v) incapacity. 
34. 
Composition of 
Council  
This clause deals with the 
composition of the Mediation Council 
of India. Clause 34(1)(b) requires the 
said person to have expertise in 
mediation or ADR mechanisms. 
Providing for mediation “or” ADR 
mechanisms will still lead to the 
situation where someone without any 
expertise in mediation is appointed to 
the Council. 
The law should ensure that any standard 
setting authority is truly independent in its 
constitution and functioning and 
composed of people with domain 
expertise. Clause 34(1)(b) should require 
the said person to have expertise in 
mediation and ADR mechanisms and not 
either of the two since there are vast 
variations in the requirements of 
mediation vis-a-vis arbitration.  
34(1)(b) person having knowledge and 
experience in law related to mediation 
and 
alternate dispute resolution mechanisms, 
to be appointed by the Central 
Government —Full-Time Member;  
44. Community 
mediation 
This clause deals with community 
mediation. 44(5) provides who may be 
included in the mediation panel and 
does not specifically provide for 
inclusion of trained and qualified 
mediators from the community.  
Clause 44(5) should explicitly provide that 
trained and qualified mediators from the 
community may also be included in the 
panel.   
44(5) The following persons may be 
included in the panel referred to in sub -
section (4)— 
(a) persons of standing and integrity who 
are respectable in the community; 
(b) any local person whose contribution 
to the society has been recognised; 
(c) representative of area or resident 
welfare associations; and 
(d) Qualified mediators from the 
community. 
(e) Any other person deemed 
appropriate.  
 
95

 
 
AMIKA 
A Society for Alternative Dispute Resolution 
Mediators, Arbitrators, &Advocates 
Reg. No 416/2021 
(Registered under Section 3 of Societies Registration Act 2001 of Govt. of T elangana) 
101, Manya Residence, Ganesh Nagar, Vanashtalipuram 
Hyderabad-500070 (T elangana) 
9676875789, 8096600333 
A Presentation on proposed Mediation Bill 
Before 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice 
29, March 2022, Parliament House, New Delhi 
AMIKA, a Society for Altertive Dispute Resoluton 1 
96

Definition: “ (j) Mediation 
Communication” 
What is there?  
 
"mediation 
communication" means 
communication made, 
whether in electronic form 
or otherwise, through— 
(i) anything said or done; 
(ii) any document; or 
(iii) any information provided, 
 
What should be there? 
 
(iv) any letter or 
communication sent by 
the mediator or the 
mediation service provider 
or the court inviting a 
party to participate in the 
mediation. 
 
AMIKA, a Society for Altertive Dispute Resoluton 2 
97

Definition (k) “Mediation Institute” 
What is there? 
"mediation institute" means a body, or 
organisation that provides training, 
continuous education and certification 
of mediators, and carries out such other 
functions under this Act; 
 
What should be there? 
"mediation institute" means a body, a 
registered society, or an organisation 
that provides mediation service,  
training, continuous education,  
certification of mediators, accreditation, 
and carries out such other functions 
under this Act; 
 
AMIKA, a Society for Altertive Dispute Resoluton 3 
98

Definition (l) “Mediation Service 
Provider” 
What is there? 
 
"mediation service provider" means a 
body or organisation that provides for 
the conduct of mediation under this Act 
and rules and regulations made 
thereunder, and are recognised by the 
Council; 
 
What should be there? 
 
"mediation service provider" means a 
body, A registered society, or 
organisation that provides for the 
conduct of mediation under this Act 
and rules and regulations made 
thereunder, and are recognised by the 
Council; 
 
AMIKA, a Society for Altertive Dispute Resoluton 4 
99

Section 5: Mediation Agreement 
 
Add this as 5(7) 
5(7) A communication  when sent by a 
mediation service provider inviting the 
other party for mediation on behalf of 
one or more parties to a dispute if 
received, acknowledged,  and attended 
by the other party  for  the mediation, 
such communication  shall constitute a 
mediation agreement. 
AMIKA, a Society for Altertive Dispute Resoluton 5 
100

Section 6 “ Pre-Litigation Mediation” 
What is there?  
 
(3) For the purposes, of sub-sections (1) 
and (2), unless otherwise agreed upon 
by the parties, a mediator,—  
(i) registered with the Council;  
(ii) empanelled by a court annexed 
mediation centre;   
(iii) empanelled by an Authority 
constituted under the Legal 
Services Authorities Act, 1987; and 
What should be there?  
 
(3) For the purposes, of sub-sections (1) 
and (2), unless otherwise agreed upon 
by the parties, a mediator,—  
(i) registered with the Council; OR 
(ii) empanelled by a court annexed 
mediation centre;  OR 
(iii) empanelled by an Authority 
constituted under the Legal 
Services Authorities Act, 1987; OR 
 
AMIKA, a Society for Altertive Dispute Resoluton 6 
101

Section 22. Mediation Settlement 
agreement 
What is there? 
 
 
22(7) Registration of Mediation 
settlement agreement 
What should be there? 
22(7) Intimation of Mediation 
settlement agreements 
Remove this and add ‘ An annual return 
of mediation cases taken up by the 
mediators/mediation service providers 
(containing names of the parties, date of 
commencement, date of closure of 
mediation, and result of mediation- 
settled or not settled) shall be submitted 
before 31st January of every year. AMIKA, a Society for Altertive Dispute Resoluton 7 
102

Section 24 Admissibility and privilege against 
disclosure 
What is there? 
24 (1) No mediator or participant in the 
mediation, including experts and 
advisers  engaged for the purpose of 
the mediation and persons involved 
in the administration of the 
mediation, shall at any time be 
permitted, or compelled to disclose to 
any court or tribunal,  
What should be there? 
24 (1) No mediator or participant 
in the mediation, including experts 
and advisers  engaged for the 
purpose of the mediation and 
persons involved in the 
administration of the mediation, 
or mediation service provider 
shall at any time be permitted, or 
compelled to disclose to any 
court or tribunal, or to any 
police authority  
 
AMIKA, a Society for Altertive Dispute Resoluton 8 
103

Section 26(3) Mediation Committee 
What is there?  
The mediation committee shall, for 
the purposes of conducting 
mediation, in all courts, maintain a 
panel of mediators and in 
accordance with the practice 
directions or rules, by whatever 
name called, framed by the 
Supreme Court or the High Courts, 
as the case may be, and such 
mediators may also conduct 
mediation other than those referred 
by a court 
What should be there? 
The mediation committee shall, for 
the purposes of conducting 
mediation, in all courts, maintain a 
panel of mediators and mediation 
service providers in accordance with 
the practice directions or rules, by 
whatever name called, framed by 
the Supreme Court or the High 
Courts, as the case may be, and such 
mediators and mediation service 
providers  may also conduct 
mediation other than those referred 
by a court 
AMIKA, a Society for Altertive Dispute Resoluton 9 
104

Section 40: Duties and Function of 
the Council 
What is there? 
 
40(h) recognize 
mediation institutes 
and mediation service 
providers and  
What should be there? 
 
Explanation: Institutions in existence 
before commencement of this act shall 
be deemed to have been recognised by 
the council and the necessary certificate 
of recognition shall be given. 
AMIKA, a Society for Altertive Dispute Resoluton 10 
105

Section 41 Gradation of Mediation Service 
Providers 
 This should be removed. The 
gradation will create a divide, and 
confuse disputants.  
AMIKA, a Society for Altertive Dispute Resoluton 11 
106

Section 44. Community Mediation 
What is there? 
44(3) n order to facilitate settlement of a dispute 
for which an application has been received under 
sub-section (2), the concerned Authority constituted 
under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 or the 
District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional Magistrate, as 
the case may be, shall constitute panel of three 
mediators 
44(4) For the purpose of this section, the Authority 
or District Magistrate or the Sub-Divisional 
Magistrate, as the case may be, shall notify a 
permanent panel of mediators, which may be 
revised from time to time. 
 
 
What should be there? 
44(3) n order to facilitate settlement of a dispute for 
which an application has been received under sub-
section (2), the concerned Authority constituted under 
the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 or the District 
Magistrate or Sub-Divisional Magistrate, as the case 
may be, shall constitute panel of three mediators or 
utilise the services of mediation service providers 
44(4) For the purpose of this section, the Authority or 
District Magistrate or the Sub-Divisional Magistrate, as 
the case may be, shall notify a permanent panel of 
mediators, and/ or mediation service providers 
which may be revised from time to time. 
44 (5) (e) any mediation service 
provider/mediation institution 
AMIKA, a Society for Altertive Dispute Resoluton 12 
107

Electronic depository  
What is there? 
 Section 40 (m) 
 Section 53 (n) 
What should be there? 
 Delete these to sub-sections. 
Maintenance of an electronic 
depository is against the principles 
of confidentiality. 
AMIKA, a Society for Altertive Dispute Resoluton 13 
108

The First Schedule 
What is there? 
4. Disputes involving 
prosecution for 
criminal offences 
What should be there? 
4. Disputes involving 
prosecution for criminal 
offences excepting those 
falling under section 320 
(1) of Criminal Procedure 
Code 1973 which do not 
require the permission of 
court for compounding. 
 
AMIKA, a Society for Altertive Dispute Resoluton 14 
109

Tenth Schedule 
What is there? 
 Reference to mediation 
What should be there? 
(i). No such reference is mandatory 
provided the parties mutually agree to go 
for mediation with a mediator or to a 
mediation service provider even before 
moving a district/state consumer 
forum/court/ national consumer disputes 
redressal commission. 
 
AMIKA, a Society for Altertive Dispute Resoluton 15 
110

Special proceedings- Code of civil 
procedure 
What is there? 
 
What should be there? 
Please add and amend as under 
89(2) (e) However, no such reference by 
court is mandatory if the parties mutually 
agree to settle their disputes through 
Arbitration, or , Mediation, or 
Conciliation  
 
 
AMIKA, a Society for Altertive Dispute Resoluton 16 
111

  
 
 
 
 
 
THANK YOU ALL  
  
AMIKA, a Society for Altertive Dispute Resoluton 17 
112

Our Ref No. APCAM/SEC/0425/2022
25 February, 2022
Deputy Secretary,
Committee Section (PPG),
Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat,
Parliament of India, Room No. 415, Block – B,
Parliament Annexe Extension Building,
New Delhi 110001
Dear Sir,
Ref: Email dated 17/02/2022 issued by the Dy. Secretary,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice
Sub: Comments/views/suggestions on various provisions of
the Mediation Bill.
At the outset, let me place my gratitude for accepting most of the
suggestions that we had given by our earlier suggestions dated 28/
09/2021 on the draft Mediation Bill dated 12/08/2021 and suggestions
dated 15/11/2021 on draft Mediation Bill dated 29/10/2021.
We are thankful and obliged for giving us a further opportunity to put
forward our views to be placed before the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice chaired by Shri. Sushil Kumar Modi, MP, Rajya
Sabha, which will be examining the Mediation Bill.
We genuinely congratulate the efforts taken by the government in
coming out with a comprehensive legislation on Mediation in India,
which will pave the way not only for speedy resolution of disputes, but
also ease of doing business in India.
As required by email referred above, please find below our comments
on the Mediation Bill (No. XLIII of 2021) as introduced in the Rajya
Sabha. We would also be happy to appear before the Committee for
oral evidence.
113

2 | Page
1. Enforcement of International Mediated Settlement Agreement:
1.1 First, let me point out a grave error noticed in the present Mediation Bill, with
respect to international Mediated Settlement Agreements (MSA), which was
present in the draft Mediation Bills dated 12/08/2021 and 29/10/2021 and which
is seen omitted in the present Bill.
1.2 As per the Statement of Objects and Reasons in the present Bill, one of the
objectives [page 30, item viii] is to establish the Mediation Council of India, the
object of which would be to promote mediation and to develop India as a robust
centre for domestic and international mediation.
1.3 As per the Statement of Objects mentioned in the draft Bills dated 12/08/2021
and 29/10/2021, [page 4] the Act is made among other things to strengthen
the legal framework on international dispute settlement, since India on 7th August
2019 became one of the first signatories to the United Nations Convention on
Enforcement of International Settlement Agreements resulting from Meditation,
also known as “The Singapore Convention”.
1.4 And since UNCITRAL has brought a Model Law for giving effect to the Singapore
Convention, it is considered expedient that India gives effect to the Singapore
Convention by providing for provisions under a stand-alone mediation law for
enforcement of international settlement agreements resulting from mediation.
1.5 So making a law enabling the provision for enforcement of international MSA’s
and for ratifying the Singapore Convention is one of the primary reasons for
enacting the Mediation Bill. This provision was made available in the draft Mediation
Bills dated 12/08/2021 and 29/10/2021 as Part-III. But unfortunately, this portion
is seen omitted from the present Mediation Bill. The Singapore Convention was
also included as Schedule-I in the earlier draft Bills, which is also seen omitted in
this Bill.
1.6 Even though the provision for enforcement of international MSA and the schedule
on Singapore Convention is omitted, still under section 2(1)(iii), the Bill specifies
that the Act is applicable to international mediation. Without an enabling provision
for enforcement of international MSA’s, this section is redundant.
1.7 This omission will take away the benefit of India signing the Singapore Convention,
as we will not have a procedural law for enforcing international MSA’s as under
the Singapore Convention and we will not be able to ratify the Convention.
114

3 | Page
1.8 In the draft Mediation Bills dated 12/08/2021 and 29/10/2021, International
Mediation is put under a separate Part III. Putting it under different Part, may
create lot of practical difficulties, for the following reasons:
(i) The definitions come under Part-I, which will also be applicable for
international mediation.
(ii) The process of mediation, appointment of mediator, status of Mediated
Settlement Agreement (MSA), Online mediation, the role of Mediation
Council of India and Mediation service Providers, which come under Part-
I is also be applicable for international mediation.
(iii) In the present Bill dated 20/12/2021, the different Parts, like Part II for
community mediation has been removed, and only one Part is made.
1.9 Therefore, the Chapter for Enforcement of International Commercial Settlement
Agreements Resulting from Mediation has to be inserted as Chapter XI. The
existing Chapter XI on Miscellaneous shall be renumbered as Chapter XII. Similarly
the Singapore Convention has to be included as Schedule-I, and the existing
Schedules I to X, shall be renumbered as Schedules II to XI.
1.10 This could be inserted as follows (taken from the draft Bill dated 29/10/2021):
CHAPTER XI
ENFORCEMENT OF INTERNATIONAL COMMERCIAL SETTLEMENT
AGREEMENTS RESULTING FROM MEDIATION
46. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, mediated
settlement agreement means a settlement agreement on differences
between persons arising out of legal relationships, whether contractual or
not, considered as commercial under the law in force in India, made on or
after the (date of ratification of Singapore Convention) in pursuance of an
agreement in writing for mediation to which the Convention set forth in the
First Schedule applies.
Provided that the provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to settlement
agreements to which Union of India is a party, or to which any governmental
agencies or any person acting on behalf of a governmental agency is a
party.
115

4 | Page
47. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 49, Settlement Agreements
shall be treated as binding for all purposes and shall be enforceable under
this Chapter against the persons or any person claiming through or under
them, as between whom it was made.
(2) The Settlement Agreement be relied upon by any of the said persons
by way of defence, set-off or otherwise in any legal proceedings in India
and any reference in this Chapter to enforce the International Commercial
Mediated Settlement Agreement shall be construed and include reference
to the same.
48. (1) The Party applying for the enforcement of a Settlement Agreement
shall, at the time of the application, produce before the High Court -
(a) the Settlement Agreement or a copy thereof duly attested by the
institution that administered the mediation in any of the manner
required by law of the country in which it was made; and
(b) such other evidence as may be required by the High Court to
prove that the Settlement Agreement is covered under the
Convention.
(2) If the Settlement Agreement and other evidence to be produced in
terms of sub-section (1) is in a foreign language, the parties seeking to
enforce the Settlement Agreement shall produce a translation into English
duly certified as correct by a diplomatic or consular agent of the country to
which that party belongs; or certified as correct in such other manner as
may be sufficient according to the law in force in India.
(3) Subject to sub-section (1) and (2) above, a party to an international
settlement agreement may —
(a) apply to the High Court to record the agreement as an order of
court for the purposes of invoking the agreement in any court
proceedings in India involving a dispute concerning a matter that
the party to the international settlement agreement claims was
already resolved by the agreement, in order to prove that the
matter has already been resolved; or
(b) in any proceedings in the High Court, —
116

5 | Page
(i) to which the party to the international settlement agreement
is a party; and
(ii) which involves a dispute concerning a matter that the party
claims was already resolved by the agreement,
apply to the High Court to take the agreement on record in the
proceedings in order to prove that the matter has already been
resolved.
Explanation – In this Chapter, “High Court” means the High Court having
original jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject matter of
the Settlement Agreement if the same had been subject matter of a suit
on its original civil jurisdiction and in other cases, in the High Court having
jurisdiction to hear appeals from judgments and decrees of Courts
subordinate to such High Court.
49. (1) Enforcement of a Settlement Agreement may be refused at the
request of the party against whom it is sought to be enforced only if that
party furnishes to the High Court proof that –
(a) parties to the Mediation Agreement were, under the law applicable
to them, under some incapacity or the said Agreement was null
and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed under the
law to which the parties have subjected it; or failing any indication
thereon, under the law of the country where the International
Mediation Settlement Agreement is sought to be enforced; or
(b) Is not binding, or is not final, according to its terms; or
(c) Has been subsequently modified; or
(d) The obligations in the settlement agreement have been performed
or are not clear or comprehensible; or
(e) Granting relief would be contrary to the terms of the settlement
agreement; or
(f) There was a serious breach by the mediator of standards applicable
to the mediator or the mediation without which breach that party
would not have entered into the settlement agreement; or
117

6 | Page
(g) There was a failure by the mediator to disclose to the parties,
circumstances that raise justifiable doubts as to the mediator’s
impartiality or independence and such failure to disclose had a
material impact or undue influence on a party without which failure
that party would not have entered into the settlement agreement.
Provided that, if decisions on the matters submitted to mediation can be
separated from those not submitted, that part of the Settlement Agreement
which contains settlement on matters submitted to Mediation shall be
enforced;
(2) Enforcement of the Settlement Agreement may also be refused if the
High Court finds –
(a) the subject matter of disputes is not capable of settlement by
mediation under the law of India; or
(b) the Settlement Agreement was induced or effected by fraud or
corruption; or
(c) It is in contravention with the public policy of India.
Explanation 1 . — For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that a
mediated settlement agreement is in conflict with the public policy of India,
only if, —
(i) the making of the settlement agreement was induced or affected
by fraud or corruption; or
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice.
50. Nothing in this Chapter shall prejudice any rights of any person under
the Settlement Agreement or pending enforcement proceedings in India of
any Settlement Agreement or of availing the said remedy as if this chapter
had not been enacted.
1.11 Since in domestic mediation, the definition of court as under sub-section 3(c), in
the Explanation, Commercial Courts are included, a similar Explanation has to be
included in Section 48.
118

7 | Page
1.13 Based on the above insertion of sections 46 to 51 in Chapter XI, existing
Chapter XI (Miscellaneous) can be renumbered as Chapter XII and sections 46
to 65, can be renumbered as sections 52 to 71.
2. Section 3:
2.1 We are grateful for accepting our earlier suggestion to include the Explanation in
sub-section 3(c) and insert a new sub-section 3(e).
2.2 Sub-section 3(l), defines “Mediation Service Provider”, which shall conduct
mediation and have in place procedures and Rules. They should also have the
requisite infrastructure to conduct mediation, as this would be a relevant requisite
of a mediation centre. This also needs to be mentioned.
The Existing Explanation could be renumbered as Explanation 1 and a new
Explanation 2 could be inserted as follows:
48. Explanation 2 – Where such application has to be filed in a High Court,
it shall be filed, heard and disposed of by the Commercial Division where
such Commercial Division has been constituted in such High Court.
1.12 There is no provision given in Chapter XI to challenge any orders passed by
courts under this Chapter. A first appeal against any order is considered as a
fundamental right.
So sufficient safeguard should be placed for a first appeal against such orders
passed by courts.
Therefore a new section 51, can be added as follows:
51. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, an appeal shall lie from the following orders (and from no
others) to the Court authorized by law to hear appeals from original decrees
of the Court passing the order, namely —
(i) Allowing or refusing to allow to enforce an international Mediated
Settlement Agreement under Section 49.
(2) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this
section, but nothing in this section shall affect or take away any right to
appeal to the Supreme Court.
119

8 | Page
3. Section 4:
3.1 In Section 4, which defines mediation, the option of institutional mediation should
also be included (especially when definition of “institutional mediation” is included
in sub-section 3(e), accepting our earlier suggestion).
3.2 Many domestic and international agreements now contain dispute resolution
clauses including Med-Arb or Arb-Med-Arb clauses of different institutions under
their Rules. In arbitration, we have already made amendments to promote
institutional arbitration. This should be followed in mediation also, otherwise there
could be a conflict in policy.
3.3 Additionally, in section 4, an explanation could be included to clarify acceptance
of mediation processes done under different hybrid processes to show that
India recognizes the innovative mechanisms of hybrid resolution methods like
Med-Arb and Arb-Med-Arb.
3.4 Section 4 as of now, reads as follows:
4. Mediation shall be a process, whether referred to by the expression
mediation, pre-litigation mediation, online mediation, community mediation,
conciliation or an expression of similar import, whereby party or parties,
request a third person referred to as mediator or mediation service
provider to assist them in their attempt to reach an amicable settlement of
a dispute.
3. (l) “Mediation Service Provider” means a body or organisation that
provides for the conduct of mediation under this Act and rules and
regulations made thereunder, and are recognised by the Council;
2.4 As such Sub-section 3(l), can be amended as follows:
3. (l) “Mediation Service Provider” means a body or organization that
provides for the conduct of mediation and have in place procedures and
Rules to govern the conduct of mediation in conformity with this Act and
provide all facilities, secretarial assistance and infrastructure for the efficient
conduct of mediations, and are recognised by the Council.
2.3 Sub-section 3(l) as of now, reads as follows:
120

9 | Page
3.5 As such Section 4, can be amended as follows:
4. Mediation means a process, whether referred to by the expression
mediation, pre-litigation mediation, institutional mediation, online mediation,
conciliation or an expression of similar import, whereby parties request a
third person or persons (“the mediator”) to assist them in their attempt to
reach an amicable settlement of the dispute.
Explanation – This would also include a mediation process, which is part of
any hybrid method, like Med-Arb Process or Arb-Med-Arb process.
4.
Section 6:
4.1 Sub-section 6(1) makes pre-litigation mediation mandatory. In such case, no
party will be able to approach the court without taking steps for pre-litigation
mediation.
4.2 The High Court of Chennai, while analysing the provision of mandatory pre-
litigation mediation under the Commercial Courts Act, in a recent decision dated
17/08/2021 (Shahi Exports Pvt Ltd. Vs. Gold Star Line Limited & Others -
C.S.No.669 of 2019) held that Section 12-A of the Commercial Courts Act, is
not a mandatory provision. The right to access justice which is a Constitutional
Right cannot be denied or deprived for not resorting to mediation. The litigant
cannot be denied the doors of justice for directly approaching the Court without
exploring the possibility of mediation. The intention of this Section is not to
prevent access to justice or to aid anyone who refuses to subject himself to the
judicial process.
4.3 It could be even more sceptical in case of a dispute which could affect peace,
harmony and tranquility in a locality, where it could be settled through community
mediation, as under Chapter X (Section 44). As per sub-section 22(1) mediation
under this Act should be completed within a period of 180 days. So in such a
dispute, the parties to a dispute could be prevented access to courts for 180
days, if such a mediation committee hold on to the dispute under the guise of
mediation.
4.4 Since access to justice is a constitutional right, it would be better to make
mediation voluntary and optional, and left to the choice of the party, otherwise
there is a probability that the courts could interpret and dilute the rigidity of the
section.
4.5 Sub-section 6(1) as of now, reads as follows:
121

10 | Page
8. (2) The court or tribunal shall after granting or rejecting urgent interim
relief, as the case may be, refer the parties to undertake mediation to
resolve the dispute, if deemed appropriate.
5.3 As such Sub-section 8(2), can be amended as follows:
8. (2) The court or tribunal shall after granting or rejecting urgent interim
relief, as the case may be, refer the parties to undertake mediation to
resolve the dispute.
6. Section 9:
6.1 We are grateful for accepting our earlier suggestion to delete sub-section 9(4)
which was there in the draft Bill dated 29/10/2021.
6. (1) Subject to other provisions of this Act, whether any mediation
agreement exists or not, any party before filing any suit or proceedings of
civil or commercial nature in any court, shall take steps to settle the
disputes by pre-litigation mediation in accordance with the provisions of this
Act:
4.6 As such Sub-section 6(1), can be reworded as follows:
6. (1) Subject to other provisions of this Act, irrespective of the existence
of any mediation agreement or otherwise, any party before filing any suit
or proceeding in any Court or Tribunal, may take steps to settle the
disputes by pre litigation mediation in accordance with the provisions of this
Act.
5.
Section 8:
5.1 Since Sub-section 8(1) is a provision for interim measures to be obtained from
courts, either before the commencement of or during the continuation of
mediation, the discretion of the court or tribunal to refer the parties back to
mediation as under Sub-section 8(2) should not be there. The parties have
approached only for an interim measure. The mediation should continue.
Therefore, the words, “if deemed appropriate” in Sub-section 8(2) should be
deleted.
5.2 Sub-section 8(2) as of now, reads as follows:
122

11 | Page
9. (1) Notwithstanding the failure to reach any settlement under
sub-section (1) of section 6, the court or tribunal may, at any stage of
proceeding, refer the parties to undertake mediation, if a request to this
effect is made by them.
6.2 That suggestion was given specifically considering the impact of Singapore
Convention. As per Article 1(3)(a) of the Singapore Convention, the Convention
does not apply to Settlement agreements, (i) that have been approved by a
court or concluded in the course of proceedings before a court; 
and (ii) that are
enforceable as a judgment in the State of that court. So any Mediated Settlement
Agreement made as part of a court proceeding or under a court annexed
proceedings which has the status of a court judgment is excluded from the
ambit of the Singapore Convention.
6.3 But in the present Bill, the ambit of the section to refer parties to mediation, in
case they have come to court in spite of having a mediation agreement, is
removed (which was there is the earlier draft Bill dated 29/10/2021). This will
make mediation agreements or clauses in commercial contracts redundant. The
relevance of agreement to mediate is also reflected in sub-section 16(a). Hence
sub-section 9(1) of the draft Bill dated 29/10/2021 has to be reinstated.
6.4 The situation covered under the present sub-section 9(1) is already taken care
under section 89 of the Civil Procedure Code. So it need not be included under
this Act.
6.5 Sub-section 9(1) as of now, reads as follows:
6.6 As such Sub-section 9(1), can be amended as follows (reinstating sub-section
9(1) under draft Bill dated 29/10/2021):
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, a Court or Tribunal, before which an action is brought in a
matter which is the subject of an agreement to submit to mediation shall, if
a party to such agreement or any person claiming through or under him,
so applies not later than the date of submitting his first statement on the
substance of the dispute, refer the parties to mediation as per the
provisions of this Act, unless it finds that 
prima facie no valid agreement
exists, or there is good reason why, notwithstanding such agreement, the
parties should not be referred to mediation.
123

12 | Page
7. Section 12:
7.1 This section mentions about termination of the mandate of the mediator in both
ad-hoc and institutional mediation. In the case of institutional mediation, the
mediator is heard on termination as per section 13. But no such provision is
made in the case of mediation other than institutional. When the parties terminate
the mandate of the mediator in such ad-hoc mediation, they shall also intimate
the mediator about the said fact. Otherwise the parties may unilaterally terminate
and the mediator will be unaware of such termination.
7.2 Sub-section 12(4)(ii) as of now, reads as follows:
12. (4) (ii) mediation other than institutional mediation, such party shall
terminate the mandate of mediator.
9. Explanation 1 – It is clarified that referring the parties to mediation under
this Section shall not be considered as a mediation referred in a matter or
proceedings pending before the court.
6.7 Since under the Singapore Convention, Settlement agreements that are concluded
in the course of proceedings before a court; and that are enforceable as a
judgment in the State of that court, is outside the purview of Convention, it
should be clarified that a reference under section 9, will not be deemed to be a
reference in the course of a court proceedings. Otherwise, this will create an
absurd situation, where in a contractual matter containing a mediation agreement,
if a party files a matter before court ignoring the mediation agreement, and if
the court refers the parties to mediation, then such MSA will be outside the
scope of Singapore Convention. But the very same matter, if the parties proceed
to go for mediation without intervention of court under Section 9, then such
MSA will become enforceable under the Singapore Convention.
6.8 Hence, an Explanation could be added as follows:
6.9 Moreover international mediation agreements can also be brought into the ambit
of Section 9, since it also deals with international mediation. So an explanation
can be included in the section as follows:
9. Explanation 2 – It is clarified that this section is also applicable in case
the court finds that the agreement to submit to mediation is with respect
to an international mediation.
124

13 | Page
8.4 Similarly, sub-section 17(3) deals with the measures taken by the mediator for
the conduct of mediation. As under sub-section 3(p), in the definition of participant,
there is a mention about expert. This shall be included in this sub-section, where
the mediator can take the assistance of an expert for assisting him in the
process, subject to the consent of the parties.
8.5 Sub-section 17(3) as of now, reads as follows:
7.3 As such Sub-section 12(4)(ii), can be amended as follows:
12. (4) (ii) mediation other than institutional mediation, the parties shall
terminate the mandate of mediator, after giving due notice to the mediator.
8. Section 17:
8.1 This section deals with the conduct of mediation by the mediator. Even though
mediation is a party autonomy process, the mediator shall be on control of the
process always to make sure that the mediation proceeding is conducted in a
professional and disciplined manner, keeping the safety and security of the
parties. This should be made clear in sub-section 17(1).
8.2 Sub-section 17(1) as of now, reads as follows:
17. (1) The mediator shall assist the parties in an independent, neutral and
impartial manner in their attempt to reach an amicable settlement of their
dispute.
8.3 As such Sub-section 17(1), can be amended as follows:
17. (1) The mediator shall assist the parties in an independent, neutral and
impartial manner in their attempt to reach an amicable settlement of their
dispute, but the mediator shall at all time be in control of the mediation
process.
17. (3) The mediation process may include the mediator taking such
measures as may be considered appropriate, taking into account the
circumstances of the case, including meeting with parties or participants,
jointly or separately, as frequently as deemed fit by the mediator, both in
order to convene the mediation, and during the mediation for the orderly
and timely conduct of the process and to maintain its integrity.
125

14 | Page
18. (1) The mediator shall attempt to facilitate voluntary resolution of the
dispute by the parties and communicate the view of each party to the
other to the extent agreed to by them, assist them in identifying issues,
reducing misunderstandings, clarifying priorities, exploring areas of
compromise and generating options in an attempt to resolve the dispute
expeditiously, emphasising that it is the responsibility of the parties to take
decision regarding their claims.
9.4 As such Sub-section 18(1), can be reworded as follows:
18. (1) The mediator shall attempt to facilitate voluntary resolution of the
dispute(s) by the parties, and communicate the interest of each party to
the other to the extent agreed to by them, assist them in identifying
issues, advancing better understanding, clarifying priorities, exploring areas
of settlement and generating options in an attempt to resolve the dispute(s),
emphasizing that it is the responsibility of the parties to take decision which
affect them.
8.6 As such Sub-section 17(3), can be amended as follows:
9.
Section 18:
9.1 Sub-section 18(1), outline the role of the mediator in facilitating mediation. The
section has used the terms “reducing misunderstandings” and “exploring areas
of compromise”.
9.2 Misunderstanding is a negative connotation is advancing resolutions and
compromise is a negative word which most of the commercial disputants disagree
while settling a matter. So it would be better to change these words to a positive
outlook.
9.3 Sub-section 18(1) as of now, reads as follows:
17. (3) The mediation process may include the mediator taking such
measures as may be considered appropriate, taking into account the
circumstances of the case, including meeting with parties and/or
participants, jointly and/or separately, as frequently as deemed fit by the
mediator, both in order to convene the mediation, and during the mediation
for the orderly conduct of the process and to maintain its integrity. The
mediator can also seek the assistance of an expert, subject to the consent
of the parties.
126

15 | Page
11.3 Existing sub-sections 20(1) and (2), can be renumbered as sub-sections 20(3)
and (4).
12. Section 21:
12.1 Sub-section 21(2) deals with extension of time for mediation. Being a party
autonomy process, the time limit of mediation should be left to the discretion of
the parties. As per sub-section 21(1) a period of 180 days is prescribed for
completion of mediation and as per sub-section 20(2) the parties can extent the
period only for a further period of 180 days. In many complex commercial
mediation more time may be required for an effective mediation for wholesome
resolution of all disputes. So, if all the parties consent for extension of time, that
option should be given to the parties. Otherwise the parties will be deprived of
the option to resolve the dispute by way of mediation. There is no provision
provided even for the parties to approach the court for extension of time if
circumstances so warrant. But making the parties to go to court for extension,
not only put additional backlogs to the courts, but also cause delay in the
mediation process, as getting an order from the court will be a delayed process.
Hence that option could be left to the parties themselves.
10.
Section 19:
10.1 We are grateful for accepting our earlier suggestion to insert section 19 in the
Bill.
11. Section 20:
11.1 This section deals with the mediation process. Here the rights of parties should
also be mentioned. Since mediation is a party-oriented process, the rights of
parties have to be clearly mentioned.
11.2 As such the section can be amended as follows:
20. (1) Participation in mediation shall be voluntary at all times.
(2) A party may —
(i) withdraw from the mediation at any time during the mediation,
(ii) be ac companied to the mediation, and assisted by, a person
(including a lawyer or consultant or advisor or expert) who is not
a party, or
(iii) obtain independent legal advice at any time during the mediation.
127

16 | Page
13. Section 22:
13.1 Sub-se ction 22(7) provides for registration of mediated settlement agreements
and getting a unique registration number for such MSA.
13.2 The p arties may sometimes want that the terms of settlement made in a MSA
should be treated as confidential. If the parties require the MSA to remain
confidential, it may not be fair to mandatorily ask them to file the MSA for
registration. In such cases, the mediator and parties can fill up a format giving
the details about the commencement and completion of mediation, the details
of parties and mediator, before the jurisdictional court or tribunal and the unique
registration number as under sub-section 22(7) can also be issued based on
such filing.
13.3 This could be clarified as a proviso in sub-section 22(7), as follows, after the
existing two provisos.
21. (2) The period for mediation mentioned under sub-section (1) may be
extended for a further period as agreed by the parties, but not exceeding
one hundred and eighty days.
12.4 As such Sub-section 21(2), can be amended as follows:
21. (2) The period for mediation prescribed under sub-section (1) may be
extended for such further period as required by the parties, by written
consent of all parties.
Explanation — For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the time
frame stipulated under this section shall not apply to international commercial
mediation and in domestic mediation where parties have agreed for a
procedure as per the rules of a mediation service provider.
12.2 Similarly international mediation done in India under the agreed Rules of Mediation
Service Providers (like national or international Mediation Institutes) will have
separate time frame as under those Institutional rules. To promote institutional
mediation, the time frame under such rules should be given effect to, at least in
international mediation. An explanation for the said purpose needs to be included.
12.3 Sub-section 21(2) as of now, reads as follows:
128

17 | Page
22. (7) Provided further that, if the parties require that the terms of the
Mediated Settlement Agreement should remain confidential, they shall file a
report with the details of the mediator, mediation service provider, parties,
date of commencement of mediation and date of completion of mediation
and the fact that the parties require the terms of Mediated Settlement
Agreement to remain confidential.
14.
Section 23:
14.1 Sub-section 23(3) gives confidentiality to mediation proceedings and stipulate
that nothing relied on in mediation proceedings shall be relied on or produced
before any courts or tribunals.
14.2 But this shall not deprive a person from relying on any evidence or document
produced in mediation on the ground that it cannot be relied on since it was
produced in mediation. This has to be clarified to avoid conflicting decisions by
courts.
14.3 Hence a proviso can be added in sub-section 23(3), as follows:
23. (3) Provided that, the evidence produced or used in mediation that is
otherwise admissible in any proceedings before a court or arbitration
proceedings shall not be or become inadmissible or protected by privilege in
such proceedings, solely because it was introduced into or used in
mediation.
15.
Section 24:
15.1 Sub-section 24(2) specifies the exceptions to privilege and confidentiality under
mediation proceedings.
15.2 It should also cover instances where there is threat of psychological injury apart
from physical injury. The section should also mention, what action could be
made in case the confidentiality is breached.
15.3 Sub-section 24(2) as of now, reads as follows:
24. (2) There shall be no privilege or confidentiality that will attach to —
(a) a threat or statement of a plan to commit an offence
punishable under any law for the time being in force;
129

18 | Page
24. (2) Confidentiality or privilege shall not apply to a communication or
records or notes, or both, where disclosure –
(a) is necessary to prevent physical or psychological injury to a
party;
(b) reveal information relating to domestic violence or child abuse;
(c) is necessary in the interests of preventing or revealing –
(i) the commission of a crime (including an attempt to
commit a crime),
(ii) the concealment of a crime, or
(iii) a thr eat to a party.
(3) In case the Mediator or the Mediation Service Provider breaches the
rules of confidentiality, independence and neutrality stipulated in this Act,
then the damaged party may have recourse to such Mediator or Mediation
Service Provider for imposition of administrative and disciplinary sanctions
before the Mediation Council, and this shall not prejudice the civil and criminal
liability thereof.
(b) information relating to domestic violence or child abuse; and
(c) statements made during a mediation showing a significant
imminent threat to public health or safety.
15.4 As such Sub-section 24(2), can be amended as follows:
16. Sections 28 and 29:
16.1 Section 28 deals with enforcement of MSA and section 29 deals with challenge
of MSA.
16.2 Providing separate procedures for challenge and enforcement of MSA would
delay the ultimate result in mediation. Taking the experience from arbitration in
India, where almost every arbitral awards are challenged before courts, such a
procedure will delay the ultimate result of mediation. Once the matter goes to
130

19 | Page
28. (1) A mediated settlement agreement resulting from a mediation signed
by the parties and authenticated by the mediator shall be final and binding
on the parties and persons claiming under them respectively and enforceable
as per the provisions of sub-section (2).
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 29, the mediated settlement
agreement shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908, in the same manner as if it were a judgment or
decree passed by a court, and may, accordingly, be relied on by any of the
parties or persons claiming through them, by way of defence, set off or
otherwise in any legal proceeding.
29. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, in any case in which the mediated settlement agreement is
arrived at between the parties other than in court referred mediation or by
Lok Adalat or Permanent Lok Adalat under the Legal Services Authorities
Act, 1987, and is sought to be challenged by either of the parties, such
party may file an application before the court or tribunal of competent
jurisdiction.
(2) A mediated settlement agreement may be challenged only on all or any
of the following grounds, namely:—
(i) fraud;
(ii) corruption;
(iii) impersonation;
(iv) where the mediation was conducted in disputes or matters not
fit for mediation under section 7.
(3) An application for challenging the mediated settlement agreement shall
not be made after ninety days have elapsed from the date on which the
party making that application has received the copy of mediated settlement
agreement under sub-section (3) of section 22:
court, delays are inevitable and the charm of going for mediation is lost. This will
prompt parties to opt mediation in other countries, beyond the jurisdiction of
courts in India. Again India will lose international mediation, in the same way we
are losing international arbitration. So it would be better to have a single procedure,
where the challenge could be integrated in the enforcement procedure.
16.3 Sections 28 and 29 as of now, reads as follows:
131

20 | Page
Provided that if the court or tribunal, as the case may be, is satisfied that
the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the application
within the said period of ninety days, it may entertain the application within
a further period of ninety days.
16.4 Integrating both sections 28 and 29, the new section 28, can be amended as
follows:
28. (1) A mediated settlement agreement resulting from a mediation signed
by the parties and authenticated by the mediator shall be final and binding
on the parties and persons claiming under them respectively.
(2) A party relying on a Mediated Settlement Agreement shall apply to the
Court for enforcement of the MSA, along with the following documents:
(a) The signed copy of the Mediated Settlement Agreement; and
(b) The Unique registration number given as under sub-section
(7) of section 22.
(3) The Court may refuse to enforce the Mediated Settlement Agreement
filed under sub-section (2), if the party against whom the enforcement is
sought, furnishes proof that:
(a) The Mediated Settlement Agreement is vitiated by:
(i) Fraud; or
(ii) Corruption; or
(iii) Gross impropriety; or
(iv) Impersonation.
(b) The terms in the Mediated Settlement Agreement:
(i) Is null and void, illegal or inoperative or incapable of
being performed under the laws of India; or
(ii) Has been subsequently modified or has been
performed; or
(iii) Are not clear or comprehensible.
(c) The subject matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement
by mediation under the laws of India.
132

21 | Page
17. Section 29:
17.1 There is no provision given in the Act to challenge any orders passed by courts.
A first appeal against any order is considered as a fundamental right. So sufficient
safeguard should be placed for a first appeal against such orders passed by
courts.
17.2 Since the existing section 29 is integrated with section 28, as above, a new
section 29 can be inserted.
17.3 As such Section 29, can be inserted as follows:
29. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, an appeal shall lie from the following orders (and from no
others) to the Court authorized by law to hear appeals from original decrees
of the Court passing the order, namely —
(i) Allowing or refusing to allow to enforce a Mediated Settlement
Agreement under Section 28;
(ii) Refusing to direct the parties to mediation under Section 9.
(2) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this
Section, but nothing in this section shall affect or take away any right to
appeal to the Supreme Court.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), where the court is satisfied
that the mediated settlement agreement is enforceable under this section,
it shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, in the same manner as if it were a judgment and/or
decree passed by a court, and may accordingly be relied on by any of
parties or persons claiming through them, by way of defense, set off or
otherwise in any legal proceedings.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, in any case in which the mediated settlement agreement is arrived
at between the parties other than in court referred mediation or by Lok
Adalat or Permanent Lok Adalat under the Legal Services Authorities Act,
1987, and is sought to be challenged by either of the parties, such party
may file an application before the court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction.
133

22 | Page
18. Section 30:
18.1 Section 30 deals with fee and cost of mediation. But no provision is mentioned
for institutional mediation and how the fee and expenses are shared and what
happens if one party fails to share the fee and cost.
18.2 This has to be clarified in this section.
18.3 Existing section 30 can be renumbered as sub-section 30(1) and the following
sub-sections can be inserted.
30. (2) The mediator may fix the amount of the deposit or supplementary
deposit, as the case may be, as an advance for the costs referred hereunder,
which he expects will be incurred in respect of the mediation proceedings:
(i) The fee and expenses of mediators;
(ii) Any administration fees of the mediation service provider;
(iii) Rentals or expenses of premises, etc.
Explanation 1 – In case of mediation other than institutional mediation, the
mediator shall be entitled to such fee at the rate as specified by the Fee
schedule prescribed by the Mediators Council of India.
Explanation 2 – In case of institutional mediation, the mediator shall be
entitled to such fee at the rate specified in the Fee schedule prescribed by
Rules of the Mediation Service Provider.
(3) The deposit referred to in sub-section (3) shall be payable in equal
shares by the parties.
Provided that where one party fails to pay his share of the deposit, the
other party may pay that share;
Provided further that where the other party also does not pay the aforesaid
share, the mediator may suspend or terminate the mediation proceedings.
19.
Section 31:
19.1 Section 31 provides for exclusion of the period of limitation during the process of
mediation, if the mediation fails or if no settlement was possible.
134

23 | Page
20. Section 40:
20.1 In the duties and performance of Mediators Council for the purpose of training
on mediation; partnering with law firms are included. Mediation Service Providers,
Mediation Institutes and Universities are appropriate, but Law firms who are not
a specialised group on mediation should be omitted.
20.2 Sub-section 40(f) as of now, reads as follows:
40. (f) hold trainings, workshops and courses in the area of mediation in
collaboration with mediation service providers, law firms and universities and
other stakeholders, both Indian and international, and any other mediation
institutes;
20.3 As such Sub-section 40(f), can be amended as follows:
40. (f) hold training workshops and courses in the area of mediation in
collaboration with mediation institutes, mediation service providers and
universities, both Indian and International; and
19.2 But there could be such situations, where the settlement is made by the parties,
but subsequently the court set-aside the MSA. This period also needs to be
excluded, as otherwise it will result in the party having no remedy. A similar
provision is provided in sub-section 43(4) of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act,
where the period from the commencement of arbitration till the award is set-
aside is excluded from the period of limitation.
19.3 Hence a sub-section can be added after sub-section 31(iv), as follows:
31. (v) setting aside of the Mediated Settlement Agreement by the court
under sub-section (3) of section 28.
21. Section 44:
21.1 Chapter X deals with community mediation for resolution of disputes which are
likely to affect peace, harmony and tranquility in any area or locality. Under sub-
section 44(4), the Authority or District Magistrate shall create a permanent
panel of mediators. As under Sub-section 3(h), “mediator” means a person who
is appointed to be a mediator to undertake mediation, and includes a person
registered as mediator with the Council. Similarly, mediation proceedings are
specified in Chapter V.
135

24 | Page
21.2 But the mediator under Chapter X, need not to have such qualifications or
requirements, even though the mediator is dealing with serious matters which
affects peace and harmony. Overlooking the training and accreditation of
mediators is against the whole scheme of the Act.
21.3 Sub-section 44(5) as of now, reads as follows:
44. (5) The following persons may be included in the panel referred to in
sub-section (4) —
(a) persons of standing and integrity who are respectable in the community;
(b) any local person whose contribution to the society has been recognised;
(c) representative of area or resident welfare associations; and
(d) any other person deemed appropriate.
21.4 As such Sub-section 44(5), can be amended as follows:
44. (5) The following persons may be included in the panel referred to in
sub-section (4) —
(a) registered as mediator with the Council; and
(b) persons of standing and integrity who are respectable in the community;
(c) any local person whose contribution to the society has been recognised;
(d) representative of area or resident welfare associations; or
(e) any other person deemed appropriate.
22.
Schedules:
22.1 As mentioned in 1.8 above, Singapore Convention has to be included as Schedule-
I, and the existing Schedules I to X, can be renumbered as Schedules II to XI.
22.2 Schedule-I (To be renumbered as Schedule-II).
22.3 In this schedule disputes that cannot be referred to mediation is included. In
clause 2, issues of fraud is discussed. In the case of fraud, even in arbitration,
the Supreme Court of India in “Avitel Post Studioz Ltd. & Others Vs. HSBC Pi
Holdings (Mauritius) Ltd.” [CDJ 2020 SC 702], held that if the allegation of fraud
is touching upon the internal affairs of the party inter-se and has no implication
in the public domain, the arbitration clause need not be avoided and the parties
can be relegated to arbitration. So allegation of serious fraud only should be
taken as a ground for making the matter not fit for mediation.
22.4 Clause (2) as of now, reads as follows:
136

25 | Page
22.5 As such Clause (2), can be amended as follows:
2. Disputes of serious and specific allegations of fraud, fabrication of
documents or forgery, which has implication in public domain.
22.6 Schedule-VI (To be renumbered as Schedule-VII).
22.7 In this schedule, amendments to Arbitration & Conciliation Act is mentioned.
22.8 As per sub-section 61(1) of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, conciliation could
be done as otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force. That
means many conciliations mentioned in many other enactments are untouched
by the Conciliation mechanism provided under Part III of the Arbitration &
Conciliation Act. Those conciliations should be left untouched by the Mediation
Act also, until and unless a detailed study on the consequences and impact of
the process is specifically studied. Otherwise it could open a floodgate of litigations.
22.9 So it would be safer to leave out such conciliations from the ambit of the
Mediation Act. A Explanation could be added in Section 61, as follows:
61. Clarification – It is clarified that notwithstanding anything contained in
section 61 any conciliation proceedings done as otherwise provided by any
law for the time being in force other than under Part III of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996, shall be continued to be called as conciliation and
not affected by the provisions of the Mediation Act, 2021.
2. Disputes involving allegations of serious and specific fraud, fabrication of
documents, forgery, impersonation, coercion.
22.10 Since the Mediation Council is being constituted under this Act, certain conflicting
provisions made in the Arbitration Council of India under the Arbitration &
Conciliation Act needs to changed.
22.11 The following changes could be made in Part IA of the Arbitration & Conciliation
Act, 1996:
22.12 In sub-section 43D(1), the word mediation should be removed. Amended sub-
section would read as follows:
137

26 | Page
22.13 In sub-section 43D (e), (f) and (i), the word conciliation needs to be omitted.
(e) frame, review and update norms to ensure satisfactory level of
arbitration;
(f) act as a forum for exchange of views and techniques to be adopted for
creating a platform to make India a robust centre for domestic and
international arbitration;
(i) conduct examination and training on various subjects relating to arbitration
and award certificates thereof.
22.14 Schedule-IX (To be renumbered as Schedule-X).
22.15 In this schedule, amendments to Commercial Courts Act is mentioned.
22.16 Amendment should be made in Section 10 which deals with “Jurisdiction in respect
of arbitration matters”. It should be renamed as “Jurisdiction in respect of
arbitration and mediation matters”.
22.17 A new Section can be inserted as 10A as follows:
43D. (1) It shall be the duty of the Council to take all such measures as
may be necessary to promote and encourage arbitration and other
alternative dispute resolution mechanism and for that purpose to frame
policy and guidelines for the establishment, operation and maintenance of
uniform professional standards in respect of all matters relating to
arbitration.
Section 10A – Where the subject-matter of a mediation is a commercial
dispute of a Specified Value and ––
(1) If such mediation is an international mediation, all applications or appeals
arising out of such mediation under the provisions of the Mediation Act,
2021 that have to be filed in a High Court, shall be heard and disposed of by
the Commercial Division where such Commercial Division has been constituted
in such High Court.
(2) If such mediation is other than an international mediation, all applications
or appeals arising out of such mediation under the provisions of the Mediation
Act, 2021 that have to be filed on the original side of the High Court, shall
be heard and disposed of by the Commercial Division where such Commercial
Division has been constituted in such High Court.
138

27 | Page
23. Statement of Objects and Reasons:
23.1 As stated in 1.1 above, the Mediation Act is made primarily for the purpose
promoting the use of mediation in international commercial disputes and to ratify
the Singapore Convention, of which India is a signatory.
23.2 This was clearly mentioned in the Statement of Objects in the draft Bills dated
12/08/2021 and 29/10/2021. But unfortunately it is omitted in the present Bill.
This will have to be included in the Statement of Objects, as that is one of the
key objectives in introducing a comprehensive law on Mediation.
23.3 Therefore a new paragraph 3 has to be inserted, as follows and the existing
paragraphs 3 and 4, shall be renumbered as 4 and 5.
(3) If such mediation is other than an international mediation, all applications
or appeals arising out of such mediation under the provisions of the Mediation
Act, 2021 that would ordinarily lie before any principal civil court of original
jurisdiction in a district (not being a High Court) shall be filed in, and heard
and disposed of by the Commercial Court exercising territorial jurisdiction
over such mediation where such Commercial Court has been constituted.
4. Whereas the United Nations Commission on International Trade And
Law (UNCITRAL) has adopted the United Nations Convention on
International Settlement Agreements resulting from Mediation, also known
as “The Singapore Convention”, on 20 December 2018 and India on 7
August 2019 became one of the first signatories to the said Convention. To
strengthen the legal framework on international dispute settlement and to
give effect to the Singapore Convention, a standalone mediation law for
enforcement of international settlement agreements resulting from
mediation is required.
(x) to recognise and facilitate enforcement of international Mediated
Settlement Agreements in India.
23.4 An additional objective to the above effect needs to be added as (x) in paragraph
4, as follows:
139

24. General suggestion:
24.1 In legislative drafting masculine pronoun was commonly used in the English
language to signify the non-specific “he or she”, based on the premise that the
norm of humanity is male. This has been used for over 150 years in English
language legislative texts. The interpretation provides that references to male
persons include female persons.
24.2 Gender neutrality is important when writing about people because it is more
accurate — not to mention respectful — and is consistent with the values of
equality recognized. The need to deal equally with men and women highlights
the desirability of drafting using gender-neutral language. Laws that exclude
references to the female gender do not promote gender equality.
24.3 The Mediation Act being one with a futuristic vision, the gender-equality language
could be used in this Act and a person could be referred as “she” or “her” to
redress the imbalance.
ABOUT APCAM
Asia Pacific Centre for Arbitration & Mediation (APCAM) is a unique concept developed
for the first time in the world, where an international ADR centre is formed jointly by
approximately 9 arbitration and mediation centres from Asia Pacific countries, with
centres available in those countries. Many new countries have shown interest and will
be joining soon, making the presence of APCAM in most of the Asia-Pacific countries.
APCAM centres are now available in India, Australia, Malaysia, Hong Kong, Indonesia,
Thailand, Nepal and South Korea. APCAM is managed by an experienced governing
board comprising of renowned professionals from all countries. APCAM also have an
Advisory Board comprising of eminent persons from various parts of the world, which
include Mr. Justice M.N. Venkatachaliah, Former Chief Justice of India, Mr. Justice
Madan B. Lokur, Former Judge, Supreme Court of India, Mr. Justice Tun Zaki Bin
Mohammed Azmi, Former Chief Justice of Malaysia, Prof. Hon. Clyde Croft AM SC,
Former Judge, Supreme Court of Australia, Mr. Rimsky 
Yuen Kwok-keung GBM, SC, JP,
Former Secretary for Justice of Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, Prof. Dr.
Mieke Komar, Former Justice, Supreme Court of the Republic of Indonesia, Mr. Phongthep
Thepkanjana, Former Deputy Prime Minister and Chief Judge, Thailand, Mr. Justice
Keshari Raj Pandit, Former Chief Judge, High Court of Nepal, Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ambeng
28 | Page
140

Kandakasi, Deputy Chief Justice, National and Supreme Court of Papua New Guinea,
Prof. Justice Chang-fa Lo, Former Justice, Constitutional Court of ROC (Taiwan) and Mr.
Justice O-Gon Kwon, Former Judge, International Criminal Tribunal, UN General Assembly
and Chair of the Judicial Policy Management Committee, Supreme Court of Korea.
APCAM is registered in India as a non-profit organisation and the initial Secretariat for
two years will be in India. APCAM being a premier organisation with centres in 10 Asia
Pacific countries and registered in India, can create an impact in making India a centralised
Asia-Pacific hub for international mediation and arbitration.
29 | Page
Regards
Anil Xavier
Chairman, Asia Pacific Centre for Arbitration & Mediation
Iram Majid
Executive Director, Asia Pacific Centre for Arbitration & Mediation
141

Page 1 of 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUGGESTIONS FOR THE MEDIATION BILL, 2021 
 
Certain key purposes that require to be achieved through the draft law under 
consideration are: 
I) Upholding Party Autonomy  – this will have a major contribution in 
promoting mediation. 
II) Assuring Confidentiality of the process as well as the outcome. 
III) Enabling Capacity Building of professional service providers and skilled 
mediators. 
IV) Creating an Ombud’s office 
V) Benefits of Conciliation 
VI) Enforcement of MSAs 
VII) Making India an international ADR hub for  disputes involving private 
parties as well as State entities. 
The Bill has by now been reviewed and commented upon by several individuals, 
groups and entities. However, keeping in mind the aforementioned expected goals, 
some suggestions are shared hereunder: 
 
I(A)        Party Autonomy: 
Considering that it is the parties who have to live with the outcome of mediation, 
whether successful or not, it must be ensured that parties themselves attend the 
mediation proceedings, express their interests and underlying concerns to each 
other and, with the assistance of the mediator, work out a settlement on their own. 
Presently, parties are sometimes represented by their lawyers who, due to their duty 
to defend their clients’ rights, are not in a position to p ersuade the other side in a 
way that their own client’s interests can be secured.  
 
Also, the impersonality of the lawyer’s approach considerably lowers the quality of 
relationship that the parties can otherwise have and enhance should they be sitting, 
expressing, hearing, deliberating and negotiating with each other in person. 
 
142

Page 2 of 5 
 
Additionally, there is sometimes a concern whether a lawyer would really be keen or 
comfortable to allow the mediation to start and continue beyond the minimum 
mandatory requirement, when his/her acumen can be better used in a court of law 
to fight for the client’s rights, which not only increases the billable hours, but also 
gives greater job satisfaction, because that is what the lawyer is trained for  – an 
adversarial role.  
  
Disputes can be best resolved when both sides are sitting with a singular purpose – 
to unearth, express and achieve their respective interests, not when they (or even 
one of them ) are more focused on the rights, which is likely when a lawyer is 
representing a party. 
 
Keeping th e above in mind , the following provision is suggested for inclusion at an 
appropriate place in the draft Bill:- 
 
Representation during mediation proceedings: 
Appearance before the Mediator in Mediation Proceedings shall be by:- 
(i) Party in person 
(ii) Authorized representative, who is on the pay -roll of the entity (company , 
organisation, etc) which is a party; 
(iii) A relative of a party disabled from attending in person; 
or 
(iv) Such person who is not  connected in any way to the legal representatives 
of that party in any legal proceedings. 
 
I (B)    It must be clarified whether the duration for completion of the mediation 
process (be it 180 days or 360 days) p rovided under clause 21 of the Bill, shall 
override: 
(i) Private agreements for mediation; 
(ii) Institutional clauses for mediation; 
and  
(iii) High Courts’ Rules for mediation. 
 
 
 
 
143

Page 3 of 5 
 
II) Confidentiality:  
Parties in conflict, often do not want to even be seen in that position, leave alone be 
found litigating or mediating.  And they certainly do not want to make public the real 
issues which require to be addressed. 
 
Also – and for the same reason - once having reached a settlement, they may not 
want to reveal how they have resolved the conflict , as the terms of settlement would 
probably reveal what really was dispute all about. 
 
Sometimes, the parties may be convinced to come to the talking table  simply 
because they have been assured of the confidentiality of the process and outcome 
thereof. Even in normal course, unless esse ntial for the purpose of enforcement, 
parties are not comfortable to see their MSA go beyond themselves. 
 
These being the ground realities, and especially considering that confidentiality is 
one of the pillars of the process of mediation, it is imperative to delete the provisions 
contained in Clauses 22 (7), (8) & (9), requiring registration of mediated settlement 
agreements (MSAs). 
  
III) Capacity building:  
Insistence must be placed on training - and continued, periodical training  - of the 
mediators (including the ‘ deemed mediators ’), the mediation service providers , 
lawyers as well as the trainers of the training institutes  providing the mediation 
trainings. 
The mediation service providers must be given the maximum autonomy, with 
minimal interference, so as to allow them to provide the optimum service to their 
constituents, who have preferred to use their services based on the Rules 
respectively established by them. 
Efforts, hence, to s tandardise these services of the mediation service providers 
should be approached with caution, keeping in mind the principle of party 
autonomy. 
 
IV) Creating an Ombudsman’s Office: 
Mediation being a  confidential process, it is essential that whatever an ybody says in 
the mediation room , stays in the mediation room . However sometimes issues do 
emerge due to a recalcitrant party /lawyer, which may put the mediator in an ethical 
144

Page 4 of 5 
 
dilemma and in fact such act , if not addressed appropriately, may scuttle the whole 
mediation process. It is hence  necessary to establish an Office of an Ombudsman. 
This will enable mediators to raise any such issues directly with the Ombuds’ Office 
so that the same can be redressed confidentially. 
 
Such O mbuds’ Office should be established in/by all the High Courts ’ mediation 
centres who should be authorized to take up complaints from mediators doing Court 
Annexed as well as private (ad hoc or institutional) mediations.  
 
V) Benefits of Conciliation: 
One reason why parties are not able to settle better and sooner is that  they do not 
have the capacity to discern dispassionately enough to be able to take decisions. 
Being caught in conflict, they are not able to see beyond the self -set notions of 
options & limitations about themselves as well as of the other side. In such sc enario, 
the parties are greatly aided by some fresh perspective. This can be achieved by what 
is known as a “mediator’s proposal”. This provision is available under Section 67 (4) 
of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 . Considering that this Bill, on enactment, 
shall be withdrawing this benefit afforded to the parties (vide Clause 61, read with 
the Sixth Schedule), it is suggested that this provision be incorporated in the present 
Bill, with all the requisite stipulatio ns and safeguards. An appropriate place would be 
at and as Clause 18 (2), by renaming the current Clause 18(2) as Clause 18 (3). 
 
In fact, our mediation rules at IIAC are titled as “ Mediation & Conciliation Rules” 
keeping in mind that parties can then hav e the benefit, inter alia of a “mediator’s 
proposal”, should they agree to Conciliation instead of Mediation. 
  
One issue that needs to be clarified under the Bill is whether the stipulation of the 
duration of the Mediation process under the act would be overriding 
a) Private Agreements between parties; 
b) The Institutional clauses adopted by parties in their agreements; 
and 
c) Provision of any law 
requiring or mandating a shorter duration. 
 
 
 
145

Page 5 of 5 
 
VI) Enforcement: 
Considerable provisions have been made in the Bill in this regard and suggestions for 
additional provisions would have been made by other reviewers of the Bill. 
However, it would seem appropriate to: 
(a)   add the ground of ‘ misrepresentation’ to the provisions contained in Clause 
29 (2); 
(b) Add the following words at th e end of Proviso to Clause 29 (3) : “…from the 
cessation of such cause.” 
 
VII) Making India an international ADR hub: 
The one and only way of making any  service popular is to make  it user friendly. This 
means the access to the service is easy, little fuss is involved in using it (no regulatory 
interruption, intervention or interference) , standards of high quality are maintained 
so as to afford consistency , expectations are met and there are no uncomfortable 
surprises along the way or at the end of the journey. 
 
Keeping this in mind, it is imperative to delete all such provisions as seek to formally 
regulate the essentially informal process of mediation and its outcome. What is really 
required – and has so far been looked past – is to have vigorous training and clear 
guidelines for the nurturing of good mediators, mediation service providers and 
training institutes. Rest shall follow. 
 
 
146

147

148

149

150

151

152

153

154

155

156

157

158

159

1 
 
Suggestions of The Institute of Company Secretaries of India on the ‘Mediation 
Bill, 2021’ 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Clause /Sub-clause Number  Suggestions/ Observations Rationale 
1.  Clause 3 (k) 
 
"mediation institute" means a 
body or organisation that 
provides training,  continuous 
education and certification of 
mediators and carries out such 
other functions under this Act. 
 
To recognize Institute of Company Secretaries 
of India (ICSI) as “Mediation Institute”. 
 
 
ICSI is a premier professional body 
established under The Company 
Secretaries Act, 1980. It is under 
the administrative control of the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs.  
 
ICSI has already delved into 
developing and regulating 
Registered Valuers  by establishing 
its wholly owned subsidiary viz.  
ICSI Registered Valuers 
Organisation (ICSI RVO) and is 
further delved in developing and 
regulating the Insolvency 
Professionals by establishing 
another wholly owned subsidiary  
viz. ICSI Institute of Insolv ency 
Professionals (ICSI IIP).  
 
Both these Organizations have 
been actively involved in 
educating, training and promoting 
160

2 
 
the members  by holding training 
workshops, issuance of different 
publications such as handbooks, 
magazines, journals, etc. and by 
launching and conducting various 
courses in their respective areas. 
 
Further, ICSI has taken several 
initiatives for the capacity building 
of members as mentioned below: 
 
 The Post Membership 
Qualification course on 
Arbitration is offered to the 
members of ICS I to familiarize 
them with legal framework of 
arbitration, arbitration 
procedures, and arbitration 
practice. This course has 
coverage relating to drafting of 
arbitration and other clauses in 
commercial contracts, 
international arbitration, 
limited liabilit y and related 
aspects, arbitration procedure, 
arbitration agreement, 
appearances and arguments, 
strategic elements in arbitration 
clauses, execution of arbitral 
award, appeals etc. A copy of 
the brochure is attached  as 
Annexure 1. 
161

3 
 
 
 Three days residential training 
program on the Arbitration in 
Commercial disputes have been 
offered to the members with the 
aim to upgrade and upskill their 
knowledge in the area of 
Arbitration. The cop y of the 
brochure is attached as 
Annexure 2. 
 
 Madhyastha Ek Vikalp: a 
series of professional training 
and capacity building programs 
in Arbitration. A copy of the 
brochure is enclosed as 
Annexure 3.  
 
 Regular workshops and 
training programmes on 
Arbitration and Conciliation 
with special focus on conduct 
of arbitral proceedings, 
appearances and arguments, 
mock arbitral tribunal and 
making arbitral award, etc.  are 
conducted across various 
locations by Chapters and 
Regional Councils of the ICSI. 
 
 Special issue on the subject 
‘Arbitration’ in Chartered 
Secretary, the monthly journal 
162

4 
 
of the ICSI and a dedicated 
monthly newsletter on 
Arbitration & Alternative 
Dispute Resolution Mechanism 
brought out by ICSI.  
 
2.  Clause 3 (l) 
 
"mediation service provider" 
means a body or organisation 
that provides for the conduct of 
mediation under this Act and 
rules and regulations made 
thereunder, and are recognised 
by the Council; 
 
Explanation I. —For the 
purposes of this clause, 
mediation service provider 
includes an Authority 
constituted under the Legal 
Services Authorities Act, 1987, 
or mediation centre annexed to 
a court, tribunal or such other 
forum as may be specified. 
 
Explanation II.—An Authority 
constituted under the Legal 
Services Authorities Act, 1987, 
or mediation centre annexed to 
a court or tribunal or such 
other forum shall be deemed to 
be a mediation service provider 
To recognize Institute of Company Secretaries 
of Indi a (ICSI) as “Mediation Service 
Provider”. 
ICSI has nationwide presence 
having its headquarters at New 
Delhi, a Centre for Corporate 
Governance, R esearch and 
Training at Navi Mumbai, a 
Centre of Excellence  at 
Hyderabad and four Regional 
Offices at New Delhi, Chennai, 
Kolkata and Mumbai and 7 2 
Chapters spread all over India  and 
five overseas centres at Australia, 
UAE, USA, UK and Singapore. 
 
Clause 42 of the Mediation Bill, 
2021 provides the various 
functions performed by the 
mediation service provider.  
 
The ICSI through its subsidiaries 
viz. ICSI IIP and ICSI RVO, is 
already providing various services 
like maintain ing panel of 
Insolvency Pro fessionals and 
Registered Valuers empanelled 
with these subsidiaries, which are 
providing services to the India 
Inc. Further the subsidiaries are 
163

5 
 
recognised by the Council. 
 
also imparting various training 
programmes, accreditation etc. in 
the respective field.  
 
ICSI is in a positio n to provide all 
facilities, secretarial assistance and 
infrastructure for the efficient 
conduct of mediation. Further, 
ICSI is actively engaged in 
maintaining and enhancing 
governance framework in the 
corporate sector of India  Inc. and  
has dynamic presenc e in 
partnering with the Government in 
its varied initiatives towards 
achievement of national goals of 
good governance. 
 
Hence, ICSI can provide all the 
necessary requireme nts as 
prescribed in the bill to act as 
mediation service provider.  
 
3.  Clause 10 (1) - Appointment 
of Mediator  
 
Unless otherwise agreed upon 
by the parties, a person of any 
nationality may be appointed 
as a mediator. 
 
Provided that mediator of any 
foreign nationality shall 
To consider the Qualification of Company 
Secretary to be eligible for being appointed as 
mediator.   
The Council of ICSI at its meeting 
held on March 24 -25, 2006 passed 
a resolution pursuant to the powers 
granted under Clause (f) of  sub-
section (2) of Section 2 of The 
Company Secretaries Act, 1980 
permitting Company Secretaries in 
practice to “Act as an arbitrator, 
mediator or conciliator for 
164

6 
 
possess such qualification, 
experience and accreditation as 
may be specified 
settlement of disputes or being on 
the panel of arbitrators or 
representing in arbitration, 
mediation or conciliation matters.” 
Company Secretaries have been 
recognised for being empaneled as 
Mediator or Conciliator under 
Section 442 of the Companies 
Act, 2013 read with Rule 4(g) of 
the Companies (Mediation and 
Conciliation) Rules, 2016, 
notified by Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs, Government of India. 
The Consumer Protection Act, 
2019 allows  Company Secretaries 
having experience of at least five 
years in mediation or conciliation 
and the Company Secretaries with 
at least fifteen years’ experience to 
be empaneled as mediator with a 
consumer mediation cell [Section 
75 of the Consumer protection  
Act, 2019 read with Regulation 3 
of the Consumer  Protection 
(Mediation) Regulations, 2020. 
Company Secretaries in Practice 
165

7 
 
have been recognized to provide 
representation services under host 
of legislations including  TRAI 
Act, 1997, Trade Marks Act, 1999 , 
Companies Act, 2013, 
Competition Act, 2002, SEBI Act, 
1992, Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code etc. and are acting as 
extended arms of the regulatory 
and quasi-judicial mechanism. 
The Company Secretary is the 
professional who is widely 
acclaimed for his unde rstanding of 
contractual law, corporate law, 
constitutional law, principles of 
natural justice, equity, common 
and customary laws, securities law, 
industrial law inter alia not only 
from a legal perspective but also 
from a management and technical 
perspective. Company Secretaries 
have been spearheading several 
complex corporate litigation 
matters before Hon’ble NCLT as 
Counsels / Authorized 
Representatives. Company 
Secretaries’ proximity and 
experience of working with top 
management of large organizations 
166

8 
 
has also inculcated sense of 
business understanding apart from 
the legal knowledge. 
Company Secretaries are governed 
by the Code of Conduct contained 
in the Company Secretaries Act, 
1980 and is, therefore, subject to 
disciplinary jurisdiction of the 
Institute. 
The curriculum of Company 
Secretaryship Course covers the 
detailed study of the laws 
impacting mediation and 
conciliation viz. 
i. The Indian Contract Act, 
1872  
ii. The Limited Liability 
Partnership Act, 2008 
iii. The Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 
iv. The Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1956 
v. The Constitution of India 
vi. The Civil Procedure Code, 
1908 
vii. The Law of Torts 
viii. The Limitation Act, 1963 
ix. The Indian Evidence Act, 
167

9 
 
1872    
x. Foreign Direct Investments 
– Regulations & FDI Policy 
xi. Overseas Direct Investment 
xii. External Commercial 
Borrowings (ECB) 
xiii. The Benami Transactions 
(Prohibition) Amendment 
Act, 2016 
xiv. The Specific Relief Act, 
1963 
xv. The Sale of Goods Act, 
1930 
xvi. The Partnership Act, 1932 
xvii. The Negotiable Instrument 
Act, 1881 
xviii. Drafting of agreements, 
documents and deeds 
xix. Pleadings 
xx. Appearances & Art of 
Advocacy 
xxi. Shareholders’ Democracy & 
Rights 
xxii. Corporate Disputes 
xxiii. Fraud under Companies 
Act and IPC 
xxiv. Misrepresentation & 
Malpractices 
xxv. Defaults, Adjudication, 
168

10 
 
prosecutions and penalties 
under the Companies Act, 
Securities Laws, FEMA, 
COFEPOSA, Money 
Laundering, Competition 
Act, Labour Laws & Tax 
Laws 
xxvi. Relief and Remedies. 
4.  Clause 8 - Interim relief by 
court or tribunal 
 
(1) If exceptional 
circumstances exist, a party 
may, before the 
commencement of, or during 
the continuation of, mediation 
proceedings under this Act, file 
suit or appropriate proceedings 
before a court or tribunal 
having competent jurisdiction 
for seeking urgent interim 
relief. 
 
(2) The court or tribunal shall 
after granting or rejectin g 
urgent interim relief, as th e 
case may be, refer the parties 
to undertake mediation to  
resolve the dispute, if deemed 
appropriate. 
This clause does not provides for right of 
appeal from any judicial decision that may be 
taken by the court or tribunal. 
 
Right of appeal before any 
judicial/quasi-judicial body is 
integral to fair procedure and 
principles of natural justice even if 
the right of appeal itself is a 
creation of statute. 
5.  Clause 20 (1) - Withdrawal by 
parties from mediation 
Clause 20 and Clause 25 of the Bill requires 
unwilling parties to stay in mediation for at 
This would imply that a party, 
who is unwilling to mediate but 
169

11 
 
 
A party may withdraw from 
mediation at any time after the 
first two mediation sessions. 
 
Clause 25 (c) and (d)- 
Termination of mediation 
 
The mediation proceedings 
under this Act shall be deemed 
to terminate— 
 
(c) on the expiry of seven days 
from the date o f the second 
mediation session, where a 
party fails to appear before the 
mediator consecu tively for the 
first two mediation sessions, 
and the mediator has not 
received any communication 
from such party; or 
 
(d) on the date of the 
communication by a party o r 
parties in writing, addressed to 
the mediator and the other 
parties to the effect t hat the 
party wishes to opt out of 
mediation. 
 
Provided that the parties shall 
have to attend at least two 
mediation sessions before 
least two mediation sessions. 
These clauses need to be re-considered. 
 
 
has to tide over two mediation 
sessions, may have to wait for 
several months before being 
allowed to approach courts or 
tribunals. 
Unwilling parties in such cases will 
try to persuade the court/tribunal 
of its “exceptional circumstances” 
for the grant of “urgent interim 
relief” under Clause 8 (Interim 
relief by court or tribunal) of the 
proposed Bill or they might resort 
to the remedies unde r Article 227 
to the High Court  and under 
Article 136 to the Supreme Court. 
Under such circumstances, 
proposed provisions might not help 
in reducing the pendency of cases 
or delays  in the dispensation of 
justice. 
170

12 
 
giving such communication. 
6.  Clause 22 (7) - Mediated 
Settlement Agreement 
 
For the purposes of record, 
mediated settlement agreement 
arrived at between  the parties, 
other than those arrived in a 
court or tribunal referred 
mediation or awa rd of Lok 
Adalat or final award of 
Permanent Lok Adalat under 
section 21 or section 22E of the 
Legal Services Authorities Act, 
1987, shall be registered with 
an Authority constituted under 
the Legal Services Authorities 
Act, 1987, in such manner as 
may be 
specified and su ch Authority 
shall issue a unique registration 
number to such settlements. 
 
Once the agreement is registered, the same is in 
public domain and no longer remain 
confidential. Hence, the clause leads to 
ambiguity and needs clarification.  
The requirement of registration of 
settlement agreement, and thereby 
putting its terms in the public 
domain even if it is for the 
purposes of record only may  
disincentive mediation as it might 
go against the confidentiality 
requirements of mediation 
proceedings which lie at the core of 
the mediation proceedings. 
 
 
******** 
171

 
 
 
 
© CAMP Arbitration and Mediation Practice Private Limited 
www.campmediation.in 
 
1 
Mediation Bill, 2021  
(Recommendation to the Parliamentary Standing Committee) 
 
Date: February 10, 2022 
 
Comments from: CAMP Arbitration and Mediation Practice Pvt. Ltd. 
 
Sr. No Section / 
Clause 
Text in the Mediation Bill, 2021 CAMP Comments  
1.  Sec 6 (3) 
(iii) 
(iii) empaneled by an Authority 
constituted under the Legal 
Services Authorities Act, 1987; and  
We recommend replacing the word 
“and” with “or”, as requirements are 
not cumulative in nature.  
 
Recommended Text:  
(iii) empaneled by an Authority 
constituted under the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987; or 
 
2.  Sec 6 (5)  (5) The courts and an Authority 
constituted under the Legal 
Services Authorities Act, 1987, shall 
maintain a panel of mediators for 
the purposes of pre-litigation 
mediation.  
 
We recommend adding the words 
“and mediation service provider” after 
“mediators”. This allows for reference 
to mediators empaneled with private 
mediation service providers 
(registered with the council), besides 
ad-hoc mediators.  
 
Recommended Text:  
(5) The courts and an authority 
constituted under the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987, shall maintain a 
panel of mediators and mediation 
service providers for the purposes of 
pre-litigation mediation.  
 
 
 
3.  
 
 
Sec 8 (1)  
 
If exceptional circumstances exist, 
a party may, before the 
commencement of, or 30 during 
the continuation of, mediation 
proceedings under this Act, file suit 
or appropriate proceedings before 
a court or tribunal having 
competent jurisdiction for seeking 
urgent interim relief  
 
 
 
We recommend that the “exceptional 
circumstances” be clearly listed out in 
the Rules that will follow the 
legislation, to avoid unnecessary 
applications without any merit, filed 
under this section.  
172

 
 
 
 
© CAMP Arbitration and Mediation Practice Private Limited 
www.campmediation.in 
 
2 
Sr. No Section / 
Clause 
Text in the Mediation Bill, 2021 CAMP Comments  
4.  Sec 8 (2)  8 (2) The court or tribunal shall 
after granting or rejecting urgent 
interim relief, as the case may be, 
refer the parties to undertake 
mediation to resolve the dispute, if 
deemed appropriate.  
 
We recommend that “if deemed 
appropriate” be replaced by “unless 
otherwise deemed not appropriate”.  
 
Recommended Text:  
8 (2) The court or tribunal shall after 
granting or rejecting urgent interim 
relief, as the case may be, refer the 
parties to undertake mediation to 
resolve the dispute, unless otherwise 
deemed not appropriate.  
 
5.  Sec 15  Every mediation under this Act 
shall be undertaken within the 
territorial jurisdiction of the court 
or tribunal of competent 
jurisdiction to decide the subject 
matter of dispute:  
 
 
Sec 15 identifying territorial 
jurisdiction to conduct a mediation is 
prescriptive. We recommend this 
clause be deleted, since in cases 
where parties don’t have consensus 
on mediator or mediation service 
provider, this section may discourage 
courts from referring cases to 
mediation service providers in India, 
who have their offices outside the 
territorial jurisdiction of the court.  
 
6.  Sec 16 r/w 
Sec 20  
 
16. The mediation proceedings 
with respect to a particular dispute 
shall be deemed to 20 have 
commenced—  
(a) where there is an existing 
agreement between the parties to 
settle the dispute through 
mediation, the day on which a 
party issues notice to the other 
party or parties for mediation and 
settlement of their disputes; or  
(b) in other cases –  
(i) on the day the parties have 
agreed to appoint a mediator of 
their choice for mediation and 
We recommend clarity on the timeline 
for mediation service providers to 
conduct the two initial sessions.  
 
Additionally, we recommend clarity on 
how to file Sec 20 report on non-
starter mediations. By non-starter 
mediation, we mean mediations that 
fail to commence, either due to no 
response from the responding party or 
due to a negative response (rejection) 
to the invitation to mediate.  
173

 
 
 
 
© CAMP Arbitration and Mediation Practice Private Limited 
www.campmediation.in 
 
3 
Sr. No Section / 
Clause 
Text in the Mediation Bill, 2021 CAMP Comments  
settlement of disputes between 
them; or  
(ii) on the day when one of the 
parties applies to a mediation 
service provider for settlement 
dispute through mediation by 
appointment of a mediator.  
 
20. (1) A party may withdraw from 
mediation at any time after the 
first two mediation sessions.  
(2) Where any party fails to attend 
the first two mediation sessions 
without any reasonable cause 
which resulted in the failure of 
mediation, the court of tribunal, in 
subsequent litigation on the same 
subject matter between the 
parties, may take the said conduct 
of such party into consideration 
and impose such costs as deem fit.  
 
7.  Sec 19 (a)  Unless otherwise agreed by the 
parties, –  
 
(a) the mediator shall not act 
as an arbitrator or as a 
representative or counsel 
of a party in any arbitral or 
judicial proceedings in 
respect of a dispute that is 
the subject matter of the 
mediation proceedings.  
 
We recommend that this provision be 
deleted completely, as we believe it is 
not ethically correct for the same 
neutral to engage in an adversarial 
process, after having been confided 
with by the parties in a collaborative 
process in the same case.  
8.  Sec 19 (b)  Unless otherwise agreed by the 
parties, –  
 
(b) the mediator shall not be 
presented by the parties as a 
Confidentiality and Privilege are 
effectively covered under Sections 23 
and 24 of the Act. We recommend 
that Sec 19 (b) be deleted to avoid 
Mediators being involuntary 
174

 
 
 
 
© CAMP Arbitration and Mediation Practice Private Limited 
www.campmediation.in 
 
4 
Sr. No Section / 
Clause 
Text in the Mediation Bill, 2021 CAMP Comments  
witness in any arbitral or judicial 
proceeding.  
 
summoned to court for matters not 
covered u/s 24 of the Act. 
Additionally, as per current language, 
mediator shall be presented as 
witness if agreed to by the parties 
which contradicts Sec 24 
9.  Sec 20 (1) 
 
 
 
A party may withdraw from 
mediation at any time after the 
first two mediation sessions 
We suggest a clarification in the Rules 
on what constitutes a “mediation 
sessions”.  1 hour? 1 day?  
10.  Sec 23 (4)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Explanation — For the removal of 
doubts, it is hereby clarified that 
nothing contained in this section 
shall apply to the mediated 
settlement agreement where its 
disclosure is necessary for the 
purpose of registration, 
implementation, enforcement and 
challenge  
 
We recommend that the word 
“registration” be deleted.  
 
Mediated Settlement Agreements for 
the purpose of registration must be 
held as confidential to build trust and 
confidence amongst parties in dispute. 
 
Recommended Text:  
Explanation — For the removal of 
doubts, it is hereby clarified that 
nothing contained in this section shall 
apply to the mediated settlement 
agreement where its disclosure is 
necessary for the purpose of 
implementation, enforcement and 
challenge  
 
11.  Sec 28 (2) Subject to the provisions of section 
29, the mediated settlement 
agreement shall be enforced in 
accordance with the provisions of 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, 
in the same manner as if it were a 
judgment or decree passed by a 
court, and may, accordingly, be 
relied on by any of the parties or 
persons claiming through them, by 
way of defence, set off or 
otherwise in any legal proceeding. 
Sec 28(2) precludes applicability of the 
Singapore Convention under Sec 3 (a) 
(2) of the Convention for international 
mediations conducted in India.   
 
Section 3(a) (2) of the Singapore 
Convention states that “This 
Convention does not apply to 
Settlement agreements that are 
enforceable as a judgment in the State 
of that court”.  
 
Sec 28 (2) of this Mediation Bill 
provides that the “mediated 
settlement agreement shall be 
enforced …in the same manner as if it 
175

 
 
 
 
© CAMP Arbitration and Mediation Practice Private Limited 
www.campmediation.in 
 
5 
Sr. No Section / 
Clause 
Text in the Mediation Bill, 2021 CAMP Comments  
were a judgement or decree passed by 
a court….” 
 
Inapplicability of the Singapore 
Convention will greatly impact the 
conduct of international mediations in 
India. 
 
We recommend amending the 
language by adding “Provided that 
settlement agreements arrived at in 
international mediation would be 
binding & enforceable under the 
United Nations Convention on 
International Settlement Agreements 
Resulting from Mediation 2019.” 
 
12.  34 (1) (b)  a person having knowledge and 
experience in law related to 
mediation or alternate dispute 
resolution mechanisms, to be 
appointed by the Central 
Government—Full-Time Member;  
 
We recommend that it is important 
to have a mediation expert on the 
council. In its current form an ADR 
expert i.e., an arbitrator could be 
appointed to fill the requirement of 
this clause. 
 
Recommended Text:  
 
“a person having knowledge and 
experience in the practice of 
mediation, to be appointed by the 
Central Government – Full-Time 
Member;” 
 
13.  Section 44 
(5) 
 
The following persons  may be 
included  in the panel referred  
to in sub-section (4)— 
 
We recommend adding a fifth 
option as below…  
 
“e) mediation service provider” 
 
14.  Schedule IV 
 
In the Code 
of Civil 
Procedure  
Section 89 (b) refer the parties to 
mediation, to the court annexed 
mediation centre or to any other 
mediator, as per the option of the 
parties, in accordance with the 
provisions of the Mediation Act, 
2021; or  
We recommend adding the words 
“or mediation service providers” 
before “as per the option of the 
parties…” 
 
Recommended Text:  
176

 
 
 
 
© CAMP Arbitration and Mediation Practice Private Limited 
www.campmediation.in 
 
6 
Sr. No Section / 
Clause 
Text in the Mediation Bill, 2021 CAMP Comments  
 Section 89 (b) refer the parties to 
mediation, to the court annexed 
mediation centre or to any other 
mediator, or mediation service 
provider, as per the option of the 
parties, in accordance with the 
provisions of the Mediation Act, 2021; 
or  
 
15.  Schedule X  
 
In the 
Consumer 
Protection 
Act, 2019,  
37. Reference to mediation —The 
District Commission or State 
Commission or the National 
Commission, as the case may be, 
shall either on an application by 
the parties, at any stage of 
proceedings refer the disputes for 
settlement by mediation under the 
Mediation Act, 2021  
 
We recommend that the word “or 
suo moto” be added between 
“parties” and “at any stage…” as the 
intent is to give the tribunal an 
option to take the initiative in 
referring suitable cases to 
mediation.  
 
Recommended Text:  
Reference to mediation —The 
District Commission or State 
Commission or the National 
Commission, as the case may be, 
shall either on an application by the 
parties, or suo moto, at any stage of 
proceedings refer the disputes for 
settlement by mediation under the 
Mediation Act, 2021 
 
 
177

 
   
  
PRS Legislative Research ◼ Institute for Policy Research Studies  
3rd Floor, Gandharva Mahavidyalaya ◼ 212, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg ◼ New Delhi – 110002 
Tel: (011) 43434035, 23234801 ◼ www.prsindia.org 
 
Comments on the Mediation Bill, 2021 submitted to the Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice 
We wish to draw the attention of the Committee to the following matters: 
1. The Bill mandates pre-litigation mediation for civil and commercial disputes.  It also 
makes participation in mediation (for at least two mediation sessions) mandatory on a 
party who may be unwilling to mediate the dispute.  Courts may impose costs on 
parties failing to attend the first two mediation sessions without reasonable cause.  
Making it mandatory to go through mediation may go against the voluntary nature of 
the mediation process. 
2. There are two issues related to international mediation: 
i. The Bill applies to international mediations conducted in India only if they 
relate to commercial disputes.  It is not clear why it does not apply to such 
mediations in case of non-commercial disputes (for instance, matrimonial, 
family or employment disputes). 
ii. As per the Bill, in case of international mediations conducted in India, 
settlement agreements will be enforceable in the same manner as a decree or 
judgment of a court.  However, this does not apply to settlements arising out 
of international mediations conducted abroad. 
3. The Mediation Council of India will be established to regulate the profession of 
mediators.  However, the Bill does not provide for representation of mediators on the 
Council.  This is unlike other professional regulators such as the Bar Council of India.  
Further, it is not clear why the Council must take approval from the central 
government before issuing regulations in discharge of its functions. 
4. The Bill provides that mediators eligible to conduct pre-litigation mediation must 
meet certain conditions.  They must be registered with the Mediation Council, and 
empanelled by a court annexed mediation centre, a mediation service provider, and a 
Legal Services Authority (National, State, or District).  That is, they must be 
registered/empanelled at all four places.  It is unclear why satisfying any one of these 
conditions is not sufficient for such mediators.  
178

 
Comments on the Mediation Bill, 2021 PRS Legislative Research  
 
February 11, 2022  - 2 - 
 
1. Background and need for the Bill 
Alternate dispute resolution (ADR) refers to means by which disputes are settled outside the 
traditional court system.  In India, modes of ADR include arbitration, negotiation, mediation, 
and Lok Adalats.  Mediation is a voluntary process in which parties attempt to settle their 
dispute with the assistance of an independent third person (the mediator).1  A mediator does 
not impose a solution on the disputing parties but creates a conducive environment in which 
parties can resolve their dispute.  The mediation process is flexible and depends on the choice 
of parties, and there are no strict or binding rules of procedure.1 
Figure 1: Outline of a general mediation process 
 
Source: Mediation and Conciliation Project Committee, Supreme Court of India; PRS. 
Mediation as a mode of ADR has several benefits.  The non-adversarial nature of mediation 
helps preserve ongoing business or personal relationships between disputing parties.2  The 
parties have control over the mediation in terms of its scope and outcome.  The issues to be 
resolved through mediation can be expanded during the process, which may result in parties 
settling related/connected cases between them besides the main dispute they set out to 
mediate.2  The mediation process is speedy, economical, voluntary, and confidential.1  In 
mediation, parties can accept creative and non-conventional remedies, regardless of their 
rights and obligations.2  Since parties arrive at the settlement consensually, they are more 
likely to comply with it.  Unlike litigation, there is no appeal or revision in a mediated case 
and disputes are settled with finality.1  Thus, mediation reduces the case burden on courts. 
At present, various Indian laws provide for mediation as a method of dispute resolution.  For 
instance, the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 confers courts with the discretion to refer cases 
to mediation.3  Table 1 lists some of the major laws pertaining to mediation in India.  
Broadly, mediation may be a private mediation (for instance, under a contract having a 
mediation clause), a court referred mediation, or mediation as provided for under a specific 
Introduction
Mediator explains 
the mediation 
process and its 
ground rules, 
establishes his 
neutrality, and 
initiates the process.
Joint Session
Mediator gathers 
information about 
facts of the dispute 
and interests of the 
parties, and 
establishes 
interaction between 
them to create a 
conducive 
environment.
Individual 
Sessions 
(Caucuses)
If necessary, the 
mediator allows 
parties to further 
explain their 
grievances, 
persuades them to 
share confidential 
information, and 
helps them create 
options for a 
settlement.
Settlement 
Agreement
Mediator confirms 
and clarifies the 
terms of settlement 
and reduces the 
settlement into a 
clear, concise, 
complete and 
binding agreement.
179

 
Comments on the Mediation Bill, 2021 PRS Legislative Research  
 
February 11, 2022  - 3 - 
 
statute (such as the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, or the Companies Act, 2013).4,5  Certain 
other Indian laws also provide for conciliation as a mode of dispute resolution.  For instance, 
the Industrial Relations Code, 2020 (though not yet in force) provides for the appointment of 
conciliation officers for settling industrial disputes.6  The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 
(which the 2020 Code seeks to replace) also contained similar provision for conciliation 
proceedings by such officers.7  The Supreme Court (2010) has noted that the terms 
‘mediation’ and ‘conciliation’ are synonymous.8 
Table 1: Illustrative list of existing Indian laws related to mediation 
Applicable law Section(s) Provision 
The Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 
Section 89 read with 
Order X, Rule 1A 
Court may refer a dispute before it to certain ADR mechanisms 
(including arbitration, conciliation, and mediation).  This is known as 
court referred mediation. 
The Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 
Part III (Conciliation) 
(i.e., Sections 61-81) 
Governs conciliation of disputes arising out of a legal relationship 
(whether contractual or not).  These provisions are used to conduct 
private mediations in India. 
The Commercial 
Courts Act, 2015 
Section 12A Persons seeking to file a suit with regard to a commercial dispute 
are first required to initiate pre-institution mediation of the dispute.  
The only exception is if the person intends to seek urgent interim 
relief under the Act. 
The Consumer 
Protection Act, 2019 
Sections 37, 49, and 59 
read with Chapter V 
The Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (whether District, 
State, or National) may refer parties to settle their dispute by 
mediation, if they consent to the same. 
The Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises 
(MSME) Development 
Act, 2006 
Section 18 To resolve disputes over the amount due to be recovered in case of 
delayed payments to micro and small enterprises, either party may 
make a reference to the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation 
Council (MSEFC).  MSEFC will itself conduct conciliation or refer the 
dispute for conciliation to an institution providing ADR services.  
Sources: Respective Acts; PRS. 
Presently, there are no uniform qualifications prescribed for mediators in India.  Private 
institutions offering mediation services and mediation centres established by courts or 
tribunals (known as court annexed mediation centres) prescribe different qualifications for 
mediators empanelled with them.  In 2005, the Supreme Court had approved certain model 
rules for court referred mediation, which specified the persons eligible to be enlisted in the 
panel of mediators.9  These include: (i) retired judges of the Supreme Court, High Courts and 
certain other courts (such as district courts), (ii) lawyers with at least 15 years’ experience of 
practicing before the Supreme Court, High Courts or district courts, (iii) experts or other 
professionals with at least 15 years’ experience, (iv) retired senior bureaucrats, or (v) 
institutions which are experts in mediation as recognised by High Courts.9  These model rules 
have since been adopted with modifications by most High Courts.2 
180

 
Comments on the Mediation Bill, 2021 PRS Legislative Research  
 
February 11, 2022  - 4 - 
 
Different High Courts (eg., Delhi High 
Court) have their own rules governing 
court annexed mediation under their 
jurisdiction.10  Statistics pertaining to 
court annexed mediation are available 
for a few mediation centres in the 
country.  Table 2 presents data on court 
referred mediation at mediation centres 
annexed to certain High Courts. 
Table 2: Data pertaining to mediation centres 
annexed to certain High Courts 
High Court Period Cases 
referred 
Cases 
settled 
% 
settled 
Gujarat 2008-2019 2,094 378 18% 
Karnataka 2007-2020 77,839 40,854 52% 
Madras+ 2005-2021 25,318 4,086 16% 
Patna 2008-2019 6,146 1,452 24% 
Punjab and 
Haryana# 
2008-2017 12,080 2,346 19% 
Note: +Sum of cases at the mediation centres annexed to the 
Madras and the Madurai benches.  #Centre at Chandigarh. 
Sources: Websites of respective Mediation Centres; PRS. 
Comprehensive data on all kinds of mediation conducted in India (such as private mediation) 
is not available. 
The Mediation Bill, 2021 seeks to promote ADR by institutional mediation, since dispute 
resolution in India is time consuming at present.11  So far, India does not have a 
comprehensive, standalone legislation governing mediation.  The Bill aims to promote 
mediation by mandating pre-litigation mediation in civil and commercial disputes, and 
providing a mechanism for enforcing mediated settlement agreements.  It establishes the 
Mediation Council of India, whose functions include registering mediators, grading 
mediation service providers, and conducting workshops and courses on mediation.11  It also 
makes amendments to certain laws (such as the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996) to 
incorporate the international practice of using the terms ‘conciliation’ and ‘mediation’ 
interchangeably.  Lastly, the Bill also seeks to make online mediation an acceptable and cost-
effective process, and encourage community mediation. 
  
181

 
Comments on the Mediation Bill, 2021 PRS Legislative Research  
 
February 11, 2022  - 5 - 
 
2. Mandatory mediation and pre-litigation mediation 
[Bill, Clause 6] (1) Subject to other provisions of this Act, whether any mediation agreement 
exists or not, any party before filing any suit or proceedings of civil or commercial nature in 
any court, shall take steps to settle the disputes by pre-litigation mediation in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act […] 
(2) The provisions, of sub-section (1) shall be applicable to the tribunals notified by the 
Central Government or a State Government, as the case may be. […] 
[Bill, Clause 10] […] (2) The parties shall be free to agree upon the name of mediator and 
the procedure for their appointment.  
(3) If the parties do not reach any agreement on a matter referred to in sub-section (2), then 
the party seeking initiation of mediation shall make an application to a mediation service 
provider for the appointment of a mediator. […] 
[Bill, Clause 16] The mediation proceedings with respect to a particular dispute shall be 
deemed to have commenced—  
(a) where there is an existing agreement between the parties to settle the dispute 
through mediation, the day on which a party issues notice to the other party or parties for 
mediation and settlement of their disputes; or  
(b) in other cases—  
(i) on the day the parties have agreed to appoint a mediator of their choice for 
mediation and settlement of disputes between them; or  
(ii) on the day when one of the parties applies to a mediation service provider 
for settlement of disputes through mediation by appointment of a mediator. 
[Bill, Clause 20] (1) A party may withdraw from mediation at any time after the first two 
mediation sessions. 
(2) Where any party fails to attend the first two mediation sessions without any reasonable 
cause which resulted in the failure of mediation, the court or tribunal, in subsequent 
litigation on the same subject matter between the parties, may take the said conduct of such 
party into consideration and impose such costs as deems fit. 
[The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, Section 89(1)] Where it appears to the Court that there 
exist elements of a settlement which may be acceptable to the parties, the Court shall 
formulate the terms of settlement and give them to the parties for their observations and after 
receiving the observations of the parties, the Court may reformulate the terms of a possible 
settlement and refer the same for:—  
(a) arbitration;  
(b) conciliation;  
(c) judicial settlement including settlement through Lok Adalat; or  
(d) mediation. 
182

 
Comments on the Mediation Bill, 2021 PRS Legislative Research  
 
February 11, 2022  - 6 - 
 
[The Commercial Courts Act, 2015, Section 12A(1)] A suit, which does not contemplate any 
urgent interim relief under this Act, shall not be instituted unless the plaintiff exhausts the 
remedy of pre-institution mediation in accordance with such manner and procedure as may 
be prescribed by rules made by the Central Government. 
[The Family Courts Act, 1984, Section 9(1)] In every suit or proceeding, endeavour shall be 
made by the Family Court in the first instance, where it is possible to do so consistent with 
the nature and circumstances of the case, to assist and persuade the parties in arriving at a 
settlement in respect of the subject-matter of the suit or proceeding and for this purpose a 
Family Court may, subject to any rules made by the High Court, follow such procedure as it 
may deem fit. 
Issue: Requiring unwilling parties to mandatorily mediate disputes may go against the 
voluntary nature of mediation 
Clause 6(1) of the Bill states that before filing a civil suit, a party “shall” take steps to settle 
the dispute by pre-litigation mediation.  Thus, the Bill mandates pre-litigation mediation in 
every civil and commercial dispute, even if one party is not willing to go through the 
mediation process.  Where no mediation agreement exists and parties are unable to agree on 
appointing a mediator of their choice, mediation proceedings commence when one party 
applies to a mediation service provider to appoint a mediator.  This implies that a party can 
unilaterally set the mediation process in motion, even if the opposite party does not agree to 
mediate the dispute.  A party can withdraw from mediation only after the first two mediation 
sessions.  If the party fails to attend the first two mediation sessions without reasonable cause, 
a court or tribunal may impose costs on them during the litigation of the dispute.  This, in 
effect, means that all mediation proceedings initiated under the Bill are mandatory on the 
opposite party, at least until the first two mediation sessions.  The question is whether 
mandating pre-litigation mediation is appropriate. 
Mediation is a voluntary dispute resolution process.1  Mediators cannot impose a settlement 
on the parties.  Unlike traditional litigation or arbitration, where the process involves 
adjudication of a dispute, mediation involves a mutual resolution of the dispute with the 
consent of the parties.  Therefore, mandatory mediation as under the Bill may be contrary to 
the voluntary nature of mediation.  Further, mandating mediation may not lead to its uptake 
as an ADR mechanism.  Parties who are unwilling to mediate may attend two mediation 
sessions as a procedural formality and not in good faith with the object to settle the dispute. 
On the other hand, requiring parties to mandatorily participate in mediation also has certain 
benefits.  Such mandatory mediation has been adopted both in India and in other 
183

 
Comments on the Mediation Bill, 2021 PRS Legislative Research  
 
February 11, 2022  - 7 - 
 
jurisdictions, to varying degrees (for instance, in some countries, mediation is compulsory 
only for certain kinds of disputes).  Mandatory pre-litigation mediation may address the issue 
of pendency and slow disposal rate in courts.12 
In India, under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, a court may refer parties to certain ADR 
mechanisms including mediation.  The Supreme Court (2010) has held that unlike arbitration, 
consent of all parties is not required for referring a case to mediation.8  As per the Mediation 
Training Manual of India (prepared by the Mediation and Conciliation Project Committee of 
the Supreme Court), the absence of consent for referring a case to mediation does not affect 
the voluntary nature of the mediation process.2  This is because parties are only required to 
participate in the mediation process, and they retain the freedom to agree or not agree to a 
settlement and to decide the terms of such settlement.9 
The Commercial Courts Act, 2015 provides for parties to attempt mediation before initiating 
a suit in case of commercial disputes.13  Unlike the 2021 Bill, the 2015 Act does not impose 
any cost on parties if they fail to attend the mediation proceedings.  The question whether 
pre-institution mediation under the 2015 Act is mandatory or not is presently pending before 
the Supreme Court of India.14 
The Family Courts Act, 1984 requires the family court to assist and persuade the parties to 
arrive at a settlement.15  The Supreme Court (2013) interpreted this requirement as mandating 
mediation as an avenue to be exhausted in matrimonial disputes.16 
The NITI Aayog (2021) noted that the ‘opt-out model’ of mandatory pre-litigation mediation 
has been successfully implemented in countries such as Italy, Brazil and Turkey.12  Under 
this model, parties are required to attend initial mediation sessions to understand the benefits 
of the mediation process and explore possible settlement, after which they may opt out of the 
process.  The NITI Aayog observed that the success of the opt-out model in Italy is 
attributable to the minimal mediation fee prescribed, and the parties’ ability to opt out of the 
process at any stage without the fear of sanctions.12  This has resulted in upscaling the 
mediation process in Italy and reducing the case burden on the judiciary.  On the other hand, 
in certain countries such as Romania, compulsory pre-litigation mediation without adequate 
incentives has reduced the mediation process to a mere formality before parties approach the 
courts and, in fact, acts as a barrier in access to courts.12 
In Australia, there is a statutory mandate to attempt mediation before going to court in family 
law proceedings, with certain exceptions (such as cases of family violence and child abuse).17  
184

 
Comments on the Mediation Bill, 2021 PRS Legislative Research  
 
February 11, 2022  - 8 - 
 
Courts in Australia have wide discretionary powers to order mediation without the parties’ 
consent on a case-by-case basis.18,19,20  In England, courts have imposed costs against parties 
who have unreasonably refused to mediate.21,22  Factors to be considered when determining 
whether a party’s refusal to mediate is unreasonable include: (i) nature of dispute, (ii) merits 
of the case, (iii) the extent to which other settlement methods have been attempted, (iv) 
disproportionately high cost of ADR, and (v) prospects of success of the ADR process.21 
The NITI Aayog (2021) noted that a framework for mandatory pre-litigation mediation in 
India must be planned keeping in mind the number of mediators available.12  It recommended 
gradually rolling out mandatory pre-litigation mediation in a phased manner, first for certain 
categories of disputes and then eventually to cover a wide range of disputes.  It observed that 
the expansion in the classes of such disputes should see a corresponding increase in capacity 
in terms of mediators and dispute resolution centres.12 
  
185

 
Comments on the Mediation Bill, 2021 PRS Legislative Research  
 
February 11, 2022  - 9 - 
 
3. Gaps in applicability of the Bill 
[Clause 2(1)] Subject to sub-section (2), this Act shall apply where mediation is conducted in 
India, and— 
(i) all or both parties habitually reside in or are incorporated in or have their place of 
business in India; or 
(ii) the mediation agreement provides that any dispute shall be resolved in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act; or 
(iii) there is an international mediation. 
[Clause 3(f)] “international mediation” means mediation undertaken under this Act and 
relates to a commercial dispute arising out of a legal relationship, contractual or otherwise, 
under any law for the time being in force in India, and where at least one of the parties, is— 
(i) an individual who is a national of, or habitually resides in, any country other than 
India; or  
(ii) a body corporate including a Limited Liability Partnership of any nature, with its 
place of business outside India; or  
(iii) an association or body of individuals whose place of business is outside India; or  
(iv) the Government of a foreign country; 
[Clause 28(2)] Subject to the provisions of section 29, the mediated settlement agreement 
shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in 
the same manner as if it were a judgment or decree passed by a court, and may, accordingly, 
be relied on by any of the parties or persons claiming through them, by way of defence, set off 
or otherwise in any legal proceeding. 
Issue: The Bill does not apply to international mediation conducted in India relating to 
non-commercial disputes 
The Bill applies to international mediations (i.e., where at least one party is a foreign party) 
conducted in India only if they relate to commercial disputes.11  It does not apply to 
international mediation pertaining to non-commercial disputes (for instance, matters of 
employment, and matrimonial and family disputes).  It is unclear why the Bill creates this 
distinction between commercial and other disputes for international mediation.  There is no 
such distinction under the Bill in case of domestic mediation.  Note that similar laws on 
mediation in other countries (such as Singapore and Germany) do not restrict their 
application to only a certain class of disputes.23,24 
 
186

 
Comments on the Mediation Bill, 2021 PRS Legislative Research  
 
February 11, 2022  - 10 - 
 
Issue: The Bill does not provide for enforcement of settlement agreements resulting 
from international mediation conducted outside India 
The Bill applies to international mediation where mediation is conducted in India.  However, 
there may be instances involving an Indian party where the mediation is conducted abroad.  
In such cases, the problem arises with the enforcement of settlement agreements in India.  
The Bill provides that mediated settlement agreements are enforceable in the same way as a 
judgment or decree of a court.  This does not cover settlement agreements resulting from 
international mediation conducted outside India. 
The Singapore Convention on Mediation provides a framework for cross-border enforcement 
of settlement agreements resulting from international mediation.25,26  On August 7, 2019, 
India became a signatory to this Convention, but has not yet ratified it. 
  
187

 
Comments on the Mediation Bill, 2021 PRS Legislative Research  
 
February 11, 2022  - 11 - 
 
4. Mediation Council of India 
[Clause 33(1)] The Central Government shall, by notification, establish for the purposes of 
this Act, a Council to be known as the Mediation Council of India to perform the duties and 
discharge the functions under this Act. 
[Clause 34(1)] The Council shall consist of the following members, namely:—  
(a) a person of ability, integrity and standing having adequate knowledge and 
professional experience or shown capacity in dealing with problems relating to law, alternate 
dispute resolution, public affairs or administration to be appointed by the Central 
Government—Chairperson; 
(b) a person having knowledge and experience in law related to mediation or 
alternate dispute resolution mechanisms, to be appointed by the Central Government—Full-
Time Member; 
(c) an eminent person having experience in research or teaching in the field of 
mediation and alternate dispute resolution laws, to be appointed by the Central 
Government—Full-Time Member; 
(d) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry 
of Law and Justice or his representative not below the rank of Joint Secretary—Member, ex 
officio; 
(e) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Expenditure, Ministry 
of Finance or his representative not below the rank of Joint Secretary—Member, ex officio; 
(f) Chief Executive Officer—Member-Secretary, ex officio; and 
(g) one representative of a recognised body of commerce and industry, chosen by the 
Central Government—Part-Time Member. 
[Clause 40] The Council shall—  
(a) endeavour to promote domestic and international mediation in India through 
appropriate guidelines; […] 
(c) lay down the guidelines for the continuous education, certification and assessment 
of mediators by the recognised mediation institutes;  
(d) provide for manner of registration of mediators and renew, withdraw, suspend or 
cancel registration on the basis of conditions as may be specified;  
(e) lay down standards for professional and ethical conduct of mediators under sub-
section (2) of section 17; […]  
(h) recognise mediation institutes and mediation service providers and renew, 
withdraw, suspend or cancel such recognition;  
(i) specify the criteria for recognition of mediation institutes and mediation service 
providers; […] 
188

 
Comments on the Mediation Bill, 2021 PRS Legislative Research  
 
February 11, 2022  - 12 - 
 
(k) lay down standards for professional and ethical conduct of the mediation institutes 
and mediation service providers; […] 
(n) perform any other function as may be assigned to it by the Central Government. 
[Clause 53] (1) The Council may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by 
notification, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry 
out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
regulations may make provision for— […] 
(c) standards for professional and ethical conduct of mediators under sub-section (2) 
of section 17; […]  
(l) conditions for registration of mediators and renewal, withdrawal, suspension or 
cancellations of such registrations under clause (d) of section 40;  
(m) criteria for recognition of mediation institutes and mediation service providers 
under clause (i) of section 40; […]  
(o) manner for grading of mediation service provider under section 41; 
(p) such other functions of mediation service provider under clause (f) of section 42;  
(q) duties and functions to be performed by mediation institutes under section 43; and  
(r) any other matter in respect of which provision is necessary for the performance of 
functions of the Council under this Act. 
The Bill provides that the central government will establish the Mediation Council of 
India.  The Council will consist of: (i) a chairperson, (ii) two full-time members (with 
experience in mediation or ADR), (iii) three ex-officio members (including Secretaries in the 
Ministries of Law and Justice, and Finance), and (iv) one part-time member (from an industry 
body).  Functions of the Council include: (i) registering mediators, (ii) recognising mediation 
service providers (institutions administering mediations) and mediation institutes (providing 
training, education, and certification of mediators), (iii) grading of mediation service 
providers, and (iv) laying down standards for professional conduct of mediators, mediation 
service providers, and mediation institutes. 
Issue: The Bill does not provide for representation of mediators on the Council 
Key functions of the Mediation Council relate to certification, assessment and registration of 
mediators, and laying down standards for their professional and ethical conduct.  The Council 
will, thus, regulate the profession of mediators.  Unlike other statutory bodies for regulating 
professionals (such as lawyers, chartered accountants, and doctors), which necessarily 
comprise persons having considerable experience or practicing in the relevant field, this Bill 
189

 
Comments on the Mediation Bill, 2021 PRS Legislative Research  
 
February 11, 2022  - 13 - 
 
does not require a mediator to be a member of the Council.27,28,29  While the two full-time 
members are required to have knowledge or experience pertaining to mediation or ADR laws, 
they may not necessarily be accredited mediators.  It is also not clear why the Secretary, 
Department of Expenditure has been made a member of the Council. 
Issue: Rationale for central government approval before issuing regulations is unclear  
The Mediation Council will consist of seven members appointed by the central government.  
The Bill envisages the Council as a body that will carry out certain functions to help promote 
mediation in India.  Under the Bill, the Council is empowered to issue regulations on various 
matters.  In fact, the Council will discharge its major functions by issuing regulations.  For 
instance, regulations may: (i) lay down professional standards for mediators, (ii) provide the 
conditions for registration of mediators and recognition of mediation institutes and mediation 
service providers, and (iii) prescribe the manner for grading mediation service providers. 
The Council is required to take approval from the central government before issuing any 
regulations.  It is not clear why such prior approval is required.  It may be argued that the 
Council will only play a nominal role if it requires prior central government approval for 
discharging its essential functions.  Note that no such previous approval for issuing rules and 
regulations is required by the National Medical Commission (which regulates the education 
and profession of doctors) and the Bar Council of India (except when prescribing 
qualifications in law which will be recognised for admitting non-citizens as advocates).27,29  
On the other hand, regulations made by the respective Councils of the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of India (ICAI) and the Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) are 
subject to the approval of the central government.28,30 
  
190

 
Comments on the Mediation Bill, 2021 PRS Legislative Research  
 
February 11, 2022  - 14 - 
 
5. High qualification threshold for mediators in pre-litigation mediation 
 [Clause 6] (1) Subject to other provisions of this Act, whether any mediation agreement 
exists or not, any party before filing any suit or proceedings of civil or commercial nature in 
any court, shall take steps to settle the disputes by pre-litigation mediation in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that pre-litigation mediation in matters of commercial disputes of Specified Value 
shall be undertaken in accordance with the provisions of section 12A of the Commercial 
Courts Act, 2015, and the rules made thereunder. 
(2) The provisions, of sub-section (1) shall be applicable to the tribunals notified by 
the Central Government or a State Government, as the case may be. 
(3) For the purposes, of sub-sections (1) and (2), unless otherwise agreed upon by the 
parties, a mediator, — 
(i) registered with the Council; 
(ii) empanelled by a court annexed mediation centre; 
(iii) empanelled by an Authority constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 
1987; and 
(iv) empanelled by a mediation service provider recognised under this Act, 
shall conduct pre-litigation mediation […] 
The Bill mandates parties to attempt mediation before opting for litigation, in case of civil 
and commercial disputes.  Unless the parties agree otherwise, this pre-litigation mediation 
can only be conducted by a mediator who meets the following conditions: (i) registration with 
the Mediation Council of India, (ii) empanelment by a court annexed mediation centre, (iii) 
empanelment by a recognised mediation service provider, and (iv) empanelment by an 
Authority constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987.  The mediator has to 
satisfy all these conditions.  It is not clear why satisfying any one of these conditions is not 
sufficient for a mediator to conduct pre-litigation mediation.  For instance, a mediator 
registered with the Council but not empanelled by a court annexed mediation centre or a 
recognised mediation service provider will not be eligible to conduct pre-litigation mediation. 
191

 
Comments on the Mediation Bill, 2021 PRS Legislative Research  
 
February 11, 2022  - 15 - 
 
 
 
1 ‘Mediation’, Mediation and Conciliation Project Committee, Supreme Court of India,  
https://main.sci.gov.in/pdf/mediation/Brochure%20-%20MCPC.pdf. 
2 Mediation Training Manual of India, Mediation and Conciliation Project Committee, Supreme Court of 
India, https://main.sci.gov.in/pdf/mediation/MT%20MANUAL%20OF%20INDIA.pdf .  
3 Section 89, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, 
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2191/1/a1908-05.pdf. 
4 The Consumer Protection Act, 2019, https://egazette.nic.in/WriteReadData/2019/210422.pdf. 
5 Section 442, The Companies Act, 2013, https://www.mca.gov.in/Ministry/pdf/CompaniesAct2013.pdf. 
6 Sections 43 and 53, The Industrial Relations Code, 2020, 
https://egazette.nic.in/WriteReadData/2020/222118.pdf.  
7 Sections 4 and 12, The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, 
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/15191/1/a1947-14.pdf. 
8 Afcons Infrastructure Ltd. vs. Cherian Varkey Construction Co. Pvt. Ltd., Supreme Court of India, Civil 
Appeal No. 6000 of 2010, July 26, 2010, https://main.sci.gov.in/jonew/bosir/orderpdf/1129534.pdf. 
9 Salem Advocate Bar Association vs. Union of India, (2005) 6 SCC 344, Supreme Court of India, August 
2, 2005, https://districts.ecourts.gov.in/sites/default/files/bSalem_Advocate_Bar_vs_Union_Of_Indi a.pdf. 
10 Delhi High Court Mediation and Conciliation Rules, 2004, Samadhan, Delhi High Court Mediation and 
Conciliation Centre, https://dhcmediation.nic.in/uploads/public/notice/Delhi-High-Court-Mediation-Centre-
Rulespdf-3cc4aa71a12f46bf61b8b8a12ae4e21d.pdf. 
11 The Mediation Bill, 2021, https://legalaffairs.gov.in/sites/default/files/mediation-bill-2021.pdf. 
12 Designing the Future of Dispute Resolution: The ODR Policy Plan for India, NITI Aayog, October 2021, 
https://www.niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2021-11/odr-report-29-11-2021.pdf.  
13 Section 12A, The Commercial Courts Act, 2015, https://legislative.gov.in/sites/default/files/A2016-
4_1.pdf. 
14 Patil Automation Pvt. Ltd. vs. Rakheja Engineers Pvt. Ltd., Supreme Court of India, Special Le ave 
Petition (Civil) No. 014697 of 2021 (pending). 
15 Section 9, The Family Courts Act, 1984, https://legislative.gov.in/sites/default/files/A1984-66_0.pdf. 
16 K. Srinivas Rao vs. D.A. Deepa, (2013) 5 SCC 226, Supreme Court of India, February 22, 2013, 
http://cja.gov.in/TJO/K.%20Srinivas%20Rao.pdf. 
17 Section 60I, Family Law Act 1975 (Australia), https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/C2020C00374. 
18 The Civil Procedure Act 2005 (New South Wales, Australia), 
https://legislation.nsw.gov.au/view/html/inforce/current/act-2005-028#pt.4. 
19 Rule 50.07, The Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015 (Victoria, Australia), 
https://content.legislation.vic.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-07/15-103sra035%20authorised.pdf. 
20 Rule 319, The Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999 (Queensland, Australia), 
https://www.legislation.qld.gov.au/view/pdf/inforce/current/sl-1999-0111. 
21 Halsey vs. Milton Keynes General NHS Trust, Court of Appeal (England), [2004] 4 All ER 920. 
22 Dunnett vs. Railtrack plc, Court of Appeal (England), [2002] 2 All ER 850. 
23 The Mediation Act, 2017 (Singapore), https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/MA2017.  
24 Mediation Act (Germany), July 21, 2021, https://www.gesetze-im-
internet.de/englisch_mediationsg/englisch_mediationsg.html#:~:text=(1)%20The%20mediator%20shall%2
0disclose,the%20parties%20explicitly%20agree%20thereto. 
25 United Nations Convention on International Settlement Agreements Resulting from Mediation, United 
Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), March 2019, 
https://uncitral.un.org/sites/uncitral.un.org/files/singapore_convention_eng.pdf .  
26 Convention Text, Singapore Convention on Mediation, last accessed on January 20, 2022, 
https://www.singaporeconvention.org/convention/text.  
27 The Advocates Act, 1961, http://www.barcouncilofindia.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/05/Advocates-
Act1961.pdf.  
192

 
Comments on the Mediation Bill, 2021 PRS Legislative Research  
 
February 11, 2022  - 16 - 
 
 
28 The Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, 
https://www.mca.gov.in/Ministry/pdf/CA_AmendmentAct_2011_07092016.pdf .  
29 The National Medical Commission Act, 2019, https://egazette.nic.in/WriteReadData/2019/210357.pdf. 
30 The Company Secretaries Act, 1980, 
https://www.mca.gov.in/Ministry/actsbills/pdf/The_Companies_Secretaries_Amendment_Act_2006.pdf . 
 
DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your information.  You may choose to reproduce or redistribute this report 
for non-commercial purposes in part or in full to any other person with due acknowledgement of PRS Legislative Research (“PRS”).  
The opinions expressed herein are entirely those of the author(s).  PRS makes every effort to use reliable and comprehensive 
information, but PRS does not represent that the contents of the report are accurate or complete.  PRS is an independent, not-for-profit 
group.  This document has been prepared without regard to the objectives or opinions of those who may receive it. 
 
193

194

195

196

197

198

199

 
 
62/1 Palace Road. Vasanthnagar. Bengaluru 560 001. India 
T: +91 80 4268 6000. infoblr@samvadpartners.com.  www.samvadpartners.com 
 
BENGALURU• CHENNAI • HYDERABAD • MUMBAI • NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
COMMENTS ON THE DRAFT MEDIATION BILL, 2021 
By Samvad Partners 
11 FEBRUARY 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section No.  Comment  Recommendation  
- 
 
Schedule I of Lok Sabha Draft 
contained United Nations 
Convention on International 
Settlement Agreements Resulting 
from Mediation but the same was 
removed from the Rajya Sabha Draft. 
However, the United Nations 
Convention is important as it serves 
as the basis for the principles of 
mediation and India has signe d the 
Can include provisions pertaining 
to enforcement of the United 
Nations Convention under a 
separate Schedule /Part. 
Alternatively, a separate law 
(modelled on the Singapore 
enactment or the Model law) for 
enforcement of the international 
mediated settlement agreements 
under the United Nations 
200

 
 
62/1 Palace Road. Vasanthnagar. Bengaluru 560 001. India 
T: +91 80 4268 6000. infoblr@samvadpartners.com.  www.samvadpartners.com 
 
BENGALURU• CHENNAI • HYDERABAD • MUMBAI • NEW DELHI 
 
same.  
 
 
Convention.  
Section 2 (s) 
Tribunal 
 
“Tribunal”  
The Definition of Tribunal not 
included in the Rajya Sabha draft but 
defined in Lok Sabha Draft as 
follows: 
 “Tribunal means a tribunal 
constituted under a ny special law 
including an arbitral tribunal to hear 
the dispute in first instance but does 
not include an appellate tribunal.”  
The definition could be included 
in the Rajya Sabha draft to say 
“Tribunal means a tribunal 
constituted under any law 
including an arbitral tribunal to 
hear the dispute in first instance 
but does not include an appellate 
tribunal.” 
Section 4 A mediator needs to be neutral and 
should not have the ability to impose 
(directly or indirectly) a solution 
upon the parties. The Singapore 
Convention requires the mediator to 
be “lacking the authority to impose a 
solution upon the parties to the 
dispute.” These words are absent in 
the definition of mediation under the 
draft Bill. To keep the sanctity of the 
process of mediation and ensure that 
a settlement is truly voluntary, the 
words as used in the Singapore 
Convention to be included in the 
definition of mediation in the draft 
Section 4 to clarify that the 
mediator be “ lacking the 
authority to impose a solution 
upon the parties to the dispute.” 
201

 
 
62/1 Palace Road. Vasanthnagar. Bengaluru 560 001. India 
T: +91 80 4268 6000. infoblr@samvadpartners.com.  www.samvadpartners.com 
 
BENGALURU• CHENNAI • HYDERABAD • MUMBAI • NEW DELHI 
 
Bill as well.  
 
Section 7 read 
with First 
Schedule (Cases 
not fit for 
mediation) 
The list provided under the First 
Schedule is too wide, and most are 
best left out. While the draft 
legislation does provide for the 
Courts having the power to refer 
parties for mediation in 
compoundable matters, it does not 
give the courts a power to refer 
parties to mediation in other matters.  
 
Parties tend to forum shop and 
criminal allegations are common 
even in a civil / commercial dispute. 
Matters such as cheque bouncing, 
matrimonial matters, corporate -
criminal matters (e.g. oppression 
mismanagement), civil -criminal 
matters (family disputes) would be 
excluded from mandatory pre -
litigation and any reference to 
mediation would require the court to 
refer the matter to mediation.  
 
The First Schedule to be amended 
as Annexure 1.  
Section 22 (7) 
(Registration) 
By creating a requirement for 
registration of all mediated settlement 
agreements, an unwarranted layer of 
bureaucracy and formality is being 
This provision to be deleted.  
202

 
 
62/1 Palace Road. Vasanthnagar. Bengaluru 560 001. India 
T: +91 80 4268 6000. infoblr@samvadpartners.com.  www.samvadpartners.com 
 
BENGALURU• CHENNAI • HYDERABAD • MUMBAI • NEW DELHI 
 
introduced. I t is not clear if such 
registration would be at an additional 
cost to the parties (such as 
registration fees) and what would be 
the consequence of non -registration, 
since the legislation states that it does 
not impact the enforceability.  
 
 
It may be noted that under the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 neither does an arbitration 
award nor a conciliation award 
require any registration.  
 
Section 28 
(Enforcement) 
Per Section 28 (2), a mediated 
settlement agreement is enforceable 
as if it were a judgment or decree 
passed by a court. This would also be 
applicable to international 
commercial mediation that take place 
in India.  
 
Per Section 3 (a) (ii) of the Singapore 
Convention, the Singapore 
Convention does  not apply to 
settlement agreements that are 
enforceable as a judgment in the State 
of that court.  
A proviso to be added to sub -
section (2) of section 28 to the 
effect that the section will not 
apply to mediated settlement 
agreements covered by this Part. 
Suggested language for such 
proviso is as follows: 
 
Provided that the provisions of 
Section 28 (2) of this Act shall not 
be applicable to an international 
mediated settlement agreement 
covered under the Singapore 
Convention save and except 
203

 
 
62/1 Palace Road. Vasanthnagar. Bengaluru 560 001. India 
T: +91 80 4268 6000. infoblr@samvadpartners.com.  www.samvadpartners.com 
 
BENGALURU• CHENNAI • HYDERABAD • MUMBAI • NEW DELHI 
 
 
The parties to the mediation should 
not lose the benefit of the Singapore 
Convention only because the 
mediated settlement agreement is 
construed to be a ju dgment of a court 
in India.  Therefore, where parties to 
a mediated settlement agreement 
would like to exercise their option to 
enforce it under the Singapore 
Convention, they should not be 
limited by the language of Section 28 
(2). 
 
where the parties to an 
international mediated settlement 
agreement have  excluded the 
applicability of the Singapore 
Convention for the p urpose of 
enforceability of the international 
mediation settlement agreement  
under this Act.   
 
Section 29 (3) The period of limitation for challenge 
is 90 days from the date of receipt of 
the mediated settlement agreement 
and not the actual cause of acti on, 
which can be extended by a further 
period of 90 days by the 
court/tribunal. There appears to be an 
assumption that any fraud, 
corruption, gross impropriety or 
impersonation would come to the 
knowledge of the parties within such 
limited period of 90 day s (extendable 
to a maximum of 180 days).  
 
Section 29 (3) to be amended as: 
 
“An application for challenging 
the mediated settlement 
agreement shall not be made after 
ninety days have elapsed from the 
date on which the party making 
that application (i) in the case of 
fraud, corruption or 
impersonation, becoming aware 
of the same; and (ii) in any other 
case, has received the copy of 
mediated settlement agreement 
under sub -section (3) of section 
204

 
 
62/1 Palace Road. Vasanthnagar. Bengaluru 560 001. India 
T: +91 80 4268 6000. infoblr@samvadpartners.com.  www.samvadpartners.com 
 
BENGALURU• CHENNAI • HYDERABAD • MUMBAI • NEW DELHI 
 
 22.” 
 
Section 34 
(Council) 
While the provision provides for 
some of the Council members to have 
knowledge of mediation, it does not 
require the same for all. It is 
imperative that all the Council 
members undergo (if no already 
undergone) a basic training in 
mediation.  
 
 
Sub-section (5) to be inserted as 
follows: 
 
“The Chairperson, the Full Time 
Member, the Part Time Member, 
the Secretaries and the Chief 
Executive Officer” shall all have 
undertaken a training in 
mediation from a mediation 
service provider/institution 
recognized under the Act.” 
 
Section 45  This provision gives an option for the 
Report to be submitted by using the 
word “may”. The provision reads as 
follows: 
“(3) In every case where a settlement 
agreement is arrived at through 
mediation under this Act, the same 
may be reduced into writing with the  
signature of the parties and 
authenticated by the mediator, a copy 
of which he provided to the parties 
and in cases where no settlement 
agreement is arrived at, a failure 
Can be replaced with:  
“(3) In every case where a 
settlement agreement is arrived at 
through mediation under this Act, 
the same may be shall be reduced 
into writing with the signature of 
the parties and authenticated by 
the mediator, a copy of which is 
to be  provided to the parties and 
in cases where no settlement 
agreement is arrived at, a failure 
report may be shall be submitted 
by the mediator t o the Authority 
205

 
 
62/1 Palace Road. Vasanthnagar. Bengaluru 560 001. India 
T: +91 80 4268 6000. infoblr@samvadpartners.com.  www.samvadpartners.com 
 
BENGALURU• CHENNAI • HYDERABAD • MUMBAI • NEW DELHI 
 
report may be submitted by the 
mediator to the Authority or the 
District Magistrate or the Sub -
Divisional Magistrate, as the case 
may be, and to the parties.” 
or the District Magistrate or the 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate, as the 
case may be, and to the parties.” 
New provision Several enactments on mediation 
provide for immunity of mediators. 
However, the same is not 
incorporated in the Bill.  
A ne w provision on mediators 
immunity to be included. Rule 22 
of the Mediation and Conciliation 
Rules, 2004 of the Delhi High 
Courtto be incorporated  can be 
the base for such provision. 
 
  
206

 
 
62/1 Palace Road. Vasanthnagar. Bengaluru 560 001. India 
T: +91 80 4268 6000. infoblr@samvadpartners.com.  www.samvadpartners.com 
 
BENGALURU• CHENNAI • HYDERABAD • MUMBAI • NEW DELHI 
 
ANNEXURE A 
 
THEFIRSTSCHEDULE 
(Seesection7) 
DISPUTESORMATTERSNOTFITFORMEDIATION 
1. Disputeswhichbyvirtueofanylawforthetimebeinginforce
maynotbesubmitted formediation. 
2. Disputes involving allegations of serious and specific 
fraud, fabrication of documents, forgery, impersonation, 
coercion. 
3. Disputes relating to claims against minors, deities; 
persons with 
intellectualdisabilities,underparagraph2oftheScheduleandperson
withdisabilityhavinghighsupport needs [as defined in clause 
(t)ofsection 2]oftheRightsofPersons with 
DisabilitiesAct,2016(49of2016);personswithmentalillnessasdefi
nedinclause(s)ofsub-
section(1)ofsection2oftheMentalHealthcareAct,2017(10of2017
);personsofunsoundmind,inrelationtowhomproceedingsaretobe
conductedunderOrderXXXIIoftheCodeofCivilProcedure,1908(
5of1908);andsuitsfordeclarationoftitleagainstGovernment;decla
rationhavingeffectofrightinrem, save and save and except 
with the permission of the relevant Court. 
4. CriminalOffences that are not compoundable , save and 
except with the permission of the relevant Court. 
 
5. Settlement of matters which are prohibited being in 
conflict with public policy or is opposed to basic notions of 
morality or justice or is in violation or contravention ofunder 
any law for the time being in force. 
6. Complaints or proceedings, initiated befo re any 
statutory authority or body inrelation to registration, 
discipline, misconduct of any practitioner, or other 
registeredprofessional, such as legal practitioner, medical 
practitioner, dentist, architect, 
charteredaccountant,orinrelationtoanyotherprofessionofwhatev
erdescription,whichisregulated 
207

 
 
62/1 Palace Road. Vasanthnagar. Bengaluru 560 001. India 
T: +91 80 4268 6000. infoblr@samvadpartners.com.  www.samvadpartners.com 
 
BENGALURU• CHENNAI • HYDERABAD • MUMBAI • NEW DELHI 
 
underanylawforthetimebeinginforce, save and save and 
except with the permission of the statutory authority or 
body or the relevant Court. 
7. Disputes which have the effect on rights of a third party 
who are not a party to the mediation proceedings. 
 
8. Anyproceedinginrelationtoanysubject-
matter,fallingwithinanyenactment,overwhich the Tribunal 
constituted under the National Green Tribunals Act, 2010 (19 
of 2010)hasjurisdiction to the extent the same is not 
permissible under the National Green Tribunals Act, 2010. 
9. Any dispute with the concerned statutory authority, 
body or regulator relating to levy, collection, penalties or 
offences, in relation to 
anydirectorindirecttaxorrefunds,enactedbyanyStatelegislatureo
rParliament, to the extent the same is not permissible un der 
the relevant applicable law. 
10. Anyinvestigation,inquiryorproceeding,undertheComp
etitionAct,2002(12of2003),includingproceedingsbeforetheDire
ctorGeneral,underthatAct;proceedingsbefore the Telecom 
Regulatory Authority of India, under the Telecom Regulatory 
Authorityof India Act, 1997 (24 of 1997) or Telecom Disputes 
Settlement and Appellate 
Tribunalestablishedundersection14ofthatAct, save and save 
and except with the permission of the statutory authority 
or body or the relevant Court. 
11. Proceedings before appropriate Commissions, and the 
Appellate Tribunal 
forElectricity,undertheElectricityAct,2003(36of2003) to the 
extent the same is not permissible under the 
ElectricityAct,2003. 
12. ProceedingsbeforethePetroleumandNaturalGasRegulat
oryBoard,andappeals therefrom before the Appellate Tribunal 
under the Petroleum and Natural Gas 
RegulatoryBoardAct,2006(19of2006) to the extent the same 
is not permissible under the Petroleum and Natural Gas 
RegulatoryBoardAct,2006. 
13. ProceedingsbeforetheSecuritiesandExchangeBoardofIn
dia,andtheSecuritiesAppellateTribunal,undertheSecuritiesandE
208

 
 
62/1 Palace Road. Vasanthnagar. Bengaluru 560 001. India 
T: +91 80 4268 6000. infoblr@samvadpartners.com.  www.samvadpartners.com 
 
BENGALURU• CHENNAI • HYDERABAD • MUMBAI • NEW DELHI 
 
xchangeBoardofIndiaAct,1992(15of1992) to the extent the 
same is not permissible under the 
SecuritiesandExchangeBoardofIndiaAct,1992. 
14. Landacquisitionanddeterminationofcompensationunder
landacquisitionlaws,oranyprovisionoflawprovidingforlandacqu
isition to the extent the same is not permissible under 
applicable law. 
15. Any other subject-matter of dispute which may be 
notified by the Central Government. 
 
 
 
209

WRITTEN RECORD OF THE FEEDBACK SUBMITTED BY DAKSH TO THE 
HON’BLE PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE DRAFT 
MEDIATION BILL, 2021 
(A) SUBMISSIONS REGARDING PRE- LITIGATION MEDIATION 
The concept of mandatory mediation is provided under the h ead “Pre-Litigation Mediation” 
defined in Section 3(r) read with Section 6.  
Section 3(r) reads as follows:  
"pre-litigation mediation" means a process of undertaking mediation, as provided under section 
6, for settlement of disputes prior to the filing of a s uit or proceeding of civil or commercial 
nature in respect thereof, before a court or notified tribunal under sub-section (2) of section 6;” 
Section 6 reads as follows:  
“Subject to other provisions of this Act, whether any mediation agreement exists or not, any 
party before filing any suit or proceedings of civil or commercial nature in any court, shall take 
steps to settle the disputes by pre -litigation mediation in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act..” 
Section 3(r) read with Section 6 elaborates that “Pre-Litigation Mediation” is a process whereby 
the disputes are settled through mediation prior to filing a suit in a court or a tribunal of 
competent jurisdiction.  A list of disputes that cannot be mediated are provided in First Schedule. 
Section 3(r) read with Section 6 allows for civil and commercial disputes to go through the 
process of Pre-Litigation Mediation.  
The concept of Pre -Litigation Mediation needs to be re -examined before being thrust on  the 
parties as a default mechanism. We request  the Hon’ble Committee to reconsider the 
application of Pre-Litigation Mediation for reasons explained herein below: 
(1) Pre-Litigation Mediation increases costs for the litigants: 
Section 20 states as follows: 
(1) A party may withdraw from mediation at any time after the first two mediation sessions. 
(2) Where any party fails to attend the first two mediation sessions without any reasonable cause 
which resulted in the failure of mediation, the court or tribunal, in subsequent litigation on the 
same subject m atter between the parties, may take the said conduct of such party into 
consideration and impose such costs as deems fit. 
210

Section 20 (1) mandates that for disputes that are worthy of mediation, the parties will have to sit 
through two rounds of mediation b efore bringing the case to be adjudicated by a judge. Section 
20 (2) contemplates imposing costs on parties who don’t attend the two mediation sessions. 
A voluntary mediation session will allow parties to participate in the first two sessions with an 
intent to settle. Making mediation mandatory using Pre -Litigation Mediation will mean parties 
who are not interested in settling will  have to pay for the two mediation se ssions and for court 
adjudication in the event that they move the case before a court. 
(2) Cost sanction under Section 20 (2) should be removed  - It is coercive to impose costs 
on parties for failure to mediate and it takes away the parties’ rights to participate in a 
proceeding of their choice (i.e., mediation or court process).  
(3) Pre-Litigation Mediation may lead to i ncrease in time taken to resolve a dispute  – 
Section 20 mandates that for disputes that are worthy of mediation, the parties will have to sit 
through two rounds of mediation before bringing the case to be adjudicated by a judge. This 
will significantly impact the time taken to adjudicate their dispute. 
(4)  Pre-Litigation Mediation and impact on rule of law, precedents  – The list of disputes 
under First Schedule that should be mediated covers disputes that might fall under the ambit 
of nascent areas, for example technology disputes which are still evolving. It is very difficult 
for legislators to decide which areas should and should not be mediated because no one  can 
foresee the developments in law.  Mandatory Pre-Litigation Mediation subsumes the rights of 
parties in deciding what is best for their case.  
We recommend Pre-Litigation Mediation be re-examined for the following reasons: 
 
 Making mediation mandatory using Pre-Litigation Mediation will mean parties who are 
not interested in settling will  have to pay for the two mediation sessions. They will then 
additionally incur legal and court related expenses for filing the case , in the event that 
mediation fails. This will significantly increase costs for the litigants.   
 Using cost sanctions to enforce Pre -Litigation Mediation can result in stripping away of 
the rights of litigants to fully participate in the justice system.  We recommend removing 
the cost sanctions under Section 20(2). 
 The parties who do not want to mediate but are forced to due to Pre -Litigation Mediation 
will end up in courts after a considerable time period as they have sat through two 
sessions of mediation. This will significantly impact the ti me taken to adjudicate their 
dispute and add to the delays in the court system. 
 Mediating all civil and commercial disputes will not provide room for applying the law to 
the merits of the case when it is necessary to do so in some disputes.  
211

 Instead of mandating Pre-Litigation Mediation, the process of introducing mediation as a 
viable option will gain more from allowing lawyers, parties to choose the best course of 
option as suitable for their circumstances. This also allows for some issues to be outlined 
before prematurely deciding that all civil and commercial cases should be mediated. 
We recommend Monitoring Pre- Litigation Mediation: 
 We suggest that it is important that all Pre -Litigation Mediation cases are recorded in the 
existing eCourts system under Pre -Litigation Mediation category. This will enable the 
tracking of these proceedings with CNR numbers if they are moved to court adju dication. 
This allows better monitoring of the progress of Pre -Litigation Mediation cases and 
evaluation of the impact of mediation on judicial delays.  
 
(B) SUBMISSIONS REGARDING CAPACITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
Capacity 
2(h) "mediator" means a person who is appointed to be a mediator to undertake 
mediation, and includes a person registered as mediator with the Council. 
10. (1) Unless otherwise agreed upon by the parties, a person of any nationality may 
be appointed as a mediator: 
Provided that mediator of any foreign nationality shall possess such qualification, 
experience and accreditation as may be specified. 
 
If Pre-Litigation Mediation on the scale envisaged by the Bill is to be implemented effectively 
there is a need for establishing standards for training and certification of mediators. Once Pre-
Litigation Mediation is made mandatory it is necessary that there be sufficient number of t rained 
mediators to meet the demand.  
 
We recommend that: 
● The qualification, experience and accreditation described in the proviso to section 10(1) 
for foreign mediators should be applicable to domestic mediators too.  
● The different kinds of mediators envi saged i.e. those registered with the Council, 
empanelled by a court annexed mediation centre, empanelled by an Authority constituted 
under the Legal Services Authorities and empanelled by a mediation service provider 
recognised under this Act and community mediators need to have basic training about the 
law and skills for mediation. Mediators not only need training on skills needed for the 
mediation process like empathy, patience, understanding relational dynamics and the 
ability to re -frame issues and imag ine solutions but also in the technical aspects of the 
subject matter of the dispute. E.g. if the dispute is a regarding a patent then the mediator 
should be familiar with patent law and the technical aspects of the patent in dispute.  
212

● A scientific study o f mediators and mediation capacity be carried out and its findings 
discussed amongst all stakeholders before adopting a phase wise implementation 
approach. 
 
Community mediation 
44. (1) Any dispute likely to affect peace, harmony and tranquility amongst the residents 
or families of any area or locality may be settled through community mediation with prior 
mutual consent of the parties to the dispute. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), any of the parties shall make an application 
before the concerned Au thority constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 or 
District Magistrate or Sub -Divisional Magistrate in areas where no such Authority has been 
constituted, for referring the dispute to mediation. 
(3) In order to facilitate settlement of a dispute for which an application has been 
received under sub -section (2), the concerned Authority constituted under the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987 or the District Magistrate or Sub -Divisional Magistrate, as the case may 
be, shall constitute panel of three mediators. 
(4) For the purpose of this section, the Authority or District Magistrate or the 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate, as the case may be, shall notify a permanent panel of mediators, 
which may be revised from time to time. 
(5) The following persons may be included in the panel referred to in 
sub-section (4)— 
(a) persons of standing and integrity who are respectable in the community; 
(b) any local person whose contribution to the society has been recognised; 
(c) representative of area or resident welfare associations; and 
(d) any other person deemed appropriate 
(6) While making panel referred to in sub-section (4) the representation of women or 
any other class or category of persons may be considered. 
(6) While making panel referred to in sub-section (4) the representation of women or 
any other class or category of persons may be considered 
45. (1) Any community mediation shall be conducted by the panel of three mediators 
referred to in sub-section (3) of section 44 who shall devise suitable procedure for the 
purpose of resolving the dispute. 
(2) The mediators shall endevour to resolve disputes through community mediation 
and provide assistance to parties for resolving disputes amicably. 
(3) In every case where a settlement agreement is arrived at through mediation under 
this Act, the same may be reduced into writing with the signature of the parties and 
authenticated by the mediator, a copy of which he provided to the parties and in cases where no 
settlement agreement is arrived at, a failure report  may be submitted by the mediator to the 
Authority or the District Magistrate or the Sub-Divisional Magistrate, as the case may be, and to 
the parties.  
213

(4) Any settlement agreement arrived at under this Chapter shall be for the purpose of 
maintaining the peace, harmony and tranquility amongst the residents or families of any area or 
locality but shall not be enforceable as a judgment or decree of a civil court. 
(5) The provisions of sub-sections (7) and (8) of section 22 shall, mutatis mutandis 
apply, in relation to the registration of mediated settlement agreement under this section. 
 
Community mediation as recommended in Chapter X may be unnecessary if there are enough 
qualified mediators available whom parties can approach with disputes. It may be danger ous for 
the state to recognise community mediators who are neither trained in mediation skills nor in law 
and the principles of justice. Such informal dispute resolution fora already exist in the form of 
community elders, khap panchayats, etc. Given their informal status they sometimes end up 
applying traditions and customs rather than the law and perpetuating already existing divisions 
and inequalities in society. Caution should be exercised before giving such individuals and 
institutions legal status without any checks and balances on their functioning. 
 
We recommend that:  
● Empirical interdisciplinary studies be carried out in this area to identify types of 
disputes/litigants/geographical areas where this might be appropriate.  
● Even if the results of such studies show that community mediation is appropriate in 
certain kinds of disputes, such mediators should be trained in legal principles and 
mediation skills. 
● Other provisions relating to the conduct of mediation and the settlement should apply to 
community mediation.  
 
(C) SUBMISSION REGARDING UNIFYING THE ARBITRATION AND 
MEDIATION COUNCILS  
 
Chapter VIII (Clauses 33 to 40) proposes to set up a Mediation Council of India to carry out the 
following important activities: 
 
(a) endevour to promote domestic and inte rnational mediation in India through appropriate 
guidelines;  
(b) endevour to develop India to be a robust centre for domestic and international mediation;  
(c) lay down the guidelines for the continuous education, certification and assessment of 
mediators by the recognised mediation institutes;  
(d) provide for manner of registration of mediators and renew, withdraw, suspend or cancel 
registration on the basis of conditions as may be specified;  
(e) lay down standards for professional and ethical conduct o f mediators under sub-section (2) of 
section 17;  
214

(f) hold trainings, workshops and courses in the area of mediation in collaboration with 
mediation service providers, law firms and universities and other stakeholders, both Indian and 
international, and any other mediation institutes;  
(g) enter into memoranda of understanding or agreements with domestic and international bodies 
or organisations or institutions;  
(h) recognise mediation institutes and mediation service providers and renew, withdraw, suspend 
or cancel such recognition;  
(i) specify the criteria for recognition of mediation institutes and mediation service providers;  
(j) call for any information or record of mediation institutes and mediation service providers; 
 
These activities are similar to the one envisaged for the Arbitration Council of India proposed to 
be set up under Section 43D(2) of the  The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2019   
to carry out the following activities in relation to arbitration: 
 
(a) frame policies governing the grading of arbitral institutions;  
(b) recognise professional institutes providing accreditation of arbitrators;  
(c) review the grading of arbitral institutions and arbitrators;  
(d) hold training, workshops and courses in the area of arbitration in collaboration of law firms, 
law universities and arbitral institutes;  
(e) frame, review and update norms to ensure satisfactory level of arbitration and conciliation;  
(f) act as a forum for exchange of views and techniques to be adopted for creating a platform to 
make India a robust centre for domestic and international arbitration and conciliation;  
(g) make recommendations to the Central Government on various measures to be adopted to 
make provision for easy resolution of commercial disputes;  
(h) promote institutional arbitration by strengthening arbitral institutions;  
(i) conduct examination and training on various subjects relating to arbitration and conciliation 
and award certificates thereof 
 
Given the significant overlap in the nature of function envisaged for these 2 institutions, we 
suggest that they be housed under a single institution, albeit as departments/divisions within it. 
This will not only provide uniformity in operation but also optimise spending of public funds.  
 
We recommend that : 
 The Arbitration Council of India be renam ed as ‘The Arbitration and Mediation Council 
of India’. 
 References to the Mediation Council of India in Ch apter VIII of the Mediation Bil l 2021 
be replaced by ‘The Arbitration and Mediation Council of India’   
 
215

To
Sh. Gautam Kumar
Deputy Secretary
 
Dear Sir,
There are some important aspects in the Bill which I wish to highlight
for your perusal wherein clarifications and redrafting is required. A
number of concerns expressed earlier have been taken care of in the
changes made in the Bill from the earlier draft which had been
circulated for comments.  I would like to submit as under for your
kind consideration:-
1. ​Chapter I  deals with Domestic Mediation.Sec2(1)(iii)
provides  that International Commercial Mediation as defined i n
Section3(f) will come under this Part where it is conducted in India.
U/s Section 28, the Mediation Settlement Agreement will have the
status of a judgment or decree of a court.
Under Article 1(3) of the Singapore Convention
The same does not apply to :
(a) ​Settlement Agreements (i) That have been approved by a
court or concluded in the course of proceedings before a court; and (ii)
That are enforceable as a judgment in the State of that court ;
b) ​Settlement agreements that have been recorded  and are
enforceable as an arbitral award.
Since the proposed Act deems  an international  mediation settlement
agreement to also be a decree of the court, the same would not be
enforceable under the Singapore Convention.  Therefore, conducting
an International Mediation in India may deprive the parties of the
benefit of the Singapore Convention, and parties would then prefer to
have the Mediation conducted out of India.  We will lose the
opportunity to make India a robust hub for International Commercial
Mediation which has been envisaged whilst drafting the Bill.  It would
therefore bebetter to treat International Mediation separately, and not
under Domestic Mediation.
2. ​Section 3(c) : As per the definition given “Court” means
principle Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a District Court in
every district and other 5 Hon’ble High Courts having Original
jurisdiction.
The definition for “Court” needs a clarification by adding “Any Court
established in India as per the provisions of law, to try any such cases-
civil or Criminal in nature, to enable reference of Criminal matters to
mediation as well as extending the ambit to enable matters such as
those under Section 138 Negotiable Instruments Act.
Presently the Bill is silent qua the remedy available for conducting
Mediation in Compoundable Criminal matters or Matrimonial cases.
 This grey area in the present Bill needs to be clarified as otherwise,
the same will lead to complications whilst referring matters under
Criminal law and other such matters to be resolved via the process of
Mediation.
3. ​Section 3(l)Explanation:  Here the, Court annexed Centres
have been bought under the definition of Service Providers in the Bill.
 These centers have their own Panel of Mediators and the Settlements
are subject to confirmation by the courts.  They are enforceable as
such.  This aspect needs to be clarified.
4. ​Chapter 3 Section 6 :  If, as per this section, all the matters
are to be referred for Pre-Litigation Mediation, are there enough216

trained Mediators ? How are the Mediators on the Panel of different
service Providers to be recognized ?
5. Section 10(2) : ​In this section, it needs to be clarified that
appointment of Mediator/s needs to be by a written agreement.
 Furthermore clarification is required that written consent becomes
immaterial in cases of mandatory Mediation whether Civil or
compoundable Criminal cases.
Since Pre-Litigation is sought to be made mandatory, opting out, if
unreasonable, needs to be penalized with costs in subsequent
proceedings.
6. ​There has been a dichotomy created in the practice of
Mediation – this needs to be clarified as there cannot be two different
types of Mediation one under the Mediation Council and the other
under the provisions of Legal Services Authority Act, 1987 and the
rules or regulations made there under.  The role of the Legal Services
and LokAdalat has to be dehors the Mediation Council and more
specific.  
7. ​Chapter 6 Section. 28(2): ​This section needs
clarifications as to how the Settlement Agreement will get the status
of a Civil Decree, particularly in Criminal matters – whether the
Criminal Procedure Code is to be amended by adding  a Section to
Compoundable offences viz.  Section 320(A).  Also the Mediation
Bill may need to make a provision, that the Settlement Agreements
executed in Mediation, concerning the criminal matters, by way of
Pre-Litigation Mediation, or Court referred Mediation will have the
same effect and status  of the Award which may be passed as per
Section 21, of the Legal Services Authorities Act.  
​This aspect needs clarification as to how a Settlement
agreement be drawn and whether any stamp duty payable for the
execution of a Settlement Agreement, by a Mediator.  The aspect of
Stamp Duty payable is very important otherwise it will create
confusion and lead to further litigation.
8. ​Chapter 8 Composition of the Mediation Council of India
​It has no provision for mediators or mediation organizations.
 There is no requirement mentioned for full-time members to have any
Mediation experience.  The composition does not suit a professional
body  but is more aligned to being a governmental regulator.  This is a
concern for virtually all Mediators and Mediation organizations.  
​Besides, there is no mention in the Bill about the constitution of
one Mediation Authority in every State in India, which would perform
the daily affairs within the state including awareness programmes and
trainings which would communicate with the Central body, and be
under the regulation and control of the Mediation Council of India.  
Section 36(1): ​As a matter of practical smooth functioning the
Bill should bring about an addition and divide the entire nation into 4-
5 zones and bring into the Council one-member each  from the
Mediators Fraternity of that zone for the proper development of the
Mediation movement.
​The need of training and awareness programs in each State
should be decided by the State Mediation Council in consultation with
the Central Body.  Matters in relation to the Mediation process
including the quality, experience, expertise, retirement, panel and
number of Mediators should be kept under the ambit of functions of
the State Body.  The State Mediation Council shall function as per the
Regulations made by the State under the direct control of the
Mediation Council of India.  
9.     CHAPTER X :  COMMUNITY MEDIATION
There is no definition or clarification given qua the Community217

mediation or the structure of the same or qualifications of Mediators
on the Panel.  Community Mediation is a mechanism to provide for
conducting Mediation for conflicts at grass root levels.  For the
smooth functioning of the Community Mediation Centers, the State
Mediation Authority can appoint one State Community Mediation
Coordinator for the State,preferably an accredited Mediator/Mediator
Trainer of State Mediation Authority.  That person would be
responsible for looking after the activities and programs conducted by
the Community mediation Centres or the Social Sponsored
Organization across the State.  The details of Honorarium, the register
to be maintained by the SSosetc may be added in the Rules to the bill
and make sufficient changes for the establishment and working of the
Community Mediation Centres.  
10. ​Criminal Procedure Code and Family Courts Act 1984 are
required to be appended to the Bill.  The Authorities under The Legal
Services Authority Act, 1987 have  been constituted  for providing
legal aid under that Act.  Entrusting various powers under the
provisions of this Bill may not be in consonance with the provisions
of the Act nor the infrastructure is available with them to carry out
further intendment of this Bill.
11. ​FIRST SCHEDULE
a) ​Exclusive in Schedule I.
The list of exclusions is quite large.  Quite often in litigation there are
allegations of fraud, etc.  However, many cases do settle without the
need to go into such charges.  Apologies and retractions also take
place.  The tendency in adversarial litigation is to use very strong
language and cast the net wide; this should not prevent such cases to
try mediation.
As regards claims of minors, deities, disabled persons, etc.  The CPC
provides  for the court to safeguard their interests.  This is preferable
rather than foregoing the benefits of settlement.
Re: being in conflict with public policy, this should preferably  come
under the section providing for grounds on which the court would
reject a settlement.  Regarding affecting third parties this should be
focused on the settlement and the power given to the court to
determine the issue. Third Parties can always be requested to join the
proceedings.
Telecom disputes between service provider’s intermediaries, etc. are
amenable to mediation.  
Therefore, First Schedule should be looked at carefully.
I earnestly request you to kindly consider this Representation.
It will be an honour to appear personally before the committee and
explain our points of view.
Kind regards,
(Mr.J.P. Sengh)
Secretary General
For Maadhyam International Council
for Conflict Resolution
 
 
218

 1 
Dr. Aman M. Hingorani, Advocate-on-Record, Supreme Court of India; 
Mediator, Supreme Court Mediation Centre and Delhi High Court Mediation & 
Conciliation Centre; International Advocacy & Mediation Skills Trainer; 
Adjunct Faculty 
 
 
Views on ‘The Mediation Bill 2021’ 
 
 
S.No. Provision Comments Suggestions 
1. Sections 
4, 18 
The definition of “mediation” is incomplete. 
Mediation is inter-alia defined in Section 4 to 
be a process “whereby party or parties, 
request a third person referred to as mediator 
or mediation service provider to assist them 
in their attempt to reach an amicable 
settlement of a dispute.” The global practice, 
as reflected in the Singapore Convention, is 
to specify in the definition of mediation itself 
that the mediator lacks the authority to 
impose a settlement upon the parties. 
Section 4 contains no such provision. Rather, 
Section 18 of the Bill, whil e requiring the 
mediator to emphasise that it is the 
responsibility of the parties to decide and to 
inform them that he only facilitates in arriving 
at the decision, goes on to state that the 
mediator is to inform the parties that he “may 
not” impose any settlement.  
 
Section 4 should 
categorically 
declare that the 
mediator and the 
mediation 
service provider 
lack the 
authority to 
impose a 
settlement upon 
the parties. 
2. Sections 
6, 8,  
20, 25 
Section 6 of the Bill provides for mandatory 
pre-litigation mediation even if parties do not 
agree to mediate, and blocks their access to 
the courts and tribunals across the board for 
all kinds of cases (except those categories of 
disputes excluded in the First Schedule which 
are dealt with later) till they first resor t to 
mediation.  
 
Section 20 and Section 25 of the Bill force 
such unwilling parties to stay in mediation for 
at least two mediation sessions, and threaten 
the party who fails to attend the first two 
mediation sessions “without reasonable 
cause” with the p ossibility of costs in 
subsequent litigation for such “conduct”. 
 
This, translated in actual practice, would 
imply that a party, who is unwilling to mediate 
but has to tide over two mediation sessions, 
Pre-litigation 
mediation 
should be 
offered as an 
option to only 
those who are 
willing to 
mediate, along 
the lines 
provided in 
Sections 62 and 
76 of the 
Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 
1996. 
 
Consequential 
changes should 
be made in the 
219

 2 
may have to wait for several months before 
being allowed to approach courts or tribunals. 
 
Section 8(1) of the Bill provides that “(i)f 
exceptional circumstances exist, a party may, 
before the commencement of, or during the 
continuation of, mediation proceedings under 
this Act, file suit or appropriate procee dings 
before a court or tribunal having competent 
jurisdiction for seeking urgent interim relief.”  
 
The position that emerges is that the Bill 
proposes to block the access of the party 
unwilling to mediate to courts and/or tribunals 
to seek redressal of hi s or her grievances till 
he or she undergoes at least two mediation 
sessions, while permitting th e party  at the 
same time to initiate litigation before courts 
and/or tribunals to seek “urgent interim relief” 
by pleading “exceptional circumstances”. 
Such a proposal is inexplicable at several 
levels.  
 
Firstly, the blocking of access of the party 
unwilling to mediate  to courts a s well as 
tribunals for relief is constitutionally 
vulnerable. A citizen is entitled to have 
access to an adjudicatory body  for redressal 
of his or her grievance. Further, t he Bill  
cannot, directly or indirectly, control the 
action of the courts or interfere with judicial 
jurisdiction in such manner so as to take 
cases out of the settled course of 
adjudication. Such law would amount to 
depriving the courts of their legitimate 
jurisdiction under the principle of separation 
of powers. 
 
Secondly, it defies comprehension as to how 
such drastic provisions will help in reducing 
the pendency of cases or delays in the 
dispensation of justice, since an aggrieved 
party will invariably initiate litigation hoping to 
persuade the court/tribunal of its “exceptional 
circumstances” for the grant of “urgent interim 
relief”. Needless to add, such litigation will, in 
all likelihood, be pursued through 
constitutional remedies under Article 227 to 
the High Court, and then under Article 136 up 
to the Apex Court, more so, in light of the 
sections 
mentioned. 
220

 3 
uncertainty as to what cons titutes 
“exceptional circumstances”.  
 
Thirdly, no right of appeal has been provided 
by the Bill from any judicial decision that may 
be taken by the court or tribunal under 
Section 8, rendering this provision 
constitutionally vulnerable as well – after all, 
at least one right of appeal on facts is, in 
current jurisprudence, integral to fair 
procedure and natural justice even if the right 
of appeal itself is a creation of statute.  
 
Fourthly, the provision of mandatory pre -
litigation mediation not only runs the risk of 
being viewed by an unwilling party as being 
condescending, but also fails to appreciate 
that a given case, otherwise fit for mediation, 
may not be right nor ripe for mediation at that 
stage.  
 
Fifthly, such provision destroys the principles 
of self-determination, party autonomy and 
voluntariness that are the essence of 
mediation. Rather, mediation will be reduced 
to an empty formality at least as far as parties 
who are unwilling to mediate are concerned – 
it will become just an additional layer to be 
crossed for being allowed access to 
courts/tribunals. Added to that would be the 
waste of precious time, energy, money, 
resources and infrastructure needed to hold 
meaningless mediation proceedings. Far 
from “mainstreaming” mediation, such 
provisions have the potential of irreparably 
damaging and discrediting the mediation 
movement itself.  
 
3. Section 7 
& First 
Schedule 
Section 7 provides that mediation shall not be 
conducted for resolution of any dispute or 
matter contained in the First Schedule. The 
First Proviso enables the court to refer 
disputes to mediation relating to 
compoundable offences or matrimonial 
offences connected with or arising out of civil 
proceedings between the parties.  
 
However, it is  Section 498A I ndian Penal 
Code, 1860, a non -compoundable offence,  
that is the most common offence in 
The First 
Proviso to 
Section 7 should 
be clarified to the 
effect that it does 
not preclude the 
court from 
referring the 
parties to 
mediation in a 
dispute where 
Section 498A 
221

 4 
matrimonial disputes . In the event of 
settlement, the proceedings in relation to 
such offence gets invariably quashed by the 
High Court exercising its power under 
Section 482 Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973. 
 
Further, the list in the First Schedule inter-alia 
involves at S. No. 2 “ disputes involving 
allegations of serious and specific fraud, 
fabrication of documents, forgery, 
impersonation, coercion”. These kinds of 
allegations are particularly routine in 
commercial, contractual and company 
disputes – a large chunk of matters typically 
referred to mediation. 
 
The list also includes at S. No. 4 “di sputes 
involving prosecution for criminal offences”. 
But then, there is a distinction between cases 
involving heinous criminal offences like 
murder and rape, and cases relating to 
criminal offences like cheque bouncing and 
electricity theft. While mediatio n cannot be 
conducted in the former category of cases, it 
can certainly be conducted in the latter.  
 
IPC has been 
invoked. 
 
S.No. 2 in the list 
in the First 
Schedule should 
be deleted so as 
to make those 
category of 
disputes 
amenable to 
mediation. 
 
S.No. 4 in the list 
in the First 
Schedule should 
be reworded to 
exclude only 
disputes 
involving 
prosecution for 
heinous criminal 
from the purview 
of mediation. 
4. Section 
18 
While defining the role of the mediator in 
Section 18(1), there is no mention of the use 
of restorative justice practices. 
 
Further, Section 18(2) is loosely worded 
inasmuch as it states that the mediator “may 
not” impose any settlement. 
The role of the 
mediator should 
include the use 
of restorative 
justice practices 
to bring closure  
to the trauma 
associated with 
the conflict.  
 
The provision 
should clearly 
state that the 
mediator “shall 
not” impose any 
settlement. 
5. Section 
21 
In light of Sections 26, 28 read with Sections 
22 and 7 , the Bill essentially appears to 
govern private mediation (whether by an 
individual or an institution) as distinct from 
court annexed mediation.  
 
Section 21 
should be 
deleted. 
222

 5 
If that be the position, there is no reason for 
Section 21 to mandate a time limit to 
complete mediation at all. There could indeed 
be cases that entail parties to, say, alienate 
property in adverse market conditions or to 
carry out extensive construction, and the time 
required for such action may exceed the 
stipulated time limit – a maximum of 360 
days. If part ies wish to mediate or keep 
mediation pending for more than a year and 
if the mediator is glad to do so, there can be 
no objection to the continuation of mediation. 
 
6. Sections 
22, 26, 
27, 7 
As a consequence of the decision of the 
Supreme Court in Afcons Infrastructure Ltd. 
Vs. Cherian Varkey Const ruction Co. (P) Ltd 
((2010) 8 SCC 24 ), a mediator in a court 
annexed mediation would be deemed to be a 
Lok Adalat under the Legal Services 
Authorities Act 1987, complete with the 
powers of a civil court in terms of Section 22 
of that Act, including though not limited to, the 
summoning and enforcing attendance of any 
witness and examining him or her on oath; 
the discovery and production of any 
document; the receiving of evidence on 
affidavit; the requisitioning of any public 
record or document or copy thereof from any 
court or office and so on so forth. And all 
mediation proceedings would be deemed to 
be judicial proceedings within the meaning of 
those provisions of the Indian Penal Code, 
1860 that, for instance, deal with punishment 
for false evidence or for intentionally insulting 
or causing interruption to a public servant in 
judicial proceedings. Further, every mediator 
would be deemed to be a civil court for the 
purpose of the provisions of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 pertaining to 
prosecution for contempt of lawful authority of 
public servant, or for offences specified in 
Section 22. 
 
Such a proposition runs counter to every 
conceivable principle of mediation. Instead to 
correcting such regrettable state of affairs, 
the Bill perpetuates it by treating court 
annexed mediation on a different footing  in 
light of Sections 26, 28 read with Sections 22 
and 7. 
The Bill should 
not distinguish 
between 
mediations 
conducted 
privately or on 
reference by the 
court or with a 
compromise or 
settlement 
(award) arrived 
at before the Lok 
Adalat. Section 
26, 27 and the 
Second Proviso 
to Section 7 
should 
accordingly be 
deleted. Suitable 
provisions 
should be 
incorporated to 
the effect t hat in 
a court referred 
mediation, the 
litigation would 
stand disposed 
of in terms of the 
mediated 
settlement 
agreement 
without there 
being a need to 
send the 
agreement back 
to the referring 
court. The 
223

 6 
 
The further consequence of treating court 
annexed mediation on a different footing is 
the conferral of varying legal status to a 
settlement agreement, depending on whether 
it was arrived at in a private matter or court -
referred matter. The former can be enforced 
like a court decree by virtue of Section 28(2)  
of the Bill , while the latter would have to be 
placed before the referring court which is to 
then record its terms and dispose of the case 
by applying the principles of Order 23 Rule 3 
of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908, that inter 
alia deal with compromise applications.  A 
mediated settlement agreement logically 
should enjoy the same legal status and 
consequences, regardless of whether it was 
arrived at in a private matter or court-referred 
matter. 
 
parties could be 
given liberty to 
apply to the 
referring court 
for refund of 
Court Fee, if so 
desired.  
7. Section 
22 
The Bill requires in Section 22 the registration 
of the mediated settlement agreement (other 
than those arrived at in a court or tribunal 
referred mediation, or awards under the 
Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987) with an 
authority constituted under the 1987 Act . 
Such provision would not negate the settled 
proposition that confidentiality extends also to 
the settlement agreement except for the 
purposes of its enforcement. An incentive for, 
say, MNCs or celebrities to settle in mediation 
is that the settle ment terms are kept away 
from public gaze. The requirement of 
registration of settlement agreement, and 
thereby putting its terms in the public domain 
even if it is for the purpos es of record only, 
dis-incentivizes mediation. Again, the Bill is 
silent on the consequences of the settlement 
agreement not being registered or on the 
rationale for putting the responsibility of the 
registration on the mediator. 
 
Registration of 
mediated 
settlement 
agreements 
should be made 
optional for the 
parties, and  
should be 
allowed only if all 
parties give 
written consent  
in this regard . 
The mediator 
should have no 
role with respect 
to the question 
of registration. 
8. Section 
24 
Proviso to Section 24(1) states that nothing in 
this section “shall protect from discl osure, 
information sought or provided to prove or 
dispute a claim or complaint of professional 
misconduct of mediator or malpractice based 
on conduct occurring during the mediation.”  
 
The Bill should 
correct this 
position and 
delete all 
exceptions to 
the principle of 
confidentiality. 
 
224

 7 
But then, should there be professional 
misconduct of the mediator or ma lpractice 
during the mediation, it is open to the party to 
immediately terminate the mediation. Surely 
an allegation of misconduct or malpractice 
during the mediation does not warrant 
removing the confidentiality attached to 
mediation. 
 
Section 24(2) provides that “(t)here shall be 
no privilege or confidentiality that will attach 
to (a) a threat or statement of a plan to 
commit an offence punishable under any law 
for the time being in force; (b) information 
relating to domestic violence o r child abuse; 
and (c) statements made during a mediation 
showing a significant imminent threat to 
public health or safety.”  
 
Again, “a threat or statement of a plan to 
commit an offence” or “statements showing a 
significant imminent threat to public health or 
safety” – howsoever vague and omnibus as 
these expressions are – should entail 
immediate termination of mediation by the 
mediator rather than being a ground to do 
away with confidentiality or privilege.  
 
As regards lack of confidentiality or privileg e 
with respect to information relating to 
domestic violence or child abuse, given the 
wide connotation of the terms “domestic 
violence” and “child abuse” and the fact that 
these would factor in most family and 
matrimonial matters as also guardianship and 
custody cases, it is doubtful that, in the 
absence of confidentiality or privilege, a given 
party would agree to even discuss, let alone 
address, issues of domestic violence or child 
abuse. These provisions of the Bill render 
mediation as an unattractive al ternative to 
resolve such disputes which ironically 
constitute a large chunk of matters typically 
referred to mediation. 
 
The Supreme Court in its decision in Perry 
Kansagra Vs. Smriti Madan Kansagra  (2019 
SCC Online SC 211)  took the view that the 
principle of confidentiality would not apply in 
matters concerning custody or guardianship 
225

 8 
issues since the court, in discharge of its role 
as parens patriae to determine the custody or 
guardianship of a child, should have access 
to all material relating to the child, including 
child counsellor reports in mediation touching 
upon the home environment of the parties, 
their personalities and their relationship with 
the child. This view, however, overlooks the 
perspective of the parties in mediation. It is 
the cloak of confidentiality and privilege that 
persuades a party, even in custody or 
guardianship disputes, to lower its defences, 
express its fears and apprehensions and 
eventually shift from its vigorously stated 
position towards a s ettlement. Parties are in 
fact encouraged to disclose even 
incriminatory information in mediation for the 
purpose of addressing underlying interests 
and concerns. A party may see no reason as 
to why mediation should become a forum to 
gather expert opinion or be converted into a 
discovery process for the court merely 
because the court has to perform its own role 
to determine the custody or guardianship of 
the child. Mediation depends on the goodwill 
and consent of the parties and a party might 
choose not to mediate at all, rather than risk 
a subjective, if not one -sided, report being 
given by a mediator (or by a child counsellor 
who participated in the mediation) to the 
judge who would be deciding that case on 
merits. More  so, if the incriminatory 
information disclosed by a party for the 
purpose of mediation could find its way to the 
judge and be used against that party. A party 
could be reluctant to even bring the child to 
the mediator or counsellor, and should there 
be judicial directions to do so, it would only 
add to the undesirable element of compulsion 
in mediation with consequential loss of faith 
and trust of that party in the process. 
 
9. Section 
29 
Section 29, while permitting a mediated 
settlement agreement to be challenged on 
the ground s like fraud, corruption, 
impersonation, provides that the application 
to challenge the agreement shall not be made 
after 90 days have elapsed from the da te on 
which the party making that application has 
received a copy of the settlement agreement. 
Firstly, there is 
no rationale for 
having a 
provision to 
challenge a 
mediated 
settlement 
agreement. If 
226

 9 
The Section further provides that if the court 
or tribunal is satisfied that the applicant was 
prevented by sufficient cause from making 
the application within t he said period of 90 
days it may entertain the application within a 
further period of 90 days.  
 
Hence, should a party discover just after six 
months of receiving a copy of the mediated 
settlement agreement that it had been 
induced to sign the settlement a greement, 
say, by fraud, the party is precluded by law 
from challenging the same. Such provision 
contravenes the elementary rule that fraud 
not only vitiates but also unravels everything, 
and that the product of fraud can be 
disregarded as being null and v oid at any 
time, even in collateral proceedings. And 
where a statutory period of limitation has 
been prescribed to move the Court against 
fraudulent action, the said limitation invariably 
begins from the date of the discovery of fraud 
– and not from the oc currence of some pre -
determined event like the receiving of a copy 
of the settlement agreement.  
 
there has indeed 
been, say, fraud, 
the aggrieved 
party can seek 
the remedy 
before the civil 
court akin to that 
of challenging a 
consent decree 
on the ground of 
fraud. Secondly, 
should there be 
a provision, then 
limitation should 
run from 
discovery of 
fraud. Further, 
grounds like 
corruption and 
impersonation 
are instances of 
fraud, and need 
not be specified 
separately. 
10. Section 
45 
Section 45(4) provides that the settlement 
agreement in community mediation “shall be 
for the purpose of maintaining peace, 
harmony and tranqui llity amongst the 
residents or families of any area or locality but 
shall not be enforceable as a judgement or 
decree of a civil court”. Such lack of 
enforceability of the settlement agreement 
will dis-incentivise the very purpose of having 
the mediation.  
Settlement 
agreement in 
community 
mediation 
should be 
enforceable as a 
court decree. 
Alternatively, the 
Bill should 
confer at least 
some 
advantages of 
taking recourse 
to community 
mediation. 
11. Fourth 
Schedule 
The proposed Section 89 to be substituted in 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 does not 
specify that the reference to mediation (or for 
that matter, arbitration) should be only with 
the consent of the parties. The Supreme 
Court held , in its decision in Afcons 
Infrastructure Ltd. Vs. Cherian Varkey 
Construction Co. (P) Ltd  ((2010) 8 SCC 24 ), 
in context of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
The proposed 
Section 89 in the 
Fourth Schedule 
should clearly 
state that the 
reference to 
arbitration or 
mediation or to 
the Lok Adalat 
227

 10 
Act, 1996, that the consent of the parties is 
required before the court can refer them to 
arbitration or conciliation. Since mediation is 
now treated to be the same as conciliation by 
virtue of Section 4 of the Bill and since 
Schedule VI to the Bill proposes to substitute 
the provisions related to conciliation in the 
1996 Act with the provisions of the Bil l, the 
consent of the parties is necessary for 
making the reference.  The same is the 
position with respect to the compromise or 
settlement (award) arrived at before  the Lok 
Adalat in terms of Section 20 of the Legal 
Services Authorities Act , 1987. The 
requirement of consent is in line with the 
principles of self -determination, party 
autonomy  and voluntariness that are so 
integral to mediation.  
 
can only be 
made with the 
consent of the 
parties. 
12. - The Bill dilutes the confidentiality principle of 
mediation. Rule 20(2) of the Civil Procedure 
Mediation Rules examined by the Supreme 
Court in its decision in  Salem Advocate Bar 
Assn. Vs. Union of India ((2005) 6 SCC 344) 
inter-alia stipulates that “when a party gives 
information to the mediator subject to a 
specific condition that it be kept confidential, 
the mediator shall not disclose that 
information to the other party”. Section 70 of 
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996 puts 
the same prohibition on the conciliator. There 
is no s uch provision in the Bill. The 
requirement in Section 18 of the Bill that the 
mediator shall communicate “the view of 
each party to the other to the extent agreed 
to by them” is no substitute for these 
provisions. 
The Bill should 
contain an 
express 
provision to the 
effect that  
when a party 
gives 
information to 
the mediator 
subject to a 
specific 
condition that it 
be kept 
confidential, the 
mediator shall 
not disclose that 
information to 
the other party. 
13. - The Bill is silent regarding the provisions to 
govern international mediation relating to 
non-commercial disputes, since Section 3(f) 
confines “international mediation” to 
mediation relating to a commercial dispute 
arising out of a legal relationship, contractual 
or otherwise, under Indian law and where at 
least one of the parties is a foreign national or 
resident, or a body corporate or association 
having foreign place of business. 
 
The Bill should 
cover the entire 
field of 
international 
mediations.  
14. - The Bill does not have provisions specifically 
dealing with the Singapore Convention (The 
The Bill should 
address the 
228

 11 
United Nations Convention on International 
Settlement Agreements Resulting from 
Mediation).   
 
Singapore 
Convention.  
15.  - Online mediation is not necessarily confined 
to the conducting of mediation in a virtual 
setting.  
 
In today’s digital world, parties to a smart 
contract can provide for automated mediation 
and enforcement of settlement agreement, 
which would pre -empt differences betw een 
the parties in the future on the existence or 
validity of the agreement to go for mediation 
or enforcement of the settlement agreement. 
Parties could incorporate into the smart 
contract itself (a) their consent to go for 
mediation, (b) the mechanism for nominating 
a mediator or opting for institutional 
mediation, (c) the giving of pre -determined 
access to the mediator to the smart contract 
in order to enable him or her to code/insert 
the settlement agreement (should there be 
one) into the blockchain, wh ich would 
automatically lead to the transfer of assets or 
monies of one party to another on the 
blockchain in terms of such settlement 
agreement. 
 
There is no clarity as to whether or not the 
Bill, while providing for online mediation, even 
intends to cover such areas.  
The Bill should 
indicate whether 
or not online 
mediation 
covers  
automated 
mediation and 
enforcement of 
settlement 
agreement, and 
if so, appropriate 
provisions 
should be 
incorporated in 
the Bill. This 
would require 
further debate 
and discuss ion 
in light of the 
ramifications for 
other statutes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
Dated : 30 January 2022  
 
 
AMAN 
MOHIT 
HINGORANI
Digitally signed by AMAN MOHIT HINGORANI 
DN: c=IN, st=Delhi, 
2.5.4.20=9f22f16e69ba6627c948fbf6b69eb055a
fae84f29a57b63ba3c270c41acbdd78, 
postalCode=110049, street=A-19 BLOCK-A, 
serialNumber=12b50570f7ddac136460ee65fb8
5e0e3734ba1af858305428f236b78b5e64773, 
o=Personal, cn=AMAN MOHIT HINGORANI, 
pseudonym=b632709a235114ca22357385fe41
c6cf 
Date: 2022.01.30 21:52:50 +05'30'
229

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 1 of 68 
 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 THE MEDIATION BILL, 2021 
 
Line 1 Remarks / Proposed 
Changes  
 An Act to promote, encourage and 
facilitate mediation especially 
institutional mediation for resolution 
of disputes commercial and 
otherwise, enforce domestic and 
international mediation settlement 
agreements, provide for a body for 
registration of mediators, to 
encourage community mediation and 
to make online mediation as an 
acceptable and cost effective process 
and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto 
1.   
 Whereas the practice of mediation for 
resolving a wide range of disputes has 
gained popularity worldwide over the 
last few decades amongst individuals, 
corporate users, governments, 
judiciary, lawyers etc. 
2.   
 And whereas it is accepted that the 
use of mediation results in better 
resolution, fosters collaborative 
problem solving, reduces the burden 
on the courts, is cost and time 
effective, and preserves relationships 
amongst disputants, and enhances 
social harmony and economic growth 
of society  
3.   
 Whereas India has a long history of 
consensual dispute resolution and has 
in recent years made rapid advances 
in the use of structured mediation, 
especially in the court annexed 
mediation schemes of the Supreme 
Court, High Courts and Subordinate 
courts. 
4.   
 Whereas the United Nations 
Commission on International Trade 
And Law (UNCITRAL) has adopted 
UNCITRAL model law on 
International Commercial Mediation 
5.   
230

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 2 of 68 
 
and United Nations Convention on 
International Settlement Agreements 
resulting from Mediation, on 20 
December 2018. 
 Whereas to strengthen the legal 
framework on international dispute 
settlement, India on 7th August 2019 
became one of the first signatories to 
the United Nations Convention on 
Enforcement of International 
Settlement Agreements resulting from 
Meditation, also known as "The 
Singapore Convention". 
6.   
 And whereas UNCITRAL has 
brought a Model Law for giving 
effect to the Singapore Convention, it 
is considered expedient that India 
gives effect to the Singapore 
Convention by providing for 
provisions under a standalone 
mediation law for enforcement of 
international settlement agreements 
resulting from mediation. 
7.   
 And whereas a robust and effective 
mediation system greatly enhances 
the ease of doing business in India 
thus improving the country's 
attractiveness as a destination for 
foreign investment and collaboration. 
8.   
 And whereas there is a strong need 
for a comprehensive uniform 
legislation for mediation in India 
which will cover the multiple aspects 
of its practice, encourage mediation 
including community mediation, and 
provide the platform of mediation for 
settling a wide range of disputes 
including domestic and cross-border 
commercial disputes, matrimonial, 
and other personal disputes. 
9.   
 And whereas it is also expedient to 
enact legislation to give mediation 
settlements the status of an order, 
judgment and decree besides 
establishing the Mediation Council of 
India and provide for recognition of 
10.   
231

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 3 of 68 
 
mediation service providers. 
 Be it enacted by Parliament in the 
Seventy-Second Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:- 
11.   
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement 
1. (1) This Act may be called the 
Mediation Act, 2021. 
12.   
 (2) The provisions of this Act shall 
come into force on such date(s) as the 
Central Government may, by 
notification(s) in the official gazette, 
appoint and different dates may be 
appointed for different provisions of 
this Act and any reference in any such 
provision to the commencement of 
this Act shall be construed as a 
reference to the coming in to force of 
that provision. 
13.   
 (3) It extends to the whole of India. 14.   
 PART I 
DOMESTIC MEDIATION 
CHAPTER 1 
Applicability and Definitions 
15.   
Applicability 2. (1) This Part shall apply where 
mediation is conducted in India and 
16.   
 (i) all or both parties habitually reside 
in or are incorporated in or have their 
business or residence in India; or 
17.   
 (ii) the parties agree that this Act (or 
any other domestic law or procedure 
thereunder providing for mediation) 
will apply to the mediation; or  
 
18.   
 (iii) is an international mediation as 
defined in this Part. 
19.   
 '"Explanation I: If a party has more 
than one place of business / residence, 
the place of business / residence is 
that which has the closest relationship 
to thesubejct matter in dispute." 
20.   
 (2) A mediated settlement agreement 
made under this Part shall be 
considered a domestic mediated 
settlement agreement. 
21.   
Definitions 3. In this Part unless the context 
otherwise requires: 
22.   
232

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 4 of 68 
 
 (a) “Council” means the Mediation 
Council of India established under 
section 35 of this Act. 
23.   
 (b) (i) "Court" for the purpose of 
mediation under this Part means the 
Court, Tribunal, Forum of competent 
jurisdiction in a district, and includes 
the High Court and Commercial 
Courtshaving jurisdiction to decide 
the disputes forming the subject 
matter of mediation if the same had 
been the subject matter of a suit or 
proceedings, provided, if the subject 
matter of th mediation is commercial 
dispute of a Specified Value as under 
the Commercial Courts Act, 2015, 
Court shall be such Commercial 
Court as speicified under the said Act. 
 
(ii) in the case of international 
mediation. the High Court in exercise 
of its ordinary original civil 
jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to 
decide the questions forming the 
subject-matter of the mediation if the 
same had been the subject-matter of a 
suit, and in other cases, a High Court 
having jurisdiction to hear appeals 
from decrees o[ courts subordinate to 
that High Court." 
24.  To bring uniformity 
in the Court related 
procedures of 
Arbitration and 
Mediation, the 
definition of Court is 
to include 
Commercial Courts, 
as well in Section 
3(b) and accordingly 
suitable changes will 
be required to be 
made in Schedule VI, 
relating to 
amendments in 
Commercial Courts 
Act. Therefore, a 
proviso can be added 
in this section.  
 
In Schedule VI the 
required changes in 
the Commercial 
Courts Act will be 
indicated.   
 (c) “International Mediation" means a 
mediation undertaken under this Act 
and relates to a commercial or any 
other dispute arising out of legal 
relationships contractual or otherwise 
under the law in force in India and 
where at least one of the parties, at 
the time of conclusion of that 
agreement, is- 
25.  Without words “or 
any other”, the 
definition is 
incomplete, as dispute 
arising not only out of 
commercial 
relationship, but 
otherwise also would 
fall in definition of 
International 
Mediation  
 (i) an individual who is a national of, 
or habitually resides in, any country 
other than India; or 
26.   
 (ii) a body corporate including 
Limited Liability Partnership of any 
27.   
233

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 5 of 68 
 
nature, with its place of business 
outside India; or 
 (iii) an association or body of 
individuals whose place of business is 
outside India; or 
28.   
 (iv) the Government of a foreign 
country. 
29.   
 Explanation- If a party has more than 
one place of business / residence, the 
place of business / residence is that 
which has the closest relationship to 
the to the subject matter in dispute.” 
30.   
 (d) “Institutional Mediation” means a 
mediation conducted by a mediation 
service provider on the parties 
agreeing to resolve their disputes by it 
and under its rules. 
31.  “Added definition of 
Institutional 
Mediation” 
 (e) “Mediation” means mediation as 
referred to in section 4. 
32.   
 (f) "Mediator" means an individual 
who is appointed to be a mediator to 
undertake mediation and includes a 
person registered as mediator with the 
Council. 
33.   
 Explanation: Where more than one 
mediator is appointed for a mediation, 
reference to a mediator under this Act 
is a reference to all the mediators. 
34.   
 (g) “Mediation agreement” means 
mediation agreement as referred to in 
section 5 
35.   
 (h) "Mediation Communication", 
whether made electronically or 
otherwise, means 
(i) anything said or done; 
(ii) any document prepared; or 
(iii) any information provided, 
for the purposes of or in relation to or 
in the course of mediation and 
includes a Mediation Agreement or a 
Mediated Settlement Agreement. 
36.   
 (i) "Mediation Institutes" means a 
body or organization or Institute, 
established, recognized and registered 
by Center or State Government or any 
37.   
234

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 6 of 68 
 
other authority, that provides training 
and continuous education and 
certification of mediators and carry 
out such other functions as may be 
specified by the Council by way of 
regulations. 
 (j) "Mediation Service Provider" 
means  an institute, body or 
organization that provides for the 
conduct of mediation and has in place 
all required facilities and 
infrastructure as also procedures and 
Rules to govern the conduct of 
mediation in conformity with this Act 
and are recognised by the Council. 
38.   
 Explanation: the term mediation 
service provider includes Lok Adalats 
and Permanent Lok Adalats 
constituted under the National Legal 
Services Authorities Act, 1987 or 
mediation centre annexed to Court, 
Tribunal, and such other bodies 
recognized as Mediation Institutes by 
Centre or State Government or any 
other authority, as may be specified 
by the Council by way of regulations. 
39.  Mediation Institutes 
established by 
Centre or any State 
Government or any 
other authority, 
which are providing 
mediation services 
are also to be 
covered in the 
definition of 
Mediation Service 
Provider 
 (k) “Mediated Settlement Agreement" 
means settlement agreement as 
referred to in sub-section (1) of 
section 21. 
40.   
 (l) “Online mediation” means online 
mediation as referred to in section 32. 
41.   
 (m) "Participants" means persons 
other than the parties who participate 
in the mediation and includes 
advisors, consultants and counsel, and 
any technical experts and observers. 
42.   
 (n) "Party" means a party to a 
mediation agreement or mediation 
proceedings whose agreement or 
consent is necessary to resolve the 
dispute and includes their successors. 
43.   
 (o) “Pre litigation Mediation” means a 
process of undertaking mediation, as 
provided under section 6 of this Act, 
44.   
235

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 7 of 68 
 
for settlement of disputes before the 
filing of a suit or proceedings of any 
nature in respect thereof, before the 
Court, Tribunal or any other authority 
of competent jurisdiction. 
 (p) "Prescribed" means prescribed by 
the Rules under this Act. 
45.   
 (q) "Regulations" means regulations 
made by the Council. 
46.   
 (r) “Secure Electronic Signature” with 
reference to online mediation means 
electronic signatures as provided for 
under section 15 of the Information 
Technology Act 2000 (Act no. 21 of 
2000) 
47.   
 (s) Private mediation” means a 
mediation which is not administered 
by any mediation service provider 
and  includes mediation by individual 
mediation practitioners.   
48.  The word “adhoc” 
suggests negative 
connotation.  
 
The proposed change 
in the existing also 
clarifies that 
mediation service 
provided by 
individual practitioner 
is also recognized 
under the Act.  
 (t) “Tribunal” means a tribunal 
constituted under any special law 
including an arbitral tribunal to hear 
the dispute in first instance but does 
not include an appellate tribunal. 
49.   
Mediation CHAPTER 2  
MEDIATION 
50.   
 4. “Mediation” means a process, 
whether referred to by the expression 
mediation, pre-litigation mediation, 
online mediation, conciliation or an 
expression of similar import, whereby 
the parties are assisted by neutral 
third person (“the mediator”) to assist 
them in their attempt to reach an 
amicable settlement of the dispute. 
Explanation – The mediation defined 
under this section will also include a 
process which is a part of any hybrid 
51.  The proposed change 
clarifies the definition 
of mediation.  It is not 
always that on the 
request of the parties 
the mediator is 
appointed.  
 
Since many domestic 
and international 
agreements contain 
dispute resolution 
236

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 8 of 68 
 
ethod like Med-Arb, Arb-Med-Arb 
process.  
clauses including 
Med-Arb or Arb-
Med-Arb, of different 
institutions under 
their rules, 
explanation is 
required to clarified 
mediation under 
different hybrid 
processes to 
demonstrate that 
India recognizes these 
internationally 
accepted mechanisms 
of hybrid resolutions.  
Mediation 
Agreement 
5. (1) Mediation Agreement means an 
agreement in writing, by or between 
parties or any one claiming through 
them, to submit to mediation all or 
certain disputes which have arisen or 
which may arise in respect of any 
relationship whether contractual or 
otherwise. 
52.   
 (2) A mediation agreement may be in 
the form of a mediation clause in a 
contract or in the form of a separate 
agreement. 
53.   
 (3) Mediation Agreement is in 
writing, if it is contained in or 
recorded as: 
(a) Any document signed by the 
parties; 
(b) An exchange of 
communications/letters including 
through electronic and digital means 
as provided for by the Information 
Technology Act, 2000.  
(c) Any pleadings in a suit or any 
other proceedings in which existence 
of mediation agreement is alleged by 
one party and not denied by the other; 
(d) Reference in any agreement 
containing a mediation clause would 
constitute a mediation agreement if 
the agreement is in writing and the 
reference is such as to make the 
54.   
237

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 9 of 68 
 
mediation as part of the Agreement. 
 (5) The parties to a dispute may agree 
to submit to mediation any dispute 
arising between them under an 
agreement whether executed prior to 
arising of dispute or subsequent 
thereto. 
55.   
 (6) A mediation agreement in case of 
international mediation shall refer to 
an agreement for resolution in matters 
of disputes referred to in clause (c) of 
section 3. 
56.   
Pre litigation 
Mediation and 
Settlement 
6. (1) Subject to other provisions of 
this Act, irrespective of the existence 
of any mediation agreement or 
otherwise, any party before filing any 
suit or proceeding in any Court or 
Tribunal or other forum or authority 
may, take steps to settle the disputes 
by pre litigation mediation in 
accordance with the provisions of this 
Act. 
57.  Resorting to 
mediation at pre-
litigation stage cannot 
be mandatory but 
optional because:  
1.  as every case 
may not be suitable 
for mediation.  
 Making 
mandatory for 
every case may 
result in futile 
exercise and 
wastage of time 
and delay the 
matter. 
2. As right to 
access to 
Court of Law, 
which is a 
constitutional 
right is 
provided 
under section 
9 CPC.  
3. As no one can 
be denied or 
deprived of 
their right to 
access the 
Civil Court 
for not 
resorting to 
238

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 10 of 68 
 
mediation.  
 (2) Unless otherwise agreed upon by 
the parties, a mediator registered with 
the Mediation Council of India or a 
Court Annexed Mediation Center or a 
Mediation Service Provider 
recognized under the provisions of 
this Act are authorized to conduct 
pre-litigation mediation. 
58.   
Cases not fit for 
mediation 
7. (1) Mediation under this Part shall 
not be conducted for resolution of any 
dispute in relation to matters listed in 
Schedule-II of this Act. 
59.   
 (2) If the Central Government is 
satisfied that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do, it may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, 
amend the Second Schedule and 
thereupon the Second Schedule shall 
be deemed to have been amended 
accordingly. 
60.   
 (3) A copy of every notification 
proposed to be issued under sub-
section (2), shall be laid in draft 
before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or 
the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in disapproving 
the issue of the notification or both 
Houses agree in making any 
modification in the notification, the 
notification shall not be issued or, as 
the case may be, shall be issued only 
in such modified form as may be 
agreed upon by the both Houses of 
Parliament. 
61.   
Interim relief by 
Court or 
Tribunal 
 62.  There is no need of 
this section. It 
overlaps the remedy 
provided in Section 
9(2).  
239

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 11 of 68 
 
Such reliefs are 
independent of 
mediation and are 
available under 
specific laws, such as 
CPC and Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act, 
etc.  
Parties will attempt to 
resort remedy from 
the Court, which will 
impact the 
requirement of good 
faith participation in 
mediation and/or will 
create mistrust with 
other party.  And 
resultantly the other 
party will discard the 
mediation.  There 
should not be court 
intervention during 
the ongoing 
mediation. 
  63.   
Power of Court 
or Tribunal to 
refer parties to 
mediation 
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, a Court or 
Tribunal or Authority, before which 
an action is brought in a matter which 
is the subject of an agreement to 
submit to mediation shall, if a party to 
such agreement or any person 
claiming through or under him, so 
applies, refer the parties to mediation 
as per the provisions of this Act, 
unless it finds that prima facie no 
valid agreement exists.  
64.  This Section requires 
a lot of changes.  
 
The mediation being 
flexible could be 
resorted to at any 
stage of the ongoing 
litigation, there 
should not be time 
limit for mediation in 
the pending litigation. 
It will not be possible 
for the Court to 
evaluate good reason 
for not referring to 
mediation.  
Subjective opinion of 
Court may lead to 
litigation in this 
regard. 
 
240

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 12 of 68 
 
 (2) If the Court or Tribunal directs the 
parties to go through the process of 
mediation, it may pass suitable 
interim orders to protect the interest 
of the parties. 
Explanation – 
1.  A direction to the parties to 
go through the process of 
mediation shall not impose 
any obligation on them to 
come to a settlement in the 
mediation. 
2. It is clarified that this section 
is also applicable in case the 
Court finds that the agreement 
to submit to mediation is with 
respect to an international 
mediation.  
65.  Existing Sub-Section 
(3) is made 
Explanation 1 of the 
Sub-section (2) and a 
new Explanation 2 
has been added.  
 (3) The Court may, while directing 
the parties to mediation or during the 
continuation of such referred 
mediation under this part, on an 
application filed by a party for 
seeking urgent interim relief, in 
special circumstances, grant the same 
or reject, as the case may be.  
66.  Existing Sub-section 
(3) will become 
explanation to Sub-
Section (2). And a 
new, Sub- Section 
9(3), as proposed will 
be required to be 
added.    
 (4) The settlement arrived at under 
this Section shall have the same status 
and effect as if it was an order, 
judgment or decree of a Court or 
Tribunal or Authority and shall be 
thereupon executable as such. 
67.   
 CHAPTER 3  
MEDIATOR 
68.   
Appointment of 
mediator 
10. (1) Unless otherwise agreed by 
the parties, a person of any nationality 
may be a mediator. 
Provided that mediator of any foreign 
nationality shall possess such 
equivalent qualification, experience 
and accreditation as may be specified 
for domestic mediators by the 
Council by way of regulations. 
69.   
 (2) The parties are free to agree on a 
procedure for appointing the mediator 
70.   
241

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 13 of 68 
 
or mediators. 
 (3) If the parties reach no agreement 
on a procedure referred to in sub-
section (2), then the party seeking to 
initiate mediation shall make an 
application to a mediation service 
provider for the appointment of a 
mediator. 
71.   
 (4) Upon receiving application under 
sub-section (3), the mediation service 
provider shallappoint 
(i) the mediator from the panel 
maintained by it, in case the parties 
are unable to reach agreement as to 
the appointment of mediator or 
mediator agreed by the parties refuses 
to act as a mediator. 
72.  It is because of this 
agreement on 
appointment of 
mediator that one 
party makes 
application under 
sub-section 3, and 
therefore, there would 
be no agreement 
between the parties 
on the appointment of 
mediator.  Service 
provider cannot 
appoint mediator 
outside its panel of 
mediators, as it would 
not be able to ensure 
ethics of such 
Mediator. 
 (5) Where the mediator is appointed 
under clause (i) of sub section (4), the 
mediation service provider shall seek 
acceptance of appointment from the 
person so appointed as mediator 
within 7 days of the appointment. 
73.   
 (6) The person appointed under 
clause (i) of sub section (4) shall 
communicate his willingness within 7 
days from the date of receipt of notice 
of such appointment under sub-
section (5). 
74.   
Preference 11. The mediation service provider 
shall, while appointing any person 
from the panel of mediators 
maintained by it, consider his 
suitability and views of the parties for 
resolving the subject-matter of 
dispute. 
75.   
242

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 14 of 68 
 
Conflict of 
Interest and 
Disclosure 
12. (1) When a person is appointed as 
a mediator, that person shall, prior to 
the commencement of the mediation, 
disclose in writing to the parties about 
any circumstances or potential 
circumstances, personal, professional 
or financial, that may constitute 
conflict of interest or that is likely to 
give rise to justifiable doubts as to 
such mediator’s independence or 
impartiality in the conduct of the 
mediation process. 
76.   
 (2) From the time of appointment and 
during the mediation proceeding, the 
mediator shall, without delay, 
disclose to the parties in writing any 
conflict of interest that has newly 
arisen or come to his knowledge as 
stated in sub-section (l). 
77.   
 (3) Upon disclosure under sub-section 
(1) or (2), the parties have the option 
to waive any objection and the same 
shall be construed as the consent of 
parties to continue with the same 
mediator and if he is willing to so 
continue. 
78.  It is unlikely that the 
parties will express 
waiver of objection in 
writing. 
 (4) Upon disclosure under sub-section 
(1) or (2), if all or any party objects to 
the continuation of the Mediator, then 
in case of:- 
(i) institutional mediation, the 
mediation service provider,  may 
proceed to  terminate the mandate of 
the mediator; or 
(ii) private mediation, the objecting 
party or parties will be free to 
terminate the mandate of mediator, 
after giving due notice to the 
mediator. 
79.  It is unlikely that all 
parties will agree to 
replace the mediator, 
therefore, the 
proposed changes are 
to be made and the 
Section can be re-
drafted as proposed. 
 
Giving of notice to 
mediator before 
termination is 
essential as it goes 
with the natural 
justice and provisions 
of Section 13.  
Termination of 
mandate of 
mediator 
13. (1) A mediation service provider, 
may terminate the mandate of a 
mediator: 
(i) upon the receipt of application 
80.   
243

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 15 of 68 
 
from the party(ies) under clause (i) of 
sub-section (4) of section 12; or  
(ii) upon the receipt of 
information about the mediator being 
involved in a matter of conflict of 
interest from participants or any other 
person; or.  
(iii) Where he withdraws from 
office for any reason. 
 
Provided that termination under 
clause(i) and  (ii) shall be effected 
only if, after giving a hearing to the 
mediator, mediation service provider 
finds that there is a justifiable doubt 
as to the mediator’s independence or 
impartiality and that the same has 
been brought to the notice of parties 
and the parties agrees to replace the 
mediator. 
 
 (2) Upon the receipt of information 
under clause (ii) of sub-section (1), 
the parties have the option to waive 
any objection and the same shall be 
construed as the consent of parties to 
continue with the same mediator and 
if he is willing to so continue. 
81.  It is unlikely that the 
parties will express 
waiver of objection in 
writing. 
Replacement of 
mediator 
14. Upon termination of mediator- 
(i) in case of private mediation under 
clause (ii) of subsection (4) of section 
12, the parties may, by mutual 
consent, appoint another mediator 
within a period of 7 days from such 
termination; and 
(ii) in case of institutional mediation 
under section 13 the mediation 
service provider shall appoint another 
mediator from the panel maintained 
by it within 7 days from such 
termination. 
 
82.   
 CHAPTER 4 
MEDIATION PROCESS 
83.   
Territorial 15. 84.  As this Chapter deals 
244

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 16 of 68 
 
Jurisdiction (1) The Mediation under this Act 
shall take place within the territorial 
jurisdiction of the Court or Tribunal 
of competent jurisdiction to decide 
the subject matter of dispute. 
 
Provided that on the mutual consent 
of the parties mediation process can 
be conducted at any place outside the 
territorial jurisdiction referred to in 
this section. 
with mediation 
process, it is 
necessary to define 
the mediation process 
at the outset.   
 (2) In case the mediated settlement 
agreement is reached between the 
parties as specified under sub-section 
(2) of section 21 then the same shall 
be registered within the territorial 
jurisdiction of the Court or Tribunal 
of competent jurisdiction to decide 
the subject matter of dispute in 
accordance with  sub-section (7) of 
section 21.  
 
Provided, that, if the parties require 
that the terms of the mediated 
settlement agreement should remain 
confidential, they shall file a report 
with the details of the mediator, 
mediation service provider, parties, 
the date of the commencement of 
mediation and date of settlement 
agreement and the fact that the parties 
require the terms of such settlement 
to remain confidential.  
85.  The proposed 
proviso is essential 
as the parties may 
want the terms of 
the settlement to 
remain confidential 
and be reluctant to 
file the Mediated 
Settlement 
Agreement for 
registration. The 
parties may furnish 
the required details 
before the 
jurisdictional Court, 
Tribunal and the 
unique registration 
number as under 
Section 21(7) can 
also be issued based 
on such filing.   
Commencement 
of mediation 
16. The mediation process under this 
part with respect to a particular 
dispute shall be deemed to have 
commenced from the date fixed for 
the first appearance of the parties 
before the mediator. 
86.  Mediation is a 
process not a 
proceeding. 
Conduct of 
mediation 
17.  (1) Mediation under this Act, 
whether institutional or ad-hoc, shall 
be conducted in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act. 
87.  This Section relating 
to conduct of 
mediation process 
requires various 
stages as proposed 
and drafted.  
 (2) The mediator shall assist the 88.   
245

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 17 of 68 
 
parties in an independent, neutral and 
impartial manner in their attempt to 
reach an amicable settlement of their 
dispute, but the mediator shall at all 
times be in control of the process.  
 (3) The mediator shall at all times be 
guided by the principles of objectivity 
and fairness and protect the 
voluntariness, confidentiality, and 
self-determination of the parties, and 
the standards for professional, ethical 
conduct specified by the Council. 
89.   
 (4) The mediator shall inform the 
parties expressly that he only 
facilitates in arriving at a decision to 
resolve the dispute(s) and that he may 
not impose any settlement nor give 
any assurance that the mediation will 
result in a settlement. 
(5)  (i) Participation in mediation by 
the parties shall be voluntary at all 
times, and subject to other provisions 
of this Act a party may withdraw 
from mediation at any time; (ii) a 
party may be  accompanied to the 
mediation and assisted by any person, 
including a lawyer, consultant, 
adviser or expert, who is not a party; 
and/ or (iii) a party may  obtain 
independent legal advice at any time 
during the mediation. 
(6) The mediation process may 
include the mediator taking such 
measures as may be considered 
appropriate, taking into account the 
circumstances of the case, including 
meeting with parties and/or 
participants, jointly and/or separately, 
as frequently as deemed fit by the 
mediator, both in order to convene the 
mediation, and during the mediation 
for the orderly conduct of the process 
and to maintain its integrity. 
90.  Section 19(1) and (2) 
which provides for  
“parties alone 
responsible for taking 
decision”  are better 
suited to be part of 
the “mediation 
process” under 
Section 17. Hence, 
they are, with 
required changes, 
being moved as 
Section 17(4) and (5) 
respectively.  
Consequently, 
existing Section 
17(4), (5), (6) will be 
renumbered as 17(6), 
(7) and (8) 
respectively. And a 
new sub-section 17(9) 
is proposed to be 
added which is 
essential for gathering 
the required and 
relevant information 
by the mediator.    
 (7) The mediator shall not be bound 
by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(5 of 1908) or the Indian Evidence 
91.   
246

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 18 of 68 
 
Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), but he shall be, 
in a given case, free to seek assistance 
of an expert on the subject, under 
intimation to the parties.  
 (8) The mediator with the consent of 
the parties shall determine the 
language or languages to be used in 
the mediation process. 
92.   
 (9) At any stage of mediation, the 
Mediator may request a party to 
submit to him such additional 
information as he deems necessary 
and appropriate.   
93.  This is proposed 
addition and is 
essential for gathering 
the required and 
relevant information 
by the mediator. 
Role of 
Mediator 
18. While conducting mediation as 
per Section 17, the mediator shall 
attempt to facilitate voluntary 
resolution of the dispute(s) by the 
parties, and communicate the view of 
each party to the other to the extent 
agreed to by them, assist them in 
identifying issues, advancing better 
understanding s, clarifying priorities, 
exploring areas of possible settlement 
and generating options in an attempt 
to resolve the dispute(s), emphasizing 
that it is the responsibility of the 
parties to take decision which affect 
them. 
94.  These words are 
added to remind the 
mediator about his 
conducting the 
mediation following 
the features and 
characteristics 
enumerated in 
Section 17. 
Misunderstanding is a 
negative connotation. 
And, Compromise is 
also a negative word 
and  is assumed  as 
forcing the party to 
compromise. 
Therefore, 
“misunderstanding” 
and  “compromise” 
are not used in 
mediation.  
Parties alone 
responsible for 
taking decision. 
19.  95.  Re-numbered and 
moved as Section 
17(4) and (5) with the 
proposed changes.  
  96.   
Time-limit for 
completion of 
mediation 
20. (1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, mediation under 
this Act shall be completed within a 
period of ninety days from the date of 
commencement of mediation. 
97.  Though time limit is 
ideal, but the 
mediation being party 
autonomy process, 
the time limit should 
be left to the 
247

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 19 of 68 
 
discretion of the 
parties with the 
consent of the 
mediator. In many 
complex commercial 
and family matters, 
more time may be 
required for effective 
mediation and holistic 
resolution of all 
disputes. Therefore, if 
the parties consent to 
extension, and it is 
necessitated and 
deemed fit by the 
mediator, they may 
have the option to 
extend. Rigid timeline 
may deprive the 
parties to resolve the 
disputes, there being 
no provision for 
seeking extension 
from the court under 
any circumstance. 
Even otherwise. 
Approaching the 
court for extension 
would further delay 
the process.  
Likewise, 
international 
mediation done in 
India, under the 
agreed rules of 
mediation service 
providers, have 
separate time frames 
under their 
institutional rules. 
Therefore, an 
explanation can be 
added to sub-section 
2, as proposed.  
 (2) The period for mediation 
prescribed under subsection (1) may 
98.   
248

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 20 of 68 
 
be extended for for such further 
period, as may be necessitated, with 
the consent of parties. 
Explanation – for the removal of 
doubts, it is hereby clarified that the 
time frame stipulated under this 
section shall not apply to international 
mediation and domestic mediation 
where parties have agreed for a 
procedure as per the rules of the 
mediation service provider.  
Fee of 
mediation 
20A(1) The Mediator may fix the fee 
in consultation with the parties and 
their counsel, being guided by the 
complexity of the matter and the time 
likely to be taken in the mediation 
process.   
99.  The proposed 
addition is relevant 
for transparency and 
the information of the 
parties about the fee 
etc. that may be 
payable by them. 
 (2) The Mediator may fix the amount 
of initial deposit or supplementary 
deposit, as the case may be, as an 
advance for the costs referred 
hereunder: 
 
a. Fee and expenses of Mediator and 
Associate, if any 
b. Administrative and Secretarial 
expenses 
c. Rental and other miscellaneous 
expenses etc. 
 
100.   
 Explanation (i) in case of institutional 
mediation, the mediator’s fee shall be 
at the rate specified in the Rules of 
Mediation service provider. 
 
Explanation ( ii) unless otherwise 
agreed by the parties differently, in 
case of private mediation the 
mediator fee shall be at the rate  as 
specified by the fee schedule 
prescribed by Mediation Council of 
India.    
 
101.   
249

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 21 of 68 
 
(3) The deposit of fee referred to in 
sub-section (i) and  (ii) shall be 
payable in equal share by the 
parties.Provided, that where one party 
fails to pay his share of the fee, the 
other party may be called upon to pay 
his share: provided further that where 
the other party also does not pay the 
aforesaid share, the mediator may 
suspend or terminate the mediation 
proceedings. 
Mediated 
Settlement 
Agreement 
21. (1) “Mediated Settlement 
Agreement” means and includes an 
agreement or interim agreement in 
writing between some or all of the 
parties resulting from mediation, 
settling some or all of the disputes 
between such parties, and 
authenticated by the mediator. 
Provided that the terms of the 
mediated settlement agreement may 
extend beyond the disputes referred to 
mediation. 
Explanation.— A mediated 
settlement agreement which is void 
under the Indian Contract Act, 1872 
(9 of 1872), shall not be deemed to be 
lawful settlement agreement within 
the meaning of mediated settlement 
agreement. 
102.   
 (2) Where a Mediated Settlement 
Agreement referred to in sub-section 
(1) is reached between the parties in 
regard to all the issues or some of the 
issues, the same shall be reduced in 
writing and signed by the parties. 
103.   
 (3) Subject to provisions of section 26 
and 27, the agreement of the parties 
so signed 
(i) in case of institutional 
mediation shall be submitted to the 
mediator who shall, after 
authenticating the settlement 
agreement, forward the same with a 
covering letter signed by him, to the 
mediation service provider and also 
104.   
250

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 22 of 68 
 
provide a copy of the same to the 
parties. 
(ii) in all other cases, shall be 
submitted to the mediator who shall, 
after authenticating the settlement 
agreement, provide a copy of the 
mediated settlement agreement to all 
the parties . 
 (4) Subject to provisions of section 26 
and 27, where no agreement is arrived 
at between the parties, within the time 
period specified in section 20 or 
where, the mediator is of the view 
that no settlement is possible, -  
(i) The Mediator shall submit a report 
to this effect to the mediation service 
provider in writing in case of 
institutional mediation.  
(ii) In all other cases the mediator 
shall prepare a report to this effect 
and provide a signed copy to all the 
parties.  
 
Provided that the report referred to in 
clause (i) or (ii) above shall not 
disclose the cause for failure of the 
parties to reach a settlement, or any 
other matter or thing referring to their 
conduct, opinions and proposal etc. 
made during the mediation. 
105.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Confidentiality is the 
basic feature of 
mediation.     
 (5) The parties, may, at any time 
during the mediation process, make 
an interim or partial agreement with 
respect to any of the issues forming 
part of the subject matter of the 
mediation. 
106.   
 (6) Any mediated Settlement 
Agreement under this section shall 
also include a settlement agreement 
resulting from online mediation and 
duly signed by the parties by way of 
secure electronic signature or 
otherwise and authenticated by the 
mediator in the like manner. 
107.   
 (7) For the purpose of record, 
mediated settlement agreement 
108.  By making 
registration 
251

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 23 of 68 
 
arrived at between the parties other 
than those arrived in Court annexed 
mediation centres or under section 21 
and 22E of the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987 shall be 
registered with the Authorities 
constituted under the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987 and such 
Authorities shall issue a unique 
registration number to such 
settlements as specified by 
regulations to be made by the 
Authorities. 
 
Provided that the mediated settlement 
agreement reached between the 
parties under sub-section (2) shall be 
registered within the territorial 
jurisdiction of the Court or Tribunal 
of competent jurisdiction to decide 
the subject matter of dispute, as under 
Section 15.  
compulsory, an 
unwanted 
bureaucratic layer is 
being introduced. 
Further, it will also 
create confusion as 
regards the authority 
and the fee etc for 
registration. As non-
registration will not 
impact the 
enforceability, people 
will avoid registration 
and make this 
provision redundant.  
 
In the alternative we 
can have more 
depositories where 
mediated settlement 
could be voluntarily 
registered/ uploaded 
electronically. 
 
In any case, if we are 
to retain registration, 
consequent upon the 
changes in Section 
15(2), this proposed 
proviso is essential.  
 (8) Registration referred to in sub-
section (7) shall be made by either of 
the parties, mediator or mediation 
service provider within a period of 
ninety days from the date of receipt of 
copy of mediated settlement 
agreement: 
 
Provided that mediated settlement 
agreement may be registered after 
expiry of period of ninety days on 
payment of such fee as may be 
specified by the Authorities by way 
of regulations, as under Section 15(2).  
(9) A mediated settlement agreement, 
resulting from a mediation under this 
109.  Consequent upon the 
changes in Section 
15(2), this proposed 
proviso is essential. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The status of 
252

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 24 of 68 
 
part, signed by the parties, and 
authenticated by the mediator shall be 
final and binding on the parties and 
persons, claiming under them, and 
subject to the provisions under 
Section 29, it shall be enforced in 
accordance with the provisions of 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in the 
same manner as if it were a judgment 
and/ or a decree passed by the court 
and may accordingly be relied on by 
any of parties or persons claiming 
through them, by way of defense, set 
off or otherwise in any legal 
proceedings. 
mediated settlement 
agreement (as 
mentioned in exiting 
Section 28(1) and (2), 
can be brought under 
Section 21(9), which 
deals with all aspects 
of mediator 
settlement agreement. 
Confidentiality 22. (1) Subject to the exceptions 
provided in this Act, the mediator, the 
parties and participants in the 
mediation shall keep confidential the 
following matters relating to the 
mediation proceedings: 
 
110.   
 (i) acknowledgements, opinions, 
suggestions, promises, proposals, 
apologies and admissions made 
during the mediation; 
111.   
 (ii) acceptance of or willingness to 
accept proposals made or exchanged 
in the mediation; 
112.   
 (iii) documents prepared solely for 
the purpose of mediation. 
113.   
 (2) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, the mediator, the 
mediation service provider and the 
parties to the mediation agreement 
shall maintain confidentially of all 
mediation proceedings except 
mediated settlement agreement. 
114.   
 (3)  There shall be no audio or video 
or stenographic  recording of any part 
of mediation proceeding by anyone, 
except the terms relating to outcome 
of mediation settlement with the 
115.  Mediation being 
entirely confidential, 
there cannot be any 
recording.  In 
recording 
253

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 25 of 68 
 
consent of the parties.  confidentiality cannot 
be maintained and 
secured.  This sub-
section as exists, can 
be re-drafted as 
proposed: 
 
 
 (4) No party to the mediation shall in 
any proceedings before a Court or 
Tribunal , rely on or introduce as 
evidence any information or 
communication set forth in clauses (i) 
to (iii) of subsection (1), including 
any information in electronic form, or 
verbal communication and the Court 
or Tribunal shall not take cognizance 
of such information or evidence.  
 
Provided that evidence or information 
that is otherwise admissible or subject 
to discovery in proceedings will not 
become inadmissible or protected 
from discovery solely by reason of its 
disclosure or use in a mediation. 
116.   
Admissibility, 
Privilege 
against 
Disclosure 
23. (1) No mediator, party  or 
participant in the mediation, including 
experts and advisors engaged for the 
purpose of the mediation and persons 
involved in the administration of the 
mediation, shall at any time be 
permitted, or compelled to disclose to 
any Court or Tribunal, or in any 
adjudicatory proceedings by 
whatsoever description, any 
communication in mediation, or to 
state the contents or conditions of any 
document or nature or conduct of 
parties during mediation including the 
content of negotiations or offers or 
counter offers with which they have 
become acquainted during the 
mediation. 
 
Provided that nothing in this section 
117.  The privilege against 
disclosure is required 
to be given to not 
only the mediator, but 
also the parties and 
participants. 
Therefore, Section 
23(1) is amended as 
proposed.  
254

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 26 of 68 
 
and section 22 shall protect from 
disclosure information sought or 
provided to prove or dispute a claim 
or complaint of professional 
misconduct or malpractice based on 
conduct occurring during the 
mediation. 
 (2) The provisions of this section will 
not prevent the mediator from 
compiling or disclosing general 
information concerning matters that 
have been subject to mediation, for 
research, reporting or training 
purposes, if the information does not 
expressly or indirectly identify a party 
or participants or the specific disputes 
in the mediation. 
118.   
 (3) There is no privilege or 
confidentiality that will attach to: 
119.   
 (a) a threat or statement of a plan to 
commit an offence punishable under 
law; 
120.   
 (b) information relating to domestic 
violence or child abuse; and 
121.   
 (c) statements made during a 
mediation showing a significant 
imminent threat to public health or 
safety.  
122.   
Termination of 
Mediation 
24. (1) The mediation proceedings 
under this part shall terminate: 
123.   
 (a) On the date of signing and 
authentication of the Mediated 
Settlement Agreement; or 
124.   
 (b) By a declaration of the mediator, 
after consultation with the parties, to 
the effect that further efforts at 
mediation are no longer justified, on 
the date of the declaration; or, 
125.   
 (c) On the date of the communication 
by a party or parties to the mediation 
in writing, addressed to the mediator 
and the other parties to the effect that 
the party wishes to opt out of 
mediation. 
 
Provided that the parties have to 
126.   
255

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 27 of 68 
 
attend at least one mediation session 
before giving such communication. 
 (a) On completion of time period as 
provided under section 20 without 
parties reaching any settlement 
agreement. 
127.   
Depository of 
mediated 
settlement 
agreements. 
25. Deleted 128.   
Court annexed 
mediation 
26. For the purpose of court annexed 
mediation the procedure of 
conducting mediation shall be such as 
may be determined under the practice 
directions or rules framed by the 
Supreme Court or the concerned High 
Courts. 
129.   
Mediation by 
Lok Adalat and 
Permanent Lok 
Adalat 
27. Mediation conducted by Lok 
Adalat and Permanent Lok Adalat 
shall be in accordance with the 
provisions of Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987 and the rules or 
regulations made thereunder. 
130.   
 CHAPTER 5 
STATUS OF MEDIATED 
SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT 
131.   
 28.  132.  These stand shifted to 
Section 21(9).  
Challenge to 
mediated 
settlement 
agreement 
29. (1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law, in any 
case in which the mediated settlement 
agreement is arrived between the 
parties and is sought to be challenged 
by either of the parties, he may apply 
to the Court or Tribunal or other 
Authority of competent jurisdiction 
before which the subject-matter of 
dispute or other proceeding would lie. 
133.   
  134.   
 (2) The Court may refuse to execute 
the Mediation Settlement, if the party 
against whom enforcement is sought, 
furnishes proof that:  
 
(i) The Mediated Settlement 
Agreement is vitiated by;   
135.  There will be 
presumption of 
mediated settlement 
agreement being 
validly entered into, 
unless sproved 
otherwise. The onus 
256

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 28 of 68 
 
(a) Fraud; or 
(b) Corruption; or 
(c) Gross impropriety; or 
(d) Impersonation. 
 
to challenge 
Meditated Settlement 
Agreement would be 
on the party against 
whom the settlement 
is sought to be 
enforced.      
 (ii) The terms of Mediated Settlement 
Agreement 
(a) are null and void, illegal or 
inoperative or incapable of 
being performed under the 
laws of India or  
(b) has been subsequently 
modified or performed or  
(c) are not clear and 
comprehensible or 
(d) are against the public policy 
  
136.   
 (iii) The subject matter of the 
dispute is not capable of 
settlement by mediation under the 
laws of India 
137.   
 (4) An application for challenging the 
mediated settlement agreement may 
not be made after six months have 
elapsed from the date on which the 
party making that application has 
received the copy of mediated 
settlement agreement under section 
21(3) of this Act. 
 
Provided that if the Court is satisfied 
that the applicant was prevented by 
sufficient cause from making the 
application within the said period of 
six months it may entertain the 
application within a further period of 
thirty days, but not thereafter. 
 
Further, provided that if the 
Settlement Agreement has been 
completely acted upon by the parties 
or accepted by the Court or the 
Tribunal or the Authority under 
Section 21(7) and 21(9) of the Act, 
138.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The additional 
proviso is essential. If 
the settlement 
agreement has been 
acted upon as stated 
in proposed 
257

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 29 of 68 
 
there would not lie challenge on any 
ground whatsoever. 
additional proviso, 
there cannot lie 
challenge.  If 
challenge is allowed 
for indefinite period, 
there would never be 
finality to the 
settlement. 
Costs 30. Unless otherwise agreed by the 
parties all costs of mediation, 
including the fees of the mediator and 
the charges of the mediation service 
provider shall be borne equally by the 
parties. 
139.   
Exclusion of 
limitation 
31. Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Limitation Act, 1963 
or in any other law for the time being 
in force, in computing the period of 
limitation specified for any 
proceedings in respect of which a 
mediation has been undertaken under 
this Part, the period from the date of 
commencement of mediation under 
section 16 until 
(i) termination of the mandate of 
mediator under clause (ii) of sub-
section (4) of section 12 in case of 
ad-hoc mediation; or 
(ii) termination of the mandate of 
mediator under sub-section (1) of 
section 13 in case of institutional 
mediation; or 
(iii) submission of report under 
sub-section (4) of section 21 
shall be excluded. 
140.   
 CHAPTER 6 
ONLINE MEDIATION 
141.   
Online 
mediation 
32.(1) Online Mediation means 
conducting mediation including pre-
litigation mediation as defined in this 
Act by the use of applications and 
computer networks, but not limited to 
an encrypted email service, secure 
chat rooms and conferencing by video 
or audio mode or both. 
 
142.   
258

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 30 of 68 
 
(2) The process of online mediation 
shall be in such manner as may be 
specified by the Council by way of 
regulations, in the light of provisions 
of Information Technology Act, 
2000. 
(3) The conduct of online mediation 
shall be in circumstances, which 
ensure that the essential elements of 
integrity of proceedings and 
confidentiality are maintained at all 
times and Mediator may take such 
appropriate steps in this regard as the 
circumstances may require to achieve 
such end. 
(4) All provisions of this Act shall 
apply to online mediation 
proceedings. 
Use of online 
mediation 
33. Online mediation may be resorted 
to either wholly or in part at any stage 
of mediation process with the written 
consent of the parties. 
143.   
Service and 
production of 
documents 
34. Mediation communications in the 
case of online mediation shall, unless 
otherwise specified by Council by 
way of regulations, be as provided by 
the provisions of the Information 
Technology Act 2000 or any other 
law for the time being in force and 
shall ensure the basic principles of 
party autonomy and confidentiality. 
144.   
 CHAPTER 7 
MEDIATION COUNCIL OF 
INDIA 
145.   
Establishment 
and 
Incorporation of 
Mediation 
Council of 
India 
35. (1) The Central Government shall, 
by notification in the Official gazette, 
establish for the purposes of this Act, 
a Council to be known as Mediation 
Council of India to perform duties 
and discharge functions specified 
under this Act. 
146.   
 (2) The Council shall be a body 
corporate by the name aforesaid, 
having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power, subject to 
the provisions of this Act, to acquire, 
147.   
259

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 31 of 68 
 
hold and dispose of property, both 
moveable and immoveable, and to 
enter into contract, and shall, by the 
said name, sue or be sued. 
 (3) The head office of the Council 
shall be at Delhi or at such other 
place as may be notified by the 
Central Government. 
148.   
 (4) The Council may, in consultation 
with the Central Government, 
establish offices at other places in 
India and abroad. 
149.   
 (5) The Council in consultation with 
the Central Government and State 
and Union Territory Governments 
to  establish State level Mediation 
Councils in the States and Union 
Territory depending, upon their 
need and requirement and all 
these State Mediation Councils 
will act and function under the 
overall supervision of the 
Council.  
150.  As it will be difficult 
for the Central 
Council to oversee 
and manage all 
activities for the 
entire country, State 
Level Mediation 
Councils will be 
required to be 
established. 
Composition of 
the Mediation 
Council of 
India 
36. (1) The Council shall consist of 
the following members: 
151.  At appropriate places 
under this section it 
can be added that: 
Chairperson, full time 
member, part-time 
member, secretaries 
and the chief 
executive officers 
shall be 
knowledgeable in 
ADR and particularly 
mediation.  
 (a) A person who has been, a Judge of 
the Supreme Court or, Chief Justice 
of a High Court or, a Judge of a High 
Court or an eminent person, having 
special knowledge and experience in 
the conduct or administration of 
mediation, to be appointed by the 
Central Government-Chairperson; 
152.   
 (b) a person having knowledge and 
experience in law related to alternate 
dispute resolution mechanisms, to be 
153.   
260

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 32 of 68 
 
appointed by the Central 
Government-Full Time Member; 
 (c) an eminent academician having 
experience in research and teaching in 
the field of mediation and alternate 
dispute resolution laws, to be 
appointed by the Central 
Government- Full Time Member; 
154.   
 (d) Secretary to the Government of 
India in the Department of Legal 
Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice 
or his representative not below the 
rank of Joint Secretary-Member, ex 
officio; 
155.   
 (e) Secretary to the Government of 
India in the Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance or 
his representative not below the rank 
of Joint Secretary- Member, ex 
officio; and 
156.   
 (f) Chief Executive Officer-Member-
Secretary, ex 
officio. 
157.   
 (2) The Chairperson and Members of 
the Council, other than ex officio 
Members, shall hold office as such, 
for a term of four years from the date 
on which they enter upon their office 
and shall be eligible for re-
appointment: 
 
Provided that no Chairperson or 
Member, other than ex officio 
Member, shall hold office as such 
after he has attained the age of 
seventy years in the case of 
Chairperson and sixty-seven years in 
the case of Member. 
158.   
 (3) The salaries, allowances and other 
terms and conditions of the 
Chairperson and Members referred to 
in clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section 
(1) shall be such as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government. 
159.   
Vacancies, etc., 
not to invalidate 
37. No act or proceeding of the 
Council shall be invalid merely by 
160.   
261

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 33 of 68 
 
proceedings of 
Council. 
reason of— 
(a) any vacancy or any defect, in the 
constitution of the Council; 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a 
person acting as a Chairperson or 
Member of the Council; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure 
of the Council not affecting the 
merits of the case. 
Resignation of 
Members. 
38. The Chairperson or the Full-time 
Member may, by notice in writing, 
under his hand addressed to the 
Central Government, resign his 
office: 
 
Provided that the Chairperson or the 
Full-time Member shall, unless he is 
permitted by the Central Government 
to relinquish his office sooner, 
continue to hold office until the 
expiry of three months from the date 
of receipt of such notice or until a 
person duly appointed as his 
successor enters upon his office or 
until the expiry of his term of office, 
whichever is earlier. 
161.   
Removal of 
Chairperson or 
Member. 
39. (1) The Central Government may, 
remove a Chairperson or Member 
from his office if he— 
(a)  is an undischarged insolvent; or 
(b)  has engaged at any time, during 
his term of office, in any paid 
employment without the 
permission of the Central 
Government; or 
(c)  has been convicted of an offence 
which, in the opinion of the 
Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or 
(d)  has acquired such financial or 
other interest as is likely to affect 
prejudicially his functions as a 
Chairperson or Member; or 
(e)  has so abused his position as to 
render his continuance in office 
prejudicial to the public interest; or 
162.   
262

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 34 of 68 
 
(f) has become physically or mentally 
incapable of acting as a Chairperson 
or Member. 
 Provided that where a Chairperson or 
Member is proposed to be removed 
on any ground, he shall be informed 
of charges against him and given an 
opportunity of being heard in respect 
of those charges. 
163.   
Appointment of 
experts and 
constitution of 
Committees 
thereof. 
40. The Council may, appoint such 
experts and constitute such 
Committees of experts as it may 
consider necessary to discharge its 
functions on such terms and 
conditions as may be specified by the 
regulations. 
164.   
Secretariat of 
the Council 
41. (7) There shall be a Chief 
Executive Officer of the Council, 
who shall be responsible for day-to-
day administration of the Council. 
165.   
 (2) The qualifications, appointment 
and other terms and conditions of the 
service of the Chief Executive Officer 
shall be such as may be specified by 
regulations by the Council. 
166.   
 (3) The Chief Executive Officer shall 
discharge such functions and perform 
such duties as may be specified by the 
regulations. 
167.   
 (4) There shall be a Secretariat to the 
Council consisting of such number of 
officers and employees as may be 
prescribed by the Central 
Government. 
168.   
 (5) The qualifications, appointment 
and other terms and conditions of the 
service of the employees and other 
officers of the Council shall be such 
as may be specified by Council by 
way of regulations.’. 
169.   
Duties and 
Functions of the 
Mediation 
Council of 
India 
42. (1) The Council shall have the 
powers and functions, as provided in 
sub-section (2), for the purposes of 
this Act. 
170.   
 (2) For the purposes of performing 171.   
263

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 35 of 68 
 
the duties and discharging the 
functions under this Act, the Council 
shall - 
(a) endeavor to develop India to be a 
robust centre for domestic and 
international mediation; 
 
(aa) endeavor to promote domestic 
and international mediation in India 
through appropriate policies and 
guidelines. 
 
(b) frame regulations and guidelines 
for the conduct of mediation; 
 (c) perform the following functions 
with regard to Mediators: 
(i) frame policies and lay down 
norms, qualification and 
experience for accreditation of 
mediators as may be specified by 
regulations ; 
(ii) lay down the guidelines for the 
continuous education, 
certification and assessment of 
mediators by the recognised 
mediation institutes; 
(iii) lay down norms for registration 
of mediators. 
(iv) register mediators and renew, 
withdraw, suspend or cancel such 
registrations on the basis of 
conditions as may be specified in 
the regulations; 
(v) lay down by way of regulations 
standards for professional ethical 
conduct of mediators; 
172.   
 (d) perform the following functions 
with regard to training and 
education of mediators: 
(i) hold training workshops and 
courses in the area of mediation in 
collaboration with mediation 
service providers, law firms and 
universities both Indian and 
International, and any other 
mediation institutions; and 
173.   
264

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 36 of 68 
 
(ii) enter into MoUs/ agreements with 
domestic and international bodies 
or organisations or institutions in 
this regard; 
 (e) perform the following functions 
with regard to Mediation 
Institutions and Mediation Service 
Providers: 
(i) recognition of Mediation 
Institutions and Mediation 
Service Providers and renew, 
withdraw, suspend or cancel such 
recognition ; 
(ii) specify the criteria for 
recognition of Mediation 
Institutions and Mediation 
Service Providers; 
(iii) lay down norms for the grading 
of Mediation Service Providers; 
(iv) call for any information or record 
of Mediation Institutions and 
Mediation Service Providers; 
(v) lay down standards for 
professional ethical conduct of 
the Mediation Institution, and 
Mediation Service Provider; 
174.   
 (f) publish such information, data, 
research studies and such other 
information as may be required; 
175.   
 (g) To maintain an electronic 
depository of the mediated 
settlement agreements made in 
India and for such other records 
related thereto in such manner as 
may be specified by the 
regulations. 
176.   
 (h) perform any other act or function 
as may be decided by the Central 
Government or in furtherance of 
the objectives of the Act. 
177.   
 CHAPTER 8 
MEDIATION SERVICE 
PROVIDER AND MEDIATION 
INSTITUTES 
178.   
Mediation 
Service 
43. The mediation service provider 
recognised by the Council as per the 
179.   
265

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 37 of 68 
 
Providers provisions of this Act shall be graded 
by the Council in accordance with the 
Regulations made by it in this behalf. 
Functions of 
Mediation 
Service 
44. The Mediation Service Providers 
shall perform the following functions, 
namely - 
(a) Accreditation of mediators 
and maintain panel of mediators. 
(b) to provide the services of 
mediator for conduct of mediation. 
(c) to provide all facilities, 
secretarial assistance and 
infrastructure for the efficient conduct 
of mediations. 
(d) to promote good professional 
and ethical conduct amongst 
mediator. 
(e) Registration of mediated 
settlement agreement in accordance 
with the provisions of section 21. 
(f) Such other functions as may 
be provided by the Council by way of 
regulations. 
180.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Since Section 25 is 
deleted. 
Mediation 
Institutes 
45. The Council shall recognise 
Mediation Institutes in accordance 
with the regulations made by it in this 
behalf. 
181.   
Functions of 
Mediation 
Institutes 
46. The Mediation Institutes shall 
function as per the regulations made 
by the Council. 
182.   
 PART II 
COMMUNITY MEDIATION 
183.   
Community 
mediation 
47. (1) Any difference, conflict or 
dispute likely to affect peace, 
harmony and tranquility as 
enumerated in Schedule, but limited 
thereto, amongst the individuals, 
groups, organisations,  residents or 
families of any area or locality may 
be settled through community 
mediation. 
184.  The breadth of 
services appropriate 
for community 
mediation will be 
large and Schedule 
will only be 
illustrative of those 
services.  
A new Schedule can 
be added at 
appropriate place for 
 (2) In order to facilitate settlement of 
a dispute under sub-section (1), 
following authorities shall have 
185.  SDMs, and DMs are 
not the competent or 
eligible officers, 
266

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 38 of 68 
 
power to notify panel of mediators 
which may be revised from time to 
time as per need: 
(i) The State Legal Service 
Authority, District Legal Service 
Authority or Taluka Legal Service 
Authority, as the case may be; 
(ii) For the purpose of settling the 
disputes through community 
mediation, the Mediation Institute or 
Mediation Service Provider if any, 
established by Center or State 
Government or other Authority, may 
constitute a panel of mediators. 
being unaware of the 
concept, philosophy 
and characteristic s of 
mediation.  Mediation 
requires special 
aptitude and training  
of skills and 
techniques, which 
these officers do not 
possess.  They are 
otherwise over -
burdened with their 
works.  Constitution 
of panel of good 
mediators by them is 
extremely impossible. 
 
The powers need to 
be given to Mediation 
Service Provider 
established by Central 
Government or State 
Governments or any 
other authority to 
constitute of panels of 
mediators. 
 
 (3) The following persons may be 
included in the panel notified 
pursuant to sub-section (2); 
(a) Lawyers or person having legal 
educational background.  
(b) persons of standing and integrity 
who are respected in the 
community. 
(c) Any local person including a state 
awardee whose contribution to the 
society has been recognised by the 
State 
(d) Representative of area/resident 
welfare associations. 
(e) Any other person deemed 
appropriate. 
186.   
 
 
The community 
disputes invariably 
have legal issues.  It 
is experienced that 
people with legal 
background can 
address such issues 
adequately.   
 
 
(4) While making panel pursuant to 
sub-section (3) the representation of 
187.   
267

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 39 of 68 
 
 
 
 
Establishment 
and 
Maintenance of 
Community 
Mediation 
Service 
Provider  
women of above qualification, may 
also be considered. 
 
47A. Every State Government and 
Union Territory  shall establish and 
maintain community mediation 
service provider and/ or  community 
mediation institute in its respective 
jurisdiction, with the  headquarter at 
its Capital. Further establishments in 
other areas of the State and/ or Union 
Territory may be formed on as 
needed basis. These establishments 
will be governed by the mediation 
rules as may be framed by those 
mediation services providers/ 
institutes, having regard to the 
provisions contained in this Act.  
Procedure for 
Community 
mediation 
48. (1) The mediator(s) shall conduct 
the mediation as for as possible in 
accordance with the provisions of the 
this Act and shall endeavor for 
resolving disputes through 
community based mediation and 
provide assistance to parties for 
resolving disputes amicably. 
188.   
 (2) Any community based mediation 
shall be conducted by sole a panel of 
community mediators who shall 
devise suitable procedure for the 
purpose of resolving the dispute. 
189.   
 (3) In every case where a mediated 
settlement agreement is arrived at 
through mediation the same may be 
recorded in writing with signature of 
the party or parties and authenticated 
by the mediator(s) and in other cases 
a failure report may be submitted to 
the authorities under Section 47(2), as 
the case may be. 
190.   
 (4) The mediated settlement 
agreement signed by the parties and 
authenticated by the Mediators shall 
be dealt in the manner as provided 
under sub-section (7) of section 21 of 
this Act. 
191.   
268

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 40 of 68 
 
 PART III 
ENFORCEMENT OF 
INTERNATIONAL 
COMMERCIAL SETTLEMENT 
AGREEMENTS RESULTING 
FROM MEDIATION 
 
192.   
 CHAPTER 1 
INTERNATIONAL 
COMMERCIAL SETTLEMENT 
AGREEMENTS-THE 
SINGAPORE CONVENTION 
193.  Since we have used 
words Mediated 
Settlement 
Agreement in Section 
49, we may amend in 
all sections the 
"Settlement 
Agreement” to 
“Mediated Settlement 
Agreement”.  
 
There being no 
provision to challenge 
any order passed by 
the Courts under this 
part, and first appeal 
being a fundamental 
right, a provision is 
needed under this part 
providing first appeal 
against such orders 
passed by the Courts. 
Therefore, a new 
section as 52A has 
been proposed.   
Definitions 49. In this Part, unless the context 
otherwise requires, “mediated 
settlement agreement” means an 
settlement agreement on differences 
between persons arising out of legal 
relationships, whether contractual or 
not, considered as commercial under 
the law in force in India, made on or 
after the (date of ratification of 
UNISA) in pursuance of an 
agreement in writing for mediation to 
which the Convention set forth in the 
First Schedule applies. 
194.   
 Provided that the provisions of this 195.   
269

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 41 of 68 
 
Part shall not apply to settlement 
agreements to which Union of India 
is a party, or to which any 
governmental agencies or any person 
acting on behalf of a governmental 
agency is a party. 
International 
Mediation 
Settlement 
Agreement 
50. (1) Subject to the provisions of 
section 52 settlement Agreements 
shall be treated as binding for all 
purposes and shall be enforceable 
under this Part against the persons or 
any person claiming through or under 
them, as between whom it was made. 
196.   
 (2) The Settlement Agreement be 
relied upon by any of the said persons 
by way of defence, set-off or 
otherwise in any legal proceedings in 
India and any reference in this Part to 
enforce the International Commercial 
Mediation Settlement Agreement 
shall be construed and include 
reference to the same. 
197.   
Enforcement 51. (1) The Party applying for the 
enforcement of a Settlement 
Agreement shall, at the time of the 
application, produce before the High 
Court - 
(a) the Settlement Agreement or a 
copy thereof duly attested by the 
institution that administered the 
mediation in any of the manner 
required by law of the country in 
which it was made; and 
(b) such other evidence as may be 
required by the High Court to prove 
that the Settlement Agreement is 
covered under the Convention. 
198.  As this Section 51(1) 
deals with jurisdiction 
of court for 
enforcement of 
international 
settlement agreement, 
to comply with the 
objective of 
commercial courts 
act, suitable insertion 
is to be made as 
Explanation 2  
 (2) If the Settlement Agreement and 
other evidence to be produced in 
terms of sub-section (l) is in a foreign 
language, the parties seeking to 
enforce the Settlement Agreement 
shall produce a translation into 
English duly certified as correct by a 
diplomatic or consular agent of the 
country to which that party belongs; 
199.   
270

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 42 of 68 
 
or certified as correct in such other 
manner as may be sufficient 
according to the law in force in India. 
 (3) Subject to sub-section (1) and (2) 
above a party to an international 
settlement agreement may — 
(a) apply to the High Court to record the 
agreement as an order of court for the 
purposes of invoking the agreement 
in any court proceedings in India 
involving a dispute concerning a 
matter that the party to the 
international settlement agreement 
claims was already resolved by the 
agreement, in order to prove that the 
matter has already been resolved; or 
200.   
 (b) in any proceedings in the High 
Court,— 
(i) to which the party to the 
international settlement agreement is 
a party; and 
(ii) which involves a dispute 
concerning a matter that the party 
claims was already resolved by the 
agreement, 
apply to the High Court to take the 
agreement on record in the 
proceedings in order to prove that the 
matter has already been resolved. 
201.   
 Explanation – 
(1) In this Part, "High Court" means 
the High Court having original 
jurisdiction to decide the 
questions forming the subject 
matter of the Settlement 
Agreement if the same had been 
subject matter of a suit on its 
original civil jurisdiction and in 
other cases, in the High Court 
having jurisdiction to hear 
appeals from judgments and 
decrees of Courts subordinate to 
such High Court. 
(2) Where such application has to be 
filed in High Court, it shall be 
filed, heard and disposed by the 
202.   
271

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 43 of 68 
 
Commercial Division, where 
such Commercial Division has 
been constituted.  
Conditions For 
Enforcement of 
Settlement 
Agreement 
52. (1) Enforcement of a Settlement 
Agreement may be refused at the 
request of the party against whom it is 
sought to be enforced only if that 
party furnishes to the High Court 
proof that- 
(a) parties to the Mediation 
Agreement were, under the law 
applicable to them, under some 
incapacity or the said Agreement was 
null and void, inoperative or 
incapable of being performed under 
the law to which the parties have 
subjected it; or failing any indication 
thereon, under the law of the country 
where the International Mediation 
Settlement Agreement is sought to be 
enforced ; or 
(b) Is not binding, or is not final, 
according to its terms; or 
(c) Has been subsequently 
modified; or 
(d) The obligations in the 
settlement agreement have been 
performed or are not clear or 
comprehensible; or 
(e) Granting relief would be 
contrary to the terms of the settlement 
agreement; or 
(f) There was a serious breach by 
the mediator of standards applicable 
to the mediator or the mediation 
without which breach that party 
would not have entered into the 
settlement agreement; or 
(g) There was a failure by the 
mediator to disclose to the parties, 
circumstances that raise justifiable 
doubts as to the mediator's 
impartiality or independence and such 
failure to disclose had a material 
impact or undue influence on a party 
without which failure that party 
203.   
272

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 44 of 68 
 
would not have entered into the 
settlement agreement; 
 
Provided that, if decisions on the 
matters submitted to mediation can be 
separated from those not submitted, 
that part of the Settlement Agreement 
which contains settlement on matters 
submitted to Mediation shall be 
enforced; 
 (2) Enforcement of the Settlement 
Agreement may also be refused if the 
High Court finds – 
 
(a) the subject matter of disputes is 
not capable of settlement by 
mediation under the law of India; 
or 
(b) the Settlement Agreement was 
induced or effected by fraud or 
corruption 
(c) It is in contravention with the 
public policy of India; 
204.   
 Explanation 1.—For the avoidance of 
any doubt, it is clarified that a 
mediated settlement agreement is in 
conflict with the public policy of 
India, only if,— 
(i) the making of the settlement 
agreement was induced or 
affected by fraud or corruption; 
or 
(ii) it is in contravention with the 
fundamental policy of Indian 
law; or 
(iii) it is in conflict with the most 
basic notions of morality or 
justice. 
205.   
Appealable 
Orders  
 
 
 
Saving 
52A. 
(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any law for the time 
being in force, any appeal shall 
lie form the following orders 
only to the Court competent to 
hear appeals from original 
decrees of the court passing the 
206.   
273

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 45 of 68 
 
order allowing or refusing to 
allow enforcement of an 
International Mediated 
Settlement Agreement under 
Section 52.  
(2)  No second appeal shall lie from 
an order passed in the appeal 
under this Section, but nothing in 
this section shall affect or take 
away any right to appeal to the 
Supreme Court.  
 
53. Nothing in this Part shall 
prejudice any rights of any person 
under the Settlement Agreement or 
pending enforcement proceedings in 
India of any Settlement Agreement or 
of availing the said remedy as if this 
chapter had not been enacted. 
 PART IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
207.   
Mediation Fund 54. (1) There shall be a fund to be 
called 'Mediation Fund' (hereinafter 
referred to as 'Fund') for the purposes 
of promotion, facilitation and 
encouragement of mediation under 
this Act. The fund shall be 
administered by the Council. 
208.   
 (2) There shall be credited to the fund 
the following, namely: 
(a) grants made by the Central 
Government or the State 
Government for the purposes of 
the Fund; 
(b) amounts deposited by persons 
as contributions to the Fund; 
(c) amounts received in the Fund 
from any other source; 
(d) interest on the above or other 
income received out of the 
investment made from the Fund. 
209.   
 (3) The accounts of the Council shall 
be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India and any 
expenditure incurred by him in 
connection with such audit shall be 
210.   
274

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 46 of 68 
 
payable by the Council to the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India. 
Power of the 
Central 
Government to 
Issue Directions 
55. (1) Without prejudice to the 
foregoing provisions of this Act, the 
Council shall, in exercise of its 
powers or the performance of its 
functions under this Act, be bound by 
such directions on questions of policy 
as the Central Government may give 
in writing to it from time to time : 
 
Provided that the views of the 
Council shall be taken into 
consideration before any direction is 
given under this sub-section. 
211.   
 (2) The decision of the Central 
Government whether a question is 
one of policy or not shall be final. 
212.   
Protection of 
Action taken in 
Good Faith 
56. No suit, prosecution or other legal 
proceedings shall lie against the 
Government of India or any of its 
officer, or the Chairperson, Member 
or Officer of the Council or the 
Mediator, Mediation Institutes, 
Mediation Service Providers which is 
done or is intended to be done in 
good faith under this Act or the rules 
or regulations made there under. 
213.   
Power to make 
rules 
57. (1) The Central Government may, 
by notification in the official gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the 
provisions of this Act. 
214.   
 (2) In particular, and without 
prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may 
make provision for— 
(a) the terms and conditions and the 
salaries and allowances payable to 
the Chairperson and Fulltime 
Members under section 36(3); 
(b) the number of officers and 
employees of the Secretariat of 
the Council under section 41(4); 
(c) any other matter in respect of 
which provision is to be made 
215.   
275

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 47 of 68 
 
under this Act. 
Power to make 
Regulations 
58. (1) The Council may, with the 
previous approval of the Central 
Government, by notification, make 
regulations consistent with this Act 
and the rules made thereunder to 
carry out the provisions of this Act. 
216.   
 (2) In particular, and without 
prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such regulations 
may make provision for— 
(a) Bodies that may be specified 
mediation service provider under 
3 (i). 
(b) Specify qualification, experience 
and accreditation for mediators of 
foreign nationality under section 
10(1). 
(c) Maintenance of Depository of 
mediated settlement agreements 
under section 25. 
(d) Specify manner of process of 
conducting online mediation 
under section 32. 
(e) Mediation communication under 
section 34. 
(f) Terms and conditions of 
Committees of experts under 
section 40. 
(g) qualifications, appointment and 
other terms and conditions of the 
service of the Chief Executive 
Officer under section 41(2). 
(h) Functions of Chief Executive 
Officer under section 41(3). 
(i) the qualifications, experience, 
method of selection and the 
functions of the employees and 
other officers of the Council under 
section 41(5). 
(j) Manner of conduct of mediation 
under section 42(2)(b). 
(k) frame policies and lay down 
norms, qualification and 
experience for accreditation of 
mediators under section 
217.   
276

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 48 of 68 
 
42(2)(c)(i). 
(l) Specify conditions for registration 
of mediators and renewal, 
withdrawal, suspension or 
cancellations of such registrations 
under section 42(2)(c)(iv). 
(m) lay down standards for 
professional ethical conduct of 
mediators under section 
42(2)(c)(v). 
(n) Norms for grading of mediation 
service provider under section 43. 
(o) Recognition of mediation 
institutes under section 45. 
(p) Functions to be performed by 
mediation institutes under section 
46. 
(q) any other matter in respect of 
which provision is necessary for 
the performance of functions of 
the Council under this Act. 
Rules and 
Regulations to 
be laid before 
Parliament 
59. Every rule and regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule 
or regulation or both Houses agree 
that the rule or regulation should not 
be made, the rule or regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done 
under that rule or regulation. 
218.   
Power to 
remove 
difficulties 
60. (1) If any difficulty arises in 
giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by 
219.   
277

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 49 of 68 
 
order published in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act, as may appear to it to be 
necessary for removing the difficulty: 
 
Provided that no such order shall be 
made under this section after the 
expiry of a period of three years from 
the date of commencement of this 
Act. 
 (2) Every order made under this 
section shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament. 
220.   
Act not in 
derogation.- 
61. The provisions of this Act shall be 
in addition to and not in derogation of 
the provisions of any other law 
providing for mediation for the time 
being in force. 
221.   
Appointed 
Dates, Repeal 
and Savings 
62. This Act shall not apply to, or in 
relation to, any mediation 
commenced before the coming into 
force of this Act. 
222.   
Amendment to 
Indian Contract 
Act, 1872 
63. The Indian Contract Act, 1872, 
shall be amended in the manner 
specified in the Schedule III 
appended to this Act. 
223.   
Amendment to 
Arbitration and 
Conciliation 
Act, 1996 
64. The Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996 shall be amended in the 
manner specified in the Schedule IV 
appended to this Act. 
224.   
Amendments to 
the Code of 
Civil 
Procedure, 1908 
65. The Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 shall be amended in the manner 
specified in the Schedule V appended 
to this Act. 
225.   
Amendments to 
the Commercial 
Courts Act, 
2015 
66. The Commercial Courts Act, 
2015 shall be amended in the manner 
specified in the Schedule VI 
appended to this Act. 
226.   
Amendments to 
the Legal 
Service 
Authorities Act, 
1987 
67. The Legal Service Authorities 
Act, 1987 shall be amended in the 
manner specified in the Schedule VII 
appended to this Act. 
227.   
 SCHEDULE I 228.   
278

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 50 of 68 
 
United Nations Convention on 
International Settlement Agreements 
Resulting from Mediation (See 
Section 49) 
Preamble 
 
The Parties to this Convention, 
 
Recognizing the value for 
international trade of mediation as a 
method for settling commercial 
disputes in which the parties in 
dispute request a third person or 
persons to assist them in their attempt 
to settle the dispute amicably, 
 
Noting that mediation is increasingly 
used in international and domestic 
commercial practice as an alternative 
to litigation, 
 
Considering that the use of mediation 
results in significant benefits, such as 
reducing the instances where a 
dispute leads to the termination of a 
commercial relationship, facilitating 
the administration of international 
transactions by commercial parties 
and producing savings in the 
administration of justice by States, 
 
Convinced that the establishment of a 
framework for international 
settlement agreements resulting from 
mediation that is acceptable to States 
with different legal, social and 
economic systems would contribute 
to the development of harmonious 
international economic relations, 
 
Have agreed as follows: 
 Article 1. Scope of application 
1. This Convention applies to an 
agreement resulting from mediation 
and concluded in writing by parties to 
resolve a commercial dispute 
229.   
279

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 51 of 68 
 
(“settlement agreement”) which, at 
the time of its conclusion, is 
international in that: 
(a) At least two parties to the 
settlement agreement have their 
places of business in different 
States; or 
(b) The State in which the parties to 
the settlement agreement have 
their places of business is 
different from either: 
(i) The State in which a 
substantial part of the 
obligations under the 
settlement agreement is 
performed; or 
(ii) The State with which the 
subject matter of the 
settlement agreement is most 
closely connected. 
 2. This Convention does not apply to 
settlement agreements: 
(a) Concluded to resolve a dispute 
arising from transactions engaged 
in by one of the parties (a 
consumer) for personal, family or 
household purposes; 
(b) Relating to family, inheritance or 
employment law. 
230.   
 3. This Convention does not apply to: 
(a) Settlement agreements: 
(i) That have been approved by a 
court or concluded in the 
course of proceedings before 
a court; and 
(ii) That are enforceable as a 
judgment in the State of that 
court; 
(b) Settlement agreements that have 
been recorded and are enforceable 
as an arbitral award. 
231.   
 Article 2. Definitions 
1. For the purposes of article 1, 
paragraph 1: 
(a) If a party has more than one place 
232.   
280

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 52 of 68 
 
of business, the relevant place of 
business is that which has the 
closest relationship to the dispute 
resolved by the settlement 
agreement, having regard to the 
circumstances known to, or 
contemplated by, the parties at the 
time of the conclusion of the 
settlement agreement; 
(b) If a party does not have a place of 
business, reference is to be made 
to the party’s habitual residence. 
 2. A settlement agreement is “in 
writing” if its content is recorded in 
any form. The requirement that a 
settlement agreement be in writing is 
met by an electronic communication 
if the information contained therein is 
accessible so as to be useable for 
subsequent reference. 
233.   
 3. “Mediation” means a process, 
irrespective of the expression used or 
the basis upon which the process is 
carried out, whereby parties attempt 
to reach an amicable settlement of 
their dispute with the assistance of a 
third person or persons (“the 
mediator”) lacking the authority to 
impose a solution upon the parties to 
the dispute. 
234.   
 Article 3. General principles 
 
1. Each Party to the Convention shall 
enforce a settlement agreement in 
accordance with its rules of procedure 
and under the conditions laid down in 
this Convention. 
235.   
 2. If a dispute arises concerning a 
matter that a party claims was already 
resolved by a settlement agreement, a 
Party to the Convention shall allow 
the party to invoke the settlement 
agreement in accordance with its 
rules of procedure and under the 
conditions laid down in this 
Convention, in order to prove that the 
236.   
281

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 53 of 68 
 
matter has already been resolved. 
 Article 4. Requirements for 
reliance on settlement agreements 
 
1. A party relying on a settlement 
agreement under this Convention 
shall supply to the competent 
authority of the Party to the 
Convention where relief is sought: 
(a) The settlement agreement 
signed by the parties; 
(b) Evidence that the settlement 
agreement resulted from mediation, 
such as: 
(i) The mediator’s signature 
on the settlement 
agreement; 
(ii) A document signed by 
the mediator indicating 
that the mediation was 
carried out; 
(iii) An attestation by the 
institution that 
administered the 
mediation; or 
(iv) In the absence of (i), (ii) 
or (iii), any other 
evidence acceptable to 
the competent authority. 
237.   
 2. The requirement that a settlement 
agreement shall be signed by the 
parties or, where applicable, the 
mediator is met in relation to an 
electronic communication if: 
(a) A method is used to identify the 
parties or the mediator and to 
indicate the parties’ or mediator’s 
intention in respect of the 
information contained in the 
electronic communication; and 
(b) The method used is either: 
(i) As reliable as appropriate for 
the purpose for which the 
electronic communication was 
generated or communicated, 
238.   
282

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 54 of 68 
 
in the light of all the 
circumstances, including any 
relevant agreement; or 
(ii) Proven in fact to have fulfilled 
the functions described in 
subparagraph (a) above, by 
itself or together with further 
evidence. 
 3. If the settlement agreement is not 
in an official language of the Party to 
the Convention where relief is sought, 
the competent authority may request a 
translation thereof into such language. 
239.   
 4. The competent authority may 
require any necessary document in 
order to verify that the requirements 
of the Convention have been 
complied with. 
240.   
 5. When considering the request for 
relief, the competent authority shall 
act expeditiously. 
241.   
 Article 5. Grounds for refusing to 
grant relief 
1. The competent authority of the 
Party to the Convention where relief 
is sought under article 4 may refuse to 
grant relief at the request of the party 
against whom the relief is sought only 
if that party furnishes to the 
competent authority proof that: 
(a) A party to the settlement 
agreement was under some 
incapacity; 
(b) The settlement agreement sought 
to be relied upon: 
(i) Is null and void, inoperative or 
incapable of being performed under 
the law to which the parties have 
validly subjected it or, failing any 
indication thereon, under the law 
deemed applicable by the competent 
authority of the Party to the 
Convention where relief is sought 
under article 4; 
(ii) Is not binding, or is not final, 
242.   
283

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 55 of 68 
 
according to its terms; or 
(iii) Has been subsequently modified; 
(c) The obligations in the settlement 
agreement: 
(i) Have been performed; or 
(ii) Are not clear or comprehensible; 
(c) (C) Granting relief would be contrary 
to the terms of the settlement 
agreement; 
(d) There was a serious breach by the 
mediator of standards applicable 
to the mediator or the mediation 
without which breach that party 
would not have entered into the 
settlement agreement; or 
(e) (f) There was a failure by the mediator 
to disclose to the parties 
circumstances that raise justifiable 
doubts as to the mediator’s 
impartiality or independence and such 
failure to disclose had a material 
impact or undue influence on a party 
without which failure that party 
would not have entered into the 
settlement agreement. 
 2. The competent authority of the 
Party to the Convention where relief 
is sought under article 4 may also 
refuse to grant relief if it finds that: 
(a) Granting relief would be contrary 
to the public policy of that Party; 
or 
(b) The subject matter of the dispute 
is not capable of settlement by 
mediation under the law of that 
Party. 
243.   
 Article 6. Parallel applications or 
claims 
If an application or a claim relating to 
a settlement agreement has been 
made to a court, an arbitral tribunal or 
any other competent authority which 
may affect the relief being sought 
under article 4, the competent 
authority of the Party to the 
244.   
284

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 56 of 68 
 
Convention where such relief is 
sought may, if it considers it proper, 
adjourn the decision and may also, on 
the request of a party, order the other 
party to give suitable security. 
 Article 7. Other laws or treaties 
This Convention shall not deprive any 
interested party of any right it may 
have to avail itself of a settlement 
agreement in the manner and to the 
extent allowed by the law or the 
treaties of the Party to the Convention 
where such settlement agreement is 
sought to be relied upon. 
245.   
 Article 8. Reservations 
1. A Party to the Convention may 
declare that: 
(a) It shall not apply this 
Convention to settlement agreements 
to which it is a party, or to which any 
governmental agencies or any person 
acting on behalf of a governmental 
agency is a party, to the extent 
specified in the declaration; 
(b) It shall apply this Convention 
only to the extent that the parties to 
the settlement agreement have agreed 
to the application of the Convention. 
246.   
 2. No reservations are permitted 
except those expressly authorized in 
this article. 
247.   
 3. Reservations may be made by a 
Party to the Convention at any time. 
Reservations made at the time of 
signature shall be subject to 
confirmation upon ratification, 
acceptance or approval. Such 
reservations shall take effect 
simultaneously with the entry into 
force of this Convention in respect of 
the Party to the Convention 
concerned. Reservations made at the 
time of ratification, acceptance or 
approval of this Convention or 
accession thereto, or at the time of 
making a declaration under article 13 
248.   
285

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 57 of 68 
 
shall take effect simultaneously with 
the entry into force of this 
Convention in respect of the Party to 
the Convention concerned. 
Reservations deposited after the entry 
into force of the Convention for that 
Party to the Convention shall take 
effect six months after the date of the 
deposit. 
 4. Reservations and their 
confirmations shall be deposited with 
the depositary. 
249.   
 5. Any Party to the Convention that 
makes a reservation under this 
Convention may withdraw it at any 
time. Such withdrawals are to be 
deposited with the depositary, and 
shall take effect six months after 
deposit. 
250.   
 Article 9. Effect on settlement 
agreements 
The Convention and any reservation 
or withdrawal thereof shall apply only 
to settlement agreements concluded 
after the date when the Convention, 
reservation or withdrawal thereof 
enters into force for the Party to the 
Convention concerned. 
251.   
 Article 10. Depositary 
The Secretary-General of the United 
Nations is hereby designated as the 
depositary of this Convention. 
252.   
 Article 11. Signature, ratification, 
acceptance, approval, accession 
1. This Convention is open for 
signature by all States in Singapore, 
on 7 August 2019, and thereafter at 
United Nations Headquarters in New 
York. 
253.   
 2. This Convention is subject to 
ratification, acceptance or approval 
by the signatories. 
254.   
 3. This Convention is open for 
accession by all States that are not 
signatories as from the date it is open 
for signature. 
255.   
286

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 58 of 68 
 
 4. Instruments of ratification, 
acceptance, approval or accession are 
to be deposited with the depositary. 
256.   
 Article 12. Participation by 
regional economic integration 
organizations 
1. A regional economic integration 
organization that is constituted by 
sovereign States and has competence 
over certain matters governed by this 
Convention may similarly sign, ratify, 
accept, approve or accede to this 
Convention. The regional economic 
integration organization shall in that 
case have the rights and obligations 
of a Party to the Convention, to the 
extent that that organization has 
competence over matters governed by 
this Convention. Where the number 
of Parties to the Convention is 
relevant in this Convention, the 
regional economic integration 
organization shall not count as a Party 
to the Convention in addition to its 
member States that are Parties to the 
Convention. 
257.   
 2. The regional economic integration 
organization shall, at the time of 
signature, ratification, acceptance, 
approval or accession, make a 
declaration to the depositary 
specifying the matters governed by 
this Convention in respect of which 
competence has been transferred to 
that organization by its member 
States. The regional economic 
integration organization shall 
promptly notify the depositary of any 
changes to the distribution of 
competence, including new transfers 
of competence, specified in the 
declaration under this paragraph. 
258.   
 3. Any reference to a “Party to the 
Convention”, “Parties to the 
Convention”, a “State” or “States” in 
this Convention applies equally to a 
259.   
287

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 59 of 68 
 
regional economic integration 
organization where the context so 
requires. 
 4. This Convention shall not prevail 
over conflicting rules of a regional 
economic integration organization, 
whether such rules were adopted or 
entered into force before or after this 
Convention: (a) if, under article 4, 
relief is sought in a State that is 
member of such an organization and 
all the States relevant under article 1, 
paragraph 1, are members of such an 
organization; or (b) as concerns the 
recognition or enforcement of 
judgments between member States of 
such an organization. 
260.   
 Article 13. Non-unified legal 
systems 
1. If a Party to the Convention has 
two or more territorial units in which 
different systems of law are 
applicable in relation to the matters 
dealt with in this Convention, it may, 
at the time of signature, ratification, 
acceptance, approval or accession, 
declare that this Convention is to 
extend to all its territorial units or 
only to one or more of them, and may 
amend its declaration by submitting 
another declaration at any time. 
261.   
 2. These declarations are to be 
notified to the depositary and are to 
state expressly the territorial units to 
which the Convention extends. 
262.   
 3. If a Party to the Convention has 
two or more territorial units in which 
different systems of law are 
applicable in relation to the matters 
dealt with in this Convention: 
(a) Any reference to the law or 
rule of procedure of a State shall be 
construed as referring, where 
appropriate, to the law or rule of 
procedure in force in the relevant 
territorial unit; 
263.   
288

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 60 of 68 
 
(b) Any reference to the place of 
business in a State shall be construed 
as referring, where appropriate, to the 
place of business in the relevant 
territorial unit; 
(c) Any reference to the competent 
authority of the State shall be 
construed as referring, where 
appropriate, to the competent 
authority in the relevant territorial 
unit. 
 4. If a Party to the Convention makes 
no declaration under paragraph 1 of 
this article, the Convention is to 
extend to all territorial units of that 
State. 
264.   
 Article 14. Entry into force 
1. This Convention shall enter into 
force six months after deposit of the 
third instrument of ratification, 
acceptance, approval or accession. 
265.   
 2. When a State ratifies, accepts, 
approves or accedes to this 
Convention after the deposit of the 
third instrument of ratification, 
acceptance, approval or accession, 
this Convention shall enter into force 
in respect of that State six months 
after the date of the deposit of its 
instrument of ratification, acceptance, 
approval or accession. The 
Convention shall enter into force for a 
territorial unit to which this 
Convention has been extended in 
accordance with article 13 six months 
after the notification of the 
declaration referred to in that article. 
266.   
 Article 15. Amendment 
1. Any Party to the Convention may 
propose an amendment to the present 
Convention by submitting it to the 
Secretary-General of the United 
Nations. The Secretary-General shall 
thereupon communicate the proposed 
amendment to the Parties to the 
Convention with a request that they 
267.   
289

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 61 of 68 
 
indicate whether they favour a 
conference of Parties to the 
Convention for the purpose of 
considering and voting upon the 
proposal. In the event that within four 
months from the date of such 
communication at least one third of 
the Parties to the Convention favour 
such a conference, the Secretary- 
General shall convene the conference 
under the auspices of the United 
Nations. 
 2. The conference of Parties to the 
Convention shall make every effort to 
achieve consensus on each 
amendment. If all efforts at consensus 
are exhausted and no consensus is 
reached, the amendment shall, as a 
last resort, require for its adoption a 
two-thirds majority vote of the Parties 
to the Convention present and voting 
at the conference. 
268.   
 3. An adopted amendment shall be 
submitted by the depositary to all the 
Parties to the Convention for 
ratification, acceptance or approval. 
269.   
 4. An adopted amendment shall enter 
into force six months after the date of 
deposit of the third instrument of 
ratification, acceptance or approval. 
When an amendment enters into 
force, it shall be binding on those 
Parties to the Convention that have 
expressed consent to be bound by it. 
270.   
 5. When a Party to the Convention 
ratifies, accepts or approves an 
amendment following the deposit of 
the third instrument of ratification, 
acceptance or approval, the 
amendment shall enter into force in 
respect of that Party to the 
Convention six months after the date 
of the deposit of its instrument of 
ratification, acceptance or approval. 
271.   
 Article 16. Denunciations 
1. A Party to the Convention may 
272.   
290

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 62 of 68 
 
denounce this Convention by a formal 
notification in writing addressed to 
the depositary. The denunciation may 
be limited to certain territorial units 
of a non-unified legal system to 
which this Convention applies. 
 2. The denunciation shall take effect 
12 months after the notification is 
received by the depositary. Where a 
longer period for the denunciation to 
take effect is specified in the 
notification, the denunciation shall 
take effect upon the expiration of 
such longer period after the 
notification is received by the 
depositary. The Convention shall 
continue to apply to settlement 
agreements concluded before the 
denunciation takes effect. 
DONE in a single original, of which 
the Arabic, Chinese, English, French, 
Russian and Spanish texts are equally 
authentic. 
273.   
 SCHEDULE II [Refer section 7] 
DISPUTES WHICH SHALL NOT 
BE FIT FORRESOLUTION 
THROUGH MEDIATION UNDER 
PART 1 
(i) Disputes of serious and 
specific allegations of fraud, 
fabrication of documents, forgery, 
impersonation, coercion. 
(ii) Disputes relating to claims 
against minors, deities, persons with 
intellectual disabilities, [under clause 
(2) of the schedule and persons with 
disability having high support needs 
(as defined in Section 2 (t)] of the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
Act, 2016, persons with mental 
illness, as defined by Section 2 (s) of 
the Mental Health Care Act, 2017, 
persons of unsound mind, in relation 
to whom proceedings are to be 
conducted under Order 32 Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 and suits for 
274.   
291

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 63 of 68 
 
declaration of title against 
government. 
(iii) Disputes involving 
prosecution for non- compoundable 
criminal offences except with the 
permission of the court. 
(iv) Disputes matters which are 
prohibited under any law or is in 
conflict with public policy or is 
opposed to basic notions of morality 
or justice; 
Complaints or proceedings, initiated 
before any statutory authority or 
body, in relation to registration, 
discipline, misconduct of any 
practitioner, or other registered 
professional, of whatever description, 
such as legal practitioner, medical 
practitioner, dentist, architect, 
chartered accountant, or any in 
relation to any other profession, 
which is regulated by provisions of 
law. 
(vi) Disputes which have the effect on 
rights of a third party who are not a 
party to the mediation proceedings. 
(vii) Any dispute relating to the validity of 
a patent, or proceedings relating to 
applications for compulsory licensing 
under the Patent Act, 1970; 
(viii) Any dispute or proceeding in relation 
to validity of registration under the 
Copyright Act, 1957, or application 
for grant of license, or fixation of any 
fee under the said Act; 
(ix) Any proceeding in relation to any 
subject matter, falling within any 
enactment, over which the tribunal 
constituted under the National Green 
Tribunals Act, 2010, has jurisdiction; 
(x) Any dispute relating to levy, 
collection, penalties or offences, in 
relation to any direct or indirect tax or 
refunds, enacted by any state 
legislature or the Parliament of India; 
292

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 64 of 68 
 
(xi) Any investigation, inquiry or 
proceeding, under the Competition 
Act, 2002, including proceedings 
before the Director General, under the 
Act; proceedings before the Telecom 
Regulatory Authority of India, under 
the Telecom Regulatory Authority of 
India Act, 1997 or Telecom Disputes 
Settlement and Appellate Tribunal 
(TDSAT), 
(xii) Proceedings before appropriate 
Commissions, and the Appellate 
Tribunal for Electricity, under the 
Electricity Act, 2003; 
(xiii) Proceedings before the Petroleum and 
Natural Gas Regulatory Board, and 
appeals therefrom before the 
Appellate Tribunal under the 
Petroleum and Natural Gas 
Regulatory Board Act, 2006; 
Proceedings before the Securities 
Exchange Board of India, and the 
Securities Appellate 
 Tribunal, under the Securities 
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992; 
(xv) Land acquisition and determination of 
compensation under land acquisition 
laws, or any provision of law 
providing for land acquisition; 
(xvi) Any other subject-matter of dispute 
which may be notified by the Central 
Government in the Official Gazette. 
Explanation: The above list is 
indicative and not exhaustive. 
  
 SCHEDULE-III (See Section 63) 
Contract Act, 1872: 
For Exception 1 to Section 28 of the 
Contract Act, 1872 the following 
shall be substituted: 
Exception I: Saving of contract to 
refer to mediation or arbitration 
dispute that may arise: 
This section shall not render illegal a 
contract, by which two or more 
persons agree that any dispute which 
275.   
293

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 65 of 68 
 
may arise between them in respect of 
any subject or class of subject shall be 
referred to resolution through 
arbitration or mediation. 
 SCHEDULE- IV 
(See Section 64) 
Amendments to Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 
1. Part III of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 containing 
Section 61-81 shall be substituted as 
follows: 
“61. (1) Any provision, in any other 
enactment for the time being in force, 
providing for resolution of disputes 
through conciliation in accordance 
with the provisions of Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 shall be 
construed as reference to mediation as 
provided for under the Mediation Act, 
2021. 
(2) The Conciliation as provided for 
under this Act or the code of Civil 
procedure shall be construed as 
mediation as defined in the Mediation 
Act, 2021. 
62. Saving.- Notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 61 any 
conciliation proceedings initiated 
under part III of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 before the 
commencement of the Mediation Act, 
2021 shall be continued as such and 
the Mediation Act, 2021 shall not 
have any bearing on status and effect 
of any settlement arrived through 
such conciliation proceedings.” 
 
 
276.   
 SCHEDULE- V (See Section 65 ) 
Amendment to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908. 
1. For section 89 following shall be 
substituted: 
“89. Settlement of disputes outside 
the Court.— 
277.   
294

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 66 of 68 
 
(1) Where it appears to the Court 
that there exist elements of a 
settlement which may be acceptable 
to the parties, the Court may at the 
first instance or at any stage 
thereafter, refer the parties for a 
possible settlement through -:— 
(a) arbitration; 
(b) conciliation or mediation; 
(c) judicial settlement including 
settlement through Lok Adalat. 
(2) Were a dispute has been 
referred— 
(a) for arbitration, the provisions 
of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996 (26 of 1996) shall apply as 
if the proceedings for arbitration were 
referred for settlement under the 
provisions of that Act; 
for conciliation or mediation, the 
provisions of the Mediation Act, 2021 
shall apply as if the proceedings for 
conciliation or mediation were 
referred for settlement under the 
provisions of that Act; 
(c) to Lok Adalat, the Court shall 
refer the same to the Lok Adalat in 
accordance with the provisions of 
sub-section (1) of section 20 of the 
Legal Services Authority Act, 1987 
(39 of 1987) and all other provisions 
of that Act shall .apply in respect of 
the dispute so referred to the Lok 
Adalat; 
for judicial settlement, the Court shall 
effect a compromise between the 
parties and shall follow such 
procedure as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government. 
 SIXTH SCHEDULE  
(See Section 66) 
Commercial Courts Act, 2015 
1. After sub-section (1) of Section 
12-A following subsection shall be 
inserted as follows: 
“(1A) Pre institution mediation may 
278.   
295

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 67 of 68 
 
be conducted online or otherwise.” 
2. Sub-section (2) of the Section 
12-A shall be substituted and read as 
follows: 
—(2) For the purposes of pre-
institution mediation, the Central 
Government may, by notification, 
authorise 
(i) the Authorities constituted under 
the Legal Services Authorities Act, 
1987 (39 of 1987); or 
(ii) any other mediation service 
provider as defined under the 
Mediation Act, 2021.” 
 SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
(See Section 67) 
Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 
1. Clause (f) of section 4 of the Act 
shall be substituted as follows: 
—(f) encourage the settlement of 
disputes, including by online mode, 
by way of negotiations, arbitration, 
mediation and conciliation;” 
2. After clause (f) following clause 
may be inserted: 
—(fa) provide for registration of 
mediated settlement agreement 
arrived at between parties under the 
provisions of Mediation Act, 2021.” 
3. In sub-section (2) of section 7 of 
the Act after clause (c) following 
clause shall be inserted: 
—(ca) provide by way of regulation 
for registration of mediated 
settlement agreement arrived at 
between parties under section 21 (7) 
of Mediation Act, 2021. 
(cb) specify, by way of regulation, fee 
for registration of mediated 
settlement agreement under section 
21 (8) of Mediation Act, 2021” 
4. In sub-section (2) of section 10 of 
the Act after clause (b) following 
clauses shall be inserted: 
—(ba) provide, by way of regulation, 
279.   
296

Justice (Retd.) M. L. Mehta 
Proposed amendments / changes in the Draft Mediation Bill by Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society (Regd.) Department of Law & Justice of Govt. of NCT, Delhi 
 
 
Page 68 of 68 
 
for registration of mediated 
settlement agreement arrived at 
between parties under section 21 (7) 
of Mediation Act, 2021. 
(bb) specify, by way of regulation, 
fee for registration of mediated 
settlement agreement under section 
21 (8) of Mediation Act, 2021” 
New Schedule as per the Remark in Section 47(1):  
Listed below are the certain types of matters that can be referred to community mediation:   
 Government Cases – revenue, house tax, service matters, etc.  
 
 Neighbourhood -Parking, noise, nuisance, destruction / repair / maintenance of property, 
fencing, pets, interpersonal etc. 
 
 Family - Parent / child, parenting (child custody / visitation / support), child welfare etc. 
adult guardianship, restitution, divorce, domestic violence, maintenance etc. 
 
 School - Special education, peer (student -student), minor complaints, corrections. 
 
 Commercial – Consumer court cases, Consumer- merchant disputes, small claims, 
workplace, bad cheques, accident compensation. 
 
 Miscellaneous – Environmental, Human Rights, Police / citizen, minor criminal, victim / 
offender, disabilities, cross-cultural, religious / charitable, multi party etc. 
 
297

MEDIATION 
PRESENTED BY 
DR RENU RAJ 
298

299

Mediation is like a root canal where 
communication flows and all the bulk 
of confusions / misunderstandings pass 
through; leaving the final focus on the 
root cause.  
300

• Mediation is  a form of alternative 
dispute resolution  
• Mediation has been popular in the 
domestic legal sector 
• The pandemic and its effects on the legal 
system  
• The passing of this bill will mark a 
positive landmark in the history of the 
ever flourishing India  
301

• All civil, commercial, workplace and peer disputes should be 
referred to mediation providing there is no foul play suspected. 
• Agreement to Mediate should be signed separately before the 
process starts  
• A mediator should maintain complete neutrality. It is very 
important for this process to be completely confidential, which is 
why a Mediator should not prepare a failure report.  
• Before the process starts the mediator should ensure that 
participants present have complete authority to settle. 
• The process should be similar to the mediation processes followed 
by most of the countries in the world  
• Facilitative Mediation should be more prominent than evaluative 
Mediation  
MEDIATION PROCESS 
302

MEDIATORS AND TRAINING 
• A clear ethical code of conduct should be set in place for 
Mediators to follow  
• A mediator should seek counsel from other senior mediators if 
there is any doubt 
• Mediation training should be accessible to everyone and not be 
limited to law professionals.  
• There should be clear training and assessment outlines set out 
for training providers to abide with  
• Training providers should be registered with the mediation 
governing body in India to provide any form of training  
• Mediators should complete a minimum of 3 CPDs every year  
303

MEDIATORS AND TRAINING 
• Mediators and training providers should have their 
licenses renewed every 2 years in the least.  
• Training providers must ensure that at least 70% of 
their course is practical and in the form of role plays  
• Trained Mediators should observe at least 3 
Mediations before beginning practise 
• It should not be a very cumbersome process to 
register as a Mediator  
304

MEDIATION GOVERNING BODY 
• Only Mediators with a minimum of 5 years experience 
should lead the Mediation governing body or any 
Mediation related committee.   
• The leaders of the committee or governing body should be 
reappointed every 3 years  
• There should be equal opportunities available.  
• There should be a clear outline of how the governing body 
is selected.  
305

THANK YOU FOR LISTENING  
306

Draft – for discussion purposes only 
Mediators India 
 
 1 
 
SHRI SRIRAM PANCHU, SR. ADVOCATE & MEDIATION EXPERT 
 
EXPLANATORY NOTE FOR KEY CHANGES TO THE DRAFT MEDIATION 
BILL, 20211 
 
SR. NO. SECTION  SUBJECT REASONS FOR 
RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
1.  Section 2 Enforceability of 
international 
commercial mediated 
settlement agreements 
under the Singapore 
Convention, in India  
Section 2 stipulates that the Act shall apply 
where mediation is conducted in India and 
……. 
 
The Act does not provide for enforcement 
of int ernational mediation (including 
international commercial mediation under 
the Singapore Convention) that takes place 
outside India.  
 
 
2.  Section 28 
(2)  
Enforceability of 
international 
commercial mediated 
settlement agreements 
for mediations 
conducted in In dia, 
under the Singapore 
Convention, in a 
member State country. 
Per Section 28 (2), a mediated settlement 
agreement is enforceable as if it were a 
judgment or decree passed by a court. This 
would also be applicable to international 
commercial mediation that take place in 
India.  
 
Per Section 3 (a) (ii) of the Singapore  
Convention, the Singapore Convention 
does not apply to settlement agreements 
concluded during court proceedings that are 
enforceable as a judgment in the State of 
that court.  
 
It would be advisable that the draft 
legislation recognize international 
commercial mediated settlement 
agreements executed in member State 
countries of the Singapore Convention, so 
that they are enforceable in India. 
 
It would also be advisable that the 
legislation enables parties to a international 
commercial mediation that was co nducted 
in India to have the same enforced under 
the Singapore Convention before the courts 
of other member countries, else India will 
lose out on being a hub for such 
mediations. 
 
The parties to the mediation should not lose 
                                                 
1 Note: This note only sets out the explanation for our key concerns. The attached draft of the Mediation Bill, 
2021 incorporates other suggested amendments as well.  
307

Draft – for discussion purposes only 
Mediators India 
 
 2 
the benefit of the Singapore Convention 
only because the mediated settlement 
agreement is construed to be a judgment of 
a court in India.   
 
We have proposed that a new Part 2 be 
incorporated for International Mediations.  
 
Please note that India may need to 
exercise a reservation under the 
Singapore Convention for implementing 
the amendments proposed under the 
second proviso to Section 28 (2). 
 
 
3.  Section 4  Mediator to Lack 
Authority 
A mediator needs to be neutral and should 
not have the ability to impose (directly or 
indirectly) a solution upon the parties. The 
Singapore Convention requires the 
mediator to be “ lacking the authority to 
impose a solution upon the parties to the 
dispute.” This is a fundamental requirement 
of mediation. 
 
However, t hese words are absent in the 
definition of mediation under the draft Bill. 
To keep the sanctity of the process of 
mediation and ensure that a settlement is 
truly voluntary, the words as used in the 
Singapore Convention to be included in the 
definition of mediation in the draft Bill as 
well.  
 
 
4.  Section 7 
read with 
the First 
Schedule 
 
 
 
Cases not fit for 
mediation 
The list provided under the First Schedule 
is too wide, and most are best left out. 
While the draft legislation does provide for 
the Courts having the power to refer parties 
for mediation in compoundable matters, it 
does not give the courts a power to refe r 
parties to mediation in other matters.  
 
Parties tend to forum shop and criminal 
allegations and allegations of fraud, 
coercion etc are common even in  civil / 
commercial disputes. Matters such as 
cheque bouncing, matrimonial matters ( 
dowry harassment ) , corporate -criminal 
matters (e.g. oppression mismanagement), 
civil-criminal matters (family disputes) 
would be excluded from mandatory pre -
litigation if the First Schedule is not 
amended.  
 
308

Draft – for discussion purposes only 
Mediators India 
 
 3 
Some matters under the First Schedule can 
be referred to mediatio n by the authority 
before which the proceeding is pending. 
That would be better than a flat prohibition. 
 
Further, it would be advisable that the 
parties be able to mediate on matters that 
are compoundable without requiring 
permission of the court. However , in such 
cases, please note that the court would have 
the power to strike down a settlement if the 
same is against public policy or is violative 
of the law.  
 
It is further suggested that the rights of the 
third party would need to be safeguarded 
and therefore it is proposed that a separate 
provision be incorporated for the same in 
Section 22 (5) and Section 28 and it be 
deleted from the First Schedule. 
 
We have suggested amendments to be 
made to Section 7 and the First Schedule of 
the draft Mediation Bill , 2021 in the draft 
attached.  
 
We have also suggested amendments to 
Section 22 (5) and the inclusion of a new 
Section 28 (3) to safeguard the interests of 
a third party who is not a signatory to the 
mediated settlement agreement.   
 
 
5. ? Section 22 
(7) 
Registration of 
Mediated Settlement 
Agreements 
By creating a requirement for registration 
of all mediated settlement agreements, an 
unwarranted layer of bureaucracy and 
formality is being introduced. It is not clear 
if such registration would be at an 
additional cost to the parties (such as 
registration fees) and what would be the 
consequence of non -registration, since the 
legislation states that it does not impact the 
enforceability.  
 
It may be noted that under the Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act, 1996 n either  an 
arbitration award nor a conciliation award 
require any registration.  
 
This provisions pertaining to registration 
should be deleted in its entirety. In the draft 
Mediation Bill, 2021 as attached, we have 
deleted all provisions that deal or refer to 
registration of the mediated settlement 
309

Draft – for discussion purposes only 
Mediators India 
 
 4 
agreement.  
 
In the alternate, one of more depositories 
can be created, where a mediated settlement 
agreement can be voluntarily and without 
any compulsion be electronically uploaded 
at the discretion of the Parties. A mediation 
institute/mediation service provider 
possessing prescribed infrastructure could 
also be recognized as a depository.  
 
The draft Mediation Bill, 2021 already 
includes creation of an electronic 
depository. We have suggested 
amendments to Section 42, where a 
mediation service provider could also be  
enabled to operate an electronic depository.  
 
The unique depository number to be shared 
only with the Parties and the mediator. 
Adequate provisions to safeguard the 
confidentiality of the mediated settlement 
agreement and the process would need to 
be implemented as well.   
 
 
6.  Section 29 
(3) 
Period for challenge of 
mediated settlement 
agreements 
The period of limitation for challenge is 90 
days from the date of receipt of the 
mediated settlement agreement and not the 
actual cause of action, which can be 
extended by a further period of 90 days by 
the court/tribunal. There appears to be an 
assumption that any fraud, corruption, gross 
impropriety or impersonation would come 
to the knowledge of the parties within such 
limited period of 90 days (extendable to a 
maximum of 180 days).  
 
The 90 days period should be computed 
from the date on which a party becomes 
aware of the fraud, corruption, gross 
impropriety or impersonation. We have 
suggested amendments to Section 29 (3) of 
the draft Mediation Bill, 2021. 
 
 
7.  Section 34 Constitution of the 
Council 
All the members of the Council should be 
knowledgeable in mediation and should 
understand the issues and concerns 
pertaining to mediation.  
 
We suggest that the Council comprise of 9 
(nine) members that includes 3 mediators. 
Further, we suggest that the Chairperson be 
310

Draft – for discussion purposes only 
Mediators India 
 
 5 
appointed by the Central Government in 
consultation with the Chief Justice of India 
and the mediator members be appointed by 
the Chief Justice of India.  
 
Additionally, we suggest that the term of 
the members be reduced to 3 (three) years. 
We have suggested amendments to be 
made to Section 34 of the draft Mediation 
Bill, 2021. 
 
8.  Section 19 
read with 
Section 51 
Immunity for 
mediators 
A provision similar to that set out in the 
Mediation and Conciliation Rules, 2004 of 
the Delhi High Court to be incorporated. 
We have suggested incorporating the 
relevant provisions in Section 51 of the 
draft Mediation Bill, 2021.  
 
A mediator cannot be called as a witness in 
a dispute, even with the consent of the 
parties. Accordingly, we have suggested 
deletion of such requirement from Section 
19 of the draft Mediation Bill, 2021. 
 
9.  Seventh 
Schedule  
Mediation by the 
Facilitation Council 
under the MSME Act 
Para 2 of the Seventh Schedule enables the 
Facilitation Council to either mediate the 
dispute itself or refer the same to a service 
provider. Further, if mediation fails, then 
per Para 4, the Facilitation Council has the 
power to arbitrate the matter as well.  
 
The same body who mediates should not be 
entitled to arbitrate as well since they 
would have access to privileged 
information during the course of mediation. 
We have suggested amendments to me 
made to the Seventh Schedule of the draft 
Mediation Bill, 2021. 
 
10.  Eighth 
Schedule 
Mediator Fees 
(Companies Act) 
The fees to be mutually agreed between the 
Parties and the mediator.  We have 
suggested amendments to me made to the 
Eighth Schedule of the draft Mediation Bill, 
2021. 
 
11.  Ninth 
Schedule 
Mediation under the 
Commercial Courts 
Act 
The mediators for Commercial Mediation 
shall not be limited and Parties  should 
have the same options  as provided in 
Section 6 (3). We have suggested 
amendments to me made to the Ninth 
Schedule of the draft Mediation Bill, 2021.  
 
 
*** 
311

Mr. Sriram Panchu, President of Mediators India 
 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CLAUSES 
 
 
THE MEDIATION BILL, 2021 
—————— 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
—————— 
PRELIMINARY 
Bill No. XLIII of 2021 
 
 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
PART I 
CHAPTER 
IAPPLICATION 
2. Application. 
3. Definitions. 
 
 
 
4. Mediation. 
5. Mediation agreement. 
6. Pre-litigation mediation. 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
MEDIATION 
7. Disputes or matters not fit for mediation. 
8. Interim relief by court or tribunal. 
9. Power of court or tribunal to refer parties to mediation. 
CHAPTER III 
MEDIATORS 
10. Appointment of mediators. 
11. Preference of parties. 
12. Conflict of interest and disclosure. 
13. Termination of mandate of mediator. 
14. Replacement of mediator. 
CHAPTER IV 
MEDIATION PROCEEDING 
15. Territorial jurisdiction to undertake mediation. 
16. Commencement of mediation. 
17. Conduct of mediation. 
18. Role of mediator. 
19. Role of mediator in other proceedings. 
20. Withdrawal by parties from mediation. 
21. Time-limit for completion of mediation. 
312

(ii) 
 
CLAUSES 
22. Mediated settlement agreement. 
23. Confidentiality. 
24. Admissibility and privilege against disclosure. 
25. Termination of mediation. 
26. Court annexed mediation. 
27. Proceedings of Lok Adalat and Permanent Lok Adalat not to be affected. 
CHAPTER V 
ENFORCEMENT OF MEDIATED SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT 
28. Enforcement of mediated settlement agreement. 
29. Challenge to mediated settlement agreement. 
30. Costs. 
31. Limitation. 
 
 
 
32. Online mediation. 
CHAPTER VI 
ONLINE MEDIATION 
 
CHAPTER VII 
MEDIATION COUNCIL OF INDIA 
33. Establishment and incorporation of Mediation Council. 
34. Composition of Council. 
35. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Council. 
36. Resignation. 
37. Removal. 
38. Appointment of experts and constitution of Committees. 
39. Secretariat and Chief Executive Officer of Council. 
40. Duties and Functions of the Council. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MEDIATION SERVICE PROVIDER, MEDIATION INSTITUTES AND NATIONAL BODY OF MEDIATORS 
41. Mediation service providers. 
42. Functions of mediation service providers. 
43. Mediation institutes. 
 
 
 
44. Community mediation. 
CHAPTER IX 
COMMUNITY MEDIATION 
45. Procedure for community mediation. 
CHAPTER X 
MISCELLANEOUS 
46. Mediation Fund. 
47. Accounts and audit 
313

(iii) 
 
CLAUSES 
48. Power of Central Government to issue directions. 
49. Power of Governments to frame schemes or guidelines. 
50. Mediated settlement agreement where Government or its, agency, etc., is a party. 
51. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
52. Power to make rules. 
53. Power to make regulations. 
54. Laying. 
55. Power to remove difficulties. 
56. Provisions of Act to have overriding effect on mediation or conciliation contained 
in other laws. 
57. Act not to apply to pending proceedings. 
58. Amendment of Act 9 of 1872. 
59. Amendment of Act 5 of 1908. 
60. Amendment of Act 39 of 1987. 
61. Amendment of Act 26 of 1996. 
62. Amendment of Act 27 of 2006. 
63. Amendment of Act 18 of 2013. 
64. Amendment of Act 4 of 2016. 
65. Amendment of Act 35 of 2019. 
 
PART II 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
INTERNATIONAL COMMERCIAL MEDIATION (SINGAPORE CONVENTION) 
 
66. Application and Scope 
67. When international commercial settlement agreement binding 
68. Enforcement of international commercial settlement agreement 
69. Evidence 
70. Grounds for refusal of enforcement of international commercial mediation settlement agreements 
71. Enforcement of international commercial mediation settlement agreements 
72. Appealable orders 
73. Saving  
 
CHAPTER II 
INTERNATIONAL MEDIATIONS (OTHER THAN SINGAPORE CONVENTION) 
 
74. Application and Scope  
75. When international settlement agreement binding 
76. Evidence  
77. Grounds for refusal of enforcement of international mediation settlement agreements 
78. Enforcement of international settlement agreements 314

 
 
 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE. 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE. 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE. 
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE. 
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE. 
THE NINTH SCHEDULE. 
THE TENTH SCHEDULE. 
315

1 
 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. XLIII of 2021 
 
 
THE MEDIATION BILL, 2021 
A 
BILL 
to promote and facilitate mediation, especially institutional mediation, for resolution of 
disputes, commercial or otherwise, enforce mediated settlement agreements, provide for  
a body for registration of mediators, to encourage community mediation and to make 
online mediation as acceptable and cost effective process and to give effect to the 
United Nations Convention on International Settlement Agreements Resulting from 
Mediation and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–– 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Mediation Act, 2021. 
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification, 
appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any 
 
 
 
 
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 
316

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Application. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions. 
reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a 
reference to the coming into force of that provision. 
PART 1 
CHAPTER I 
APPLICATION 
2. (1) Subject to sub -section (2), Part I of this Act shall apply where mediation is 
conducted in India, and— 
(i) all or both parties habitually reside in or are incorporated in or have their place 
of business in India; or 
(ii) the mediation agreement provides that any dispute shall be resolved in  
accordance with the provisions of this Act; or 
(iii) there is an international mediation. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply wherein one of the parties to the 
dispute is the Central Government or a State Government, or agencies, public bodies,  
corporations and local bodies, including entities controlled or owned by such Government, 
except where the matter pertains to a commercial dispute: 
Provided that nothing shall prevent the Central Government or a State Government from 
notifying, such kind of dispute, as it deems appropriate for such Government, for resolution 
through mediation under this Act, wherein such Government, or agencies, publi c bodies, 
corporations and local bodies including entities controlled or owned by them, is a party. 
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) "commercial  dispute" means a dispute defined in clause  (c) of sub-
section (1) of section 2 of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015; 
(b) "Council" means the Mediation Council of India established under 
section 33; 
(c) "court" means the principal civil court of original jurisdiction in a district, and 
includes the High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil  jurisdiction, having 
jurisdiction to decide the disputes forming the subject matter of mediation, if the same 
had been the subject matter of a suit or proceeding; 
Explanation.—In a commercial dispute of a Specified Value as defined in the  
clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015, the court 
of competent jurisdiction shall be the Commercial Courts referred to in Chapter II of the 
said Act; 
(d) "court annexed mediation" means mediation including pre-litigation mediation 
conducted at the mediation centres established by any court or tribunal; 
(e) "institutional mediation" means mediation conducted under the aegis of a  
mediation service provider; 
(f) "international mediation" means mediation undertaken under this Act and  
relates to  a commercial dispute arising out of a legal relationship, contractual or  
otherwise, under any law for the time being in force in India, and where at least one of 
the parties, is— 
(i) an individual who is a national of, or habitually resides in, any country 
other than India; or 
(ii) a body corporate including a Limited Liability Partnership of any nature, 
with its place of business outside India; or 
(iii) an association or body of individuals whose place of business is 
outside India; or 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10  
 
 
 
 
 
 
15  
 
 
 
 
 
 
20  
 
 
4 of 2016. 
 
 
 
25  
 
 
 
 
 
30     4 of 2016. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35  
 
 
 
 
 
40  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45  
317

3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15  
 
 
 
 
 
 
20  
 
 
 
39 of 1987. 
 
 
25  
39 of 1987. 
 
 
 
 
 
30  
 
 
 
 
 
 
35  
 
 
 
 
 
 
40  
 
 
 
 
 
45  
(iv) the Government of a foreign country; 
(g) "mediation" means mediation referred to in section 4; 
(h) "mediator" means a person who is appointed to be a mediator to undertake 
mediation, and includes a person registered as mediator with the Council. 
Explanation.—Where more than one mediator is appointed for a mediation,  
reference to a mediator under this Act shall be a reference to all the mediators; 
(i) "international mediation settlement agreement” means a mediation 
agreement referred to in Section 66; 
(j) "mediation agreement" means a mediation agreement referred to in sub-
section (1) of section 5; 
(k) "mediation communication" means communication made, whether in 
electronic form or otherwise, through— 
(i) anything said or done; 
(ii) any document; or 
(iii) any information provided, 
for the purposes of, or in relation to, or in the course of mediation, and includes a 
mediation agreement or a mediated settlement agreement; 
(l) "mediation institute" means a body or organisation that provides training,  
continuous education and certification of mediators and carries out such other functions 
under this Act; 
(m) "mediation service provider" means a body or organisation that 
provides for the conduct of mediation under this Act and rules and regulations made 
thereunder, and are recognised by the Council; 
Explanation I.—For the purposes of this clause, mediation service provider  
includes an Authority constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, or 
mediation centre annexed to a court, tribunal or such other forum as may be specified. 
Explanation II.—An Authority constituted under the Legal Services Authorities 
Act, 1987, or mediation centre annexed to a court or tribunal or such other forum shall 
be deemed to be a mediation service provider recognised by the Council; 
(n) "mediated settlement agreement" means settlement agreement referred to in 
sub-section (1) of section 22; 
(o) "notification" means notification published in the Official Gazette and the  
expression ‘‘notified’’ with its cognate meanings and grammatical variations shall be 
construed accordingly; 
(p) "online mediation" means online mediation referred to in section 32; 
(q) "participants" means persons other than the parties who participate in the  
mediation and includes advisers, advocates, consultants and any technical experts  
and observers; 
(r) "party" means a party to a mediation agreement or mediation proceeding  
whose agreement or consent is necessary to resolve the dispute and includes their  
successors; 
(s) "pre-litigation mediation" means a process of undertaking mediation, as  
provided under section 6, for settlement of disputes prior to the filing of a suit or  
proceeding of civil or commercial nature in respect thereof, before a court or notified 
tribunal under sub-section (2) of section 6; 
(t) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government  
under this Act; 
318

4 
 
(u) "Schedule" means the Schedule annexed to this Act; 
(v) "secure electronic signature" with reference to online mediation means,  
electronic signatures referred to in section 15 of the Information Technology 
Act, 2000;  
(w)"specified" means specified by regulations made by the Council under this 
Act; and 
(x) “Tribunal” means a tribunal constituted under any law. 
 
 
 
 
 
21 of 2000. 
 
5 
 
CHAPTER 
IIMEDIATION 
Mediation. 
 
 
 
 
 
Mediation 
agreement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pre-litigation 
mediation. 
4. Mediation shall be a process, whether referred to by the expression mediation,  
pre-litigation mediation, online mediation, community mediation, conciliation or an expression 
of similar import, whereby party or parties, request a third person, lacking the authority to 
impose a solution upon the parties to the dispute,  referred to as mediator or mediation 
service provider to assist them in their attempt to reach an amicable settlement of a dispute. 
5. (1) A mediation agreement shall be in writing, by or between parties and anyone  
claiming through them, to submit to mediation all or certain disputes which have arisen or  
which may arise between the parties. 
(2) A mediation agreement may be in the form of a mediation clause in a contract or in 
the form of a separate agreement. 
(3) A mediation agreement is in writing, if it is contained in or recorded as— 
(a) any document signed by the parties; 
(b) an exchange of communications or letters including through electronic form 
as provided under the Information Technology Act, 2000; 
(c) any pleadings in a suit or any other proceedings in which existence of 
mediation agreement is alleged by one party and not denied by the other. 
(4) A reference in any agreement containing a mediation clause shall constitute a  
mediation agreement if the agreement is in writing and the reference is such as to make the 
mediation clause as part of the agreement. 
(5) The parties may agree to submit to mediation any dispute arising between them  
under an agreement, whether entered prior to arising of the dispute or subsequent thereto. 
(6) A mediation agreement in case of international mediation shall refer to an agreement 
for resolution in matters of commercial disputes referred to in clause (a) of section 3. 
6. (1) Subject to other provisions of this Act, whether any mediation agreement exists 
or not, the court or tribunal may at any time during the pendency of any proceedings, require 
parties to attempt to settle the dispute by way of mediation in accordance with the provisions 
of this Act.: 
(2) The provisions, of sub-section (1) shall be applicable to the tribunals notified by 
the Central Government or a State Government, as the case may be. 
(3) For the purposes, of sub-sections (1) and (2), , a mediator,— 
(i) registered with the Council; 
(ii) empanelled by a court annexed mediation centre; 
(iii) empanelled by an Authority constituted under the Legal Services Authorities 
Act, 1987;  or 
 
10  
 
 
 
 
 
15  
 
 
 
 
 
 
20  
 
 
21 of 2000. 
 
 
 
25  
 
 
 
 
 
 
30  
 
 
 
 
 
35  
 
 
 
4 of 2016. 
 
 
40  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45  
39 of 1987. 
319

5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 of 1987. 
 
 
 
39 of 1987. 
 
 
59 of 1988. 
(iv) empanelled by a mediation service provider recognised under this 
Act; 
(v) otherwise chosen by the parties 
 shall conduct pre-litigation mediation. 
(4) For conducting pre-litigation mediation under clauses (ii) and (iii) of sub-
section (3), a party may  request any  person designated for this  purpose by the 
5    High Courts, or an Authority constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, as 
the case may be. 
(5) The courts and an Authority constituted under the Legal Services Authorities 
Act, 1987, shall maintain a panel of mediators for the purposes of pre-litigation mediation. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2) and the Motor 
10 Vehicles Act, 1988, when an application for compensation arising out of an accident is made 
before the Claims Tribunal, if the settlement as provided for in section 149 of that Act is not 
arrived at between the parties, the Claims Tribunal shall refer the parties for mediation to a 
mediator or mediation service provider under this Act. 
(7) Where the parties arrive at a settlement agreement under sub-section (6), it shall be 
15     placed before the Claims Tribunal for its consideration. 
(8) If the parties do not reach to settlement agreement under sub-section (6), a failure 
report prepared by the mediator shall be forwarded to the Claims Tribunal, which has referred 
the matter for mediation, for adjudication. 
7. (1) A mediation under this Act shall not be conducted for resolution of any dispute 
20     or matter contained in the indicative list under the First Schedule: 
Provided that nothing contained herein shall prevent any court, if deemed appropriate, 
from referring any dispute to mediation relating to the matters listed in the First Schedule,: 
Provided further that the outcome of such mediation shall not be deemed to be a 
25 judgement or decree of court referred to in sub-section (2) of section 28 unless such mediated 
settlement agreement is confirmed by the court. 
(2) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it 
may in consultation with the Council and by notification, amend the First Schedule. 
8. (1) If exceptional circumstances exist, a party may, before the commencement of, or 
30 during the continuation of, mediation proceedings under this Act, file suit or appropriate  
proceedings before a court or tribunal  having competent jurisdiction for seeking urgent  
interim relief. 
(2) The court or tribunal shall after granting or rejecting urgent interim relief, as the  
case may be, refer the parties to undertake mediation to resolve the dispute, if deemed 
35     appropriate. 
9. (1) Notwithstanding the failure to reach any settlement under sub -section (1) of 
section 6, the court or tribunal may, at any stage of proceeding, refer the parties to undertake 
mediation, if a request to this effect is made by them. 
(2) If the court or tribunal refers the parties to undertake mediation, it may pass suitable 
40     interim order to protect the interest of any party if deemed appropriate. 
(3) The parties shall not be under obligation to come to a settlement in the mediation 
pursuant to a reference under sub-section (1). 
CHAPTER III 
MEDIATORS 
45  10. (1) Unless otherwise agreed upon by the parties, a person of any nationality may 
be appointed as a mediator: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disputes or  
matters not 
fit for 
mediation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interim relief 
by court or 
tribunal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of court 
or tribunal to 
refer parties to 
mediation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appointment  
of mediators. 
320

6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preference of 
parties. 
 
 
Conflict of 
interest and 
disclosure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Termination 
of mandate of 
mediator. 
Provided that mediator of any foreign nationality shall possess such qualification, 
experience and accreditation as may be specified. 
(2) The parties shall be free to agree upon the name of mediator and the procedure for 
their appointment. 
(3) If the parties do not reach any agreement on a matter referred to in sub-section (2), 5 
then the party seeking initiation of mediation shall make an application to a mediation service  
provider for the appointment of a mediator. 
(4) Upon receiving an application under sub-section (3), the mediation service provider 
shall, within a period of seven days, appoint, — 
(i) the mediator as agreed by the parties; or 10  
(ii) in case the parties are unable to reach agreement as to the appointment of  
mediator or mediator agreed by them refuses to act as mediator, a mediator from the 
panel maintained by it, with his consent. 
(5) The person appointed under clause (i) of sub-section (4) shall communicate his 
willingness or otherwise within a period of seven days from the date of receipt of 15  
communication of such appointment. 
11. The mediation service provider shall, while appointing any person from the panel 
of mediators maintained by it, consider his suitability and the preference of the parties for  
resolving the dispute. 
12. (1) The person appointed as a mediator shall, prior to the conduct of mediation, 20  
disclose in writing to the parties regarding any circumstance or potential circumstance,  
personal, professional, financial, or otherwise, to the knowledge of the mediator, that may 
constitute any conflict of interest or that is likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his 
independence or impartiality as a mediator. 
(2) During the mediation, the mediator shall, without delay, disclose to the parties in 25  
writing any conflict of interest, referred to in sub -section (1), that has newly arisen or has  
come to his knowledge. 
(3) Upon disclosure under sub -section (1) or sub -section (2), the parties shall have the  
option to waive any objection if all of them express in writing, which shall be construed as the  
consent of parties. 30  
(4) Upon disclosure under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), if either party desires to 
replace the mediator, then, in case of— 
(i) institutional mediation, such party shall apply to the mediation service provider 
for termination of the mandate of mediator; 
(ii) mediation other than institutional mediation, such party shall terminate the 35  
mandate of mediator. 
13. A mediation service provider may terminate the mandate of a mediator upon— 
(i) the receipt of application from a party under clause (i) of sub-section (4) of 
section 12; or 
(ii) his withdrawal from mediation for any reason: 
321

7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10  
 
 
 
 
 
 
15  
 
 
 
 
 
20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25  
 
 
 
 
 
 
30  
 
 
 
 
 
 
35  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 of  1908. 40  
1 of 1872. 
 
 
 
 
 
45  
14. Upon termination of the mandate of mediator— 
(i) in case of mediation other than institutional mediation , the parties may, 
appoint another mediator within a period of seven days from such termination or 
such other extended period as the parties may mutually agree; and 
(ii) under section 13, the mediation service provider shall appoint another mediator 
from the panel maintained by it within a period of seven days from such termination. 
CHAPTER IV 
MEDIATION PROCEEDINGS 
15. Every mediation under this Act shall be undertaken within the territorial jurisdiction 
of the court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction to decide the subject matter of dispute: 
Provided that on the mutual consent of the parties, mediation may be conducted at  
any place outside the territorial jurisdiction of the court or tribunal, or by way of online  
mediation. 
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that where the parties agree to 
conduct the mediation at any place outside the territorial jurisdiction or online, the same 
shall be deemed to have been undertaken within the territorial jurisdiction of the  court or 
tribunal of competent jurisdiction, for the  purpose of enforcement and challenge of the 
mediated settlement agreement. 
Provided that where the territorial jurisdiction of such online mediation is outside 
India, Part 1 of this Act shall not be app licable to such mediation proceedings  and such 
mediation proceedings shall be international mediations under Part 2 of this Act.  
16. The mediation proceedings with respect to a particular dispute shall be deemed to 
have commenced— 
(a) where there is an existing agreement between the parties to settle the dispute 
through mediation, the day on which the mediator is appointed; or 
(b) in other cases— 
(i) on the day the parties have appointed the mediator; or 
(ii) on the day when the parties have agreed to engage the services of a 
mediation service  provider for settlement of disputes through mediation by 
appointment of a mediator. 
17. (1) The mediator shall assist the parties in an independent, neutral and impartial  
manner in their attempt to reach an amicable settlement of their dispute. 
(2) The mediator shall at all times be guided by the principles of objectivity and  
fairness and protect the voluntariness, confidentiality, and self-determination of the parties, 
and the standards for professional and ethical conduct as may be specified. 
(3) The mediation process may include the mediator taking such measures as may be 
considered appropriate, taking into account the circumstances of the case, including meeting 
with parties or participants, jointly or separately, as frequently as deemed fit by the mediator, 
both in order to convene the mediation, and during the mediation for the orderly and timely 
conduct of the process and to maintain its integrity. 
(4) The mediator shall not be bound by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, or the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872. 
(5) The mediator with the consent of the parties shall determine the language or  
languages to be used in the mediation process. 
18. (1) The mediator shall attempt to facilitate voluntary resolution of the dispute by 
the parties and communicate the view of each party to the other to the extent agreed to by  
them, assist them in identifying issues, reducing misunderstandings, clarifying priorities, 
 
Replacement 
of mediator. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Territorial 
jurisdiction to 
undertake 
mediation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Commencement 
of mediation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conduct of 
mediation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Role of 
mediator. 
322

8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Role of 
mediator in 
other  
proceedings. 
 
 
 
 
 
Withdrawal by 
parties from 
mediation. 
 
 
 
 
 
Time-limit 
for  
completion of 
mediation. 
 
 
 
Mediated 
settlement 
agreement. 
exploring areas of compromise and generating options in an attempt to resolve the dispute  
expeditiously, emphasising that it is the responsibility of the parties to take decision regarding 
their claims. 
(2) The parties shall be informed expressly by the mediator that he only facilitates in 
arriving at a decision to resolve a dispute and that he may not impose any settlement nor give 
any assurance that the mediation may result in a settlement. 
(4) If the parties agree, t he mediator may, at any stage of the mediation 
proceedings, make proposals for a settlement of the dispute. Such proposals need not be 
in writing and need not be accompanied by a statement of the reasons therefor.  Further, 
the partie s are not bound to accept any proposal (in whole or in part) made by the 
mediator.  
 
19. Unless otherwise agreed by the parties,— 
(a) the mediator shall not act as an arbitrator or as a representative or counsel of 
a party in any arbitral or judicial proceeding in respect of a dispute that is the subject 
matter of the mediation proceedings; 
20.      (1) The Central Government may by way of notification specify the 
categories of disputes, where the parties to a dispute are required to attend mediation 
counselling as may  be prescribed before filing any suit or proceedings of civil or 
commercial nature in any court or tribunal. 
 
(2) A mediation counselling shall comprise of not more than [2] sessions. At the 
end of the mediation counselling sessions, the parties or any par ty shall have the 
right to pursue litigation in a court or tribunal, or both parties may choose to pursue 
mediation in accordance with this Act. 
 
(2) Where the parties, or any of them, choose to pursue litigation after the mediation 
counselling as per sub-section (2) of section 20, they shall inform the court or tribunal, in 
such manner as may be prescribed as to the name of the mediator counsellor, the date(s) 
on which the mediation counselling was conducted and the venue where the mediation 
counselling was conducted.   
 
 
21. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in  
force, mediation under this Act shall be completed within a period of one hundred and eighty 
days from the date fixed for the first appearance before the mediator. 
(2) The period for mediation mentioned under sub-section (1) may be extended for a 
further period as agreed by the parties, but not exceeding one hundred and eighty days. 
22. (1) A mediated settlement agreement means and includes an agreement in writing 
between some or all of the parties resulting from mediation, settling some or all of the  
disputes between such parties, and authenticated by the mediator: 
Provided that the terms of the mediated settlement agreement may extend beyond the 
disputes referred to mediation. 
Explanation.—A mediated settlement agreement which is void under the Indian Contract 
Act, 1872, shall not be deemed to be lawful settlement agreement within the meaning of  
mediated settlement agreement. 
(2) Where a mediated settlement agreement is reached between the parties in regard to 
all or some of the disputes, the same shall be reduced in writing and signed by the parties. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sections 26 and 27, the mediated settlement agreement 
so signed— 
(i) i
n case of 
institutio
nal 
mediatio
n, shall 
be 
submitted 
to the 
mediator, 
who 
shall, 
after 
authentic
ating the 
same in 
the manner 
prescribed 
and 
forward it 
with a 
covering 
letter 
signed by 
him, to 
the 
mediatio
n service 
provider 
and also 
provide a 
copy to 
the 
parties; 
(ii) i
n all 
other 
cases, 
shall be 
submitted 
to the 
mediator 
who 
shall, 
after 
authentic
ating the 
settlemen
t 
agreemen
t in the 
manner 
prescribe
d, 
provide a 
copy to 
all the 
parties. 
(4) Subje
ct to provisions 
of sections 26 323

9 
 
and 27, where 
no agreement 
is arrived at  
between the 
parties, within 
the time 
period as 
provided 
under section 
21, or where, 
the mediator 
is of the view 
that no 
settlement is 
possible,— 
(i) t
he 
mediato
r shall 
submit a 
failure 
report to 
this 
effect to 
the 
mediati
on 
service 
provider 
in 
writing 
in case 
of 
instituti
onal 
mediati
on; 
(ii) i
n all 
other 
cases, 
the 
mediato
r shall 
prepare 
a failure 
report to 
this 
effect 
and 
provide 
a signed 
copy to 
all the 
parties: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10  
 
 
 
 
 
 
15  
 
 
 
 
 
20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
25  
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 9 of 1872. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35  
 
 
 
 
 
 
40  
 
 
 
 
 
 
45  
324

10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10  
 
 
39 of 1987. 
 
15  
 
 
 
 
 
 
20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
25  
 
 
 
 
 
30  
 
 
 
 
 
 
35  
 
 
 
 
 
 
40  
 
 
 
 
 
 
45  
Provided that the report referred under this sub-section shall not disclose the cause of 
failure of the parties to reach a settlement, or any other matter or thing referring to their 
conduct, during mediation. 
(5) The parties, may, at any time during the mediation process, make an agreement with 
respect to any of the disputes which is the subject matter of mediation,  provided that no 
agreement shall be made  prejudicially affecting the properties, assets, rights and 
entitlements of any person, who is not a signatory to the mediated settlement agreement. 
(6) Any mediated settlement agreement under this section shall also include a  
settlement agreement resulting from online mediation and duly signed by the parties by  
way of secure electronic signature or otherwise and authenticated by the mediator in the  
like manner. 
 
23. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the med iator, mediation service  
provider, the parties and participants in the mediation shall keep confidential the following 
matters relating to the mediation proceedings, namely:— 
(i) acknowledgements, opinions, suggestions, promises, proposals, apologies 
and admissions made during the mediation; 
(ii) acceptance of, or willingness to, accept proposals made or exchanged in the 
mediation; 
(iii) documents prepared solely for the conduct of mediation or in relation 
thereto. 
(2) No audio or video recording of the mediation proceedings shall be made or maintained 
by the parties or the participants including the mediator and mediation service provider,  
whether conducted in person or online to ensure confidentiality of the conduct of mediation 
proceedings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Confidentiality. 
325

11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Admissibility 
and privilege 
against 
disclosure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Termination 
of mediation. 
(3) No party or participant to the mediation shall in any proceeding before a court or 
tribunal including arbitral tribunal, rely on or introduce as evidence any information or 
communication set forth in clauses (i) to (iii) of sub-section (1), including any information in 
electronic form, or verbal communication and the court or tribunal including arbitral tribunal 
shall not take cognizance 
of such information or evidence. 5 
(4) The provisions of this section shall not prevent the mediator from compiling 
or disclosing general information concerning matters that have been subject of 
mediation, for research, reporting or training purposes, if the information does not 
expressly or indirectly identify a party or participants or the specific disputes in the 
mediation. 10  
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that nothing contained 
in this section shall apply to the mediated settlement agreement where its  disclosure is 
necessary for the limited purpose of implementation, enforcement  and challenge. 
24. (1) No mediator or participant in the mediation, including experts and advisers   15  
engaged for the purpose of the mediation and persons involved in the administration of the 
mediation, shall at any time be permitted, or compelled to disclose to any court or tribunal, or 
in any adjudicatory proceedings, by whatever description, any communication in mediation, 
or to state the contents or conditions of any document or nature or conduct of parties during 
mediation including the content of negotiations or offers or counter offers with which they   20  
have become acquainted during the mediation: 
Provided  that nothing  in this section  and section  23 shall protect  from  
disclosure, information sought or provided to prove or dispute a claim or complaint of 
professional misconduct of mediator or malpractice based on conduct occurring during the 
mediation. 25  
(2) There shall be no privilege or confidentiality that will attach to— 
(a) a threat or statement made during a mediation showing a significant imminent 
threat to commit an  offence under Chapter XVI (Offences against the Human Body) of the 
Indian Penal Code, 1862;  
(b) information relating to domestic violence or child abuse; and 
(c) statements made during a mediation showing a significant imminent threat to 30  
public health or safety. 
25. The mediation proceedings under this Act shall be deemed to terminate— 
(a) on the date of signing and authentication of the mediated settlement 
agreement; or 
(b) on the date of the written declaration of the mediator, after consultation with 35  
the parties or otherwise, to the effect that further efforts at mediation are no longer 
justified; or 
(c) on the expiry of seven days from the date of the second mediation session, 
where a party fails to appear before the mediator consecutively for the first two 
mediation sessions, and the mediator has not received any communication from such 40  
party; or 
(d) on the date of the communication by a party or parties in writing, addressed 
to the mediator and the other parties to the effect that the party wishes to opt out 
of mediation: 
Provided that the parties shall have to attend at least two mediation sessions 45  
before giving such communication; or 
(e) on the expiry of time limit under section 21. 
326

12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
10  
 
 
 
 
 
 
15  
 
 
 
 
 
 
20  
39 of 1987. 
 
 
 
 
 
25  
 
 
 
 
5 of 1908. 
30  
 
 
 
 
 
35  
39 of 1987. 
 
 
 
 
 
40  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45  
26. (1) For the purposes of court annexed mediation including pre-litigation mediation, 
the procedure of conducting mediation shall be such as may be determined under the  
practice directions or rules, by whatever name called, framed by the Supreme Court or the 
High Courts. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Supreme Court or the High Courts, as the 
case may be, may constitute mediation committee. 
(3) The mediation committee shall, for the purposes of conducting mediation, in all 
courts, maintain a panel of mediators in accordance with the practice directions or rules, by 
whatever name called, framed by the Supreme Court or the High Courts, as the case may be, 
and such mediators may also conduct mediation other than those referred by a court. 
(4) Where the parties to a mediation referred by the court or tribunal arrive at settlement 
agreement in respect of some or all of the disputes, a copy of settlement agreement shall be 
placed before the said court or tribunal for consideration and in cases, other than court  
referred mediation provided, to the parties. 
(5) If the parties do not reach settlement agreement referred to in sub -section (4), a 
failure report shall be forwarded by the mediator— 
(i) to the court or tribunal, as the case may be, which has referred the matter for 
mediation; 
(ii) to the parties in all other cases. 
27. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to the proceedings conducted by 
Lok Adalat and Permanent Lok Adalat under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987. 
CHAPTER V 
ENFORCEMENT OF MEDIATED SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT 
28. (1) A mediated settlement agreement resulting from a mediation signed by the  
parties and authenticated by the mediator shall be final and binding on the parties and  
persons claiming under them respectively and enforceable as per the provisions of sub-
section (2). 
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 29, the mediated settlement agreement shall be 
enforced in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in the same 
manner as if it were a judgment or decree passed by a court, and may, accordingly, be relied 
on by any of the parties or persons claiming through them, by way of defence, set off or  
otherwise in any legal proceeding. 
Provided that the provisions of Section 28 (2) of this Act shall not be applicable to an 
international mediation settlement agreement covered under Part 2 of this Act.  
Provided further that Parties to an international mediation settlement agreement may by 
writing exclude the applicability of Part 2 of the Act for the purpose of enforceability of 
the international mediation settlement agreement under Section 28 (2) of the Act. 
(3) A mediated settlement agreement shall not be binding on nor shall it be 
enforceable against the properties, assets, rights and entitlements of any person, who is not a 
signatory to the mediated settlement agreement, and to such extent the mediated settlement 
agreement shall be void ab initio. 
29. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
in any case in which the mediated settlement agreement is arrived at between the parties other 
than in court referred mediation or by Lok Adalat or Permanent Lok Adalat under the Legal 
Services Authorities Act, 1987, and is sought to be challenged by either of the parties, such 
party may file an application before the court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction. 
(2) A mediated settlement agreement may be challenged only on all or any of the  
following grounds, namely:— 
(i) fraud; 
(ii) corruption; 
(iii) impersonation; 
(iv) w
here the 
mediation 
was 
conducted 
in 
disputes 
or matters 
not fit for 
mediation 
under 
section 7. 
(3) An 
application for 
challenging the 
mediated 
settlement 
agreement shall 
not be  made 
after ninety days 
have elapsed 
from the date on 
which the party 
making that 
application (i) 
in the case of 
fraud, 
corruption or 
impersonation, 
becoming 
aware of the 
same; and (ii) 
in any other 
case, has 
received the 
copy of 
mediated 
settlement 
agreement 
under sub-
section (3) of 
section 22: 
327

13 
 
 
Court annexed 
mediation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proceedings 
of Lok   Adalat 
and 
Permanent 
Lok 
Adalat not 
to be 
affected. 
Enforcement 
of mediated 
settlement 
agreement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Challenge to 
mediated 
settlement 
agreement. 
328

14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Costs. 
 
 
Limitation. 
Provided that if the court or tribunal, as the case may be, is satisfied that the applicant 
was prevented by sufficient cause from making the application within the said period of  
ninety days, it may entertain the application within a further period of ninety days. 
30. Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, all costs of mediation, including the fees of the 
mediator and the charges of the mediation service provider shall be borne equally by the parties. 
31. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Limitation Act, 1963 or in any other law 
for the time being in force, in computing the period of limitation fixed for any proceedings in 
respect of which a mediation has been undertaken under this Act, the period from the date of 
commencement of mediation under section 16, and up to— 
(i) submission of report under sub-section (4) of section 22; or 
(ii) termination of mediation under section 25; or 
(iii) the settlement agreement arrived at in terms of sub-section (4) of section 26, 
in case of mediation other than court referred mediation; or 
(iv) forwarding of failure report in terms of clause (ii) of sub-section (5) of 
section 26, 
shall be excluded. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
36 of 1963. 
 
 
 
 
10  
 
 
 
 
 
 
15  
 
 
 
 
Online 
mediation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Establishment 
and 
incorporation 
of Mediation 
Council. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Composition 
of Council. 
CHAPTER VI 
ONLINE MEDIATION 
32. (1) Online mediation including pre-litigation mediation may be conducted at any 
stage of mediation under this Act, with the written consent of the parties including by the   20 
use of electronic form or computer networks. 
(2) The process of online mediation shall be in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) The conduct of online mediation shall be in the circumstances, which ensure that 
the essential elements of integrity of proceedings and confidentiality are maintained at all  25  
times and the mediator may take such appropriate steps in this regard as he deems fit. 
(4) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, in the case of online mediations, the 
mediator, the parties and the participants shall maintain confidentiality of all mediation 
communications . 
CHAPTER VII 
MEDIATION COUNCIL OF INDIA 30  
33. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish for the purposes of 
this Act, a Council to be known as the Mediation Council of India to perform the duties and 
discharge the functions under this Act. 
(2) The Council shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual 
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, 35  
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to enter into contract, and 
shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 
(3) The head office of the Council shall be at Delhi or at such other place as may be 
notified by the Central Government. 
(4) The Council may, in consultation with the Central Government, establish offices at 40  
other places in India and abroad. 
34. (1) The Council shall consist of the following members, namely:— 
(a) a person of ability, integrity and standing having adequate knowledge and 
professional experience or shown capacity in dealing with problems relating to law, 
mediation, alternate dispute resolution and public affairs to be appointed by the 45  
Central Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of India—Chairperson; 
329

15 
 
(b) fifteen (15) persons having knowledge and experience in mediation and 
alternate dispute resolution mechanisms, being chosen in the manner as may 
be prescribed, and till such time as the relevant rules or regulations are made, 
they shall be appointed by the Chief Justice of India —Part-Time Member. 
Provided that when a national body of mediators comes into being pursuant to 
Section 43A, atleast 10 (ten) persons in this category shall be nominees of such 
national body; 
(c) an eminent person having experience in research or teaching in the field of 
5 mediation and alternate dispute resolution laws, to be appointed by the Central 
Government—Part-Time Member; 
(d) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Legal Affairs, 
Ministry of Law and Justice or his representative not below the rank of Joint  
Secretary—Member, ex officio; 
10  (e) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance or his representative not below the rank of Joint Secretary— 
Member, ex officio; 
(f) Chief Executive Officer—Member-Secretary, ex officio; and 
(g) one representative of a recognised body of commerce and industry, chosen 
15 by the Central Government—Part-Time Member. 
(2) The Chairperson, Full-Time Member and Part-Time Member of the Council, other 
than ex officio members, shall hold office as such, for a term of three years from the date 
on which they enter upon their office and they shall not be eligible for re-appointment: 
Provided that no Chairperson, Full-Time Member or Part-Time Member, other than 
20   ex officio member, shall hold office as such after he has attained the age of seventy years 
in the case of Chairperson and sixty-seven years in the case of Full-Time or Part-Time 
Member. 
(3) The salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of the Chairperson and 
Full-Time members referred to in clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) shall be such as may 
be prescribed. 
25  (4) The Part-Time Member shall be entitled to such travelling and other allowances as 
may be prescribed. 
  (5) The Chairperson, the Full Time Member, the Part Time Member, the Secretaries 
and the Chief Executive Officer” shall be knowledgeable in mediation. 
35. No act or proceeding of the Council shall be invalid merely by reason of— 
(a) any vacancy or any defect, in the constitution of the Council; 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Chairperson or 
30 Full-Time Member or Part-Time Member of the Council; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Council not affecting the merits of the case. 
36. The Chairperson or the Full-Time Member or Part-Time Member may, by notice in 
writing, under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office: 
Provided that the Chairperson or the Full-Time Member or Part-Time Member shall, 
35    unless he is permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue to 
hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a 
person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term 
of office, whichever is earlier. 
37. (1) The Central Government may, remove the Chairperson or Full-Time Member or 
40 Part-Time Member from his office, if he— 
(a) is an undischarged insolvent; or 
(b) has engaged at any time, during his term of office, in any paid employment 
without the permission of the Central Government; or 
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central 
45 Government, involves moral turpitude; or 
(d) h
a
s
 
a
c
q
u
i
r
e
d
 
s
u
c
h
 
f
i
n
a
n
c
i
a
l
 
o
r
 
o
t
h
e
r
 
i
n
t
e
r
e
s
t
 
a
s
 
i
s
 
l
i
k
e
l
y
 
t
o
 330

16 
 
affect prejudicially his functions as a Chairperson or such Member; or  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vacancies, 
etc., not to 
invalidate 
proceedings of 
Council. 
 
 
 
 
Resignation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Removal. 
331

17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appointment  
of experts and  
constitution 
of  
Committees. 
 
Secretariat and 
Chief 
Executive 
Officer of 
Council. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Duties and 
Functions of 
the Council. 
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial 
to the public interest; or 
(f) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Chairperson or 
Full-Time Member or Part-Time Member: 
Provided that where a Chairperson or Full-Time Member or Part-Time Member is    5 
proposed to be removed on any ground, he shall be informed of charges against him and 
given an opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges. 
38. The Council may, appoint such experts and constitute such committees of experts 
as it may consider necessary to discharge its functions on such terms and conditions as may 
be specified. 10  
39. (1) There shall be a Chief Executive Officer of the Council, who shall be responsible 
for the day to day administration and implementation of the decisions of the Council. 
(2) The qualification, appointment and other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chief Executive Officer shall be such as may be specified. 
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall discharge such functions and perform such 15  
duties as may be specified. 
(4) There shall be a Secretariat to the Council consisting of such number of officers 
and employees as may be specified. 
(5) The qualification, appointment and other terms and conditions of the service of 
the employees and other officers of the Council shall be such as may be specified. 20  
(6) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and employees as 
may be necessary for the functioning of the Council till regulations are made under this section. 
40. The Council shall— 
(a) endevour to promote domestic and international mediation in India through  
appropriate guidelines; 25  
(b) endevour to develop India to be a robust centre for domestic and international 
mediation; 
(c) lay down the guidelines for the continuous education, certification and 
assessment of mediators by the recognised mediation institutes; 
(d) provide for manner of registration of mediators and renew, withdraw, suspend 30  
or cancel registration on the basis of conditions as may be specified; 
(e) lay down standards for professional and ethical conduct of mediators under 
sub-section (2) of section 17; 
(f) hold trainings, workshops and courses in the area of mediation in collaboration  
with mediation service providers, law firms and universities and other stakeholders, 35  
both Indian and international, and any other mediation institutes; 
(g) enter into memoranda of understanding or agreements with domestic and 
international bodies or organisations or institutions; 
(h) recognise mediation institutes and mediation service providers and renew,  
withdraw, suspend or cancel such recognition; 40  
(i) specify the criteria for recognition of mediation institutes and mediation 
service providers; 
(j) call for any information or record of mediation institutes and mediation service 
providers; 
332

18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15  
 
 
 
 
 
 
20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25  
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 of 1987.   30  
(k) lay down standards for professional and ethical conduct of the mediation  
institutes and mediation service providers; 
(l) publish such information, data, research studies and such other information 
as may be required; 
(m) maintain an electronic depository of the mediated settlement agreements  
made in India and for such other records related thereto in such manner as may be  
specified; and 
(n) perform any other function as may be assigned to it by the Central Government. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MEDIATION SERVICE PROVIDERS, MEDIATION INSTITUTES AND 
NATIONAL BODY OF MEDIATORS 
41. The mediation service provider recognised by the Council shall be graded by it in 
the manner as may be prescribed. 
 
42. The mediation service providers shall perform the following functions, namely:— 
(a) accredit mediators and maintain panel of mediators in the manner as may 
be prescribed; 
(b) provide the services of mediator for conduct of mediation; 
(c) provide all facilities, secretarial assistance and infrastructure for the efficient 
conduct of mediation; 
(d) promote professional and ethical conduct amongst mediators; 
(e) maintain an electronic depository, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed, for keeping a record of the settlement agreements; and 
(f) such other functions as may be prescribed. 
43. The Council shall recognise mediation institutes to perform such duties and exercise 
such functions as may be prescribed. 
43A. The Council shall recognise a national body of mediators which is formed to 
protect the interest of mediators, provided that such body is not a mediation service provider or a mediation 
institute. 
 
CHAPTER IX 
COMMUNITY MEDIATION 
44. (1) Any dispute likely to affect peace, harmony and tranquility amongst the residents 
of any area or locality or any community or a group of people may be settled through 
community mediation with prior mutual consent of the parties to the dispute. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), any of the parties shall make an application  
before the concerned Authority constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 
or District Magistrate or Sub -Divisional Magistrate in areas  where no such Authority has  
been constituted, for referring the dispute to mediation. 
(3) In order to facilitate settlement of a dispute for which an application has been 
received under sub-section (2), the concerned Authority constituted under the Legal Services 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mediation 
service 
providers. 
Functions of 
mediation 
service 
providers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mediation 
institutes. 
 
 
 
 
Community 
mediation. 
39 of 1987. 35  
 
 
 
 
40  
Authorities Act, 1987 or the District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional Magistrate, as the case 
may be, shall constitute panel of mediators, after considering the suggestions (if any) that 
may be given by the parties, which may include persons in the panel under sub-section (4) of 
section 44 or such other persons as may be deemed fit given the nature of the dispute. 
 
Provided that one person appointed in the panel shall be a trained mediator.  
(4) For the purpose of section sub -section (2) of section 44 (2) and sub -
section (3) of section 44 , the Authority or District Magistrate or the  Sub-Divisional 
Magistrate, as the case may be, shall notify a panel of mediators, which may be revised 
from time to time. 333

19 
 
(5) T
h
e
 
f
o
l
l
o
w
i
n
g
 
p
e
r
s
o
n
s
 
m
a
y
 
b
e
 
i
n
c
l
u
d
e
d
 
i
n
 
t
h
e
 
p
a
n
e
l
 
r
e
f
e
r
r
e
d
 
t
o
 
in sub-section (4)— 
(a) persons of standing and integrity who are respectable in the community; 
(b) any local person whose contribution to the society has been recognised; 
(c) representative of area or resident welfare associations; and 
334

20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Procedure for 
community 
mediation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mediation 
Fund. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accounts and 
audit. 
(d) any other person deemed appropriate. 
(6) While making panel referred to in sub-section (4) the representation of women or 
any other class or category of persons may be considered. 
45. (1) Any community mediation shall be conducted by the panel of mediators referred 
to in sub -se ct io n (2 ) o f se c t io n 44 a nd sub-section (3) of section 44 who shall 
devise suitable procedure for the   5 purpose of resolving the dispute. 
(2) In every case where a settlement agreement is arrived at through mediation under 
this Chapter, the same may be reduced into writing with the signature of the parties and authenticated   
10 by the panel of mediators, a copy of which he provided to the parties and in cases where no 
settlement agreement is arrived at, a failure report may be submitted by the panel of mediators to 
the Authority or the District Magistrate or the Sub-Divisional Magistrate, as the case may be, and 
to the parties. 
(3) Any settlement agreement arrived at under this Chapter shall  be enforceable as a 
judgment or decree of a civil court once the same has been duly confirmed by the jurisdictional 
High Court as prescribed. 
CHAPTER X 
MISCELLANEOUS 20  
46. (1) There shall be a fund to be called "Mediation Fund" (hereinafter referred to as 
the "Fund") for the purposes of promotion, facilitation and encouragement of mediation 
under this Act, which shall be administered by the Council. 
(2) There shall be credited to the Fund the following, namely:— 
(a) all monies provided by the Central Government; 25  
(b) all fees and other charges received from mediation service provider, mediation 
institutes or bodies or persons; 
(c) all monies received by the Council in the form of donations, grants, 
contributions and income from other sources; 
(d) grants made by the Central Government or the State Government for the 30  
purposes of the Fund; 
(e) amounts deposited by persons as contributions to the Fund; 
(f) amounts received in the Fund from any other source; and 
(g) interest on the above or other income received out of the investment made  
from the Fund. 
(h) Any costs or fees ordered by a court or tribunal, in relation to a mediation, 
other than any amount specified to be paid to the mediator for the service provided by 
the mediator.  35  
(3) The Fund shall be applied towards meeting the salaries and other allowances of 
Chairperson, Full-Time Member, Part-Time Member, Chief Executive Officer, Officers 
and employees and the expenses of the Council including expenses incurred in the exercise 
of its powers and discharge of its duties under this Act. 
47. (1) The Council shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and 40  
prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the balance sheet, in such form and  
manner as may be prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India. 
(2) The accounts of the Council shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor- 
General of India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be  45 
payable by the Council to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
335

21 
 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Council shall have the same rights, privileges 
and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India 
has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have 
5  the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other  
documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the Council. 
(4) The accounts of the Council as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report  
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and the Central Government 
10    shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament. 
48. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Council shall, in 
exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such 
directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from 
time to time: 
15  Provided that the views of the Council shall be taken into consideration before any  
direction is given under this sub-section. 
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not 
shall be final. 
49. Nothing contained in this Act shall prevent the Central Government or State 
20  Government, as the case may be, from framing any scheme or guidelines, to be notified, for 
resolution of any dispute through mediation or conciliation in cases where the Central  
Government or State Government or any of its entity or agencies is one of the parties and in 
such cases mediation or conciliation may be conducted in accordance with such scheme or 
guidelines. 
25  50. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no dispute including a commercial 
dispute, wherein the Central Government or State Government or any of its agencies, public 
bodies, corporations and local bodies including entities controlled or owned by them is a  
party, the settlement agreement arrived at shall be signed only after obtaining the prior  
written consent of the competent authority of such Government or any of its entity or 
30  agencies, public bodies, corporations and local bodies, as the case may be. 
51. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against  the Central      
Government or a State Government or any officer of such Government, or the Chairperson, 
Full-Time Member or Part-Time Member or Officer or employee of the Council or a mediator, 
mediation institutes, mediation service providers, which is done or is intended to be done in 
35  good faith under  this Act or  the rules or  regulations made  thereunder. Further, no 
mediator shall be held liable for anything bonafide done or omitted to be done by him during the 
mediation proceedings for civil or criminal action nor shall he be summoned by any party to the 
suit or proceeding to appear in a Court of law to testify in regard to information received by him 
or action taken by him or in respect of drafts or records prepared by him or shown to him during 
the mediation. 
52. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the 
provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may make provision for— 
40  (a) the salaries and allowances and the terms and conditions of the Chairperson 
and Full-time Members under sub-section (3) of section 34; 
(b) the travelling and other allowances payable to the Part-Time Member under 
sub-section (4) of section 34; 
(c) the form and manner of annual statement of accounts, including the balance 
45 sheet under sub-section (1) of section 47; and 
(d) any other matter which is to be, or may be prescribed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of 
Central 
Government 
to issue 
directions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of 
Governments 
to frame 
schemes or 
guidelines. 
 
 
 
Mediated 
settlement 
agreement 
where 
Government 
or its, agency, 
etc., is a party. 
 
Protection of 
action   taken 
in good faith. 
 
 
 
Power to 
make rules. 
336

22 
 
 
Power to 
make 
regulations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Laying. 
53. (1) The Council may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by 
notification, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to  
carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  
regulations may make provision for—                                                                                       5 
(a) such other forum under Explanation I to clause (l) of section 3; 
(b) qualification, experience and accreditation for mediators of foreign nationality 
under the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 10; 
(c) standards for professional and ethical conduct of mediators under 
sub-section (2) of section 17; 10  
(d)  
(e)  
(f) manner of process of conducting online mediation under sub-section (2) of 15  
section 32; 
(g) the terms and conditions of experts and committees of experts under 
section 38; 
(h) qualifications, appointment and other terms and conditions of service of the  
Chief Executive Officer under sub-section (2) of section 39; 20  
(i) functions and duties to be performed by the Chief Executive Officer under  
sub-section (3) of section 39; 
(j) the number of officers and employees of the Secretariat of the Council under 
sub-section (4) of section 39; 
(k) the qualification, appointment and other terms and conditions of the 25  
employees and other officers of the Council under sub-section (5) of section 39; 
(l) conditions for registration of mediators and renewal, withdrawal, suspension 
or cancellations of such registrations under clause (d) of section 40; 
(m) criteria for recognition of mediation institutes and mediation service providers 
under clause (i) of section 40; 30  
(n) manner of maintenance of electronic depository of mediated settlement 
agreement under clause (m) of section 40; 
(o) manner for grading of mediation service provider under section 41; 
(p) such other functions of mediation service provider under clause (f) of 
section 42; 35  
(q) duties and functions to be performed by mediation institutes under 
section 43; and 
(r) any other matter in respect of which provision is necessary for the performance 
of functions of the Council under this Act. 
54. Every notification under sub-section (2) of section 7, sub-section (2) of section 56, 40  
rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,  
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the  
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
337

23 
 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the notification, rule or regulation or both 
Houses agree that the notification, rule or regulation should not be made, the notification,  
rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
5  prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notification, rule or regulation. 
55. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not  
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for removing 
the difficulty: 
10  Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a  
period of three years from the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 
56. (1) Subject to the enactments mentioned in the Second Schedule, the provisions 
15   of this Act shall have overriding effect for conduct of mediation or conciliation notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, and 
any instrument having force of law. It being clarified that where the enactments 
mentioned in the Second Schedule do not prescribe any rules or regulations governing the 
conduct of mediation or conciliation, the provisions of this Act and the rules and 
regulations framed hereunder shall be applicable.   
(2) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it 
may, by notification, amend the Second Schedule and thereupon it shall be deemed to have 
20 been amended accordingly. 
57. This Act shall not apply to, or in relation to, any mediation or conciliation commenced 
before the coming into force of this Act. 
 
58. The Indian Contract Act, 1872, shall be amended in the manner specified in the  
Third Schedule. 
25  59. The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, shall be amended in the manner specified in the 
Fourth Schedule. 
 
60. The Legal Service Authorities Act, 1987, shall be amended in the manner specified 
in the Fifth Schedule. 
 
61. The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, shall be amended in the manner specified 
30   in the Sixth Schedule. 
62. The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006, shall be amended 
in the manner specified in the Seventh Schedule. 
 
63. The Companies Act, 2013, shall be amended in the manner specified in the Eighth 
Schedule. 
 
35  64. The Commercial Courts Act, 2015, shall be amended in the manner specified in the 
Ninth Schedule. 
 
65. The Consumer Protection Act, 2019, shall be amended in the manner specified in 
the Tenth Schedule. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Provisions 
of Act to 
have 
overriding 
effect on 
mediation or 
conciliation 
contained in 
other laws. 
 
Act not to apply 
to pending 
proceedings. 
Amendment of 
Act 9 of 1872. 
 
Amendment 
of Act 5 of 
1908.  
Amendment 
of Act 39 of  
1987.  
Amendment 
of Act 26 of  
1996.  
Amendment 
of Act 27 of  
2006.  
Amendment 
of Act 18 of  
2013.  
Amendment 
of Act 4 of 
2016.  
Amendment 
of Act 35 of  
2019.  
338

 
 
339

 
PART II 
 
INTERNATIONAL MEDIATION 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
International Commercial Mediation (Singapore Convention) 
 
66. Application and Scope 
 
1. In this Chapter, an international mediation settlement agreement means a settlement 
agreement resulting from mediation and concluded in writing by parties to resolve:  
 
(a) a commercial dispute as defined in the United Nations Convention on International 
Settlement Agreements Resulting from Mediation set forth in the [] Schedule;  
 
(b) which, at the time of its conclusion, is international as provided under that Convention.  
 
2. This Chapter will not apply to a settlement agreement mentioned in Article 1, paragraph 2 or 
3 of the Convention. 
 
3. In this Chapter, an agreement covered by sub -section (1) above, will be referred to an 
‘international commercial settlement agreement’. 
 
4. In this Chapter, ‘High Court’ means the High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil 
jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject -matter of the 
agreement if the same had been the subject -matter of a suit, and in other case s, a High Court 
having jurisdiction to hear appeals from decrees of courts subordinate to that High Court.  
 
67. When international commercial settlement agreement binding .—Any international 
commercial settlement agreement which would be enforceable under this Chapter, shall be 
treated as binding for all purposes on the persons as between whom it was made, and persons 
claiming under them, and may accordingly be relied on by any of those persons by way of 
defence, set off or otherwise in any legal proceeding s in India. Any references in this Chapter 
to enforcing an international commercial settlement agreement shall be construed as including 
references to relying on such international commercial settlement agreement.  
 
68. Enforcement of international commercial settlement agreement 
 
1. Any person referred to in Section 66 above, may apply to the High Court for the purposes of (a) 
enforcing the international commercial settlement agreement in India, or, (b) establishing in any 
proceedings anticipated, filed or pen ding before any court, tribunal, arbitral tribunal or other 
judicial authority, that the matter in dispute before such authority has already been resolved 
under an international commercial settlement agreement. 
 
2. If any proceedings are initiated or pending in respect of or concerning a matter that a party 
claims was already resolved by an international commercial settlement agreement, such court, 
tribunal, arbitral tribunal or other judicial authority where such proceedings are filed or referred, 
on an application by a party, may, if it considers it proper, adjourn the proceedings in the matter 
until determination of the application under sub-section (1) (b) above. 
 
69. Evidence.— 1. The party applying for the enforcement of an international commercial 
settlement agreement under Section 68(1) or (2) shall, at the time of the application, produce 340

 
before the High Court— 
 
(a) The settlement agreement signed by the parties;  
 
(b) Evidence that the settlement agreement resulted from mediation, such as:  
 
(i) The mediator’s signature on the settlement agreement;  
 
(ii) A document signed by the mediator indicating that the mediation was carried out;  
 
(iii) An attestation by the institution that administered the mediation; or  
 
(iv) In the absence of (i), (ii) or (iii), any other evidence acceptable to the High Court.  
 
2. The requirement that an international commercial settlement agreement shall be signed by the 
parties or, where applicable, the mediator, is met in relation to an electronic communication if :  
 
a) A method is used to identify the parties or the mediator and to indicate the parties’ or mediator’s 
intention in respect of the information contained in the electronic communication; and  
 
(b) if the information contained therein is accessible so as to be useable for subsequent reference.  
 
3. If the international commercial settlement agreement to be produced under sub -section (1) is in a 
foreign language, the party seeking to enforce the internat ional commercial mediation settlement 
agreement shall produce a translation into English certified as correct by a diplomatic or consular 
agent of the country to which that party belongs or certified as correct in such other manner as 
may be sufficient according to the law in force in India. 
 
70. Grounds for refusal of enforcement of international commercial mediation settlement 
agreements.—  
 
1. The High Court before which the application in Section 68(1) or (2) is made may, at the request of 
the party agains t whom the international commercial settlement agreement is sought to be 
enforced or invoked, refuse to grant the application if such party furnishes proof of any of the 
grounds set out in sub-section (2).  
 
2. Enforcement of an international commercial media tion settlement agreement may be refused, at 
the request of the party against whom it is invoked, only if that party furnishes to the court proof 
that— 
 
(a) A party to the settlement agreement was under some incapacity;  
 
(b) The settlement agreement sought to be relied upon:  
 
(i) Is null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed under the law to which the parties 
have validly subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the law deemed applicable by 
the court;  
 
(ii) Is not binding, or is not final, according to its terms; or  
 
(iii) Has been subsequently modified;  
 
(c) The obligations in the settlement agreement:  341

 
 
(i) Have been performed; or  
 
(ii) Are not clear or comprehensible;  
 
(d) Granting relief would be contrary to the terms of the settlement agreement;  
 
(e) There was a serious breach by the mediator of standards applicable to the mediator or the 
mediation without which breach that party would not have entered into the settlement 
agreement; or  
 
(f) There was a failure by the mediator to disclose to the parties, circumstances that raise justifiable 
doubts as to the mediator’s impartiality or independence and such failure to disclose had a 
material impact or undue influence on a party without which failure that party would not have 
entered into the settlement agreement.  
 
3. Even if the conditions in sub-section (2) are fulfilled, the court may refuse to grant relief if it finds 
that:  
 
(a) granting relief would be contrary to the public policy of India; or  
 
(b) the subject matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by mediation under Indian law.  
 
71. Enforcement of international commercial mediation settlement agreements. —Where the 
Court is satisfied that the international commercial settlement agreement is enforceable under this 
Chapter, the international commercial mediation settlement agreement  shall be deemed to be a 
judgement and decree of that Court. 
 
72 Appealable orders.— 
An appeal shall lie from the order refusing to enforce an international commercial settlement 
agreement under Section 71, to the Court authorised by law to hear appeals from such order. 
 
73. Saving.—Nothing in this Chapter shall prejudice any rights which any person would have had of 
enforcing in India of any international commercial mediation settlement agreement  or of availing 
of any international commercial mediation settlement agreement in India if this Chapter had not 
been enacted.  
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 International Mediations (Other than Singapore Convention)  
 
MI Note: While the Singapore Convention applies only to international commercial mediations 
that are defined in the Singapore Convention. There is a need to recognize other forms of 
international mediated settlement agreements as well, including from non -convention countries 
as well as other form of disputes, including employment, matrimonial/custody, family and 
property, consumer, etc, 
 
74. Application and Scope  
 
1. In this Chapter,  international settlement agreement means a settlement agreement resulting from 
mediation, which is international in that:  
  
(a) At least two parties to the settlement agreement have their domicile, places of incorporation, or 342

 
places of business in different countries; or   
 
(b) The country in which the parties to the settlement agreement have their domicile, place of 
incorporation, or place of business is different from either: 
 
(i)  The country in which a substantial part of the obligations under the set tlement agreement is 
performed; or   
 
(ii)  The country with which the subject matter of the settlement agreement is most closely 
connected; 
but does not include a settlement agreement that is governed by Chapter I of this Part.  
 
(2) The enforcement of an international settlement agreement under this section shall be 
subject to any other law applicable to such agreements, or to any order of a judicial authority in 
respect of any matters forming a part of the mediated settlement agreement.  
 
(3) In this Chapter court shall mean: 
 
(i) the principal civil court of original jurisdiction in a district and includes the High Court in 
exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction having jurisdiction to decide the subject matter of 
the mediation if the same had bee n the subject matter of a suit, but will not include any civil court 
of a grade inferior to such principal Civil Court or any Court of Small Causes;  and  
 
(ii) where the subject matter of the mediation would fall within the exclusive jurisdiction of any 
special court, tribunal or quasi -judicial body under a law, such special court or tribunal or quasi -
judicial body. 
  
75. When international settlement agreement binding. — Any international settlement agreement 
which would be enforceable under this Chapter, shall be treated as binding for all purposes on the 
persons as between whom it was made, and persons claiming under them, and may accordingly be 
relied on by any of thos e persons by way of defence, set off or otherwise in any legal proceedings 
in India. Any references in this Chapter to enforcing an international settlement agreement shall be 
construed as including references to relying on such international settlement agreement. 
 
76. Evidence.— 1. The party applying for the enforcement of an international mediation settlement 
agreement shall, at the time of the application, produce before the court— 
 
(a) The settlement agreement signed by the parties;  
 
(b) Evidence that the settlement agreement resulted from mediation, such as:  
 
(i) The mediator’s signature on the settlement agreement;  
 
(ii) A document signed by the mediator indicating that the mediation was carried out;  
 
(iii) An attestation by the institution that administered the mediation; or  
 
(iv) In the absence of (i), (ii) or (iii), any other evidence acceptable to the competent authority.  
 
2. The requirement that a settlement agreement shall be signed by the parti es or, where applicable, 
the mediator, is met in relation to an electronic communication if:  
 
(a) A method is used to identify the parties or the mediator and to indicate the parties’ or mediator’s 343

 
intention in respect of the information contained in the electronic communication; and 
 
(b) if the information contained therein is accessible so as to be useable for subsequent reference.  
 
3. If the international mediation settlement agreement to be produced under sub -section (1) is in a 
foreign language, the party seeking to enforce the international commercial mediation settlement 
agreement shall produce a translation into English certified as correct by a diplomatic or consular 
agent of the country to which that party belongs or certified as correct in such other manner as 
may be sufficient according to the law in force in India. 
 
77. Grounds for refusal of enforcement of international mediation settlement agreements. —  
 
1. Enforcement of an international mediation settlement agreement may be refused, at the req uest of 
the party against whom it is invoked, only if that party furnishes to the court proof that — 
 
(a)      the party was not competent as defined in section 11 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, to enter 
into the mediated settlement agreement; 
 
(b) The settlement agreement sought to be relied upon:  
 
(i) Is null and void, voidable, inoperative or incapable of being performed;  
 
(ii) Is not binding, or is not final, according to its terms;  
 
(iii) Has been subsequently modified; or 
 
(iv) the object or consideration of the mediated settlement agreement is not lawful in the manner 
provided in section 23 of the Contract Act, 1872; 
 
(c) The obligations in the settlement agreement have been performed;  
 
(d) Granting relief would be contrary to the terms of the settlement agreement;  
 
(e) where the subject matter of the dispute to which the agreement involves the guardianship, 
fostering or custody of a child, or relates to the welfare, property or other interests of a child, and 
one or more of the terms of the agreement is not in the best interests of the child; 
 
(f) There was a serious breach by the mediator of standards applicable to the mediator or the 
mediation without which breach that party would not have entered into the settlement agreement; 
or  
 
(g) the agreement is in breach of any law providing for conditions or safeguards subject to which 
such disputes may be resolved. 
 
2. Enforcement or reliance on a mediated settlement agreement may be refused by a court at the 
request of the party against whom it is invoked, only if that party furnishes to the court proof of 
the same grounds as set forth in sub-section (1) above. 
 
3. Even if the conditions in sub-section (1) are fulfilled, the court may refuse to grant relief if it finds 
that:  
 
(a) Granting relief would be contrary to the public policy of India; or  
 344

 
(b) The subject matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by mediation under Indian law.  
 
Explanation 1.—For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an award is in conflict with the 
public policy of India, only if,—  
 
(i) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or  
 
(ii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice. 
 
78. Enforcement of international settlement agreements. — Where the Court is satisfied that the 
international mediation settlement agreement is enforceable under this Chapter, the international 
mediation settlement agreement  shall be deemed to be a judgement or decree of that Court. 
 
 
 
345

 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 7) 
DISPUTES OR MATTERS NOT FIT FOR MEDIATION 
1. Disputes which by virtue of any law for the time being in force may not be submitted 
for mediation. 
2. Disputes relating to claims against minors, deities; persons with intellectual  
disabilities, under paragraph 2 of the Schedule and person with disability having high support 
needs [as defined in clause ( t) of section 2] of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities  
Act, 2016 (49 of 2016); persons with mental illness as defined in clause (s) of sub-section (1) 
of section 2 of the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 (10 of 2017); persons of unsound mind, in 
relation to whom proceedings are to be conducted under Order XXXII of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908); and suits for declaration of title against Government; declaration 
having effect of right in rem, save and except with the permission of the statutory 
authority or body or the Court having jurisdiction. 
3. Disputes involving prosecution for non-compoundable criminal offences, save and 
except with the permission of the statutory authority or body or the Court having 
jurisdiction. 
4. Settlement of matters which are prohibited being in conflict with public policy or is 
in violation or contravention of any law for the time being in force. 
5. Complaints or proceedings, initiated before any statutory authority or body in  
relation to registration, discipline, misconduct of any practitioner, or other registered  
professional, such as legal practitioner, medical practitioner, dentist, architect, chartered  
accountant, or in relation to any other profession of whatever description, which is regulated 
under any law for the time being in force, save and except with the permission of the 
statutory authority or body or the Court having jurisdiction. 
6. Any proceeding in relation to any subject-matter, falling within any enactment, over 
which the Tribunal constituted under the National Green Tribunals Act, 2010 (19 of 2010) 
has jurisdiction, save and except with the permission of the statutory authority or body or 
the Court having jurisdiction. 
7. Any dispute relating to levy, collection, penalties or offences, in relation to any  
direct or indirect tax or refunds, enacted by any State legislature or Parliament, save and 
except with the permission of the statutory authority or body or the Court having 
jurisdiction. 
8. Any investigation, inquiry or proceeding, under the Competition Act, 2002 
(12 of 2003), including proceedings before the Director General, under that Act; proceedings 
before the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, under the Telecom Regulatory Authority 
of India Act, 1997 (24 of 1997) or Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal  
established under section 14 of that Act, save and except with the permission of the 
statutory authority or body or the Court having jurisdiction. 
9. Proceedings before appropriate Commissions, and the Appellate Tribunal for  
Electricity, under the Electricity Act, 2003 (36 of 2003), save and except with the permission 
of the statutory authority or body or the Court having jurisdiction. 
10. Proceedings before the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board, and appeals 
therefrom before the Appellate Tribunal under the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory  
Board Act, 2006 (19 of 2006), save and except with the permission of the statutory 
authority or body or the Court having jurisdiction. 
11. Proceedings before the Securities and Exchange Board of India, and the Securities 
Appellate Tribunal, under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992), 
save and except with the permission of the statutory authority or body or the Court 
having jurisdiction. 
12. Land acquisition and determination of compensation under land acquisition laws, 
or any provision of law providing for land acquisition., save and except with the 
permission of the statutory authority or body or the Court having jurisdiction 
13. The Central  Government, in consultation with the Council, may amend this 346

 
Schedule. 
 
20 
347

 
 
 
 
 
SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 56) 
1. The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947). 
2. The Brahmaputra Board Act, 1980 (46 of 1980). 
3. The Cine-Workers and Cinema Theatre Workers (Regulation of Employment) 
Act, 1981 (50 of 1981). 
4. The Family Courts Act, 1984 (66 of 1984). 
5. The Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987). 
6. The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizen Act, 2007 (56 of 2007). 
7. The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and 
Redressal) Act, 2013 (14 of 2013). 
8. The Finance Act, 20l6 (28 of 2016). 
9. The Industrial Relations Code, 2020 (35 of 2020). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
348

 
 
 
 
 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 58) 
In section 28 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), for Exception 1 and 
Exception 2, the following shall be substituted, namely:— 
"Exception 1.—Saving of contract to refer to arbitration or mediation dispute 
that may arise.—This section shall not render illegal a contract, by which two or more 
persons agree that any dispute which may arise between them in respect of any  
subject or class of subjects shall be referred to resolution through arbitration or  
mediation. 
Exception 2.—Saving of contract to refer questions that have already arisen.— 
Nor shall this section render illegal any contract in writing, by which two or more  
persons agree to refer to arbitration or mediation any question between them which  
has already arisen, or affect any provision of any law in force for the time being as to 
references to arbitration or mediation.". 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
349

 
 
 
 
 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 59) 
In the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908),— 
(i) under Part V, under the heading SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS, the sub-heading 
"ARBITRATION" shall be omitted; 
(ii) for section 89, the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 
"89. Settlement of disputes outside the Court. —Where it appears to the 
Court that the dispute between the parties may be settled and there exists elements 
of settlement which may be acceptable to the parties, the Court may— 
(a) refer the dispute to arbitration, and thereafter, the provisions of 
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996) shall apply as if the 
proceedings for arbitration were referred for settlement under the provisions 
of that Act; or 
(b) refer the parties to mediation, to the court annexed mediation  
centre or to any other mediator as per the option of the parties, in  
accordance with the provisions of the Mediation Act, 2021; or 
(c) refer the dispute to Lok Adalat, in accordance with the provisions 
of sub-section (1) of section 20 of Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987  
(39 of 1987) and thereafter, all other provisions of that Act shall apply in 
respect of the dispute; 
(d) effect compromise between the parties and shall follow such  
procedure as deemed fit for judicial settlement.". 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
350

 
 
 
 
 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 60) 
In the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987), in section 4, for clause (f), the 
following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
"(f) encourage the settlement of disputes, including online by way of 
negotiations, arbitration, mediation and conciliation;". 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
351

 
 
 
 
 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 61) 
In the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996),— 
(a) in section 43D,— 
(i) in sub-section (1), the words "mediation, conciliation" shall be omitted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), in clauses (e), (f) and (i), the words "and conciliation" 
wherever they occur shall be omitted; 
(b) for sections 61 to 81, the following sections shall be substituted, namely:— 
"61. Reference of conciliation in enactments.—(1) Any provision, in any 
other enactment for the time being in force, providing for resolution of disputes 
through conciliation in accordance with the provisions of this Act, shall be 
construed as reference to mediation as provided under the Mediation Act, 2021. 
(2) Conciliation as provided under this Act and the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 (5 of 1908), shall be construed as mediation referred to in section 4 of the 
Mediation Act, 2021. 
62. Saving.—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 61, any  
conciliation proceeding initiated in pursuance of sections 61 to 81 of this Act as 
in force before the commencement of the Mediation Act, 2021, shall be continued 
as such, as if the Mediation Act, 2021, had not been enacted.". 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
352

 
 
 
 
 
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 62) 
In the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 (27 of 2006), for 
section 18, the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 
"18. Reference to Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council. —(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, any 
party to a dispute may, with rega rd to any amount due under section 17, make a  
reference to the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council. 
(2) On receipt of a reference under sub -section (1), the Council shall refer the 
matter to any mediation service provider as provided under the Mediation Act, 2021. 
(3) The conduct of mediation under this section shall be as per the provisions of 
the Mediation Act, 2021. 
(4) Where the mediation initiated under sub -section (3) is not successful and  
stands terminated without any settlement between the parties, the Council shall either 
itself take up the dispute for arbitration or refer it to any institution or centre providing 
alternative dispute resolution services for such arbitration and the provisions of the  
Arbitration and Conciliation Act,  1996 (26 of 1996), shall, then apply to the 
dispute as if the arbitration was in pursuance of an arbitration agreement referred to in 
sub-section (1) of section 7 of that Act. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in  
force, the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council s shall have jurisdiction 
to act as an Arbitrator under this section in a dispute between the supplier located 
within its jurisdiction and a buyer located anywhere in India.". 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
353

 
 
 
 
 
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 63) 
In the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), for section 442, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
"442. Reference to mediation.—(1) Any of the parties to a proceedings before  
the Central Government, Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal may, at any time apply to 
the Central Government, Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, in  
such form along with such fees, if any, as may be prescribed, for referring the matter 
pertaining to such proceedings for mediation and the Central Government, Tribunal or 
the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, shall refer the matter to mediation to be  
conducted under the provisions of the Mediation Act, 2021. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall prevent the Central Government, Tribunal or the 
Appellate Tribunal before which any proceeding is pending from referring any matter 
pertaining to such proceeding suo motu to mediation to be conducted under the  
provisions of Mediation Act, 2021 as the Central Government, Tribunal or the Appellate 
Tribunal, deems fit. 
(3) The mediator or mediation service provider shall file the mediated settlement 
agreement arrived at between the parties with the Central Government or the Tribunal 
or the Appellate Tribunal under the Act. 
(4) The Central Government or the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal shall pass 
an order or judgment making the said Mediated settlement agreement as part thereof. 
(5) The fee of the mediator shall be such as agreed between the Parties and the 
mediator.". 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 
354

THE NINTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 64) 
 
In the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 (4 of 2016),— 
(a) for Chapter IIIA, the following Chapter shall be substituted, namely:— 
"CHAPTER IIIA 
PRE-LITIGATION MEDIATION AND SETTLEMENT 
12A. Pre-litigation Mediation and Settlement.—(1) A suit, which does not 
contemplate any urgent interim relief under this Act, shall not be instituted  
unless the plaintiff exhausts the remedy of pre-litigation mediation in accordance 
with such manner and procedure as may be p rescribed by rules made by the  
Central Government. 
(2) For the purposes of pre-litigation mediation, a mediator: — 
(i) registered with the Council; 
(ii) empanelled by a court annexed mediation centre; 
(iii) empanelled by an Authority constituted under the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987; or 
(iv) empanelled by a mediation service provider recognised under 
this Act,  
(v) otherwise chosen by the parties 
 
shall conduct pre-litigation mediation 
 
 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Legal Services Authorities 
Act, 1987 (39 of 1987), the Authority or mediation service provider authorised by 
the Central Government under sub -section (2) shall complete the process of  
mediation within a period of six months from the date of application made by the 
plaintiff under sub-section (1): 
Provided that the period of mediation may be extended for a further period 
of six months with the consent of the parties: 
Provided further that, the period during which the parties spent for  
pre-litigation mediation shall not be computed for the purposes of limitation 
under the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963). 
(4) If the parties to the commercial dispute arrive at a settlement, the same 
shall be reduced into writing and shall be signed by the parties and the mediator. 
(5) The mediated settlement agreement arrived at under this section shall 
be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of sections 28 and 29 of the  
Mediation Act, 2021."; 
(b) in section 21A, in sub-section (2), for clause (a), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
"(a) the manner and procedure of pre-litigation mediation under sub-
section (1) of section 12A;". 
 
 
 
 
355

THE NINTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 64) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
356

THE TENTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 65) 
 
In the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019),— 
(a) in section 2, clauses (25) and (26) shall be omitted; 
(b) for section 37, the following sections shall be substituted, namely:— 
"37. Reference to mediation.—The District Commission or State Commission 
or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall either suo moto or on an 
application by the parties at any stage of proceedings refer the disputes for 
settlement by mediation under the Mediation Act, 2021. 
37A. Settlement through mediation. —(1) Pursuant to mediation, if an  
agreement is reached between the parties with respect to all of the issues involved 
in the consumer dispute or with respect to only some of the issues, the terms of 
such agreement shall be reduced to writing accordingly, and signed by the  
parties to such dispute or their authorised representatives. 
(2) The mediator shall prepare a settlement report of the settlement and  
forward the signed agreement along with such report to the concerned 
Commission. 
(3) Where no agreement is reached between the parties within the specified 
time or the mediator is of the opinion that settlement  is not possible, he shall  
prepare his report accordingly and submit the same to the concerned Commission. 
37B. Recording settlement and passing of order.—(1) The District 
Commission or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case 
may be, shall, within seven days of the receipt of the settlement report, pass  
suitable order recording such settlement of consumer dispute and dispose of  
the matter accordingly. 
(2) Where the consumer dispute is settled only in part, the District  
Commission or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case 
may be, shall record settlement of the issues which have been so settled and  
continue to hear other issues involved in such consumer dispute. 
(3) Where the consumer dispute could not be settled by mediation, the 
District Commission or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the 
case may be, shall continue to hear all the issues involved in such consumer  
dispute."; 
(c) in section 38, in sub-section (1), the words "or in respect of case referred for 
mediation on failure of settlement by mediation," shall be omitted; 
(d) in section 41, the third proviso shall be omitted; 
(e) Chapter V shall be omitted; 
(f) in section 101, in sub-section (2),— 
(i) clause (r) shall be omitted; 
(ii) clause (zf ) shall be omitted; 
(g) in section 102, in sub-section (2), clause (p) shall be omitted; 
(h) in section 103, in sub-section (2), clauses (c) to (h) shall be omitted. 
 
 
29 
357

 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
An effective dispute resolution process has a significant impact on the economy and 
doing business in the country, thereby promoting ease of living for citizens, access to justice 
and rule of law. The rapidly changing society and progress in various areas not limited to  
economic, industrial or financial sectors, demand commensurate expeditious settlement of 
dispute between the parties, which at present is time consuming. Thus, there is a need to  
further promote Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR), inter alia, by institutional mediation. 
The ADR mechanism of mediation though finds mention in various existing laws, but as on 
date, there is no comprehensive law governing the various aspects of mediation. 
2. Mediation results in amicable resolution of disputes in civil, commercial, family and 
matrimonial matters and fosters collaborative approach, reduces the burden on the courts,  
and preserves relationships amongst disputants. Therefore, bringing a comprehensive  
mediation law and providing for online mediation may serve the interests of all the stakeholders 
as effective alternative mechanism for resolving disputes. 
3. The Bill covering the various aspects of mediation seeks to promote mediation as a 
preferred mode of ADR, inter alia, providing for— 
(i) subsuming conciliation under Part III of the Arbitration and Conciliation  
Act, 1996, in mediation as per international practice of using the terms “conciliation” 
and “mediation” interchangeably; 
(ii) compulsory pre-litigation mediation in matters of civil or commercial dispute, 
before parties approach a court or a tribunal as provided; 
(iii) conduct of online mediation; 
(iv) an indicative list of matters which are not fit for mediation under the First  
Schedule; 
(v) mediation that will take place within the territorial jurisdiction of the court or 
tribunal of competent jurisdiction, unless parties agree otherwise or undertake mediation 
in online mode; 
(vi) a period of one hundred and eighty days, for completing the mediation  
process which is further extendable to a maximum period of one hundred and eighty 
days with the mutual consent of the parties; 
(vii) the mediated settlement agreement resulting from mediation which will be 
final and binding and will be enforceable in accordance with the provisions of Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908, in the same manner as if it were a judgment or decree of a Court; 
(viii) establishment of Mediation Council of India, objects of which would be, 
inter alia, to promote mediation and to develop India as a robust centre for domestic 
and international mediation, make regulations for registration of mediators, grade  
mediation service providers, specify criteria for recognition of mediation institutes and 
mediation service providers, to hold training workshops and courses in the area of  
mediation, etc.; and 
(ix) conduct of community mediation with consent of parties for disputes which 
are likely to affect peace, harmony and tranquility amongst the residents or families of 
any area or locality. 
(x) To give effect to the provisions of the United Nations Convention on 
International Settlement Agreements Resulting from Mediation. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
NEW DELHI; KIREN RIJIJU. 
The 14th December, 2021. 
 
 358

 
 
30 
359

 
 
 
 
 
Notes on clauses 
Clause 1 of the Bill provides for short title, extent and commencement of the Act. 
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for applicability of the Act. 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides definition of various expressions used in the Bill. 
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that mediation shall be a process whereby party or  
parties, request a third person referred to as mediator or mediation service provider to assist 
in the attempt to reach an amicable settlement of dispute. 
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that mediation agreement shall be in writing, by or between 
parties and anyone claiming through them, to submit to mediation all or certain disputes  
which have arisen or which may arise between the parties. It further provides that mediation 
agreement may be in the form of a mediation clause in a contract or in the form of a separate 
agreement. 
Clause 6 of the Bill provides that whether any mediation agreement exists or not, any 
party before filing any suit or proceedings of civil or commercial nature in any Court shall, 
take steps to settle the disputes by pre-litigation mediation in accordance with the provisions 
of the new law. It further provides that pre -litigation mediation in matters of commercial  
disputes of Specified Value, shall be undertaken in accordance with the provisions of  
section 12A of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015, and the rules made thereunder. 
Clause 7 of the Bill provides an indicative list of disputes or matters which cannot be 
referred to mediation except some compoundable offences or matrimonial offences connected 
with or arising out of civil proceedings which can be referred to mediation by Court, if  
deemed appropriate. Settlement arrived in these cases not to have effect of judgement or  
decree of Court. 
Clause 8 of the Bill provides that if exceptional circumstances exist, a party may, before 
the commencement of or during the continuation of mediation proceedings under this Part, 
file appropriate proceedings before a court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction for seeking 
urgent interim measures. 
Clause 9 of the Bill provides that court or tribunal may, at any stage of pending  
proceeding, refer the parties to undertake mediation if a request to this effect is made by  
them. 
Clause 10 of the Bill provides for the appointment of mediator. 
Clause 11 of the Bill provides that mediation service provider while appointing mediator 
shall consider his suitability and the preference of the parties for resolving the dispute. 
Clause 12 of the Bill provides that when a person is appointed as a mediator, he shall 
disclose in writing to the parties about any circumstances or potential circumstances, personal, 
professional or financial, that may constitute conflict of interest or that is likely to give rise to 
justifiable doubts as to such mediator's independence or impartiality in the conduct of the  
mediation process. 
Clause 13 of the Bill provides for the termination of mandate of mediator. 
Clause 14 of the Bill provides for the replacement of mediator. 
Clause 15 of the Bill provides that mediation under this Act shall take place within the 
territorial jurisdiction of the court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction unless parties agree to 
conduct mediation outside the said territorial jurisdiction or by way of online mediation. 
Clause 16 of the Bill provides that mediation proceedings with respect to a particular 
dispute shall be deemed to have commenced on the date on which a party issues notice to 
 
31 
360

32 
 
the other party in case of prior mediation agreement and in other cases on the day the parties 
have agreed to appoint a mediator of their choice or on the day when a party applies to a  
mediation service provider for mediation. 
Clause 17 of the Bill provides that the mediator shall assist the parties in an independent, 
neutral and impartial manner in their attempt to reach an amicable settlement of their dispute. 
It further provides that mediator shall not be bound by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or 
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 
Clause 18 of the Bill provides that mediator shall attempt to facilitate voluntary  
resolution of the dispute by the parties, and communicate the view of each party to the other 
to the extent agreed to by them, assist them in identifying issues, reducing misunderstandings, 
clarifying priorities, exploring areas of compromise and generating options in an attempt to 
resolve the dispute. 
Clause 19 of the Bill provides that mediator shall not act as an arbitrator or as a  
representative or counsel of a party in any arbitral or judicial proceeding in respect of a  
dispute that is the subject of the mediation proceedings and he shall not be presented by the 
parties as a witness in any arbitral or judicial proceeding. 
Clause 20 of the Bill provides that parties may withdraw from mediation at any time 
after the first two mediation sessions. The court or tribunal can however, impose cost in  
subsequent litigation if a party fails to attend the first two mediation sessions without any  
reasonable cause thereby resulting in the failure of mediation. 
Clause 21 of the Bill provides that mediation under this Act shall be completed within 
a period of one hundred and eighty days from the date fixed for the first appearance before 
the mediator and the period can be extended by further period of one hundred and eighty  
days with the mutual consent of the parties. 
Clause 22 of the Bill provides that mediated settlement agreement means and includes 
an agreement in writing between some or all of the parties resulting from mediation including 
online mediation, settling some or all of the disputes between such parties, and authenticated 
by the mediator. It further provides that mediated settlement agreement arrived at between 
the parties other than those arrived in Court annexed mediation centres or under sections 21 
and 22E of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 shall be registered with the Authority 
constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 within a period of one hundred  
and eighty days. However, registration is not mandatory till the time regulations specifying 
the manner of registration are made by the Council. 
Clause 23 of the Bill provides that the mediator, mediation service provider, the parties 
and participants in the mediation shall keep information and communication relating to the 
mediation proceedings confidential and no party to the mediation shall in any proceedings 
before a court or tribunal including arbitral tribunal, rely on or introduce as evidence any  
such information or communication. However, confidentiality shall not apply to the mediated 
settlement agreement where its discl osure is necessary for the purpose of registration,  
implementation, enforcement and challenge. 
Clause 24 of the Bill provides immunity to the participants including experts and  
advisers engaged for the purpose of the mediation and persons involved in the administration 
of the mediation from disclosing by whatever description, any communication in mediation, 
or to state the contents or conditions of any document or nature or conduct of parties during 
mediation including the content of negotiations or offers or counter offers with which they 
have become acquainted during the mediation. 
Clause 25 of the Bill provides for termination of mediation proceedings in certain  
circumstances. 
Clause 26 of the Bill provides that court annexed mediation including pre-litigation 
mediation in court annexed mediation centre shall be conducted in accordance with the 
361

33 
 
practice directions or rules by whatever name called by the Supreme Court or the High  
Courts. Also, Supreme Court or the High Court to constitute mediation committee for the  
empanelment of mediators who shall conduct mediation in all courts. 
Clause 27 of the Bill provides that the provisions of the proposed Act shall not apply 
to the proceedings conducted by Lok Adal at and Permanent Lok Adalat under the Legal  
Services Authorities Act, 1987. 
Clause 28 of the Bill provides that mediated settlement agreement resulting from  
mediation is final and binding and is enforceable in accordance with the provisions of Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908, in the same manner as if it were a judgement or decree passed by a 
court. 
Clause 29 of the Bill provides that mediated settlement agreement can be challenged 
on the grounds of fraud, corruption, impersonation or where mediation is conducted in a  
dispute or matter not fit for mediation and that such challenge can be made within a period of 
ninety days from the date of receipt of copy of mediated settlement agreement by the parties. 
Clause 30 of the Bill provides that all costs of mediation, including the fees of the  
mediator and the charges of the mediation service provider shall be borne equally by the  
parties unless otherwise agreed by the parties. 
Clause 31 of the Bill provides that the period during which the parties were engaged in 
the mediation shall be excluded for computing the period of limitation specified for any  
proceedings. 
Clause 32 of the Bill provides that the online mediation including pre-litigation mediation 
may be conducted at any stage of mediation with the written consent of the parties and that 
such online mediation shall be conducted in the manner specified by the Council. 
Clause 33 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Mediation Council of India as a 
body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold 
and dispose of property, both moveable and immoveable, and to enter into contract, and  
shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 
Clause 34 of the Bill provides for the composition of Council and appointment and  
qualifications, term of office, salary and allowances, etc., of Chairperson, Full-Time Member 
and Part-Time Member. 
Clause 35 of the Bill provides that any vacancy, defect in the appointment or any  
irregularity in procedure shall not invalidate the proceedings of the Council. 
Clause 36 of the Bill provides for the procedure for resignation of Chairperson or the 
Full-Time Member and Part -Time Member by notice in writing, addressed to the Central  
Government. 
Clause 37 of the Bill specifies the circumstances in which the Central Government may, 
remove Chairperson or a Full-Time Member or a Part-Time Member of the Council. 
Clause 38 of the Bill provides for the appoint of experts and constitution of committees 
of experts as Council may consider necessary for the effective discharge of its functions. 
Clause 39 of the Bill provides for the Chief Executive Officer of the Council as well as 
the Secretariat of the council, which shall comprise of such number of officers and employees 
as may be specified by the Council. 
Clause 40 of the Bill provides the duties and functions of the Council. 
Clause 41 of the Bill provides for the recognition and grading of mediation service  
provider by the Council. 
Clause 42 of the Bill provides the functions to be performed by the mediation service 
provider. 
362

34 
 
Clause 43 of the Bill provides for the recognition of mediation institutes by the Council 
and the functions and duties to be performed by such mediation institutes as may be specified 
by the Council. 
Clause 44 of the Bill provides for community mediation, with prior mutual consent of 
parties, for resolution of disputes which are likely to affect peace, harmony and tranquility 
amongst the residents or families of any area or locality and empowers the concerned Authority 
or District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional Magistrate to constitute a panel of three mediators 
for conducting the community mediation. 
Clause 45 of the Bill provides that a panel of three community mediators shall conduct 
community mediation in accordance with the procedure to be devise by them for resolving 
the dispute. 
Clause 46 of the Bill provides that there shall be a fund to be called "Mediation Fund" 
for the purposes of promotion, facilitation and encouragement of mediation and empowers 
the Council to administer the Fund. 
Clause 47 of the Bill provides that Council shall maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the balance sheet,  
in such form and manner as may be made by rule in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India. It further provides that the accounts of the Council shall be audited 
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
Clause 48 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to issue directions to the  
Council on questions of policy which shall be binding on the Council. 
Clause 49 of the Bill provides that Central Government or State Government can frame 
any scheme or guidelines for resolution of any dispute through mediation or conciliation in 
cases where the Central Government or State Government or any of its entity or agencies is 
one of the party. 
Clause 50 of the Bill provides that the settlement agreement arrived at in a dispute  
including a commercial dispute, wherein the Central Government or State Government or any 
of its agencies, public bodies, corporations and local bodies including entities is a party shall 
be signed only after obtaining the prior written consent of the competent authority. 
Clause 51 of the Bill provides that no suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Central Government or a State Government or any officer of such Government, 
or the Chairperson, Full-Time Member or Part-Time Member or Officer or employee of the 
Council or a mediator, mediation institutes, mediation service providers, which is done or is 
intended to be done in good faith. 
Clause 52 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the 
provisions of this Act. 
Clause 53 of the Bill empowers the Council to make regulations, by notification, with 
the previous approval of the Central Government. It further provides that the regulations  
shall be consistent with the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder. 
Clause 54 of the Bill provides for laying of every notification issued under sub-
clause (2) of clause 7 and sub-clause (2) of clause 56 and every rule made by the Central 
Government and every regulation made by the Council, as soon as may be, after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament. 
Clause 55 of the Bill seeks to provide that, if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the 
provisions of the Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, 
make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act, as may appear to it to 
be necessary for removing the difficulty. 
363

35 
 
Clause 56 of the Bill seeks to provide that the provisions of Act to have overriding  
effect on mediation or conciliation contained in other laws except those mentioned in the  
Second Schedule. It further provides that the Central Government may amend the Schedule 
by notification in the Official Gazette. 
Clause 57 of the Bill seeks to provide that the Act shall not apply to, or in relation to, 
any mediation or conciliation commenced before the coming into force of this Act. 
Clause 58 of the Bill amends the Indian Contract Act, 1872 in the manner specified in 
the Third Schedule. 
Clause 59 of the Bill amends the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in the manner specified 
in the Fourth Schedule. 
Clause 60 of the Bill amends the Legal Service Authorities Act, 1987 in the manner  
specified in the Fifth Schedule. 
Clause 61 of the Bill amends the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 in the manner 
specified in the Sixth Schedule. 
Clause 62 of the Bill amends the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development 
Act, 2006 in the manner specified in the Seventh Schedule. 
Clause 63 of the Bill amends the Companies Act, 2013 in the manner specified in the 
Eighth Schedule. 
Clause 64 of the Bill amends the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 in the manner specified 
in the Ninth Schedule. 
Clause 65 amends the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 in the manner specified in the 
Tenth Schedule. 
364

 
 
 
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 33 of the Bill provides for establishment of Mediation Council 
of India. 
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 34 of the Bill provides for the composition of the Mediation 
Council of India. 
3. Sub-clauses (3) and (4) of clause 34 provides for the terms and conditions, salary  
and allowances payable to the Chairperson, Full-Time Member and Part-Time Member. 
4. Clause 38 of the Bill provides for appointment of such experts and constitution of 
such committees of experts by the Mediation Council as it may consider necessary to discharge 
its functions. 
5. Sub-clause (1) of clause 39 provides for appointment of a Chief Executive Officer, 
who shall be responsible for the day to day administration of the Council. 
6. Sub-clause (2) of clause 39 provides for the qualification, appointment and other  
terms and conditions of Chief Executive Officer. 
7. Sub-clause (4) of clause 39 provides for Secretariat to the Council consisting of such 
number of officers and employees. Further, sub -section ( 5) provides for qualification,  
appointment and other terms and conditions of the service of the employees and other  
officers of the Council. 
8. Clause 46 of the Bill provides for maintenances of a Fund called "Mediation Fund" 
for crediting all monies provided by the Central Government; all fees and other charges  
received from mediation service provider, mediation institutes or bodies or persons; all  
monies received by the Council in the form of donations, grants, contributions and income 
from other sources; grants made by the Central Government or the State Government for the 
purposes of the Fund; amounts deposited by persons as contributions to the Fund; amounts 
received in the Fund from any other source; interest on the above or other income received 
out of the investment made from the Fund. 
9. Sub-clause (3) of clause 46 provides that the Fund shall be applied towards meeting 
the salaries and other allowances of Chairperson, Full-Time Member, Part-Time Member, 
Chief Executive Officer, Officers and employees and the expenses of the Council including 
expenses incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its duties under this Act. 
10. It is estimated that the proposed law when passed would entail an expenditure of 
approximately twenty-one crores one lakh fifteen thousand thirty-six rupees in the first year, 
twenty crores ninety-nine lakhs nine thousand forty in the second year, twenty-three crores 
sixteen lakhs seven thousand one hundred ninety-four in the third year of establishment of 
Council as initial establishment expenses, including salaries and allowances and other  
remuneration of Chairperson, Full-Time Member, Part-Time Member and its officers and  
other employees. 
11. The Bill if enacted and brought into operation would not involve any other  
expenditure of a recurring or non-recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36 
365

 
 
 
 
 
 
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (2) of clause 7 of the Bill provides for amendment of the First Schedule by 
notification by the Central Government. 
2. Clause 33 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Mediation Council of India. 
3. Clause 52 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules with respect to 
the matters which relate to the terms and conditions and the salaries and allowances payable 
to the Chairperson and Full-Time Members; the travelling and other allowances payable to 
the Part-Time Members; the form and manner of annual statement of accounts, including the 
balance sheet and any other matter which is to be, or may be prescribed. 
4. Clause 53 of the Bill provides for the Mediation Council of India, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government, to make regulations consistent with the Act and the  
rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act which, inter alia relate to 
qualification, experience and accreditation for mediators of foreign nationality; manner of 
registration of mediated settlement agreement; fees for registration of mediated settlement 
agreement; manner of process of conducting online mediation; the terms and conditions of 
experts and committees of experts; qualifications, appointment and other terms and conditions 
of service of the Chief Executive Officer; functions and duties to be performed by the Chief 
Executive Officer; the number of officers and employees of the Secretariat of the Council; the 
qualification, appointment and other terms and conditions of the employees and other officers 
of the Council; conditions for registration of mediators and renewal, withdrawal, suspension 
or cancellations of such registrations; standards for professional and ethical conduct of  
mediators; criteria for recognition of mediation institutes and mediation service providers; 
manner of maintenance of electronic depository of mediated settlement agreement; manner 
for grading of mediation service provider; functions of mediation service provider; duties  
and functions to be performed by mediation institutes; any other matter in respect of which 
provision is necessary for the performance of functions of the Council under this Act. 
5. Sub-clause (2) of clause 56 provides for the amendment of the Second Schedule by 
notification to be issued by the Central Government. 
6. The matters in respect of which notification, rules and regulations may be made  
under the aforesaid provisions are matters of procedure and administrative details and it is  
not practical to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is,  
therefore, of a normal character. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37 
366

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agreements in 
restraint of 
legal 
proceedings. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872 
(9 OF 1872) 
* * * * * 
28. Every agreement,— 
(a) by which any party thereto is restricted absolutely from enforcing his rights under 
or in respect of any contract, by the usual legal proceedings in the ordinary tribunals, or  
which limits the time within which he may thus enforce his rights; or 
(b) which extinguishes the rights of any party thereto, or discharges any party thereto, 
from any liability, under or in respect of any contract on the expiry of a specified period so as 
to restrict any party from enforcing his rights, is void to the extent. 
Exception 1.—Saving of contract to refer to arbitration dispute that may arise.—This 
section shall not render illegal a contract, by which two or more persons agree that any  
dispute which may arise between them in respect of any subject or class of subjects shall be 
referred to arbitration, and that only the amount awarded in such arbitration shall be recoverable 
in respect of the dispute so referred. 
Exception 2.—Saving of contract to refer questions that have already arisen.—Nor 
shall this section render illegal any contract in writing, by which two or more persons agree 
to refer to arbitration any question between them which has already arisen, or affect any  
provision of any law in force for the time being as to references to arbitration. 
* * * * * 
__________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Settlement of 
disputes outside 
the Court. 
 
EXTRACT FROM THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908 
(5 OF 1908) 
* *  * * * 
PART V 
SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS 
ARBITRATION 
89. (1) Where it appears to the Court that there exist elements of a settlement which  
may be acceptable to the parties, the Court shall formulate the terms of settlement and give 
them to the parties for their observations and after receiving the observations of the parties, 
the Court may reformulate the terms of a possible settlement and refer the same for:— 
(a) arbitration; 
(b) conciliation; 
(c) judicial settlement including settlement through Lok Adalat; or 
(d) mediation. 
(2) Were a dispute has been referred— 
(a) for arbitration or conciliation, the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996 shall apply as if the proceedings for arbitration or conciliation were referred 
for settlement under the provisions of that Act; 
(b) to Lok Adalat, the Court shall refer the same to the Lok Adalat in accordance 
with the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 20 of the Legal Services Authorities 
38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 of 1996. 
 
 
 
 
39 of 1987. 
367

39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 of 1987. 
Act, 1987 and all other provisions of that Act shall apply in respect of the dispute so 
referred to the Lok Adalat; 
(c) for judicial settlement, the Court shall refer the same to a suitable institution 
or person and such institution or person shall be deemed to be a Lok Adalat and all the 
provisions of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 shall apply as if the dispute  
were referred to a Lok Adalat under the provisions of that Act; 
(d) for mediation, the Court shall effect a compromise between the parties and 
shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed 
* * * * * 
 
 
 
EXTRACT FROM THE LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITIES ACT, 1987 
(39 OF 1987) 
* * * * * 
4. The Central Authority shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely:— 
* * * * * 
(f) encourage the settlement of disputes by way of negotiations, arbitration and  
conciliation; 
* * * * * 
__________ 
EXTRACTS FROM THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION ACT, 1996 
(26 OF 1996) 
* * * * * 
43D. (1) It shall be the duty of the Council to take all such  measures as may be  
necessary to promote and encourage arbitration, mediation, conciliation or other alternative 
dispute resolution mechanism and for that purpose to frame policy and guidelines for the  
establishment, operation and maintenance of uniform professional standards in respect of all 
matters relating to arbitration. 
(2) For the purposes of performing the duties and discharging the functions under this 
Act, the Council may— 
* * * * * 
(e) frame, review and update norms to ensure satisfactory level of arbitration and 
conciliation; 
(f) act as a forum for exchange of views and techniques to be adopted for creating 
a platform to make India a robust centre for domestic and international arbitration and 
conciliation; 
* * * * * 
(i) conduct examination and training on various subjects relating to arbitration 
and conciliation and award certificates thereof; 
* *  * * * 
PART III 
CONCILIATION 
61. (1) Save as otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force and unless 
the parties have otherwise agreed, this Part shall apply to conciliation of disputes arising out 
of legal relationship, whether contractual or not and to all proceedings relating thereto. 
 
 
 
 
 
Functions of 
the Central 
Authority. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Duties and 
functions of 
Council. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Application 
and scope. 
368

40 
 
 
 
 
 
Commencement 
of conciliation 
proceedings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of 
conciliators. 
 
 
 
 
Appointment  
of conciliators. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Submission of 
statements to 
conciliator. 
(2) This Part shall not apply where by virtue of any law for the time being in force  
certain disputes may not be submitted to conciliation. 
62. (1) The party initiating conciliation shall send to the other party a written invitation 
to conciliate under this Part, briefly identifying the subject of the dispute. 
(2) Conciliation proceedings, shall commence when the other party accepts in writing 
the invitation to conciliate. 
(3) If the other party rejects the invitation, there will be no conciliation proceedings. 
(4) If the party initiating conciliation does not receive a reply within thirty days from 
the date on which he sends the invitation, or within such other period of time as specified in 
the invitation, he may elect to treat this as a rejection of the invitation to conciliate and if he 
so elects, he shall inform in writing the other party accordingly. 
63. (1) There shall be one conciliator unless the parties agree that there shall be two or 
three conciliators. 
(2) Where there is more than one conciliator, they ought, as a general rule, to act  
jointly. 
64. (1) Subject to sub-section (2)— 
(a) in conciliation proceedings, with one conciliator, the parties may agree on the 
name of a sole conciliator; 
(b) in conciliation proceedings with two conciliators, each party may appoint  
one conciliator; 
(c) in conciliation proceedings with three conciliators, each party may appoint 
one conciliator and the parties may agree on the name of the third conciliator who shall 
act as the presiding conciliator. 
(2) Parties may enlist the assistance of a suitable institution or person in connection  
with the appointment of conciliators, and in particular,— 
(a) a party may request such an institution or person to recommend the names of 
suitable individuals to act as conciliator; or 
(b) the parties may agree that the  appointment of one or more conciliators be  
made directly by such an institution or person: 
Provided that in recommending or appointing individuals to act as conciliator, the  
institution or person shall have regard to such considerations as are likely to secure the 
appointment of an independent and impartial conciliator and, with respect to a sole or third 
conciliator, shall take into account the advisability of appointing a conciliator of a nationality 
other than the nationalities of the parties. 
65. (1) The conciliator, upon his appointment, may request each party to submit to  
him a brief written statement describing the general nature of the dispute and the points at  
issue. Each party shall send a copy of such statement to the other party. 
(2) The conciliator may request each party to submit to him a further written statement 
of his position and the facts and grounds in support thereof, supplemented by any documents 
and other evidence that such party deems appropriate. The party shall send a copy of such  
statement, documents and other evidence to the other party. 
(3) At any stage of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator may request a party to 
submit to him such additional information as he deems appropriate. 
Explanation.—In this section and all the following sections of this Part, the term  
"conciliator" applies to a sole conciliator, two or three conciliators, as the case may be. 
369

41 
 
 
5 of 1908. 
1 of 1872. 
66. The conciliator is not bound by the Code of  Civil Procedure, 1908 or the Indian  
Evidence Act, 1872 . 
 
 
67. (1) The conciliator shall assist the parties in an independent and impartial manner 
in their attempt to reach an amicable settlement of their dispute. 
(2) The conciliator shall be guided by principles  of objectivity, fairness and justice,  
giving consideration to, among other things, the rights and obligations of the parties, the  
usages of the trade concerned and the circumstances surrounding the dispute, including  
any previous business practices between the parties. 
(3) The conciliator may conduct the conciliation proceedings in such a manner as he 
considers appropriate, taking into account the circumstances of the case, the wishes the  
parties may express, including any request by a party that the conciliator hear oral statements, 
and the need for a speedy settlement of the dispute. 
(4) The conciliator may, at any stage of the conciliation proceedings, make proposals 
for a settlement of the dispute. Such proposals need not be in writing and need not be  
accompanied by a statement of the reasons therefor. 
68. In order to facilitate the conduct of the conciliation proceedings, the parties, or the 
conciliator with the consent of the parties, may arrange for administrative assistance by a  
suitable institution or person. 
69. (1) The conciliator may invite the parties to meet him or may communicate with 
them orally or in writing. He may meet or communicate with the parties together or with each 
of them separately. 
(2) Unless the parties have agreed upon the place where meetings with the conciliator 
are to be held, such place shall be determined by the conciliator, after consultation with the 
parties, having regard to the circumstances of the conciliation proceedings. 
70. When the conciliator receives factual information concerning the dispute from a 
party, he shall disclose the substance of that information to the other party in order that the 
other party may have the opportunity to present any explanation which he considers  
appropriate: 
Provided that when a party gives any information to the conciliator subject to a specific 
condition that it be kept confidential, the conciliator shall not disclose that information to the 
other party. 
71. The parties shall in good faith co -operate with the conciliator and, in particular,  
shall endeavour to comply with requests by the conciliator to submit written materials,  
provide evidence and attend meetings. 
72. Each party may, on his own initiative or at the invitation of the conciliator, submit 
to the conciliator suggestions for the settlement of the dispute. 
 
 
73. (1) When it appears to the conciliator that there exist elements of a settlement  
which may be acceptable to the parties, he shall formulate the terms of a possible settlement 
and submit them to the parties for their observations. After receiving the observations of the 
parties, the conciliator may reformulate the terms of a possible settlement in the light of such 
observations. 
(2) If the parties reach agreement on a settlement of the dispute, they may draw up and 
sign a written settlement agreement. If requested by the parties, the conciliator may draw up, 
or assist the parties in drawing up, the settlement agreement. 
(3) When the parties sign the settlement agreement, it shall be final and binding on the 
parties and persons claiming under them respectively. 
 
Conciliator 
not bound by 
certain 
enactments. 
 
Role of 
conciliator. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Administrative 
assistance. 
 
 
Communication 
between 
conciliator 
and parties. 
 
 
 
 
Disclosure of 
information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Co -operation  
of parties with 
conciliator. 
 
Suggestions by 
parties for 
settlement of 
dispute. 
 
Settlement 
agreement. 
370

42 
 
 
 
 
 
Status and 
effect of 
settlement 
agreement. 
Confidentiality. 
 
 
 
 
Termination 
of conciliation 
proceedings. 
(4) The conciliator shall authenticate the settlement agreement and furnish a copy  
thereof to each of the parties. 
74. The settlement agreement shall have the same status and effect as if it is an arbitral 
award on agreed terms on the substance of the dispute rendered by an arbitral tribunal under 
section 30. 
 
75. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
the conciliator and the parties shall keep confidential all matters relating to the conciliation 
proceedings. Confidentiality shall extend also to the settlement agreement, except where its 
disclosure is necessary for purposes of implementation and enforcement. 
76. The conciliation proceedings shall be terminated— 
(a) by the signing of the settlement agreement by the parties, on the date of the 
agreement; or 
(b) by a written declaration of the conciliator, after consultation with the parties, 
to the effect that further efforts at conciliation are no longer justified, on the date of the 
declaration; or 
(c) by a written declaration of the parties addressed to the conciliator to the  
effect that the conciliation proceedings are terminated, on the date of the declaration; 
or 
 
 
 
 
Resort to 
arbitral or 
judicial 
proceedings. 
 
Costs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits. 
(d) by a written declaration of a party to the other party and the conciliator, if  
appointed, to the effect that the conciliation proceedings are terminated, on the date of 
the declaration. 
77. The parties shall not initiate, during the conciliation proceedings, any arbitral or 
judicial proceedings in respect of a dispute that is the subject -matter of the conciliation  
proceedings except that a party may initiate arbitral or judicial proceedings where, in his  
opinion, such proceedings are necessary for preserving his rights. 
78. (1) Upon termination of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator shall fix the 
costs of the conciliation and give written notice thereof to the parties. 
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), "costs" means reasonable costs relating to— 
(a) the fee and expenses of the conciliator and witnesses requested by the  
conciliator with the consent of the parties; 
(b) any expert advice requested by the conciliator with the consent of the parties; 
(c) any assistance provided pursuant to clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 
64 and section 68. 
(d) any other expenses incurred in connection with the conciliation proceedings 
and the settlement agreement. 
(3) The costs shall be borne equally by the parties unless the settlement agreement  
provides for a different apportionment. All other expenses incurred by a party shall be borne 
by that party. 
79. (1) The conciliator may direct each party to deposit an equal amount as an advance 
for the costs referred to in sub-section(2) of section 78 which he expects will be incurred. 
(2) During the course of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator may direct  
supplementary deposits in an equal amount from each party. 
(3) If the required deposits under sub-sections (1) and (2) are not paid in full by both 
parties within thirty days, the conciliator may suspend the proceedings or may make a  
written declaration of termination of the proceedings to the parties, effective on the date of 
that declaration. 
371

43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 of 1996. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 of 1996. 
(4) Upon termination of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator shall render an  
accounting to the parties of the deposits received and shall return any unexpended balance 
to the parties. 
80. Unless otherwise agreed by the parties,— 
(a) the conciliator shall not act as an arbitrator or as a representative or counsel 
of a party in any arbitral or judicial proceeding in respect of a dispute that is the subject 
of the conciliation proceedings; 
(b) the conciliator shall not be presented by the parties as a witness in any  
arbitral or judicial proceedings. 
81. The parties shall not rely on or introduce as evidence in arbitral or judicial  
proceedings, whether or not such proceedings relate to the dispute that is the subject of the 
conciliation proceedings,— 
(a) views expressed or suggestions made by the other party in respect of a  
possible settlement of the dispute; 
(b) admissions made by the other party in the course of the conciliation  
proceedings; 
(c) proposals made by the conciliator; 
(d) the fact that the other party had indicated his willingness to accept a proposal 
for settlement made by the conciliator. 
* * * * * 
________ 
EXTRACT FROM THE MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES DEVELOPMENT ACT, 2006 
(27 OF 2006) 
* * * * * 
18. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in  
force, any party to a dispute may, with regard to any amount due under section 17, make a 
reference to the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council. 
(2) On receipt of a reference under sub -section (1), the Council shall either itself  
conduct conciliation in the matter or seek the assistance of any institution or centre providing 
alternate dispute resolution services by making a reference to such an institution or centre, 
for conducting conciliation and the provisions of sections 65 to 81 of the Arbitration and  
Conciliation Act, 1996 shall apply to such a dispute as if the conciliation was initiated under 
Part III of that Act. 
(3) Where the conciliation initiated under sub-section (2) is not successful and stands 
terminated without any settlement between the parties, the Council shall either itself take up 
the dispute for arbitration or refer it to any institution or centre providing alternate dispute  
resolution services for such arbitration and the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996 shall then apply to the dispute as if the arbitration was in pursuance of an arbitration 
agreement referred to in sub-section (1) of section 7 of that Act. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council or the centre providing alternate dispute 
resolution services shall have jurisdiction to act as an Arbitrator or Conciliator under this  
section in a dispute between the supplier located within its jurisdiction and a buyer located 
anywhere in India. 
(5) Every reference made under this section shall be decided within a period of ninety 
days from the date of making such a reference. 
* * * * * 
____________ 
 
 
 
 
 
Role of 
conciliator in 
other  
proceedings. 
 
 
 
 
 
Admissibility 
of evidence in 
other  
proceedings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reference to 
Micro and 
Small 
Enterprises 
Facilitation 
Council. 
372

44 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mediation and 
Conciliation 
Panel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pre-Institution 
Mediation and 
Settlement. 
EXTRACT FROM THE COMPANIES ACT, 2013 
(18 OF 2013) 
* * * * * 
442. (1) The Central Government shall maintain a panel of experts to be called as the 
Mediation and Conciliation Panel consisting of such number of experts having such  
qualifications as may be prescribed for mediation between the parties during the pendency 
of any proceedings before the Central Government or the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal 
under this Act. 
(2) Any of the parties to the proceedings may, at any time during the proceedings  
before the Central Government or the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, apply to the Central 
Government or the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, in such form along 
with such fees as may be prescribed, for referring the matter pertaining to such proceedings 
to the Mediation and Conciliation Panel and the Central Government or the Tribunal or the 
Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, shall appoint one or more experts from the panel  
referred to in sub-section (1). 
(3) The Central Government or the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal before which 
any proceeding is pending may, suo motu, refer any matter pertaining to such proceeding to 
such number of experts from the Mediation and Conciliation Panel as the Central Government 
or the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, deems fit. 
(4) The fee and other terms and conditions of experts of the Mediation and Conciliation 
Panel shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(5) The Mediation and Conciliation Panel shall follow such procedure as may be  
prescribed and dispose of the matter referred to it within a period of three months from the 
date of such reference and forward its recommendations to the Central Government or the  
Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be. 
(6) Any party aggreived by the recommendation of the Mediation and Conciliation  
Panel may file objections to the Central Government or the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, 
as the case may be. 
* * * * * 
__________ 
EXTRACT FROM THE COMMERCIAL COURTS ACT, 2015 
(4 OF 2016) 
* *  * * * 
CHAPTER IIIA 
PRE-INSTITUTION MEDIATION AND SETTLEMENT 
12A. (1) A suit, which does not contemplate any urgent interim relief under this Act, 
shall not be instituted unless the plaintiff exhausts the remedy of preinstitution mediation in 
accordance with such manner and procedure as may be prescribed by rules made by the 
Central Government. 
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, authorise the Authorities constituted 
under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 , for the purposes of pre-institution mediation. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, 
the Authority authorised by the Central Government under sub -section (2) shall complete 
the process of mediation within a period of three months from the date of application made 
by the plaintiff under sub-section (1): 
Provided that the period of mediation may be extended for a further period of two  
months with the consent of the parties: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 of 1987. 
39 of 1987. 
373

45 
 
 
 
 
36 of 1963. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 of 1996. 
Provided further that, the period during which the parties remained occupied with the 
pre-institution mediation, such period shall not be computed for the purpose of limitation  
under the Limitation Act, 1963 . 
(4) If the parties to the commercial dispute arrive at a settlement, the same shall be  
reduced into writing and shall be signed by the parties to the dispute and the mediator. 
(5) The settlement arrived at under this section shall have the same status and effect 
as if it is an arbitral  award on agreed terms under sub -section ( 4) of section 30 of the  
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 . 
* * * * * 
 
 
 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 2019 
(35 OF 2019) 
* * * * * 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
* * * * * 
(25) "mediation" means the process by which a mediator mediates the consumer 
disputes; 
(26) "mediator" means a mediator referred to in section 75; 
* * * * * 
37. (1) At the first hearing of the complaint after its admission, or at any later stage, if 
it appears to the District Commission that there exists elements of a settlement which may be 
acceptable to the parties, except in such cases as may be prescribed, it may direct the parties 
to give in writing, within five days, consent to have their dispute settled by mediation in  
accordance with the provisions of Chapter V. 
(2) Where the parties agree for settlement by mediation and give their consent in  
writing, the District Commission shall, within five days of receipt of such consent, refer the 
matter for mediation, and in such case, the provisions of Chapter V, relating to mediation,  
shall apply. 
* * * * * 
38. (1) The District Commission shall, on admission of a complaint, or in respect of 
cases referred for mediation on failure of settlement by mediation, proceed with such complaint. 
* * * * * 
41. Any person aggrieved by an order made by the District Commission may prefer an 
appeal against such order to the State Commission on the grounds of facts or law within a  
period of forty-five days from the date of the order, in such form and manner, as may be  
prescribed: 
Provided that the State Commission may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said 
period of forty-five days, if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within 
that period: 
Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount in  
terms of an order of the District Commission, shall be entertained by the State Commission 
unless the appellant has deposited fifty per cent. of that amount in the manner as may be  
prescribed: 
Provided also that no appeal shall lie from any order passed under sub-section (1) 
of section 81 by the District Commission pursuant to a settlement by mediation under  
section 80. 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reference to 
mediation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Procedure on 
admission of 
complaint. 
 
 
Appeal against 
order of 
District 
Commission. 
374

46 
 
 
 
 
 
Establishment 
of consumer 
mediation cell. 
CHAPTER V 
MEDIATION 
74. (1) The State Government shall establish, by notification, a consumer mediation  
cell to be attached to each of the District Commissions and the State Commissions of that  
State. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Empanelment 
of mediators. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nomination 
of mediators 
from panel. 
 
Duty of 
mediator to 
disclose 
certain facts. 
 
 
 
 
 
Replacement  
of mediator in 
certain cases. 
 
 
Procedure for 
mediation. 
(2) The Central Government shall establish, by notification, a consumer mediation cell 
to be attached to the National Commission and each of the regional Benches. 
(3) A consumer mediation cell shall consist of such persons as may be prescribed. 
(4) Every consumer mediation cell shall maintain— 
(a) a list of empanelled mediators; 
(b) a list of cases handled by the cell; 
(c) record of proceeding; and 
(d) any other information as may be specified by regulations. 
(5) Every consumer mediation cell shall submit a quarterly report to the District  
Commission, State Commission or the National Commission to which it is attached, in the 
manner specified by regulations. 
75. (1) For the purpose of mediation, the National Commission or the State Commission 
or the District Commission, as the case may be, shall prepare a panel of the mediators to be 
maintained by the consumer mediation cell attached to it, on the recommendation of a selection 
committee consisting of the President and a member of that Commission. 
(2) The qualifications and experience required for empanelment as mediator, the  
procedure for empanelment, the manner of training empanelled mediators, the fee payable to 
empanelled mediator, the terms and conditions for empanelment, the code of conduct for  
empanelled mediators, the grounds on which, and the manner in which, empanelled mediators 
shall be removed or empanelment shall be cancelled and other matters relating thereto, shall 
be such as may be specified by regulations. 
(3) The panel of mediators prepared under sub-section (1) shall be valid for a period of 
five years, and the empanelled mediators shall be eligible to be considered for re-empanelment 
for another term, subject to such conditions as may be specified by regulations. 
76. The District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission shall, 
while nominating any person from the panel of mediators referred to in section 75, consider 
his suitability for resolving the consumer dispute involved. 
77. It shall be the duty of the mediator to disclose— 
(a) any personal, professional or financial interest in the outcome of the consumer 
dispute; 
(b) the circumstances which may give rise to a justifiable doubt as to his 
independence or impartiality; and 
(c) such other facts as may be specified by regulations. 
78. Where the  District Commission or the State Commission or the National  
Commission, as the case may be, is satisfied, on the information furnished by the mediator or 
on the information received from any other person including parties to the complaint and  
after hearing the mediator, it shall replace such mediator by another mediator. 
79. (1) The mediation shall be held in the consumer mediation cell attached to the  
District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be. 
375

47 
 
(2) Where a consumer dispute is referred for mediation by the District Commission or 
the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, the mediator nominated 
by such Commission shall have regard to the rights and obligations of the parties, the  
usages of trade, if any, the circumstances giving rise to the consumer dispute and such other 
relevant factors, as he may deem necessary and shall be guided by the principles of natural 
justice while carrying out mediation. 
(3) The mediator so nominated shall conduct mediation within such time and in such 
manner as may be specified by regulations. 
80. (1) Pursuant to mediation, if an agreement is reached between the parties with  
respect to all of the issues involved in the consumer dispute or with respect to only some of 
the issues, the terms of such agreement shall be reduced to writing accordingly, and signed 
by the parties to such dispute or their authorised representatives. 
(2) The mediator shall prepare a settlement report of the settlement and forward the 
signed agreement along with such report to the concerned Commission. 
(3) Where no agreement is reached between the parties within the specified time or the 
mediator is of the opinion that settlement is not possible, he shall prepare his report  
accordingly and submit the same to the concerned Commission. 
81. (1) The District Commission or the State Commission or the National Commission, 
as the case may be, shall, within seven days of the receipt of the settlement report, pass  
suitable order recording such settlement of consumer dispute and dispose of the matter  
accordingly. 
(2) Where the consumer dispute is settled only in part, the District Commission or the 
State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall record settlement of 
the issues which have been so settled and continue to hear other issues involved in such  
consumer dispute. 
(3) Where the consumer dispute could not be settled by mediation, the District  
Commission or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall 
continue to hear all the issues involved in such consumer dispute. 
* * * * * 
101. (1) * * * * * 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide 
for,— 
* * * * * 
(r) the cases which may not be referred for settlement by mediation under sub-section (1) 
of section 37; 
* * * * * 
(zf) the persons in the consumer mediation cell under sub-section (3) of section 74; 
* * * * * 
102. (1) * * * * * 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
* * * * * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Settlement 
through 
mediation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recording 
settlement and 
passing of 
order. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of 
Central 
Government 
to make rules. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of State  
Government to 
make rules. 
376

48 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of 
National 
Commission 
to make 
regulations. 
(p) the persons in the consumer mediation cell under sub-section (3) of section 74; 
* * * * * 
103. (1) * * * * * 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
regulations may make provisions for— 
* * * * * 
(c) the maintenance of any other information by the consumer mediation cell  
under sub-section (4) of section 74; 
(d) the manner of submission of quarterly report by consumer mediation cell to 
the District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission under sub- 
section (5) of section 74; 
(e) the qualifications and experience required for empanelment as mediator, the 
procedure for empanelment, the manner of training empanelled mediators, the fee  
payable to empanelled mediator, the terms and conditions for empanelment, the code 
of conduct for empanelled mediators, the grounds on which, and the manner in which, 
empanelled mediators shall be removed or empanelment shall be cancelled and the  
other matters relating thereto under sub-section (2) of section 75; 
(f) the conditions for re -empanelment of mediators for another term under  
sub-section (3) of section 75; 
(g) the other facts to be disclosed by mediators under clause (c) of section 77; 
(h) the time within which, and the manner in which, mediation may be conducted 
under sub-section (3) of section 79; 
* * * * * 
377

 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
BILL 
to promote and facilitate mediation, especially institutional mediation, for resolution of 
disputes, commercial or otherwise, enforce mediated settlement agreements, provide  
for a body for registration of mediators, to encourage community mediation 
and to make online mediation as acceptable and cost effective process 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Kiren Rijiju, Minister of Law and Justice) 
 
MGIPMRND—1609RS—15-12-2021. 
378

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
1 
 
Topic/Section Comments  
s.2 &  
Applicability 
of Act 
 The first basis for applicability of the Act is where 
mediation is conducted between parties and on a subject 
matter that is domestic, when the law will perforce apply. 
 The second basis for its applicability is where (a) the 
mediation may not be conducted in India, or (b) may be 
international, but parties apply this law as the law 
governing their mediation. 
 It will follow that in international mediations where parties 
conduct the mediation in India, but subject the process to a 
law of another jurisdiction, that law will apply. 
 It may be unnecessary to add the other qualifiers.  
 
 The Bill has not included the Singapore Convention and 
this should be done in the Bill so that we have an integrated 
law on mediation. The draft for the implementation of the 
Singapore Convention is provided later in this submission. 
This inclusion will have implications on the Application 
provisions of the Act. 
 
 If the Singapore Convention is implemented, this law / Part 
will govern (a) the process of mediation, and (b) oversight 
on the mediated settlement agreement, in international 
commercial mediations  (as defined in the Singapore 
Convention), but will not govern the status and 
enforcement of such mediated settlement agreemen t. The 
status and enforcement of the mediated settlement 
agreement will be governed by the Part implementing the 
Singapore Convention. 
 
s. 2(2) 
Excluding the 
Government  
 The Bill adopts the premise that mediation will not be used 
in government disputes ( Section 2(2)) . The proviso to 
section 2(2) proceeds to state that mediation will be utilised 
in certain kind of Government disputes as deemed 
appropriate.  
 
379

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
2 
 
 If the government, which is the largest litigant, is unwilling 
to adopt mediation, this will not inspire confidence in 
mediation as an effective and wholesome  process for 
resolving disputes. 
 
 Mediation has special advantages in the case of 
government disputes. It supports interest based resolution 
– that will take into account government’s concerns, is cost 
effective, time effective, and most importantly, builds 
confidence amongst the citizenry that the government is 
listening to their issues and grievance s and working 
collaboratively to resolve them. 
 
 The concerns that a government will have in adopting 
mediation are well understood. These include concerns on 
adopting a private dispute resolution process for a public 
dispute, public interests involved, concerns on abuse of 
discretion, the clash of confidentiality in mediation versus 
the public’s right to information, etc.  
 
 However, and keeping these concerns in mind, it would be 
beneficial for resolution of government disputes, and for a 
policy on mediation as reflected in this Bill, to not exclude 
mediation for government disputes, but rather to adopt 
mediation - agency by agency, department by department 
and sector by sector, through evaluation of the process and 
setting up guardrails specific to each agency/ department, 
that will address the concerns listed above.  
 
 As such, the embargo in section 2(2) of the Bill may be 
removed. 
 
s.3(c) Court  The inclusion of the definition of ‘court’ in this Part is 
unclear, and appears to be superfluous. 
 
 The expression is used in sections 3(e), 6, 8, 9, 15, 29, etc., 
and these include any court having territorial or subject 
380

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
3 
 
matter jurisdiction over the dispute that is the subject of the 
mediation. Thus, the references to court are not confined to 
the principal civil court or the High Court in exercise of its 
original jurisdiction.  
 
 Disputes, including in ternational disputes may be filed or 
may fall unde r the jurisdiction of any court or  tribunal, 
including courts below the principal civil court of original 
jurisdiction, as well as criminal courts in the case of 
compoundable criminal offences. 
 
s.3(f) & s.5(6) 
International 
mediation  
 The definition of ‘ international commercial mediation’ 
adopts the definition of ‘commercial dispute’ under section 
2(a). The element of ‘commercial’ in this definition does 
not match ‘commercial’ as defined in the Singapore 
Convention, viz., where both parties enter into the 
agreement/ arrangement with a commercial purpose.   
 This extends the categories of disputes beyond the scope of 
disputes considered commercial under the Singapore 
Convention. 
 There will thus be two sets of international commercial 
disputes: one covered by the Singapore Convention, and 
the rest that will not be covered. 
 On account of this definition, there is a duality in terms of 
the grounds of challenge of international commercial 
mediation (under either or both  of sections 29 and the 
Singapore Convention if implemented ), and duality in 
terms of manner of en forcement (under section 28(2)  in 
terms of which the agreement can immediately be enforced 
as if it were a decree in India, and under the Singapore 
Convention, where the party must satisfy the court that the 
grounds under section 52 are not attracted). 
 Insofar as ‘international commercial settlement 
agreements’ as fall within the definition of the Singapore 
Convention are concerned, the Convention sets out the 
outcome and conditions for enforcement of such 
agreements.  
381

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
4 
 
 The consequences under the Singapore Convention follow 
irrespective of where the mediation is conducted. ‘Seat’ is 
not a relevant consideration in the case of ‘inter national 
commercial mediation’ , (unlike in international 
arbitrations under the New York Convention). 
 As such, section 28(2), tha t deals with the status of 
settlement agreements arising from mediations conducted 
under this law must exclude such international commercial 
settlement agreements that are covered by the Convention. 
 Insofar as the Indian law is adopted by parties to an 
international commercial dispute  not covered by the 
Singapore Convention , t he status/ outcome, grounds for 
evaluating and enforcement of international settlement 
agreements arising from mediation will require detailed 
consideration in light of the relationships from which these 
disputes arise (e.g., employment, consumer disputes).  
 
s.3(f), s.28(2) 
International 
mediations 
(non-
commercial)  
 The definition in section 3(f ) as it stands is limited to 
commercial mediation.  
 Mediations of non -commercial international disputes and 
the settlement agreements that arise should also be covered 
by this law. 
 Mediated agreements in such contexts may be regarded as 
an agreement whose enforcement will be the subject of, and 
subject to, the sectoral laws, and considered by the courts/ 
tribunals that have jurisdiction in these matters. 
Alternatively, they may be considered for enforcement on 
an enumeration of grounds that accommodate the specific 
cultural, legal and policy considerations that arise in these 
contexts. 
 Please see at the end of this document at Appendix A , 
suggested provisions for enforcement of mediated 
settlement agreements in such contexts. 
s.2(l) Mediation Service Providers may be defined as a body or 
organisation that provides mediation services in conformity with 
the Act 
382

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
5 
 
s.2(q) Party The expression “parties claiming through them” may be added 
to the definition  of ‘party’ to include assignees and other legal 
representatives.  
 
s.4 
Mediation 
 The definition of mediation is a definition of the process, 
and need not include contexts such as pre -litigation 
mediation, or online mediation  or community mediation, 
when mediation is undertaken. 
 It will be important to add to the definition the aspect that 
the mediator will not have the authority to imp ose a 
settlement on the parties. 
 
s.5(5) The language in this section needs review. 
 
s.6 Mandating 
pre-litigation 
mediation 
 A dispute of a civil and commercial nature, will first have 
to be attempted to be resolved through mediation, and that 
such attempt is mandatory ( use of the expression ‘shall’) 
before filing a case in the relevant court or Tribunal  
 It is suggested that mandatory mediation may be introduced 
for a narrower category of disputes under the Bill, and its 
efficacy and utility may be reviewed, and extended to other 
categories based on the learnings from this. 
 The use of mediation can also be left to the determination 
of sectoral regulators/ institutions/ dispute resolution 
bodies that will assess the appropriateness of this st ep in 
the context and the nature of the disputes they are 
concerned with. 
 
 With respect to mediation of commercial disputes, it is 
important that parties to commercial disputes be able to 
appoint mediators of their choice. 
 The appropriateness of the Legal Services Authorities 
(LSA) as a designated authority to handle mandatory 
mediation in commercial disputes falling under the 
Commercial Courts Act, 2015 may also be reconsidered. 
The remit of the LSA is for a different and larger purpose, 
which may not align with the objective of mandating 
383

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
6 
 
mediation in commercial disputes. The Pre -Institution 
Mediation Rules, 2018, notified by the Government under 
the Commercial Courts Act, 2015, is a case in point, where 
it half-heartedly implements section 12A , and makes the 
process a discretionary process, that any party can 
disregard. 
  
Proviso to 
s.6(1); s.8(1) 
 The proviso states that pre-litigation mediation of 
commercial disputes of a Specified Value will be under 
taken in terms of section 12A of the Commercial Courts 
Act, 2015. 
 Under section 12A, as proposed to be amended by the Bill, 
parties to a commercial dispute will not have a c hoice of 
the mediator, but will allotted mediators from panels 
maintained by the authorities set out in this section 12A. 
 This creates an anomaly. While parties to a dispute of a 
value falling below the Specified Value, and to civil 
disputes, and disputant s generally, will have access to 
mediators of their choice (see s.6(3)), parties to a 
commercial dispute of a Specified Value will necessarily 
have to go to the LSA/ mediation service provider 
authorised by the Central Government, and be bound to 
mediate through a mediator selected by them.  
 This also militates against the important principle of party 
autonomy in section 10(2) of the Bill. 
 The second anomaly is in the conditions when pre -
institution mediations in commercial disputes need not be 
attempted. While section 12A speaks of the need for an 
‘urgent interim relief ’, upon which, pre - institution 
mediation need not be attempted, section 8(1) of the Bill 
uses the expression ‘ exceptional circumstances ’ when 
parties can first approach court before attempti ng 
mediation.   
 This postulates different conditions or circumstances in 
case interim relief is necessary, and is anomalous. The use 
of the expression ‘exceptional circumstances’ is new, and 
suggests a situation that is dire or exceptional when 
384

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
7 
 
compared to ‘urgent interim relief ’. This will lead to 
immense churn and interventions by courts before a 
definitive resolution of this expression is reached, which 
disserves the cause of mediation. 
 Third, the existence of the need for urgent interim relief, 
completely exempts the mandate of attempting resolution 
through pre-institution mediation for commercial disputes 
under the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 . In the case  of 
mandatory pre -institution mediation under the Bill, the 
matter can be referred to mediation by the court when the 
application for urgent interim relief has been ordered by the 
court.  
 A similar provision may be added in section 12A in the 
proposed amendment to the Commercial Courts Act, 2015, 
in the Ninth Schedule  
 
s.6(4)  The purport of section 6(4) should be made clearer. 
 
s.6 (6) to (8)  These provisions may be re -drafted as proposed 
amendments to the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, and moved 
to a Schedule to the Bill. This will ensure parity with the 
language of that Act, and recourse to mediation as a part of 
the legislative policy of that Act. 
 
s.7 & 
Schedule I - 
Exclusion of 
categories of 
disputes from 
mediation 
 The appropriateness of private dispute processes for 
resolution of certain disputes is an important issue. 
 However, it is not dispute categories but certain types of 
disputes within such categories that are inappropriate. For 
instance, intellectual property disputes may be 
inappropriate for mediation where parties privately 
determine or confirm the valid ity of a patent, by agreeing 
to withdraw a challenge to the patent  on the basis of a 
settlement agreement . However, intellectual property 
disputes arising from contractual relationships , such as 
licenses, may be resolved through mediation. 
 Settlement agreements in the context of validity of 
intellectual property rights (rights in rem) are permitted in 
385

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
8 
 
the U.S.A., subject to disclosure of such agreements, and 
independent review by statutory authorities.  Please see 
pages 327 to 333 in Mediation Policy and Practice, Chitra 
Narayan (Oakbridge, 2021). 
 The Supreme Court has elaborated on the principles that 
must be considered when deciding if a type of dispute can 
be resolved by private dispute processes such as arbitration, 
and if such disputes are prop erly to be determined by the 
courts/ tribunals/ statutory authorities. Please see: Vidya 
Drolia v. Durga Trading Corporation, (2021) 2 SCC 1; 
Booz Allen and Hamilton Inc. v. SBI Home Finance Ltd., 
(2011) 5 SCC 532; A. Ayyasamy v. A. Paramasivam, 
(2016) 10 SCC 386. 
 These principles provide sufficient guidance on the use of 
mediation in different types of disputes. 
 Please consider the removal of section 7 and Schedule I. 
 
 Finally, and importantly, most matrimonial offences relate 
to domestic violence. The legislative policy in treating 
these offences, though non -compoundable, as offences  
across the bar,  that can be settled, diminishes the 
seriousness of these offences, and ignores the vulnerable 
and disempowered conditions of women in families , in 
negotiating mediated settlements. 
 
s.8 – Interim 
relief as an 
exception to 
pre-litigation 
mediation 
 The bar in section 8 is at variance with the standards a party 
will need to show for obtaining interim relief. 
 It is suggested that the section be amended exclude the need 
to demon strate exceptional circumstances, and the well 
understood expression ‘urgent interim relief’ be used in its 
place. Section 77 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 captures this situation succinctly and may be adopted 
here.1 
                                                           
1 S. 77: The parties shall not initiate, during the conciliation proceedings, any arbitral or judicial proceedings in 
respect of a dispute that is the subject -matter of the conciliation proceedings except that a party may initiate 
arbitral or judicial proceedings where, in his opinion, such proceedings are necessary for preserving his rights. 
386

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
9 
 
 Sub-section (2) in any case provides that if an interim relief 
is necessitated in a case, the parties will be directed to 
mediation, after such relief has been considered by the 
court/tribunal. 
 
s.9(3)  It is integral to a mediation process that parties shall not be 
under obligation to come to a settlement . This statement 
made only in the specific context of section 9, dealing with 
the power of the court to refer parties to mediation, is 
inappropriate and suggests that this principle is confined to 
section 9.  
 
s.10(1)  The section has been bodily adopted from s. 11(1) of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. 
 The context of mediation is different from arbitration, 
where culture and context ual understanding  play an 
important role. Thus, while not suggesting that mediators 
of other nationalities may be appointed, it is suggested that 
this provision not be made a part of the policy of the Act. 
 
Proviso to 
s.13(1) – 
hearing to 
mediator 
 Where the parties or any of them are of the view that the 
mediator is conflicted, such assessment should be given its 
due, and not be subject to a hearing of the mediator. 
 This not only delays the commencement of mediation, but 
also derogates from party autonomy in the choice of 
mediator, and in particular, imposing a mediator in respect 
of whom a party has expressed a reservation on grounds of 
conflict of interest. 
 
s.17  The use of the expression ‘ neutral’ may be reconsidered. 
The expressions ‘independent’ and ‘impartial’, serve the 
purpose well. 
 Neutrality is fluid state. Most experts in mediation suggest 
that where the imbalance in power between parties is 
immense, and a party is incapable of negotiating in this 
context, it would be advisable to terminate the mediation. 
387

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
10 
 
While this would be seen as the correct course of action, 
would the action of the mediator be neutral in this context? 
 Given the difficulty in encapsulating the contours of this 
expression, it would be better to keep this expression out 
from the law.   
 Section 17(2) that imposes a responsibility of ensuring 
‘fairness’, ‘voluntariness’, and ‘ self-determination’. If a 
mediator is neutral, they will be precluded from making 
assessments on these bases. 
 
s.18- Role of 
Mediator – 
facilitative 
mediation 
 The language in this section may be reviewed. 
 Would this definition preclud e the use of evaluative 
mediation or the mediator suggesting terms of settlement 
to the parties if the parties so desire? 
 
s.20  Does the requirement in section 20(1) for participation in a 
mediation for at least two sessions apply to all mediations, 
or only for mandatory pre-institution mediations? 
 
s.21 - Time-
limit for 
completion of 
mediation 
 The provision of a limit in time for completion of the 
mediation may be reconsidered. 
 Depending on the nature and complexity of disputes, the 
number and location of parties, etc., mediations can take 
longer than the duration of 90 plus 90 days that have been 
provided. It will be a wasted effort of the parties if a 
mediation has to be abandoned merely because the time 
stipulated has lapsed. 
 It is, in any event, open  to a party or the mediator to 
terminate the mediation if it is believed that the process if 
being protracted or misused. 
 
s.22(1) 
Mediated 
settlement 
agreement 
 The use of the expression ‘ means and includes ’ may be 
reviewed. 
 The requirement of the settlem ent agreement being in 
writing may be mandated only if parties are seeking the 
status and enforcement of the settlement agreement as 
proposed by the Bill. 
388

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
11 
 
 The Explanation to section 22(1) may be extended to 
agreements that are voidable under the Indian Contract Act, 
1872. 
 Section 12A of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015, proposes 
signing of the mediated settlement agreement by the 
mediator. These provisions may be amended to state that 
the agreement will be authenticated by the mediator.  
 
s.22(9) 
Registration 
 The requirement of registration of the settlement agreement 
makes the process onerous for disputants. 
 While mandating registration, the law does not set out the 
consequences of non-registration. If the consequence were 
to be to make the settle ment agreement of no legal effect, 
this would mean that efforts at resolution and the resolution 
would be put to waste; actions taken by parties pursuant to 
such resolution will have to be reversed; result in 
disenchantment with the mediation process, etc. 
 The requirement of registration of the mediated settlement 
agreement should be optional. 
 It should also not be the responsibility of the mediator to 
undertake such registration. This could impact the 
perception of neutrality of the mediator, if the partie s do 
not themselves take steps for registration. 
 
s.27, 29 (1) – 
Mediation by 
Lok Adalat 
and 
Permanent 
Lok Adalat 
 The provisions in the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, 
for mediation by the Lok Adalats, (a) do not provide for 
confidentiality of the proceedings, (b) directs the 
Permanent Lok Adalat to decide the issue if the parties do 
not reach a settlement – without the consent of the parties, 
and (c) empowers such Adalats to summon witnesses and 
call for documents.  
 These aspects derogate from principles and considerations 
that are essential to mediation, and provision may be made 
for their amendment in the Legal Services Authorities Act, 
1987. 
 
389

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
12 
 
s.28 – Status 
of a mediated 
settlement 
agreement 
The status and enforcement of an agreement arising from 
international commercial mediation may be excluded from the 
consequence provided in this section, for reasons addressed 
above. 
 
s.29 – 
Challenge to 
mediated 
settlement 
agreements 
 Since mediated settlement agreements under this law could 
cover all categories of disputes, not restricted to contractual 
disputes, it is important that the grounds for challenge be 
expanded to accommodate considerations that arise in 
other categories of disputes, for instance the paramount 
interests of a child, whose custody may be the subject of 
the mediated settlement agreement. 
 The provisions of sections 10 to 19A of the Indian Contract 
Act, 1872 provide broader grounds for avoiding an 
agreement, and these may be considered for inclusion as 
well. 
 Please see the corresponding pr ovision in the Singapore 
Mediation Act, 2017, for instance.2 
 The Draft Bill proposes challenge only by a party to the 
mediation. This for instance, could preclude challenge by a 
person on the grounds of impersonation. It should be open 
to persons affected to challenge the settlement agreement. 
 It is not clear what ‘corruption’ and ‘gross impropriety’ 
means/ includes, and if this is limited to the conduct of the 
mediator. 
 The time limit it is understood will be extended where fraud 
or other incapacity applies, and will start only from the time 
such fraud is discovered/ incapacity ceases.  
 
                                                           
2 Section 12(4) of the Singapore Mediation Act, 2017: 
(a) the agreement is void or voidable because of incapacity, fraud, misrepresentation, duress, coercion, 
mistake or any other ground for invalidating a contract; (b) the subject matter of the agreement is not 
capable of settlement; (c) any term of the agreement is not capable of enforcement as an order of court; 
(d) where the subject matter of the dispute to which the agreement relates involves the welfare or 
custody of a child, one or more of the terms of the agreement is not in the best interest of the child; or 
(e) the recording of the agreement as an order of court is contrary to public policy. 
390

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
13 
 
S.33 Online 
Mediation 
The section may be amended to allow for the written consent of 
the parties to be obtained electronically. 
 
Chapter 7 – 
Mediation 
Council of 
India 
 This Council should be a self -regulatory body comprising 
mediators, with governance and leadership being matters 
that are determined by the mediators as a professional body 
 The council will also be empowered to co -opt other 
stakeholders to the body, such as representatives from 
ODR institutions. 
 
s.41 
Mediation 
Service 
Providers 
The provisions relating to grading of mediation service providers 
may be deleted. The work of the service providers will generate 
the necessary goodwill and  reputation to enable disputants to 
make their choices. 
 
 Part II Community Mediation 
  This Part may be deleted. 
 Community dispute resolution through mediation should 
be attempted through such per sons as the communities’ 
repose faith and confidence in, rather than the imposition 
of mediators selected by the Legal Services Authority or 
the District Magistrate  
 
Singapore Convention (a) exclusion in the current draft and (b) its 
treatment in the draft dated 29.10 2021 
 
A Part implementing the Singapore Convention is to be added in the Bill. This 
was part of the earlier draft published for comments. 
 
Please see draft provisions for inclusion for enforcement of international 
commercial mediations as defined in the Singapore Convention, and for 
international mediations generally, in Appendices B and A  at the end of this 
document 
391

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
14 
 
s.49 – The 
earlier draft of 
the Bill that 
was published 
for comments 
had the issues 
listed in the 
next column. 
 
Please consider the points made above on the duality in treatment 
of international commercial settlement agreements that are 
governed by the Singapore Convention in this Draft Bill. 
 The Singapore Convention governs international 
commercial mediated settlement agreements as defin ed in 
Article 2 of the Convention. 
 As such the definition of ‘mediated settlement agreement’ 
in this section (and consequently this Part) will cover such 
agreements and not those “considered as commercial 
under the law in force in India..” 
Proviso to s.49 
 The proviso to section 49 in the earlier version of the Bill 
made a reservation for government and government 
agencies. This exclusion of government and government 
agencies may be reconsidered as this will exclude a large 
category of disputes, including in vestor state disputes 
under investment treaties and free trade agreements, that 
could be resolved through mediation. 
 Mediation is appropriate in investor state disputes, by 
resolution on a consideration of the interests of all 
stakeholders concerned. The i nvestor seeks a long term 
relationship with India through the investment, and such 
interest is well addressed by the mediation process. 
 Appropriate oversight mechanisms, the setting up of a 
nodal agency in the government to assist and evaluate 
settlement proposals, etc., will help in the due process of 
government participation and agreement in mediation 
s.51 -Enforcement 
 The Singapore Convention provides two broad 
circumstances for enforcement under Article 3: (i) use of 
the settlement agreement as a defenc e when proceedings 
are initiated in respect of the same dispute that was settled 
in mediation; and (ii) for implementation of the settlement 
agreement through the processes of the court, when a party 
to the agreement does not give effect to the agreed terms. 
 The second aspect of enforcement is not included in section 
51. 
392

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
15 
 
 Both clauses (a) and (b) in section 51(3) address the 
enforcement of the settlement agreement only by way of a 
defence in proceedings to show that the dispute was already 
resolved by agreement. 
 Parties should be enabled to raise the issue of the dispute 
already being resolved by agreement in the courts/ tribunals 
where the proceedings have been filed. The court/tribunal 
would be required to stay the proceedings until appropriate 
orders from the High Court on the enforcement of the 
agreement in the manner set out in section 52 are 
concluded. 
393

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
16 
 
 Part IV Miscellaneous 
s.48 It is not clear why this provision has been included, and what the 
questions of policy as addressed in this section will cover. 
 
s.56  Section 56 of the Draft Bill also states that this law will not 
be in derogation of other laws providing for mediation that 
are Schedule II. 
 The effect is that (a) different laws could provide differing 
standards on which pre-litigation mediation is mandated to 
be attempted; and (b) the laws could exempt pre -litigation 
mediation simply on a showing that an interim relief is 
necessary ( please see section 12A of the Co mmercial 
Courts Act, 2015). 
 The provisions in the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, 
for mediation by the Lok Adalats, (a) do not provide for 
confidentiality of the proceedings, (b) directs the 
Permanent Lok Adalat to decide the issue if the parties do 
not reach a settlement – without the consent of the parties, 
and (c) empowers such Adalats to summon witnesses and 
call for documents.  
 These aspects derogate from principles and considerations 
that are essential to mediation, and provision may be made 
for their amendment in the Legal Services Authorities Act, 
1987. 
 
 
  
394

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
17 
 
Appendix A 
CHAPTER II 
 International Mediations (Other than Singapore Convention)  
 
Section 1 
 
1. In this Chapter, international settlement agreement means a settlement 
agreement resulting from mediation, which is international in that:  
 (a) At least two parties to the settlement agreement have their domicile, places 
of incorporation, or places of business in different countries; or   
(b) The country in which the parties to the settlement agreement have their 
domicile, place of incorporation, or place of business is different from either: 
(i)  The country in which a substantial part of the obligations under the settlement 
agreement is performed; or   
(ii)  The country with which the subject matter of the settlement agreement is 
most closely connected; 
but does not include a settlement agreement that is governed by Chapter I of this 
Part. 
(2) The enforcement of an international settlement agreement under this section 
shall be subject to any other law  applicable to such agreements, or to any  order 
of a judicial authority in respect of any matters forming a part of the mediated 
settlement agreement. 
(3) In this Chapter court shall mean: 
395

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
18 
 
(i) the principal civil court of original jurisdiction in a district and includes 
the High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction having 
jurisdiction to decide the subject matter of the mediation if the same  had 
been the subject matter of a suit, but will not include any civil court of a 
grade inferior to such principal Civil Court or any Court of Small Causes;  
and 
(ii) where the subject matter of the mediation would fall within the 
exclusive jurisdiction of any special court, tribunal or quasi-judicial body 
under a law, such special court or tribunal or quasi-judicial body. 
  
Section 2 
When international settlement agreement binding. — Any international 
settlement agreement which would be enforceable under this Chapter, shall be 
treated as binding for all purposes on the persons as between whom it was made, 
and persons claiming under them, and may accordingly be relied on by any of 
those persons by way of defence, set off or otherwise in any legal proceedings in 
India. A ny references in this Chapter to enforcing a n international  settlement 
agreement shall be construed as including references to relying on such 
international settlement agreement. 
 
 
Section 3 
Evidence.— 1. The party applying for the enforcement of an international 
mediation settlement agreement shall, at the time of the application, produce 
before the court— 
396

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
19 
 
(a) The settlement agreement signed by the parties;  
(b) Evidence that the settlement agreement resulted from mediation, such as:  
(i) The mediator’s signature on the settlement agreement;  
(ii) A document signed by the mediator indicating that the mediation was carried 
out;  
(iii) An attestation by the institution that administered the mediation; or  
(iv) In the absence of (i), (ii) or (iii), any other evidence acceptable to the 
competent authority.  
 
2. The requirement that a settlement agreement shall be signed by the parties or, 
where applicable, the mediator, is met in relation to an electronic communication 
if:  
a) A method is used to identify the parties or the mediator and to indicate the 
parties’ or mediator’s intention in respect of the information contained in the 
electronic communication; and 
(b) if the  information contained therein is acces sible so as to be useable for 
subsequent reference. 
3. If the international mediation settlement agreement to be produced under sub-
section (1) is in a foreign language, the party seeking to enforce the international 
commercial mediation settlement agreeme nt shall produce a translation into 
English certified as correct by a diplomatic or consular agent of the country to 
which that party belongs or certified as correct in such other manner as may be 
sufficient according to the law in force in India. 
 
 
397

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
20 
 
Section 4 
Grounds for refusal of enforcement of international mediation settlement 
agreements.—  
1. Enforcement of an international mediation settlement agreement may be 
refused, at the request of the party against whom it is invoked, only if that 
party furnishes to the court proof that— 
(a)      the party was not competent as defined in section 11 of the Indian 
Contract Act, 1872, to enter into the mediated settlement agreement; 
(b) The settlement agreement sought to be relied upon:  
(i) Is null and void, voidable, inoperative or incapable of being performed;  
(ii) Is not binding, or is not final, according to its terms;  
(iii) Has been subsequently modified; or 
(iv) the object or consideration of the mediated settlement agreement is not 
lawful in the manner provided in section 23 of the Contract Act, 1872; 
(c) The obligations in the settlement agreement have been performed;  
(d) Granting relief would be contrary to the terms of the settlement 
agreement;  
(e) where the subject matter of the dispute to which the agreement involves 
the guardianship, fostering or custody of a child, or relates to the welfare, 
property or other interests of a child, and one or more of the terms of the 
agreement is not in the best interests of the child; 
(f) There was a serious breach by the mediator of standards applicable to 
the mediator or the mediation without which breach that party would not 
have entered into the settlement agreement; or  
398

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
21 
 
(g) the agreement is in breach of a ny law providing for conditions or 
safeguards subject to which such disputes may be resolved. 
2. Enforcement or reliance on a mediated settlement agreement may be refused 
by a court at the request of the party against whom it is invoked, only if that party 
furnishes to the court proof of the same grounds as set forth in sub -section (1) 
above. 
2. Even if the conditions in sub -section (1) are fulfilled, the court may refuse to 
grant relief if it finds that:  
(a) Granting relief would be contrary to the public policy of India; or  
(b) The subject matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by mediation 
under Indian law. 
Explanation 1. —For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an 
award is in conflict with the public policy of India, only if,—  
(i) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or  
(ii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice. 
 
Section 5 
Enforcement of international settlement agreements. — Where the Court is 
satisfied that the international mediation settlement agreement is enforceable 
under this Chapter, the international mediation settlement agreement  shall be 
deemed to be a judgement or decree of that Court. 
 
 
399

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
22 
 
Appendix B 
 
NOTE: A proviso to be added to sub-section (1) of section 28 to the effect that the 
section will not apply to mediated settlement agreements covered by this Part. 
Part [] 
INTERNATIONAL MEDIATION 
 
CHAPTER I 
International Commercial Mediation (Singapore Convention) 
 
Section 1 
1. In this Chapter, an international mediation settlement agreement means a 
settlement agreement resulting from mediation and concluded in writing 
by parties to resolve:  
(a) a commercial dispute as defined in the United Nations Convention on 
International Settle ment Agreements Resulting from Mediation set 
forth in the [] Schedule;  
(b) which, at the time of its conclusion, is international as provided under 
that Convention. 
2. This Chapter will not apply to a settlement agreement mentioned in Article 
1, paragraph 2 or 3 of the Convention. 
3. In this Chapter, an agreement covered by sub -section (1) above, will be 
referred to an ‘international commercial settlement agreement’. 
4. In this Chapter, ‘High C ourt’ means the High Court in exercise of its 
ordinary original civil jurisd iction, having jurisdiction to decide the 
questions forming the subject-matter of the agreement if the same had been 
400

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
23 
 
the subject -matter of a suit, and in other cases, a High Court having 
jurisdiction to hear appeals from decrees of courts subordinate to that High 
Court. 
 
Section 2 
When international commercial settlement agreement binding .—Any 
international commercial settlement agreement which would be enforceable 
under this Chapter, shall be treated as binding for all purposes on the persons as 
between whom it was made, and persons claiming under them, and may 
accordingly be relied on by any of those persons by way of defence, set off or 
otherwise in any legal proceedings in India . Any references in this Chapter to 
enforcing an international commercial settlement agreement shall be construed 
as including references to relying on such international commercial settlement 
agreement. 
 
Section 3 
Enforcement of international commercial settlement agreement 
1. Any person referred to in section 2 above, may apply to the High Court for 
the purposes of (a) enforcing the international commercial settlement 
agreement in India, or, (b) establishing in any proceedings anticipated, 
filed or pending before any court, tribunal, arbitral tribunal or other judicial 
authority, that the matter in dispute before such authority has already been 
resolved under an international commercial settlement agreement. 
2. If any proceedings are initiated or pending in respect of or concerning a 
matter that a party claims was already resolved by a n international 
401

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
24 
 
commercial settlement agreement, such court, tribunal, arbitral tribunal or 
other judicial authority where such proceedings are filed or referred, on an 
application by a party, may, if it considers it proper, adjourn the 
proceedings in the matter until determination of the application under sub-
section (1) (b) above. 
 
Section 4 
Evidence.— 1. The party applying for the enforcement of an in ternational 
commercial settlement agreement under section 3(1) or (2) shall, at the time of 
the application, produce before the High Court— 
(a) The settlement agreement signed by the parties;  
(b) Evidence that the settlement agreement resulted from mediation, such as:  
(i) The mediator’s signature on the settlement agreement;  
(ii) A document signed by the mediator indicating that the mediation was carried 
out;  
(iii) An attestation by the institution that administered the mediation; or  
(iv) In the absence of (i), (ii) or (iii ), any other evidence acceptable to the High 
Court.  
 
2. The requirement that a n international commercial settlement agreement shall 
be signed by the parties or, where applicable, the mediator, is met in relation to 
an electronic communication if:  
a) A me thod is used to identify the parties or the mediator and to indicate the 
parties’ or mediator’s intention in respect of the information contained in the 
electronic communication; and 
402

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
25 
 
(b) if the  information contained therein is accessible so as to be useabl e for 
subsequent reference. 
3. If the international commercial settlement agreement to be produced under sub-
section (1) is in a foreign language, the party seeking to enforce the international 
commercial mediation settlement agreement shall produce a tran slation into 
English certified as correct by a diplomatic or consular agent of the country to 
which that party belongs or certified as correct in such other manner as may be 
sufficient according to the law in force in India. 
 
Section 5 
Grounds for refusal of enforcement of international commercial mediation 
settlement agreements.—  
1. The High Court before which the application in section 3(1) or (2) is made 
may, at the request of the party against whom the international commercial 
settlement agreement is sought to be enforced or invoked, refuse to grant 
the application if such party furnishes proof of any of the grounds set out 
in sub-section (2).  
2. Enforcement of an international commercial mediation settlement 
agreement may be refused, at the request of the party against whom it is 
invoked, only if that party furnishes to the court proof that— 
(a) A party to the settlement agreement was under some incapacity;  
(b) The settlement agreement sought to be relied upon:  
403

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
26 
 
(i) Is null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed under the law 
to which the parties have validly subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, 
under the law deemed applicable by the court;  
(ii) Is not binding, or is not final, according to its terms; or  
(iii) Has been subsequently modified;  
(c) The obligations in the settlement agreement:  
(i) Have been performed; or  
(ii) Are not clear or comprehensible;  
(d) Granting relief would be contrary to the terms of the settlement agreement;  
(e) There was a serious breach by the mediator of standards applicable to the 
mediator or the mediation without which breach that party would not have 
entered into the settlement agreement; or  
(f) There was a failure by the mediator to disclose to the parties, circumstances 
that raise justifiable doubts as to the mediator’s impartiality or independence 
and such failure to disclose had a material impact or undue influence on a 
party without which failure that party would not have entered into the 
settlement agreement.  
3. Even if the conditions in sub-section (2) are fulfilled, the court may refuse 
to grant relief if it finds that:  
(a) granting relief would be contrary to the public policy of India; or  
(b) the subject matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by mediation 
under Indian law. 
404

 
Date: 6 February 2022 
Comments on the Draft Mediation Bill 2021 – as introduced before Rajya Sabha and placed before 
the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament of India – CHITRA NARAYAN- MEDIATOR AND ADVOCATE, CHENNAI 
  
 
 
27 
 
Section 6 
Enforcement of international commercial mediation settlement 
agreements.—Where the Court is satisfied that the international commercial 
settlement agreement is enforceable under this Chapter, the international 
commercial mediation settlement agreement  shall be deemed to be a judgement 
and decree of that Court. 
 
Section 7 
Appealable orders.— 
An appeal shall lie from the order refusing to enforce an international commercial 
settlement agreement unde r section 5, to the court authorised by law to hear 
appeals from such order. 
 
Section 8 
Saving.—Nothing in this Chapter shall prejudice any rights which any person 
would have had of enforcing in India of any international commercial mediation 
settlement agreement  or of availing of any international commercial mediation 
settlement agreement in India if this Chapter had not been enacted.  
 
405

5/18/22, 2:42 PM Email
https://email.gov.in/h/printmessage?id=146921&tz=Asia/Kolkata&xim=1 1/4
From :ajjawad62@gmail.com
Subject :Re: Change in meeting schedule and venue
of the meeting on the Mediation Bill - reg.
To :Committee Section PPG <rs-
cpers@sansad.nic.in>
Cc :chitranarayan1996@gmail.com, sriram
panchu <sriram.panchu@gmail.com>,
tnmacc@tn.gov.in, secy@chennaiport.gov.in
Email Committee Section PPG
Re: Change in meeting schedule and venue of the meeting on the
Mediation Bill - reg.
Thu, Apr 28, 2022 11:35 AM
Hon’ble Chairman and Esteemed members of the Committee
Thank you for the opportunity given to me for presenting my views on the
Mediation Bill to you. To confirm the points made by me, I am sending you this
email. 
1. Mandatory mediation:
A point was raised by some lawyers present that mandatory mediation is
violative of the fundamental right to invoke the jurisdiction of the courts. This
may not be correct for the following reasons:
a. Parties are not deprived of the opportunity of going to the court. They
are only required to explore the possibility of an amicable resolution before
seeking to invoke the courts. 
b. Are the fundamental rights not violated when there is a huge delay in
rendering decisions by the courts owing to the huge backlog?
c. Mandatory pre litigation mediation is like the proverbial taking the horse
to the water. The new Act will only be showing them the option of
mediation. It is their choice to continue or to withdraw after they have
attended two sessions.
406

5/18/22, 2:42 PM Email
https://email.gov.in/h/printmessage?id=146921&tz=Asia/Kolkata&xim=1 2/4
d. Experience has shown that parties who come reluctantly to mediation,
take part willingly once they understand the benefits of the process. 
e. The Act provides for urgent interim orders being passed if so required
and parties can go for the mediation after securing their immediate
interests.
f. The dissonance induced by 200 years of the colonial legacy of the court
system will take some time to go. In the beginning it may be difficult to
inculcate the culture of mediation. But over a period of time, mediation
may become the norm. To do this mandatory pre litigation mediation will
be needed.
2. Online mediation:
Online mediation has been found to be very effective during the pandemic
period. The modes and medium of online mediation are diverse and the choice
depends on the nature of the dispute and people involved. Too much regulation
in this regard may be counter-productive and hence there should be some
flexibility allowed in its evolution.
3. Community mediation:
Given the cultural, class and caste dynamics operating at the community level,
the community members should be given the flexibility to choose their
mediators along with those prescribed under the Act. Secondly, given the
possibility that dominant groups may be able to force the weaker groups to
accept onerous terms, the mediated settlement should be approved by the
court. This would ensure the fairness of the process.
4. Excluded matters under the First Schedule:
Not all criminal cases are grievous or heinous in nature where state intervention
is mandatory. Even cases involving fraud and forgery can be mediated and
settled. Hence an omnibus exclusion of all criminal cases may be reconsidered.
The above points are confined only to the submissions made by me, while my
colleagues have raised other points too. 
407

5/18/22, 2:42 PM Email
https://email.gov.in/h/printmessage?id=146921&tz=Asia/Kolkata&xim=1 3/4
In conclusion, I would like to congratulate the Government of India for brining
in this law which will usher the revival of our ancient and hoary culture of
conflict resolution through dialogue.
Yours truly,
 A.J. Jawad
Advocate and Mediator
*Strictly Confidential - Attorney-Client privileged communication 
Unintended recipients of this email are prohibited from disseminating, 
distributing, copying or using its contents. They should immediately 
destroy the email and notify the sender at +919840087114. Recipients 
should run their own virus checks and we shall not be liable for any losses.
The provisions of Chapter IX to be amended to (i) give the community m
On 26-Apr-2022, at 7:42 PM, Committee Section PPG <rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in>
wrote:
Madam/Sir,
The meeting of the Committee on the Mediation Bill, 2021 with the
mediation experts which was earlier scheduled on 28th April, 2022,
has now been rescheduled (preponed) and the details of the date,
time and venue are as under:
Revised Schedule
Meeting on the Mediation Bill, 2021 with:
(i) Mediation Experts;
(ii) Tamil Nadu Mediation and Conciliation Centre;
(ii) Bar Council; and
(iii) Bar Associations. 
Date : 27th April, 2022
Time:   5:30 PM - 7:00 PM
Venue: MADRAS HIGH COURT
408

5/18/22, 2:42 PM Email
https://email.gov.in/h/printmessage?id=146921&tz=Asia/Kolkata&xim=1 4/4
You are requested to take note of the above change. 
-- 
Regards,
Committee Section (PPG)
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Parliament of India
Room No. 415, Block - B
Parliament Annexe Extension Building
New Delhi - 110001
Ph. No. 011 - 2303 5781
Fax No. 011 - 2309 3562
e-mail - rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in
409

   
 
   RESPONSE TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE  1. What are your views on the government bringing a standalone Bill on Mediation, when there is already a statute on Conciliation (i.e., Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996), which has now been recognised as same thing as mediation in the present Mediation Bill?  Conciliation and mediation are two different alternate dispute resolution (ADR) procedures. Conciliation is normally included in a contract as one of the steps for dispute resolution. Provisions for conciliation have been provided in the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. It is, in my opinion, a good idea to have a standalone Mediation Bill.   2. One of the key aspects of Mediation is its 'voluntariness', however, the Mediation Bill, 2021 has made pre-litigation mediation compulsory in civil and commercial matters. Do you think that mandatory pre-litigation mediation mechanism would defeat the essence of mediation where the parties are unwilling to mediate?  Since the entire rationale behind mediation is its voluntariness, compulsory pre-litigation mediation cannot be the norm. Parties frequently require urgent ex parte relief, the purpose of which would be defeated by compulsory pre-litigation mediation, which would give parties time to change the status quo and cause damage to other parties, thus defeating the purpose of ex parte/ad interim injunctions.        
410

   
 
   3. How do you see the Bill on facilitating the resolution of commercial disputes and boosting the 'ease of doing business' in India?  The twin aspects which are most important for the ease of doing business in ADR are (i) impartiality and integrity of mediators/conciliators/arbitrators and (ii) expeditious disposal. Although mediation is a step forward in providing quick, expeditious, and less expensive resolution of disputes, and would thus improve the ease of doing business, it may not be a major factor. However, even if it is a viable option only for a small percentage of stakeholders i.e., those having contractual business agreements, it would have a salutary role.    4. How is the Bill going to help in establishing and facilitating 'Private Mediation' in India?  Although trained mediators have become popular in some parts of the world, with well-respected private mediation centres that inspire the confidence of both the parties, this confidence is lacking in India. We have also not seen the growth of many private mediation centres at present.    5. Do you think that we have enough trained mediators and other infrastructure for making the pre-litigation mediation binding?  Each court system has trained mediators attached to it. Mediation is more a temperament than merely training. In some courts, sitting judges act as mediators, in other courts, retired judges are the mediators. Yet another alternative is lawyers trained in mediation. In my view, the training for mediators is not vigorous. The disadvantage of mediation is its lack of transparency. The advantage is its voluntariness. The former could cause some injustice to unempowered people. However, given the fact that we have such extreme pendency of cases, the way forward has to be through mediation, while maintaining its confidentiality and voluntariness.  
411

   
 
   6. India is one of the signatories to the 'Singapore Convention on Mediation'. Does the Bill fulfil the provisions mandated for its signatories? How is the Bill going to help in making India a leading centre in international dispute resolution?  The Singapore Convention on Mediation applies to international settlement agreements resulting from mediation, concluded by parties to resolve a commercial dispute. Thus, only international commercial settlement agreements resulting from mediation can be enforced under the Convention. The scope of the Mediation Bill, 2021 is broader.  The main difference lies in Article 5 (grounds for refusing to grant relief), Singapore Convention: 1. The competent authority of the Party to the Convention where relief is sought under article 4 may refuse to grant relief at the request of the party against whom the relief is sought only if that party furnishes to the competent authority proof that: (a) A party to the settlement agreement was under some incapacity; (b) The settlement agreement sought to be relied upon: (i) Is null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed under the law (ii) Is not binding, or is not final, according to its terms; or (iii) Has been subsequently modified; (c) The obligations in the settlement agreement: (i) Have been performed; or (ii) Are not clear or comprehensible; (d) Granting relief would be contrary to the terms of the settlement agreement; (e) There was a serious breach by the mediator of standards applicable to the mediator or the mediation without which breach that party would not have entered into the settlement agreement; or    
412

   
 
   (f) There was a failure by the mediator to disclose to the parties circumstances that raise justifiable doubts as to the mediator’s impartiality or independence and such failure to disclose had a material impact or undue influence on a party without which failure that party would not have entered into the settlement agreement.  2. The competent authority of the Party to the Convention where relief is sought under article 4 may also refuse to grant relief if it finds that: (a) Granting relief would be contrary to the public policy of that Party; or (b) The subject matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by mediation under the law of that Party.  The provision in the Indian Mediation Bill, 2021, for reference, is as follows: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, in any case in which the mediated settlement agreement is arrived at between the parties other than in court referred mediation or by Lok Adalat or Permanent Lok Adalat under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, and is sought to be challenged by either of the parties, such party may file an application before the court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction. (2) A mediated settlement agreement may be challenged only on all or any of the following grounds, namely:— (i) fraud; (ii) corruption; (iii) impersonation; (iv) where the mediation was conducted in disputes or matters not fit for mediation under section 7. (3) An application for challenging the mediated settlement agreement shall not be made after ninety days have elapsed from the date on which the party making that application has received the copy of mediated settlement agreement under sub-section (3) of section 22:  Provided that if the court or tribunal, as the case may be, is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the application   
413

   
 
   within the said period of ninety days, it may entertain the application within a further period of ninety days.  The UN has also drafted a Model Bill for the Singapore Convention, attached with this email, which may be referred to for this purpose.                              
414

   
 
   DRAFT PROVISIONS   1. CONFIDENTIALITY  Section 23, Mediation Bill –  (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the mediator, mediation service provider, the parties and participants in the mediation shall keep confidential the following matters relating to the mediation proceedings, namely:— (i) acknowledgements, opinions, suggestions, promises, proposals, apologies and admissions made during the mediation; (ii) acceptance of, or willingness to, accept proposals made or exchanged in the mediation; (iii) documents prepared solely for the conduct of mediation or in relation thereto.  (2) No audio or video recording of the mediation proceedings shall be made or maintained by the parties or the participants including the mediator and mediation service provider, whether conducted in person or online to ensure confidentiality of the conduct of mediation proceedings.  (3) No party to the mediation shall in any proceeding before a court or tribunal including arbitral tribunal, rely on or introduce as evidence any information or communication set forth in clauses (i) to (iii) of sub-section (1), including any information in electronic form, or verbal communication and the court or tribunal including arbitral tribunal shall not take cognizance of such information or evidence.   (4) The provisions of this section shall not prevent the mediator from compiling or disclosing general information concerning matters that have been subject of mediation, for research, reporting or training purposes, if the information does    
415

   
 
   not expressly or indirectly identify a party or participants or the specific disputes in the mediation.   Explanation.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the mediated settlement agreement where its disclosure is necessary for the purpose of registration, implementation, enforcement and challenge.  Article 7, European Union Directive 2008/52/EC –  Given that mediation is intended to take place in a manner which respects confidentiality, Member States shall ensure that, unless the parties agree otherwise, neither mediators nor those involved in the administration of the mediation process shall be compelled to give evidence in civil and commercial judicial proceedings or arbitration regarding information arising out of or in connection with a mediation process, except: (a) where this is necessary for overriding considerations of public policy of the Member State concerned, in particular when required to ensure the protection of the best interests of children or to prevent harm to the physical or psychological integrity of a person; or (b) where disclosure of the content of the agreement resulting from mediation is necessary in order to implement or enforce that agreement.  Suggestion –  ADD Section 23(5):  Nothing in this section shall prevent disclosure of the abovementioned information where this is necessary for overriding considerations of public policy, in particular when required to ensure the protection of the best interests of children or to prevent harm to the physical or psychological integrity of a person.    
416

   
 
    2. VOLUNTARINESS  Section 17, Mediation Bill –  (1) The mediator shall assist the parties in an independent, neutral and impartial manner in their attempt to reach an amicable settlement of their dispute.  (2) The mediator shall at all times be guided by the principles of objectivity and fairness and protect the voluntariness, confidentiality, and self-determination of the parties, and the standards for professional and ethical conduct as may be specified.  (3) The mediation process may include the mediator taking such measures as may be considered appropriate, taking into account the circumstances of the case, including meeting with parties or participants, jointly or separately, as frequently as deemed fit by the mediator, both in order to convene the mediation, and during the mediation for the orderly and timely conduct of the process and to maintain its integrity.  EU Directive –  The mediation provided for in this Directive should be a voluntary process in the sense that the parties are themselves in charge of the process and may organise it as they wish and terminate it at any time.  Suggestion –  ADD Explanation to Section 17:  Voluntariness in this section means that the parties are themselves in charge of the mediation proceedings and may organise it as they wish and terminate it at any time.    
417

   
 
     3. MEDIATED SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT  Section 29, Mediation Bill –  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, in any case in which the mediated settlement agreement is arrived at between the parties other than in court referred mediation or by Lok Adalat or Permanent Lok Adalat under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, and is sought to be challenged by either of the parties, such party may file an application before the court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction.  (2) A mediated settlement agreement may be challenged only on all or any of the following grounds, namely:— (i) fraud; (ii) corruption; (iii) impersonation; (iv) where the mediation was conducted in disputes or matters not fit for mediation under section 7.  (3) An application for challenging the mediated settlement agreement shall not be made after ninety days have elapsed from the date on which the party making that application has received the copy of mediated settlement agreement under sub-section (3) of section 22:  Court annexed mediation. Provided that if the court or tribunal, as the case may be, is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the application within the said period of ninety days, it may entertain the application within a further period of ninety days.  Section 12(4), Singapore Mediation Act 2017 –   
418

   
 
   The court may refuse to record a mediated settlement agreement as an order of court if — (a) the agreement is void or voidable because of incapacity, fraud, misrepresentation, duress, coercion, mistake or any other ground for invalidating a contract; (b) the subject matter of the agreement is not capable of settlement; (c) any term of the agreement is not capable of enforcement as an order of court; (d) where the subject matter of the dispute to which the agreement relates involves the welfare or custody of a child, one or more of the terms of the agreement is not in the best interest of the child; or (e) the recording of the agreement as an order of court is contrary to public policy.  Suggestion –  ADD the above grounds to Section 29(2).   4. TIME LIMIT  Section 21, Mediation Bill:   (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, mediation under this Act shall be completed within a period of one hundred and eighty days from the date fixed for the first appearance before the mediator.   (2) The period for mediation mentioned under sub-section (1) may be extended for a further period as agreed by the parties, but not exceeding one hundred and eighty days.     
419

   
 
   Suggestion –  AMEND: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, mediation under this Act shall be completed within a period of thirty days from the date fixed for the first appearance before the mediator.   (2) The period for mediation mentioned under sub-section (1) may be extended for a further period as agreed by the parties, but not exceeding ninety days.  
420

P.G. Suresh, Advocate &Mediator Trainer,  
KSMCC, High Court of Kerala 
 
Suggestions on Draft Mediation Bill 2021 by Kerala 
Mediator Trainers Team. (Amended Version) 
 
I. Sec.3 (b) (i) : -Definition 
 
“Court”. For the purpose of Mediation under this part means the 
principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a district, and includes 
the High Court in exercise of its Ordinary Original Civil Jurisdiction, 
having jurisdiction to decide the disputes fo rming the subject matter of 
mediation if the same had been the subject matter of a suit.   
 
As per this definition the Court means District Court s in every district  
and other 5 High Courts – (Bombay, Delhi, Calcutta, Madras and 
Himachal Pradesh)where it has its Ordinary Original Civil Jurisdiction. 
 
It may not be correct and contradictory to the Sec. 29 (1) of this Bill.  
 
Sec. 29 (1) : -  Challenge to Mediated Settlement Agreement.  
 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, in any case in 
which the mediated settlement agreement is arrived between the parties 
and is sought to be challenged by either of the parties, he may apply to 
the Court or Tribunal of competent jurisdict ion before which the subject 
matter of dispute or other proceeding would lie.  
 
421

Here it is mentioned that either party can challenge the mediated 
settlement agreement before the Court of Competent Jurisdiction before 
which the subject of the dispute would lie. – For example, it may be a 
Munsiff Court or Sub Court.  
 
Hence should make a change in this section and add this provision of 
Sec.3 (b) (i) into the “Court” means – Any Court or Tribunal 
established in India as per the provisions of law to try any such cases 
in civil or criminal in nature of competent jurisdiction before which 
the subject matter of dispute or other proceeding would lie. 
So that the reference of criminal matters to Mediatio n is also will be 
possible. Eg: - 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act.  
 
In the present Bill it is not specifically mentioned anywhere else for the 
remedy of conducting mediation in compoundable criminal matters, 
matrimonial matters  criminal in nature , 138 N.I Act matters, The 
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, Maintenance and 
Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, etc.  
Hence this has to be addressed in the present Mediation Bill otherwise it 
will certainly create problems for referr ing the criminal cases or such 
other disputes for the resolution of issues through Mediation. 
 
II. Sec. 3(a): - “Council” Means the Mediation Council of India 
established under Sec.35 of this Act.  
Here it is evident that there is only a Central body is established. But 
Like other enactments, this Mediation Act also should get some 
independent statutory rights.  For Eg: - Legal Services Authorities Act. 
422

Then only we can easily spread the message of M ediation throughout 
nation. The Mediation should implement in the grass root level of 
society to get the benefit of this enactment for which there must be a 
separate statutory body which should be constituted under this new 
enactment.  
So, the cons titution of such statutory body also must be mentioned in 
the Bill. Hence as mentioned herein the Bill, there must be a central body 
to control every aspects of Mediation in national and international basis.  
It is also very much necessary to note that there must be state and 
district bodies to look after the entire matters with in the state and each 
district. There are so many cultural, religious, customary, 
linguistic,regionaldiversities and differencesall over India and that are 
very important in the field of Mediation. This has to be addressed by the 
new enactment by giving independent right to the State and districts but 
under the supervision of the central body.  
Hence, we should  Provide relevant provisions to  constitute State 
Mediation Authority in each State in all over India and under them there 
must be District Mediation Authorities by whom the ground level works 
can be implemented.   
So, after mentioning the definition for “Council” should give the 
definition for the “Authority”.  
“Authority” Means the State Mediation Authority and District 
Mediation Authority constituted under this Act.  
The constitution may be like wise mentioned in the Legal Services 
Authorities Act. Thus, the Mediation will get separate statutory right to 
implement everymatter related to Mediation.  
It is to be noted that as per Sec.89 of CPC, the ADR mechanism,  
423

i. Arbitration - There is one Enactment that Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996. 
ii. Lok Adalat – The Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 
iii. Judicial Settlement – Follow such procedures prescribed by the 
central Government in this behalf.  
iv. Mediation – Mediation Act,2021 
Here Mediation also coming under a new enactment which has separate 
body and power and then why to merge some of the activities with 
other authority and enactment like, Legal Services Authorities Act. For 
Eg: - for effecting Registration of Settlement Agreement or passing any 
such awards etc.  
It is also to be noted that so many responsibilities are given to the Legal 
Services Authority to imple ment the activities imposed upon them as 
per that legislation and now why we are seeking the mercy of another 
enactment to implement the legalities and other Mediation activities.  
So according to us we need to establish a new operating system and 
procedure to the entire nation from top to bottom and the fund and 
other things should come from the central government which is more 
profitable to the government if it is implemented.  
So, from the Reference of a matter to Mediation and till the final  
settlement agreement registration and its filing process and other allied 
things should be done by the state and district authorities. The central 
authority will have the final decision making power and entire 
monitoring rights over the state. The Accredi tation of Mediator and all 
other rights conferred as per this Bill should be maintained as such and 
should done by the Mediation Council of India.   
424

Otherwise to meet the expenditure for conducting and completion of the 
Mediation process we have to wait fo r the mercy of the Legal Services 
Authority and neverget any independent rights on this.  Even now it is 
evident in the grass route level of each district in India and that has to be 
addressed.   
 
III. Sec. 6 (1) – Pre-Litigation Mediation and Settlement: -  
 
Here we need more clarification about the consent of the parties. 
Whether the consent for Pre-Litigation Mediation is compulsory or not? 
If it is compulsory then what are the norms to be clarified and 
mentioned herein? If not, what should be done? 
 
IV. Sec. 6 (2) – Pre-Litigation Mediation and Settlement: -  
 
In this provision there should be more clarification about the 
qualification of a Mediator. Who can be a Mediator?  
While going through the present Sec.6 (2) anybody who is appointed by 
the parties can be a Mediator. If that be so what is the importance of 
registration of a Mediator with the Mediation C ouncil of India  to 
become a Mediator. So also, the person who is not  qualified as per the 
norms of the Council, if opted by the parties and the status of such 
Settlement Agreement also will be questioned. This aspect should be 
clarified and should mention that any person registered with the 
Mediation Council of India can b e opted by the parties to be a Mediator 
……  
 
425

V. Sec. 8 (2) : - Interim Relief by Court or Tribunal: -  
 
The Court or Tribunal shall after granting or rejecting urgent interim 
relief, as the case may be, refer the parties to undertake mediation to 
resolve the dispute, if deemed appropriate.  
 
It is to be noted and specified in this Mediation Bill that there is no 
Appeal remedy to either party from any settlement arrived on account 
of Mediation and in other cases the aggrieved party can approach the 
jurisdictional appeal court to challenge any order other than the matters 
directly or indirectly affected in Mediation process.  
It is also to be clarified that no appeal remedy is available to either party 
from challeng ing any Media tion Settlement Agreement in any manner 
and the challenge raised by either party before the jurisdictional court 
will be final. The resolution of disputes through Mediation must be final 
and the finality is very important and that also to be highlighted in  the 
Mediation Bill.   
 
VI. Sec. 9: -- Power of Court or Tribunal to Refer the Parties to 
Mediation: -  
 
In Sec. 9 (1) Not withstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, a Court or Tribunal, before which an action is 
brought in a  matter which is the subject of an agreement to submit to 
Mediation shall,  if aparty to such agreem ent or any person claiming 
through or under him so applies no t later than the date of submitting 
his first statement on the substance of the dispute have to be omitted.  
426

Without applying by the parties if there is any such Mediation 
Agreement the matter sho uld be referred to Mediation without consent 
or willingness of any other parties thereto.  
 
VII. Sec.10 (2) : - Appointment of Mediator: -  
 
The parties are free to agree on a procedure for appointing the Mediator 
or Mediators.  
Here we have to make it clear that whether the consent of the parties is 
necessary for the reference to Mediation or not?  If Consent is necessary 
then it must be a written agreement and by whom it will be taken and 
when and where it will be taken who will  keep those documents and its 
confidentiality. These matters must be clarified in the Mediation Bill 
itself.  
 
If the consent is not mandatory for conducting Mediation, then it will 
affect the conducting of Pre -Litigation Mediation as per this Mediation 
Bill.  
If the Pre -Litigation Mediation is compulsory and mandatory in any 
civil proceedings or any other compoundable criminal proceedings 
which has the civil flavor, the consent of parties will become immaterial. 
These aspects should be clarified and specified in this Mediation Bill. 
 
It is also to be clarified that how a person can initiate the Pre -Litigation 
Mediation proceedings and what are the procedures to be complied with 
by the parties. 
 
427

VIII. Sec.21 (3) (ii) : - Mediated Settlement Agreement : -  
 
As per this Mediation Bill, it is clearly mentioned that if any settlement is 
arrived in an Institutional Mediation, the Mediator sh all after 
authenticate the same, submit to the Mediation Service Provider.  
As per Sub Sec. 3 (ii) it is further mentioned t hat in all other cases shall 
be submitted to the Mediator and after authenticating the same, the 
mediator can provide a copy of this agreement to the parties.  
 
Here we need some clarifications. If the Mediation is conducted through 
an Ad -Hoc Mediation  process, what should be done by the Meditator 
with the original settlement agreement? The Accredited Mediator 
should mention his Accreditation Number issued by the Mediation 
Council of India while authenticating the Settlement Agreement and 
also producing for registration before the District Mediation Authority.   
The District Mediation Aut hority should maintain a list of Accredited 
Mediators in the District as well as whole State and verify with the same 
while producing the Settlement Agreement for Registration by anybody 
at any point of time.    
Who should keep the original after furnishin g the authenticated copies 
to the parties? These aspects to be clarified in the Mediation Bill. 
As per Sec. 21 (8) who can produce this settlement agreement for 
effecting registration before the District Mediation Authority. 
 
Here there should be some clar ifications with regard to the Execution 
and Registration of the Settlement Agreement.  
 
428

IX. Sec. 21 (7): - Mediated Settlement Agreement: -  
Provided that the mediated settlement agreement reached between the 
parties under sub section (2) shall be registered within the territorial 
jurisdiction of the Court or Tribunal of competent jurisdiction to decide 
the subject matter of dispute.  
 
Here it is very much necessary to clarify that in a case of court annexed 
mediation what to do with this settlement agreement and all such 
procedures before the Court also should mention in this Bill. Otherwise 
it will create problem in future.  
 
It is to be noted that as per this Mediation Bill it is clear that the 
Mediated Settlement Agreement is equallent to judgment and decree  
and if that be so there need not pass any further decree in  a matter 
considering the settlement agreement  in case of court annexed 
mediation.  
This has to be clarified and explained as proviso to this section.  
 
X. Sec. 21 (8): - Mediated Settlement Agreement: -  
 
Registration referred to in sub section 7 shall be made by either of the 
parties, mediator, mediation service provider within a period of ninety 
days from the date of receipt of copy of the mediated settlement 
agreement.  
 
Here also there must be some clarification with respect to the production 
of settlement agreement before the District Mediation Authority for 
429

effecting registration as per sub section 7 . Whether the mediator who 
occupies the original settlement agreement should produce for 
registration or the parties themselves have to get it registered from the 
authority. If it is not clarified there will be disputes on this matter in 
future and that has to be cleared now itself.  
 
Here we have to give some more clarifications with regard to the 
authenticity of the Mediator who is executing and producing for 
registration of a Settlement Agreement before the District Mediation 
Authority.  
 
Registration of Settlement agreement: -  
 
In relation to the registration of the settlement agreement before the 
District Mediation Authority there should be more clarity. At the time of 
preparing and authenticating the settlement agreement by an Accredited 
Mediator, he/she should be very careful and put their enrollment 
number or Accreditation Number to prove that h e/she is an accredited 
mediator and qualified to do a mediation as per the law. Moreover, the 
DistrictMediation Authority also should verify the same and after 
confirmation only they should effect registration of the Mediation 
Settlement Agreement and give the registration number to the parties 
concerned. Thereafter the District Mediation Authority should give a 
Certificate bearing the details of partie s, summary of settlement 
including the name of competent court jurisdiction, the registration 
number, the Accreditation Number/Enrollment Number of the 
430

Mediator and by whom it was produced and accepted from the 
Authority including the registration .The party concerned can file the 
execution petition and should insist to  produce this  registration 
certificate along with the E.P. Any court should not accept the E.P. in file 
without producing the Registration Certificate issued by the District 
Mediation Authority as contemplated in the Bill.  Otherwise any party 
may create any fake settlement agreement and produ ce it for the 
registration and if it is registered that cannot be challenged later.   
 
XI. Sec.22 (4): - Confidentiality: -  
 
Sec.22 (4) provided that evidence or information that is otherwise 
admissible or subject to discovery in proceedings will not become 
inadmissible or protected from discovery solely by reason of its 
disclosure or use in a mediation.  
We need some clarification in this proviso.  
 
XII. Sec.28 (2) : - Status of Mediated Settlement agreement: -  
 
Subject to the provisions of Sec.29, i t shall be enforced in accordance 
with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in the same 
manner as if it were a judgement and/or decree passed by a court, and 
may accordingly be relied on by any of parties or persons claiming 
through them, by  way of defense, set off or otherwise in any legal 
proceedings.  
 
431

It is further to be clarified that how we will get the status of a civil 
decree for the settlement agreement in a criminal matter. Eg: - 138 N.I. 
Act matter settled what shoulddo with this s ettlement agreement and if 
the same is accepted by the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court or any 
Appellate Court in case of settlement. 
 
It is c orrect that criminal court cannot pass a decree /judgmenteven if it 
is settled in Mediation. T hereby accepting this settlement agreement 
before a Criminal Court by whom cannot pass a decree on it.  
Thus, what should we do with a settlement Agreement before a 
Criminal Court having jurisdiction to settle an issue and how it can be 
dealt with? 
Is it possible that if the Mediation Bill provides a provision that the 
Settlement Agreement executed in Mediation with respect to the 
criminal matters by way of Pre Litigation Mediation or Court Referred 
Mediation will have the same effect and status of the Awar d which may 
be passed as per Sec.21 of The Legal Services Authorities Act. 
 
For the settlement of criminal cases compoundable in nature, the non -
compoundable cases which the court gives permission, all the matters 
related to the offences under Sec.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act, all 
the matrimonial matters including the petitions filed under Protection of 
Women from Domestic Violence Act 2005 , Maintenance and Welfare of 
Parents and  Senior Citizens Act 2007 ,  and which are all the other 
criminal cases h aving civil flavor and disputes which are personal in 
nature which may be permitted by any court of law including any 
Appellate or Revisional Court,  may be referred to Mediation as an ADR 
432

mode of resolution of the disputes . For this purpose, one new provi sion 
may be added as Sec.320A in the Code of Criminal Procedure. All 
the settlement arrived in mediation under this provision shall have the 
same effect and status as equallent to the Award under Section 21 of the 
Legal Services Authorities Act. Hence suff icient amendments also to be 
carried out in the Code of Criminal Procedure for the strict compliance 
of this provision and by which the Pre -Litigation Mediation rights also 
will be protected under this provision. For the purpose of execution of 
the Award w hich are executed under this provision shall be either 
criminal or civil in nature/manner which may be opted by the parties 
concerned and the court concerned can initiate deterrent punishment by 
awarding sentence for 2 years which may be extended to 3 year s in 
accordance with the gravity of offence  and the court can pass any order 
for the recovery of any amount as compensation from any party for the 
compliance of the settlement terms arrived between the parties  in 
Mediation. 
 
This aspect should be clarified here.  
 
XIII. Sec.28 (2) : - Status of Mediated Settlement agreement: -  
 
Here it should be clarified that how a settlement agreement should be 
drawn and what is the stamp duty payable for the execution of a 
settlement agreement by a Mediator and who can produce stamp paper 
for preparing the settlement agreement.  The time/period of production 
of stamp paper is also to be clarified. Since it is a Settlement Agreement, 
433

the stamp duty payable may prefer for preparing a valid agreement and 
the same can be considered while drafting the Rules in the Act.  
 
The stamp duty payable for drawing a  settlement agreement is very 
much important otherwise it will create problem in future which may 
led to further litigation.  
 
The details can be included in the Rules which may be framed hereafter.  
 
XIV. Sec. 30: - Cost: -  
 
Needs more clarification with regard to the costs which may be incurred 
in Ad-Hoc Mediation. 
 
XV. Sec.36: - Composition of the Mediation Council of India: -  
 
Now it is clear that only one Council is going to establish for the entire 
activities of Mediation in India. It may create many issues in future and 
the sole body cannot control all over India all the matters related to 
Mediation. So as a matter of reality  we can divide the entire nation as 4 
or 5 Zones and select one participant from each Zones from the 
Mediators Fraternity and include them also in the Mediation Council of 
Indian to represent the entire Nation for the development of Mediation. 
Apart from constitution of the State Mediation Authority and District 
Mediation Authority also should be included as another provision in 
this Mediation Bill.  
434

While drafting the Rules and regulations the rights and liabilities and 
constitution of the State Authority and District Au thority may be 
mentioned in detail.  
 
XVI. Sec. 44 (f): - Functions of Mediation Service: -  
 
Since the Sec.25 is seen deleted then no need to include this sub section 
and hence it has to be deleted.  
 
XVII. CHAPTER –7 – MEDIATION COUNCIL OF INDIA  
 
It is not mentioned elsewhere in this Bill about the constitution of 
Mediation Authority in each and every state as stated earlier. 
It is very much necessary to constitute Mediation Authority in each and 
every state in India which has to communicate with t he Central Body, 
Mediation Council of Indi a, and the State body  can be called as “State 
Mediation Authority”  and district body can be called as “District 
Mediation Authority” 
The State Body as well as District body haveso many duties to be 
complied with in connection with the day to day affairs of Mediation 
within the state. The entire things engaged by the Central body should 
be materialized through the State and District body and providing 
trainings and awareness progr ams in each State/District should be 
decided by the State body and in confirmation of the Central Body. The 
each and every matter in relation to the Mediation process including the 
quality, experience, expertise, retirement, panel and number of 
Mediators should be kept under the custody of the State Body and the 
435

District body should come under the direct control and supervision of 
the State Body and the same shall be intimated to the Central Body and 
they can keep sufficient registers and records with respect to these 
matters and final decision will be taken by the Central Body on each and 
every matter, if arises.  
The State Body should give the power in making Reg ulations for that 
State in relation to the entire Mediation process within the state and 
working of this State Body which should not be against the interest of 
the Central Body.  
 
The State Body shall consist One Senior High Court Judge as Chairman 
and one  District Judge shall be the Executive Director and shall also 
nominate 3 or 4 Mediators from the panel to the executive committee 
and also one member nominated by the State Government (Qualification 
can be decided)to the State Body. 
The State Mediation Au thority shall function as per the Regulations 
made by the State under the direct control by the Mediation Council of 
India.  
The District Mediation Authority shall consist one Chairman, the 
District and Sessions Judge of the District, One Sub Judge as Executive 
Secretary, and one Nodal Officer to look after the office affairs of the 
District Mediation Authority and the State Aut hority can appoint any 
other employees for the smooth functioning of the State as well as 
District Authorities in consultation with the State Government. These 
points also to be added in this Act.  
 
436

This also may be considered and added as another Chapter in addition 
to this chapter in the Mediation Bill.  
 
XVIII. SCHEDULE-  II – Disputes which may not be fit for 
Resolution Through Mediation under PART -I 
 
(ii). – Disputes relating to claim against minors………..  This should be 
removed and effect amendment like this …. 
Here we should add and amend that those matters relating to the claims 
against and in favour of minors which are not permitted or consented by 
the competent Court  
XIX. SCHEDULE-  IV –  
 
In this Schedule we have to add one sub Section as.. 
Sub Section 3. Th e Words Mediation and Conciliation referred in 
Sec.43D of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 shall stand omitted.  
 
XX. Sec.65 – SCHEDULE -V: -  
 
There will be some corrections in the amendment sought in CPC Sec.89. 
It is stated in Sec.89 (b) that conciliation or Mediation. Here the word 
conciliation also must be removed since the entire conciliation part in 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act is removed and amended. So that 
herein after in CPC also we need not mention anything about 
Conciliation. So , after Sub section (a) in Sec.89 need to mention only 
“Mediation”. 
437

Thereafter in sub section (c) also there need some corrections. Now it is 
written that “judicial settlement including settlement through Lok 
Adalat”. Here we have to segregate these two form s of ADR and 
mention as (c) Lok Adalat and (d) Judicial Settlement. It is to be noted 
that in sub Section (2) of Sec.89 will prove the same and in sub section 
(2) (b) and (c) are very much correct and that has to be looked into and 
make sufficient corrections like wise.  
In Sec.89 (2) (b) we have to remove the word conciliation and only 
mention Mediation. We need not mention “Conciliation or Mediation” . 
Since the conciliation is already amended and omitted from the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act s per thi s Bill and thereby we need not 
mention it again the word conciliation.  
The same thing is again repeated in Sec.67 Schedule VII which is sought 
for amendment in the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 in 1 st Clause, 
it is mentioned last …… “negotiation, arbitration, mediation and 
conciliation”. Here we have to remove the word Conciliation.  
 
XXI. SCHEDULE – VIII – To be added 
Sec.320A is to be added in the Code of Criminal Procedure and other 
relevant amendments to be effected in the Code. 
Sec. 320 A of the Code of Criminal Procedure: -  
 
For the settlement of criminal cases compoundable in nature, the non -
compoundable cases which the court gives permission, all the matters 
related to the offences under Sec.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act,  all 
the matrimonial matters including the petitions filed under Protection of 
Women from Domestic Violence Act 2005 , Maintenance and Welfare of 
438

Parents and  Senior Citizens Act 2007 ,  and which are all the other 
criminal cases having civil flavor and disp utes which are personal in 
nature which may be permitted by any court of law including any 
Appellate or Revisional Court,  may be referred to Mediation as an ADR 
mode of resolution of the disputes . All the settlement arrived in 
mediation under this provisi on shall have the same effect and status as 
equallent to the Award under Section 21 of the Legal Services 
Authorities Act. Pre-Litigation Mediation rights also will be protected 
under this provision.  
Provided that f or the purpose of execution of the Award which are 
executed under this provision shall be either criminal or civil in 
nature/manner which may be opted by the parties concerned and the 
court concerned can initiate deterrent punishment by awarding sentence 
for 2 years which may be extended to 3 yea rs in accordance with the 
gravity of offence  and the court can pass any order for the recovery of 
any amount as compensation for the compliance of the settlement terms 
arrived between the parties in Mediation. 
 
XXII. SCHEDULE – IX – To be added 
Sufficient amendm ents to be effected in Family Court Act  1984, for 
encouraging the Settlement through Mediation. All the Settlement 
Agreements arrived in Mediation with respect to any of the family 
disputes civil in nature which are not excludedas per the Schedule– II of 
this Act shall have the same status and effect as if it was an order, 
judgment or decree of a civil court as per Sec.9 (4) of this Act.  
All Settlement Agreements arrived in Mediation with respect to the 
matters criminal in nature shall have the same s tatus and effect as if it 
439

was an Award under Sec.21 of the Legal Services Authority and also will 
follow the provisions of Sec.320A of  Code of Criminal Procedure as  
mentioned in Schedule VIII under this Act.  
 
XXIII. SCHEDULE – X: - Amendment in The Consumer 
Protection Act, 2019 
All Mediations mentioned in this Act comes under this enactment shall 
be governed by the provisions of the Mediation Act 2021. 
 
XXIV. SCHEDULE – XI: - Amendment in The Companies Act, 
2013 
All mediations mentioned in The Companies Act, 2013 will be governed 
by the Media tion Act 2021. For that purpose, Sec.442 of The Companies 
Act should be amended so as to give effect to the Mediation Act to 
conduct the Mediation and Conciliation referred in Section 442.  The 
word conciliation also should be remove d from this provision by 
amending it. 
Dated this the 13thDay of November 2021 
        P.G. Suresh, 
Advocate &Mediator Trainer,  
KSMCC, High Court of Kerala. 
9447224763. advsureshpg@gmail.com 
440

2/14/22, 10:22 PM Email: Inbox (15)
https://email.gov.in/?lang=en#8 1/2
To
     Shri Goutham Kumar,
     Deputy Secretary, Rajya Sabha Secretariat
Sir,
      I am Dr. C Thilakanandan, former Principal, Government Law College, Kozhikode, Kerala. My research was in
ADR with the topic " Alternative Dispute Resolution a Study with Special reference to Kerala." It is available in
ShodhGanga. 
I am happy that a new standalone legislation for  Mediation  is going to be enacted in the Country. It adds to my
happiness that  almost all recommendations I made in my thesis are seen in the bill. It is a great endeavour,d a
good piece of work on legislation. I have a few suggestions to this effect. The most important among them is the
need for an amendment in the Indian Evidence Act.1872. I would like to point out one by one as follows.
1) In section 3 which deals with definitions I think, it is better to define " Ad hoc" mediation as well, just below
clause "e". It would be better to at least mention the expression 'Adhoc" Mediation in the statute.
2) In Chapter VIII dealing with the Mediation council of India, there is a considerable change from the draft Bill. It
would be better if the provision given in the draft bill be reinstated. It would be better to be a Retired Judge  of the
Supreme Court of India who has inclination  towards Mediation.
I have a view that one representative from the bar is also required.
Apart from this I would like to suggest making explicit provisions in the Act itself for the constitution of Similar
councils in the state level,District level and Panchayath level. This is required for the spread and development of
mediation to the grassroot level and also to encourage and compel the state governments to promote it.
3) In the bill wherever the expression  " Alternate Dispute Resolution" is given , has to be changed to "Alternative
Dispute resolution". Because, Alternate and Alternative are different in meaning.
4) In section 40 it would be better to include one clause stating that " endeavour to establish spacious well
equipped modern mediation centers" in every part of the country..
5) In Chapter X dealing with Community Mediation,  sub section 5 of section 44 deals with the panelists. My
humble suggestion is to include one trained mediator also among the panelists. Lastly,
6) Add one more schedule for the amendment in the Indian Evidence Act1872.
Since Confidentiality is an important factor in mediation, apart from the provisions in the Act, it is necessary that
section 126 of the Indian Evidence Act be amended to include Mediator also in the category of persons to whom 
protection is guaranteed by Section 126 of the Evidence Act 1872.
The above are my humble suggestions. Many of the researchers across the country including me would have
suggested the enactment of a stand alone legislation for Mediation. We will be happy if an acknowledgement is
made to that effect also.
 I would like to attach the conclusions and suggestions portion of my thesis along with this mail. Important areas
are highlighted in red colour. If your good self has time, I request you to kindly go through it. I have conducted an
extensive empirical study conducting surveys among the stakeholders like parties in mediation, parties in Lok
adalat, Mediators, Advocates, Law teachers etc. across the state of Kerala.
 I have visited Many of the Mediation centers in Kerala and Bangalore Mediation centre, Delhi high Court Mediation
centre, Thees hazari  mediation centre etc. I have interviewed eminent persons like Adv. Shri Sri Ram Panchu, Dr. N
R Madhava Menon, Adv. Anil Xaviour etc. The thesis is available on the ShodhGanga site of Inflibnet.
Thanking you very much Sir
441

2/14/22, 10:22 PM Email: Inbox (15)
https://email.gov.in/?lang=en#8 2/2
Dr. C Thilakanandan,, 
       
442

346  
 
 
CHAPTER XV 
CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS 
 
“if our business methods are as antiquated as our legal system, we would 
have become a bankrupt nation long back". 
Lord Devlin 
 
In this fast changing world everybody is busy with their schedules. No  
one will be interested to conduct litigations ad nauseam . People need quick  
remedy to their solutions. In such circumstances, in order to provide speedy  
remedy to the litigant public, promotion of Alternative Dispute Resolution 
methods like mediation, conciliation etc. may be one of the appropriate 
remedies available to people. 
The statistical results obtained from various collected data (on the 
present status of the ADR system in Kerala and the opinions of its various  
stakeholders) have already been presented, discussed and summarized in the  
various previous chapters. Possible inferences have already been made in 
those chapters. Most conclusions have also been arrived at in those chapters. 
In add ition, this chapter aims at presenting them in a brief and consolidated  
manner and adds a few more conclusions, suggestions and proposals, all 
related the further development of the ADR system in the state. 
15.1. Some General Suggestions 
The results obtained from this study primarily reveals that the law 
experts (advocates, judges etc.) are expected to take action for spreading 
awareness to the litigants about the different alternatives (provided by the 
ADR system), their advantages and disadvantages and making them aware 
about the right to choose the forum from among different alternatives to 
litigation. Before referring cases to various forms of ADR the referring courts  
should make the litigants aware of its importance, explain them about the 
different modes of settlement, and about the process in each forum. 
One of the most important suggestions to be made here is on 
consultation before referring the case to ADR. Since the study reveals that 
443

347  
 
 
advocates in Kerala are not against ADR but many of them are against 
referring cases for settlement without consulting them and their clients. While  
referring the cases to ADR the courts need to consider the particular aspect 
that ADR process is a consensus one and therefore, the initiation of a 
consensual process also should be in a consensus manner (as against arbitrary  
manner). In other words,  the courts are not expected  to mechanically refer 
cases to ADR.  It is generally expected that the court will discuss this  matter 
with the appearing counsels (and if necessary, with the parties in litigation)  
before referring cases to ADR. The desirable (and not mandatory) 
consultations by the court (with the appearing counsels and parties) can 
sometimes be essential for taking the lawyers also in to confidence (and there 
is nothing wrong in taking them into confidence if such an action will be 
ultimately beneficial to the parties in litigation). All the referring judges are  
expected to note down these points and if needed, bring an attitudinal change 
in their functioning. 
This study has already revealed that (the fundamentals of the ADR 
system are quite different from those of adjudication and so,) all advocates are  
expected acquire the fundamentals of the ADR system to a certain extent. For 
instance, the fundamentals of mediation teach that the mindset of a mediator is  
not that of a judge and he or she needs a considerable amount of patience to  
listen others without interruption and interference1. The mediation need not be 
a to-the-point-deliberation. It is not a process to investigate in to what is right 
and what is wrong. It is all about an art and science of winning the minds for  
getting to yes. 2 Since the mediation process is different from adjudication, the  
mindsets required for both are different. Just like those of mediation, the 
fundamentals of adalats, conciliation etc. are also different from those of 
adjudication and so all advocates are expected to understand this truth 
 
1 Henry j Brown & Arthur l. Marriott, ADR Principles  and practice (1999), p.328 
&pp.128to149  
2 Roger Fisher,  &  Willium  Ury,  Getting  to  Yes  (1981)  pp200,  G.Richard  Shell, 
Bargaining  for Advantage (1999) pp.286 
444

348  
 
 
This study suggests  that there  should be an education  system to build 
ADR professionals from educated and skilled professionals. These 
professionals can even be drawn from areas outside law and judiciary  like 
management, social work, science and technology.  The selection process of 
ADR professionals are expected to be based on some internationally accepted  
stringent methods of tests to assess the aptitude of the mediator aspirants. All 
the trained ADR professionals must undergo apprenticeship training under 
well experienced efficient and successful ADR professionals for sufficient 
number of sittings. All ADR professionals should be given periodic refresher  
courses. Based on the responses from the feedback nonperforming and 
unsuccessful ADR professionals must be decertified. 
The judicial officers manning the ADR processes can be slowly 
replaced by (the above mentioned) well trained ADR professionals with 
experience in negotiation and mediation. The judicial officers shall be  re- 
deployed to adjudication processes. Such a revised policy in turn can be 
beneficial to the judiciary too in the context of the insufficiency of judicial  
(Wo)man power for adjudication. 
Also, this study emphasizes there is a need for  eventual bifurcation 
between adjudication and consensual processes like conciliation and 
mediation. 
ADR processes are expected to be treated as an independent status 
rather than a subsidiary means  to clear the  backlog of cases in courts.  Thus 
there shall be measures to attract youngsters into mediation. Under the present  
rules, for example, one requires fifteen years legal practice to become a 
mediator. This is not only a restriction upon the youngsters entering into 
mediation but a discouragement to qualitative leap in the entire ADR 
processes. Therefore, the entry level restriction shall be brought to a minimum 
of experience from fifteen to five. For this purpose, the Civil Procedure 
(Alternative Dispute Resolution) rules may be amended accordingly. 
445

349  
 
 
In order to further develop  the current ADR system to an  attractive 
dispute resolution programme as well as an attractive profession, more 
importance to ADR must be given in the LL.B curriculum. Also, ADR 
fundamentals need to be included in school curriculum. 
The advocates’ associations are also encouraged to take up a proactive  
role in strengthening the  dispute resolution system and justice  delivery in a  
better manner. Every Bar association in the state is encouraged to set up (1) a  
Dispute Resolution Division; (2) Continuing Legal Education Division; and 
(3) a Research Division, all with an objective of the professional development 
of its members in ADR. 
On the strength of the various provisions contained in the Code of 
Civil Procedure (Alternative Dispute Resolution) Rules, 2008 and the various  
provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,1996, the Bar Associations 
in every District in Kerala can start their own centres for mediation and 
arbitration and can conduct mediation and arbitration of cases with the help of  
advocates with good aptitude in mediation and arbitration. There are 
recommendations in supportive to this in the report of the 246th law 
Commission. The dispute Resolution Division of every Bar Association shall  
work in tandem  with (and need not  be under) the judiciary. When the Bar 
takes up such a  responsibility of consensual dispute resolution system in the  
State and Nation, the judiciary will confine its functioning in the adjudication  
process alone. This thesis argues that it is the absence of such a responsibility  
shown by the Bar that encourages the Bench to rem ain proactive and also to  
assume the lead role in the consensual way of dispute resolution. If the 
advocate community is willing to take up such a responsibility, it will create a  
new dispute resolution culture in our society. 
The lack of chance for a legal scrutiny in settlements reported by 
parties before  Lok Adalats and mediation centres may lead to  injustice and  
violation of human rights. This may be  a major setback for  ADR initiatives 
and it may become counterproductive. Therefore it is desirable that every 
446

350  
 
 
settlement reported shall be brought under the scrutiny of a statutory authority 
or statutorily recognised forum. 
At present the Lok Adalat settlement or resolution of disputes at the  
court-annexed mediation centres are free of cost to rich and poor alike.  At this 
initial stage of development of mediation in the country and state, it is 
desirable that the state providing it free of cost. But at the same time it is time 
to think about limiting the free delivery of service only to the poor litigants  
deserving legal aid under the provisions of the Legal Services Authorities Act,  
1987. Those litigants with own financial support need  not be given the benefit 
of free service. The fee collected should be utilised for the development of  
mediation and other ADR processes. 
Court fee must be collected from Banks, financial institutions, and also  
from financially sound litigants. Poor people must be exempted from payment 
of court fees. Court fee refund shall not be given for all litigants. Only those  
deserving litigants must be given this refund. The amount collected by way of  
court fees should be utilised for the development of judicial administration and  
ADR. 
15.2. Some Specific Suggestions on Lok Adalat 
The long standing issues between the parties may not always be 
possible to resolve in a hasty manner within the available limited time of the  
Adalat. Hence the courts must take very much care in referring cases to Lok 
Adalats. Only those cases which do not involve confidential issues and those 
do not require much deliberations shall be referred to Lok Adalat settlement. 
The need to consult the appearing counsels before referring case to 
ADR (including to Lok Adalat) and also to take them into confidence has 
already been discussed above. Such a discussion between the Bar and the 
Bench can also enable both of them to suggest / determine whether a particular  
case is suitable for settlement in Lok Adalat. 
As it is generally seen in the Lok Adalat melaas, all the litigating 
parties of multiple litigations / cases reach the Adalat venue at the same time. 
447

351  
 
 
Such a mass gathering can often make the adalat venue, a busy and congested  
one. In addition, such a mass gathering often  compels each party to  wait for 
long before his/her case is called for. As an effective solution to the issues  
created by such a massive gathering, it is proposed that separate time slots be  
earmarked for each case. This slight change in the system itself can make the  
settlement process comfortable to the litigating parties. Such a change can also  
help avoid public discussion of the private, personal and confidential matters  
of the litigating parties in a particular case,  particularly where there are no  
mediation centres. 
15.3. Some Specific Suggestions on Mediation 
This primary point that this study reveals is that the advocate 
community in general are in need of more theoretical exposure to the 
mediation process. They are expected to be given more awareness about the  
various dimensions of mediation, the role of advocates in mediation,  the scope 
of mediation as a profession etc. 
In addition, this study reveals that mediators too are in need of more  
theoretical exposure and practical training in areas like interpersonal skills 
motivation skills etc. Since the role of a mediator is chiefly to facilitate 
communication between parties and motivate them to arrive  at an amicable  
settlement, it is not the province of the mediators to give legal counseling and  
advice to the parties involved in mediation. The study reveals that, during the  
mediation process. There have been chances that some mediators forgot their  
designated neutral role as mediators and often transgress their limits (as 
mediators) and self-importantly act themselves as legal counselors. The 
mediators, their trainers and also the authorities of the Kerala State Mediation  
and Conciliation Centre are expected not only to be aware of this fact but also 
to necessary and sufficient steps to emphasise and ensure the principle of 
neutrality in conducting mediation process. 
The parties appearing in the mediation  too need to be aware  of the  
actual process of mediation and only through such an awareness campaign can 
448

352  
 
 
the authorities ensure that the mediation process can be carried out according 
to the principles of mediation. As part of this awareness campaign, waiting 
room are expected to be set up and parties are expected to compulsorily watch  
video shows on the mediation process, prior to their appearance before 
mediators. In addition, invocation classes can be given to the litigants at the  
mediation center. 
After the mediation process, the parties should be encouraged to express 
their opinion and experience during mediation. Their feedbac k documents are  
expected to be  properly analyzed and the  results of such an analysis  can be  
used by the ADR authorities to further strengthen and improve the process of  
mediation. 
In addition, an ombudsman may be introduced to conduct surprise 
inspection in the mediation centers. 
Amenities must be provided for litigants in the mediation centers 
including play area for children (after taking cue from the amenities provided 
at several modern mediation centers across the world,  including the one  at 
Delhi High Court). 
The study reveals that there is widespread support for establishment of  
mediation centers in major centers across the state, even outside the premises 
of courts. Although most mediators do not want to move out of court 
premises, most advocates and most law faculty members support setting up  
mediation centers outside the court premises 
There is scope even for amending rules so that the disputants can 
approach such mediation centres (outside the premises of the court) first and 
try for settlement of their disputes before approaching courts. Thus mediation  
centres should be able to provide a venue for the parties to settle all kinds of  
disputes, whether referred to or not by the judiciary. Parties, who were unable 
to settle their disputes in a mediation centre, may subsequently consider 
instituting litigation before courts. 
449

353  
 
 
Such mediation centers will be helpful in many ways. Firstly, they can  
enable the courts to entertain only serious contentious case s which in turn can  
be useful to improve the quality of legal profession and standards of 
adjudication. Secondly, as is evident from the results of the data from general  
public, many are  dreaded to approach courts and  many litigants hesitate  to 
again approach courts, in case of disputes in their future life. 
In the absence of such mediation centres, there is likelihood that the  
unrecognized, unethical, informal and even illegal settlement practices will 
grow in the  society and parties (especially those  who are already disgruntled  
with their bad experience in courts) will be forced to resort to such unethical  
practices. 
Now mediation is governed under the rules made by High Court. Since  
all the stakeholders are in  support of the future development of  mediation in 
the state, for the future development of mediation a comprehensive legislation 
is required with the constitution of a Mediation Commission of India with 
representatives from judiciary, Bar, mediators, government etc. the 
commission can lay down standards, certify decertify, conduct training, give  
accreditation, organize awareness programmes etc This shall be a national 
legislation. The people and the government of Kerala shall take initiatives for  
such legislation. 
For the development of mediation as an effective way of dispute 
Resolution, awareness must be created among, Advocates, judges, Law teachers,  
General Public etc. 
15.4. Some Specific Suggestions on Arbitration 
Although arbitration, as an alternative  to litigation, has its importance 
in commercial disputes, the lack of popularity for arbitration in Kerala is 
evident in the results of this study. This lack of popularity can be attributed to  
many aspects like (1) deficiencies of the present law on arbitration in the 
country; (2) the pending amendment bill before the parliament etc. Even then,  
there is scope for improvement in the arbitration process. 
450

354  
 
 
The government courts and advocate community need to take action 
for to help the business community to quickly resolve business disputes. An  
immediate suggestion is that advocates are expected to form arbitrational 
forums under various Bar Associations and are expected to create instruments  
to train advocates in arbitration, prepare its own panel of arbitrators and 
educate the business community about the benefits of institutional arbitration  
and also to attract this community to the arbitration forum of bar associations.  
The High Court will have to prepare panel of arbitrators including advocates  
having experience in handling commercial disputes and shall take steps to 
appoint them in rotation. 
There are several problems involved in the matter of appointment of  
arbitrators. Since the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 provides that a  
clause in the contract to submit any  dispute for arbitration is misused by many  
parties who are in an advantageous position. The parties who are in a 
disadvantaged end are forced to sign the agreement that includes an arbitration  
clause. The financing companies situated at faraway places are able to 
manipulate the liberty that is provided by the Act and can appoint their own 
men as arbitrators. Therefore, in order to ensure the appointment convenient to  
parties, to avoid delay in appointment and also to ensure transparency in 
appointments, one important helpful step is to empower the Principal District  
Judges also as the Delegates of the Chief Justice. The Section 11 of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 need to be amended to achieve this. 
The introduction of Commercial courts  in all districts may be  a very 
good step as recommended by the 246 th report of the Law Commission, but  
fixing Rs. One crore as its lowest pecuniary jurisdiction may not be helpful for  
all litigants. Therefore, the lower limit has to be brought to Ten Lakh Rupees. 
Interim attachments ordered under section 9 of the  Act are valid only 
for the period fixed in the order or till passing of  the award, whichever is  
earlier. Because of these, as soon as  the moment the award is passed, the 
attachment ordered by the court ceases. The award can be executed only after 
451

355  
 
 
the time for challenge to the award is over and the Act provides for an 
automatic stay of execution once the OP is filed in the District Court. The  
dangerous possibility is that the next day after the award the respondent 
against whom the award is  passed can sell his property. Therefore, the period 
of interim stay should be extended to cover the  period to challenge the award. 
In order to achieve this amendment to the Arbitration rules is necessary. 
15.5. Some Specific Suggestions in the form of Amendments in Law 
1) Code of Civil Procedure (Alternative Dispute Resolution) Rules,  
2008: In the rule 8(b) of the said rules; Legal Practitioners  with at  
least ‘fifteen years’ standing at the bar has to be substituted in to ‘five  
years’ standing at the bar. In the rule (c) also similar change has to be  
brought. 
2) In the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,  1996: In the Arbitration 
Act under Section 11 If powers are conferred upon the Chief Justice to  
empower all Principal District Judges to be his delegates the practical  
impediments like delay involved in the appointment of arbitrators, and 
to the problems can be overcome. Promotion of institutional 
arbitration is the next step.  Preparation of a panel that includes the  
names of advocates who have experience in handling commercial 
disputes and appointing the arbitrators on rotation will be another 
desirable step. Introduction of video conferencing in arbitration 
proceedings as recommended by the Law Commission in its 176th 
report may be another useful step in this direction 
3) Arbitration and Conciliation (Kerala) Rules: 
i. Any interim order granted by the Court u/s 9 shall remain in  
force for a period of six months unless it is extended, or 
modified by the Arbitrator on application by any of the parties. 
ii. The Arbitrator shall specify in the award whether such interim  
orders are to continue with or without any modifications as are  
deemed necessary. 
452

356  
 
 
4) In the Indian Evidence Act 1872 
Confidentiality is an important factor in mediation. The 
litigant parties during the private session of the mediation may 
disclose several private secret and confidential matters relating to a  
case. According to the principles of mediation and also as part  of 
ethics and law the mediator is  bound to  keep them confidential.  
Therefore, there is the need to include mediator also in the category  
of persons to whom is protection guaranteed by Section 126 of the  
Evidence Act, 1872. 
15.6. Future directions in this research 
Several suggestions have already been made in the various previous 
chapters (while discussing the various results obtained) along the  future directions 
of this research. The remaining suggestions are given below. 
It is seen  that among the  Pre-Litigation Petitions (PLP) considered  in the 
Lok Adalats many of the cases are submitted by banks. In cases where the 
limitation period is exceeded, the banks approach the Adalats. Therefore, without  
paying the court fee the banks are able to recover the amount. The banks will not 
get a decree in such matters if they approach any other legal forum except the Lok 
Adalats. Similarly there are views that other corporate also use  Lok Adalat forum 
for their benefit free of costs. The legal Services Authorities Act which was 
enacted chiefly to help the poor litigants have now appears to be turned as a relief 
for rich clients. The loss of money to the exchequer as a consequence of this 
practice needs scientific investigation. 
It is seen that the average amount of compensation paid in the 
settlement of MACT cases through Lok Adalats in Kerala is very low 
compared to the national average. There may be several reasons for this 
average low amount of compensation paid in Kerala. Whatever be the reason,  
this lowest average amount in compensation awarded in Lok Adalat 
settlements in Kerala needs further investigation and analysis. 
453

357  
 
 
A considerable 30.2% advocates feel that cases bounced back to 
adjudication from ADR are usually short -shrifted (or  dismissed rapidly and  
without sympathy) by the courts (see table -12.1 and figure 12.1). Why do a  
significant group of lawyers feel that judges  act tough in such cases? Does 
their such a feeling arise from own experience?  On behalf of clients (or not),  
why do advocates expect sympathy from judges and what shortage in the 
degree of sympathy did these advocates feel in such cases? Can judges 
denounce this feeling as prejudice of and absurdity from the part of advocates?  
All these aspects need to be further studied. 
Although 68.2% advocates and many field experts feel that mediation  
centers should be established at places away from court premises, only 7.3% 
of mediators feel so. Is this reduced percentage among mediators a net result 
of their potential insecu rity feeling in case they are forced to work outside the  
court premise? Or, it is due to their fear of possible reduction in their self - 
important and self -assumed status of a judge  in a court premise? Given the 
fact that mediators  are picked by courts from an approval panel, do mediators  
fear that establishment of mediation centers at places away from court 
premises will reduce their professional opportunities to act as mediators? All  
these questions demand further studies. 
The que stion relating to the bifurcation of adjudication and the ADR  
systems is desirable or to the view that they should run independent of each 
other but under the same judicial structure? This question needs to be 
thoroughly explored with the help of more studies. 
Given the fact that some cases, which are potentially eligible to create  
some important precedents, can be referred for settlement and thus, lose 
chance to create precedents. So, the apprehension of the 40.1% advocates 
cannot be disregarded. Since mediators and law faculty members are also 
expected to be aware of this lost chance, why did majority of them disregarded  
this fact while answering the questionnaire? This question needs to be further  
explored with the help of further studies. 
454

Sanjeev Ahuja (Mediator & Resolution Professional) 
Founder – MissingBridge (www.missingbridge.in) 
 
Critical Analysis of the Mediation Bill (The Other Side) 
 
The Perspective 
Well, we hear a lot about Mediation now a days. This is primarily for reasons 
emanating from the business environment which are in a way forcing the 
Government to do something real and fast in this space. Hence, the government 
is out with a Mediation Bill, open for discussion and suggestions. We all need to 
be active in giving our suggestions to make sure that what we get is a good 
piece of legislation, which is the need of the hour. 
Sense of Urgency in imbibing Mediation 
The reasons which likely are putting the added pressure on the government and 
judiciary now a days in imbibing mediation are two-fold. 
 One, Singapore Convention on Mediation (2019) is inviting lot of 
attention from world over and countries are actively exploring its 
ratification, Georgia being the 9th one in the list. India may not want to be 
late (as we missed the bus earlier wanting to be the hub for the 
International Arbitration and regret it till date) and in any case would 
need a law of its own before the convention can be ratifie d, having been 
a signatory to the said convention already.  
 Second pressing need, which we keep hearing all through by almost 
everyone linked or connected to the Judicial system is the huge backlog 
we have in respect of pendency of cases in the courts. Well, ask me and I 
would have always wanted this not to be the reason for the required and 
desired push to Mediation but then, since we need both push and pull, let 
this reason be one for the push. The inherent benefits of Mediation are so 
many and such that,  if they are properly explained and understood, the 
Courts would in any case become the last option/resort (as also wished 
by our CJI recently in his remarks while the opening of an (ADR) 
Alternate Dispute Resolution platform). 
Mediation has been known to be a collaborative way of resolving disputes. It 
can be the most flexible and creative tool in terms of finding solutions suiting 
455

either side, ideally with the aid of a neutral or a facilitator and it is touted to be a 
cheaper mode of ADR. What is importan t is a proper ‘pull’ and a ‘push’. Pull 
takes time and need to be handled differently. For now, the right push can 
happen through the Mediation Bill which is being discussed and debated in the 
corridors across. We need to be sure that the bill puts forth what needs to be told 
and accordingly understood by various stakeholders, reduces the ambiguity on 
certain aspects of Mediation  and clarifies the government stand with regards to 
its own commitment. This would be an Act soon and it would be expected of all 
of us to choose Mediation as the default option to resolve our disputes, all types, 
always. Hence, a critical view required on the current document in circulation: 
Critical Analysis of the Draft Bill: 
A critical analysis of the current Mediation Bill (Draf t) is being done with a 
request to policy makers (as they set out to debate on this bill) to get the basics 
right as the world is watching us, and we cannot go wrong in ‘pace’ and surely 
not in the ‘direction’. Some precautions as mentioned below, if taken care at the 
right stage, might be a good idea. 
a) Ad hoc mediation  is a taboo, is a word with huge negative connotation. 
Let this be addressed as non-institutional or private mediation. After all, 
policy making includes taking care of the psychological facto rs and 
avoiding an improper use of nomenclature and terminology. (Would 
humbly suggest the removal of ‘ insolvency in corporate insolvency 
resolution process’ in IBC on the same lines) 
b) Court annexed mediation  is not and cannot be equated with private 
mediation (or the stated ‘pre litigation’ mediation) Mediation is purely a 
voluntary initiative and anything happening on the direction of the Court 
cannot be voluntary. A said/unsaid pressure on the parties, having already 
litigated for a while, cannot be coerc ed to settle. Having said this, an 
option to mediate and explore settlement should be and can be given at 
any stage of the ongoing litigation and even an out of court (private) 
mediation should be an option.  
c) Pre-litigation Mediation  should be the buzz wor d and promoted, 
endorsed, and pushed across all the time. Though, it cannot be forced or 
coerced as would go against the grain of the concept. Just that if we can 
find a better word and avoid the term ‘litigation’ in pre -litigation 
mediation when we promote Mediation, we would do justice to the cause. 
CJI recent remarks be repeated that courts should be the last option to be 
456

explored to resolve disputes. The takeaway from this statement is that 
ADR (and Mediation in that being the first option) be tried first to resolve 
those disputes.  
d) Making an Agreement to Mediate in writing  as a pre -requisite is both 
inconsistent with above mentioned Pre litigation Mediation as a default 
step and goes against the intent of giving the free will to  the parties to opt 
for mediation (whether agreed prior or not). In any case, over the period, 
the intent would be to have all agreements and contracts contain the 
mediation clause as the default option. 
e) Any kind of timelines being imposed to initiate or c omplete the 
Mediation process is contrary to the intent of bringing this law itself when 
we first put pressure on parties to settle and then to settle within the 
defined time frame. Let the party autonomy be at play and let them take 
their own time, after all they are not coming to the Court till the time, 
they are busy resolving. Yes, in any case any one side can call off 
mediation and move to the next best alternative.  
f) Of course, it would be great to have dedicated courts  to handle the 
settlements through mediation so that unwanted situations can be avoided 
and a veiled threat of a big brother watching is available. After all, a 
fresh/different mindset would be required to deal with this concept. This 
in any case might be required as the last resort, in c ase of any unintended 
situation as normally enforcement would seldom be an issue as these 
settlements would be an outcome of a voluntary initiative. Settlement 
through mediation carries the weight and force of a decree and that is a 
good weight behind it. 
g) Mediation is to be promoted as a career and a profession and cannot and 
should not be looked down upon by tagging it as a cheaper resolution 
option. Let the best of minds be excited and attracted towards this and 
help the larger cause. The cost efficiency is only to the extent it can be 
attributed to a quicker resolution which is a possibility under this concept. 
h) Registration and the Depository concept be brought in cautiously keeping 
in mind the very essence of Mediation which is ‘confidentiality’. 
i) Setting up of Mediation Council of India  as a regulatory body be only 
required for discipline and a structure and not to stifle the creativity and 
flexibility which is the hall mark of the Mediation process. 
j) Schedule II inserted talks about the exceptions and the  types of disputes 
which are not to be subjected to Mediation. List is surprisingly very long. 
457

Ideally only the typical kind of issues like those dealing with fraud, 
misrepresentations, and ones where adjudication is required need be 
excluded, else ideally  most of them should pass through the prism of 
Mediation atleast once and parties in dispute be encouraged to solve, 
resolve, and explore creative settlements. Restricting types of issues to 
Mediation might also be an outcome of the existing mindset where justice 
by a third -party is seen superior to the actual solutions expected and 
desired by the parties in dispute. When last year some statements from 
the top bosses appeared in the papers suggesting use of Mediation even in 
Income Tax Disputes, it raised a  ray of hope. Let that hope remain. It’s 
worth the effort.  
Mediation in commercial space might be a non -starter if Government does not 
lead with the example. Yes, the biggest litigator in Government (authorities and 
departments) too are welcome to try med iation in all their issues. To make it 
easy for them to avoid scrutiny later, let there be committees (a three -member 
team) formed taking joint calls while taking part in the mediation process and 
come out with creative and flexible solutions and bring dow n litigation and 
disputes, alike. 
Let India grab this opportunity to be the hub of Mediation , let the world get 
attracted to this jurisdiction and learn from us and follow us. Let us do the 
basics right from the very beginning. Yes, the law would evolve li ke others, but 
let us not repeat any of the earlier mistakes. Let these  (mistakes) be the new 
ones and let us use mediation to settle new and old disputes alike, using 
mediation. After all, ease of doing business needs a further boost and so does 
the world bank rankings. This would help. Happy drafting and debating. 
 
*** 
458

459

460

461

462

463

464

Page 1 of 8 
 
To 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
New Delhi 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice 
 
Respected Sir 
 
Subject: Suggestions on “The Mediation Bill, 2021” 
 
In reference to your Press Communique dated 28 th January 2022, we are submitting 
our suggestions on Draft “The Mediation Bill, 2021”. 
 
Suggestions on Mediation Bill, 2021 
Change suggested by: Dr. (h.c) CS Mamta Binani, Practicing Advocate 
and 
G Sriram, Practicing Company Secretary 
Date  09/02/2022 
Page 
No.in 
the 
Bill 
Guidelines  
/Annexure 
Para and 
Sub-para/ 
Clauses in 
the draft 
Bill 
Comments/ 
Suggestions 
Reasons  
4  Title of the 
Bill is  
The 
Mediation 
Bill, 2021 
The Title of the 
Bill can be 
changed to 
The Mediation 
Code, 2021  
Through this Mediation Bill section s 
in various Acts are likely to be 
amended, like MSME Act, 2006; 
Companies Act , 2013; Legal 
Services Authority Act, 1987; Indian 
Contract Act , 1872; Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act , 1996; The 
Consumer Protection Act, 2019; etc. 
The above amendments in various 
Acts are similar to the amendments 
brought about by the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code and Labour Code. 
 
Therefore, it is suggested that, the 
title “The Mediation Bill, 2021” can 
be changed to 
“The Mediation Code 2021” 
 
5  2nd Proviso 
of Clause 2 
The words  
“Provided that 
nothing shall 
prevent the 
Central 
This will give clarity that Union 
Territories can also notify the 
disputes for mediation. 
465

Page 2 of 8 
 
Government or 
a State 
Government 
from 
notifying, such 
kind of dispute, 
as it deems 
appropriate for 
such 
Government, for 
resolution 
through 
mediation under 
this Act,”…. 
 
 
After the Word 
Central 
Government or 
a State 
Government,  
the word “Union 
Territory” shall 
be included 
5  Clause 3(C) 
Definition 
of “Court” 
In the definition 
of Court, 
 
Tribunals and 
Consumer 
Commissions 
can be included 
Reason being that the  National 
Company Law Tribunal can refer the 
matters for Mediation as per section 
442 of the Companies Act , 2013 as 
well as the Consumer Commissions 
can also refer the dispute for 
Mediation as per the Consumer 
Protection Act, 2013. 
 
As they have the power to refer the 
disputes for mediation under the 
respective Acts. Therefore, Tribunals 
and Consumer Commissions may be 
considered for inclusion  under the 
definition of “Court”.  
3.  Clause 3(P) “participants" 
means persons 
other than the 
parties who 
participate in the 
mediation and 
includes 
advisers, 
advocates, 
consultants and 
any technical 
Company Secretaries who are 
members of the Professional Body  
i.e., t he Institute of Company 
Secretaries of India who ha ve 
domain expertise knowledge in 
various laws like  
I&B Code,  Companies Act, Limited 
Liability Partnership Act, Consumer 
Protection Act, MSME Act,  Real 
Estate Regulatory Authority Act etc.  
466

Page 3 of 8 
 
experts 
and observers”. 
 
In the above 
definition after 
the word, 
advocates the 
following 
professional can 
be included 
 
“Company 
Secretaries in 
Practice” 
may be included in the definition of 
“participants”. 
 
Currently, Company Secretaries are 
appearing before many forums such 
as Micro Small Enterprises 
Facilitation Council, Real Estate 
Regulatory Authority, Real Estate 
Appellate Tribunals, 
National Company Law Tribunal and 
National Company Law Appellate 
Tribunal etc.  
 
Therefore, it suggested that, 
Company Secretaries in Practice 
may be included in the definition 
of “participants”. 
5. Chapter IV 
MEDIATO
RS  
Clause -10 
Appointme
nt of 
Mediators 
In Subclause (1) 
of Clause 10 of 
the Bill. 
 
“Unless 
otherwise 
agreed upon by 
the parties, a 
person of any 
nationality may 
be appointed 
as a mediator : 
Provided that 
mediator of any 
foreign 
nationality shall 
possess such 
qualification, 
experience and 
accreditation as 
may be 
specified. 
 
Our Suggestion: 
“Unless 
otherwise 
agreed upon by 
the parties, a 
person of any 
nationality may 
be appointed as 
a mediator in 
case of 
Only in the matter of International 
Commercial Disputes, a person of 
any nationality can be allowed to act 
as a mediator. 
 
In case of disputes between the 
Indian parties only mediators who 
are Indian nationals and resident in 
India should be appointed. 
It will help  with the development of 
mediation and growth of mediation 
professionals in India. 
467

Page 4 of 8 
 
International 
Commercial 
Dispute”. 
 
 
6  Clause -12 The term 
“conflict of 
interest” be 
defined/ 
explained in the 
Bill. 
 
The Committee 
may consider to 
define the t erm 
conflict of 
interest or an 
explanation may 
be provided in 
the respective 
section itself. 
If the term conflict of interest is not 
defined or explained then it may be 
difficult for mediators and parties to 
the disputes to understand that, what 
constitutes a “conflict of interest”. 
7  Clause-14 Replacement of 
Mediator 
 
After sub-clause 
(ii) of 14 
the following 
clause may be 
included: 
 
(iii) mediation 
service 
providers shall 
intimate the 
concerned 
Courts or 
Tribunals of 
replacement of 
mediators within 
7 days from the 
date of such 
replacement, in 
case the 
mediation was 
referred by the 
Courts or 
Tribunals. 
In some cases, the matters which 
were pending before, the Court or 
Tribunal may be referred for 
mediation by the Courts or Tribunals. 
 
Therefore, it is important to inform 
the replacement of mediator by the 
mediation service provider to the 
Court or Tribunal . Hence this 
inclusion is suggested. 
19  Insertion of 
Clause-65 
After clause 65  
the following 
clauses may be 
1.The RERA Act 2016 consists 
provision for referring the dispute to 
conciliation under Section 32(g). 
468

Page 5 of 8 
 
inserted in the 
draft Bill 
 
Insertion of 
Clause 66  
RERA ACT 
2016 
 
1.The Real 
Estate 
Regulatory 
Authority Act 
2016 shall be 
amended in the 
manner 
specified in the 
Eleventh 
Schedule. 
 
Insertion of 
Clause 67 
 
SARFAESI ACT 
 
2. The 
SARFAESI Act 
2002 shall be 
amended in the 
manner 
specified in the 
Twelfth 
Schedule  
 
2.SARFAESI Act 2002 consists of 
resolving the disputes through 
Conciliation under Section-11 
(Resolution of Disputes) 
29  Insertion of 
Eleventh 
and Twelfth 
Schedule 
in the Draft 
Bill 
After the Tenth 
Schedule in the 
Bill, the following 
Eleventh and 
Twelfth 
Schedule may 
be inserted: 
 
Eleventh 
Schedule 
 
In RERA Act  
2016 for the 
Section 32(g) , 
the following 
shall be 
substituted: 
As the RERA Act 2016 consist of 
provisions for settling the disputes 
through conciliation under Section 
32(g) of the Act. 
 
Therefore, this amendment is 
suggested to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
469

Page 6 of 8 
 
Section 32 
subclause (g) 
 
“Measures to 
facilitate 
amicable 
Mediation of 
disputes 
between the 
promoters and 
the 
allottees through 
Mediators 
appointed by the 
Mediation 
Service 
Providers in 
accordance with 
provisions of 
“The Mediation 
Act, 2021; …” 
 
Twelfth 
Schedule 
Securitisation 
and 
Reconstruction 
of Financial 
Assets and 
Enforcement of 
Security Interest 
Act 2002  
(SARFAESI Act)  
 
For Section 11 
in the Act 
(Resolution of 
Disputes): 
 
The following 
shall be 
substituted: 
 
“Where any 
dispute relating 
to securitisation 
or 
reconstruction 
or non -payment 
of any  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As the SARFAESI Act , 2002 consist 
of provision for resolving the disputes 
through conciliation under section 11 
of the Act. 
 
Therefore, this amendment is 
suggested to the Committee. 
470

Page 7 of 8 
 
amount due 
including 
interest arises 
amongst any of 
the parties, 
namely, the 
bank or financial 
institution or 
securitisation 
company or 
reconstruction 
company or 
qualified 
institutional 
buyer, 
such dispute 
shall be settled 
either by 
Mediation as 
Provided under 
the Mediation 
Act 2022 or by 
way of  
arbitration as 
provided in the 
Arbitration and  
Conciliation Act, 
1996 (26 of 
1996), as if the 
parties to the 
dispute have 
consented in 
writing for  
determination of 
such dispute by 
Mediation or 
arbitration and 
the provisions of 
that Act shall 
apply 
accordingly.” 
 
 
 
 
 
471

Page 8 of 8 
 
Therefore, we humbly request the Hon’ble Committee to kindly consider our 
suggestions. 
Thanking You, 
Your Truly 
Digitally Signed  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr. (h.c) CS Advocate Mamta Binani 
Insolvency Professional &  Vice President-
National Company Law Tribunal Kolkata 
Bar Association 
Chairperson-Legal Affairs Committee of 
The Merchants Chamber of Commerce & 
Industry 
Board Advisor-Asian African Chamber of 
Commerce & Industry 
Co-Chair of The International Women's 
Insolvency & Restructuring Confederation -
India Network 
Past President (2016) of The Institute of 
Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) 
IWIRC Woman of the Year in Restructuring 
(Asia) Award, 2021  
Insolvency Law Award Winner (India) for 
2020 (By International Advisory Experts) 
Handphone: +91 9831099551  
Email: mamtabinani@gmail.com  
G SRIRAM, MBA, M. PHIL, FCS, 
LL.B, Practicing Company 
Secretary 
No.2,25th Street, Thillai Ganga Nagar, 
Nanganallur, Chennai-600061 
Mobile :9994669266 
Email: sriramvishnu@hotmail.com   
 
 
MAMTA 
BINANI
Digitally signed by MAMTA BINANI 
DN: c=IN, o=PERSONAL, 
pseudonym=b4424e4404bb57581ed0fcaffe8a0a0dc2
b0bf9e207e83af7de254b29c2c5d33, 
postalCode=700054, st=WEST BENGAL, 
serialNumber=68561a9a56c343614d2aef5e8fd00820
5a17f837e4d9460164fd11ef7709f3e6, cn=MAMTA 
BINANI 
Date: 2022.02.10 13:40:53 +05'30'
SRIRAM 
GURURAJ
Digitally signed by 
SRIRAM GURURAJ 
Date: 2022.02.10 
15:01:17 +05'30'
472

 
 
www.sdsadvocates.com     
Email:   sds@sdsadvocates.com 
Tel +91(0)22-35656191 
 
 
 
No.155, 15th floor, Maker Chambers -III, 
Nariman Point, Mumbai 400 021 
Maharashtra, India 
 
 
 
 
To,           11.02.2022 
Shri Goutam Kumar, 
Deputy Secretary, 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
 
Sub: Memoranda containing views/suggestions regarding the Mediation Bill, 2021. 
 
Dear Sir, 
 
The Mediation Bill, 2021 (“the Bill”) has been proposed to encourage and prom ote institutional mediation 
for resolution of disputes. Keeping in view this objective, we have the following comments for your 
consideration- 
 
1. Challenge to mediated settlement agreement under s. 29 of the Bill - We propos e that a 
provision for challenge before the arbitrator be included as a challenge to the mediati on 
settlement agreement can be adjudicated through arbitration in case of failure of 
mediation. 
 
The Bill provides that a party which seeks to challenge the mediated settlement agreement 
may file  an application before the court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction. However, 
most alternate dispute resolution clauses contain reference to arbitration in case of failure 
of mediation between parties. Keeping in mind the concept of party autonomy and in order 
to further reduce the burden of the courts, we propose that a provision for challenge to the 
mediated settlement agreement be sought before the Ld. Arbitrator or Arbitral Tribunal , 
subject to agreement between the parties. Such a provision would facilitate adjudication of 
dispute between the parties without having to approach the courts, thereby reducing the 
burden on judicial forums. 
 
2. Disputes or matters not fit for mediation provided under s. 7 read with the First Schedule 
of the Bill- We propose that a liberal view be taken towards mediation of tax disputes. 
 
There is growing conse nsus regardi ng the arbitrability of tax disputes internationally. Since 
mediation is also a form of alternate dispute resolution, the act may provide for certain classes of 
tax disputes to be arbitra ble, especially under international business transactions or under investor 
state treaties as these are not necessarily restrictive of the national legislation pertaining to taxation. 
We propose that a liberal view may be taken for mediation of tax disputes under the Bill. 
 
3. Time-limit for completion of mediation under s. 21 of the Bill- We propose that the period 
for mediation be reduced from one hundred and eighty days which can be  extended upto 
one hundred and eighty days  to be reduced to ninety days which can be extended upto 
ninety days. 
 
The Bill provides for a period of one hundred and eighty days from the date fixed for first 
appearance before the mediator, which can be extended upto one hundred and eighty days  
as agreed by the parties. We propose that this period be reduced to ninety days which can 
473

 
 
www.sdsadvocates.com     
Email:   sds@sdsadvocates.com 
Tel +91(0)22-35656191 
 
 
 
No.155, 15th floor, Maker Chambers -III, 
Nariman Point, Mumbai 400 021 
Maharashtra, India 
 
 
 
 
be extended upto ninety days  for mediation. Alternative Dispute Resolution is becoming 
increasingly popular as an effective and speedy means of adjudication. Ther efore, 
providing the parties with 180+180 days may prove to be time consuming, especially if the 
parties ultimately fail to reach a settlement agreement. A period of 90+90 days may be an 
adequate period for resolution of disputes through mediation especially since mediation is 
based on consent of parties.  
 
4. Commencement of mediation under s. 16 of the Bill - We propose that a provision be 
included for the mode of service of the notice to the other party. 
 
It may be in the interest of parties to indicate the  modes of service available for service of 
notice to the other party. This would not leave any room for confusion or error between the 
parties with respect to an important aspect which is commencement of medi ation. 
Therefore, we propose that a provision be included for the mode of service of the notice to 
the other party. 
 
We request you to consider our suggestions and we will be obliged to assist the Committee in case any 
clarification or further discussion is necessary pertaining to these points in terms of oral evidence, or 
through any other mode. We are grateful for your time and consideration. 
  
 
Regards, 
 
 
 
 
Subir Kumar 
Founder 
SDS Advocates 
Mob: 9769441090 
474

2/16/22, 1:38 AM Email
https://email.gov.in/h/printmessage?id=7239&tz=America/Los_Angeles&xim=1 1/4
From :mediatorvikram@gmail.com
Subject :The Mediation Bill, 2021
To :Chanderlekha Sharma <rs-memocpers@sansad.nic.in>
Email Chanderlekha Sharma
The Mediation Bill, 2021
Sun, Feb 13, 2022 08:31 AM
Dear Mr. Kumar
Hope you and your family are doing well and are staying safe and healthy.
 
This is with reference to the Draft Mediation Bill, 2021 for which the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice has invited comments.
 
I'm an Advocate who is focused on practicing as a Mediator. I'm on the Panel of Mediators & 
Conciliators, Ministry of Corporate Affairs. I'm promoting Mediation around the world. You can find 
details of the work that I'm doing on my website, https://MediatorVikram.com. In August and 
September, I organised a Symposium on Mediation In Our Culture & Traditions with 90+ Speakers 
from 40+ Countries. The Symposium has given insights on Mediation in all parts of the world. The 
recordings of the sessions are available on my YouTube Channel. Link is 
https://www.youtube.com/c/MediatorVikram. Details of the speakers are available on 
https://MediatorVikram.com.
 
I have various shows in relation to Mediation including Evolution Of A Mediator, In Conversation With 
A Beautiful Mind, Talking Books and Mediator Experiences. The recordings are available on my 
YouTube Channel. Link Details of the videos are available on my website.
I had sent my comments on the Bill to the Department of Legal Affairs. I had organised a Discussion 
on the Draft Bill that was circulated by the Department of Legal Affairs. Link to the recording is 
https://youtu.be/TnhnY-VG0J8. I had also organised a Workshop on the Draft Mediation Bill, 2021 
circulated by the Department of Legal Affairs. Link to the recording is https://youtu.be/fCH3cfM57Jk
 
Mediation has been appropriately defined in the Singapore Convention in a very broad manner as:
a process, irrespective of the expression used or the basis upon which the process is carried out, 
whereby parties attempt to reach an amicable settlement of their dispute with the assistance of a third 
person or persons lacking the authority to impose a solution upon the parties to the dispute.
 
Countries around the world have agreed on the definition of Mediation. India is a signatory to the 
Convention and has in-principle accepted this definition. UNCITRAL has drafted a Model Law in 
relation to International Commercial Mediation which should be a guide while drafting the Mediation 
Bill in India. Link to the Model Law is https://bit.ly/UNCITRALModelLawMediation which also gives the 
rationale behind the Model Law. Discussions and deliberations with participants from all over the world 
have taken place before UNCITRAL has finalised the draft Model Law. We should take advantage of it 
475

2/16/22, 1:38 AM Email
https://email.gov.in/h/printmessage?id=7239&tz=America/Los_Angeles&xim=1 2/4
instead of overlooking it.  Adopting the Model Law will make our legislation internationally accepted 
and will go a long way in our ease of doing business ranking.
 
Contrary to the confusion being created by many people who may have a vested interest or self 
interest, India has an excellent law on Mediation which is Conciliation as contained in Part III of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (the Act). Conciliation as provided in the Act is covered by the 
definition of Mediation in the Singapore Convention. The word "Conciliation" was used because 
UNCITRAL was using that word at the time the Act was enacted. The current Model Law clarifies this 
position as under:
 
For the purposes of this Law, “mediation” means a process, whether referred to by the expression 
mediation, conciliation or an expression of similar import, whereby parties request a third person or 
persons (“the mediator”) to assist them in their attempt to reach an amicable settlement of their 
dispute arising out of or relating to a contractual or other legal relationship. The mediator does not 
have the authority to impose upon the parties a solution to the dispute.
 
It is further clarified in footnote 2 of the Model Law that:
 
In its previously adopted texts and relevant documents, UNCITRAL used the term “conciliation” with 
the understanding that the terms “conciliation” and “mediation” were interchangeable. In preparing this 
Model Law, the Commission decided to use the term “mediation” instead in an effort to adapt to the 
actual and practical use of the terms and with the expectation that this change will facilitate the 
promotion and heighten the visibility of the Model Law. This change in terminology does not have any 
substantive or conceptual implications.
 
The Conciliation provisions are simple and can be easily understood by the layman. This is what we 
need because we always have to think of the person living in a village who doesn’t have access to 
justice and is actually denied justice. Mediation is the only hope they have for Dispute Resolution in 
India and we have to empower the people. The ODR Handbook prepared by Niti Aayog in 
collaboration with other organisations has mentioned that 75% to 97% of matters don't reach Courts. 
With 18 million matters going into Courts every year, it means that there could be about 600 million 
disputes that arise every year.
There is a colonial mindset that Dispute Resolution happens only in Courts. We have to undo this 
mindset and Mediation is an excellent method which is totally unconnected to the Court system. 
Mediation is a method of Dispute Resolution where parties resolve their dispute on their terms and 
under our law on Conciliation gives the Settlement Agreement status of a Court Decree. This is 
empowerment of people where they can get a Court Decree sitting in their village and with Online 
Mediation they can get a Court Decree sitting in their home. The Government should highlight this as 
people don't have to go through the most inefficient institution, the Indian Judiciary.
 
Mediation and litigation are diametrically opposite methods of Dispute Resolution and the Courts 
should be kept far away from it. Courts have destroyed litigation and arbitration by sitting on matters 
for an average of 14 years. Now, they are going to destroy Mediation. By providing Mediation for free 
devalues Mediation and Mediators in the minds of people which also doesn't let the profession 
develop. With the Courts sending parties for Mediation is like the Government sending people who 
approach it to make a road to their village to make the road themselves. If the Government does that, 
476

2/16/22, 1:38 AM Email
https://email.gov.in/h/printmessage?id=7239&tz=America/Los_Angeles&xim=1 3/4
the Courts will pull up the Government and ask Government officials to appear before it and pull them 
up. However, the Judiciary cannot be questioned even if they deny Justice because Justice delayed is 
Justice denied.
 
In the Bill there is an attempt to regulate Institutions providing Mediation services and training. It's 
surprising that the Government wants to do that whereas law firms are still not regulated. Mediation 
Institutions only create a panel of Mediators and do not and cannot mediate as that has to be done by 
the Mediators. However, law firms are providing legal services in their own name. In any case, the 
number of disputes that are handled by Mediation Institutions around the world is really low. JAMS in 
the USA is considered the largest private ADR Institution in the world and it only handles about 9,000 
Mediations in the entire year. Singapore Mediation Centre has mediated only 5,200 matters since its 
launch in 1997. This is the same all around the world. Do we really need to regulate this? Institutions 
will have to self-regulate for their own reputation.
 
There may be people with a vested interest in providing Mediation training that may push their agenda 
to include a requirement of training to practice as a Mediator. Where are the number of trainers 
required for the large number of Mediators required in the country to handle the millions of disputes 
that arise every year? Who accredits the trainers? Training, accreditation and certification hasn’t 
helped develop Mediation around the world which was highlighted in the Symposium that I had 
organised. The only people that are making money in relation to Mediation are the training Institutions 
that are providing training while the Mediators are providing services almost for free in the Courts 
which has led to devaluing Mediators and Mediation.
 
Mediation has to be left to the disputing parties. They are smart enough to choose their Mediator and 
decide the way the process is to be conducted. They will do their due diligence and appoint a person 
they trust and it is not for the Government or Judiciary to decide whom people can appoint as 
Mediators . The Government and the Judiciary have no role to play in the process. There is a section 
on Community Mediation in the draft Bill where the Government wants to interfere in a process which 
is the people's process. As I said, people are smart enough to appoint the people they trust as 
Mediators. 
  
We have to strengthen traditional methods of collaborative Dispute Resolution by whatever name they 
are called. People might not be familiar with the word "Mediation" but are familiar with the process as it 
has been used and has been used in families and communities for centuries. Let's not destroy this by 
regulating it.
 
I want to appear before the Committee to put across my views on the Bill.
Please acknowledge the receipt of this email.
 
Warm Regards
Vikram
 
Vikram Singh
Mediator. Advocate. Golfer. Peacemaker
 
C 17 Anand Niketan
477

2/16/22, 1:38 AM Email
https://email.gov.in/h/printmessage?id=7239&tz=America/Los_Angeles&xim=1 4/4
Benito Juarez Marg
New Delhi 110021
India
 
MediatorVikram.com
Mobile: +91 9810616644
478

2/20/22, 9:30 PM Email: Inbox
https://email.gov.in/#2 1/5
Open Le er to Parliamentary Standing Commi ee (Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Jus ce) on the Dra  Media on Bill 2021.
It is a case where the le  hand does not know what the right is doing. India ra ﬁed the UN Conven on on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabili es within months of its coming into force. We have since then replaced our older laws on disability 
rights and mental health to bring them in harmony with the UN Conven on. A common feature in all these legal 
instruments was the recogni on of persons with disabili es as persons before the law — possessed of legal capacity on 
an equal basis with others. A logical consequence of this posi on is that whenever any law is made for the people of the 
country, it will as much extend to persons with disabili es. Any law excluding persons with disabili es would be in breach 
of both the country’s interna onal commitment and its na onal laws. Yet the Media on Bill 2021 has excluded a range 
of persons with disabili es from the purview of the Media on law as if to say these path-breaking rights aﬃrming eﬀorts 
never happened. 
Media on, unlike adjudica on, is supposed to be a win-win, give and take exercise. It operates on the principle that both 
society and people beneﬁt when disputes are peaceably resolved. Yet any legal proceedings against persons with 
intellectual disability or persons with mental illness or persons with high support needs have been kept out of the 
purview of this law. Other people’s unhappiness or disagreement with them cannot be peaceably se led, be it in 
individual or community media on. No one can be compelled to go for media on and this non compulsion would as 
much apply to people with disabili es as to others . 
From such a framing of the bill it appears as though people with disabili es either do not have any requirement for 
media on or their representa on or need for media on is dispensable. What the law has done is that it has denied to 
persons with disabili es the op on to se le disputes amicably. With this one act these persons with disabili es have 
been rendered invisible by the law. When people are barred from having any grievance against any member of a 
community then people prefer to have nothing to do with them : they are shunned or socially ostracised. Yet the UN 
Conven on and our na onal laws speak about giving all persons with disabili es the right to live independently and in 
the community. So who will solve their disputes if they have any? Or will they con nue to either be socially ostracised or 
face con nued prejudice and violence of diverse sorts?
The lawmakers of the country are expected to make law with full knowledge and understanding of what they have the 
power to do and not do. To honour the interna onal commitments of the country and not override special laws through 
general laws is a part of the commitment. Furthermore, it is in order to enable course correc on and ensure that laws 
made are not opposed to the interests of the people; that rules for pre-legisla ve public par cipa on have been 
formulated. The rules require that at least a period of 30 days must be given to the people to oﬀer their comments and 
sugges ons. Even that period has been unilaterally cut down to ﬁ een days by the Parliamentary Standing Commi ee. 
So, the doors of the Standing Commi ee have been shut on us even before the invita on to par cipate could reach us. 
Clause 7 of the Bill read along with Schedule 1 ought to be closely examined so that s gma prevailing against persons 
with disabili es is not mechanically reinforced by the law. Through this open le er we are conveying our dismay to the 
Parliamentary Standing Commi ee and urge it to fulﬁl its du es in both le er and spirit by recommending that schedule 
1 of the Bill be duly amended. 
Ignorance of the law is no excuse - neither for the people nor for the governors. 
--------------------------------------------------------- 
Endorsed on 17 February 2022 by
AMITA DHANDA (Professor Emerita, NALSAR Hyderabad)
479

2/20/22, 9:30 PM Email: Inbox
https://email.gov.in/#2 2/5
PRATEEKSHA SHARMA (Peer psychotherapist, Founder Bright Side Family Counselling Centre)  
DISABILITY RIGHTS ALLIANCE (DRA)
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR PROMOTION OF EMPLOYMENT FOR DISABLED PEOPLE (NCPEDP)
NATIONAL PLATFORM FOR THE RIGHTS OF THE DISABLED
PASCHIM BANGA RAJYA PRATHIBANDHI SAMMELANI
TAMILNADU ASSOCIATION FOR RIGHTS OF DIFFERENTLY-ABLED & CAREGIVERS
DIFFERENTLY-ABLED WELFARE FEDERATION, KERALA
VIKALANGULA HAKKULA JATHIYA VEDIKA, TELANGANA
VIKALANGULA HAKKULA JATHIYA VEDIKA, AP
HARYANA VIKLANG ADHIKAR MANCH, HARYANA
KARNATAKA RAJYA ANGAVIKALARA MATTU PALAKARA OKKOTA
TRIPURA PRATHIBANDHI ADHIKAR MANCH
GUJARAT VIKLANG ADHIKAR MANCH
LAKSHWADEEP DISABLED ASSOCIATION
MADHYA PRADESH VIKLANG ADHIKAR MANCH
JHARKHAND VIKLANG MORCHA
DELHI VIKLANG ADHIKAR MANCH
TEAM EKTHA
DECEMBER 3 MOVEMENT
EQUALS CENTRE FOR PROMOTION OF SOCIAL JUSTICE (EQUALS CPSJ)
SHISHU SAROTHI
VIDYA SAGAR
BAPU TRUST
THE INTEGRATED RURAL DEVELOPMENT OF WEAKER SECTIONS IN INDIA, TAMIL NADU
ECUMENICAL COUNCIL FOR DROUGHT ACTION AND WATER MANAGEMENT, ANDHRA PRADESH
ORISSA DEVELOPMENT ACTION FORUM, ODISHA.
OIKOTREE INDIA
AUTISTIC MINORITY INTERNATIONAL
AFRICAN ALBINISM AMBASSADORS
VAISHNAVI JAYAKUMAR (Co-Founder  The Banyan, Member  Disability Rights Alliance)
SUDHA RAMAMOORTHY (Equals Centre for Promo on of Social Jus ce)
DR. ANJLEE AGARWAL (Execu ve Director, Samarthyam / Member, NITI Aayog [CSO-SC])
POONAM NATARAJAN (Founder Vidya Sagar)
SATHISH KUMAR (Member Disability Rights Alliance)
MEENAKSHI BALASUBRAMANIAN (Co-founder  Equals Centre for Promo on of Social Jus ce)
DR V JANAKI, CHENNAI
SANGEETA ISVARAN
T M RAMANA RAO
KARTHIK CHANDRASEKAR
DR. SRINIVAS GOLI (Medical Oﬃcer, North Delhi Municipal Corpora on)
ARMAN ALI (Execu ve Director, NCPEDP)
UMMUL KHAIR (Advocate with disability, Member DRA)
RADHA RAMESH (Director, Vidya Sagar)
DR MS KETNA MEHTA (Founder Trustee, Nina Founda on)
RAJESH (Accessibility consultant)
VIDHYA RAMASUBBAN
DR SATENDRA SINGH (Doctors with Disabili es: Agents of Change)
LV JAYASHREE (Director, The Spas cs Society of Tamil Nadu)
GOPINATH RAMAKRISHNAN (Managing Trustee, Special Child Assistance Network [SCAN])
RAMANATHAN G
RAJUL PADMANABHAN
480

2/20/22, 9:30 PM Email: Inbox
https://email.gov.in/#2 3/5
SMITHA SADASIVAN
P RAJASEKHARAN (Co-founder, v-shesh)
DR. LALITHKUMAR NATARAJAN (Love and Acceptance & Tamil Nadu Spinal Cord Disabili es Associa on)
PROF. YASMIN SULTANA (Head Pharmaceu cs, SPER, Jamia Hamdard)
MOHD FAISAL NAWAZ (Disability Rights Ac vist)
PAWAN KUMAR MUNTHA (CEO, Swadhikaar)
PREETHA KRISHNADAS (Deputy Director, The Banyan)
LALITHA VELLORE
DR. AISWARYA RAO (Pediatrician and Disability Ac vist)
GAYATRI KHANDHADAI (Lawyer)
BIR SINGH
ADIM PHUKAN, (Vedic counselor)
SAJIDA
NALINI (Associate Professor,  DCAC, University of Delhi)
ANJU VARMA
MRS. SAROJ KAUSHAL
BINDHULAKSHMI PATTADATH (TISS Mumbai)
DR. M. V. CHANDRAMATHI (Principal, Anantha Law College, Kukatpally, Hyderabad)
INDERJEET SINGH
REEMA MALIK
DR VIJAY KUMAR WADIA
NANDINI GHOSH (Assistant Professor, IDSK)  
ABHISHEK ANICCA (Poet & Ac vist)
PRITI
NILESH SINGIT
GAUTAM CHAUDHURY (Disability Development worker)
PROF. G. VASUKI (Department of chemistry, Pondicherry University, Pondicherry)
ARCHANA SUDHAKARAN
RUTH ARCHANA
SHARADA DEVI. V (PhD Research Scholar and Disability Rights Advocate)
PATRICK RODRIGUES
PRIYA VARADAN (Disability Researcher)
CHETAN (PhD scholar in Psychology and Disability Studies/IIT Hyderabad)
KOTA PRABHU
NITHIN (Sign Language Interpreter)
NARENDRA SATHE (Advocate with disability, Maharashtra)
B VENKATESH (Hon.President CBR Global network,Hon Convener IFRA & DDC)
SRILATHA JUVVA (Professor, School of Social Work, TISS)
AKHIL PAUL (Founder, Sense India)
PARIMALA V BHAT
K RAMKRISHNA (Re red from IDBI Bank)
JESSICA PRAKASH-RICHARD (Consultant, TouchStone Consultancy, Chennai)
SANDESHIKA SHARMA (Ar st n Holis c Health Prac  oner)
DR. L. RAMAKRISHNAN, Chennai.
PROF. SANDHYA LIMAYE, TISS, Mumbai
MANJIT KUMAR RAM, Kolkata
VIJAY GAJANAN JADHAV
GNANA BHARATHI
DR NONITA GANGWANI (Senior Resident, University College of Medical Sciences)
DR.SUNANDA.K.REDDY (Developmental  Pediatrician , CARENIDHI)
SWARNALATHA J (Managing Trustee, Swarga Founda on)
481

2/20/22, 9:30 PM Email: Inbox
https://email.gov.in/#2 4/5
SWAMI SHIVANANDA (Promoter Spiritual Sciences)
BHUSHAN PUNANI (General Secretary, Blind People's Associa on, India)
RAMA KANT AGNIHOTRI
RUMI HARISH
SAI
G RAVI (Disability Rights Ac vist)
TANUSHREE SARKAR (PhD candidate Vanderbilt University)
BANIBRATA MAHANTA (Professor of English, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi)
SHILPA DAS (Na onal Ins tute of Design)
SHAMPA SENGUPTA (Director, Sru  Disability Rights Centre)
DR ARAVINDA BHAT, Assistant Professor, Department of Languages, Manipal Academy of Higher Educa on,
Manipal
NILIKA MEHROTRA Professor JNU
RAJAN MANI, Director, Disability Law Ini a ve
JAYANT SINGH RAGHAV, President, Bhumika Trust
ANJALI CAPILA
TIRTHA PRATIM DEB, Research Scholar, EFLU, Hyderabad
MERRY BARUA (Director, Ac on For Au sm)
DIETHONO NAKHRO, Nagaland
KIM FERNANDES, Doctoral candidate, University of Pennsylvania
AZIZ MINAT, a concerned ci zen
ÁINE KELLY-COSTELLO, disabled person, MSC journalism
VANDANA BEDI, Consultant & Trainer - Disability and Development
ALAGAMMAI, University student
TANMOY BHATTACHARYA, Professor, University of Delhi
DR. NAMITA JACOB, Director, Chetana Trust
ERICH KOFMEL, President, Au s c Minority Interna onal
RANJANI. K MURTHY
DR GAYATRI MAHAJAN, Consultant Radiologist, mumbai
MONICA GUPTA Associate professor Gargi College  University  of Delhi
RACHANA SINGH, Disabled Sexual Assault Survivor
JAVED AHMAD TAK, Humanity Welfare Organisa on HELPline J&K
ABHA KHETARPAL
KANU PRIYA
ANERI ARYA
RICHA SHARMA
MEENU SHARMA
SANJAY JAIN
DAYANIDAS SUDHAKAR
PRIYAM SINHA
RAJAGOPALAN SS
PROF V SUNDER (Member, Disability Rights Alliance)
BHAVNA BOTTA (Editor, Connect Special)
PETER GIBSON (EnableMe Access - EMA)
ASHLEY TELLIS (Independent Researcher)
SANJAY E (Advocate)
ARPITA GUPTA (Clinical Psychologist & PhD Scholar at IIT Kanpur)
DR. P. SEKAR (Chairperson, LC Project Nagapa nam)
DENNIS
MARY GEORGE (School administrator)
VISHNU ADITYA (Ordinary ci zen)
482

2/20/22, 9:30 PM Email: Inbox
https://email.gov.in/#2 5/5
ANUJ GOYAL
PATHLOTH OMKAR
G RAVI
TADIGATLA KIRAN KUMAR
BISWAJIT K. BORA
SHILPAA ANAND (Associate Professor, HSS, BITS-Pilani Hyderabad Campus)
SAMUEL SAMSON
PALLAVI GAURI DEHARI (The Gender Lab Fellow)
NISHANT
REV. IMMANUEL NEHEMIAH
DR SANGEETA SAKSENA (Co-Founder, Enfold Proac ve Health Trust)
ROCHE VICTOR ( RISE, Pondicherry)
P SATTIYABAMA (WORD, Pondicherry)
.
.
.
Signatures are still being appended here : http://bit.ly/fix-mediation-bill
--------------------------------------- VAISHNAVI JAYAKUMAR
http://about.me/vjayakumar
Mobile : +919003088388
483

484

485

486

487

488

489

490

491

492

493

494

495

496

497

498

499

500

501

502

503

7/11/22, 12:47 PM Email
https://email.gov.in/h/printmessage?id=146986&tz=Asia/Kolkata&xim=1 1/1
From :tnmacc@gmail.com
Subject :Suggestions regarding Mediation Bill, 2021
by Hon'ble Mr. Justice Bharatha
Chakravarthy (PPT presentation in pdf
format) and the Institution (TNMCC) -
Forwarded - Regarding.
To :Committee Section PPG <rs-
cpers@sansad.nic.in>
Email Committee Section PPG
Suggestions regarding Mediation Bill, 2021 by Hon'ble Mr. Justice
Bharatha Chakravarthy (PPT presentation in pdf format) and the
Institution (TNMCC) - Forwarded - Regarding.
Mon, May 02, 2022 01:04 PM
2 attachments
Sir/Madam,
I am enclosing herewith the Power Point Presentation given by Hon'ble Mr.
Justice Bharatha Chakravarthy, Judge High Court of Madras, in respect of
Mediation Bill, 2021 and the Suggestions regarding Mediation Bill, 2021 along
with necessary enclosures.
Regards,
TNMCC
DBCJ PPT - Mediation bill - PDF Format.pdf 368 KB 
Suggestions regarding Mediation Bill - 2.pdf 13 MB 
504

Mediation Bill –
Concerns & 
Suggestions
Presented during
The Interaction of Standing 
Committee & The Madras High Court 
505

Mediation Bill - Concerns
Section – 2 –
Applicability
Section – 4 –
Definition
Section -7 –
Exclusion of 
Certain Cases 
Section – 33 
Composition of 
Council
Section – 44 –
Community 
Mediation
Schedule 1 & 7 –
Exclusion and 
Amendments
Separate Chapter 
for International 
Mediations
506

Section -
2(1)
2. (1) Subject to sub-section (2), this Act shall apply 
where mediation is conducted in India, and— (i) all or 
both parties habitually reside in or are incorporated in 
or have their place of business in India; or (ii) the 
mediation agreement provides that any dispute shall 
be resolved in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act; or (iii) there is an international mediation. 
In many cases either or both or some of the parties 
may habitually reside outside India ?
507

Section 
2(1)
International Mediation &  the various provisions contained in 
respect thereof – Runs into Article 3 of Singapore Convention
Article 3 – Reads 
“3. This convention does not apply to:
(a) Settlement agreements :
(i) that have been approved by a Court or concluded in the 
course of proceedings before a court;
ii) That are enforceable as a Judgment in the state of that 
court
508

Section 2 
(2)
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply wherein one of the 
parties to the dispute is the Central Government or a State Government, 
or agencies, public bodies, corporations and local bodies, including 
entities controlled or owned by such Government, except where the 
matter pertains to a commercial dispute: Provided that nothing shall 
prevent the Central Government or a State Government from notifying, 
such kind of dispute, as it deems appropriate for such Government, for 
resolution through mediation under this Act, wherein such Government, 
or agencies, public bodies, corporations and local bodies including 
entities controlled or owned by them, is a party.
It is estimated about 46% of  the litigation involve Government & 
Government Agencies. There is no logic to excluding this cases and 
Including by notification. Fit case cannot be by category but on the facts 
– Examples of TNEB case, School Case. Public Sector Undertakings – are 
Industries – Labour Disputes etc
509

China Model 
510

Suggestion 
Section -2 : This act applies to all Mediations 
conducted in India, and Part –II of this act shall 
apply to International Mediations
All provisions in various sections for International 
Mediation, except definition may be deleted and 
a separate Part –II by  Incorporating UNCITRAL 
Model law on International Commercial 
Mediation & International Settlement 
Agreements can be made
511

Section 4
4. Mediation shall be a process, whether referred to 
by the expression mediation, pre-litigation mediation, 
online mediation, community mediation, conciliation 
or an expression of similar import, whereby party or 
parties, request a third person referred to as mediator 
or mediation service provider to assist them in their 
attempt to reach an amicable settlement of a dispute.
The words “party or parties request” may be deleted 
as the Court also sends the matter to mediation under 
Section 89
512

Section -7
7. (1) A mediation under this Act shall not be conducted for resolution of 
any dispute or matter contained in the indicative list under the First 
Schedule: Provided that nothing contained herein shall prevent any 
court, if deemed appropriate, from referring any dispute to mediation 
relating to compoundable offences or matrimonial offences connected 
with or arising out of civil proceedings between the parties: Provided 
further that the outcome of such mediation shall not be deemed to be a 
judgement or decree of court referred to in sub-section (2) of section 28, 
and shall be further considered by the court in accordance with the law 
for the time being in force
Matrimonial Offenses and such other offenses predominantly civil in 
nature
513

Section 34
• 34. (1) The Council shall consist of the following members, namely:— (a) a 
person of ability, integrity and standing having adequate knowledge and 
professional experience or shown capacity in dealing with problems relating to 
law, alternate dispute resolution, public affairs or administration to be 
appointed by the Central Government—Chairperson; Costs. 36 of 1963. 
Limitation. Online mediation. Establishment and incorporation of Mediation 
Council. Composition of Council. 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 13 (b) a person 
having knowledge and experience in law related to mediation or alternate 
dispute resolution mechanisms, to be appointed by the Central Government—
Full-Time Member; (c) an eminent person having experience in research or 
teaching in the field of mediation and alternate dispute resolution laws, to be 
appointed by the Central Government—Full-Time Member; (d) Secretary to the 
Government of India in the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and 
Justice or his representative not below the rank of Joint Secretary—Member, ex 
officio; (e) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance or his representative not below the rank of 
Joint Secretary— Member, ex officio; (f) Chief Executive Officer—Member-
Secretary, ex officio; and (g) one representative of a recognised body of 
commerce and industry, chosen by the Central Government—Part-Time 
Member. (2) The Chairperson, Full-Time Member and Part-Time Member of the 
Council, othe
• Chairperson – A retired Judge of the Supreme Court or High Court , who is 
trained as a Mediator ; Council should consists of atleast 3 Trained Mediators –
Member Secretary, NALSAR or Registrar, Mediation Committee  or any person 
nominated by the Supreme Court can be an ex-officio member
514

S-44 –
Community 
Mediation
• 44. (1) Any dispute likely to affect peace, harmony and 
tranquility amongst the residents or families of any area or 
locality may be settled through community mediation with 
prior mutual consent of the parties to the dispute. (2) For 
the purposes of sub-section (1), any of the parties shall 
make an application before the concerned Authority 
constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 
or District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional Magistrate in areas 
where no such Authority has been constituted, for 
referring the dispute to mediation. (3) In order to facilitate 
settlement of a dispute for which an application has been 
received under sub-section (2), the concerned Authority 
constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 
or the District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional Magistrate, as 
the case may be, shall constitute panel of three mediators
• One Mediator is enough and if necessary two can be 
considered.  Three is too many in a mediation room – The 
name to be altered as Neighbourhood/Grassroots 
Mediation as the concept of community mediation is larger
515

Schedule I & VII
Except for Entries 4,5,7 & 8 – other entries prevent otherwise fit 
cases for mediation
MSME –Act they are taking up arbitration after mediation – will run 
counter to the confidentiality part – therefore needs amendment
Thanks for the appropriate Section -89
516

Thank you
Presented virtually on 27/04/2022
517

- 1 - 
 
Preliminary Views/Suggestions on ‘The Mediation Bill, 2021’  
by Bar Council of India 
 
Realizing that mediation is one of the most effective and efficacious  mode of 
alternate dispute resolution, and, can go a long way in addressing and 
alleviating the problem of pendency of cases, Bar Council of India took a 
decision in 2020 to make mediation a compulsory subject for LL.B degree 
course in India. 
 
We welcome the decision of the Central Govt. to introduce The Mediation Bill, 
2021 to encourage and promote mediation of resolution of dispute.  
 
The Bar Council of India would like to give the following preliminary 
comments and suggestions, which, it considers necessary and worthwhile to 
be taken care of for a final draft of the Bill:- 
 
1. It is important to keep private players having vested interest out from 
the ambit of Mediation Service Providers or Institutional Mediation. 
Experience shows that even Institutional Arbitration has not worked 
successfully in India and in order to ensure that the process of 
mediation does not fall prey to vested interests, it is suggested that 
court annexed mediation or mediation agreed between the parties 
through a mediation agreement is only recognized. The court annexed 
mediation centers have been quite successful as they are manned by 
lawyers and judges, who are trained mediators too. The USP of court 
518

- 2 - 
 
annexed mediation centers is that it is supervised by legally trained 
minds, and, therefore, there is almost zero backfires, there are no off-
shoots, such as challenge to higher courts. In this way, the basic 
objective to reduce pendency right from lower court to Supreme Court 
is being achieved.  
 
2. The introduction of compulsory pre-litigation mediation in The 
Mediation Bill, 2021, we are afraid, may result in delaying of cases and 
may prove to be an additional tool in hands of truant litigants to delay 
the disposal of cases.  
 
 The adversarial system that exists in India has been aptly termed as 
“Defendant’s Paradise”. Odds work heavily against the person who has 
knocked at the door of justice. The dice has been heavily loaded against 
the propounder of cause of action, be it the plaintiff, the petitioner or 
the applicant. 
 
 In this backdrop, the recourse to pre-litigation mediation, as envisaged 
in the Bill does not equally put the onus upon the parties. Any law, if it 
has to earn the distinction of being fair, must aim at equal treatment of 
parties. This aspect is conspicuous by absence in the provisions that 
deal with pre-litigation mediation.  
 
519

- 3 - 
 
 While Section 6(1) has put an embargo upon the plaintiff, no equal 
embargo has been created upon the defendant in Section 20(2) of the 
Bill. Thus, the defendant has his field’s day at the cost and expense of 
the plaintiff. 
 
 Section 20(2) of the Bill provides that where any party fails to attend the 
first two mediation sessions without any reasonable cause which 
resulted in the failure of mediation, the Court, Tribunal or the 
Authority, in a subsequent litigation on the same subject matter, 
between the parties, may take the said conduct of such party into 
consideration and impose such cost as it deems fit. 
 
 The conditions in Section 20(2) of the Bill have various aspects:- 
 
i. It is generic in nature and applies to both the parties: 
 
ii. It does not impose any embargo upon the defendant or does not 
create any deterrence against him in withdrawing from the 
mediation: 
 
iii. It does not provide any basis for imposition of cost, when the 
Court is not aware of any circumstances as to why the defendant 
has withdrawn from the pre-litigation mediation and whether 
such conduct invites imposition of cost: 
520

- 4 - 
 
 
iv. Courts cannot impose cost as a rule of thumb and must have 
justifiable material to impose the cost. Mediation proceedings 
being confidential, no evidence can be available to the Court to 
cull out any substantive reason to impose the cost. 
 
3. The provision for pre-institution mediation has been introduced as 
Section 12 A in the Commercials Courts Act, 2015 as a maiden measure 
w.e.f. 18.5.2018. The results can be broadly summarized as under:- 
 
i. The parties have taken refuse under the umbrella of “urgent 
interim relief” to bypass the pre-institution mediation: 
 
ii. Wherever the mediation has been resorted to, in more than 90% 
of the matters, it has been a non-starter 
 
 Thus, the aversion to pre-institution mediation is manifestly clear 
from the above. The concept of pre-institution mediation has been 
reduced to empty formality or a mere ritual; it may not take the 
movement of mediation any further or far. Therefore, in view of 
the ground position that cases are not getting settled through pre-
institution mediation, and, ultimately going to trial, the embargo 
of resorting to pre-institution mediation in the Mediation Bill 
should be revisited.  
521

- 5 - 
 
 
 Another aspect which we cannot lose sight of is that plaintiff or 
petitioner will have just an additional layer of litigation, and, for 
pre-institution mediation, will have to engage a Counsel, incur 
expenses, and, after failure of mediation again knock at the door 
of the courts for going to a trial which would mean bearing more 
and additional expenses for filing and prosecuting court case.  
 
4. Another aspect which must be born in mind is that when it is made 
mandatory for the plaintiff to take recourse to pre-institution mediation, 
why similar measures cannot be put against the defendant responsible 
for failure of mediation. It is the foremost duty in any statute to balance 
and equalize the rights and responsibilities of both the parties, else it 
may become lopsided.  
 
 It is suggested that this can be achieved by creating an embargo against 
the defendants by not permitting them to file a statement of defense, 
until and unless they deposit a sum of money in the court, depending 
on the value of the claim or other factors as may be determined. This 
embargo would create a sufficient deterrence for avoiding mediation 
and would give an impetus to the mediation movement. Otherwise, the 
provision of pre-institution mediation may turn out to be a dead letter.  
 
522

- 6 - 
 
 It is suggested that instead of having the provision of Section 6 in The 
Mediation Bill, 2021 in place, a provision can be inserted thereby 
making it mandatory for the courts to refer the parties to mediation on 
the very first hearing, unless, there is some application for an urgent 
relief, which may be first disposed of and the parties thereafter can be 
referred to mediation. Experience shows that post-litigation mediation 
succeeds in almost 50 percent cases referred for mediation by the court. 
 
 If at all pre-litigation mediation is to be retained it should only be 
through court annexed mediation center and not through private 
service providers.  
 
5. The role of advocates in the mediation process should be made clear, 
particularly, when in circumstances where there is a large power 
imbalance between the parties, or a complete breakdown of 
communication, it can be beneficial for the mediation process if lawyers 
remain essential part of it. This will ensure fairness of the process.  
 
6.  Mediation is completely confidential and things said at mediation 
cannot be raised later in court. This means the parties can speak freely 
and discuss all issues to explore options to resolve the problem. Under 
Section 23(1)(iii) of the Bill, although, confidentiality of a dispute is 
maintained and documents produced during mediation are not 
523

- 7 - 
 
admissible as evidence in any Court or Tribunal, this can be somewhat 
problematic if one party decides to sue the counterparty following a 
failed mediation and is prevented from introducing key documents into 
evidence in Court simply because they were a part of the mediation 
proceedings. 
 
7. The present scheme of establishment and incorporation of Mediation 
Councils given in Section 33 of the Bill may create a body with no 
accountability. All the powers will vest with the government with 
actual or genuine mediators having no say in running/ managing the 
Council. 
 
In our view, the body should be a mix of appointees with adequate 
number to be brought in the body through election among mediators so 
that mediators can have a say in the entire process. 
 
Further, among the appointees to be nominated by the Govt., Chairman 
Bar Council of India or his nominee should also be made an ex-officio 
member keeping in view the fact that a pre-dominant section among the 
mediators would be from among advocates whose regulator is the Bar 
Council.  
 
As suggested above, there should be a State Mediation Council also 
consisting of a mix of Members to be nominated by the State Govt. and 
524

- 8 - 
 
should also have Chairman of State Bar Council or his nominee as ex-
officio member 
 
8.  Adequate provisions are required to be made for regulating the fee of 
mediators and expenses for mediation process. 
 
9.  Further Comments on The Mediation Bill, 2021 
 
Sl. No. Section Comments 
1. 3(b) There should be State Mediation Councils also with 
power of Registration of mediators. 
 
2. 3(h) Mediator should be a person accredited and registered 
with Bar Council, State Mediation Councilor a person 
who is appointed to be mediator to undertake 
mediation by the Court. 
 
It should be mandatory for all mediators to be 
registered with State Mediation Council, whether they 
are accredited with any MSP (Mediation Service 
Provider) and mentioning of their registration number 
on all documents should be a must.  
 
525

- 9 - 
 
Sl. No. Section Comments 
3. 3 (k) & (l) “Mediation Institutes” & “Mediation Service 
Providers” will be two separate entities and have two 
separate registrations? Its like Law Colleges and Law 
Firms. 
 
 Will ‘MI’ & ‘MSP’ be permitted to advertise their 
expertise? If this happens, it may lead to 
cartelization of Mediation Process in all the 
regions. 
 
4. 10(1) The language should be as follows :- 
 
“Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, a person(s) 
of Indian nationality shall be a /the mediator(s).” 
 
Otherwise, we will be subletting the mediation process 
to foreigners, which is not acceptable. 
 
5. Proviso to 
Section 13 
 
Needs clarification. 
6. Section 
16(a) 
“And the mediator gives its consent to act as mediator 
and makes disclosure in terms of Section 12 above” 
 
526

- 10 - 
 
Sl. No. Section Comments 
7. Section 21 The period of 180 days and also the period given in the 
proviso is excessive. 
 
8. Section 22 
(3) 
Subject to the provisions under Section 26 and 27, 
mediator shall draw a settlement with the help of the 
parties and their counsels which is lawful and is not 
barred by any law and the settlement shall be reduced 
in writing and signed by parties.  
 
 
***** 
 
527

528

529

530

531

532

533

534

535

To, 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament House/Annexe, 
New Delhi 110001 
   Subject: Mediation Bill,2021 
    Views of Bombay Bar Association 
Dear Sir, 
This refers to your letter dated 11th January 2022 received by the Association on 17th 
January 2022. We are called upon to give our suggestions views on the Mediation Bill,2021. 
Due to ongoing pandemic the time at our disposal is very short and we have made our best 
efforts to give our suggestions. 
At the outset our Association welcomes the Mediation Bill and underlying concept. We as 
one of the stakeholders are always in favor of encouraging Alternate Dispute Resolution 
modes. Mediation being one where resolution of disputes by consent will go a long way in 
resolving problems of pendency of cases in courts. 
Coming to the present bill please find below our comments with reference to certain 
provisions. For want of sufficient time we have not been able to give comments on other 
provisions. If you happen to extend time please let us know. 
1.  In Section 5(3) after sub-section ( c ) add the following: 
(d) the order of the Court, 
Reason: 
It so happens that courts in pending matter records agreement of parties to refer disputes to 
Mediation. The order of court therefore serves as agreement between the parties and it will 
obviate signing of any fresh agreement. So if the agreement is contained in order of court it 
should be treated as mediation agreement.  
BOMBAY BAR 
ASSOCIATION 
Room No 57, 3rd Floor , High Court, Bombay – 400 032 
Tel : 2267 3367 ; Fax : 91-22-22701160 
http://www.bombaybar.com/
536

2.  In Section 5(5) requires re consideration as it limits the application of the Section to 
the disputes arising out of agreement. There may be disputes which may arise other 
than out of agreement. 
3. In Section 9(1) add the following at the end after the word them; 
“Or if the Court deems it fit that it is appropriate for the parties to settle the disputes.” 
Reason: 
It is better to give some leeway and discretion to court to nudge the parties to adopt 
mediation. Some times the view of the court goes a long way in parties agreeing to go to 
mediation. 
4. In Section 14 provision be made for appointment of substituted mediator if the 
parties don’t agree on the name of substituted mediator within & days. Otherwise it will 
remain open ended. 
5. In Section 22(1) in 3rd line after the word parties the following be added; 
    “which is signed by them”, 
    Delete sub-section(2). 
    Renumber other sub-sections, consequently in the renumbered sub-section 7 and 8 
reference to sub-section 7 shall become 6. 
Reason. 
There is no need  to have separate sub-section to indicate requirement of signature of the 
parties. If it is incorporated in sub-section (1) it will give complete definition of a mediated 
settlement agreement. Other changes are consequential. 
6. In Section 22(8) the word Authorised Representative needs to be defined. Secondly 
there is no consequences provided of a party not attending before the registering 
authority. 
Some provision like in Registration Act of registration if one of the parties does not 
attend in spite of the notice than the registration shall be effected. Such provision be 
enacted. 
The provision should also be made like disentitling the party not attending for 
registration from disputing the same. 
7. In Section 25( c ) in 3rd line the words “ has not received any communication from 
such party;” be deleted and be substituted by the words “ makes a declaration under (b) 
above”. 
537

Reason: 
The present language will give rise to dispute and therefore it is mediator’s declaration which 
should be insisted. 
8. In Section 31 in (i). Consequent to suggestion made above being accepted  sub-section 
will be (3) of Section 22 instead of (4) of 22. 
Reason: 
It is consequential. 
9.  In First Schedule Clause 2 and 7 be deleted. In any event except impersonation 
everything else be deleted. 
Reason: 
Mediation is process which happens with the consent of the parties. 
Inclusion of this clause will exclude large number of matters for reference to mediation. In 
civil matters ultimately the settlements take place on commercial terms and the parties know 
the truth or at least know with what numbers they are comfortable to settle. Inclusion of 
Clause 2 in not conducive to encourage parties to settle the matter in spite of having such 
allegations. 
Clause 7 will be misused. Any settlement if it affects third party will not be binding on third 
parties and therefore Clause 7 be also deleted. 
10. A model format of mediated settlement agreement requiring mentioning of 
mandatory details be prescribed. it should be a schedule to the Act. 
There are other suggestions but for want of time it has not been possible to enumerate 
them. 
We will be willing to appear before committee and explain all our suggestions. 
Nitin Thakker 
President
538

1/21/22, 10:21 AM Email
https://email.gov.in/h/printmessage?id=139121&tz=Asia/Kolkata&xim=1 1/1
From :sikkimhcba@gmail.com
Subject :views as suggested on draft bill " Mediation Bill, 2021"
To :Com. PPG RS <rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in>
Email Com. PPG RS
views as suggested on draft bill " Mediation Bill, 2021"
Wed, Jan 19, 2022 03:04 PM
Esteemed Sir,
First of all Sikkim High Court Bar Association, Gangtok, would like to express the sincere
gratitude and honour for making part of the process of drafting of bill by seeking
views/suggestion. 
As a stakeholder after having perused the entire draft bill, the draft bill is well thought out
and most of the pertinent issues required to be considered both in pre-litigation and during
litigation is covered.
 Nothing seems to have been left excellently done. 
Only suggestion with respect to cost if Woman, physically challenged person and LGBTQIA
community exempted. It might serve inclusive Mediation 
If through virtual mode can be part of process as stake holder would be grate as small
suggestion.
Warm Regards
Dr. Doma T. Bhutia
President
SHCBAG
539

  
Date:- 20.01.2022 
To,  
The Director, 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, 
Parliament House/ Annexe, New Delhi-110001 
 
Ref:-  Your Office letter no. LAFEAS-PP18/1/2021-PPG-RSS dt. 
11.01.2022 
 
Sub:- Examination of the Mediation Bill, 2021” by Department 
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law & Justices-Reg. 
 
Sir, 
I have the privilege of going through the Mediation Bill, 2021 , 
hereinafter referred to as “the Bill”  and upon perusal of the same I, on 
behalf of the OHCBA, consider it expedient to submit my precise 
views as delineated below:- 
1. S.2(1) (i) under Chapter -II of the Bill,  the expression used 
“habitually” may be substituted as “ ordinarily”.  Reason- the 
expression habitually appears to be not appropriately worded. 
2. S. 3(f) (i) under Chapter -II of the Bill,  the expression used 
“habitually” may be substituted as “ ordinarily”. Reason- the 
expression habitually appears to be not appropriately worded. 
3. S. 10 (1) under Chapter -IV of the Bill, is required to be re -
considered. 
     The changes suggested is described as hereunder  :- “Unless 
otherwise agreed upon by the parties , a person of any other 
nationality may be appointed as a Mediator in respect of such 
commercial disputes and such other disputes as may be notified 
by the Central Government from time to time.” 
     Reason:- Appointment of a person of any nationality as Mediator 
will result in causing growing resentment both among the public in 
general as well as legal fraternity since the scope and nature of 
litigation in India intended to be resolved through mediation will be 
impaired. Secondly, the legislative intent behind the present 
scheme of law cannot be successful when left to Mediators of  any 
nationality unless the same is cautiously and appropriately revisited 
with pragmatism and legislative wisdom. 
      Regards, 
                                                        
      Jagabandhu Sahoo,  
                                                 Sr. Advocate, President,    
                        Orissa High Court Bar Association,   
                             Cuttack, Odisha. 
 
540

541

542

543

544

545

546

547

548

549

550

551

552

553

554

555

556

557

558

559

560

561

562

563

564

565

566

567

568

569

570

571

572

573

574

575

576

577

578

579

580

581

582

583

584

585

586

587

588

  
 
 
HEADINGS 
 
 
 
SECTION 
 
 
 
CONTENTS OF 
MEDIATION BILL 2021 
 
 
 
PROPOSED 
SUGGESTIONS BY 
SAMADHAN TO THE 
VARIOUS PROVISIONS 
OF THE MEDIATION 
BILL 2021 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
   
 
 
 
An Act to promote and 
facilitate mediation, 
especially institutional 
mediation, for resolution of 
disputes, commercial or 
otherwise, enforce mediated 
settlement agreements, 
provide for a body for 
registration of mediators, to 
encourage community 
mediation and to make online 
mediation as acceptable and 
cost effective process and for 
matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
 
Be it enacted by Parliament in 
the Seventy-second Year of 
the Republic of India as 
follows:–– 
 
An Act to promote and 
facilitate mediation, 
especially institutional 
mediation, for resolution of 
disputes, commercial or 
otherwise, enforce mediated 
settlement agreements, 
provide for a body for 
registration of mediators, to 
encourage community 
mediation and to make online 
mediation as acceptable and 
cost effective process and for 
matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
 
Be it enacted by Parliament in 
the Seventy-second Year of 
the Republic of India as 
follows:–– 
 
 
CHAPTER I            :PRELIMINARY 
 
  1 Short title, extent and 
commencement. 
(1) This Act may be called 
the Mediation Act, 2021. 
(2) It shall extend to the 
whole of India. 
Short title, extent and 
commencement. 
(1) This Act may be called 
the Mediation Act, 2021. 
(2) It shall extend to the 
whole of India. 
589

(3) It shall come into force on 
such date as the Central 
Government may, by 
notification, appoint and 
different dates may be 
appointed for different 
provisions of this Act and any 
reference in any such 
provision to the 
commencement of this Act 
shall be construed as a 
reference to the coming into 
force of that provision. 
 
(3) It shall come into force on 
such date as the Central 
Government may, by 
notification, appoint and 
different dates may be 
appointed for different 
provisions of this Act and any 
reference in any such 
provision to the 
commencement of this Act 
shall be construed as a 
reference to the coming into 
force of that provision. 
 
 
CHAPTER II  :    APPLICATION/ GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
 Application 2 2. (1) Subject to sub-section 
(2), this Act shall apply 
where mediation is conducted 
in India, and— 
(i) all or both  parties 
habitually reside  in or are 
incorporated in or have their 
place of business in India; or 
(ii) the mediation agreement 
provides that any dispute 
shall be resolved in 
accordance with the 
provisions of this Act; or 
(iii) there is an  international 
mediation. 
 
(2) The provisions of sub-
section ( 1) shall  not  apply 
wherein one of the parties to 
the dispute is the Central 
Government or a State 
Government, or agencies, 
public bodies, corporations 
and local bodies, including 
entities controlled or owned 
by such Government, except 
where the matter pertains 
to a commercial dispute: 
2. (1) Subject to sub-section 
(2), this Act shall apply 
where mediation is conducted 
in India, and— 
(i)Any, both or all the  
parties are residence or 
domiciled in or are 
incorporated in or have their 
place of business in India; or 
(ii) the mediation agreement 
provides that any dispute 
shall be resolved in 
accordance with the 
provisions of this Act; or 
(2) The provisions of sub-
section ( 1) shall alsoapply 
wherein one of the parties to 
the dispute is the Central 
Government or a State 
Government, or agencies, 
public bodies, corporations 
and local bodies, including 
entities controlled or owned 
by such Government. 
 
 
 
590

 
Provided that nothing shall 
prevent the Central 
Government or a State 
Government from notifying, 
such kind of dispute, as it 
deems appropriate for such 
Government, for resolution 
through mediation under this 
Act, wherein such 
Government, or agencies, 
public bodies, corporations 
and local bodies including 
entities controlled or owned 
by them, is a party. 
 
 
Provided that nothing shall 
prevent the Central 
Government or a State 
Government from notifying, 
such kind of dispute, as it 
deems appropriate for such 
Government, which are not 
fit for resolution through 
mediation under this Act, 
wherein such Government, or 
agencies, public bodies, 
corporations and local bodies 
including entities controlled 
or owned by them, is a party. 
 
 Definitions 3 3. In this Act, unless the 
context otherwise requires,— 
(a) "commercial dispute" 
means a dispute defined in 
clause (c) of 
sub-section (1) of section 2 of 
the Commercial Courts Act, 
2015; 
(b) "Council" means the 
Mediation Council of India 
established under section 33; 
(c) "court" means the 
principal civil court of 
original jurisdiction in a 
district, and includes the 
High Court in exercise of its 
ordinary original civil 
jurisdiction, having 
jurisdiction to decide the 
disputes forming the subject 
matter of mediation, if the 
same had been the subject 
matter of a suit or proceeding; 
Explanation.—In a 
commercial dispute of a 
Specified Value as defined in 
the clause ( i) of sub-section 
(1) of section 2 of the 
Commercial Courts Act, 
2015, the court of competent 
jurisdiction shall be the 
3. In this Part, unless the 
context otherwise requires,— 
(a) "commercial dispute" 
means a dispute defined in 
clause (c) of 
sub-section (1) of section 2 of 
the Commercial Courts Act, 
2015; 
(b) "Council" means the 
Mediation Council of India 
established under section 33; 
(c) "court" means the civil or 
criminal  court of original or 
appellate  jurisdiction, having 
jurisdiction to decide the 
disputes forming the subject 
matter of mediation, if the 
same had been the subject 
matter of a suit or proceeding; 
Explanation.—In a 
commercial dispute of a 
Specified Value as defined in 
the clause ( i) of sub-section 
(1) of section 2 of the 
Commercial Courts Act, 
2015, the court of competent 
jurisdiction shall be the 
Commercial Court referred to 
in Chapter II of the said Act; 
(d) "court annexed 
591

Commercial Courts referred 
to in Chapter II of the said 
Act; 
(d) "court annexed 
mediation" means mediation 
including pre- litigation 
mediation conducted at the 
mediation centres established 
by any court or tribunal; 
(e) "institutional mediation" 
means mediation conducted 
under the aegis of a mediation 
service provider; 
(f) "international mediation" 
means mediation undertaken 
under this Act and relates to a 
commercial dispute arising 
out of a legal relationship, 
contractual or otherwise, 
under any law for the time 
being in force in India, and 
where at least one of the 
parties, is— 
(i) an individual who is a 
national of, or habitually 
resides in, any country other 
than India; or 
(ii) a body corporate 
including a Limited Liability 
Partnership of any nature, 
with its place of business 
outside India; or 
(iii) an association or body of 
individuals whose place of 
business is 
outside India; or 
(iv) the Government of a 
foreign country; 
(g) "mediation" means 
mediation referred to in 
section 4; 
(h) "mediator" means a 
person who is appointed to be 
a mediator to undertake 
mediation, and includes a 
person registered as mediator 
mediation" means mediation 
including pre-litigation 
mediation conducted at the 
mediation centres established 
by any court or tribunal; 
(e) "institutional mediation" 
means mediation conducted 
under the aegis of a mediation 
service provider; 
(f) "international mediation" 
means mediation undertaken 
under this Act and relates to a 
dispute arising out of a legal 
relationship, contractual or 
otherwise, under any law for 
the time being in force in 
India, and where at least one 
of the parties, is— 
(i) an individual who is a 
national of, or domiciled 
resides in, any country other 
than India; or 
(ii) a body corporate 
including a Limited Liability 
Partnership of any nature, 
with its place of business 
outside India; or 
(iii) an association or body of 
individuals whose place of 
business is 
outside India; or 
(iv) the Government of a 
foreign country; 
(g) "mediation" means 
mediation referred to in 
section 4; 
(h) "mediat or" means a 
person who is appointed to be 
a mediator to undertake 
mediation, and includes a 
person registered as mediator 
with the Council. 
Explanation.—Where more 
than one mediator is 
appointed for a mediation, 
reference to a mediator under 
592

with the Council. 
Explanation.—Where more 
than one mediator is 
appointed for a mediation, 
reference to a mediator under 
this Act shall be a reference 
to all the mediators; 
(i) "mediation agreement" 
means a mediation agreement 
referred to in sub-section ( 1) 
of section 5; 
(j) "mediation 
communication" means 
communication made, 
whether in electronic form or 
otherwise, through— 
(i) anything said or done; 
(ii) any document; or 
(iii) any information 
provided, 
for the purposes of, or in 
relation to, or in the course of 
mediation, and includes a 
mediation agreement or a 
mediated settlement 
agreement; 
(k) "mediation institute" 
means a body or organisation 
that provides training, 
continuous education and 
certification of mediators and 
carries out such other 
functions under this Act; 
(l) "mediation service 
provider" means a body or 
organisation that provides for 
the conduct of mediation 
under this Act and rules 
and regulations made 
thereunder, and are 
recognised by the Council; 
Explanation I.—For the 
purposes of this clause, 
mediation service provider 
includes an Authority 
constituted under the Legal 
this Act shall be a reference 
to all the mediators; 
(i) "mediation agreement" 
means a mediation agreement 
referred to in sub-section ( 1) 
of section 5; 
(j) "mediation 
communication" means 
communication made, 
whether in electronic form or 
otherwise, through— 
(i) anything said or done; 
(ii) any document; or 
(iii) any information 
provided, 
for the purposes of, or in 
relation to, or in the course of 
mediation, and includes a 
mediation agreement or a 
mediated settlement 
agreement; 
(k) "mediation institute" 
means a body or organisation 
that provides training, 
continuous education and 
certification of mediators and 
carries out such other 
functions under this Act; 
(l) "mediation service 
provider" means a body or 
organisation that provides for 
the conduct of mediation by 
the Mediator Certified by 
Mediation Council  
Explanation I.—For the 
purposes of this clause, 
mediation service provider 
includes an Authority 
constituted under the Legal 
Services Authorities Act, 
1987, or mediation centre 
annexed to a court, tribunal or 
such other forum as may be 
specified. 
Explanation II.—An 
Authority constituted under 
593

Services Authorities Act, 
1987, or mediation centre 
annexed to a court, tribunal or 
such other forum as may be 
specified. 
Explanation II.—An 
Authority constituted under 
the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987, or 
mediation centre annexed to a 
court or tribunal or such other 
forum shall be deemed to be a 
mediation service provider 
recognised by the Council; 
(m) "mediated settlement 
agreement" means settlement 
agreement referred to in sub-
section (1) of section 22; 
(n) "notification" means 
notification published in the 
Official Gazette and the 
expression ‘‘notified’’ with 
its cognate meanings and 
grammatical variations shall 
be construed accordingly; 
(o) "online mediation" means 
online mediation referred to 
in section 32; 
(p) "participants" means 
persons other than the parties 
who participate in the 
mediation and includes  
advisers, advocates, 
consultants and any technical 
experts and observers; 
(q) "party" means a party to a 
mediation agreement or 
mediation proceeding whose 
agreement or consent is 
necessary to resolve the 
dispute and includes their 
successors; 
(r) "pre-litigation mediation" 
means a process of 
undertaking mediation, as 
provided under section 6, for 
settlement of disputes prior to 
the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987, or 
mediation centre annexed to a 
court or tribunal or such other 
forum shall be deemed to be a 
mediation service provider 
recognised by the Council; 
(m) "mediated settlement 
agreement" means settlement 
agreement referred to in sub-
section (1) of section 22; 
(n) "notification" means 
notification published in the 
Official Gazette and the 
expression ‘‘notified’’ with 
its cognate meanings and 
grammatical variations shall 
be construed accordingly; 
(o) "online mediation" means 
online mediation referred to 
in section 32; 
(p) "participants" means 
persons other than the parties 
who participate in the 
mediation and includes 
family members, advisers, 
advocates, consultants and 
any technical experts and 
observers; 
(q) "party" means a party to a 
mediation agreement or 
mediation proceeding whose 
agreement or consent is 
necessary to resolve the 
dispute and includes their 
successors; 
(r) "pre-litigation mediation" 
means a process of 
undertaking mediation, as 
provided under section 6, for 
settlement of disputes prior to 
the filing of a suit or 
proceeding of civil, 
matrimonial, commercial or 
criminal  nature in respect 
thereof, before a court , 
authority  or notified tribunal 
under sub-section ( 2) of 
594

the filing of a suit or 
proceeding of civil or 
commercial nature in respect 
thereof, before a court or 
notified tribunal under sub-
section (2) of section 6; 
(s) "prescribed" means 
prescribed by rules made by 
the Central Government 
under this Act; 
(t) "Schedule" means the 
Schedule annexed to this Act; 
(u) "secure electronic 
signature" with reference to 
online mediation means, 
electronic signatures referred 
to in section 15 of the 
Information Technology Act, 
2000; and 
(v) "specified" means 
specified by regulations made 
by the Council under this Act. 
section 6; 
(s) "prescribed" means 
prescribed by rules made by 
the Central Government 
under this Act; 
(t) "Schedule" means the 
Schedule annexed to this Act; 
(u) "secure electronic 
signature" with reference to 
online mediation means, 
electronic signatures referred 
to in section 15 of the 
Information Technology Act, 
2000; and 
(v) "specified" means 
specified by regulations made 
by the Council under this Act. 
 
CHAPTER III   :   MEDIATION 
 
 Mediation 4 4. Mediation shall be a 
process, whether referred to 
by the expression mediation, 
pre-litigation mediation, 
online mediation, community 
mediation, conciliation or an 
expression of similar import, 
whereby party or parties, 
request a third person 
referred to as mediator or 
mediation service provider to 
assist them in their attempt 
to reach an amicable 
settlement of a dispute. 
4. Mediation shall be a 
voluntary process, whether 
referred to by the expression 
mediation, pre-litigation 
mediation, online mediation, 
community mediation, or an 
expression of similar import, 
whereby party or parties are 
facilitated by  a third person 
referred to as mediator or 
mediation service provider to 
facilitate them in their 
endeavour to reach an 
amicable settlement of a 
dispute. 
 Mediation 
agreement. 
5 5. (1) A mediation agreement 
shall be in writing, by or 
between parties and anyone 
claiming through them, to 
submit to mediation all or 
certain disputes which have 
5. (1) A mediation agreement 
shall be in writing, by or 
between parties and anyone 
claiming through them, to 
submit to mediation all or 
certain disputes which have 
595

arisen or which may arise 
between the parties. 
(2) A mediation agreement 
may be in the form of a 
mediation clause in a contract 
or in the form of a separate 
agreement. ( 3) A mediation 
agreement is in writing, if it is 
contained in or recorded as— 
(a) any document signed by 
the parties; 
(b) an exchange of 
communications or letters 
including through electronic 
form as provided under the 
Information Technology Act, 
2000; 
(c) any pleadings in a suit or 
any other proceedings in 
which existence of mediation 
agreement is alleged by one 
party and not denied by the 
other. 
(4) A reference in any 
agreement containing a 
mediation clause shall 
constitute a mediation 
agreement if the agreement is 
in writing and the reference is 
such as to make the mediation 
clause as part of the 
agreement. 
(5) The parties may agree to 
submit to mediation any 
dispute arising between them 
under an agreement, whether 
entered prior to arising of the 
dispute or subsequent thereto. 
(6) A mediation agreement in 
case of international 
mediation shall refer to an 
agreement for resolution in 
matters of commercial 
disputes referred to in 
clause (a) of section 3 
arisen or which may arise 
between the parties. 
(2) A mediation agreement 
may be in the form of a 
mediation clause in a contract 
or in the form of a separate 
agreement. ( 3) A mediation 
agreement is in writing, if it is 
contained in or recorded as— 
(a) any document signed by 
the parties; 
(b) an exchange of 
communications or letters 
including through electronic 
form as provided under the 
Information Technology Act, 
2000; 
(c) any pleadings in a suit or 
any other proceedings in 
which existence of mediation 
agreement is alleged by one 
party and not denied by the 
other. 
(4) A reference in any 
agreement containing a 
mediation clause shall 
constitute a mediation 
agreement if the agreement is 
in writing and the reference is 
such as to make the mediation 
clause as part of the 
agreement. 
(5) The parties may agree to 
submit to mediation any 
dispute arising between them 
under an agreement, whether 
entered prior to arising of the 
dispute or subsequent thereto. 
(6) A mediation agreement in 
case of international 
mediation shall refer to an 
agreement for resolution in 
matters of any dispute 
referred to in clause (f) of 
section 3. 
 Pre-litigation 6 6. (1) Subject to other 
provisions of this Act, 
6. (1) Subject to other 
provisions of this Act, 
596

mediation. whether any mediation 
agreement exists or not, any 
party before filing any suit or 
proceedings of   civilor  
commercial nature in any 
court, shall take steps to settle 
the disputes by pre-litigation 
mediation in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act: 
Provided that pre-litigation 
mediation in matters of 
commercial disputes of 
Specified Value shall be 
undertaken in accordance 
with the provisions of section 
12A of the Commercial 
Courts Act, 2015, and the 
rules made thereunder. 
(2) The provisions, of sub-
section (1) shall be applicable 
to the tribunals notified by the 
Central Government or a 
State Government, as the case 
may be. 
(3) For the purposes, of sub-
sections ( 1) and ( 2), unless 
otherwise agreed upon by the 
parties, a mediator,— 
(i) registered with the 
Council; 
(ii) empanelled by a court 
annexed mediation centre; 
(iii) empanelled by an 
Authority constituted under 
the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987; and 
(iv) empanelled by a 
mediation service provider 
recognised under this Act, 
shall conduct pre-litigation 
mediation. 
(4) For conducting pre-
litigation mediation under 
clauses ( ii) and ( iii) of sub-
section ( 3), a party may 
request any person  
designated for this purpose by 
whether any mediation 
agreement exists or not, any 
party before filing any suit or 
proceedings of civil, 
matrimonial commercial or 
criminal   nature or any 
matter amenable to mediation 
in any court, shall take steps 
to settle the disputes by pre-
litigation mediation in 
accordance with the 
provisions of this Act: 
Provided that pre-litigation 
mediation in matters of 
commercial disputes of 
Specified Value shall be 
undertaken in accordance 
with the provisions of section 
12A of the Commercial 
Courts Act, 2015, and the 
rules made thereunder. 
(2) The provisions, of sub-
section (1) shall be applicable 
to the tribunals notified by the 
Central Government or a 
State Government, as the case 
may be. 
(3) For the purposes, of sub-
sections ( 1) and ( 2), unless 
otherwise agreed upon by the 
parties, a mediator, who is : 
(i) registered with the 
Council; or 
(ii) empanelled by a court 
annexed mediation centre; or 
(iii) empanelled by an 
Authority constituted under 
the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987; or 
(iv) empanelled by a 
mediation service provider 
recognised under this Act, 
shall conduct pre-litigation 
mediation. 
(4) For conducting pre-
litigation mediation under 
clauses ( ii) and ( iii) of sub-
597

the High Courts , or an 
Authority constituted under 
the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987, as the 
case may be. 
(5) The courts and an 
Authority constituted under 
the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987, shall 
maintain a panel of mediators 
for the purposes of pre-
litigation mediation. 
(6) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in sub-
sections (1) and ( 2) and the 
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 , 
when an application for 
compensation arising out of 
an accident is made before 
the Claims Tribunal, if the 
settlement as provided for in 
section 149 of that Act is not 
arrived at between the parties, 
the Claims Tribunal shall 
refer the parties for mediation 
to a mediator or mediation 
service provider under this 
Act. 
(7) Where the parties arrive at 
a settlement agreement under 
sub-section ( 6), it shall be 
placed before the Claims 
Tribunal for its consideration. 
(8) If the parties do not reach 
to settlement agreement under 
sub-section ( 6), a failure 
report prepared by the 
mediator shall be forwarded 
to the Claims Tribunal, which 
has referred the matter for 
mediation, for adjudication. 
section ( 3), a party may 
request any person / 
coordinator designated for 
this purpose by the Court, or 
an Authority constituted 
under the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987, as the 
case may be. 
(5) The courts and an 
Authority constituted under 
the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987, shall 
maintain a panel of mediators 
for the purposes of pre-
litigation mediation. 
Provided that when an 
application for compensation 
arising out of an accident is 
made before the Claims 
Tribunal  under the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1996, if the 
settlement as provided for in 
section 149 of that Act is not 
arrived at between the parties, 
the Claims Tribunal may in 
appropriate cases shall refer 
the parties for mediation to a 
mediator or mediation service 
provider under this Act. 
(7) Where the parties arrive at 
a settlement agreement under 
sub-section ( 6), it shall be 
placed before the Claims 
Tribunal for its consideration. 
(8) If the parties do not reach 
to settlement agreement under 
sub-section ( 6), Non 
Settlement report prepared by 
the mediator shall be 
forwarded to the Claims 
Tribunal, which has referred 
the matter for mediation, for 
adjudication. 
 Disputes 
ormattersnotfitformediation
. 
7 7. (1) A mediation under this 
Act shall not be conducted for 
resolution of any dispute or 
matter contained in the 
indicative list under the First 
7.  
If the Central Government is 
satisfied that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do, it may, by 
notification, exclude any 
598

Schedule: 
Provided that nothing 
contained herein shall prevent 
any court, if deemed 
appropriate, from referring 
any dispute to mediation 
relating to compoundable 
offences or matrimonial 
offences connected with or 
arising out of civil 
proceedings between the 
parties: 
Provided further that the 
outcome of such mediation 
shall not be deemed to be a 
judgement or decree of court 
referred to in sub-section ( 2) 
of section 28, and shall be 
further considered by the 
court in accordance with the 
law for the time being in 
force. 
(2) If the Central Government 
is satisfied that it is necessary 
or expedient so to do, it may, 
by notification, amend the 
First Schedule. 
dispute  from the preview of 
this Act. 
 
(Rest all can be deleted) 
 Interim reliefby court 
ortribunal. 
8 8. (1) If exceptional 
circumstances exist, a party 
may, before the 
commencement of, or during 
the continuation of, mediation 
proceedings under this Act, 
file suit or appropriate 
proceedings before a court or 
tribunal having competent 
jurisdiction for seeking urgent 
interim relief. 
(2) The court or tribunal shall 
after granting or rejecting 
urgent interim relief, as the 
case may be, refer the parties 
to undertake mediation to 
resolve the dispute, if deemed 
appropriate. 
8. (1) A party may, before the 
commencement of, or during 
the continuation of, mediation 
proceedings under this Act, 
file suit or appropriate 
proceedings before a court or 
tribunal having competent 
jurisdiction for seeking urgent 
interim relief. 
(2) The court or tribunal shall 
after granting or rejecting 
urgent interim relief, as the 
case may be, refer the parties 
to undertake mediation to 
resolve the dispute, if deemed 
appropriate. 
 Power of courtor tribunal 
torefer parties tomediation. 
9 9. (1) Notwithstanding the 
failure to reach any 
settlement under sub-section 
9. (1) Notwithstanding the 
inability to reach any 
settlement under section 6, 
599

(1) of section 6 , the court or 
tribunal may, at any stage of 
proceeding, refer the parties 
to undertake mediation, if a 
request to this effect is made 
by them. 
(2) If the court or tribunal 
refers the parties to 
undertake mediation, it may 
pass suitable interim order to 
protect the interest of any 
party if deemed appropriate. 
(3) The parties shall not be 
under obligation to come to a 
settlement in the mediation 
pursuant to a reference under 
sub-section (1). 
the court,tribunal or authority 
may, at any stage of 
proceedings, on the request of 
any or all the parties or if 
there is any element o f 
settlement refer the parties to 
undertake mediation.  
(2) If the court or tribunal 
refers the parties to 
mediation, it may pass 
suitable interim order to 
protect the interest of any 
party in appropriate cases if 
deemed appropriate. 
(3) The parties shall not be 
under an obligation to come 
to a settlement in the 
mediation pursuant to a 
reference under sub-section 
(1). 
 
CHAPTER IV :  MEDIATORS 
 
 Appointment 
of mediators 
10 10. (1) Unless otherwise 
agreed upon by the parties, a 
person of any nationality 
maybe appointed as a 
mediator: 
Provided that mediator of any 
foreign nationality shall 
possess such qualification, 
experience and accreditation 
as may be specified. 
(2) The parties shall be free to 
agree upon the name of 
mediator and the procedure 
for their appointment. 
(3) If the parties do not reach 
any agreement on a matter 
referred to in sub-section ( 2), 
then the party seeking 
initiation of mediation shall 
make an application to a 
mediation service provider 
for the appointment of a 
mediator. 
10. (1) Unless otherwise 
agreed upon by the parties, a 
person of any nationality 
maybe appointed as a 
mediator: 
Provided that mediator of any 
foreign nationality shall 
possess such qualification, 
experience and accreditation 
as may be specified. 
(2) The parties shall be free to 
agree upon the name of 
mediator and the procedure 
for the appointment. 
(3) If the parties do not reach 
any agreement on a matter 
referred to in sub- section (2), 
then the party seeking 
initiation of mediation shall 
make an application to a 
mediation service provider 
for the appointment of a 
mediator. 
600

(4) Upon receiving an 
application under sub-section 
(3), the mediation service 
provider shall, within a period 
of seven days, appoint,— 
(i) the mediator as agreed by 
the parties; or 
(ii) in case the parties are 
unable to reach agreement as 
to the appointment of 
mediator or mediator agreed 
by them refuses to act as 
mediator, a mediator from the 
panel maintained by it, with 
his consent. 
(5) The person appointed 
under clause ( i) of sub-
section (4) shall communicate 
his willingness or otherwise 
within a period of seven days 
from the date of receipt of 
communication of such 
appointment. 
(4) Upon receiving an 
application under sub-section 
(3), the mediation service 
provider shall, within a period 
of seven days, appoint,— 
(i) the mediator as agreed by 
the parties; or 
(ii) in case the parties are 
unable to reach agreement as 
to the appointment of 
mediator or mediator agreed 
by them refuses to act as 
mediator, a mediator from the 
panel maintained by it, with 
his consent. 
(5) The person appointed 
under clause ( i) of sub-
section (4) shall communicate 
his willingness or otherwise 
within a period of seven days 
from the date of receipt of 
communication of such 
appointment. 
  
Preference ofparties. 
11 11. The mediation service 
provider shall, while 
appointing any person from 
the panel of mediators 
maintained by it, consider his 
suitability and the preference 
of the parties for resolving the 
dispute. 
11. The mediation service 
provider shall, while 
appointing any person from 
the panel of mediators 
maintained by it, consider his 
suitability and the preference 
of the parties for resolving the 
dispute. 
 Conflict 
ofinterestanddisclosure. 
12 12. (1) The person appointed 
as a mediator shall, prior to 
the conduct of mediation, 
disclose in writing to the 
parties regarding any 
circumstance or potential 
circumstance, personal, 
professional, financial, or 
otherwise, that may constitute 
any conflict of interest or that 
is likely to give rise to 
justifiable doubts as to his 
independence or impartiality 
as a mediator. 
(2) During the mediation, the 
mediator shall, without delay, 
disclose to the parties in 
12. (1) The person appointed 
as a mediator shall, prior to 
the conduct of mediation, 
disclose in writing to the 
parties and the mediation 
service provider regarding 
any circumstance or potential 
circumstance, personal, 
professional, financial, or 
otherwise, that may constitute 
any conflict of interest or that 
is likely to give rise to 
justifiable doubts as to his 
independence or impartiality 
as a mediator. 
(2) During the mediation, the 
mediator shall, without delay, 
601

writing any conflict of 
interest, referred to in sub-
section ( 1),that has newly 
arisen or has come to his 
knowledge. 
(3) Upon disclosure under 
sub-section (1) or sub-section 
(2), the parties shall have the 
option to waive any objection 
if all of them express in 
writing, which shall be 
construed as the consent of 
parties. 
(4) Upon disclosure under 
sub-section (1) or sub-section 
(2), if either party desires to 
replace the mediator, then, in 
case of— 
(i) institutional mediation, 
such party shall apply to the 
mediation service provider 
for termination of the 
mandate of mediator; 
(ii) mediation other than 
institutional mediation, such 
party shall terminate the 
mandate of mediator. 
disclose to the parties in 
writing any conflict of 
interest, referred to in sub-
section ( 1),that has newly 
arisen or has come to his 
knowledge. 
(3) Upon disclosure under 
sub-section (1) or sub-section 
(2), the parties shall have the 
option to waive any objection 
if all of them express in 
writing, which shall be 
construed as the consent of 
parties. 
(4) Upon disclosure under 
sub-section (1) or sub-section 
(2), if either party desires to 
replace the mediator, then, in 
case of— 
(i) institutional mediation, 
such party shall apply to the 
mediation service provider 
for termination of the 
mandate of mediator; 
(ii) mediation other than 
institutional mediation, such 
party shall terminate the 
mandate of mediator. 
 Terminationof mandate 
ofmediator. 
13 13. A mediation service 
provider may terminate the 
mandate of a mediator 
upon— 
(i) the receipt of application 
from a party under clause ( i) 
of sub-section ( 4) of section 
12; or 
(ii) the receipt of information 
about the mediator being 
involved in a matter of 
conflict of interest from 
participants or any other 
person; or 
(iii) his withdrawal from 
mediation for any reason: 
Provided that termination 
under clause ( ii) shall be 
13. A mediation service 
provider may terminate the 
mandate of a mediator 
upon— 
(i) the receipt of application 
from a party under clause ( i) 
of sub-section ( 4) of section 
12; or 
(ii) the receipt of information 
about the mediator being 
involved in a matter of 
conflict of interest from 
participants or any other 
person; or 
(iii) his withdrawal from 
mediation for any reason: 
Provided that termination 
under clause (ii) shall be 
602

effected if, after giving a 
hearing to the mediator, 
mediation service provider 
finds that there is justifiable 
doubt as to the independence 
or impartiality of the 
mediator and that the same 
has been brought to the notice 
of parties and that they desire 
to replace the mediator. 
effected if, after giving a 
hearing to the mediator, 
mediation service provider 
finds that there is justifiable 
doubt as to the independence 
or impartiality of the 
mediator and that the same 
has been brought to the notice 
of parties and that they desire 
to replace the mediator. 
 Replacementof mediator. 14 14. Upon termination of the 
mandate of mediator— 
(i) in case of mediation other 
than institutional mediation 
under clause ( ii) of sub-
section ( 4) of section 12, the 
parties may, appoint another 
mediator within a period of 
seven days from such 
termination; and 
(ii) under section 13, the 
mediation service provider 
shall appoint another 
mediator from the panel 
maintained by it within a 
period of seven days from 
such termination. 
14. Upon termination of the 
mandate of mediator— 
(i) in case of mediation other 
than institutional mediation 
under clause ( ii) of sub-
section ( 4) of section 12, the 
parties may, appoint another 
mediator within a period of 
seven days from such 
termination; and 
(ii) under section 13, the 
mediation service provider 
shall appoint another 
mediator from the panel 
maintained by it within a 
period of seven days from 
such termination. 
 
CHAPTER V  :    CONDUCT OF MEDIATION PROCEEDINGS 
 
 Territorialjurisdictiontound
ertakemediation. 
15 15. Every mediation under 
this Act shall be undertaken 
within the territorial 
jurisdiction of the court or 
tribunal of competent 
jurisdiction to decide the 
subject matter of dispute: 
Provided that on the mutual 
consent of the parties, 
mediation may be conducted 
at any place outside the 
territorial jurisdiction of the 
court or tribunal, or by way of 
online mediation. 
Explanation.—For the 
removal of doubts, it is 
15. Every mediation under 
this Act shall be undertaken 
within the territorial 
jurisdiction of the court or 
tribunal of competent 
jurisdiction to decide the 
subject matter of dispute: 
Provided that with the mutual 
consent of the parties, 
mediation may be conducted 
at any place outside the 
territorial jurisdiction of the 
court or tribunal, or by way of 
online mediation. 
Explanation.— Where the 
parties agree to conduct the 
603

clarified that  where the 
parties agree to conduct the 
mediation at any place 
outside the territorial 
jurisdiction or online, for the 
purpose of 
enforcementchallenge and 
registration of the mediated 
settlement agreement ,the 
same shall be deemed to have 
been undertaken within the 
territorial jurisdiction of the 
court or tribunal of competent 
jurisdiction. 
mediation at any place 
outside the territorial 
jurisdiction or online, for the 
purpose of enforcement or to 
challenge the mediated 
settlement agreement, the 
same shall be deemed to have 
been undertaken within the 
territorial jurisdiction of the 
court, authority  or tribunal of 
competent jurisdiction. 
 Commencementof 
mediation. 
16 16. The mediation 
proceedings with respect to a 
particular dispute shall be 
deemed to have 
commenced— 
(a) where there is an existing 
agreement between the 
parties to settle the dispute 
through mediation, the day on 
which a party issues notice 
to the other party or parties 
for mediation and settlement 
of their disputes; or 
(b) in other cases— 
(i) on the day the parties  
have agreed to appoint  a 
mediator of their choice for 
mediation and settlement of 
disputes between them; or 
(ii) on the day when one of 
the parties applies to a 
mediation service provider 
for settlement of disputes 
through mediation by 
appointment of a mediator. 
 
16. The mediation 
proceedings with respect to a 
particular dispute shall be 
deemed to have 
commenced— 
(a) where there is an existing 
agreement between the 
parties to settle the dispute 
through mediation, the day on 
which  both the parties first 
meet for mediation and 
settlement of their disputes; 
or 
(b) in other cases— 
(i) on the day the parties meet 
a mediator of their choice for 
mediation and settlement of 
disputes between them; or 
(ii) on the day when one of 
the parties applies to a 
mediation service provider 
for settlement of disputes 
through mediation by 
appointment of a mediator. 
 Conduct ofmediation. 17 17. (1) The mediator shall 
assist the parties in an 
independent, neutral and 
impartial manner in their 
attempt to reach an amicable 
settlement of their dispute. 
(2) The mediator shall at all 
17. (1) The mediator shall 
assist the parties in an 
independent, neutral and 
impartial manner in their 
endeavour to reach an 
amicable settlement of their 
dispute. 
604

times be guided by the 
principles of objectivity and 
fairness and protect the 
voluntariness, 
confidentiality, and self-
determination of the 
parties, and the standards 
for professional and ethical 
conduct as may be specified. 
(3) The mediation process 
may include the mediator 
taking such measures as may 
be considered appropriate, 
taking into account the 
circumstances of the case, 
including meeting with 
parties or participants, jointly 
or separately, as frequently as 
deemed fit by the mediator, 
both in order to convene the 
mediation, and during the 
mediation for the orderly and 
timely conduct of the process 
and to maintain its integrity. 
(4) The mediator shall not be 
bound by the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, or the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 
 
(5) The mediator with the 
consent of the parties shall 
determine the language or 
languages to be used in the 
mediation process 
(2) The mediator shall at all 
times be guided by the 
principles of objectivity and 
fairness; follow the standards 
and ethical conduct as may be 
specified; protect the 
voluntariness, confidentiality, 
and self-determination of the 
parties 
 
 (3) The mediation process 
may include the mediator 
taking such measures as may 
be considered appropriate, 
taking into account the 
circumstances of the case, 
including meeting with 
parties or participants, jointly 
or separately, as frequently as 
deemed fit by the mediator , 
both in order to convene the 
mediation, and during the 
mediation for the orderly and 
timely conduct of the process 
and to maintain its integrity. 
(4) The mediator shall not be 
bound by the procedure of 
Civil Procedure, 1908, or the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 
while conducting mediation. 
(5) The mediator with the 
consent of the parties shall 
determine the language or 
languages to be used in the 
mediation process 
 
 Role of Mediator. 18 18. (1) The mediator shall 
attempt to facilitate voluntary 
resolution of the dispute by 
the parties and communicate 
the view of each party to the 
other to the extent agreed to 
by them, assist them in 
identifying issues, reducing 
misunderstandings, clarifying 
priorities, exploring areas of 
compromise and generating 
options in an attempt to 
18. (1) The mediator shall 
attempt to facilitate voluntary 
resolution of the dispute by 
the parties and communicate 
the view of each party to the 
other to the extent agreed to 
by them, assist them in 
identifying issues, reducing 
misunderstandings, clarifying 
priorities, exploring areas of 
settlement and generating 
options in an endeavour to 
605

resolve the dispute 
expeditiously, emphasising 
that it is the responsibility of 
the parties to take decision 
regarding their claims. 
(2) The parties shall be 
informed expressly by the 
mediator that he only 
facilitates in arriving at a 
decision to resolve a dispute 
and that he may not impose 
any settlement nor give any 
assurance that the mediation 
may result in a settlement. 
resolve the dispute 
expeditiously, emphasising 
that it is the responsibility of 
the parties to take decision 
regarding their claims. 
(2) The parties shall be 
informed expressly by the 
mediator that he only 
facilitates in arriving at a 
decision to resolve a dispute 
and that he may not impose 
any settlement nor give any 
assurance that the mediation 
may result in a settlement. 
 Role ofmediator in 
Otherproceedings. 
19 19. Unless otherwise agreed 
by the parties,— 
(a) the mediator shall not act 
as an arbitrator or as a 
representative or counsel of a 
party in any arbitral or 
judicial proceeding in respect 
of a dispute that is the subject 
matter of the mediation 
proceedings; 
 
(b) the mediator shall not be 
presented by the parties as a 
witness in any arbitrator 
judicial proceedings. 
 
Unless otherwise agreed by 
the parties,— 
(a) the mediator shall not act 
as an arbitrator or as a 
representative or counsel of a 
party in any arbitral or 
judicial proceeding in respect 
of a dispute that is the subject 
matter of the mediation 
proceedings; 
 
(b) the mediator shall not be 
presented by the parties as a 
witness in any arbitration or 
judicial proceedings. 
 
 Withdrawal 
bypartiesfrommediation. 
20 20. (1) A party may withdraw 
from mediation at any time 
after the first two mediation 
sessions. 
(2) Where any party fails to 
attend the first two mediation 
sessions without any 
reasonable cause which 
resulted in the failure of 
mediation, the court or 
tribunal, in subsequent 
litigation on the same subject 
matter between the parties, 
may take the said conduct of 
such party into consideration 
and impose such costs as 
(1) A party may withdraw 
from mediation at any time 
after the first two mediation 
sessions. 
(2) Where any party fails to 
attend the first two mediation 
sessions without any 
reasonable cause which 
results in the failure of 
mediation, the court or 
tribunal, in subsequent 
litigation on the same subject 
matter between the parties, 
may take the conduct of such 
party into consideration and 
impose  such costs as deems 
606

deems fit. fit. 
 
 
 
 Time-
limitForcompletionofmedia
tion. 
21 21. (1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any 
other law for the time being 
in force, mediation under this 
Act shall be completed within 
a period of one hundred and 
eighty days from the date 
fixed for the first appearance 
before the mediator. 
(2) The period for mediation 
mentioned under sub-section 
(1) may be extended for a 
further period  as agreed by 
the parties, but not exceeding 
one hundred and eighty days. 
 
(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, 
mediation under this Act shall 
be completed within a period 
of one hundred and eighty 
days from the date fixed for 
the first appearance before 
the mediator. 
(2) The period for mediation 
mentioned under sub-section 
(1) may be extended further 
for a period as agreed by the 
parties, but not exceeding one 
hundred and eighty days. 
 
 
 Mediated 
Settlement 
Agreement. 
22 22. (1) A mediated settlement 
agreement means and 
includes an agreement in 
writing between some or all 
of the parties resulting from 
mediation, settling some or 
all of the disputes between 
such parties, and 
authenticated by the 
mediator; 
Provided that the terms of the 
mediated settlement 
agreement may extend 
beyond the disputes referred 
to mediation. 
Explanation.—A mediated 
settlement agreement which 
is void under the Indian 
Contract Act, 1872, shall not 
be deemed to be lawful 
settlement agreement within 
the meaning of mediated 
settlement agreement. 
(2) Where a mediated 
22. (1) A mediated settlement 
agreement means and 
includes an agreement in 
writing between some or all 
of the parties as a result of 
mediation  settling some or 
all of the disputes between 
such parties, and 
authenticated by the 
mediator; 
 
Provided that the terms of the 
mediated settlement 
agreement may extend 
beyond the disputes referred 
to mediation. 
 
Explanation.—A mediated 
settlement agreement which 
is void under the Indian 
Contract Act, 1872, shall not 
be deemed to be lawful 
settlement agreement within 
the meaning of mediated 
607

settlement agreement is 
reached between the parties 
in regard to all or some of the 
disputes, the same shall be 
reduced in writing and signed 
by the parties. 
(3) Subject to the provisions 
of sections 26 and 27, the 
mediated settlement 
agreement so signed— 
(i) in case of institutional 
mediation, shall be submitted 
to the mediator, who shall, 
after authenticating the same 
and forward it with a 
covering letter signed by him, 
to the mediation service 
provider and also provide a 
copy to the parties; 
(ii) in all other cases, shall be 
submitted to the mediator 
who shall, after 
authenticating the settlement 
agreement, provide a copy to 
all the parties. 
(4) Subject to provisions of 
sections 26 and 27, where no 
agreement is arrived at 
between the parties, within 
the time period as provided 
under section 21, or where, 
the mediator is of the view 
that no settlement is 
possible,— 
(i) the mediator shall submit a 
failure report to this effect to 
the mediation service 
provider in writing in case of 
institutional mediation; 
(ii) in all other cases, the 
mediator shall prepare a 
failure report to this effect 
and provide a signed copy to 
all the parties: 
Provided that the report 
referred under this sub-
section shall not disclose the 
settlement agreement. 
(2) Where a mediated 
settlement agreement is 
reached between the parties 
in regard to all or some of the 
disputes, the same shall be 
reduced in writing and signed 
by the parties. 
(3) Subject to the provisions 
of sections 26 and 27, the 
mediated settlement 
agreement so signed— 
(i) in case of institutional 
mediation, shall be submitted 
to the mediator, who shall, 
after authenticating the same 
forward it with a covering 
letter signed by him, to the 
mediation service provider 
and also provide a copy to the 
parties; 
(ii) in all other cases, shall be 
submitted to the mediator 
who shall, after 
authenticating  the settlement 
agreement, provide a copy to 
all the parties. 
(4) Subject to provisions of 
sections 26 and 27, where no 
agreement is arrived at 
between the parties, within 
the time period as provided 
under section 21, or where, 
the mediator is of the view 
that no settlement is 
possible,— 
(i) the mediator shall submit a 
failure report to this effect to 
the mediation service 
provider in writing in case of 
institutional mediation; 
(ii) in all other cases, the 
mediator shall prepare a non-
settlement report to this effect 
and provide a signed copy to 
all the parties: 
Provided that the report 
608

cause of failure of the parties 
to reach a settlement, or any 
other matter or thing referring 
to their conduct, during 
mediation. 
(5) The parties, may, at any 
time during the mediation 
process, make an agreement 
with respect to any of the 
disputes which is the subject 
matter of mediation. 
(6) Any mediated settlement 
agreement under this section 
shall also include a settlement 
agreement resulting from 
online mediation and duly 
signed by the parties byway 
of secure electronic signature 
or otherwise authenticated by 
the mediator in the like 
manner. 
(7) For the purposes of 
record, mediated settlement 
agreement arrived at between 
the parties, other than those 
arrived in a court or tribunal 
referred mediation or award 
of Lok Adalat or final 
award of Permanent Lok 
Adalat under section 21 or 
section 22Eof the Legal 
Services Authorities Act, 
1987, shall be registered 
with an Authority constituted 
under the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987, in such 
manner as may be specified 
and such Authority shall issue 
a unique registration number 
to such settlements: 
Provided that the mediated 
settlement agreement under 
this section shall be 
registered with such 
Authority situated within the 
territorial jurisdiction of the 
court or tribunal of competent 
jurisdiction to decide the 
referred under this sub-
section shall not disclose the 
cause of inability of the 
parties to reach a settlement, 
or any other matter or thing 
referring to their conduct, 
during mediation. 
(5) The parties, may, at any 
time during the mediation 
process, make an agreement 
with respect to any of the 
disputes which is the subject 
matter of mediation. 
(6) Any mediated settlement 
agreement under this section 
shall also include a settlement 
agreement resulting from 
online mediation and duly 
signed by the parties by way 
of secure electronic signature 
or otherwise authenticated by 
the mediator in the like 
manner. 
(7) For the purposes of 
record, mediated settlement 
agreement arrived at between 
the parties, other than those 
arrived in a court, authority or 
tribunal referred mediation, 
shall be deposited with an 
Authority constituted under 
the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987, in such 
manner as may be specified 
and such Authority shall issue 
a uniquedeposit  number to 
such settlements: 
Provided that the mediated 
settlement agreement under 
this section shall be deposited  
with such Authority situated 
within the territorial 
jurisdiction of the court or 
tribunal of competent 
jurisdiction to decide the 
subject matter of dispute: 
Provided further that such 
deposit  shall not be 
609

subject matter of dispute: 
Provided further that such 
registration shall not be 
mandatory till the time 
regulations under this sub-
section are made. 
Explanation.—For the 
removal of doubts, it is 
clarified that  nothing 
contained in this sub-section 
shall affect the rights of 
parties to enforce the 
mediated settlement 
agreement under section 28 
or challenge the same as 
provided under section 29. 
(8) For the purposes of 
registration of mediated 
settlement agreement, in 
matters other than 
commercial disputes, 
wherein mediation is not 
conducted by a mediation 
service provider, the 
presence of parties to the 
mediated settlement 
agreement or their 
authorised representative 
shall be mandatory before 
the Authority referred to in 
sub-section (7). 
(9) The registration referred 
to in sub-section ( 7) shall be 
made by the parties, mediator 
or mediation service provider 
within a period of one 
hundred and eighty days  
from the date of receipt of 
authenticated  
copy of mediated settlement 
agreement: 
Provided that mediated 
settlement agreement may be 
allowed to be registered after 
the expiry of period of one 
hundred and eighty days on 
payment of such fee as may 
be specified in consultation 
mandatory till the time 
regulations under this sub-
section are made. 
Explanation-Nothing 
contained in this sub-section 
shall affect the rights of 
parties to enforce the 
mediated settlement 
agreement under section 28 
or challenge the same as 
provided under section 29. 
(8) can be deleted completely. 
(9) The deposit referred to in 
sub-section (7) shall be made 
by the parties or the mediator, 
within a period of 90 days 
from the date of receipt of 
signed  
copy of mediated settlement 
agreement: 
Provided that mediated 
settlement agreement may be 
allowed to be deposited after 
the expiry of period of 90 
days on payment of such fee 
as may be specified in 
consultation with the 
Authority referred to in sub-
section (7). 
 
(9) The registration referred 
to in sub-section ( 7) shall be 
made by the parties, mediator 
or mediation service provider 
within a period of one 
hundred and eighty days  
from the date of receipt of 
authenticated  
copy of mediated settlement 
agreement: 
Provided that mediated 
settlement agreement may be 
allowed to be registered after 
the expiry of period of one 
hundred and eighty days on 
payment of such fee as may 
610

with the Authority referred to 
in sub-section (7). 
be specified in consultation 
with the Authority referred to 
in sub-section (7). 
 Confidentiality. 23 23. (1) Subject to the other 
provisions of this Act, the 
mediator, mediation service 
provider, the parties and 
participants in the mediation 
shall keep confidential the 
following matters relating to 
the mediation proceedings, 
namely:— 
(i) acknowledgements, 
opinions, suggestions, 
promises, proposals, 
apologies and admissions 
made during the mediation; 
(ii) acceptance of, or 
willingness to, accept 
proposals made or exchanged 
in the mediation; 
(iii) documents prepared 
solely for the conduct of 
mediation or in relation 
thereto. 
(2) No audio or video 
recording of the mediation 
proceedings shall be made or 
maintained by the parties or 
the participants including the 
mediator and mediation 
service provider, whether 
conducted in person or online 
to ensure confidentiality of 
the conduct of mediation 
proceedings. 
(3) No party to the mediation 
shall in any proceeding 
before a court or tribunal 
including arbitral tribunal, 
rely on or introduce as 
evidence any information or 
communication set forth in 
clauses ( i) to ( iii) of sub-
section ( 1), including any 
information in electronic 
form, or verbal 
communication and the court 
23. (1) Subject to the other 
provisions of this Act, the 
mediator, mediation service 
provider, the parties and 
participants in the mediation 
shall keep confidential the 
following matters relating to 
the mediation proceedings, 
namely:— 
(i) acknowledgements, 
opinions, suggestions, 
promises, proposals, 
apologies and admissions 
made during the mediation; 
(ii) acceptance of, or 
willingness to, accept 
proposals made or exchanged 
in the mediation; 
(iii) documents prepared 
solely for the conduct of 
mediation or in relation 
thereto. 
(2) No audio or video 
recording of the mediation 
proceedings shall be made or 
maintained by the parties or 
the participants including the 
mediator and mediation 
service provider, whether 
conducted in person or 
online, to ensure 
confidentiality of the conduct 
of mediation proceedings. 
(3) No party to the mediation 
shall in any proceeding 
before a court or tribunal 
including arbitral tribunal, 
rely on or introduce as 
evidence any information or 
communication set forth in 
clauses ( i) to ( iii) of sub-
section ( 1), including any 
information in electronic 
form, or verbal 
communication and the court 
611

or tribunal including arbitral 
tribunal shall not take 
cognizance of such 
information or evidence. 
(4) The provisions of this 
section shall not prevent the 
mediator from compiling or 
disclosing general 
information concerning 
matters that have been subject 
of mediation, for research, 
reporting or training 
purposes, if the information 
does not expressly or 
indirectly identify a party or 
participants or the specific 
disputes in the mediation. 
Explanation.—For the 
removal of doubts, it is 
hereby clarified that nothing 
contained in this section shall 
apply to the mediated 
settlement agreement where 
its disclosure is necessary for 
the purpose of registration, 
implementation, enforcement 
and challenge. 
or tribunal including arbitral 
tribunal shall not take 
cognizance of such 
information or evidence. 
(4) The provisions of this 
section shall not prevent the 
mediator from compiling or 
disclosing general 
information concerning 
matters that have been subject 
of mediation, for research, 
reporting or training 
purposes, if the information 
does not expressly or 
indirectly identify a party or 
participants or the specific 
disputes in the mediation. 
Explanation- Nothing 
contained in this section shall 
apply to the mediated 
settlement agreement where 
its disclosure is necessary for 
the purpose of deposit , 
implementation, enforcement 
and challenge. 
 Admissibility 
and privilege 
againstdisclosure. 
24 24. (1) No mediator or 
participant in the mediation, 
including experts and 
advisers engaged for the 
purpose of the mediation and 
persons involved in the 
administration of the 
mediation, shall at any time 
be permitted, or compelled to 
disclose to any court or 
tribunal, or in any 
adjudicatory proceedings, by 
whatever description, any 
communication in mediation, 
or to state the contents or 
conditions of any document 
or nature or conduct of parties 
during mediation including 
the content of negotiations or 
offers or counter offers with 
which they have become 
acquainted during the 
24. (1) No mediator or 
participant in the mediation, 
including experts and 
advisers engaged for the 
purpose of the mediation and 
persons involved in the 
administration of the 
mediation, shall at any time 
be permitted, or compelled to 
disclose to any court or 
tribunal, or in any 
adjudicatory proceedings, by 
whatever description, any 
communication in mediation, 
or to state the contents or 
conditions of any document 
or nature or conduct of parties 
during mediation including 
the content of negotiations or 
offers or counter offers with 
which they have become 
acquainted during the 
612

mediation: 
Provided that nothing in this 
section and section 23 shall 
protect from disclosure, 
information sought or 
provided to prove or dispute a 
claim or complaint of 
professional misconduct of 
mediator or malpractice based 
on conduct occurring during 
the mediation. 
(2) There shall be no 
privilege or confidentiality 
that will attach to— 
(a) a threat or statement of a 
plan to commit an offence 
punishable under any law for 
the time being in force; 
(b) information relating to 
domestic violence or child 
abuse; and 
(c) statements made during a 
mediation showing a 
significant imminent threat to 
public health or safety. 
 
mediation: 
Provided that nothing in this 
section and section 23 shall 
protect from disclosure, 
information sought or 
provided to prove or dispute a 
claim or complaint of 
professional misconduct of 
mediator or malpractice based 
on conduct occurring during 
the mediation. 
(2) There shall be no 
privilege or confidentiality 
that will attach to— 
(a) a threat or statement of a 
plan to commit an offence 
punishable under any law for 
the time being in force; 
(b) information relating to 
domestic violence or child 
abuse; and 
(c) statements made during a 
mediation showing a 
significant imminent threat to 
public health or safety. 
 
 Termination 
of mediation. 
25 25. The mediation 
proceedings under this Act 
shall be deemed to 
terminate— 
(a) on the date of signing and 
authentication of the 
mediated settlement 
agreement; or 
(b) on the date of the written 
declaration of the mediator, 
after consultation with the 
parties or otherwise, to the 
effect that further efforts at 
mediation are no longer 
justified; or 
(c) on the expiry of seven 
days from the date of the 
second mediation session, 
where a party fails to appear 
before the mediator 
25. The mediation 
proceedings under this Act 
shall be deemed to 
terminate— 
(a) on the date of signing and 
authentication of the 
mediated settlement 
agreement; or 
(b) on the date of the written 
declaration of the mediator, 
after consultation with the 
parties or otherwise, to the 
effect that further efforts at 
mediation are no longer 
justified; or 
(c) on the expiry of seven 
days from the date of the 
second mediation session, 
where a party fails to appear 
before the mediator 
613

consecutively for the first two 
mediation sessions, and the 
mediator has not received any 
communication from such 
party; or 
(d) on the date of the 
communication by a party or 
parties in writing, addressed 
to the mediator and the other 
parties to the effect that the 
party wishes to opt out of 
mediation: 
Provided that the parties shal l 
have to attend at least two 
mediation sessions before 
giving such communication; 
or 
(e) on the expiry of time limit 
under section 21. 
consecutively for the first two 
mediation sessions, and the 
mediator has not received any 
communication from such 
party; or 
(d) on the date of the 
communication by a party or 
parties in writing, addressed 
to the mediator and the other 
parties to the effect that the 
party wishes to opt out of 
mediation: 
Provided that the parties shall 
have to attend at least two 
mediation sessions before 
giving such communication; 
or 
(e) on the expiry of time limit 
under section 21. 
 Court annexedmediation. 26 26. (1) For the purposes of 
court annexed mediation 
including pre-litigation 
mediation, the procedure of 
conducting mediation shall be 
such as may be determined 
under the practice directions 
or rules, by whatever name 
called, framed by the 
Supreme Court or the High 
Courts.  
(2) For the purposes of sub-
section ( 1), the Supreme 
Court or the High Courts, as 
the case may be, may 
constitute mediation 
committee. 
(3) The mediation committee 
shall, for the purposes of 
conducting mediation, in all 
courts, maintain a panel of 
mediators in accordance with 
the practice directions or 
rules, by whatever name 
called, framed by the 
Supreme Court or the High 
Courts, as the case may be, 
and such mediators may also 
26. (1) For the purposes of 
court annexed mediation 
including pre-litigation 
mediation, the procedure of 
conducting mediation shall be 
such as may be determined 
under the practice directions 
or rules, framed by the 
Supreme Court or the High 
Courts.  
(2) For the purposes of sub-
section ( 1), the Supreme 
Court or the High Courts, as 
the case may be, may 
constitute mediation 
committee. 
(3) The mediation committee 
shall, for the purposes of 
conducting mediation, in all 
courts, maintain a panel of 
mediators in accordance with 
the practice directions or 
rules, framed by the Supreme 
Court or the High Courts, as 
the case may be, 
and such mediators may also 
conduct mediation other than 
those referred by the court. 
614

conduct mediation other than 
those referred by a court. 
(4) Where the parties to a 
mediation referred by the 
court or tribunal arrive at 
settlement agreement in 
respect of some or all of the 
disputes, a copy of settlement 
agreement shall be placed 
before the said court or 
tribunal for consideration and 
in cases, other than court 
referred mediation provided, 
to the parties. 
(5) If the parties do not reach 
settlement agreement referred 
to in sub-section (4), a failure 
report shall be forwarded by 
the mediator— 
(i) to the court or tribunal, as 
the case may be, which has 
referred the matter for 
mediation; 
(ii) to the parties in all other 
cases. 
(4) Where the parties to a 
mediation referred by the 
court or tribunal arrive at 
settlement agreement in 
respect of some or all of the 
disputes, a copy of settlement 
agreement shall be placed 
before the said court or 
tribunal for consideration and 
in cases, other than court 
referred mediation provided, 
to the parties. 
(5) If the parties do not reach 
settlement agreement referred 
to in sub-section ( 4), a Non-
Settlement report shall be 
forwarded by the mediator— 
(i) to the court or tribunal, as 
the case may be, which has 
referred the matter for 
mediation; 
(ii) to the parties in all other 
cases. 
 Proceedings 
ofLokAdalatandPermanent 
Lok Adalatnot to be 
affected. 
27 27. The provisions of this Act 
shall not apply to the 
proceedings conducted by 
Lok Adalat and Permanent 
Lok Adalat under the Legal 
Services Authorities Act, 
1987. 
It is contradictory to 
Sections 22(7) and 44(2) as 
at various places the Bill 
refers to Legal Services 
Authority Act.  
 
CHAPTER VI  :   ENFORCEMENT OF MEDIATED SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT 
 
 Enforcementofmediatedsett
lement 
agreement. 
28 28. (1) A mediated settlement 
agreement resulting from a 
mediation signed by the 
parties and authenticated by 
the mediator shall be final 
and binding on the parties and 
persons claiming under them 
respectively and enforceable 
as per the provisions of sub-
section (2). 
 
 
  The aspect of Stamp Duty 
payable is very important 
otherwise it will create 
confusion and lead to further 
litigation 
 
615

(2) Subject to the provisions 
of section 29, the mediated 
settlement agreement shall be 
enforced in accordance with 
the provisions of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908, in the 
same manner as if it were a 
judgment or decree passed 
by a court,  and may, 
accordingly, be relied on by 
any of the parties or persons 
claiming through them, by 
way of defence, set off or 
otherwise in any legal 
proceeding. 
 
This is not in consonance 
with Article 1(3) of the 
Singapore Convention. If 
separate Chapter for 
International Mediation needs 
to be made. 
 
 
 Challenge to 
mediated 
settlement 
agreement. 
29 29. (1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any 
other law for the time being 
in force, in any case in which 
the mediated settlement 
agreement is arrived at 
between the parties other than 
in court referred mediation or 
by Lok Adalat or Permanent 
Lok Adalat under the Legal 
Services Authorities Act, 
1987, and is sought to be 
challenged by either of the 
parties, such party may file an 
application before the court 
or tribunal of competent 
jurisdiction. 
(2) A mediated settlement 
agreement may be challenged 
only on all or any of the 
following grounds, namely:— 
(i) fraud; 
(ii) corruption; 
(iii) impersonation; 
(iv) where the mediation was 
conducted in disputes or 
matters not fit for mediation 
under section 7. 
 
(3) An application for 
challenging the mediated 
settlement agreement shall 
29. (1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any 
other law for the time being 
in force, in any case in which 
the mediated settlement 
agreement is arrived at 
between the parties other than 
in court referred mediation or 
by Lok Adalat or Permanent 
Lok Adalat under the Legal  
Services Authorities Act, 
1987, and is sought to be 
challenged by either of the 
parties, such party may file an 
application before the court 
or tribunal of competent 
jurisdiction. 
(2) A mediated settlement 
agreement may be challenged 
only on all or any of the 
following grounds, namely:— 
(i) fraud; 
(ii) corruption; 
(iii) impersonation; 
(iv) where the mediation was 
conducted in disputes or 
matters not fit for mediation 
under section 7. 
(3) An application for 
challenging the mediated 
settlement agreement shall 
not be made after ninety days 
616

not be made after ninety days 
have elapsed from the date on 
which the party making that 
application has received the 
copy of mediated settlement 
agreement under sub-section 
(3) of section 22: 
 
 
Provided that if the court or 
tribunal, as the case may be, 
is satisfied that the applicant 
was prevented by sufficient 
cause from making the 
application within the said 
period of ninety days, it may 
entertain the application 
within a further period of 
ninety days. 
 
have elapsed from the date on 
which the party making that 
application has received the 
copy of mediated settlement 
agreement under sub-section 
(3) of section 22: 
 
 
 
 
 
Provided that if the court or 
tribunal, as the case may be, 
is satisfied that the applicant 
was prevented by sufficient 
cause from making the 
application within the said 
period of ninety days, it may 
entertain the application 
within a further period of 
ninety days. 
 
 Costs. 30 30. Unless otherwise agreed 
by the parties, all costs of 
mediation, including the fees 
of the mediator and the 
charges of the mediation 
service provider shall be 
borne equally by the parties. 
30. Unless otherwise agreed 
by the parties, all costs of 
mediation, including the fees 
of the mediator and the 
charges of the mediation 
service provider shall be 
borne equally by the parties. 
 Limitation. 31 31. Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Limitation 
Act, 1963 or in any other law 
for the time being in force, in 
computing the period of 
limitation fixed for any 
proceedings in respect of 
which a mediation has been 
undertaken under this Act, the 
period from the date of 
commencement of mediation 
under section 16, and up to— 
(i) submission of report under 
sub-section (4) of section 22; 
or 
(ii) termination of mediation 
31. Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Limitation 
Act, 1963 or in any other law 
for the time being in force, in 
computing the period of 
limitation fixed for any 
proceedings in respect of 
which a mediation has been 
undertaken under this Act, the 
period from the date of 
commencement of mediation 
under section 16, and up to— 
(i) submission of report under 
sub-section (4) of section 22; 
or 
(ii) termination of mediation 
617

under section 25; or 
(iii) the settlement agreement 
arrived at in terms of sub-
section ( 4) of section 26,in 
case of mediation other than 
court referred mediation; or 
(iv) forwarding of failure 
report in terms of clause ( ii) 
of sub-section ( 5) 
ofsection26,shall be 
excluded. 
under section 25; or 
(iii) the settlement agreement 
arrived at in terms of sub-
section ( 4) of section 26,in 
case of mediation other than 
court referred mediation; or 
(iv) forwarding of Non-
Settlement report in terms of 
clause (ii) of sub-section (5) 
ofsection26,shall be 
excluded. 
 
CHAPTER VII  : ONLINE MEDIATION 
 
 Onlinemediation. 32 32. (1) Online mediation 
including pre-litigation 
mediation may be conducted 
at any stage of mediation 
under this Act, with the 
written consent of the parties 
including by the use of 
electronic form or computer 
networks but not limited to an 
encrypted electronic mail 
service, secure chat rooms or 
conferencing by video or 
audio mode or both. 
(2) The process of online 
mediation shall be in such 
manner as may be specified. 
 
(3) The conduct of online 
mediation shall be in the 
circumstances, which ensure 
that the essential elements of 
integrity of proceedings and 
confidentiality are maintained 
at all times and the mediator 
may take such appropriate 
steps in this regard as he 
deems fit. 
(4) Subject to the other 
provisions of this Act, the 
mediation communications in 
the case of online mediation 
32. (1) Online mediation 
including pre-litigation 
mediation may be conducted 
at any stage of mediation 
under this Act, with the 
written consent of the parties 
including by the use of 
electronic form or computer 
networks but not limited to an 
encrypted electronic mail 
service, secure chat rooms or 
conferencing by video or 
audio mode or both. 
(2) The process of online 
mediation shall be in such 
manner as may be specified. 
 
(3) The conduct of online 
mediation shall be in the 
circumstances, which ensure 
that the essential elements of 
integrity of proceedings and 
confidentiality are maintained 
at all times and the mediator 
may take such appropriate 
steps in this regard as he 
deems fit. 
(4) Subject to the other 
provisions of this Act, the 
mediation communications in 
the case of online mediation 
618

shall, ensure confidentiality 
of mediation. 
shall, ensure confidentiality 
of mediation. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER VIII   :      MEDIATION COUNCIL OF INDIA 
 
 Establishment 
and 
incorporation 
of Mediation 
Council. 
33 33. (1) The Central 
Government shall, by 
notification, establish for the 
purposes of this Act, a 
Council to be known as the 
Mediation Council of India to 
perform the duties and 
discharge the functions under 
this Act. 
(2) The Council shall be a 
body corporate by the name 
aforesaid, having perpetual 
succession and a common 
seal, with power, subject to 
the provisions of this Act, to 
acquire, hold and dispose of 
property, both movable and 
immovable, and to enter into 
contract, and shall, by the 
said name, sue or be sued. 
(3) The head office of the 
Council shall be at Delhi or at 
such other place as may be 
notified by the Central 
Government. 
(4) The Council may, in 
consultation with the Central 
Government, establish offices 
at other places in India and 
abroad. 
33. (1) The Central 
Government shall, by 
notification, establish for the 
purposes of this Act, a 
Council to be known as the 
Mediation Council of India to 
perform the duties and 
discharge the functions under 
this Act. 
(2) The Council shall be a 
body corporate by the name 
aforesaid, having perpetual 
succession and a common 
seal, with power, subject to 
the provisions of this Act, to 
acquire, hold and dispose of 
property, both movable and 
immovable, and to enter into 
contract, and shall, by the 
said name, sue or be sued. 
(3) The head office of the 
Council shall be at Delhi or at 
such other place as may be 
notified by the Central 
Government. The council 
shall also have regional office 
in every state to carry out the 
functions of the Council in 
that state. 
(4) The Council may, in 
consultation with the Central 
Government, establish offices 
at other places in India and 
abroad. 
 Composition 
of Council. 
34 34. (1) The Council shall 
consist of the following 
members, namely:— 
(a) a person of ability, 
34. (1) The Council shall 
consist of the following 
members, namely:— 
(a) Chairperson: of ability, 
619

integrity and standing having 
adequate knowledge and 
professional experience or 
shown capacity in dealing 
with problems relating to law, 
alternate dispute resolution , 
public affairs or 
administration to be 
appointed by the Central 
Government—Chairperson; 
(b) a person having 
knowledge and experience in 
law related to mediation or 
alternate dispute resolution 
mechanisms, to be appointed 
by the Central Government —
Full-Time Member; 
(c) an eminent person having 
experience in research or 
teaching in the field of 
mediation and alternate 
dispute resolution laws, to be 
appointed by the Central 
Government—Full-Time 
Member; 
(d) Secretary to the 
Government of India in the 
Department of Legal Affairs, 
Ministry of Law and Justice 
or his representative not 
below the rank of Joint 
Secretary—Member, ex 
officio; 
(e) Secretary to the 
Government of India in the 
Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance or his 
representative not below the 
rank of Joint Secretary —
Member, ex officio; 
(f) Chief Executive Officer —
Member-Secretary, ex officio; 
and 
(g) one representative of a 
recognised body of commerce 
and industry, chosen by the 
Central Government —Part-
integrity and standing having 
adequate knowledge and 
professional experience or 
shown capacity in dealing 
with problems relating to law, 
arbitration or mediation, 
public affairs or 
administration to be 
appointed by the Central 
Government; 
(b) Full-Time Member: (i) a 
person having knowledge and 
experience in law related to 
mediation or alternate dispute 
resolution mechanisms, to be 
appointed by the Central 
Government; 
(ii) an eminent person having 
experience in research or 
teaching in the field of 
mediation and alternate 
dispute resolution laws, to be 
appointed by the Central 
Government; 
(c) Ex-officio Member  
(i) Secretary to the 
Government of India in the 
Department of Legal Affairs, 
Ministry of Law and Justice 
or his representative not 
below the rank of Joint 
Secretary; 
(ii) Secretary to the 
Government of India in the 
Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance or his 
representative not below the 
rank of Joint Secretary; 
(f) Chief Executive Officer —
Member-Secretary, ex officio; 
and 
 
Part-Time Member 
(g) one representative of a 
recognised body of commerce 
and industry, chosen by the 
620

Time Member. 
(2) The Chairperson, Full-
Time Member and Part-Time 
Member of the Council, other 
than ex officio members, shall 
hold office as such, for a term 
of four years from the date on 
which they enter upon their 
office and shall be eligible for 
re-appointment: 
Provided that no Chairperson, 
Full-Time Member or Part-
Time Member, other than ex 
officio member, shall hold 
office as such after he has 
attained the age of seventy 
years in the case of 
Chairperson and sixty-seven 
years in the case of Full-Time 
or Part-Time Member. 
(3) The salaries, allowances 
and other terms and 
conditions of the Chairperson 
and Full-Time members 
referred to in clauses ( b) and 
(c) of sub-section ( 1) shall be 
such as maybe prescribed. 
(4) The Part-Time Member 
shall be entitled to such 
travelling and other 
allowances as may be 
prescribed. 
Central Government. 
(2) The Chairperson, Full-
Time Member and Part-Time 
Member of the Council, other 
than ex officio members, shall 
hold office as such, for a term 
of four years from the date on 
which they enter upon their 
office and shall be eligible for 
re-appointment: 
Provided that no Chairperson, 
Full-Time Member or Part-
Time Member, other than ex 
officio member, shall hold 
office as such after he has 
attained the age of seventy 
years in the case of 
Chairperson and sixty-seven 
years in the case of Full-Time 
or Part-Time Member. 
(3) The salaries, allowances 
and other terms and 
conditions of the Chairperson 
and Full-Time members 
referred to in clauses ( b) and 
(c) of sub-section ( 1) shall be 
such as maybe prescribed. 
- (4) The Part-Time 
Member shall be entitled 
to such travelling and 
other allowances as may 
be prescribed. 
 Vacancies,etc., not to 
InvalidateproceedingsofCo
uncil. 
35 35. No act or proceeding of 
the Council shall be invalid 
merely by reason of— 
(a) any vacancy or any 
defect, in the constitution of 
the Council; 
(b) any defect in the 
appointment of a person 
acting as a Chair person or 
Full-Time Member or Part-
Time Member of the Council; 
or 
(c) any irregularity in the 
procedure of the Council not 
affecting the merits of the 
35. No act or proceeding of 
the Council shall be invalid 
merely by reason of— 
(a) any vacancy or any 
defect, in the constitution of 
the Council; 
(b) any defect in the 
appointment of a person 
acting as a Chair person or 
Full-Time Member or Part-
Time Member of the Council; 
or 
(c) any irregularity in the 
procedure of the Council not 
affecting the merits of the 
621

case. case. 
 Resignation. 36 36. The Chairperson or the 
Full-Time Member or Part-
Time Member may, by notice 
in writing, under his hand 
addressed to the Central 
Government, resign his 
office: 
Provided that the Chairperson 
or the Full-Time Member or 
Part-Time Member shall, 
unless he is permitted by the 
Central Government to 
relinquish his office sooner, 
continue to hold office until 
the expiry of three months 
from the date of receipt of 
such notice or until a person 
duly appointed as his 
successor enters upon his 
office or until the expiry of 
his term of office, whichever 
is earlier. 
(b) a person having 
knowledge and experience in 
law related to mediation or 
alternate dispute resolution 
mechanisms, to be appointed 
by the Central Government—
Full-Time Member; 
 Removal. 37 37. (1) The Central 
Government may, remove the 
Chairperson or Full-Time 
Member or Part-Time 
Member from his office, if 
he— 
(a) is an undischarged 
insolvent; or 
(b) has engaged at any time, 
during his term of office, in 
any paid employment without 
the permission of the Central 
Government; or 
(c) has been convicted of an 
offence which, in the opinion 
of the Central Government, 
involves moral turpitude; or 
(d) has acquired such 
financial or other interest as is 
likely to affect prejudicially 
his functions as a Chairperson 
or such Member; or (e) has so 
abused his position as to 
render his continuance in 
37. (1) The Central 
Government may, remove the 
Chairperson or Full-Time 
Member or Part-Time 
Member from his office, if 
he— 
(a) is an undischarged 
insolvent; or 
(b) has engaged at any time, 
during his term of office, in 
any paid employment without 
the permission of the Central 
Government; or 
(c) has been convicted of an 
offence which, in the opinion 
of the Central Government, 
involves moral turpitude; or 
(d) has acquired such 
financial or other interest as is 
likely to affect prejudicially 
his functions as a Chairperson 
or such Member; or (e) has so 
abused his position as to 
render his continuance in 
622

office prejudicial to the 
public interest; or 
(f) has become physically or 
mentally incapable of acting 
as a Chairperson or Full-Time 
Member or Part-Time 
Member: 
Provided that where a 
Chairperson or Full-Time 
Member or Part-Time 
Member is proposed to be 
removed on any ground, he 
shall be informed of charges 
against him and given an 
opportunity of being heard in 
respect of those charges. 
office prejudicial to the 
public interest; or 
(f) has become physically or 
mentally incapable of acting 
as a Chairperson or Full-Time 
Member or Part-Time 
Member: 
Provided that where a 
Chairperson or Full-Time 
Member or Part-Time 
Member is proposed to be 
removed on any ground, he 
shall be informed of charges 
against him and given an 
opportunity of being heard in 
respect of those charges. 
 Appointmentof experts 
andconstitutionofCommitte
es. 
38 38. The Council may, appoint 
such experts and constitute 
such committees of experts as 
it may consider necessary to 
discharge its functions on 
such terms and conditions as 
maybe specified. 
38. The Council may, appoint 
such experts and constitute 
such committees of experts as 
it may consider necessary to 
discharge its functions on 
such terms and conditions as 
maybe specified. 
 Secretariat 
andChiefExecutiveOfficero
fCouncil. 
39 39. (1) There shall be  a 
Chief Executive Officer of 
the Council, who shall be 
responsible for the day to day 
administration and 
implementation of the 
decisions of the Council. 
(2) The qualification, 
appointment and other terms 
and conditions of service of 
the Chief Executive Officer 
shall be such as may be 
specified. 
(3) The Chief Executive 
Officer shall discharge such 
functions and perform such 
duties as may be specified. 
(4) There shall be a 
Secretariat to the Council 
consisting of such number of 
officers and employees as 
may be specified. 
 
39. (1) Chief Executive 
Officer of the Council, who 
shall be responsible for the 
day to day administration and 
implementation of the 
decisions of the Council. 
(2) The qualification, 
appointment and other terms 
and conditions of service of 
the Chief Executive Officer 
shall be such as may be 
specified. 
(3) The Chief Executive 
Officer shall discharge such 
functions and perform such 
duties as may be specified. 
(4) There shall be a 
Secretariat to the Council 
consisting of such number of 
officers and employees as 
may be specified. 
 
(5) The qualification, 
623

(5) The qualification, 
appointment and other terms 
and conditions of the service 
of the employees and other 
officers of the Council shall 
be such as may be specified. 
(6) The Central Government 
shall provide such number of 
officers and employees as 
may be necessary for the 
functioning of the Council till 
regulations are made under 
this section. 
appointment and other terms 
and conditions of the service 
of the  officers and other 
employees of the Council 
shall be such as may be 
specified. 
(6) The Central Government 
shall provide such number of 
officers and employees as 
may be necessary for the 
functioning of the Council till 
regulations are made under 
this section. 
 Duties andFunctions ofthe 
Council. 
40 40. The Council shall— 
(a) endeavour to promote 
domestic and international 
mediation in India through 
appropriate guidelines; 
(b) endeavour to develop 
India to be a robust centre for 
domestic and international 
mediation; 
(c) lay down the guidelines 
for the continuous education, 
certification and assessment 
of mediators by the 
recognised mediation 
institutes; 
(d) provide for manner of 
registration of mediators and 
renew, withdraw, suspend or 
cancel registration on the 
basis of conditions as may be 
specified; 
(e) lay down standards for 
professional and ethical 
conduct of mediators under 
sub-section (2) of section 17; 
(f) hold trainings, workshops 
and courses in the area of 
mediation in collaboration 
with mediation service 
providers, law firms and 
universities and other 
stakeholders, both Indian and 
international, and any other 
40. The Council shall— 
(a) endeavour to promote 
domestic and international 
mediation in India through 
appropriate guidelines; 
(b) endeavour to develop 
India to be a robust centre for 
domestic and international 
mediation; 
(c) lay down the guidelines 
for the continuous education, 
certification and assessment 
of mediators by the 
recognised mediation 
institutes; 
(d) provide for manner of 
registration of mediators and 
renew, withdraw, suspend or 
cancel registration on the 
basis of conditions as may be 
specified; 
(e) lay down standards for 
professional and ethical 
conduct of mediators under 
sub-section (2) of section 17; 
(f) hold trainings, workshops 
and courses in the area of 
mediation in collaboration 
with mediation service 
providers, law firms and 
universities and other 
stakeholders, both Indian and 
international, and any other 
624

mediation institutes; 
(g) enter into memoranda of 
understanding or agreements 
with domestic and 
international bodies or 
organisations or institutions; 
(h) recognise mediation 
institutes and mediation 
service providers and renew, 
withdraw, suspend or cancel 
such recognition; 
(i) specify the criteria for 
recognition of mediation 
institutes and mediation 
service providers; 
(j) call for any information or 
record of mediation institutes 
and mediation service 
providers; 
(k) lay down standards for 
professional and ethical 
conduct of the mediation 
institutes and mediation 
service providers; 
(l) publish such information, 
data, research studies and 
such other information as 
may be required; 
(m) maintain an electronic 
depository of the mediated 
settlement agreements made 
in India and for such other 
records related thereto in such 
manner as may be specified; 
and 
(n) perform any other 
function as may be assigned 
to it  by the Central 
Government. 
mediation institutes; 
(g) enter into memoranda of 
understanding or agreements 
with domestic and 
international bodies or 
organisations or institutions; 
(h) recognise mediation 
institutes and mediation 
service providers and renew, 
withdraw, suspend or cancel 
such recognition; 
(i) specify the criteria for 
recognition of mediation 
institutes and mediation 
service providers; 
(j) call for any information or 
record of mediation institutes 
and mediation service 
providers; 
(k) lay down standards for 
professional and ethical 
conduct of the mediation 
institutes and mediation 
service providers; 
(l) publish such information, 
data, research studies and 
such other information as 
may be required; 
(m) maintain an electronic 
depository of the mediated 
settlement agreements made 
in India and such other 
records related thereto in such 
manner as may be specified; 
and 
(n) perform any other 
function as may be assigned 
by the Central Government 
 
CHAPTER IX  :   MEDIATION SERVICE PROVIDERS AND MEDIATION INSTITUTES 
 
 Mediation Service 
Providers. 
41 41. The mediation service 
provider recognised by the 
Council shall be graded by it 
41. The mediation service 
provider recognised by the 
Council shall be graded by it 
625

in the manner as may be 
specified. 
in the manner as may be 
specified. 
 Functions of 
MediationServiceproviders. 
42 42. The mediation service 
providers shall perform the 
following functions, 
namely:— 
(a) accredit mediators  and 
maintain panel of mediators; 
(b) provide the services of 
mediator for conduct of 
mediation; 
(c) provide all facilities, 
secretarial assistance and 
infrastructure for the efficient 
conduct of mediation; 
(d) promote professional and 
ethical conduct amongst 
mediators; 
(e) facilitate registration of 
settlement agreements in 
accordance with the 
provisions of section 22; and 
(f) such other functions as 
may be specified. 
42. The mediation service 
providers shall perform the 
following functions, 
namely:— 
(a)maintain panel of 
mediators; 
(b) provide the services of 
mediator for conduct of 
mediation; 
(c) provide all facilities, 
secretarial assistance and 
infrastructure for the efficient 
conduct of mediation; 
(d) promote professional and 
ethical conduct amongst 
mediators; 
(e) facilitate registration of 
settlement agreements in 
accordance with the 
provisions of section 22; and 
(f) such other functions as 
may be specified. 
 Mediationinstitutes. 43 43. The Council shall 
recognise mediation institutes 
to perform such duties and 
exercise such functions as 
may be specified. 
43. The Council shall 
recognise mediation institutes 
to perform such duties and 
exercise such functions as 
may be specified. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER X   :    COMMUNITY MEDIATION 
 
 
 
 Community 
Mediation. 
44 44. ( 1) Any dispute likely to 
affect peace, harmony and 
tranquility amongst the 
residents or families of any 
area or locality may be settled 
through community 
44. ( 1) Any dispute likely to 
affect peace, harmony and 
tranquility amongst the 
residents or families of any 
area or locality may be settled 
through community 
626

mediation with priormutual 
consent of the parties to the 
dispute. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-
section (1), any of the parties 
shall make an application 
before the concerned 
Authority constituted under 
the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987or 
District Magistrate or Sub-
Divisional Magistrate in areas 
where no such Authority 
hasbeen constituted, for 
referring the dispute to 
mediation. 
(3) In order to facilitate 
settlement of a dispute for 
which an application has been 
received under sub-section 
(2), the concerned Authority 
constituted under the Legal 
ServicesAuthorities Act, 1987 
or the District Magistrate or 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate, as 
the case may be, shall 
constitute panel of three 
mediators. 
(4) For the purpose of this 
section, the Authority or 
DistrictMagistrate or theSub-
Divisional Magistrate, as the 
case may be, shall notify a 
permanent panel of 
mediators, which may be 
revised from time to time. 
(5) The following persons , 
may be included in the panel 
referred to in 
sub-section (4)— 
(a) persons of standing and 
integrity who are respectable 
in the community; 
(b) any local person whose 
contribution to the society has 
been recognised; 
(c) representative of area or 
mediation with prior mutual 
consent of the parties to the 
dispute. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-
section (1), any of the parties 
shall make an application 
before the concerned 
Authority constituted under 
the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987or 
District Magistrate or Sub-
Divisional Magistrate in areas 
where no such Authority has 
been constituted, for referring 
the dispute to mediation. 
(3) In order to facilitate 
settlement of a dispute for 
which an application has been 
received under sub-section 
(2), the concerned Authority 
constituted under the Legal 
Services Authorities Act, 
1987 or the District 
Magistrate or Sub-Divisional 
Magistrate, as the case may 
be, shall constitute panel of 
two or more mediators. 
(4) For the purpose of this 
section, the Authority or 
District Magistrate or the 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate, as 
the case may be, shall notify a 
permanent panel of 
mediators, which may be 
revised from time to time. 
(5) The following persons 
who have been trained as 
Mediators may be included in 
the panel referred to in 
sub-section (4)— 
(a) persons of standing and 
integrity who are respectable 
in the community; 
(b) any local person whose 
contribution to the society has 
been recognised; 
(c) representative of area or 
627

resident welfare associations; 
and 
(d) Any other person deemed 
appropriate. 
(6) While making panel 
referred to in sub-section ( 4) 
the representation of women 
or any other class or category 
of persons may be 
considered. 
resident welfare associations; 
and 
(d) Any other person deemed 
appropriate. 
(6) While making panel 
referred to in sub-section ( 4) 
the representation of women 
or any other class or category 
of persons may be 
considered. 
 Procedure 
forcommunitymediation. 
45 45. (1) Any community 
mediation shall be conducted 
by the panel of three 
mediatorsreferred to in sub-
section (3) of section 44 who 
shall devise suitable 
procedure for the purpose of 
resolving the dispute. 
(2) The mediators shall 
endeavour to resolve disputes 
through community 
mediation and provide 
assistance to parties for 
resolving disputes amicably. 
(3) In every case where a 
settlement agreement is 
arrived at through mediation 
under this Act, the same may 
be reduced into writing with 
the signature of the parties 
and authenticated by the 
mediator, a copy of which he 
provided to the parties and in 
cases where no 
settlementagreement is 
arrived at, a failure report 
may be submitted by the 
mediator to the Authority or 
theDistrict Magistrate or the 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate , 
as the case may be, and to the 
parties. 
(4) Any settlement agreement 
arrived at under this Chapter 
shall be for the purpose 
ofmaintaining the peace, 
harmony and tranquility 
amongst the residents or 
45. (1) Any community 
mediation shall be conducted 
by the panel of two or more 
mediators referred to in sub-
section (3) of section 44 who 
shall devise suitable 
procedure for the purpose of 
resolving the dispute. 
(2) The mediators shall 
endeavour to resolve disputes 
through community 
mediation and provide 
assistance to parties for 
resolving disputes amicably. 
(3) In every case where a 
settlement agreement is 
arrived at through mediation 
under this Act, the same may 
be reduced into writing with 
the signature of the parties 
and parties and signed by the 
mediator, a copy of which be 
provided to the parties and in 
case where no settlemen t 
agreement is arrived at, a 
Non-Settlement report may 
be submitted by the mediator 
to the Authority or the 
District Magistrate or the 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate or 
Mediation service provider , 
as the case may be, and to the 
parties. 
(4) Any settlement agreement 
arrived at under this Chapter 
shall be for the purpose of 
maintaining the peace, 
harmony and tranquility 
628

families of any areaor locality 
but shall not be enforceable 
as a judgment or decree of a 
civil court. 
(5) The provisions of sub-
sections (7) and (8) of section 
22 shall, mutatis mutandis 
apply, in relation to the 
registration of mediated 
settlement agreement under 
this section. 
amongst the residents or 
families of any area or 
locality and shall be 
enforceable as a judgment or 
decree of a civil court. 
(5) The provisions of sub-
sections (7) and (8) of section 
22 shall, mutatis mutandis 
apply, in relation to the 
deposit of mediated 
settlement agreement under 
this section. 
 
CHAPTER XI  : MISCELLANEOUS 
 
 Mediation 
Fund. 
46 46. (1) There shall be a fund 
to be called "Mediation 
Fund" (hereinafter referred to 
as the "Fund") for the 
purposes of promotion, 
facilitation and 
encouragement of mediation 
under this Act, which shall be 
administered by the Council. 
(2) There shall be credited to 
the Fund the following, 
namely:— 
(a) all monies provided by the 
Central Government; 
(b) all fees and other charges 
received from mediation 
service provider, mediation 
institutes or bodies or 
persons; 
(c) all monies received by the 
Council in the form of 
donations, grants, 
contributions and income 
from other sources; 
(d) grants made by the 
Central Government or the 
State Government for the 
purposes of the Fund; 
(e) amounts deposited by 
persons as contributions to 
46. (1) There shall be a fund 
to be called "Mediation Fund" 
(hereinafter referred to as the 
"Fund") for the purposes of 
promotion, facilitation and 
encouragement of mediation 
under this Act, which shall be 
administered by the Council. 
(2) There shall be credited to 
the Fund the following, 
namely:— 
(a) all monies provided by the 
Central Government; 
(b) all fees and other charges 
received from mediation 
service provider, mediation 
institutes or bodies or 
persons; 
(c) all monies received by the 
Council in the form of 
donations, grants, 
contributions and income 
from other sources; 
(d) grants made by the 
Central Government or the 
State Government for the 
purposes of the Fund; 
(e) amounts deposited by 
persons as contributions to 
the Fund; 
629

the Fund; 
(f) amounts received in the 
Fund from any other source; 
and 
(g) interest on the above or 
other income received out of 
the investment made from the 
Fund. 
(3) The Fund shall be applied 
towards meeting the salaries 
and other allowances of 
Chairperson, Full-Time 
Member, Part-Time Member, 
Chief Executive Officer, 
Officers and employees and 
the expenses of the Council 
including expenses incurred 
in the exercise of its powers 
and discharge of its duties 
under this Act. 
 
(f) amounts received in the 
Fund from any other source; 
and 
(g) Interest on the above or 
other income received out of 
the investment made from the 
Fund. 
(3) The Fund shall be applied 
towards meeting the salaries 
and other allowances of 
Chairperson, Full-Time 
Member, Part-Time Member, 
Chief Executive Officer, 
Officers and employees and 
the expenses of the Council 
including expenses incurred 
in the exercise of its powers 
and discharge of its duties 
under this Act. 
.  
 
 
 Accounts and Audit. 47 47. (1) The Council shall 
maintain proper accounts and 
other relevant records and 
prepare an annual statement 
of accounts, including the 
balance sheet, in such form 
and manner as may be 
prescribed in consultation 
with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the 
Council shall be audited by 
the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India and any 
expenditure incurred by him 
in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the 
Council to the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India. 
(3) The Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India and 
any person appointed by him 
in connection with the audit 
of the accounts of the Council 
shall have the same rights, 
47. (1) The Council shall 
maintain proper accounts and 
other relevant records and 
prepare an annual statement 
of accounts, including the 
balance sheet, in such form 
and manner as may be 
prescribed in consultation 
with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the 
Council shall be audited by 
the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India and any 
expenditure incurred by him 
in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the 
Council to the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India. 
(3) The Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India and 
any person appointed by him 
in connection with the audit 
of the accounts of the Council 
shall have the same rights, 
630

privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as 
the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India as in 
connection with the audit of 
the Government accounts, 
and, in particular, shall have 
the right to demand the 
production of books, 
accounts, connected vouchers 
and other 
 
documents and papers and to 
inspect the offices of the 
Council. 
(4) The accounts of the 
Council as certified by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India or any other 
person appointed by him in 
this behalf together with the 
audit report hereon shall be 
forwarded annually to the 
Central Government and the 
Central Government shall 
cause the same to be laid 
before each House of 
Parliament. 
privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as 
the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India has in 
connection with the audit of 
the Government accounts, 
and, in particular, shall have 
the right to demand the 
production of books, 
accounts, connected vouchers 
and other 
 
documents and papers and to 
inspect the offices of the 
Council. 
(4) The accounts of the 
Council as certified by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India or any other 
person appointed by him in 
this behalf together with the 
audit report thereon shall be 
forwarded annually to the 
Central Government and the 
Central Government shall 
cause the same to be laid 
before each House of 
Parliament. 
 Power ofCentral 
Governmentto issue 
directions. 
48 48. (1) Without prejudice to 
the foregoing provisions of 
this Act, the Council shall, in 
exercise of its powers or the 
performance of its functions 
under this Act, be bound by 
such directions on questions 
of policy as the Central 
Government may give in 
writing to it from 
time to time: 
Provided that the views of the 
Council shall be taken into 
consideration before any 
direction is given under this 
sub-section. 
(2) The decision of the 
Central Government whether 
a question is one of policy or 
48. (1) Without prejudice to 
the foregoing provisions of 
this Act, the Council shall, in 
exercise of its powers or the 
performance of its functions 
under this Act, be bound by 
such directions on questions 
of policy as the Central 
Government may give in 
writing to it from 
time to time: 
Provided that the views of the 
Council shall be taken into 
consideration before any 
direction is given under this 
sub-section. 
(2) The decision of the 
Central Government whether 
a question is one of policy or 
631

not shall be final. not, shall be final. 
 Power ofGovernments 
to 
frameschemesorguidelines. 
49 49. Nothing contained in this 
Act shall prevent the Central 
Government or State 
Government, as the case may 
be, from framing any scheme 
or guidelines, to be notified, 
for resolution of any dispute 
through mediation or 
conciliation in cases where 
the Central 
Government or State 
Government or any of its 
entity or agencies is one of 
the parties and in such cases 
mediation or conciliation 
may be conducted in 
accordance with such scheme 
or guidelines. 
49. Nothing contained in this 
Act shall prevent the Central 
Government or State 
Government, as the case may 
be, from framing any scheme 
or guidelines, to be notified, 
for resolution of any dispute 
through mediation or 
conciliation in cases where 
the Central 
Government or State 
Government or any of its 
entity or agencies is one of 
the parties and in such cases 
mediation or conciliation may 
be conducted in accordance 
with such scheme or 
guidelines. 
 Mediatedsettlement 
Agreementwhere 
Governmentor its, 
agency,etc., is a party. 
 
50 50. Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act, no 
dispute including a 
commercial dispute, wherein 
the Central Government or 
State Government or any of 
its agencies, public bodies, 
corporations and local bodies 
including entities controlled 
or owned by them is a 
party, the settlement 
agreement arrived at shall be 
signed only after obtaining 
the prior written consent of 
the competent authority of 
such Government or any of 
its entity or agencies, public 
bodies, corporations and local 
bodies, as the case may be. 
50. Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act, no 
dispute including a 
commercial dispute, wherein 
the Central Government or 
State Government or any of 
its agencies, public bodies, 
corporations and local bodies 
including entities controlled 
or owned by them is a 
party, the settlement 
agreement arrived at shall be 
signed only after obtaining 
the prior written consent of 
the competent authority of 
such Government or any of 
its entity or agencies, public 
bodies, corporations and local 
bodies, as the case may be. 
 Protection ofactiontakenin 
good faith. 
51 51. No suit, prosecution or 
other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central 
Government or a State 
Government or any officer of 
such Government, or the 
Chairperson, Full-Time 
Member or Part-Time 
Member or Officer or 
employee of the Council or a 
51. No suit, prosecution or 
other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central 
Government or a State 
Government or any officer of 
such Government, or the 
Chairperson ,Full-Time 
Member or Part-Time 
Member or Officer or 
employee of the Council or a 
632

mediator, mediation 
institutes, mediation service 
providers, which is done or is 
intended to be done in good 
faith under this Act or the 
rules or regulations made 
thereunder. 
mediator, mediation 
institutes, mediation service 
providers, which is done or is 
intended to be done in good 
faith under this Act or the 
rules or regulations made 
there under. 
 Power tomake rules. 52 52. (1) The Central 
Government may, by 
notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of 
this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without 
prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing power, such 
rules may make provision 
for— 
(a) the salaries and 
allowances and the terms and 
conditions of the Chairperson 
and Full-time Members under 
sub-section (3) of section 34; 
(b) the travelling and other 
allowances payable to the 
Part-Time Member under 
sub-section (4) of section 34; 
(c) the form and manner of 
annual statement of accounts, 
including the balance sheet 
under sub-section ( 1) of 
section 47; and 
(d) Any other matter which is 
to be, or may be prescribed. 
52. (1) The Central 
Government may, by 
notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of 
this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without 
prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing power, such 
rules may make provision 
for— 
(a) the salaries and 
allowances and the terms and 
conditions of the Chairperson 
and Full-time Members under 
sub-section (3) of section 34; 
(b) the travelling and other 
allowances payable to the 
Part-Time Member under 
sub-section (4) of section 34; 
(c) the form and manner of 
annual statement of accounts, 
including the balance sheet 
under sub-section ( 1) of 
section 47; and 
(d) Any other matter which is 
to be, or may be prescribed. 
 
 Power tomakeregulations. 53 53. (1) The Council may, 
with the previous approval of 
the Central Government, by 
notification, make regulations 
consistent with this Act and 
the rules made there under to 
carry out the provisions of 
this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without 
prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing power, such 
regulations may make 
53. (1) The Council may, 
with the previous approval of 
the Central Government, by 
notification, make regulations 
consistent with this Act and 
the rules made there under to 
carry out the provisions of 
this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without 
prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing power, such 
regulations may make 
633

provision for— 
(a) such other forum under 
Explanation I to clause ( l) of 
section 3; 
(b) qualification, experience 
and accreditation for 
mediators of foreign 
nationality under the proviso 
to sub-section ( 1) of section 
10; 
(c) standards for professional 
and ethical conduct of 
mediators under 
sub-section (2) of section 17; 
(d) manner of registration of 
mediated settlement 
agreement under 
sub-section (7) of section 22; 
(e) fees for registration of 
mediated settlement 
agreement under the proviso 
to sub-section ( 9) of section 
22; 
(f) manner of process of 
conducting online mediation 
under sub-section ( 2) 
ofsection32; 
(g) the terms and conditions 
of experts and committees of 
experts under section 38; 
(h) qualifications, 
appointment and other terms 
and conditions of service of 
the Chief Executive Officer 
under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 39; 
(i) functions and duties to be 
performed by the Chief 
Executive Officer under sub-
section (3) of section 39; 
(j) the number of officers and 
employees of the Secretariat 
of the Council under sub-
section (4) of section 39; 
provision for— 
(a) such other forum under 
Explanation I to clause ( l) of 
section 3; 
(b) qualification, experience 
and accreditation for 
mediators of foreign 
nationality under the proviso 
to sub-section ( 1) of section 
10; 
(c) standards for professional 
and ethical conduct of 
mediators under 
sub-section (2) of section 17; 
(d) manner of registration of 
mediated settlement 
agreement under 
sub-section (7) of section 22; 
(e) fees for registration of 
mediated settlement 
agreement under the proviso 
to sub-section ( 9) of section 
22; 
(f) manner of process of 
conducting online mediation 
under sub-section ( 2) 
ofsection32; 
(g) the terms and conditions 
of experts and committees of 
experts under section 38; 
(h) qualifications, 
appointment and other terms 
and conditions of service of 
the Chief Executive Officer 
under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 39; 
(i) functions and duties to be 
performed by the Chief 
Executive Officer under sub-
section (3) of section 39; 
(j) the number of officers and 
employees of the Secretariat 
of the Council under sub-
section (4) of section 39; 
634

(k) the qualification, 
appointment and other terms 
and conditions of the 
employees and other officers 
of the Council under sub-
section (5) of section 39; 
(l) conditions for registration 
of mediators and renewal, 
withdrawal, suspension or 
cancellations of such 
registrations under clause ( d) 
of section 40; 
 
 
(m) criteria for recognition of 
mediation institutes and 
mediation service providers 
under clause (i) of section 40; 
(n) manner of maintenance of 
electronic depository of 
mediated settlement 
agreement under clause ( m) 
of section 40; 
(o) manner for grading of 
mediation service provider 
under section 41; 
(p) such other functions of 
mediation service provider 
under clause (f) ofsection42; 
(q) duties and functions to be 
performed by mediation 
institutes under section 43; 
and 
(r) Any other matter in 
respect of which provision is 
necessary for the performance 
of functions of the Council 
under this Act. 
(k) the qualification, 
appointment and other terms 
and conditions of the 
employees and other officers 
of the Council under sub-
section (5) of section 39; 
(l) conditions for registration 
of mediators and renewal, 
withdrawal, suspension or 
cancellations of such 
registrations under clause ( d) 
of section 40; 
 
 
(m) criteria for recognition of 
mediation institutes and 
mediation service providers 
under clause (i) of section 40; 
(n) manner of maintenance of 
electronic depository of 
mediated settlement 
agreement under clause ( m) 
of section 40; 
(o) manner for grading of 
mediation service provider 
under section 41; 
(p) such other functions of 
mediation service provider 
under clause (f) ofsection42; 
(q) duties and functions to be 
performed by mediation 
institutes under section 43; 
and 
(r) Any other matter in 
respect of which provision is 
necessary for the performance 
of functions of the Council 
under this Act. 
 Laying. 54 54. Every notification under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 7, 
sub-section ( 2) of section 
56,rule and regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is 
made,before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in 
54. Every notification under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 7, 
sub-section ( 2) of section 
56,rule and regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in 
635

session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or 
in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before 
theexpiry of the session 
immediately following the 
session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any 
modification in the 
notification, rule or regulation 
or both Houses agree that the 
notification, rule or regulation 
should not be made, the 
notification, rule or regulation 
shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or 
annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done 
under that notification, rule or 
regulation 
session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or 
in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session 
immediately following the 
session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any 
modification in the 
notification, rule or regulation 
or both Houses agree that the 
notification, rule or regulation 
should not be made, the 
notification, rule or regulation 
shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or 
annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done 
under that notification, rule or 
regulation 
 Power toremovedifficulties. 55 55. (1) If any difficulty arises 
in giving effect to the 
provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by 
order published in the 
Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this 
Act, as may appear to it to be 
necessary for removing the 
difficulty: 
Provided that no such order 
shall be made under this 
section after the expiry of a 
period of three years from the 
date of commencement of 
this Act. 
 
 
 
(2) Every order made under 
sub-section ( 1) shall be laid, 
55. (1) If any difficulty arises 
in giving effect to the 
provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by 
order published in the 
Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this 
Act, as may appear to it to be 
necessary for removing the 
difficulty: 
Provided that no such order 
shall be made under this 
section after the expiry of a 
period of three years from the 
date of commencement of 
this Act. 
 
 
 
(2) Every order made under 
sub-section ( 1) shall be laid, 
636

as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of 
Parliament. 
as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of 
Parliament. 
 
 Provisionsof Act to 
Haveoverridingeffectonme
diationorconciliationcontai
nedinother laws. 
56 56. (1) Subject to the 
enactments mentioned in the 
Second Schedule, the 
provisionsof this Act shall 
have overriding effect for 
conduct of mediation or 
conciliation 
notwithstandinganything 
inconsistent therewith 
contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, 
andany instrument having 
force of law. 
(2) If the Central Government 
is satisfied that it is necessary 
or expedient so to do, itmay, 
by notification, amend the 
Second Schedule and 
thereupon it shall be deemed 
to havebeen amended 
accordingly. 
Sec 56 impliedly bars 
mediation in relation to ‘The 
Sexual Harassment of 
Women at Workplace 
(Prevention, Prohibition and 
Redressal) Act, 2013 (14 of 
2013)’. This needs to be 
reconsidered as there are 
many such cases that have 
been settled through the 
Mediation process or are 
capable of settlement.  Act not to apply 
to pendingproceedings. 
57 57. This Act shall not apply 
to, or in relation to, any 
mediation or conciliation 
commenced before the 
coming into force of this Act. 
57. This Act shall not apply 
to, or in relation to, any 
mediation or conciliation 
commenced before the 
coming into force of this Act. 
 Amendment ofAct 9 of 
1872. 
58 58. The Indian Contract Act, 
1872, shall be amended in the 
manner specified in the Third 
Schedule. 
58. The Indian Contract Act, 
1872, shall be amended in the 
manner specified in the Third 
Schedule. 
 Amendmentof Act 5 of 
1908. 
59 59. The Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, shall be 
amended in the manner 
specified in the Fourth 
Schedule. 
 
59. The Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, shall be 
amended in the manner 
specified in the Fourth 
Schedule. 
 
 Amendmentof Act 39 
of1987. 
60 60. The Legal Service 
Authorities Act, 1987, shall 
be amended in the manner 
specified in the Fifth 
Schedule. 
 
60. The Legal Service 
Authorities Act, 1987, shall 
be amended in the manner 
specified in the Fifth 
Schedule. 
 
637

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 Amendmentof Act 26 
of1996. 
61 61. The Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996, shall 
be amended in the manner 
specified in the Sixth 
Schedule. 
 
61. The Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996, shall 
be amended in the manner 
specified in the Sixth 
Schedule. 
 
 Amendmentof Act 27 
of2006. 
62 62. The Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises 
Development Act, 2006, shall 
be amended in the manner 
specified in the Seventh 
Schedule. 
 
62. The Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises 
Development Act, 2006, shall 
be amended in the manner 
specified in the Seventh 
Schedule. 
 
 Amendmentof Act 18 
of2013. 
63 63. The Companies Act, 
2013, shall be amended in the 
manner specified in the 
Eighth Schedule. 
 
63. The Companies Act, 
2013, shall be amended in the 
manner specified in the 
Eighth Schedule. 
 
 
 
 Amendmentof Act 4 of 
2016. 
64 64. The Commercial Courts 
Act, 2015, shall be amended 
in the manner specified in the 
Ninth Schedule. 
 
64. The Commercial Courts 
Act, 2015, shall be amended 
in the manner specified in the 
Ninth Schedule. 
 
 Amendmentof Act 35 
of2019. 
65 65. The Consumer Protection 
Act, 2019, shall be amended 
in the manner specified in the 
Tenth Schedule. 
65. The Consumer Protection 
Act, 2019, shall be amended 
in the manner specified in the 
Tenth Schedule. 
638

639

640

641

642

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC on Mediation Bill, 2021  
Before the Parliamentary Standing Committee on  
Personal, Public Grievances, Law and Justice 
……………………………………………………………………………. 
Johny Sebastian 
District Judge & Director, KSMCC 
[Director, ADR Centre, High Court] 
Ram Mohan Palace, 
High Court of Kerala. 
 
 
 
 
 
643

 
 
 
 
PART - I 
DOMESTIC MEDIATION 
---------------------------------------- 
 
CHAPTER 1 - APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS
 
 
S. 3 Definitions 
 
 In this Part unless the context otherwise requires: 
 
(a) “Council”  means the Mediation Council of India established under 
section 35 of this Act. 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
After mentioning the definition for “Council” should give the definition 
for the “Authority”.  
“Authority” Means the State Mediation Authority and District Mediation 
Authority constituted under this Act.  
 
The Mediation should get separate statutory right to implement every 
matter related to Mediation.  
 
It is to be noted that as per Sec.89 of CPC, the ADR mechanism,  
Arbitration - There is one Enactment that Arbitration and Conciliation 
                                                                                              Act, 1996. 
Lok Adalat – The Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 
 
Judicial Settlement – Follow such procedures prescribed by the central  
                                                                   Government in this behalf.  
Mediation – Mediation Act, 2021 
Here Mediation also coming under a new enactment which has separate 
644

body and power and then why to merge some of the activities with other 
authority and enactment like, Legal Services Authorities Act. 
 
So, from the Reference of a matter to Mediation and till the final settlement 
agreement registration and its filing process and other allied t hings should 
be done by the state and district authorities. The central authority wi ll 
have the final decision making power and entire monitoring rights over the 
state. The Accreditation of Mediator and all other rights conferr ed as per 
this Bill should be maintained as such and should done by the Me diation 
Council of India.   
 
(b) (i) "Court"  for the purpose of mediation under this Part means the 
principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a district, and 
includes the High Court in exercise of its Ordinary Original Civil 
Jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide the disputes forming th e 
subject matter of mediation if the same had been the subject matter 
of a suit. 
   
  (ii)  in the case of international mediation -  the   High Court in exercise of 
its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide 
the questions forming the subject-matter of the mediation if the same 
had been the subject-matter of a suit, and in other cases. a High 
Court having jurisdiction to hear appeals from decrees of courts 
subordinate to that High Court." 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
This Sec. 3 (b) (i) is contradictory to Sec.29 (1) of this Mediatio n Act. 
Hence should make a change in this section and add this provision o f Sec.3 
(b) (i) into the “Court” means –  Any Court or Tribunal established in 
India as per the provisions of law to try any such cases in ci vil or criminal 
in nature of competent jurisdiction before which the subject matter  of 
dispute or other proceeding would lie. So that the reference  of criminal 
matters to Mediation is also will be possible. 
 
In the present Bill it is not specifically mentioned anywhere els e for 
the remedy of conducting mediation in compoundable criminal matters, 
matrimonial matters criminal in nature, 138 N.I Act matters, The 
645

Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, Maintenance and 
Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2 – MEDIATION 
--------------------------------------- 
 
S.6  Pre litigation Mediation and Settlement  
 
(1) Subject to other provisions of this Act, irrespective of the existence of 
any mediation agreement or otherwise, any party before filing any suit 
or proceeding in any Court or Tribunal shall, take steps to settle the 
disputes by pre litigation mediation in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act. 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
 Is consent of parties required for conducting pre-litigation 
Mediation? This is not clear from the provisions of the bill. 
 
(2) Unless otherwise agreed upon by the parties, a mediator registered with 
the Mediation Council of India or a Court Annexed Mediation Center or a 
Mediation Service Provider recognized under the provisions of this Act 
are authorized to conduct pre-litigation mediation. 
 
S.8  Interim relief by Court or Tribunal 
 
(1) If exceptional circumstances exist, a party may, before the 
commencement of or during the continuation of mediation proceedings 
under this Part, file an application before a Court or Tribunal of 
competent jurisdiction for seeking urgent interim measures. 
 
(2) The Court or Tribunal shall after granting or rejecting urgent interim 
relief, as the case may be, refer the parties to undertake mediation to 
resolve the dispute, if deemed appropriate. 
 
646

Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
The provision is silent whether consent of parties is required before they 
could be referred to mediation.  
It is to be noted and specified in this Mediation Bill that th ere is no Appeal 
remedy to either party from any settlement arrived on account of 
Mediation and in other cases the aggrieved party can approach t he 
jurisdictional appeal court to challenge any order other than the  matters 
which directly or indirectly affected the Mediation process.  
It is also to be clarified that no appeal remedy is available to eith er party 
from challenging any Mediation Settlement Agreement in any manner 
and the challenge raised by either party before the juri sdictional court will 
be final. The resolution of disputes through Mediation must be final  and 
the finality is very important and that also to be highlighted in the 
Mediation Bill.  
 
S.9  Power of Court or Tribunal to refer parties to mediation. 
 
(1)    Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being 
in force, a Court or Tribunal, before which an action is brought in a 
matter which is the subject of an agreement to submit to mediation shall, 
if a party to such agreement or any person claiming through or under 
him, so applies not later than the date of submitting his first statement 
on the substance of the dispute,   refer   the   parties   to   mediation   as   
per the provisions of this Act, unless it finds that prima facie no valid 
agreement exists, or there is good reason why, notwithstanding such 
agreement, the parties should not be referred to mediation. 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
In Sec. 9 (1) Not withstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in force, a Court or Tribunal, before which an act ion is 
brought in a matter which is the subject of an agreement to submit to 
Mediation shall, if a party to such agreement or any person claiming 
through or under him so applies not later than the date of 
submitting his first statement on the substance of the dispute have 
to be omitted.  Without applying by the parties if there is any such 
647

Mediation Agreement the matter should be referred to Mediation wi thout 
consent or willingness of any other parties thereto. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 3 – MEDIATOR 
…..…………………………… 
 
S.10 Appointment of mediator 
 
(1)    Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, a person of any nationality may 
be a mediator. 
 
Provided that mediator of any foreign nationality shall possess 
such equivalent qualification, experience and accreditation as may be 
specified for domestic mediators by the Council by way of regulations. 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
This provision will pave the way for introduction of foreign nati onals in 
the legal sector, through the route of mediation, which is not desir able and 
this is likely to be opposed by legal fraternity. 
 
(2)    The parties are free to agree on a procedure for appointing the mediator 
or mediators. 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
Here we have to make it clear that whether the consent of the parties is 
necessary for the reference to Mediation or not?   
If Consent is necessary then it must be a written agreement and by whom 
it will be taken and when and where it will be taken who will k eep those 
documents and its confidentiality. These matters must be clarified in the 
Mediation Bill itself.    
648

If the consent is not mandatory for conducting Mediation, then it will 
affect the conducting of Pre-Litigation Mediation as per this Mediati on 
Bill.  
If the Pre-Litigation Mediation is compulsory and mandatory in any ci vil 
proceedings or any other compoundable criminal proceedings whic h has 
the civil flavor, the consent of parties will become immaterial.  
These aspects should be clarified and specified in this Mediation Bill.  
It is also to be clarified that how a person can initiate the Pre-Li tigation 
Mediation proceedings and what are the procedures to be complied with by 
the parties.   
CHAPTER 4 - MEDIATION PROCESS 
………………….…………………………… 
 
S.20 Time-limit for completion of mediation 
 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being 
in force, mediation under this Act shall be completed within a period of 
ninety days from the date of commencement of mediation. 
 
(2) The period for mediation prescribed under sub- section (1) may be 
extended for a further period of ninety days with the consent of parties. 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
The time limit is too long and can be limited to 60+60 days 
S.21 Mediated Settlement Agreement 
  
(1)   Mediated Settlement Agreement ‖means and includes an agreement or 
interim agreement in writing between some or all of the parties resulting 
from mediation, settling some or all of the disputes between such 
parties, and authenticated by the mediator. 
 
Provided that the terms of the mediated settlement agreement may 
extend beyond the disputes referred to mediation. 
 
Explanation. — A mediated settlement agreement which is void under 
the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), shall not be deemed to be 
lawful settlement agreement within the meaning of mediated settlement 
649

agreement. 
 
(2) Where a Mediated Settlement Agreement referred to in sub- section (1) 
is reached between the parties in regard to all the issues or some of the 
issues, the same shall be reduced in writing and signed by the parties. 
 
(3)    Subject to provisions of section 26 and 27, the agreement of the parties so 
signed 
 
(i)      in case of institutional mediation shall be submitted to the mediator 
who shall, after authenticating the settlement agreement, forward 
the same with a covering letter signed by him, to the mediation 
service provider and also provide a copy of the same to the parties. 
 
(ii) in all other cases, shall be submitted to the mediator who shall, 
after authenticating the settlement agreement, provide a copy of 
the mediated settlement agreement to all the parties . 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
It is not clear as to who should be the custodian of Mediation settlement 
agreement in case of Ádhoc’ Mediation. 
 
Here we need some clarifications. If the Mediation is conducted through an 
Ad-Hoc Mediation process, what should be done by the Meditator with the  
original settlement agreement? The Accredited Mediator should mention 
his Accreditation Number issued by the Mediation Council of India whil e 
authenticating the Settlement Agreement and also producing for 
registration before the District Mediation Authority.   
The District Mediation Authority should maintain a list of Accr edited 
Mediators in the District as well as whole State and verify w ith the same 
while producing the Settlement Agreement for Registration by any body at 
any point of time.    
Who should keep the original after furnishing the authenticated copies to 
the parties? These aspects to be clarified in the Mediation Bill. 
As per Sec. 21 (8) who can produce this settlement agreement for effecting 
registration before the District Mediation Authority. 
 
650

(4)  Subject to provisions of section 26 and 27, where no agreement is 
arrived at between the parties, within the time period specified in 
section 20 or where, the mediator is of the view that no settlement is 
possible,- 
 
(i) The Mediator shall submit a report to this effect to the mediation 
service provider in writing in case of institutional mediation. 
(ii) In all other cases the mediator shall prepare a report to this effect 
and provide a signed copy to all the parties. 
 
Provided that the report referred to in clause (i) or (ii) above shall 
not disclose the clause for failure of the parties, to reach a settlement, or 
any other matter or thing referring to their conduct, during mediation. 
 
(5)    The parties, may, at any time during the mediation process, make an 
interim or partial agreement with respect to any of the issues forming 
part of the subject matter of the mediation. 
 
(1) Any mediated Settlement Agreement under this section shall also 
include a settlement agreement resulting from online mediation and 
duly signed by the parties by way of secure electronic signature or 
otherwise and authenticated by the mediator in the like manner. 
 
(7)   For the purpose of record, mediated settlement agreement arrived at 
between the parties other than those arrived  in  Court  annexed  
mediation  centres or under section 21 and 22E of the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987 shall be registered with the Authorities constituted 
under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 and such Authorities 
shall issue a unique registration number to such settlements as specified 
by regulations to be made by the Authorities. 
 
Provided that the mediated settlement agreement reached between 
the parties under sub-section (2) shall be registered within the territorial 
jurisdiction of the Court or Tribunal of competent jurisdiction to decide 
the subject matter of dispute. 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
There is no mediation for Lok Adalat or Permanent Lok Adalat. Hence 
reference to S.21 and 22E is misplaced. 
 
651

Here it is very much necessary to clarify that in a case of cour t annexed 
mediation what to do with this settlement agreement and all such  
procedures before the Court also should mention in this Bill. Otherw ise it 
will create problem in future.  
It is to be noted that as per this Mediation Bill it is clear that the Mediated 
Settlement Agreement is equallent to judgment and decree and if that be so 
there need not pass any further decree in a matter considering th e 
settlement agreement in case of court annexed mediation.  
This has to be clarified and explained as proviso to this section. 
 
(8)  Registration referred to in sub-section (7) shall be made by either of the 
parties, mediator or mediation service provider within a period of 
ninety days from the date of receipt of copy of mediated settlement 
agreement: 
 
Provided that mediated settlement agreement may be registered 
after expiry of period of ninety days on payment of such fee as may be 
specified by the Authorities by way of regulations. 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
This provision may give rise to illegal activity insofar as there is likelihood 
of parties bringing fraudulent settlements for registration. Ther e has to be 
a mechanism for ensuring the authenticity of settlement agreement. All 
mediators can be given a registration number/Accreditation number, like 
Bar Council Roll No. and Mediators should be directed to mandatorily 
give the roll number in the settlement agreement.  
 
Is the original should be produced for registration? The bill is silent on this 
aspect. 
 
Thereafter the District Mediation Authority should give a Certifi cate 
bearing the details of parties, summary of settlement including the name of 
competent court jurisdiction, the registration number, the Accreditati on 
Number/ Enrolment Number of the Mediator and by whom it was 
produced and accepted from the Authority including the registrati on. The 
party concerned can file the execution petition and should insist to produce 
652

this registration certificate along with the E.P. Any court sh ould not 
accept the E.P. in file without producing the Registration Certificate issued 
by the District Mediation Authority as contemplated in the Bill.  
Otherwise any party may create any fake settlement agreement and 
produce it for the registration and if it is registered t hat cannot be 
challenged later. 
 
S.22 Confidentiality 
 
(1)    Subject to the exceptions provided in this Act, the mediator, the parties 
and participants in the mediation shall keep confidential the following 
matters relating to the mediation proceedings: 
 
(i)   acknowledgements, opinions, suggestions, promises, proposals, 
apologies and admissions made during the mediation; 
 
(ii) acceptance of or willingness to accept proposals made or exchanged 
in the mediation; 
 
(iii)   documents prepared solely for the purpose of mediation. 
 
(2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being 
in force, the mediator, the mediation service provider and the parties to 
the mediation agreement shall maintain confidentially of all mediation 
proceedings except mediated settlement agreement. 
 
(3) Any audio or video recording of the mediation proceedings shall be 
kept confidential by the parties and the participants including the 
mediator. 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
Mediation proceedings are to be confidential. There is no question of audio 
or video recording of mediation. So this provision is to be deleted. 
 
(4)   No party to  the  mediation  shall  in  any proceedings before a Court or 
Tribunal , rely on or introduce as evidence any information or 
communication set forth in clauses (i) to (iii) of sub- section (1), 
including any information in electronic form, or verbal communication 
and the Court or Tribunal shall not take cognizance of such information 
or evidence. 
653

 
Provided that evidence or information that is otherwise admissible 
or subject to discovery in proceedings will not become inadmissible or 
protected from discovery solely by reason of its disclosure or use in a 
mediation. 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
Proviso is vague and likely to give rise to litigation. We need some  
clarification in this proviso.  
 
S.23 Admissibility, Privilege against Disclosure 
 
 (1)  No mediator or participant in the mediation, including experts and 
advisors engaged for the purpose of the mediation and persons 
involved in the administration of the mediation, shall at any time be 
permitted, or compelled to disclose to any Court or Tribunal, or in any 
adjudicatory proceedings by whatsoever description, any 
communication in mediation, or to state the contents or conditions of 
any document or nature or conduct of parties during mediation 
including the content of negotiations or offers or counter offers with 
which they have become acquainted during the mediation. 
 
Provided that nothing in this section and section 22 shall protect 
from disclosure information sought or provided to prove or dispute a 
claim or complaint of professional misconduct or malpractice based on 
conduct occurring during the mediation. 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
Mediator should be given protection from prosecution and Civil liabi lity 
for anything done in mediation or for the consequences of settlement 
agreement. 
 
 
 
 
654

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - 5 
STATUS OF MEDIATED SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT 
………………………………………………………………… 
 
S.28 Status of mediated settlement agreement  
 
(1)    A mediated settlement agreement resulting from a mediation under this 
part signed by the parties and authenticated by the mediator shall be 
final and binding on the parties and persons claiming under them 
respectively and enforceable in law. 
 
(2)   Subject to the provisions of section 29, it shall be enforced in accordance 
with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in the same 
manner as if it were a judgment and/ or decree passed by a court, and 
may accordingly be relied on by any of parties or persons claiming 
through them, by way of defense, set off or otherwise in any legal 
proceedings. 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
S. 29[2] – What about criminal matters settled in mediation? 
 
655

Is it possible that if the Mediation Bill provides a provision th at the 
Settlement Agreement executed in Mediation with respect to the crimi nal 
matters by way of Pre Litigation Mediation or Court Referred Me diation 
will have the same effect and status of the Award which may be passed as 
per Sec.21 of The Legal Services Authorities Act. 
 
For the settlement of criminal cases compoundable in nature, the non-
compoundable cases which the court gives permission, all the matter s 
related to the offences under Sec.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act, all the 
matrimonial matters including the petitions filed under Protection of  
Women from Domestic Violence Act 2005, Maintenance and Welfare of 
Parents and  Senior Citizens Act 2007,  and which are all the oth er 
criminal cases having civil flavor and disputes which are personal in 
nature which may be permitted by any court of law including any 
Appellate or Revisional Court,  may be referred to Mediation as an ADR 
mode of resolution of the disputes. For this purpose, one new provis ion 
may be added as Sec.320A in the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
All the 
settlement arrived in mediation under this provision shall have the  same 
effect and status as equallent to the Award under Section 21 of the Leg al 
Services Authorities Act. Hence sufficient amendments also to be carried 
out in the Code of Criminal Procedure for the strict compliance of th is 
provision and by which the Pre-Litigation Mediation rights als o will be 
protected under this provision. For the purpose of execution of th e Award 
which are executed under this provision shall be either crim inal or civil in 
nature/manner which may be opted by the parties concerned and t he court 
concerned can initiate deterrent punishment by awarding sentence for  2 
years which may be extended to 3 years in accordance with the  gravity of 
offence and the court can pass any order for the recovery of an y amount as 
compensation from any party for the compliance of the settlement t erms 
arrived between the parties in Mediation. 
This aspect should be clarified here.   
 
There should be a corresponding amendment in the concerned Stamp Act  
providing for the stamp duty payable for the MSA or provid e the stamp 
duty payable in this bill itself. 
 
656

Here it should be clarified that who can produce the stamp paper for 
preparing the settlement agreement. The time/period of production o f 
stamp paper is also to be clarified. Since it is a Settlement Agreem ent, the 
stamp duty payable may prefer for preparing a valid agreement and  the 
same can be considered while drafting the Rules in the Act. 
 
S.29 Challenge to mediated settlement agreement 
 
(1)   Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, in any case in 
which the mediated settlement agreement is arrived between the parties 
and is sought to be challenged by either of the parties, he may apply to 
the Court or Tribunal of competent jurisdiction before which the subject-
matter of dispute or other proceeding would lie. 
 
(2) A mediated settlement agreement can be challenged only on all or any of 
the following ground of: 
(i) Fraud; or 
(ii) Corruption; or 
(iii) Gross impropriety; or Impersonation. 
 
(3)   An application for challenging the mediated settlement agreement may 
not be made after three months have elapsed from the date on which the 
party making that application has received the copy of mediated 
settlement agreement under section 21(3) of this Act. 
 
Provided that if the Court is satisfied that the applicant was 
prevented by sufficient cause from making the application within the 
said period of three months it may entertain the application within a 
further period of thirty days, but not thereafter. 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
There is no point in providing that MSA can be challenged  only within 
120 days. Once the party comes to know that the MSA is vitiated, he 
should be permitted to challenge it within so many days from date o f 
knowledge. 
 
S.30 Costs 
 
Unless otherwise agreed by the parties all costs of mediation, including 
657

the fees of the mediator and the charges of the mediation service 
provider shall be borne equally by the parties. 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
Needs clarity on costs of Adhoc mediation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 7  
MEDIATION COUNCIL OF INDIA  
……………………………………………… 
 
S.35 Establishment and Incorporation of Mediation Council of India 
 
(1)  The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official gazette, 
establish for the purposes of this Act, a Council to be known as 
Mediation Council of India to perform duties and discharge functions 
specified under this Act. 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
Now it is clear that only one Council is going to establish for the e ntire 
activities of Mediation in India. It may create many issues in future and 
the sole body cannot control all over India all the matters relate d to 
Mediation. So as a matter of reality we can divide the entire nation as 4 or 
5 Zones and select one participant from each Zones from the Mediators  
658

Fraternity and include them also in the Mediation Council of Indian to 
represent the entire Nation for the development of Mediation. 
Apart from constitution of the State Mediation Authority and District 
Mediation Authority also should be included as another provision in th is 
Mediation Bill.  
While drafting the Rules and regulations the rights and liabili ties and 
constitution of the State Authority and District Authority may be 
mentioned in detail.  
Effective functioning of the mediation mechanism requires Medi ation 
council at the National level, State Authority at State level and District 
authority at district level. See for ex. LSA Act, 1986, Consumer prote ction 
Act, 2019.  
 
When the entire nation is trying to decentralize the power, Media tion Bill 
attempts to concentrate power in one body, which will not be conducive 
from growth of Mediation in India. Mediation activities all over the nation 
cannot be controlled by one Council at the national level.  
 
Ideally, the State Authority should have a High Court judge as th e 
President and one District Judge as the Executive Director. Th ree 
Mediators can be nominated as Member of the State Authority. 
 
Similarly in district authority, the PDJ can be the President, the Sub Judge 
can be the Secretary and three mediators can be included as members. 
 
(2)   The Council shall be a  body  corporate  by  the name aforesaid, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to th e 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
moveable and immoveable, and to enter in to contract, and shall, by the 
said name, sue or be sued. 
 
(3) The head office of the Council shall be at Delhi or at such other place as 
may be notified by the Central Government. 
 
(4)    The Council may, in consultation with the Central Government, 
establish offices at other places in India and abroad. 
 
659

S.36 Composition of the Mediation Council of India 
 
(1)  The Council shall consist of the following members: 
 
(a) A person who has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or, Chief 
Justice of a High Court or, a Judge of a High Court or an eminent 
person, having special knowledge and experience in the conduct or 
administration of mediation, to be appointed by the Central 
Government–Chairperson; 
 
(b)    a person having knowledge and experience in law related to 
alternate dispute resolution mechanisms, to be appointed by the 
Central Government–Full Time Member; 
 
(c) an eminent academician having experience in research  
and  teaching  in  the field of mediation and alternate dispute 
resolution laws, to be appointed by the Central Government- Full 
Time Member; 
 
(d)  Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Legal 
Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice or his representative not below 
the rank of Joint Secretary–Member, ex officio; 
 
(e) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance or his representative not below 
the rank of Joint Secretary– Member, ex officio; and 
 
(f) Chief Executive Officer – Member - Secretary, ex officio. 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
The composition of the Mediation Council does not have space for 
mediators. This is a patent lacunae which should be cured. Mediators  from 
each Zone of the Country should be made members of the Council.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
660

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - 8 
MEDIATION SERVICE PROVIDER AND MEDIATION INSTITUTES 
…………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
S.44 Functions of Mediation Service Providers 
 
The Mediation Service Providers shall perform the following functions, 
namely – 
 
(a) Accreditation of mediators and maintain panel of mediators. 
 
(b) to provide the services of mediator for conduct of mediation. 
 
(c) to provide all facilities, secretarial assistance and infrastructure 
for the efficient conduct of mediations. 
 
(d) to promote good professional and ethical conduct amongst 
mediator. 
 
(e) Registration of mediated settlement agreement in accordance 
with the provisions of section21. 
 
661

(f) Filing of mediated settlement agreement in depository as per 
the provisions of section 25 of this Act. 
 
(g) such other functions as may be provided by the Council by 
way of regulations. 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
S.44 (f) to be deleted as S.25 is seen deleted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SCHEDULE - II 
 
[Refer section 7] 
DISPUTES WHICH MAY NOT BE FIT FOR RESOLUTION THROUGH 
MEDIATION UNDER PART 1 
………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
(i) Disputes of serious and specific allegations of fraud, fabricati on of 
documents, forgery, impersonation, coercion. 
 
(ii) Disputes relating to claims against minors, deities, persons with 
intellectual disabilities, [under clause (2) of the schedule and per sons 
with disability having high support needs (as defined in Sect ion 2 (t)] 
of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, per sons with 
mental illness, as defined by Section 2 (s) of the Mental Health Care 
Act, 2017, persons of unsound mind, in relation to whom proceedings 
are to be conducted under Order 32 Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and 
suits for declaration of title against government. 
 
662

(iii) Disputes involving prosecution for non- compoundable criminal 
offences except with the permission of the court. 
 
(iv) Disputes matters which are prohibited under any law or is in c onflict 
with public policy or is opposed to basic notions of morality or justice; 
 
(v) Complaints or proceedings, initiated before any statutory authority or  
body, in relation to registration, discipline, misconduct of any 
practitioner, or other registered professional, of whatever description, 
such as legal practitioner, medical practitioner, dentist, architec t, 
chartered accountant, or any in relation to any other profession, which 
is regulated by provisions of law. 
 
(vi) Disputes which have the effect on rights of a third party who are not a 
party to the mediation proceedings. 
 
(vii) Any dispute relating to the validity of a patent, or proceedin gs 
relating to applications for compulsory licensing under the Pate nt 
Act, 1970; 
 
(viii) Any dispute or proceeding in relation to validity of registration  under 
the Copyright Act, 1957, or application for grant of license, or fixation 
of any fee under the said Act; 
 
(ix) Any proceeding in relation to any subject matter, falling within an y 
enactment, over which the tribunal constituted under the National 
Green Tribunals Act, 2010, has jurisdiction; 
 
(x) Any dispute relating to levy, collection, penalties or offences , in 
relation to any direct or indirect tax or refunds, enacted by any stat e 
legislature or the Parliament of India; 
 
(xi) Any investigation, inquiry or proceeding, under the Competition Act, 
2002, including proceedings before the Director General, unde r the 
Act; proceedings before the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, 
under the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 or 
Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal(TDSAT), 
 
(xii) Proceedings before appropriate Commissions, and the Appellate 
Tribunal for Electricity, under the Electricity Act,2003; 
 
(xiii) Proceedings before the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board, 
and appeals therefrom before the Appellate Tribunal under the 
663

Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act,2006; 
 
Proceedings before the Securities Exchange Board of India, and the 
Securities Appellate Tribunal, under the Securities Exchange Board of 
India Act, 1992; 
 
(xv) Land acquisition and determination of compensation under land 
acquisition laws, or any provision of law providing for land 
acquisition; 
 
(xvi) Any other subject-matter of dispute which may be notified by the 
Central Government in the Official Gazette. 
 
Explanation: The above list is indicative and not exhaustive. 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
Disputes relating to claim against minors………..  This should be removed and 
effect amendment like this …….. 
 
those matters relating to the claims against and in favour of mino rs which are 
not permitted or consented by the competent Court. 
 
 
 
 
SCHEDULE - IV 
 
(See Section 64) 
Amendments to Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996  
………………………………………………………………. 
 
1. Part III of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 containing Section 
61-81 shall be substituted as follows: 
 
61. (1)  Any provision, in any other enactment for the time being in force, 
providing for resolution of disputes through conciliation in 
accordance with the provisions of Arbitration and Conciliation   
Act, 1996   shall   be construed as reference to mediation as 
provided for under the Mediation Act, 2021. 
664

 
(2)  The Conciliation as provided for under this Act or the code of 
Civil procedure shall be construed as mediation as defined in the 
Mediation Act, 2021. 
 
62. Saving.- Notwithstanding anything contained in section 61 any 
conciliation proceedings initiated under part III of the Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act, 1996 before the commencement of the 
Mediation Act, 2021 shall be continued as such and the Mediation 
Act, 2021 shall not have any bearing on status and effect of any 
settlement arrived through such conciliation proceedings.‖ 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
In this Schedule we have to add one sub Section as .. 
Sub Section 3. The Words Mediation and Conciliation referred in Sec.4 3D 
of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 shall stand omitted.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SCHEDULE - V 
 
(See Section 65) 
Amendment to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.  
……………………………………………………………….. 
 
1. For section 89 following shall be substituted: 
 
89. Settlement of disputes outside the Court.— 
 
(1) Where it appears to the Court that there exist elements of a 
settlement which may be acceptable to the parties, the Court may at 
the first instance or at any stage thereafter, refer the parties for a 
665

possible settlement through-:— 
 
(a) arbitration; 
(b) conciliation or mediation; 
(c) judicial settlement including settlement through Lok Adalat. 
 
(2) Were a dispute has been referred— 
 
(a) for arbitration, the provisions of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996) shall apply as if the 
proceedings for arbitration were referred for settlement under 
the provisions of that Act; 
 
(b) for conciliation or mediation, the provisions of the Mediation 
Act, 2021 shall apply as if the proceedings for conciliation or 
mediation were referred for settlement under the provisions of 
that Act; 
 
(c) to Lok Adalat, the Court shall refer the same to the Lok Adalat 
in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 
20 of the Legal Services Authority Act, 1987 (39 of 1987) and 
all other provisions of that Act shall .apply in respect of the 
dispute so referred to the Lok Adalat; 
 
(d) for judicial settlement, the Court shall effect a compromise 
between the parties and shall follow such procedure as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
 
In S.89[b] the word ‘conciliation’ is not required’. 
 
In S.89[c] Judicial settlement and Lok Adalat should be separated and Lok 
Adalat should be included in (d)  
 
Herein after in CPC also we need not mention anything about 
Conciliation. So, after Sub section (a) in Sec.89 need to mention only 
“Mediation”. 
 
666

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
 
(See Section 67) 
Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 
…………………………………………………………………… 
 
1. Clause (f) of section 4 of the Act shall be substituted as follows: 
 
(f)  encourage the settlement of disputes, including by online mode, 
by way of negotiations, arbitration, mediation and conciliation; 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: - 
667

 
The word ‘conciliation’ may be deleted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC:
 -  
 
Schedule VIII may added to bring in amendment to Cr. P.C. by adding S. 
320A to it so that criminal cases can be mediated and  to give status of 
award to order passed pursuant to MSA. 
 
Sec. 320 A of the Code of Criminal Procedure: -  
 
For the settlement of criminal cases compoundable in nature, the non-
compoundable cases which the court gives permission, all the matters related to 
the offences under Sec.138 of Negotiable Instruments Act, all the matr imonial 
matters including the petitions filed under Protection of Women from Domestic 
Violence Act 2005, Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and  Senior Citizens 
668

Act 2007,  and which are all the other criminal cases having civil flavor and 
disputes which are personal in nature which may be permitted by any court of 
law including any Appellate or Revisional Court,  may be referred to Mediation 
as an ADR mode of resolution of the disputes. All the settlement arr ived in 
mediation under this provision shall have the same effect and status as equallent 
to the Award under Section 21 of the Legal Services Authorities Ac t. Pre-
Litigation Mediation rights also will be protected under this provision.  
 
Provided that for the purpose of execution of the Award which are executed 
under this provision shall be either criminal or civil in nature/manner which 
may be opted by the parties concerned and the court concerned can init iate 
deterrent punishment by awarding sentence for 2 years which may be extended 
to 3 years in accordance with the gravity of offence and the cour t can pass any 
order for the recovery of any amount as compensation for the complianc e of the 
settlement terms arrived between the parties in Mediation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: -  
 
SCHEDULE – IX – To be added 
 
Sufficient amendments to be effected in Family Court Act 1984, for 
encouraging the Settlement through Mediation. All the Settlement Agreem ents 
arrived in Mediation with respect to any of the family disputes c ivil in nature 
which are not excluded as per the Schedule – II of this Act shall have the same 
status and effect as if it was an order, judgment or decree of a c ivil court as per 
Sec.9 (4) of this Act. 
 
All Settlement Agreements arrived in Mediation with respect to the 
matters criminal in nature shall have the same status and effect as if  it was an 
669

Award under Sec.21 of the Legal Services Authority and also will follow the 
provisions of Sec.320A of Code of Criminal Procedure as mentioned in Schedule 
VIII under this Act.  
 
 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: -  
 
SCHEDULE – X: - may be added. Amendment in The Consumer Protection 
Act. 
All Mediations mentioned in this Act comes under this enactment shall be 
governed by the provisions of the Mediation Act 2021. 
 
 
 
 
Suggestions of KSMCC: -  
 
SCHEDULE – XI:- may be added.  Amendment in The Companies Act, 2013 
 
All mediations mentioned in The Companies Act, 2013 will be governed by 
the Mediation Act 2021. For that purpose, Sec.442 of The Companies A ct 
should be amended so as to give effect to the Mediation Act to conduc t the 
Mediation and Conciliation referred in Section 442. The word concil iation also 
should be removed from this provision by amending it.  
670

671

Department of Legal Affairs 
CLAUSE-WISE RESPONSES TO THE COMMENTS RECEIVED FROM 
THE VARIOUS STAKEHOLDERS 
S.No SUGGESTIONS AND 
PUBLIC COMMENTS – 
CLAUSE WISE 
MEMO NOS. AND 
NAMES  OF THE 
STAKEHOLDERS 
WHO HAVE 
PROVIDED THE 
SUGGESTIONS 
COMMENTS OF DEPARTMEN OF 
LEGAL AFFAIRS 
1  Clause 3 (a) – Definition of 
commercial dispute – 
recommendation on clarity 
that definition be applicable 
only for domestic 
commercial disputes as the 
definition for International 
Mediation may need to align 
with the Singapore 
Convention. 
 
Provisions exclude 
applicability of the Bill to 
non-commercial 
international arbitration. 
 
Clause 3 (f) – Definition of 
international mediation - this 
definition needs to be 
considered in light of Article 
1 of the Singapore 
Convention - the definition 
of international mediation in 
the Bill may need to be 
reviewed, after examining 
the international law 
implications, from the 
perspective of enforcement 
of such mediated settlement 
agreements.  
Memo No. 19 – MCPC, 
Supreme Court of 
India, Memo No. 11 – 
Shri Sriram Panchu , 
Memo No. 2 – CII, 
Memo No. 9, Justice 
(Retd.) M.L. Mehta for 
Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society , 
Memo No. 16 – CAMP. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memo No. 17 – NLU 
Delhi, Memo No. 5 – 
Shri Lalit Mohan Bhat, 
Advocate in 
collaboration with PHD 
Chamber of Commerce, 
Memo No. 6 – Shri 
Sudhanshu Batra, 
Senior Advocate in 
collaboration with PHD 
Chamber of Commerce, 
Memo No. 7 – Dr. 
Aman M. Hingorani, 
Advocate, Memo No. 8 
– Mr. JP Sengh – For 
Maadhyam 
International Council 
for Conflict Resolution , 
Memo No. 9, Justice 
(Retd.) M.L. Mehta fo r 
Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society , 
Memo No. 10 – Chitra 
Narayan, Advocate , 
Memo No. 13 – 
APCAM, Memo No. 16 
Clause 2 (1) of the Bill states that subject 
to sub -section (2) of the said clause, the 
Act s hall apply , inter-alia to mediation  
conducted in India including international 
mediation. Clause 3 (f)  of the Bill states 
that “international mediation”  means 
mediation undertaken under this Act and 
relates to a commercial dispute arising out 
of a legal re lationship and where at least 
one of the parties resides in or has a place 
of business in the country other than India. 
Accordingly, international mediation 
relating to commercial disputes, conducted 
in India would also fall within the purview 
of the present Bill.  
 
There is no proposal to extend the 
application of the bill beyond international 
mediation conducted in India relating to 
commercial disputes. 
 
 
As stated in Serial No. 35 of the issue-wise 
responses to the comments received from 
the various stakeholders in the past 
(enclosed as Annexure I  and hereinafter 
referred to as “ Previous Comments ”), 
presently it has been decided not to 
include the applicab ility of Singapore 
Convention to the Bill. 
672

– CAMP, Memo No. 20 
– Vidhi Centre for 
Legal Policy. 
 
2  Clause 2 (2) – recommend 
that exclusion of cases from 
mediation, where 
government is a party be 
done away with. 
Memo No. 17 – NLU 
Delhi, Memo No. 10 – 
Chitra Narayan, 
Advocate. 
 
As stated in Serial No . 36 of the  Previous 
Comments, disputes involving government 
are not barred from resolution by way of 
mediation. Sub - clause (2) of clause 2 of 
the Bill provides that the Mediation Act 
will not apply to a dispute other than 
commercial disputes, wherein one of the 
parties to the dispute is the Central 
Government or a State Government, or 
agencies, public bodies, corporations and 
local bodies, including entities controlled 
or owned by such Government. In other 
words, commercial disputes involving 
Government as a party a re covered for 
being resolved by recourse to mediation  as 
even the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 
does not make any such distinction.  
 
Further, proviso to sub- clause (2) of 
clause 2 provides that the Central 
Government or a State Government may 
notify dispu tes other than commercial 
which it deems appropriate for resolution 
through mediation. 
 
This provision also contemplates to factor 
in while notifying that all disputes where 
government is one of the parties are not 
referred to mediation but only those 
matters are referred which are capable of 
resolution through mediation including 
pre-litigation mediation. 
3  Clause 3 (l) – Definition of 
“mediation service provider” 
means a body or 
organization that provides 
for the conduct of mediation 
under this Act an d rules and 
regulations made thereunder, 
and are recognized by the 
Council” – Recommend that 
the word ‘ are’ may be 
replaced by ‘is’ 
Memo No. 20 – Vidhi 
Centre for Legal Policy. 
 
May be considered as the intent of the law 
is for being definite and determinative of a 
class of mediation service providers. 
4  Clause 4 - mediator needs to 
be neutral and should not 
have ability to impose a 
solution upon the parties - 
recommend to add the words 
“lacking the authority to 
impose a solution upon the 
parties to the dispute”. 
Memo No. 11 – Shri 
Sriram Panchu , Memo 
No. 7 – Dr. Aman M. 
Hingorani, Advocate , 
Memo No. 20 – Vidhi 
Centre for Legal Policy. 
 
 
Clause 18 of the Bill lays down the role of 
mediator and sub -section 2 of Section 18 
states that the parties shall be informed 
expressly by the mediator that he only 
facilitates in arriving at a decision to 
resolve a dispute and that he may not 
impose any settlement nor give any 
assurance that the mediation may result in 
673

a settlement.  
 
Clause 17 (2) further states that the 
mediator shall at all times be guided by the 
principles of objectivity and fairness and 
protect the voluntariness, confidentiality 
and self-determination of the parties, and 
the standards of professional ethical 
conduct as may be specified. 
 
Accordingly, the Bill provides for 
provisions stating that the mediator does 
not have the authority to impose a 
settlement on the parties. 
5  Clause 5  (3) - recommend 
addition of another 
subsection with the words, 
“the order of the court” 
 
 
Clause 5 (5) - recommended 
that this requires 
reconsideration as it limits 
the application of the Clause  
to disputes arising out of 
agreement - further stated 
that there could be  disputes 
which may arise other than 
out of agreement. 
 
Recommend clubbing of 
sub-section 1 and sub-section 
5. 
Memo No. 22 – 
Bombay Bar 
Association, Memo No. 
2 – CII 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memo No. 2 – CII 
Clause 9 of the Bill provides for power of 
court or tribunal to refer parties to 
mediation. The said Clause further 
provides for the procedure in such cases as 
well. Accordingly, there may not be a 
requirement of inclusion of the 
recommendation in Clause 5. 
 
The reference herein is to a mediation 
agreement and not the substantive 
agreement under which the dispute may 
arise. The present sub-clause is intended to 
allow the parties to enter into a mediation 
agreement either prior to or subsequent to 
the disputes having arisen between the 
parties. 
 
 
 
 
 
The said sub -sections have been separated 
to avoid ambiguity and retain clarity.  
 
6  Clause 6 – recommend 
avoiding making pre -
litigation mediation 
compulsory. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memo No. 15 –Bar 
Council of India, Memo 
No. 17 – NLU Delhi , 
Memo No. 5 – Shri 
Lalit Mohan Bhat, 
Advocate in 
collaboration with PHD 
Chamber of Commerce, 
Memo No. 1 – 
ASSOCHAM, Memo 
No. 7 – Dr. Aman M. 
Hingorani, Advocate , 
Memo No. 9, Justice 
(Retd.) M.L. Mehta for 
Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society , 
Memo No. 13 – 
As stated in Serial No. 1 of the Previous 
Comments, pre -litigation mediation has 
been made mandatory  before approaching 
courts or tribunals and to unclog the 
judiciary which at present is burdened 
with more than 4.5 crore pending cases. It 
may however be noted that parties are 
under no obligation to arrive at a 
settlement. Further parties have been 
allowed not only to withdraw from the 
mediation after the two sessions but also to 
seek interim relief from the court or 
tribunals before undertaking or during the 
continuation of mediation to safeguard 
their interest. Thus, the  voluntariness in 
the arrival of settlement has not been 
interfered with under the provisions of the 
674

 
 
Clause 6 (3) (iii) - 
recommend replacing the 
word “and” with “or”, as 
requirements are not 
cumulative in nature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clause 6 (5) - recommend 
adding the words “ and 
mediation service 
provider” after “mediators” - 
thereby allowing for 
reference to mediators 
empanelled with private 
mediation service providers 
(registered with the Council), 
besides ad hoc mediators. 
APCAM, Memo No. 20 
– Vidhi Centre for 
Legal Policy. 
 
Memo No. 19 – MCPC, 
Supreme Court of India 
 
Bill. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As submitted in Serial No.  5  of the 
Previous Comments , the intent is that 
mediator should meet either of the criteria.  
 
For further clarity,  the addition of the 
word “either” may be considered pursuant 
to which subclause (3)  would read as 
follows, “for the purposes, of subsections 
(1) and (2), unless otherwise agreed upon 
by the parties, a mediator either –…… 
 
 
 
 
As submitted in Serial No. 27 of the 
Previous Comments, Clause 6(5) has to be 
read along with clause 6 (4) and  for the 
purpose of clause 6 (5), the Courts or the 
authorities would be the mediation ser vice 
provider (MSP), hence there  may not be a 
requirement of reference to any other 
MSP. Even otherwise, section 42 (a) 
includes the function of the m ediation 
service provider as “ac credit and maintain 
panel of mediators” as well. 
  
7  Clause 7 – Recommend 
reduction of exclusions – 
modifications – First proviso 
excludes non -compoundable 
offences such as Section 
498-A, IPC, which are 
otherwise quashed upon 
settlement by Courts under 
inherent powers. 
 
 
 
 
 
Proviso in Clause 7 – 
“Provided further that the 
outcome of such mediation 
shall not be deemed  to be a 
judegment or decree of 
court referred to in sub -
section (2) of Section 28 and 
Memo No. 17 – NLU 
Delhi, Memo No. 6 – 
Shri Sudhanshu Batra, 
Senior Advocate in 
collaboration with PHD 
Chamber of Commerce, 
Memo No. 7 – Dr. 
Aman M. Hingorani, 
Advocate, Memo No. 8 
– Mr. JP Sengh – For 
Maadhyam 
International Council 
for Conflict 
Resolution., Memo No. 
11 – Shri Sriram 
Panchu 
 
Memo No. 20 – Vidhi 
Centre for Legal Policy. 
 
Clause 7(2) stipulates that if the Central 
Government is satisfied that it is necessary 
or expedient so to do, it may, by 
notification amend the First Schedule. 
Accordingly, based on the impl ementation 
and review of the working, suitable 
modifications can be carried out by the 
Central Government under Clause 7 (f). 
 
Additionally, t he power to quash 
proceedings for offences by using inherent 
powers of constitutional courts is 
distinguishable fr om settlement in 
mediation. The said power continues to be 
available with the constitutional courts. 
 
 
 
The typographical error would be required 
to be rectified. 
675

shall be further considered 
by the court in accordance 
with the law for the time 
being in force.” - the word 
‘judgement’ may be replaced 
with ‘judgment’ 
8  Clause 8 – recommend that a 
time period should be added 
within which the mediation 
should commence after 
receiving interim order as 
provided for in Section 9 of 
the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996. 
 
Recommend that the term 
“exceptional circumstances” 
in Clause 8 (1) may be 
deleted and the details of the 
interim relief that can be 
sought similar to Section 9 of 
the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 may 
be included.  
 
Clause 8 (2) – recommend 
deletion of the term “if 
deemed appropriate”.  
 
 
 
Recommend providing of a 
provision for appeal from 
orders under Section 8. 
Memo No. 17 – NLU 
Delhi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memo No. 2 – CII 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memo No. 2 – CII, 
Memo No. 13 – 
APCAM, Memo No. 20 
– Vidhi Centre for 
Legal Policy. 
 
Memo No. 2 – CII, 
Memo No. 13 - 
APCAM 
 
 
Suggestion may be suitably considered by 
the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As stated in Serial No. 28 of the Previous 
Comments, Clause 8 of the Bill empowers 
the parties to seek interim relief in case of 
exceptional circumstances both before the 
commencement of or during the 
continuation of mediation. What 
circumstance would cons titute exceptional 
will depend on case to case basis.  
 
Accordingly, the details of what relief can 
be granted , has not been stipulated 
in/limited by the Bill. 
 
 
The intention for inclusion of the term is 
to allow the Court to retain the discretion , 
while granting or rejecting interim relief,  
to consider referring the disputes to 
mediation based on the existent 
circumstances and keeping in view party 
autonomy. 
 
As stated in Serial No. 15 of the Previous 
Comments, the intention is to limit the 
litigation trail for any such interim orders 
and focus on settlement through 
mediation. In the absence of any specific 
provision for appeal, no appeal would 
admittedly lie. 
9  Clause 9 (1) - recommend to 
add the following, “or if the 
court deems it fit that it is 
appropriate for the parties to 
settle the dispute” 
Memo No. 22 – 
Bombay Bar 
Association, Memo No. 
17 – NLU Delhi. 
Suggestion may be considered by the 
Committee by addition of the words “suo 
moto”.  
 
Since the parties have been unable to 
resolve their disputes in pre -litigation 
mediation, subsequent reference to 
mediation, which is meaningful, should be 
upon their request. However, the 
suggestion may be considered in light of 
676

the intention. 
10  Clause 10 – recommend 
preference to Indian 
nationals as media tors by 
stating “unless otherwise 
agreed by the parties, a 
person of Indian nationality 
shall be the mediator” 
 
Timelines prescribed under 
Clause 10 (4) relating to 
appointment of mediator are 
short. 
 
Clause 10 states that 
qualifications etc. of the 
mediators would be 
determined by the Council – 
recommend that the 
qualification etc. should be 
decided in consultation with 
judiciary. 
 
Recommend deletion of the 
term “provided that 
mediator of any foreign 
nationality shall possess 
such qualification, 
experience and accreditation 
as may be specified” 
 
Recommend that it should be 
stated that appointment of 
mediator needs to be by a 
written agreement and in 
case of opting out of pre -
litigation mediation, the said 
act should result in costs 
being imposed. 
Memo No. 1 5 –Bar 
Council of India, Memo 
No. 17 – NLU Delhi. 
 
 
 
 
 
Memo No. 5 – Shri 
Lalit Mohan Bhat, 
Advocate in 
collaboration with PHD 
Chamber of Commerce. 
 
Memo No. 1 – 
ASSOCHAM, Memo 
No. 3 – FICCI. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memo No. 2 – CII 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memo No. 8 – Mr. JP 
Sengh – For Maadhyam 
International Council 
for Conflict Resolution. 
 
 
As stated in Serial No. 24 of the Previous 
Comments, the intent is to allow greater 
scope and participation of pool of 
mediators. Limiting the scope as stated 
would restrict the said pool largely to  
mediators of Indian nationality only. The 
provision also upholds the principle of 
party autonomy. 
 
 
 
Considering that the Mediation Service 
Provider are intended to be professionally 
managed, the timelines are intended to 
enable expeditious appointment of  
mediators. 
 
 
The Mediation Council, which would be 
laying down the qualifications, would be a 
professional body having members of 
varied experience as per Clause 34 of the 
bill.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The term has been included to ensu re that 
the mediators of foreign nationality are 
equipped with certain minimum 
qualification, skills, experience and 
accreditation to deal with disputes . The 
qualifications in this regard  would be as 
specified by the  Mediation Council 
keeping in view the treatment meted out to 
India based  mediators dealing with 
mediations in foreign jurisdictions. 
 
 
Clause 5 states that the mediation 
agreement should be in writing and Clause 
20 provides for costs in case any party 
fails to a ttend first two sessions of  
mediation to protect voluntariness of the 
parties. 
11  Clause 11 and Clause 12 – 
recommend that the 
mediation service provided 
not bound by views of the 
parties, time period of 
disclosure by mediator  and 
Memo No. 2 – CII 
 
The objective of the Bill is to facilitate the 
regime of mediation by allowing party 
autonomy in matters of mediation. With 
the said objective in mind, the Bill intends 
to allow leeway for procedural aspects. 
677

other time periods  to be 
specified in the statute. 
12  Clause 13 (ii) – recommend 
that there is no need to allow 
“any other person” to be able 
to challenge the mandate of a 
mediator. 
 
Recommend that the 
procedure for termination of 
mandate of a mediator by the 
mediation service provider 
may be specified in 
regulations to be formulated 
by the Mediation Council to 
enable unifo rmity- 
consequent amendment in 
Clause 13 and 40 of the Bill.  
Memo No. 17 – NLU 
Delhi. 
 
 
 
 
Memo No. 2 – CII 
 
Clause 13 enables only the mediation 
service provider to consider terminating 
the mandate of mediator upon receipt of 
information from various categories of 
persons. Per se there is no challenge 
procedure and the discretion is conferred 
on the mediation service provider. 
 
There is ample clarity in the Bill with 
regard to termination of the mandate of the 
mediators in certain eventualities . It is for 
the Mediation Service Provider to deal 
with the provisions under their rules. 
 
13  Clause 14 – recommend that 
provision be made for 
appointment of substituted 
mediator the parties don’t 
agree on the name of 
substituted mediator within 
the stipulated period. 
Memo No. 22 – 
Bombay Bar 
Association. 
In such a situation, the procedure as 
stipulated in Clause 10 (3) would apply. 
14  Clause 15 – Linking the 
mediation process with 
territorial jurisdiction 
restricts the process itself. 
Memo No. 5 – Shri 
Lalit Mohan Bhat, 
Advocate in 
collaboration with PHD 
Chamber of Commerce. 
 
As stated in Serial No. 29 of the Previous 
Comments, proviso to section 15 provides 
that parties may undertake mediation 
either online or outside the aforementioned 
territorial jurisdiction also. Further, 
explanation to section 15 specifies that 
mediation conducted outside the territorial 
jurisdiction or by way of online mode will 
be deemed to have taken place within the 
territorial jurisdiction of the court or 
tribunal of competent jurisdiction. 
 
Accordingly, there may not be any 
restriction as suggested. 
 
15  Clause 16 (a) – recommend 
further clarity on the time 
periods for 
acceptance/commencement 
of mediation. 
Memo No. 19 – MCPC, 
Supreme Court of 
India. 
 
In cases, where there is an existing 
agreement between the parties to settle the 
dispute to mediation,  the intent is to 
respect the said agreement and therefore it 
is proposed that mediation is deemed to 
have commenced on the day on which the 
party issues a notice to the other party 
without there being any requirement of 
any interregnum period.  
 
16  Clause 17 – recommend 
adding the definition of 
voluntariness to convey to 
the parties that they are 
themselves in charge of the 
Memo No. 4 – Ms. 
Geeta Luthra, Senior 
Advocate 
Clause 18(2) states that the parties shall be 
informed expressly by the mediator that he 
only facilitates in arriving at a decision 
resolve a dispute and that he may not 
impose any settlement not give any 
678

mediation proceedings etc. assurance that the mediation may result in 
a settlement. 
Clause 17 read with Clause 18 (2) conveys 
the voluntariness of the procedur e of 
mediation to the parties appropriately. 
17  Clause 19 (b) – 
confidentiality and privilege 
are effectively covered under 
Sections 23 and 24 of the 
Act – recommend that 
Section 19 (b) be deleted to 
avoid mediators being 
involuntarily summoned to 
court for matters not covered 
under clause 24 of the Bill. 
 
 
 
Clause 51 - Mediators 
immunity 
Memo No. 19 – MCPC, 
Supreme Court of 
India, 
Memo No. 11 – Shri 
Sriram Panchu.  
 
As submitted in Serial No. 31 of the 
Previous Comments, these two clauses, i.e. 
clause 19 (b) and clause 24 deal with two 
different possible situations. Clause 19 (b) 
deals with the situation wherein the parties 
may explicitly agree to present the 
mediator as a witness or otherwise in an 
arbitral or judicial proceeding. Thus, it 
deals with the rights of parties to do so and 
accordingly party autonomy prevails. 
Clause 24 on the other hand deals with the 
situation wherein mediator and others are 
not to disclose or withhold information on 
any communication to which they may be 
privy during the mediation proceedings 
and it contemplates situations beyond the 
purview of clause 19 (b). 
 
 
As stated in Serial No. 7 of the Previous 
Comments, Clause 51 of t he Bill provides 
for aspects relating to immunity including 
for mediators. 
18  Clause 20 (1) - recommend 
addition of the words “with 
the appointed mediator” at 
the end of clause 20 (1).  
 
 
Clause 20 (2) – recommend a 
provision for non -starter 
mediation. 
 
 
Clause 20 -costs in case of 
failure to attend first two 
mediation sessions , Does it 
apply to all mediations or 
only compulsory pre -
litigation mediation as 
provided for in Clause 6. 
 
 
 
 
Clause 20 (2) – Where any 
party fails to attend the first 
two mediation sessions 
without any reasonable 
clause which resulted in the 
Memo No. 19 – MCPC, 
Supreme Court of India 
 
 
 
 
Memo No. 16 – CAMP. 
 
 
 
 
Memo No. 15 –Bar 
Council of India, Memo 
No. 17 – NLU Delhi , 
Memo No. 1 – 
ASSOCHAM, Memo 
No. 10 – Chitra 
Narayan, Advocate. 
 
Clause 21 states that the time limit for 
completion of mediation commences from 
the date fixed for the first appearance 
before the mediator. Clause 21 read with 
clause 20 can be said to clarify that the 
mediation sessions are to be understood as 
being before the mediator only.  
 
As stated in Serial No. 14 of the Previous 
Comments, the procedural aspects on 
timelines etc. with respect to nonstarter 
mediations can be considered at the time 
of adoption of institutional rules by the 
Mediation Service Providers.  
 
As stated in Serial N o. 14 of the Previous 
Comments, the provision is incorporated 
to ensure that parties get sufficient time to 
understand the nuances of mediation 
process before opting out. This provision 
will also help in bringing the required 
behavioral change amongst the litigants 
i.e. from pro -litigation to pro -mediation 
approach. 
 
The imposition of costs for failure to 
attend initial two mediation sessions 
679

failure of mediation, the 
court or tribunal, in 
subsequent litigation on the 
same subject matter between 
the parties, may take the said 
conduct of party into 
consideration and impose 
such costs a s it deems fit.” – 
the word “ it” may be added 
as aforesaid. 
applies for all types of mediations 
including pre-litigation mediation. 
 
The said suggestion can be considered by 
the Committee for further clarity. 
 
 
19  Clause 21 - period of 180 
days is excessive. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clause 21 (2) – both sub -
sections stipulate 180 days – 
typographical error. 
 
 
 
Clause 21 – Recommend that 
parties should be allowed to 
extend the period at their 
discretion in order to enable 
settlement of complex 
disputes. 
Memo No. 15 – Bar 
Council of India, Memo 
No. 4 – Ms. Geeta 
Luthra, Senior 
Advocate, Memo No. 
17 – NLU Delhi, Memo 
No. 1 – ASSOCHAM. 
 
Memo No. 17 – NLU 
Delhi. 
 
 
 
 
Memo No. 13 – 
APCAM, Memo No. 20 
– Vidhi Centre for 
Legal Policy. 
 
 
As stated in Serial No. 10 of the Previous 
Comments, the intention is to give the 
parties sufficient outer limit of time to 
consider settling the matter through 
mediation, especially complex matters. 
There i s no bar to the parties settling the 
matter in mediation prior to the expiry of 
the outer limit of time provided. 
 
 
In subsection (2), the word “further” has 
been used and therefore, the  said period of 
180 days therein may be read together 
with the said word “further” meaning 
thereby that the further extended period 
beyond the original 180 days period can be 
by a maximum of additional 180 days. 
 
The intent is to ensure the mediation 
procedure is time bound. Therefore, a 
fixed time period has been stipulated. In 
case it is left to the discretion of the 
parties, the inten t of expeditious and time 
bound settlement may get diluted. 
 
20  Clause 22 (1) – recommend 
deletion of sub -section 2 and 
addition of words “signed by 
then in sub-section 1” 
 
Clause 22 (3) to include 
various aspects such as not 
barred by law, to be signed 
etc. 
 
 
Clause 22 (7) - recommend 
that registration of mediated 
settlement agreements 
should not be compulsory 
and there should be a 
depository created where 
mediated settlement 
agreements can be 
voluntarily and without any 
Memo No. 22 – 
Bombay Bar 
Association 
 
 
 
 
Memo No. 15 –Bar 
Council of India. 
 
 
 
 
Memo No. 11 – Shri 
Sriram Panchu , Memo 
No. 17 – NLU Delhi , 
Memo No. 5 – Shri 
Lalit Mohan Bhat, 
Advocate in 
collaboration with PHD 
The separation of the provision of 
signature in a sub -section is inte nded to 
avoid ambiguity and prolixity. 
 
 
 
 
The said provisions are provided for in the 
Explanation to Clause 22 (1) and Clause 
22 (2) 
 
 
 
 
As stated in Serial No. 6 of the Previous 
Comments, registration of mediated 
settlement agreements would enable 
having the repository of the said 
agreement is and also lend 
authenticity/credibility to the mediated 
680

compulsion be electronically 
uploaded at the discretion of 
the parties. 
 
 
 
 
Clause 22 (8) – recommend 
define authorized 
representative and 
consequence of non -
registration 
Chamber of Commerce, 
Memo No. 2 – CII, 
Memo No. 7 – Dr. 
Aman M. Hingorani, 
Advocate, Memo No. 9, 
Justice (Retd.) M.L. 
Mehta for Delhi 
Dispute Resolution 
Society, Memo No. 10 
– Chitra Narayan, 
Advocate Memo No. 12 
– AMIKA. 
 
 
settlement agreement, if either of the 
parties used to enforce it or challenge it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As submitted in Serial No. 6 of the 
Previous Comments, the detaile d mode 
and manner of registration, including 
recommendations, may be adopted by the 
Mediation Council after due consultation  
with the Central Government. 
 
 
 
21  Clause 23 (4) – recommend 
deletion of the word 
“registration” be deleted. 
 
 
 
 
Recommend providing  
consequences for not 
maintaining confidentiality. 
 
 
Recommend addition of 
another sub -clause stating 
that disclosure would be 
allowed in case warranted 
for overriding considerations 
of public policy 
notwithstanding 
confidentiality obligations 
provided in Section 23 
Memo No. 19 – MCPC, 
Supreme Court of India 
 
 
 
 
 
Memo No. 1 
ASSOCHAM 
 
 
 
Memo No. 4 – Geeta 
Luthra, Senior 
Advocate. 
As stated in Serial No. 16 of the Previous 
comments, Clause 22 (7) of the Bill that 
the mediated agreement shall be registered 
in such manner as may be specified. The 
regulations/rules relating to the 
registration to be adopted by the Council, 
may if deemed appropriate, consider 
specifying the extent to which the content 
of mediated settlement agreement may be 
disclosed therein. 
 
In case the mediator or mediation service 
provider breaches confidentiality 
obligations as provided under the Bill, the 
consequences could be detailed in the 
regulations to be adopted relating  to the 
said entities. 
 
There may not be a large possibility of 
public policy being involved  in disputes 
submitted for mediation. Any such wide 
exception to confidentiality may dilute the 
intent of protection of confidentiality. 
22  Clause 24 – Recommend 
deletion of certain phrases  
since they dilute 
confidentiality in mediation. 
 
 
 
The word “party” should be 
added after “mediator or 
participant” in clause 24 (1) 
Memo No. 6 – Shri 
Sudhanshu Batra, 
Senior Advocate in 
collaboration with PHD 
Chamber of Commerce. 
 
 
Memo No. 20, VIDHI 
Confidentiality in mediation proceedings 
is protected and only in situations such as 
professional misconduct of mediator, 
threat of offences being committed, 
information relating to domestic violence 
or child abuse, matters of public health or 
safety etc., could a disclosure be required. 
Accordingly, only in serious and limited 
conditions would such disclosures be 
required. 
681

 
The intent is to apply the section only to 
mediators and participants. 
23  Clause 25 (c) – recommend 
replacement of the words 
“has not received any 
communication from such 
party” by the words “makes 
a declaration under ( b) 
above” 
Memo No. 22 – 
Bombay Bar 
Association. 
The subsections (b) and (c) are intended 
for different situations and therefore it 
may not be appropriate to link the said 
subsections. 
24  Clause 28 (2) - recommend 
applicability of the 
Singapore Convention to the 
provisions of the Bill. 
 
 
Memo No. 19 – MCPC, 
Supreme Court of 
India. 
 
Memo No. 11 – Shri 
Sriram Panchu.  
 
 
As stated in Serial No. 35 of the Previous 
Comments, presently it has been decided 
not to include the applicability of the 
Singapore Convention to the Bill. 
25  Clause 29 (3) - recommend 
that the period of challenge 
as provided being 90 days, 
shall be computed from the 
date on which a party 
becomes aware of the fraud, 
corruption, gross 
impropriety, impersonation. 
 
Clause 29 – recommend 
adding grounds where court 
may refuse to record a 
mediated settlement 
agreement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clause 29 – Recommend 
addition of definition of 
“sufficient cause”  for delay 
in filing ch allenge and the 
ground being “gross 
impropriety” 
 
Recommend removal of 
challenge to mediated 
settlement agreement. 
Memo No. 11 – Shri 
Sriram Panchu , Memo 
No. 17 – NLU Delhi , 
Memo No. 7 – Dr. 
Aman M. Hingorani, 
Advocate. 
 
 
 
 
Memo No. 4 – Ms. 
Geeta Luthra, Senior 
Advocate, Memo No. 
17 – NLU Delhi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memo No. 3 – FICCI, 
Memo No. 1 – 
ASSOCHAM 
 
 
 
 
Memo No. 1 – 
ASSOCHAM, Memo 
No. 7 – Dr. Aman M. 
Hingorani, Advocate. 
As stated in Serial No. 13 of the Previous 
Comments, Clause 29 states that the 
limitation pe riod begins from the date 
when a party has received the copy of the 
mediated settlement agreement. The 
suggestion of making it from the date on 
which the party becomes aware would 
make its objective and amenable to 
requirement of proving the same. 
 
 
 
The explanation to Clause 22 (1) states 
that a mediated settlement agreement 
which is void under the Indian Contract 
Act, 1872, shall not be deemed to be 
lawful settlement agreement within the 
meaning of mediated settlement 
agreement. Further Clause 29 als o 
provides for challenge to a mediated 
settlement agreement on certain grounds.  
 
There is no requirement of a court to 
record a mediated settlement agreement 
under the present Bill.  
 
 
The circumstances that could constitute 
“sufficient cause” will depend on case to 
case basis. Accordingly, it may be difficult 
to have wide definition for the term.  
 
 
 
 
The grounds are intended to provide 
adequate remedy for challenging mediated 
682

settlement agreement under exceptional 
and limited circumstances only.  
26  Clause 30 – recommend not 
leaving the mediators fees to 
discretion of parties. 
Memo No. 17 – NLU 
Delhi. 
Party autonomy is intended to be protected 
by inclusion of Clause 30. Further, the fees 
of mediators would vary based on the 
location, type and nature of disputes etc.  
 
Additionally, s ince the object ive is to 
promote institutional mediation , greater 
emphasis would be  on the competition 
amongst the Mediation Service Provider s, 
which can  ensure that discretion given to 
them to provide for the fees to be charged 
for the mediation conducted by them and 
others, do not cross a reasonable level and 
is affordable. 
27  Clause 34 - Constitution of 
the Council - various 
recommendations such as 9 
members to be appointed to 
the Council, appointment of 
the Chairperson to be in 
consultation with the Chief 
Justice of India, term of the 
members to be three years 
etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
State level Mediation 
Councils. 
Memo No. 11 – Shri 
Sriram Panchu , Memo 
No. 15 –Bar Council of 
India, Memo No. 17 – 
NLU Delhi, Memo No. 
6 – Shri Sudhanshu 
Batra, Senior Advocate 
in collaboration with 
PHD Chamber of 
Commerce, Memo No. 
8 – Mr. JP Sengh – For 
Maadhyam 
International Council 
for Conflict Resolution , 
Memo No. 10 – Chitra 
Narayan, Advocate , 
Memo No. 20 – Vidhi 
Centre for Legal Policy. 
 
Memo No. 9, Justice 
(Retd.) M.L. Mehta for 
Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society. 
As stated in Serial No. 3 of the Previous 
Comments, the composition of the Council 
has been revised after consultation w ith 
stakeholders as well as the different 
Ministries and Departments. They 
eligibility of a person to be appointed as a 
Chairperson has been expanded to include 
not only judges but any person having 
adequate knowledge and professional 
experience in dealing  with problems 
relating to law alternate dispute resolution 
public affairs or administration. Similarly, 
to make it a professional body emphasis of 
the bill is on engaging domain experts as 
Members. Thus, experts in the field of 
mediation and other modes o f Alternative 
Dispute Resolution are included as full -
time Members of the Council. Besides, 
there is one representative of a recognised 
body of commerce and industry who will 
be a part-time Member. 
 
 
 
 
The central level body in the form of 
Mediation Counci l of India has been 
proposing the bill to ensure uniformity of 
standards across the country. The State 
Governments are also not be barred from 
establishing bodies/mediation centres to 
promote mediation in states. 
28  Clause 44 and 45 – 
Community mediation – 
recommend having 
mediation service providers 
to do community mediation 
as well, training of such 
mediators and need to revisit 
Memo No. 17 – NLU 
Delhi, Memo No. 5 – 
Shri Lalit Mohan Bhat, 
Advocate in 
collaboration with PHD 
Chamber of Commerce, 
Memo No. 6 – Shri 
Considering the nature of community 
mediation wherein it would involve  
interest of large number of  local citizens, 
the concerned Authority under Legal 
Services Authorities Act, 1987 or the 
District Magistrate or Sub -Divisional 
Magistrate, well versed with the ground 
683

three member panel  – 
recommend deletion of 
provisions relating to 
community mediation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommend that Settlement 
Agreement in community 
mediation should be 
enforceable as a court 
decree. 
Sudhanshu Batra, 
Senior Advocate in 
collaboration with PHD 
Chamber of Commerce, 
Memo No. 2 – CII, 
Memo No. 8 – Mr. JP 
Sengh – For Maadhyam 
International Council 
for Conflict Resolution , 
Memo No. 9, Justice 
(Retd.) M.L. Mehta for 
Delhi Dispute 
Resolution Society , 
Memo No. 13 – 
APCAM, Memo No. 20 
– Vidhi Cen tre for 
Legal Policy. 
 
Memo No. 7 – Dr. 
Aman M. Hingorani, 
Advocate. 
 
realities has been given the mandate to 
facilitate carrying out community 
mediation by a diverse panel of mediators.  
 
The role of the local administration is 
limited to facilitating appointment of 
panel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Under c lause 45 (4), considering the 
purpose of community mediation, which is 
to maintain the peace, harmony and 
tranquility amongst residents or families of 
an area or locality, settlement agreement in 
community mediation has not been made 
enforceable under the Bill. 
29  First Schedule, Entry 7 - 
inclusion of this clause may 
affect conduct of mediation 
in matrimonial cases where 
children are involved and in 
such similar matters – 
recommend addition of 
“except in only matrimonial 
cases where the interest of 
the child is involved” 
Memo No. 19 – MCPC, 
Supreme Court of India 
 
The suggestion may be considered by the 
Committee. 
30  Seventh Schedule – 
Mediation by the Facilitation 
Council under the MSME 
Act, 2006 – recommend that 
same body mediates should 
not be entitled to arbitrate as 
well. 
Memo No. 11 – Shri 
Sriram Panchu.  
 
Section 18 of the MSMED Act, 2006 has 
been proposed to be amended by the 
present Bill  only to the extent of the 
replacing the provisions relating to 
conciliation as provided earlier, with 
provisions relating to mediation. 
31  Eighth Schedule – mediator 
fees under Section 442 of the 
Companies Act, 2013  - 
recommend that fees should 
be mutually  agreed between 
the parties and the mediator  
– Sub-Clause (5) in the 
Eighth Schedule provides as 
follows “The fees of the 
mediator shall be such as 
may be prescribed” 
Memo No. 11 – Shri 
Sriram Panchu.  
 
The Companies Act, 2013 has been 
proposed to be amended by the present 
Bill to the extent of aligning the said Act 
with the provisions of the Bill. 
684

32  Ninth Schedule – Mediation 
under Commercial Court 
Act, 2015 – recommend that 
mediators doing  mediation 
under the Commercial 
Courts Act, 2015 should not 
be limited and parties should 
have the same options as 
provided in Section 6 (3) 
Memo No. 11 – Shri 
Sriram Panchu.  
Mediation Service Provider can enable 
carrying out such mediations  as per 
Section 12A of the Commercial Courts 
Act, 2015  and the definition of  the 
Mediation Service Provider  as provided 
therein relates back to Section 3 (l) of the 
Bill.  
33  Tenth Schedule - recommend 
that the word “or suo moto” 
be added, as the intent is to 
give the tribunal an option to 
take the initiative in referring 
suitable cases to mediation. 
Memo No. 19 – MCPC, 
Supreme Court of India 
 
As stated in Serial No. 34 of the Previous 
Comments and Serial No. 9 hereinabove , 
the suggestion may be suitably considered 
by the Committee. 
34  Recommend format of 
mediated settlement 
agreement is a schedule to 
the Bill. 
Memo No. 22 – 
Bombay Bar 
Association. 
Considering the wide gamut of disputes 
which could be referred to mediation and 
the consequent mediated settlement 
agreements being required to be in 
consonance with  intricacies of such 
disputes, a common model format of 
mediated settlement agreement catering to  
such various disputes may not be feasible. 
35  Recommend keeping private 
players out from the ambit of 
Mediation Service Providers 
Memo No. 15 –Bar 
Council of India. 
The Bill intends to create an environment 
and framework for Institutional Mediation  
which is competitive and efficient. 
Therefore, the inclusion of various 
Mediation Service Providers is proposed 
so that the stakeholders can enable a 
competitive and efficient regim e of 
Institutional Mediation. 
36  Clause 26 - Recommend 
reduction of Role of Legal 
Services Authority, further 
exclusion of court annexed 
mediation and mediation 
under the Legal Service 
Authority Act does not serve 
the purpose bringing uniform 
law governing practice of 
mediation. 
Memo No. 17 – NLU 
Delhi 
The intent is to continue with the pre -
established role of Legal Service 
Authorities and court annexed mediation 
centers so that the implementation of 
mediation regime can be smoothened with 
assistance from th e said pre -established 
infrastructure/institutions. 
37  Recommend existence of 
mediation and conciliation as 
separate concepts 
Memo No. 2 – CII The concept of conciliation has been 
subsumed within mediation as per the 
provisions of the Bill in order to have a 
consolidated law relating to the subject. 
38  Interplay between pre -
litigation mediation under 
the Bill and the Commercial 
Courts Act, 2015 (especially 
vis a vis Specified Value 
under the  Commercial 
Courts Act, 2015, urgent 
interim relief vs interim 
relied under exceptional 
circumstances) may be 
Memo No. 10 – Chitra 
Narayan. 
The procedure for mediation under the Bill 
and the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 are  
distinctive only in  certain procedural 
aspects.  
685

reconsidered. 
 
*** 
686