PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 53
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, 
LAW AND JUSTICE
FIFTY THIRD REPORT
ON
THE RIGHT OF CITIZENS FOR TIME BOUND DELIVERY OF GOODS
AND SERVICES AND REDRESSAL OF THEIR GRIEVANCES BILL, 2011
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2012/BHADRAPADA, 1934 (SAKA)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28 AUGUST, 2012)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28 AUGUST, 2012)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW
AND JUSTICE
FIFTY THIRD REPORT
ON
THE RIGHT OF CITIZENS FOR TIME BOUND DELIVERY OF GOODS
AND SERVICES AND REDRESSAL OF THEIR GRIEV ANCES BILL, 2011
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28 TH AUGUST, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28 TH AUGUST, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2012/BHADRAPADA, 1934 (SAKA)
CS (P & L)-105
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)-( iv)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( v)
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—27
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ......................... 28—36
6. M INUTES  OF D ISSENT ............................................................................................................. 37—39
7. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ 41—62
8. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 63 —161
A. The Right of Citizens for Time Bound Delivery of Goods and Services and
Redressal of their Grievances Bill, 2011 .................................................................. 65—113
B. Comments of the Department of Personnel and Training on the views/
suggestions contained in memoranda submitted by individuals/organisations/
experts on the Provisions of the Bill ....................................................................... 1 14—160
C. List of Organisations/Stakeholders heard during the study visit of the
Committee ..................................................................................................................... 1 61

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
*1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Amar Singh
3. Shri Parimal Nathwani
4. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
7. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
8. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
@9. Shri Bhupender Yadav
#10. Ms. Anu Aga
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Arun Yadav
12. Kumari Meenakshi Natrajan
13. Shri Shailendra Kumar
14. Shri S. Semmalai
15. Shri Anirudhan Sampath
16. Shri Lalu Prasad
17. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
18. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
19. Shrimati Deepa Dashmunsi
20. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
21. Shri P. T. Thomas (Idukki)
22. Shri Kirti Jha Azad
23. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
24. Shri Pinaki Misra
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
27. Shri Madhusudan Yadav
28. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
29. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
* Nominated to be Chairman of the Committee w.e.f.  4 th May, 2012 vice  resignation by Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi.
@ Nominated to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f.  4 th May, 2012.
# Nominated to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f.  21 st May, 2012.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok Kumar Sahoo, Joint Director
Shri B.M.S. Rana, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby
present the Fifty Third Report on the Right of Citizens for Time Bound Delivery of Goods and
Services and Redressal of their Grievances Bill, 2011. The Bill seeks to establish a mechanism to lay
down an obligation upon every public authority to publish citizens charter stating therein the time
within which specified goods shall be supplied and services be rendered and provide for a grievance
redressal mechanism for non-compliance of citizens charter and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee,
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred
♣ the Bill, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on the
20th December, 2011 and pending therein, to this Committee on the 13 th January, 2012 for examination
and report.
3. Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee decided to issue a press communique
to solicit views/suggestions from desirous individuals/organisations on the provisions of the Bill.
Accordingly, a press communique was issued in national and local newspapers and dailies, in response
to which memoranda containing suggestions were received, from various organizations/ individuals/
experts, by the Committee.
4. The Committee heard the presentation of the Secretary, Department of Administrative Reforms
& Public Grievances on the provisions of the Bill in its meeting held on 17
th February, 2012.
The Committee also heard the views of stakeholders/NGOs in its meetings held on 8 th & 29 th February,
12th March and 1 st August, 2012. The Committee further held in-house discussion on the Bill on the
18th July, 2012.
5. While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information
placed before it :–
(i) Background note on the Bill submitted by the Department of Administrative Reforms and
Public Grievances, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions;
(ii) V iews/suggestions contained in the memoranda received from various organisations/
institutions/individuals/experts on the provisions of the Bill and the comments of the
Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances thereon;
(iii) V iews expressed during the oral evidence tendered before the Committee by the
stakeholders such as Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, Lok Satta Party, the representatives of
CII, National Campaign for People’s Right to Information, Public Interest foundation,
FICCI Quality Forum, Centre for Policy Research, PRS Legislative Research, IC Centre
for Governance, Pardarshita, National Alliance for Maternal Health and Human Rights,
Transparency International India, Society for Justice; Chairman, Delhi Public Grievances
Commission; Shri Manjit Singh, IAS (Retd.); Shri P.S. Krishnan, IAS (Retd.);
Dr. Christopher Lakra; Prof. Sushma Yadav; Dr. Idreez Qureshi; Shri Paramjit Saroy;
and representatives of the State Governments of Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh,
♣ Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No. 49210) dated the 16 th January, 2012.

Punjab, Karnataka in its meetings held on 8 th, 17 th & 29 th February, 2012 and 12 th March
& 1 st August, 2012.
(iv) Comments furnished by various State Governments on the Bill; and
(v) Other research material/documents related to the Bill.
6. The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 23 rd August, 2012.
7. Minutes of Dissent given by Shri Sukhendu Shekhar Roy, Member of the Committee has been
appended.
8. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
SHANTARAM NAIK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
23rd August, 2012 Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice.
(iv)

ACRONYMS
1. CCA – Classification, Control and Appeal
2. CCS – Central Civil Services
3. CII – Confederation of Indian Industry
4. CPGRAMS – Centralised Public Grievances Redress and Monitoring System
5. DAR & PG – Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances
6. FICCI – Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry
7. GIS – Geographic Information System
8. GRO – Grievance Redress Officer
9. HOD – Head of Department
10. IAS – Indian Administrative Service
11. ICT – Information and Communication Technology
12. IFCs – Information and Facilitation Centres
13. MGNREGA – Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
14. NCPRI – National Campaign for People’s Right to Information
15. NCT – National Capital Territory
16. NGOs – Non Governmental Organisations
17. PC – Prevention of Corruption
18. PPP – Public Private Partnership
19. RTI – Right to Information
20. SCs – Scheduled Castes
21. UTs – Union Territories.
(v)

1
REPORT
The Right of Citizens for Time Bound Delivery of Goods and Services and Redressal of their
Grievances Bill, 2011 was introduced* in the Lok Sabha on the 20 th December, 2011. It was referred ♣
by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice on the 13 th January, 2012 for examination and report.
2. The Bill (Annexure-A) seeks to lay down “an obligation upon every public authority to publish
citizens charter stating therein the time within which specified goods shall be supplied and services
be rendered and provide for a grievance redressal mechanism for non-compliance of citizens charter
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.”
3. The Statement of Objects and Reasons, appended to the Bill, describe the objective of
legislation as under :–
“Citizen’ s Charters were introduced in India in 1997,  which was voluntary in character. The
main elements of the Citizens Charter were to be published containing the details of services
and the time period for delivery of such services. These charters gradually spread from Central
Ministries and Departments to States and their Organisations. However, a vast majority of them
remained ineffective and dormant. In order to improve Public Service Delivery, a service
excellence model called “Sevottam” was initiated in 2005 to give a new thrust to the
implementation of Citizens Charter, which has been successfully piloted in a few chosen
organisations of the Government of India and States and is being upscaled considerably.
Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) was launched in
2007, which is a web based portal for lodging complaints by the public. It is now operational
in all the Ministries and Departments of Government of India along with about 6000 of their
subordinate organisations. Many States have also enacted Right to Public Service Delivery
Legislation in which a few important Public Services have been selected for service delivery.
It was felt that these efforts were  noteworthy, but in the absence of an overarching structure,
their impact was diffused and limited. In this context, it was felt that Rights based approach
be followed in this respect by making the Citizens Charter statutory and endowing public with
the right to get delivery of services within stipulated time lines.
2. In view of the aforesaid, it has been felt necessary to enact a comprehensive legislation,
namely, the Right of Citizens for Time Bound Delivery of Goods and Services and Redressal
of their Grievances Bill, 2011. The Bill, inter alia,—
(a) confers right on every individual citizen to time bound delivery of goods and
provision for services and Redressal of grievances;
(b) require every public authority to publish, within six months of the commencement
of the proposed legislation, a Citizens Charter specifying therein the category of
goods supplied and services rendered by it, the time within which such goods shall
be supplied or services be rendered the name and addresses of individuals responsible
for the delivery of goods or rendering of services;
(c) provide for obligation of the Head of the Department for updating and verifying
the Citizens Charter;
* Published in Gazette of India (Extraordinary) Part-II Section 2 dated the 20 th December, 2011.
♣  Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No. 49210) dated the 16 th January, 2012.

2
(d) require every Public Authority to establish information and facilitation centre for
efficient and effective delivery of services and redressal of grievances, which may
include establishment of customer care centre, call centre, help desk and people’s
support centre;
(e) require every public authority to, within six months from the date of the coming
into force of the proposed legislation, designate as many officers as may be
necessary as Grievance Redress Officers in all administrative units or offices at the
Central, State, district and sub-district levels, municipalities, Panchayats whereat
supplies of goods or render services to receive, enquire into and redress any
complaints from citizens in the prescribed manner;
(f) require the concerned Grievance Redress Officer, upon receipt of a complaint, to
ensure that the grievance is remedied in a time-frame not exceeding thirty days from
the date of receipt of the complaint;
(g) provides that any individual aggrieved by a decision of the concerned Grievance
Redress Officer or who has not received an action taken report in respect of a
complaint filed by him, may, if he so desires, within thirty days from the expiry of
such period or from the receipt of such decision, prefer an appeal to the Designated
Authority who shall dispose of such appeal within thirty days from the date of
receipt of such appeal;
(h) provide for constitution of the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission and
the Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission consisting of Chief Commissioners
and other Commissioners;
(i) any person aggrieved by the decision of the Designated Authority falling under the
jurisdiction of the State Government may prefer an appeal to the State Public
Grievance Redressal Commission and any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Designated Authority falling under the jurisdiction of the Central Government may
prefer an appeal to the Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission;
(j) confer power upon the Designated Authority, the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission and the Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission to impose a
lump sum penalty, including compensation to the complainant, against designated
official responsible for delivery of goods and services or Grievance Redress Officer
for their failure to deliver goods or render services to which the applicant is
entitled, which may extend up to fifty thousand rupees which shall be recovered
from the salary of the official against whom penalty has been imposed;
(k) provides that on the imposition of the penalty, the appellate authority may, by
order, direct that such portion of the penalty imposed under the proposed legislation
shall be awarded to the appellant, as compensation, not exceeding the amount of
penalty imposed, as it may deem fit;
(l) provides that if any public servant is found guilty of offence, the disciplinary
authority shall initiate the disciplinary proceedings against such officer of the
public authority, who if proved to be guilty of a mala fide action in respect of any
provision of this Act, shall be liable to such punishment including a penalty as the
disciplinary authority may decide;
(m) provides that in any appeal proceedings, the burden of proof to establish that a
non-redressal of complaint by the Grievance Redressal Officer shall be on the
Grievance Redress Officer who denied the request;

3
(n) provides that where it appears to the Designated Authority or the State Public
Grievance Redressal Commission or the Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission that the grievance complained of is prima facie indicative of a corrupt
act or practice in terms of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, on the part of
the responsible officer of the public authority complained against then it shall
record such evidence as may be found in support of such conclusion and shall refer
the same to the appropriate authorities competent to take cognizance of such
corrupt practice;
(o) provides that any person aggrieved by the decision of the Central Public Grievance
Redressal Commission may prefer an appeal to the Lokpal, and any person
aggrieved by the decision of the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission may
prefer an appeal to the Lokayukta, constituted under the Lokpal and Lokayuktas
Act, 2011...”
4. In order to have a broader view on the Bill, the Committee decided to invite views/suggestions
from desirous individuals/organisations on the Bill. Accordingly, a press communique was issued
inviting views/suggestions from the general public. In response to the press release published in major
English and Hindi dailies and newspapers all over India on the 11
th February, 2012 a number of
representations/memoranda were received.
Suggestions received through memoranda
4.1 The major points raised/suggestions made in the memoranda are summarized as follows:
(i) The scope of the Bill should not be restricted to citizens only Non-citizens &
Organizations should also be brought within its ambit.
(ii) Synergy between the RTI Act and this Bill may be created by merging the
framework and structure of the two.
(iii) The integration of the Electronic Delivery of Services Bill and this Bill may be
considered.
(iv) Provision for Reward for outstanding service delivery.
(v) Title of the Bill should be shorter.
(vi) Designated Authority may be a district level tribunal set up by the appropriate
government which will have jurisdiction to hear complaints, give directions,
compensation and impose penalty in relation to all public authorities located within
the district.
(vii) The appointment, transfer and/or removal of the designated authority must be with
the concurrence of the State/Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission, who
would also be the accepting authority for their annual confidential reports.
(viii) The term ‘sub stantially financed’ may mean substantially financed in cash or kind,
directly or indirectly, by public resources which would require the submission of
accounts, the auditing of accounts or restrictions on its use or disposal.
(ix) Before the finalization of the Citizens Charter and Statement of Obligations for
each public authority, a draft citizens charter and statement of obligations should
be prepared for public discussion. This discussion should be conducted in a
transparent and participatory manner. It should involve at the very least, a
process of widely publicising and seeking suggestions and comments from the

4
public on the draft Citizens Charter and Statement of Obligation in conformity
with the procedure laid down under Section 4 and the basis on which any of the
suggestions of the public are rejected, should also be put in the public domain.
This process has to be followed when the Citizens Charter is reviewed every year
as per Section 5 of this Act.
(x) Those matters deemed urgent should be redressed immediately upon receipt of the
complaint and no later than 24 hours.
(xi) There should be Information and Facilitation Centres at the block level in case of
rural areas and municipal wards in case of urban areas.
(xii) The Information and Facilitation Centre should register complaints filed by citizens
and forward them to the appropriate Grievance Redress Officer.
(xiii) The Information and Facilitation Centre should provide all necessary assistance to
citizens in filing complaints where necessary and by assisting citizens in tracking
their complaints.
(xiv) The staff and the co-ordinator of the Information and Facilitation Centre should be
appointed by the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission in accordance with
rules as may be prescribed.
(xv) Any complaint regarding non-registration of complaint or any violation of the
provisions of the Act by the Information and Facilitation Centre shall lie with the
Designated Authority.
(xvi) All complaint should be made in writing or through the electronic means or through
text message or through telephone or through any other means that may be
prescribed and be acknowledged by a receipt with in two days of the making of
the complaint.
(xvii) The time of thirty days given to the aggrieved individual, to prefer an appeal to the
Designated Authority may be enhanced to ninety days.
(xviii) The Bill may provide that certain categories of grievances as laid down in the
Citizens Charter and Statement of Obligation or prescribed by the State/Central
Public Grievance Redressal Commission, shall mandatorily result in compensation
being made to the complainant, the amount of which shall be determined by the
designated authority and be appealable by the complainant to the grievance
commission.
(xix) In Clause 19, it may be added that the temporary charge will be held with the next
senior most commissioner, till a permanent appointment is made in accordance with
the law.
(xx) The Bill may provide that any compensation awarded under this Act shall be paid
by the public authority and that the compensation amount may be recovered from
any penalty imposed upon the concerned official, as prescribed in this law.
(xxi) Every public authority shall ensure that its website contains a system for citizens
to track the progress on the complaints filed by them using the unique complaint
number awarded to their complaint.
(xxii) “An obligation on every public authority to publish and monitor implementation of
citizen charter” should be added in the Bill.

5
(xxiii) There should be mandatory audit of compliance with the charter and auditors’
report should be accessible by the public.
(xxiv) Emphasis should be on prevention of grievances. The additional responsibility on
the Grievance Redress Officer (GRO), for removal of reasons for recurrence of
similar grievance in future, should also be fixed.
(xxv) A clause of making it obligatory to take corrective and preventive action should be
added. There should be a stem action against officers responsible for repetitive
grievances of similar nature.
(xxvi) Time taken to redress grievance should vary with simple cases taking less time and
complicated cases requiring more time. Therefore, fixing a 30 day limit for all types
of grievances serves no purpose.
(xxvii) Definition of complaint should be restricted only to any failure in the delivery of
goods or rendering of services as per the charter.
(xxviii) The definition of Public Authority to be restricted to the definition of Authority
under Right to Information Act, 2005.
(xxix) It is observed that wide power has been conferred on the GRO to recommend a
penalty. Therefore, Government should notify the specific nature of penalty to be
imposed in a given case and lay down broad guidelines in this regard.
(xxx) Section 45 (2) deals with disciplinary procedure against officer proved guilty of
mala fide action. Here, it may be inserted that disciplinary authority may impose
such penalty as deemed fit under CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965. This will result in
double jeopardy and is likely to be struck down before Court of Law.
(xxxi) There should be provision for time bound delivery of judicial services also.
(xxxii) The generic amount of penalty proposed in the Bill is alright as a standard penalty,
but in certain cases penalty should be as per financial/social/economic impact of
denial or delay in services which could be assessed as the estimated loss suffered.
(xxxiii) Responsibilities of Health Department officials should be defined in relation to GRO
at the district level with an ombudsperson under the aegis of a National Health
Regulatory and Development Authority.
(xxxiv) The work of the GRO in the block/ward should be periodically (say once in 6
months) reviewed by the community monitoring committee.
(xxxv) In Clause 10, the words “under advice to complainant” should be added at the end
of section, so that complainant himself may not file appeal with designated
authority.
(xxxvi) Language of reply from GRO or designated authority and State Commissions
should be in the language of complaint/appeal.
(xxxvii) T oken filing fee of Rs. 5/- be levied by way of court fee stamp or revenue stamp
or revenue stamp or postal stamp or non-judicial stamp/franking, cash, money
order or net banking for each complaint. Paying filing fee will make complainant
a consumer under Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
(xxxviii) In Clauses 11(9), 25(2) 42(2) of the Bill, for imposition of penalty, the word ‘may’
should be replaced by the word ‘shall’ as in the RTI Act.

6
(xxxvix) There is no provision for action required to be taken if appeals are not disposed
of in the time limit of 60 days.
(xxxx) In sub-clause (2) of Clause 4, the following provisions may be added :–
(i) Provision for specific relevance and special significance for SCs Citizen Charters.
(ii) Measures for securing Forest Rights, removing obstacles to the effective
functioning of Panchayats in tribal areas according to PESA. (iii) Provision for
specific relevance and special significance for Other Backward Classes/Socially and
Educationally Backward Classes/and Backward Classes of Religious Minorities Citizen
Charters for uplifting them.
(xxxxi) The Bill may provide that if any public servant is found guilty for the second time,
one annual increment of the public servant shall be stopped by the disciplinary
authority. If the public servant is found guilty for the third time, he shall be
compulsorily retired from the service by the disciplinary authority.
(xxxxii) The phrase “goods” used in the Bill needs to be defined.
(xxxxiii) The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill, 2011 is currently pending in Parliament and,
therefore, the Lokpal is yet to be instituted at the Centre. A number of States have
also not established Lokayuktas. In the absence of these bodies, it is not clear
which body shall adjudicate over these appeals.
(xxxxiv) Retirement age has to be provided for the Central Chief Public Grievance
Commissioner on the Central Commissioners.
(xxxxiii) No time limit is fixed for acknowledgement of appeal. This may be done.
(xxxxv) Use of Geographic Information System (GIS) for disseminating information under
the Bill as GIS is a free and an open source. It can be used for recording of
grievances digitally, and visualizing the grievance along with additional information
as per data base, for a quicker analysis, etc.
(xxxxvi) The definition of “Citizens Charter”, “Service” and “Public Authority” under the Bill
is too wide and deep, and covers in its ambit the Executive, the Legislature and
the Judiciary. It also brings organizations, bodies, government owned companies,
and all contractors, suppliers, etc. under the PPP model, under its ambit. This wide
scope of the Bill will generate too many complaints. Service should be defined as
those to be notified in the Schedule, as has been done by many State legislations
on the subject.
(xxxxvii) The cost of implementing the Bill to service every grievance against all public
authorities is likely to be huge.
4.2 The Committee forwarded some select memoranda, from out of the ones received from the
individuals/organisations, to the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances, for their
comments thereon. A list of such memoranda along with the gist of views/suggestions contained
therein and the comments of the Department thereon is placed at Annexure-B.
COMMENTS OF DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES
4.3 The major highlights of the comments furnished by the Administrative Reforms and Public
Grievances are given below :–
(i) We are open to suggestion to include clients (organizations, bodies, etc.) and even
non-citizens in the scope of this Bill.

7
(ii) The RTI Act, 2005 and this Bill differ in scope, mandate and subject matter, and
therefore, the framework cannot be merged.
(iii) We are open to suggestion that Electronic Delivery of Services Bill may be
harmoniously integrated with the present Bill as the subject matter of both the Bills
relates to improvement in Public Service Delivery.
(iv) We are open to suggestion that a reward system will act as a catalyst for overall
improvement.
(v) Cabinet has approved the title of the Bill which is comprehensive.
(vi) The definition approved by the Cabinet regarding designated authority is flexible and
decentralized. It has been left to the discretion of the appropriate Government
(State Government or Central Government as the case may be) to appoint designated
authorities as they deem appropriate.
(vii) There is need to clarify the quantum involved to be taken as “substantially”
financed.
(viii) The Guidelines for Implementing “Sevottam”, September 2011, accessible at
www.darpg.gov.in, already include the requirement of stakeholder consultation and
Steps 3, 4 and 5 in Chapter 3 on ‘Charter Design and Implementation process’
include how stakeholder consultation is to be planned, how input is to be received,
and how stakeholder consultation results are to be consolidated for the purpose of
finalization of service standards for the Citizens Charter.
(ix) While the contact details of the person responsible for service delivery are already
a part of the Citizens Charter framework, the Job Card or Job Charts are internal
tools for enhancing individual efficiency. These are covered in the Capability
Building part and are not required to be included in the Citizens Charter.
(x) The quantitative as well as qualitative standards for each and every good and
service included in the Citizens Charter, are already a part of the Sevottam
Compliant Citizens Charter being implemented in Government of India Ministries/
Departments since August, 2010. The concept has been introduced in six social
sectors of all States/UTs also through the two Workshops on Capability Building for
Sevottam organized in November 2011.
(xi) Earlier in June/July, 2009, through the recommendations of the Second Administrative
Reforms Commission in its 12
th Report all State Governments and Union Territory
Administration had been requested to consider adoption of “Sevottam” for bringing
improvement in public service delivery.
(xii) The provision for compensation as approved by the Cabinet is appropriate as it
would be left to the discretion of competent authorities who will act in a quasi-
judicial manner.
(xiii) The provision as approved by the Cabinet is providing for an IFC at every level
of public authority. The suggestion is to have block/ward level IFCs. This is not
needed as the Bill already covers Blocks and Municipalities as well as other public
authorities.
(xiv) Further elaboration of the functions and responsibilities of the IFC etc., would be
covered under rules and guidelines to be issued under the Bill, from time to time.

8
(xv) The provision as approved by Cabinet is sufficient as the proviso enables the
designated authority to admit appeals even after thirty days.
(xvi) The existing proviso under clause 25 and 42 providing for an appeal of urgent or
immediate nature to be disposed of within the same day of the receipt of the
appeal, as approved by the Cabinet are sufficient.
Compensation would be decided by the Competent Authority on a case to case
basis.
(xvii) Penalty is to be decided on a case to case basis through exercise of quasi-judicial
powers.
(xviii) Initiation of disciplinary proceedings, along with imposition of penalty, does not
amount to double jeopardy.
(xix) The provisions of the Bill relate to Services offered by Public Authorities and
redressal of grievances. All Public Authorities as defined in the Bill would formulate
their citizens charters as per the existing rules, laws and procedures prevailing
therein.
(xx) The Bill provides for imposition of penalty by the competent authority, in exercise
of its quasi-judicial powers, on a case to case basis, as per gravity of the reasons
for the complaint. Therefore, the penalty related clauses in the Bill as approved by
Union Cabinet are appropriate, and the suggestions are not accepted.
(xxi) The provisions of the Bill, as approved by the Cabinet, are comprehensive and
applies to Health sector as well.
(xxii) Under the Bill, redressal of grievance of a citizen has been taken as a statutory right
of the citizen; hence no fee is chargeable for filing complaint.
(xxiii) The title of the Bill is comprehensive, as it relates to the Rights of Citizens for
Time Bound Delivery of Goods and Services and Redressal of their Grievances.
(xxiv) Guidelines of Citizens Charter in Government of India are already available since
1997 and are published in the form of Compilation from time to time. The last
Compilation is of August, 2010. A Handbook on Citizens Charter has also been
brought out by the Department in 2007. From 2005 onwards, Sevottam Compliant
Citizens Charter Guidelines of June, 2010, August, 2010 and September, 2011 have
been brought out. All the above Compilations and Guidelines are accessible on the
Department’s website www.darpg.gov.in The Guidelines may be reviewed and
revised after the enactment of the Bill to include the additional requirements.
(xxv) The Model Citizens Charters, submitted in the suggestion, do not meet all the
requirements of the Government of India Guidelines on Sevottam Complaint Citizens
Charter as contained in ‘Guidelines for Implementation of Sevottam – September,
2011’. Further additions will be required after the enactment of this Bill.
(xxvi) The penalty provision in the Bill as approved by the Union Cabinet is appropriate,
because under the Bill, penalty is to be imposed on a case to case basis after
assessing the gravity as well as the nature of the complaint, and in exercise of
quasi-judicial powers by the Competent Authority.. Therefore, it cannot be made
mandatory on lines of the RTI Act, which is merely requiring available information
to be sent to the citizen. Grievances that are required to be redressed under the Bill
are more complex than RTI information.

9
(xxvii) The framework being created by the Bill is for Time Bound delivery of all activities
included therein.
(xxviii) The rules and guidelines can include suitable provisions to enable the concerned
Public Authorities to appropriately prepare and publish citizens charters, specifically
for various categories.
(xxix) Section 45 (3) of the Bill providing for disciplinary proceedings against a delinquent
official, making him liable to such punishment, including a penalty, as disciplinary
authority may decide, is sufficient and a reasonable deterrent.
(xxx) Punishment need to be commensurate with the gravity of offence and no straightjacket
provision for punishment could be made in the Bill.
(xxxi) The definition of complaint in the Bill is comprehensive, also relating to the
redressal of the grievances of citizens, which goes beyond service delivery.
(xxxii) As and when Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill comes into force, appeal may be filed
against the decision of State/Central Public Redressal Commission, which contain
the findings relating to corruption under PC Act, 1988, before Lokpal/Lokayukta.
(xxxiii) In Clause 34(1), for Central Commissions the language “or until they attain the age
of sixty-five years whichever is earlier,” has been omitted by mistake, although for
State Commissioners, the above language exists in the Bill.
(xxxiv) The provision of Clause 11(3), is adequate for acknowledgement of appeal by the
office of the Designated Authority.
(xxxv) The Reward must remain separate in order to serve as a catalyst for bringing
improvements and imparting motivation to officers involved in the time bound
delivery of goods and services as per provisions of the Bill.
(xxxvi) Adoption of electronic modes, internet etc., for public service delivery, has been
made the responsibility of the HOD of Public Authority under Clause 6(2).
(xxxvii) No additional costs are suggested in the Bill except for the cost of establishing
Information and Facilitation Centres and the Central and State Public Grievances
Redressal Commissions. Improvements in infrastructure and capability building are
already covered under various Government initiatives for the application of ICT in
governance and service delivery.
PRESENTATIONS BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
5. The Committee heard Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, President, Lok Satta Party; Secretary, Department
of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances and representatives of Confederation of Indian
Industry and National Campaign for People’s Right to Information; representatives of Public Interest
Foundation, FICCI Quality Forum, Centre For Policy Research, PRS Legislative Research, IC Centre
for Governance and Pardarshita; Chairman, Delhi Public Grievances Commission, Shri Manjit Singh,
IAS (Retd.), National Alliance for Maternal Health and Human Rights,Transparency International India,
Shri P.S. Krishnan, IAS (Retd.), Dr. Christopher Lakra, Prof. Sushma Yadav, Dr. Idreez Qureshi, Shri
Paramjit Saroy and Society for Justice; and representatives of State Governments of Madhya Pradesh,
Uttar Pradesh, Punjab and Karnataka.
5.0 The Committee also sought the views of all the State Governments on the provisions of the
Bill. The Governments of NCT of Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Andaman and Nicobar
Administration, Rajasthan, Dadra and Nagar Haveli Administration, Union Territory of Lakshadweep

10
Administration, Haryana, Union Territory of Chandigarh Administration, Assam, Jammu and Kashmir,
Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Nagaland, Mizoram, Gujarat and Punjab submitted their written comments
thereon.
STUDY VISIT
5.1 In order to interact with various Public Authorities of the Central Government who are service
providers, the Committee undertook a Study visit to Kolkata, Shillong, Guwahati and Imphal and
interacted with various Organisations and State Governments from 3
rd to 9 th June, 2012. The list of
such Organisations is given at Annexure-C.
5.2 The Committee further held in-house discussion on the Bill on the 18 th July, 2012.
5.3 The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on 23 rd August, 2012.
5.4 The views expressed by witnesses and Members and the feedback received from stakeholders
have been dealt with in the succeeding paras.

11
CHAPTER-II
MAJOR ISSUES EXAMINED BY THE COMMITTEE AND ITS
RECOMMENDATIONS THEREON
Definitions
6. Citizens Charter
6.1 Clause 2(e) of the Bill defines Citizens Charter.
6.2 A suggestion came up before the Committee that Citizens Charters shall be specified only
for those goods and services where (i) there is a universal coverage, (ii) there are no capacity
constraints in the Public Authority, and (iii) there are no supply constraints for delivery of the
goods and services.
6.3 Another suggestion that came before the Committee was that the goods and services
covered under the Citizens Charter should be restricted to only those which are notified by the
appropriate Government from time to time. This suggestion was there in several responses. Some of
the State legislations provide for such a dispensation.
6.4 The Committee takes note of the fact that the Citizens Charter contemplated under
the Bill envisages enumeration of all the goods supplied and services rendered by a Public
Authority. A strong view has come before the Committee that the Bill should provide for
notification of services by the appropriate Government for the purpose of inclusion in the
Citizens Charter. In fact, this is the position in several States including Madhya Pradesh,
Delhi, etc. where only notified services have been brought under the Citizens Charter.
6.5 The Committee does not find any merit in the above proposition as this would only lead
to lowering the pace of implementation of the Bill. The Committee feels that there should be
no difficulty in incorporating all goods and services in the Citizens Charter at the initial stage
itself particularly when this has to be done by the Public Authority and the said Public
Authority has the option to determine the time period within which the goods/services being
dealt with by it, shall be rendered. The Committee, accordingly, endorses the provisions of the
Bill that oblige the Public Authorities to incorporate all categories of goods supplied and
services rendered in the Citizens Charter.
7. Complaint
7.1 Clause 2(f) of the Bill defines the term ‘complaint’.
7.2 It was suggested by some of the witnesses and stakeholders that the definition of the term
‘complaint’ should be more precise and specific and that, including any grievance relating to violation
of any law, policy, programme, order or scheme under the ambit of ‘complaint’, would be far fetched.
7.3 Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, while tendering oral evidence before the Committee, stated thus:
“...If you look at the Bill, clause 2 (f) has dealt with the definition of the word ‘complaint’...
Here, it has become too expansive. Functioning of the public authority has a very, very wide
latitude; practically, it includes anything and everything under the sun. Similarly, if it is
applicable to a law or a rule or even an order, that is, perfectly, all right. But if we go
11

12
into policies, schemes, and programmes, then, it will have very wide latitude and it will
become impossible to handle things. I have no quarrel with the intent of this legislation. But
I have serious reservations about the ability to, actually, enforce this law. Therefore, there
will be the real dilution, and the whole law may, ultimately, become ineffective and non-
operational. Therefore, our submission is that if you could specify that it is applicable to
the Citizen’ s Charter and to violation of any law or a rule or an order, then, that should
be satisfactory...”
7.4 The representative of PRS Legislative Research, stated in this regard, that:
“...It says “Complaint” means a complaint filed by a citizen regarding any grievance relating
to, or arising out of, any failure in the delivery of goods or rendering of service pursuant to
the Citizens Charter, or in the functioning of a public authority, or any violation of any law,
policy, programme, order or scheme but does not include grievance relating to the service matters
of a public servant whether serving or retired. This definition implies that there could be
complaints related to the functioning of a public authority or in violation of any law, policy,
programme, order or scheme. Many schemes have their own internal grievance redressal mechanism
as was mentioned. Even the MGNREGA has its own grievance redressal mechanism. Many others
have it. In addition to that, some of the services rendered or goods provided may involve a
consideration and, in that case, the consumer courts under the Consumer Protection Act could
also be the authority in those cases. Having yet another grievance redressal mechanism would
lead to multiplicity of forums. And we all know that it is not a desirable objective...”
7.5 While raising doubts as to whether such wide range of goods and services can be delivered
within the prescribed time limit, one of the witnesses said:
“...But how does a Grievance Redressal Officer or a designated authority within the 30 days
available to him look into the issues of standards? What is the mechanism available to him?
Let us say, it is a Government undertaking which makes goods available for distribution to
the designated or eligible persons. But the standard as such would be seen by the Bureau of
Indian Standards or by some other agency which is qualified to do it or by the testing
laboratories like the Indian Standards Institute which are fixed for this purpose. I don’t think
this forum or this hierarchy of Grievance Redressal Officers or designated authorities would
be able to ensure the standards within the period of 30 days... would the Grievance Redressal
Officer (GRO) or the designated authority have any mechanism available to enforce those
standards within 30 days when he is hearing this matter under a procedure prescribed in this
Bill?...”
7.6 While highlighting the difficulties that could arise in providing such an elaborate range of goods
and services, one of the witnesses said that:
“...how are they going to enforce an issue relating to violation of law or a policy or a
programme? It’s a very broad definition. Perhaps, there is more specificity called for...”
7.7 Another point raised in this regard was that the definition covers only failure in the delivery
of goods or rendering of service pursuant to the Citizens Charter and that it does not cover ‘undue
delay’.
7.8 In its written comments furnished by DAR&PG, it, has been stated that this has been taken
care of by the term failure in delivery of goods and services in a time bound manner.
7.9 While clarifying on this point, Secretary, DAR&PG stated:
“...It is not merely the failure of the service, it is also delayed service because delay in service
will be considered as and when the timelines are published in the Citizens Charter. So, if a

13
service is to be rendered within thirty days, beyond thirty days it will be considered delay. And,
that will be considered as a failure of the public service. Obviously, if there is any specific
mention of delay, it could be considered. But it is also a part of the failure of public service,
if there is a delay...”
7.10 One of the witnesses was of the following view regarding registration of complaints:
“...
gekjk ,d vU; lq>ko gS fd  information technology dk bLrseky fd;k tk,A yksx viuh
f”kdk;rksa dks ntZ djus ds fy, SMS, toll-free helpline dk bLrseky dj ldsa vkSj mlds
ek/;e ls mudks feedback Hkh fn;k tk, fd mudh f”kdk;r ntZ gqbZ gS] fdl vf/kdkjh ds
ikl xbZ gS] mldk Qksu uacj] mldh bZ -esy vkbZ-Mh- oxSjg nh tk,A ...”
7.11 A view has come before the Committee that the definition of the term ‘Complaint’ in
the Bill is too wide as it includes violation of any law, policy, programme, order or scheme by
the Public Authority and an apprehension has been expressed whether the Public Authority or
the appropriate Government would be in a position to settle complaints on such wide spectrum
of issues within the limited period provided for in the Bill to the Grievance Redressal Officer,
Designated Authority, etc. The Committee also takes note of the difficulty pointed out by the
witnesses arising out of certain grievance redressal mechanisms already being in place and the
likely conflict with the procedure sought to be put in place through the proposed legislation.
7.12 In the Committee’s view, the definition of the term ‘Complaint’ is comprehensive
enough so as to cover not only the cases of failure to deliver goods or render services in
accordance with the Citizens Charter but also cases where the Public Authority has violated
any law, policy, scheme, order, etc. and it should be possible for the Public Authority to handle
the same within the given parameters. The Committee is of the firm opinion that issues
related to violation of law, policy, scheme, etc. are vital and the same cannot be kept outside
the purview of the grievance redress mechanism. However, in case it is felt that such matters
require some different time schedule for adjudication, the Ministry may examine the issue and
provide appropriately in the Bill.
7.13 As regards the specific suggestion that the definition of the term ‘Complaint’ should
also cover undue delay in the delivery of goods and services, the Committee is of the view that
cause of action for a complaint arises as soon as there is failure to deliver goods/services
within the time specified in the Citizens Charter and hence there is no need to specifically add
undue delay as a basis for the complaint. However, the Committee being deeply concerned
about preventing undue delay in the delivery of goods/services, recommends that Government
may suitably incorporate in the rules to be framed under the legislation, provisions specifying
the shortest possible time for delivery of goods and services of common nature.
8. Designated Authority
8.1 The term ‘Designated Authority’ is defined in Clause 2(e) of the Bill as such officer or
authority outside the concerned public authority as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
8.2 The Central Information Commissioner, in his written memorandum, has raised doubts about
the feasibility of appointing Designated Authority from outside the Public Authority.
8.3 Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, while deposing before the Committee, stated that:
“...Then the designated authority, clause 2 (h) (k) gives the definition of designated
authority. It says that the person must be outside the pubic authority. There are two issues.
One is that the designated authority must be within the district, at the very least. Otherwise,
if you create a designated authority at the State level, for the citizen for a simple service

14
to go the State level, is meaningless. If possible it should be at the district level or even
at lower level...”
8.4 Shri Nikhil Dey, while placing the views of NCPRI before the Committee, said:
“...there should be a designated authority at the district level. And, that is independent and
that has the capacity to penalise and compensate...”
8.5 One of the witnesses who appeared before the Committee placed his views, as under:
“...The Bill starts by saying that we must identify somebody who is responsible and the
Grievance Redressal Officer will, then, be somebody who is of a level higher than that of his.
This, Sir, is completely flawed in thinking. It is inappropriate. It does not work anywhere in
the world and flies in the face of the fundamental requirement of quality management. You
need to appreciate that a service cannot be delivered by one individual. So, the focus has to
be on procedures and processes. A process, in fact, comprises the continuous interplay of
people, procedures, methods, machines, measurements, funds, responsibilities and information in
a proper manner, so that these services are delivered in a required manner...”
8.6 The Ministry, in its written comments furnished to the Committee, has stated that the definition
is flexible and that it has been left to the discretion of the appropriate Government to appoint
designated authorities.
8.7 The Committee notes the novel concept of Designated Authority that has been
incorporated in the Bill. Designated Authority means an officer or authority outside the public
authority  that has been authorized to hear appeals against the orders of the Grievance
Redressal Officer. The Designated Authority has also been empowered to impose penalty and
award compensation to the complainant.
8.8 An apprehension has been expressed about the feasibility of having a Designated
Authority from outside the Public Authority. The Committee finds merit in having Designated
Authority from outside the Public Authority and hopes that it would discharge its functions
more independently and objectively compared to the situation where the Designated Authority
had been from within the Public Authority. The Committee hopes that substantial percentage
of complaints would be settled at the level of Designated Authority keeping in view the fact
that it has been bestowed with the power of imposing penalty on the defaulting public servant
and award compensation to the complainant. The Committee is also in agreement with the
viewpoint which has come before it that the Designated Authority should be available at the
district/sub-district level so that the general public has an easy and convenient access to it.
8.9 The Committee finds that the Bill does not provide anything regarding who could be
appointed as a Designated Authority. Further, in terms of Clause 2(h) which defines this term,
relevant details about the Designated Authority have been left to be provided for in the Rules.
The Designated Authority being an important level in the grievance redress mechanism, it is
important that the Bill gives an outline of the form, shape and the content of this level in
the grievance redress machinery.
8.10 The Committee also has some observations to make with regard to certain provisions
of Clause 11 of the Bill which relates to appeal before the Designated Authority. As per Proviso
to Clause 11(7) of the Bill, an appeal of urgent or immediate nature shall be disposed off
before the date on which the cause of action may cease to exist. The Committee recommends
that this proviso may be amended so as to provide for disposal of appeal ‘well’ before the date
on which the subject matter of cause of action may cease to exist. Secondly, Clause 11(3)
provides for acknowledgement of receipt of appeal by the Designated Authority but it does not
prescribe a time period for such acknowledgement. The Committee notes that in terms of

15
Clause 8, the Grievance Redress Officer is required to acknowledge receipt of complaint within
two days. The Committee recommends that a time period for acknowledging complaints may
be prescribed in case of Designated Authority also. The Committee further recommends that
in matters of personal delivery of complaints, acknowledgement must be on the spot. Further,
intimation regarding acknowledgement should reach the complainant within a specific time
period.
9. Grievance Redress Officer
9.1 Clause 7(1) of the Bill provides that every public authority shall designate Grievance Redress
Officers in all administrative units or offices at the Central, State, district and sub-district levels,
municipalities, Panchayats whereat supplies of goods or render services to receive, enquire into and
redress complaints from citizens.
9.2 The representative of NCPRI, while tendering oral evidence before the Committee, said:
“...The third issue is the Grievance Redress Officer who has been appointed. This has been
done at the municipal and the Panchayat level which is extremely useful because this really
establishes the decentralized nature of the whole law. 
blesa geus ,d fjdesaMs”ku ;g nh gS fd
the GRO should have supervisory control on the person who is supposed to be delivering the
service in the first place. In addition  to that, 
f”kdk;r ysdj tks Hkh tk,¡] ;g t:jh ugha gks
fd os vius ckjs esa gh f”kdk;r djsaA ;fn mUgsa fdlh vkSj ds ckjs esa Hkh f”kdk;r djuh gks]
rks 
that should be allowed and dkj.k nsus dh t:jr gks] tSlk fd geus ,d pht+ ;g ns[kh
gS fd lwpuk dk vf/kdkj dkuwu ls yksxksa dks dkQh enn feyh gS] D;ksafd tc muls dkj.k
iwNk tkrk gS] rks çkWCye gksrh gSA
...”
9.3 The Committee notes the provisions of Clause 10 of the Bill which provide that the
Grievance Redress Officer shall, after the expiry of 30 days period, report every complaint that
has not been redressed, along with relevant details, to the Designated Authority and it shall
be treated as an appeal with the Designated Authority. The Committee appreciates this
mechanism which is people friendly. The Committee, however, recommends a slight modification
in Clause 10 so as to provide therein that the GRO, while forwarding complaints to the
Designated Authority, should also inform the complainant by adding words ‘under intimation
to the complainant’ at the end of Clause 10 of the Bill.
10. Public Authority
10.1 Clause 2(n) of the Bill defines the term Public Authority.
10.2 Concerns were raised from various quarters that the term ‘substantially financed’ in clause
2(n)(iv) should be clearly defined.
10.3 The Ministry, in its written comments furnished to the Committee, has stated that there is need
to clarify on the quantum which constitute “substantially financed”.
10.4 The Committee notes that the term ‘Public Authority’ appearing in the Bill has a wide
coverage extending to Bodies/Institutions set up under the Constitution of India, the laws
made by the Parliament/State Legislatures. The Bill also authorizes the appropriate Government
to cover, by issue of notification Bodies/Institutions substantially financed by the appropriate
Government, Government companies under the Companies Act, 1956 as well as private entities
engaged in the supply of goods/services on private-public partnership model or otherwise. The
Committee is happy to note that this wider definition of the term Public Authority would
uphold citizens’ rights for prompt service not only with reference to Government institutions/

16
bodies but also with reference to the private entities which are working for Government under
some memorandum/contract. This is a welcome step particularly keeping in view the increasing
participation of private sector in the service sector in partnership with Government.
10.5 The Committee, however, is also concerned over the use of the word ‘substantially
financed’ in Clauses 4(n)(iv)(A) & (B) of the Bill. The Committee finds this expression to be
vague and recommends that it should be suitably qualified so that there is no ambiguity with
regard to the Institutions/Organisations receiving funds from appropriate Government which
could be brought within the scope of the Bill.
11. Publication and reviewing of Citizens Charter
11.1 In one of the memorandum submitted to the Committee, it was suggested that before the
finalization of the Citizens Charter and Statement of Obligations for each public authority, a draft
citizens charter and statement of obligation shall be prepared for public discussion. This discussion will
be conducted in a transparent and participatory manner. It must involve at the very least, a process
of widely publicizing and seeking suggestions and comments from the public on the draft Citizens
Charter and Statement of Obligation in conformity with the procedure laid down under Clause 4 and
the basis on which any of the suggestions of the public are rejected, shall also be put in the public
domain. This process will also be followed when the Citizens Charter is reviewed every year as per
Clause 5 of this Act.
11.2 The representative of NCPRI while speaking on this issue, stated as follows:
“...But, we feel that the law should require a participatory process for creating of a Citizen’ s
Charter. 
tks dksbZ fMikVZesaV viuk flfVtal pkVZj cuk jgh gS] there should be a draft charter.
They should allow people to give their views. And, it should be renewed every year in the same
participatory process...”
11.3 The DAR&PG, in its written comments furnished to the Committee, has stated these details
would be covered under Rules and Guidelines to be issued after the Bill is enacted. It was further
stated that the Guidelines for Implementing Sevottam, September 2011, accessible at 
www.darpg.gov.in
already include the requirement of stakeholder consultation and Steps 3, 4 and 5 in Chapter 3 on
‘Charter Design and Implementation process’ include how stakeholder consultation is to be planned,
how input is to be received, and how stakeholder consultation results are to be consolidated for the
purpose of finalization of service standards for the Citizen Charter.
11.4 The Committee fully appreciates the viewpoint presented before it regarding the people’s
participation in the finalization of the Citizens Charter and its review from time to time. In
this context, the Committee notes the provisions of Clause 5 of the Bill which provides for
wide and extensive publicity of the Citizens Charter through all available means and its
updating every year. The Committee also takes note of the provisions of Clause 4(3) of the
Bill which authorizes the appropriate Government to make and notify rules in relation to the
Citizens Charter. The Committee is convinced that people’s participation in the finalization and
review of the Citizens Charter would be a useful step and the Charter finalized in this manner
would have better acceptability and compliance. The Committee, accordingly, recommends
consultation with the concerned stakeholders in the process of finalization/review of the
Citizens Charter through suitable provisions in the rules under Clause 4(3).
12. Information and Facilitation Centres
12.1 Chapter IV of the Bill provides for establishment of Information and Facilitation Centres for
efficient and effective delivery of services and redressal of grievances.

17
12.2 One of the witnesses, while tendering oral evidence before the Committee, opined:
“...lk/kkj.k yksxksa ds fy,] xjhcksa ds fy, ,dne Åijh Lrj rd tkuk cgqr eqf”dy gS]
blfy, gekjk ;g lq>ko gS fd blds varxZr CykWd Lrj ij ,d tu lgk;rk dsaæ j[kk
tk,A vki yksxksa us dgk gS fd gj foHkkx ds] gj Lrj ij ,d ifCyd uksfVl gksuk pkfg,
fd D;k
-D;k lwpuk,a gSaA blesa gekjk ;g lq>ko gS fd CykWd Lrj ij ,d dsaæ gks] ftldk
uke tu lgk;rk dsaæ gks vkSj ftlesa gj foHkkx dh ckrsa j[kh tk,aA ...”
12.3 The Secretary, DAR&PG , while clarifying on this issue, stated:–
“...There was a question about information and facilitation centre, at which level we will have.
Obviously, every public authority will have that responsibility, not merely in the Ministry or
Departments of the Central Government, but also even at the Gram Panchayat level. So, at
every level we should have these in order to sensitize the citizens. There is a responsibility
given on the head of the department of public authority to do that, irrespective of the level...”
12.4 The representative of NCPRI, while speaking on this point, said:
“...we feel the Department should have IFC, but there must be one outside, at least, in every
block and it is not a big price to pay for us to have that kind of facilitation centre...”
12.5 The Committee appreciates the concept of Information and Facilitation Centers envisaged
in Chapter IV of the Bill. The Committee feels that the setting up of such Facilitation Centers
would considerably ease the problems being faced by the common man today in participating/
availing benefit under so many schemes/projects announced by Government from time to time
for the benefit of the common man. The Committee is in full agreement with the suggestions
received by it regarding the location of these Facilitation Centers. These Centers should be so
located that they are easily accessible. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the
Facilitation Centers should be located at the point where the service is being provided or goods
are being supplied by the Public Authority so that people approach the Public Authority with
proper information/guidance. This, in the opinion of the Committee, would save the common
man from much of the harassment and trouble which he faces at present due to absence of
guidance/help. In this context, the Committee also recommends that the persons manning such
Facilitation Centres should be selected/trained suitably so that they are polite, courteous and
cooperative while dealing with the public.
12.6 The Committee further recommends that these Facilitation Centres should be properly
equipped with facilities for communication, etc. so that they are able to discharge their
responsibility properly and satisfactorily covering all matters/areas falling within their jurisdiction.
The Committee, in this context, would also recommend to Government to consider adopting
private-public partnership model in the case of these facilitation centers whereby some value
added services could be added on nominal/moderate payment basis. Such an arrangement, in
Committee’s view, would on the one hand, resolve the constraint of manpower which is
generally seen with the Public Authorities and, on the other hand, improve the quality of
services, generate employment in the private sector and also partially neutralize operational
cost of the facilitation centers.
13. Acknowledgement of complaint, appeal
13.1 Clause 8 of the Bill provides that all complaints shall be acknowledged by a receipt within two
days of the making of the complaint.
13.2 One of the issues highlighted by many witnesses who appeared before the Committee was that
the concerned Public Authority refuses or delays acknowledgment of complaint/appeal.

18
13.3 The representative of the State Government of Madhya Pradesh, while deposing before the
Committee, said that in the survey conducted on Madhya Pradesh Lok Sewaon Ke Pradan Ki
Guarantee Act, 2010 it was found that 43% applicants did not receive acknowledgement.
13.4 Another concern raised was that though a time-frame has been given in the Bill for
acknowledgment of complaint, no such time limit is given for acknowledgment of appeal. Clause 11
(3) of the Bill only provides for acknowledgment of appeal and a definite time-frame therefor, has not
been prescribed.
13.5 The Committee notes that Clause 11(3) provides for acknowledgement of receipt of
appeal by the Designated Authority but it does not prescribe a time period for such
acknowledgement. The Committee notes that in terms of Clause 8, the Grievance Redressal
Officer (GRO) is required to acknowledge receipt of complaint within two days. The Committee
recommends that a time period for acknowledging complaints may be prescribed in case of
Designated Authority also.
14. Time frame for redressal of grievance
14.1 Clause 9(1)(a) of the Bill stipulates the time-frame for redress of grievance at the level of the
Grievance Redressal Officer as 30 days from the date of receipt of the complaint.
14.2 One of the suggestions placed before the Committee was that the 30 day timeline by which
the Grievance Redressal Officers shall resolve the complaints specified in Section 9 of this Bill shall
be modified as follows: (i) 3 days in the case of complaints which have no supply constraints, e.g.,
issue of a birth certificate, (ii) 15 days in the case of complaints related to physical works, e.g.
provision of water connection, and (iii) 60 days in the case of complaints related to violation of any
law or rules or order.
14.3 Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, while placing his views before the Committee, said:
“...But the 30-days’ time-frame is not simply the right one because there are many services
which we may require the same day; there are also services which you require in an hour’ s
time; like, in the case of an FIR, if the Grievance Redressal Officer says, “All right; you
register the complaint within one month”, then, the very purpose is defeated. Therefore,
we should look at it more deeply. ...There cannot be a uniform time-line for all services.
There are very simple, routine services and there are complicated services and there are
services where application of law is required and, therefore, even, perhaps, 60 days may be
called for...”
14.4 The Committee takes note of the provisions of Clause 9(1)(a) of the Bill which provides
that the Grievance Redressal Officer (GRO) shall remedy the grievance in a time-frame not
exceeding 30 days. The Committee finds merit in the suggestions made by the witnesses that
such a standard prescription of thirty days time period might create an adverse effect in
certain cases where an urgent relief is required. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that
the provisions of Clause 9 may be modified suitably so as to provide for disposal of matters
by the GRO in a shorter period in urgent cases. In case of complaints that have a bearing
on the application of law, scheme, etc. the Committee recommends Government to consider a
wider time schedule at the level of the GRO and the Designated Authority.
15. Time limit for appeal
15.1 It was suggested by some of the stakeholders that the time limit stipulated in the Bill, for
preferring an appeal to the designated authority and to the State/Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission, should be increased from 30 days.

19
15.2 The Ministry, in its written comments in this regard, has stated that the provision in the Bill
is adequate as designated authority may admit an appeal even after the prescribed 30 days.
15.3 The Committee takes note of the fact that the Bill provides for a 30 days time period
for preferring an appeal with the Designated Authority and with the Public Grievance Redressal
Commission. The Committee does not feel the necessity of increasing this time period beyond
30 days as both these Appellate Authorities have been vested with discretionary powers to
admit appeals received after the expiry of the prescribed period of 30 days under Clauses 11,
12 and 29 of the Bill.
16. Lesser number of tier of appeals
16.1 One of the witnesses raised a pertinent issue as under:
“...So, I think the other key issue is that in this whole edifice of creating State-level
Grievance Redressal Officers and Commissioners, Central Commissioners, we are creating a
quasi judicial organization that is going to be large, unwieldy and cumbersome...”
16.2 The Committee is conscious of the fact that the Bill provides for appeal at four stages
going up to the level of the Lokpal/Lokayukta. The Committee has recommended in para 21
‘Appeal to the Lokpal’ that follows in the report that the provision in the Bill for appeal to
the Lokpal/Lokayukta is undesirable and unnecessary. The remaining three levels of appeal
are desirable and appropriate in the Committee’s view.
17. Search Committee
17.1 The Committee takes note of the proposal that the Search Committee should consist of persons
of standing and having special knowledge and expertise in the matters relating to the grievances, public
administration, policy making and management.
17.2 The Ministry has, however, replied that the provision contained in clause 15(2) of the Bill is
sufficient.
17.3 The Committee takes note of the provisions of Clauses 15(2) and 32(2) of the Bill which
provide for Selection Committee in the process of the appointment of Central and State
Grievance Redress Commissioners. These provisions also refer to Search Committees consisting
of such Members as may be prescribed.
17.4 The Committee takes note of the proposals that these Search Committees should
consist of persons of standing having special knowledge and expertise in matters relating to
handling of grievances, public administration, policy making and management.
17.5 The Committee is agreeable to the view that the Search Committees play an important
role in the selection process. Accordingly, the Committee finds merit in the suggestion to have
specialized persons in the relevant field as Members of the Search Committee. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that these aspects may be taken care of adequately by making
suitable provisions in the rules.
18. Retirement age for the Central Commissioners
18.1 The Committee notes that Clause 17 of the Bill provides a retirement age for the State Chief
Public Grievance Commissioner and the State Public Grievance Commissioners. However, no retirement
age has been provided for the Central Chief Public Grievance Commissioner or the Central Public
Grievance Commissioners.

20
18.2 The Ministry, in its written comments furnished to the Committee, has stated that they are
open to the suggestion, as in Clause 34(1) for Central Commissions the language “or until they attain
the age of sixty-five years whichever is earlier,” has been omitted by mistake, although for State
Commissioners, the above language exists in the Bill.
18.3 The Committee, accordingly, recommends that clause 34 of the Bill which provides the terms
of Office of Central Grievance Redressal Commissioners may be amended on the lines of clause 17
of the Bill.
19. Imposition of penalty, granting compensation
19.1 Chapter IX of the Bill deals with penalties and compensation.
19.2 One of the proposals put forth was to impose a mandatory obligation on the Designated
Authority to impose penalty on the guilty officer and that if no penalty is imposed, a reasoned order
will be passed.
19.3 Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, while voicing his opinion on this point, said:
“...Unless the compensation is payable from the pocket of the person who has delayed the
service, there is a danger of collusion between the service providing individual at the cost of
the Government... Therefore, for all fee paying services, there will have to be a provision for
automatic compensation for non-delivery. There should be recovery of penalty from the agency
or the individual...”
19.4 The Secretary, DAR&PG was of the following view in this regard:
“...The penalty level is up to the GRO because beyond that it will not be possible to impose
penalty on an outside authority, which will hear the first appeal in respect of a petitioner...”
19.5 The Committee notes that the Bill provides for a maximum penalty up to Rs.50,000/-
to be imposed by the Designated Authority on the official responsible for delivery of goods/
services. The Committee feels that while deciding the quantum of penalty, the Appellate
Authorities should have due regard to the hardships faced by the complainant in pursuing the
complaint. The Committee recommends that suitable provision may be added in the Bill to this
effect.
19.6 The Committee takes note of the proviso to Clause 45(2) of the Bill which says that
the amount of compensation awarded shall not exceed amount of penalty imposed under
Clause 45(1) of the Bill. Clause 45(2) of the Bill already provides that the Appellate Authority
may direct only a portion of the penalty imposed, as deemed fit, to be awarded by way of
compensation to the appellant. In view of the provisions of Clause 45(2), the proviso thereto
seems redundant. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the proviso to Clause 45(2)
may be deleted.
19.7 The Committee also takes note of the provisions of Clause 45(3) whereunder a public
servant found guilty under Clause 45(1) is liable for disciplinary proceedings in case he is proved
guilty of a mala fide  action in respect of any provision of the Act. The Committee feels that the
public official once having been found guilty under Clause 45(1) should not be required to be
proved guilty of mala fide  action again in terms of Clause 45(3) before being made liable for
imposition of punishment/penalty by the disciplinary authority. Element of mala fide is not easy
to establish and prove, and further, once a public servant is proved to have violated the law
which requires him to provide a service or goods in question, in time, whether the action of the
public servant was mala fide or not is not material. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Clause 45(3) be amended suitably to give effect to these observations.

21
20. Quantum of penalty, compensation
20.1 In one of the memoranda received by the Committee, it has been suggested that penalty should
be as per financial/social/economical impact of denial/delay in services.
20.2 Some Members of the Committee were of the view that the maximum limit prescribed as
Rs. 50,000/- in the Bill as penalty is on the higher side.
20.3 The Committee notes that Rs. 50,000 is the upper limit of the penalty that can be
imposed on the erring public servant. The Committee has already recommended in para 10.5
above, the parameters for deciding the quantum of penalty. Further, this being the maximum
limit of the penalty and the actual penalty being based upon the facts and circumstances of
the case, the Committee is not inclined to interfere in the quantum of penalty prescribed in
the Bill.
21. Appeal to Lokpal
21.1 Some of the Members of the Committee raised doubts about the provision in the Bill regarding
preferring appeals to Lokpal/Lokayukta.
21.2 The Ministry, in its written reply, has clarified that Clause 47 of the Bill provides for appeal
against the decision of Central Commission or State Commission to Lokpal/Lokayukta, only in cases
which contain the findings relating to corruption under the ‘Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988’ and
that it has been provided in view of clause 49 of ‘The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill, 2011’.
21.3 Shri Nripendra Misra, while placing his views before the Committee, said :
“...Where is the need for creating an organic link with Lokpal and Lokayukta? They are
independent institutions. They will look into performing their activities the manner in which
this is passed...”
21.4 The Committee takes note of the provisions of Clause 47 of the Bill which provides for
appeal to the Lokpal/Lokayukta against the decisions of the Central/State Grievance Redressal
Commission, respectively. The Committee does not find much justification in providing for
appeal with the Lokpal/Lokayukta against the decision of the Central/State Commission. Such
a linkage, in Committee’s view, is unfounded as the institution of Lokpal has been set up
under a different legislation aiming to put in place an anti corruption institution while the
objective of the present Bill is to ensure timely delivery of goods/services and grievance
redressal. Besides, the Bill in hand, already provides for three levels of appeal up to the level
of the Commission and adding another level of appeal above the Commission level does not
seem to be called for. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the provisions of the Bill
which provide for preference of appeal to the Lokpal/Lokayukta against the decision of the
Central/State Commissions may be deleted.
22. Monitoring the implementation of the Act
22.1 Some of the stakeholders were of the view that the implementation of Citizens Charter should
be monitored and emphasis should be on pro-active action to prevent grievances.
22.2 Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, while stressing upon this point, stated thus:
“...Our appeal is, under section 26(1) and 43(1), please ensure that the power to monitor the
implementation of this law and power to give guidelines and directives to the agencies of the
Government in furtherance of this law must be inherent in the Commission. Otherwise now
directives such as they may be issued are only upon adjudication. If a case comes before them

22
in appeal, on adjudication they may give the directive. That the law provides for. It does not
provide for general directives and guidelines to monitor the implementation of the grievance
redressal Act...”
22.3 Dr. Sanjeevan Bajaj, FICCI Quality Forum also emphasized this issue, as under :
“...Right now what it says is that a citizen has a right to complain if he is not getting service
within the time. But if a citizen does not complain, then it means nobody is going to check
the monitoring of the Citizens’ Charter. We would say that if this kind of a measure has to
be brought in, then monitoring should be a part of it. Just as financial audit happens,
management audit should also happen. Wherever an organisation has a Citizens’ Charter and
measurable time norms are given, that should be monitored...”
22.4 The Ministry, in its written comments furnished to the Committee, has stated that it is open
to the suggestion and that while implementing the Citizens Charter, the relevant Rules and Guidelines
can include these.
22.5 The Committee appreciates the concerns expressed by the witnesses over the need for
monitoring the implementation of the Bill. The Committee is convinced that an effective
monitoring of the implementation of the Bill would definitely yield better results. The Committee,
in this context, takes note of the provisions contained in Clauses 26(3), 43(3) and 46 of the
Bill which vest the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission and the Central Public
Grievance Redressal Commission with the powers to suo motu take notice of failure to deliver
goods and services in accordance with the provisions of the Act and refer such cases for
disposal to the Head of Department of the concerned public authority. The Head of the
Department in turn is required to submit an Action Taken Report to the Commission within
30 days. Further, under Clause 46, every public authority is required to ensure that each
Grievance Redress Officer keeps a record of the complaints made to it or appeals preferred
and the decisions on such complaints and appeals and publish on its website by the 15th day
of every month or at such intervals as may be prescribed, a report mentioning the number
of complaints received, the number of complaints pending and the number of complaints
disposed of. The Committee feels that the Bill carries adequate provisions to ensure its
effective monitoring and implementation. The need is to ensure strict compliance of these
provisions of the Bill. The appropriate Government may keep these aspects in view while
framing rules in this respect so that the law is complied with strictly, without any laxity.
23. Title of the Bill
23.1 The Secretary, DAR&PG while tendering oral evidence before the Committee, said:
“...So far as the name of the Act is concerned, definitely other options were available there.
But, we thought of making it a comprehensive name, which will cover not only the delivery
of public services but also grievance redressal. So, it is a comprehensive title. I am not saying
that it is a very catchy title, but it is a comprehensive title...”
23.2 One of the witnesses was of the following opinion:
“...First point is that the title of the Bill itself needs a re-look. According to us ‘delivery of
goods’ should not form part of the title of the Bill. Redressal of grievances should come within
the body of the Bill...”
23.3 The Ministry, in its written comments furnished to the Committee, has stated that the title
has been approved by the Cabinet to reflect the element of “time bound delivery” of goods and
services.

23
23.4 The Committee takes note of the various suggestions that have come before it suggesting
a short and crisp title for the Bill. The Bill primarily seeks to put in place a mechanism to
ensure time bound delivery of goods and services and a grievance redressal mechanism in case
there is a failure in the time bound delivery of goods and services. The Bill envisages a
Citizens Charter which brings out in public domain the obligations, duties, commitments of the
Public Authority in the matter of providing goods and services within specified time limits
together with designation of the public servant responsible for delivery of such goods and
services. The Committee feels that the Citizens Charter finds a key position in the Bill and
is fairly at the root in achieving the objective of the Bill. Accordingly, the Committee
recommends that the title of the Bill may be shortened suitably but, it may essentially carry
the words ‘Citizens Charter’. The Committee would prefer “Citizens Charter Bill, 2012” as the
title of the Bill.
24. Scope of the Bill
24.1 In one of the memorandum submitted to the Committee, it has been stated that there are a
number of organizations, namely non-governmental organizations, companies, and even Government
organizations that would require goods and services from other service providers in the Government
or organizations authorized by the government. Therefore, it was suggested that the scope of this Bill
be enlarged.
24.2 The Committee takes note that the Punjab Right to Service Act, 2011 and the Rajasthan
Guaranteed Delivery of Public Services Act, 2011 have stipulated that access to the redressal
mechanism would be provided to all eligible persons. These Acts define eligible persons as ‘any person
who is eligible for the notified services’.
24.3 Shri M.R. Madhavan, PRS Legislative Research while placing his views before the Committee,
stated:
“...The definition of complaint is available only to a citizen. A State provides several services,
which are available as well as required, in some cases, by a foreign national as well. For
example, if a foreign national is a resident in India, he needs a driving licence and if he is
working here, he will require P AN of income tax. Does that person not require access to
grievance redressal mechanism? Why are we saying ‘citizens’ here? Why are we making that
distinction?...”
24.4 The Ministry, in its written comments furnished to the Committee, has stated that the
Government is open to suggestion.
24.5 The Committee takes note of the suggestion that the Bill should be extended to provide
coverage to the non-citizens also. The Committee in this regard takes note of the fact that
the Punjab Right to Service Act, 2011 and the Rajasthan Guaranteed Delivery of Public
Services Act, 2011 stipulate 
access to the redress mechanism to all eligible persons. These Acts
define eligible persons as ‘Any person who is eligible for notified services’.
24.6 In the given situation, the Committee would like the Ministry to review whether the
coverage of the Bill can be extended to the non-citizens also. The Committee notes the written
comments of the Ministry wherein they have said that they are open to suggestion in this
regard. Government can consider notifying a few limited services and goods as regards non-
citizens rather than totally excluding them. This may also help in establishing goodwill among
the international community.

24
CHAPTER-III
OTHER RELATED ISSUES
25. Need for the Bill
25.1 The Committee notes that the Service Delivery legislations enacted by 12 States are noteworthy.
However, they are limited to a few public services only. A broader canvas is needed to improve the
existing public service delivery being provided by Public Authorities. The State Acts do not have the
overarching structure being envisaged by this Bill.
25.2 One of the witnesses, while appearing before the Committee, said that:
“...I am speaking from my experience in dealing with tracking another important set of
legislations, that is, the 73rd and 74th Amendments of the Constitution, under which, Citizen’s
Charter and Redressal of Public Grievances are important items. Already, 22 States have
passed community participation and public disclosure laws and many of these laws include
specific Citizen’ s Charters. In some cases, they are provided for under the rules, and in some
cases, they are also provided for by the respective public authorities. For instance, Maharashtra
has an Act. But, the Bombay Municipal Corporation has a fairly extensive Citizen’ s Charter,
and there is also a fairly elaborate procedure about how grievances and several daily services
should be dealt with. Tamil Nadu has it. Haryana has it. A number of States have it. Now,
it is still not very clear that what has been the outcome of all these disclosure laws...”
25.3 The Committee is of the view that the Bill seeks to put in place a service delivery
mechanism both at the Central and the State level. This is a milestone step in the opinion
of the Committee. The decision to enact a Central legislation, as is apparent from the
statement of objects and reasons appended to the Bill, has emanated from the experience of
the Government of not being successful in extending Citizens Charter over a vast majority
of the people in the country. The Committee notes that the Government introduced in the
year 1997 the Citizens Charter which was voluntary in character and subsequently initiated
service excellence model called “Sevottam” in 2005 to give a new thrust to the implementation
of the Citizens Charter. Many States have also enacted Right to Public Service Delivery
Legislation in which a few important public services have been selected for service delivery.
No doubt these efforts are noteworthy but in the absence of an overarching structure, their
impact was diffused and limited. Therefore, the rationale and objective of bringing a
comprehensive legislation is to provide rights based approach and make the Citizens Charter
statutory and endow the public with the right to get delivery of services within the stipulated
timelines.
25.4 The Committee is of the view that the provisions of the Bill are salutary and will have
great impact on the service delivery system when operationalised by the Public Authorities
under the Central and the State Governments.
26. Integration with Electronic Services Delivery Bill
26.1 Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, was of the following opinion on this issue:
“...We must have convergence of various laws, for instance, Electronic Service Delivery law
24

25
and other laws. But ideally our submission is that, create a district ombudsman whose
jurisdiction also applies to Employment Guarantee Act and such other entitlement Acts and it
will come automatically to the grievance redressal authority and therefore, he can be drawn
from the Government for a period. He must be a senior officer who has a special rank, etc.,
of District Collector at least, so that he carries the conviction as the stature and power but
is outside the public agency and he can deal with all the issues related to all departments
within the State Government...”
26.2 He further stated that:
“...Every law is creating a National Commission, a State Commission, too many high powered
bodies acting parallel. It is not very wise. We are creating a large bureaucracy and post
retirement havens and enormous expenditure, without convergence. Sometimes actually there is
parallel jurisdiction and conflict of jurisdiction, all kinds of problems. Our appeal is and a
very humble appeal we make, the Electronic Service Delivery Act should actually be integrated
with this law, though of a separate Ministry, Ministry of Information and the Ministry of
Electronics have to pilot that, it must be integrated with this law...”
26.3 The Ministry, in its written comments furnished to the Committee, has stated that Government
is open to the suggestion that the two Bills may be harmoniously integrated.
26.4 The Committee takes note of the views expressed by the experts that various laws,
particularly, the Electronic Service Delivery Law should be integrated with the Citizens Charter
Bill. The Committee feels that such an integration would facilitate the rationalization of the
resources and better achieving of the objective of the Bill. The Committee notes the comments
of the Government in this regard that it is open to the suggestion that the two Bills may be
harmoniously integrated.
27. Reward Mechanism
27.1 The Committee takes note of the proposition made that the Bill may have provisions which will
make it mandatory for the respective Governments to design a reward scheme for best performing
public authorities and the personnel within. The resources for the financial incentives shall come from
the penalties in a particular geographic unit as well as a specified percentage of the fee collected by
the public authorities in that geographic unit. The respective Governments shall frame the rules, by
which the financial incentives shall be offered.
27.2 In this regard, Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan was of the following view:
“...we should also institutionalize the reward mechanism. Otherwise, it will not be a balanced
one, if you want to achieve the desired goal...”
27.3 The Committee sees merit in the propositions made before it that the Bill should have
mandatory provisions for a reward scheme for best performing public authorities and the
personnel within. In Committee’s view, such a reward scheme would prove to be a source of
encouragement and motivation for those public servants who were able to render the services
within the time targets specified in the Citizens Charter. The Committee notes that the Bill
already provides under Clause 45(3) to punish and impose penalty on those public servants who
falter in compliance of the Citizens Charter. The Committee feels that in this kind of system
being generated through the legislation, an element of motivation to encourage the officials
for performing efficiently will have far reaching effects on the success of the Bill. The
Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Government to consider providing a suitable reward
scheme for the officers working at various levels who have shown their impeccable performance
in delivery of services to the people.

26
28. Constitutionality of the Bill
28.1 The Ministry, in its written reply furnished to the Committee, has stated that the Bill has been
introduced under Item 8, ‘Actionable wrongs’ of the Concurrent List of the Constitution of India.
28.2 Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, while placing his views before the Committee, stated thus:
“...On matters of fundamental rights, every Government, including the local authority, has the
power to make laws and regulations. And, if there are simultaneous laws in existence made
by the Union Parliament and the State Legislature, we already have a Constitutional scheme
in which the Union law will be prevailing, wherever there is a conflict, unless the State law
has obtained the assent of the President of India. Now, on that principle, that law was
enacted...”
28.3 The representative of NCPRI, while speaking on this issue, said:
“...In terms of the federalism issue, there is a precedent in the form of the Consumer
Protection Act. I can take the local postal office for poor delivery of service to the District
Consumer Forum as much as I can take any other State-run enterprises for poor quality of
commodity or service that they deliver. So, we could think of developing the principles based
on that particular Act which is already in existence...”
28.4 However, Shri M.R. Madhavan, PRS Legislative Research stated that :
“...It is not clear to us whether Parliament has jurisdiction over defining such procedures for
States. Item 41 of the Seventh Schedule mentions State Public Services Parliament definitely
has jurisdiction over enacting this Bill to the extent it applies to public authorities at the
Union level. I am not clear and I think that needs a close examination whether its jurisdiction
extends to enacting similar provisions for State public authorities...”
28.5 The representative of Government of Madhya Pradesh, while touching upon this issue, stated
as follows:
“...I just want to express what the State Government feels only in one sentence. Do we really
need a Central law to determine the processes of delivering Khasra copies and water
connections in the State? That’ s what my State Government very strongly feels about it...”
28.6 Similar views were expressed by the representative of the Government of Punjab as stated
below:
“...Sir, firstly, if the Centre wants to enact a law about services provided by the Central
Government, we have no opinion on it. As far as that is concerned, the Centre is perfectly
within its jurisdiction. When it comes to the States, the fact is that various States have already
gone in for it and each State has found a model that is suitable to it...”
28.7 The Committee takes note of the fact that the Bill has been enacted by the Central
Government in pursuance to Entry 8 of List III in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution
of India which enumerates the subject matters falling under the Concurrent List. The said
Entry 8 mentions ‘actionable wrongs’. The Committee further takes note of the provisions of
Article 246 of the Constitution which deals with subject matters on which laws can be made
by the Parliament and the legislatures of the States. As per Article 246(2), both the Parliament
and the State Legislatures have the powers to legislate on matters enumerated in List III. The
Committee also takes note of the fact that the layout and the scheme of the Bill ensure that
the Public Authorities under the Central and the State Government, while implementing the
Bill, are independent of each other. The Committee feels that both the Central Government
and the State Governments would be in a position to implement the Bill independently and

27
without each others’ interference. Central legislation on subjects mentioned in the Concurrent
List, has always triggered the activities of the State Governments in that regard and, have
always been seen as bringing in greater awareness in the States about the subjects in question.
29. Capacity building
29.1 The Secretary, DAR&PG while making a presentation on the Bill before the Committee, said
that:
“...The capacity-building is a must for the Government officers. It is about developing their
skills and also telling them how to have Government process in engineering because Government
process is very important to render the services within timeline. And ‘sewottam’ is one such
thing where we have done a lot of work for capacity building, in some of the domains, not
in all...”
29.2 The Committee is aware of the fact that the Bill is a novel legislation of paramount
importance, whereby services are to be delivered to the citizens within the stipulated time. The
obligation to deliver goods/services in time would certainly need efficient work force of
officials. The Committee is of the view that enhancing individual efficiency lies at the core for
the successful implementation of the provisions of the Bill. The Committee, therefore, impresses
upon the Government to undertake capacity building measures such as training, adopting
efficiency improving techniques etc.
30. Financial assistance to States
30.1 Many State Governments which furnished their comments to the Committee, have opined that
Central funds should be granted for setting up infrastructure, enhancing manpower, giving publicity to
the statute, etc.
30.2 Shri Nripendra Misra, while tendering oral evidence before the Committee, stated thus:
“...There is one Act called the Construction Workers’ Welfare Act, 1996. Sir, this Act envisages
that for construction workers, a cess will be created. It is a Central Act but the entire
responsibility has been given to the States. The cess will be collected by the States, the rules
will be formed by the States and the welfare activities for the labourers or the workers
connected with the construction activities will be done...”
30.3 The Committee takes note of the concerns raised by some of the representatives who
deposed before the Committee regarding the provision of finance for meeting the obligations
provided for in the Bill. The Committee further notes that the Financial Memorandum
appended to the Bill refers to the likely additional expenditure to be incurred by the Central
Government in the implementation of the Bill. The Committee is of the view that timely
provision of goods and services is the responsibility of the Public Authority and the Central
Government and State Governments are distinct Public Authorities under the Bill. Therefore,
the issue of meeting the financial requirements for the implementation of the Bill in respect
of services in the States have to be addressed by the Central Government and the State
Governments themselves. Services and goods are to be provided on time by the State
Government in their respective departments. But in case we are enacting a loaded legislation
for them, it is the duty of the Central Government to share some financial burden in this
regards lest, the law remains unenforceable, partly or otherwises.

28
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
Definitions
Citizens Charter
1. The Committee takes note of the fact that the Citizens Charter contemplated under
the Bill envisages enumeration of all the goods supplied and services rendered by a
Public Authority. A strong view has come before the Committee that the Bill should
provide for notification of services by the appropriate Government for the purpose of
inclusion in the Citizens Charter. In fact, this is the position in several States including
Madhya Pradesh, Delhi, etc. where only notified services have been brought under the
Citizens Charter. [Para 6.4]
2. The Committee does not find any merit in the above proposition as this would only lead
to lowering the pace of implementation of the Bill. The Committee feels that there
should be no difficulty in incorporating all goods and services in the Citizens Charter
at the initial stage itself particularly when this has to be done by the Public Authority
and the said Public Authority has the option to determine the time period within which
the goods/services being dealt with by it shall be rendered. The Committee, accordingly,
endorses the provisions of the Bill that oblige the Public Authorities to incorporate all
categories of goods supplied and services rendered in the Citizens Charter. [Para 6.5]
Complaint
3. A view has come before the Committee that the definition of the term ‘Complaint’ in
the Bill is too wide as it includes violation of any law, policy, programme, order or
scheme by the Public Authority and an apprehension has been expressed whether the
Public Authority or the appropriate Government would be in a position to settle
complaints on such wide spectrum issues within the limited period provided for in the
Bill to the Grievance Redressal Officer, Designated Authority, etc. The Committee also
takes note of the difficulty pointed out by the witnesses arising out of certain grievance
redressal mechanisms already being in place and the likely conflict with the procedure
sought to be put in place through the proposed legislation. [Para 7.11]
4. In the Committee’s view, the definition of the term ‘Complaint’ is comprehensive
enough so as to cover not only the cases of failure to deliver goods or render services
in accordance with the Citizens Charter but also cases where the Public Authority has
violated any law, policy, scheme, order, etc. and it should be possible for the Public
Authority to handle the same within the given parameters. The Committee is of the
firm opinion that issues related to violation of law, policy, scheme, policy, etc. are vital
and the same cannot be kept outside the purview of the grievance redress mechanism.
However, in case it is felt that such matters require some different time schedule for
adjudication, the Ministry may examine the issue and provide appropriately in the Bill.
[Para 7.12]
5. As regards the specific suggestion that the definition of the term ‘Complaint’ should
also cover undue delay in the delivery of goods and services, the Committee is of the
view that cause of action for a complaint arises as soon as there is failure to deliver
28

29
goods/services within the time specified in the Citizens Charter and hence there is no
need to specifically add undue delay as a basis for the complaint. However, the
Committee being deeply concerned about preventing undue delay in the delivery of
goods/services, recommends that Government may suitably incorporate in the rules to
be framed under the legislation, provisions specifying the shortest possible time for
delivery of goods and services of common nature. [Para 7.13]
Designated Authority
6. The Committee notes the novel concept of Designated Authority that has been
incorporated in the Bill. Designated Authority means an officer or authority outside the
public authority that has been authorized to hear appeals against the orders of the
Grievance Redressal Officer. The Designated Authority has also been empowered to
impose penalty and award compensation to the complainant. [Para 8.7]
7. An apprehension has been expressed about the feasibility of having a Designated
Authority from outside the Public Authority. The Committee finds merit in having
Designated Authority from outside the Public Authority and hopes that it would discharge
its functions more independently and objectively compared to the situation where the
Designated Authority had been from within the Public Authority. The Committee hopes
that substantial percentage of complaints would be settled at the level of Designated
Authority keeping in view the fact that it has been bestowed with the power of imposing
penalty on the defaulting public servant and award compensation to the complainant.
The Committee is also in agreement with the viewpoint which has come before it that
the Designated Authority should be available at the district/sub-district level so that the
general public has an easy and convenient access to it. [Para 8.8]
8. The Committee finds that the Bill does not provide anything regarding who all could
be appointed as a Designated Authority. Further, in terms of Clause 2(h) which defines
this term, relevant details about the Designated Authority have been left to be provided
for in the Rules. The Designated Authority being an important level in the grievance
redress mechanism, it is important that the Bill gives an outline of the form, shape and
the content of this level in the grievance redress machinery. [Para 8.9]
9. The Committee also has some observations to make with regard to certain provisions
of Clause 11 of the Bill which relates to appeal before the Designated Authority. As per
Proviso to Clause 11(7) of the Bill, an appeal of urgent or immediate nature shall be
disposed off before the date in which the cause of action may cease to exist. The
Committee recommends that this Proviso may be amended so as to provide for disposal
of appeal ‘well’ before the date on which the subject matter of cause of action may
cease to exist. Secondly, Clause 11(3) provides for acknowledgement of receipt of appeal
by the Designated Authority but it does not prescribe a time period for such
acknowledgement. The Committee notes that in terms of Clause 8, the Grievance
Redress Officer is required to acknowledge receipt of complaint within two days. The
Committee recommends that a time period for acknowledging complaints may be
prescribed in case of Designated Authority also. The Committee further recommends
that in matters of personal delivery of complaints, acknowledgement must be on the
spot. Further, intimation regarding acknowledgement should reach the complainant
within a specific time period. [Para 8.10]
Grievance Redress Officer
10. The Committee notes the provisions of Clause 10 of the Bill which provide that the

30
Grievance Redress Officer shall, after the expiry of 30 days period, report every
complaint that has not been redressed, along with relevant details, to the Designated
Authority and it shall be treated as an appeal with the Designated Authority. The
Committee appreciates this mechanism which is people friendly. The Committee, however,
recommends a slight modification in Clause 10 so as to provide therein that the GRO,
while forwarding complaints to the Designated Authority, should also inform the
complainant by adding words ‘under intimation to the complainant’ at the end of Clause
10 of the Bill. [Para 9.3]
Public Authority
11. The Committee notes that the term ‘Public Authority’ appearing in the Bill has a wide
coverage extending to Bodies/Institutions set up under the Constitution of India, the
laws made by the Parliament/State Legislatures. The Bill also authorizes the appropriate
Government to cover, by issue of notification Bodies/Institutions substantially financed
by the appropriate Government, Government companies under the Companies Act, 1956
as well as private entities engaged in the supply of goods/services on private-public
partnership model or otherwise. The Committee is happy to note that this wider
definition of the term Public Authority would uphold citizens’ rights for prompt service
not only with reference to Government institutions/bodies but also with reference to the
private entities which are working for Government under some memorandum/contract.
This is a welcome step particularly keeping in view the increasing participation of
private sector in the service sector in partnership with Government. [Para 10.4]
12. The Committee, however, is also concerned over the use of the word ‘Substantially
financed’ in Clauses 4(n)(iv)(A) & (B) of the Bill. The Committee finds this expression
to be vague and recommends that it should be suitably qualified so that there is no
ambiguity with regard to the Institutions/Organisations receiving funds from appropriate
Government which could be brought within the scope of the Bill. [Para 10.5]
Publication and reviewing of Citizens Charter
13. The Committee fully appreciates the viewpoint presented before it regarding the people’s
participation in the finalization of the Citizens Charter and its review from time to
time. In this context, the Committee notes the provisions of Clause 5 of the Bill which
provides for wide and extensive publicity of the Citizens Charter through all available
means and its updating every year. The Committee also takes note of the provisions
of Clause 4(3) of the Bill which authorizes the appropriate Government to make and
notify rules in relation to the Citizens Charter. The Committee is convinced that
people’s participation in the finalization and review of the Citizens Charter would be a
useful step and the Charter finalized in this manner would have better acceptability and
compliance. The Committee, accordingly, recommends consultation with the concerned
stakeholders in the process of finalization/review of the Citizens Charter through
suitable provisions in the rules under Clause 4(3). [Para 11.4.]
Information and Facilitation Centres
14. The Committee appreciates the concept of Information and Facilitation Centers envisaged
in Chapter IV of the Bill. The Committee feels that the setting up of such Facilitation
Centers would considerably ease the problems being faced by the common man today
in participating/availing benefit under so many schemes/projects announced by
Government from time to time for the benefit of the common man. The Committee is

31
in full agreement with the suggestions received by it regarding the location of these
Facilitations Centers. These Centers should be so located that they are easily accessible.
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Facilitation Centers should be located
at the point where the service is being provided or goods are being supplied by the
Public Authority so that people approach the Public Authority with proper information/
guidance. This, in the opinion of the Committee, would save the common man from
much of the harassment and trouble which he faces at present due to absence of
guidance/help. In this context, the Committee also recommends that the persons
manning such Facilitation Centres should be selected/trained suitably so that they are
polite, courteous and cooperative while dealing with the public. [Para 12.5]
15. The Committee further recommends that these Facilitation Centres should be properly
equipped with facilities for communication, etc so that they are able to discharge their
responsibility properly and satisfactorily covering all matters/areas falling within their
jurisdiction. The Committee, in this context, would also recommend to Government to
consider adopting private-public partnership model in the case of these facilitation
centers whereby some value added services could be added on nominal/moderate payment
basis. Such an arrangement, in Committee’s view, would on the one hand, resolve the
constraint of manpower which is generally seen with the Public Authorities and, on the
other hand, improve the quality of services, generate employment in the private sector
and also partially neutralize operational cost of the facilitation centers. [Para 12.6]
Acknowledgement of complaint, appeal
16. The Committee notes that Clause 11(3) provides for acknowledgement of receipt of
appeal by the Designated Authority but it does not prescribe a time period for such
acknowledgement. The Committee notes that in terms of Clause 8, the Grievance
Redress Officer is required to acknowledge receipt of complaint within two days. The
Committee recommends that a time period for acknowledging complaints may be
prescribed in case of Designated Authority also. [Para 13.5]
Time frame for redressal of grievance
17. The Committee takes note of the provisions of Clause 9(1)(a) of the Bill which provides
that the Grievance Redress Officer shall remedy the grievance in a time frame not
exceeding 30 days. The Committee finds merit in the suggestions made by the witnesses
that such a standard prescription of 30 days time period might create an adverse effect
in certain cases where an urgent relief is required. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that the provisions of Clause 9 may be modified suitably so as to provide
for disposal of matters by the GRO in a shorter period in urgent cases. In case of
complaints that have a bearing on the application of law, scheme, etc. the Committee
recommends Government to consider a wider time schedule at the level of the GRO
and the Designated Authority. [Para 14.4]
Time limit for appeal
18. The Committee takes note of the fact that the Bill provides for a 30 days time period
for preferring an appeal with the Designated Authority and with the Public Grievance
Redressal Commission. The Committee does not feel the necessity of increasing this
time period beyond 30 days as both these Appellate Authorities have been vested with
discretionary powers to admit appeals received after the expiry of the prescribed period
of 30 days under Clauses 11, 12 and 29 of the Bill. [Para 15.3]

32
Lesser number of tier of appeals
19. The Committee is conscious of the fact that the Bill provides for appeal at four stages
going up to the level of the Lokpal/Lokayukta. The Committee has already recommended
in para 21 ‘Appeal to the Lokpal’ that follows in the report that the provision in the Bill
for appeal to the Lokpal/Lokayukta is undesirable and unnecessary. The remaining three
levels of appeal are desirable and appropriate in the Committee’s view. [Para 16.2]
Search Committee
20. The Committee takes note of the provisions of Clauses 15(2) and 32(2) of the Bill which
provide for Selection Committee in the process of the appointment of Central and State
Grievance Redress Commissioners. These provisions also refer to Search Committees
consisting of such Members as may be prescribed. [Para 17.3]
21. The Committee takes note of the proposals that these Search Committees should
consist of persons of standing having special knowledge and expertise in matters
relating to handling of grievances, public administration, policy making and management.
[Para 17.4]
22. The Committee is agreeable to the view that the Search Committees play an important
role in the selection process. Accordingly, the Committee finds merit in the suggestion
to have specialized persons in the relevant field as Members of the Search Committee.
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that these aspects may be taken care of
adequately by making suitable provisions in the rules. [Para 17.5]
Retirement age for the Central Commissioners
23. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that clause 34 of the Bill which provides the
terms of Office of Central Grievance Redressal Commissioners may be amended on the
lines of clause 17 of the Bill. [Para 18.3]
Imposition of penalty, Granting compensation
24. The Committee notes that the Bill provides for a maximum penalty of up to Rs.50,000/-
to be imposed by the Designated Authority on the official responsible for delivery of
goods/services. The Committee feels that while deciding the quantum of penalty, the
Appellate Authorities should have due regard to the hardships faced by the complainant
in pursuing the complaint. The Committee recommends that suitable provision may be
added in the Bill to this effect. [Para 19.5]
25. The Committee takes note of the Proviso to Clause 45(2) of the Bill which says that
the amount of compensation awarded shall not exceed amount of penalty imposed under
Clause 45(1) of the Bill. Clause 45(2) of the Bill already provides that the Appellate
Authority may direct only a portion of the penalty imposed, as deemed fit, to be
awarded by way of compensation to the appellant. In view of the provisions of Clause
45(2), the Proviso thereto seems redundant. The Committee, accordingly, recommends
that the Proviso to Clause 45(2) may be deleted. [Para 19.6]
26. The Committee also takes note of the provisions of Clause 45(3) where under a public
servant found guilty under Clause 45(1) is liable for disciplinary proceedings in case he
is proved guilty of a mala fide  action in respect of any provision of the Act. The
Committee feels that the public official once having been found guilty under Clause
45(1) should not be required to be proved guilty of mala fide  action again in terms of

33
Clause 45(3) before being made liable for imposition of punishment/penalty by the
disciplinary authority. Element of mala fide is not easy to establish and prove, and
further, once a public servant is proved to have violated the law which requires him to
provide a service or goods in question, in time, whether the action of the public servant
was mala fide or not is not material. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Clause 45(3) be amended suitably to give effect to these observations. [Para 19.7]
Quantum of penalty, compensation
27. The Committee notes that Rs 50,000 is the upper limit of the penalty that can be
imposed on the erring public servant. The Committee has already recommended in para
10.5 above, the parameters for deciding the quantum of penalty. Further, this being the
maximum limit of the penalty and the actual penalty being based upon the facts and
circumstances of the case, the Committee is not inclined to interfere in the quantum
of penalty prescribed in the Bill. [Para 20.3]
Appeal to Lokpal
28. The Committee takes note of the provisions of Clause 47 of the Bill which provides for
appeal to the Lokpal/Lokayukta against the decisions of the Central/ State Grievance
Redressal Commission, respectively. The Committee does not find much justification in
providing for appeal with the Lokpal/Lokayukta against the decision of the Central/
State Commission. Such a linkage, in Committee’s view, is unfounded as the institution
of Lokpal has been set up under a different legislation aiming to put in place an anti
corruption institution while the objective of the present Bill is to ensure timely delivery
of goods/services and grievance redressal. Besides, the Bill in hand, already provides for
three levels of appeal up to the level of the Commission and adding another level of
appeal above the Commission level does not seem to be called for. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that the provisions of the Bill which provide for preference of
appeal to the Lokpal/Lokayukta against the decision of the Central/State Commissions
may be deleted. [Para 21.4]
Monitoring the implementation of the Act
29. The Committee appreciates the concerns expressed by the witnesses over the need for
monitoring the implementation of the Bill. The Committee is convinced that an effective
monitoring of the implementation of the Bill would definitely yield better results. The
Committee, in this context, takes note of the provisions contained in Clauses 26(3),
43(3) and 46 of the Bill which vest the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission
and the Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission with the powers to suo motu
take notice of failure to deliver goods and services in accordance with the provisions
of the Act and refer such cases for disposal to the Head of Department of the concerned
public authority. The Head of the Department in turn is required to submit an Action
Taken Report to the Commission within 30 days. Further, under Clause 46, every public
authority is required to ensure that each Grievance Redressal officer keeps a record of
the complaints made to it or appeals preferred and the decisions on such complaints and
appeals and publish on its website by the 15th day of every month or at such intervals
as may be prescribed a report mentioning the number of complaints received, the
number of complaints pending and the number of complaints disposed of. The Committee
feels that the Bill carries adequate provisions to ensure its effective monitoring and
implementation. The need is to ensure strict compliance of these provisions of the Bill.
The appropriate Government may keep these aspects in view while framing rules in this
respect so that the law is complied strictly, without any laxity. [Para 22.5]

34
Title of the Bill
30. The Committee takes note of the various suggestions that have come before it
suggesting a short and crisp title for the Bill. The Bill primarily seeks to put in place
a mechanism to ensure time bound delivery of goods and services and a grievance
redressal mechanism in case there is a failure in the time bound delivery of goods
and services. The Bill envisages a Citizens Charter which brings out in public domain
the obligations, duties, commitments of the Public Authority in the matter of providing
goods and services within specified time limits together with designation of the public
servant responsible for delivery of such goods and services. The Committee feels that
the Citizens Charter finds a key position in the Bill and is fairly at the root in
achieving the objective of the Bill. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the
title of the Bill may be shortened suitably but, it may essentially carry the words
‘Citizens Charter’. The Committee would prefer “Citizen Charter Bill, 2012” as the
title of the Bill. [Para 23.4]
Scope of the Bill
31. The Committee takes note of the suggestion that the Bill should be extended to provide
coverage to the non-citizens also. The Committee in this regard takes note of the fact
that the Punjab Right to Service Act, 2011 and the Rajasthan Guaranteed Delivery of
Public Services Act, 2011 stipulate access to the redress mechanism to all eligible
persons. These Acts define eligible persons as ‘Any person who is eligible for notified
services’. [Para 24.5]
32. In the given situation, the Committee would like the Ministry to review whether the
coverage of the Bill can be extended to the non-citizens also. The Committee notes the
written comments of the Ministry wherein they have said that they are open to
suggestion in this regard. Government can consider notifying a few limited services and
goods as regards non-citizens rather than totally excluding them. This may also help in
establishing goodwill among the international community. [Para 24.6]
OTHER RELATED ISSUES
Need for the Bill
33. The Committee is of the view that the Bill seeks to put in place a service delivery
mechanism both at the Central and the State level. This is a milestone step in the
opinion of the Committee. The decision to enact a Central legislation, as is apparent
from the statement of objects and reasons appended to the Bill, has emanated from the
experience of the Government of not being successful in extending Citizens Charter
over a vast majority of the people in the country. The Committee notes that the
Government introduced in the year 1997 the Citizens Charter which was voluntary in
character and subsequently initiated service excellence model called “Sevottam” in 2005
to give a new thrust to the implementation of the Citizens Charter. Many States have
also enacted Right to Public Service Delivery Legislation in which a few important
public services have been selected for service delivery. No doubt these. efforts are
noteworthy but in the absence of an overarching structure, their impact was diffused
and limited. Therefore, the rationale and objective of bringing a comprehensive legislation
is to provide rights based approach and make the Citizens Charter statutory and endow
the public with the right to get delivery of services within the stipulated timelines.
[Para 25.3]

35
34. The Committee is of the view that the provisions of the Bill are salutary and will have
great impact on the service delivery system when operationalised by the Public Authorities
under the Central and the State Governments. [Para 25.4]
Integration with Electronic Services Delivery Bill
35. The Committee takes note of the views expressed by the experts that various laws,
particularly, the Electronic Service Delivery Law should be integrated with the Citizens
Charter Bill. The Committee feels that such an integration would facilitate the
rationalization of the resources and better achieving of the objective of the Bill. The
Committee notes the comments of the Government in this regard that it is open to the
suggestion that the two Bills may be harmoniously integrated. [Para 26.4]
Reward Mechanism
36. The Committee sees merit in the propositions made before it that the Bill should have
mandatory provisions for a reward scheme for best performing public authorities and
the personnel within. In Committee’s view, such a reward scheme would prove to be a
source of encouragement and motivation for those public servants who were able to
render the services within the time targets specified in the Citizens Charter. The
Committee notes that the Bill already provides under Clause 45(3) to punish and
impose penalty on those public servants who falter in compliance of the Citizens
Charter. The Committee feels that in this kind of system being generated through the
legislation, an element of motivation to encourage the officials for performing efficiently
will have far reaching effects on the success of the Bill. The Committee, therefore,
impresses upon the Government to consider providing a suitable reward scheme for the
officers working at various levels who have shown their impeccable performance in
delivery of services to the people. [Para 27.3]
Constitutionality of the Bill
37. The Committee takes note of the fact that the Bill has been enacted by the Central
Government in pursuance to Entry 8 of List III in the Seventh Schedule of the
Constitution of India which enumerates the subject matters falling under the Concurrent
List. The said Entry 8 mentions ‘actionable wrongs’. The Committee further takes note
of the provisions of Article 246 of the Constitution which deals with subject matters on
which laws can be made by the Parliament and the legislatures of the States. As per
Article 246(2), both the Parliament and the State Legislatures have the powers to
legislate on matters enumerated in List III. The Committee also takes note of the fact
that the layout and the scheme of the Bill ensure that the Public Authorities under the
Central and the State Government, while implementing the Bill are independent of each
other. The Committee feels that both the Central Government and the State Governments
would be in a position to implement the Bill independently and without each others’
interference. Central legislation on subjects mentioned in the Concurrent List, has
always triggered the activities of the State Governments in that regard and have always
been seen as bringing in greater awareness in the States about the subjects in question.
[Para 28.7]
Capacity building
38. The Committee is aware of the fact that the Bill is a novel legislation of paramount
importance, whereby services are to be delivered to the citizens within the stipulated

36
time. The obligation to deliver goods/services in time would certainly need efficient
work force of officials. The Committee is of the view that enhancing individual efficiency
lies at the core for the successful implementation of the provisions of the Bill. The
Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Government to undertake capacity building
measures such as training, adopting efficiency improving techniques etc. [Para 29.2]
Financial assistance to States
39. The Committee takes note of the concerns raised by some of the representatives who
deposed before the Committee regarding the provision of finance for meeting the
obligations provided for in the Bill. The Committee further notes that the Financial
Memorandum appended to the Bill refers to the likely additional expenditure to be
incurred by the Central Government in the implementation of the Bill. The Committee
is of the view that timely provision of goods and services is the responsibility of the
Public Authority and the Central Government and State Governments are distinct
Public Authorities under the Bill. Therefore, the issue of meeting the financial
requirements for the implementation of the Bill in respect of services in the States
have to be addressed by the Central Government and the State Governments themselves.
Services and goods are to be provided on time by the State Government in their
respective departments. But in case we are enacting a loaded legislation for them, it is
the duty of the Central Government to share some financial burden in this regards lest,
the law remains unenforceable, partly or otherwise. [Para 30.3]

MINUTES OF DISSENT

39
Minutes of Dissent Submitted by Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy:
I submit below a few points for consideration of the Committee before adopting the draft
report in the above subject:
1. Redressal of Grievances and Delivery of Services in the States are covered by list-II of
seventh schedule of the Constitution of India. As such, the proposed Central Act should
be limited to public authorities under the Union Government only. In so far as the
rendering of time bound delivery of goods and services to the people and/or redressal of
their grievances in the States are concerned, those should be left to the domain of State
legislatures for enactment of an appropriate legislation to meet the objects of the present
Bill.
2. If the Central Act is thrusted upon the States as the present one, this will not only offend
the federal character of the Constitution of India, but also make way for the Centre to
transgress into the powers of the States and may tend to jeopardise and/or jettison our
constitutional arrangements in vogue.
3. Chapter VII of the present bill which deals with establishment of State Public Grievances
Redressal Commission and all other provisions relating to time bound delivery of the
duties and responsibilities of the Public Authorities in the States be deleted and kept out
of the ambit of the present bill.
4. At best, the present Bill may be circulated to States which have not yet framed any
legislation in this regard to enable them to bring State law with such modifications/
additions/ alterations as the State legislatures may deem fit and proper.
5. This may please be treated as dissenting note to the extent the Bill relates to the States
and as discussed above.
Sd/-
(Sukhendu Sekhar Roy)

MINUTES

43
RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL,
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 4.15 P.M. on Wednesday, the 8 th February, 2012 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Balchandra Mungekar
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Ram Jethmalani
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
6. Shri O.T. Lepcha
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Kirti Azad
8. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
9. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
10. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
11. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
12. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
13. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
14. Shri Harin Pathak
15. Shri Lalu Prasad
16. Shri S. Semmalai
17. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
18. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer

44
NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES
1. Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, President, Lok Satta Party, Hyderabad;
2. Shri Ashwani Mahesh
3. Shri Surendra Srivastava
4. Shri Sandeep Verma
5. Shri Milan Gupta
OFFICIAL - WITNESSES
A. Representatives of the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public
Grievances
1. Shri Shashi Shekhar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Satish Kumar, Director.
B. Representative of Legislative Department
1. Dr. G . Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. * * *
3. Thereafter, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan who was
invited to appear before the Committee for tendering oral evidence on the “Right of Citizens for
Time Bound Delivery of Goods and Services and Redressal of their Grievances Bill, 2011.” He
started his presentation by thanking the Committee for giving him the opportunity to place his views
before it.
4. The witness termed the Bill as a citizen centric and a sound legislative proposal as it provides
for a long-awaited system to ensure accountability of the public delivery of goods and services, at
the grass root level. Though he was in agreement with the general principles of the Bill, he
expressed concerns over some specifics and also the scope of the Bill. He, inter-alia, raised seven
key issues, which in his view, needed to be earnestly considered to enhance the efficacy of the Bill.
These seven issues were:- rational delineation of the coverage of some definitions, harmonious
convergence of the provisions of the present Bill with other Bills/Acts dealing with similar subjects,
particularly, the RTI Act, 2005 and the Electronic Delivery of Goods and Services Bill etc., ensuring
real access to the citizens, an inbuilt compensation, mechanism for non-delivery of goods and
services in line with the Citizen’s Charter of U.K., institutionalizing a reward mechanism, categorization
of required time-frames keeping in view the complexity or the simplicity of the tasks and the
jurisdictional reach of the Bill.
5. Having elaborated upon the abovesaid issues, the witness highlighted the likely roadblocks,
which need to be overcome in order to make the provisions of the Bill, more enforceable and
effective. He also suggested necessary amendments in some provisions of the Bill, keeping in view the
workability quotient. While elaborating upon such suggestions, he was of the earnest view that instead
of an all inclusive omnibus approach to cover everything under the Bill, a rational distinction among
various types of complaints/grievances needs to be considered. The other specific issues touched upon
in his presentation were:- clause 4(2) and clause 45(1) dealing with the nature of Citizens’ Charter,
clause 2 (h) (k) providing for the definition of Designated Authority, Clauses 6(1) and 6(2) for the
common information and facilitation centre, etc.
*** Relates to some other matter.

45
6. The Chairman and Members of the Committee sought clarifications on some issues, which
were responded to in detail by the witnesses.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee adjourned at 5.59 P.M.

46
XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 17 th February, 2012 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Balchandra Mungekar
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
4. Shri O.T. Lepcha
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Kirti Azad
7. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
8. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
9. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
10. Kumari Meenakshi Nataranjan
11. Adv. A. Sampath
12. Shri S. Semmalai
13. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
14. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
THE RIGHT OF CITIZENS FOR TIME BOUND DELIVERY OF GOODS AND SERVICES
AND REDRESSAL OF THEIR GRIEV ANCES BILL, 2011
OFFICIAL WITNESSES
A. Representatives of the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances
1. Shri Ramesh C. Misra, Secretary
2. Shri P.K. Jha, Joint Secretary
46

47
B. Representatives of the Legislative Department
1. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.R. Battu, Additional Legislative Counsel
3. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
NON - OFFICIAL WITNESSES:
I. CII
1. Shri Salil Singhal, Chairman
2. Shri S.Sen, Principal Adviser
3. Shri Bharat Wakhlu, Resident Director
4. Shri Shreeram Lakshman, Deputy Director
II. National Campaign for People’s Right to Information
1. Ms. Aruna Roy
2. Shri Shekhar Singh
3. Shri Harsh Mander
4. Shri Nikhil Dey
5. Shri Venkatesh Nayak
6. Ms. Anjali Bharadwaj
***
2. The Chairman greeted the Members of the Committee and welcomed the Secretary, Department
of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances who had been invited to appear before the Committee
to make a presentation on the Right of Citizens for Time Bound Delivery of Goods and Services and
Redressal of their Grievances Bill, 2011. The Secretary made a power point presentation, highlighting
the salient features of the Bill and its objectives. Responding to queries, the Secretary appraised the
Committee that the Information and Facilitation Centres are to be set up at the Gram Panchayat level
and that the penalty is imposable on the designated official responsible for delivery of goods/services
or the Grievance Redressal Officer in case of failure to deliver the goods/services.
3. While appreciating the provisions of the Bill, the Members were circumspect about its
implementation in the States and whether the existing manpower in various Departments would be
sufficient to handle the anticipated workload. The Secretary responded to the queries raised by the
Members. Members expressed concern about the convenience of public in availing remedies available
under the Bill from the angle of logistics.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
(Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi arrived and assumed the Chair in the meeting)
4. The Chairman requested the representatives of CII to tender their views on the Bill. While
voicing their appreciation for the objective of the Bill, they were of the view that timely delivery of
services needs proper administration and that to achieve this end, there is a need for a change in the
rules of business, processes and systems by which decisions are taken. They emphasized on the need
for an in-built system of reprimand and punishment for non-performance. They felt that if the
responsibility is fixed at the top level, there would be little need for such a legislation. They clarified
on the points put forth by the Members.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
*** Relates to some other matter.

48
5. Next, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of NCPRI to the meeting and requested them
to place their views on the Bill, before the Committee. The representatives of NCPRI opined that the
provision in the Bill which mandates that the Designated Authority shall be outside the Public Authority
is appreciable. They suggested that the Designated Authority may be empowered to protect the
interests of whistleblowers also and that non-citizens may also be permitted to file a complaint for
services rendered to them during their presence in India. They also put forth the concept of having
consolidated bodies at the District/State level for dealing with matters under various legislations such
as the Consumer Protection Act, RTI Act and this Bill. They opined 1% of the budget of the Centrally
Sponsored Schemes would be sufficient for meeting the expenses of such a set up. The representatives
felt that this would avoid duplication, lead to optimum utilization of resources, would be logistically
convenient to the people and to a large extent resolve the federal issue also as the establishments
would be functioning on a territorial basis and not on the basis whether the Public Authority belongs
to the Central or the State Governments. They replied to the queries put forward by the Chairman
and Members of the Committee.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
6. * * *
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee adjourned at 6.32 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

49
XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 29 th February, 2012 in Committee Room, G-074,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Harin Pathak — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte
4. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Kirti Azad
6. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
9. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
10. Shri Pinaki Misra
11. Shri Lalu Prasad
12. Adv. A. Sampath
13. Shri S. Semmalai
14. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
15. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
16. Shri Arun Subhash Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
49

50
THE RIGHT OF CITIZENS FOR TIME BOUND DELIVERY OF GOODS AND SERVICES
AND REDRESSAL OF THEIR GRIEV ANCES BILL, 2011.
A. NON - OFFICIAL WITNESSES:
I. Public Interest Foundation
Shri Nripendra Misra, IAS (Retd.) Director.
II. FICCI Quality Forum
Dr. Sanjeevan Bajaj, CEO
III. Centre for Policy Research
1. Shri K.C. Sivaramakrishnan, Chairman
2. Ms. Yamini Aiyar, Senior Fellow
IV. PRS Legislative Research
1. Shri M.R. Madhavan
2. Ms. Harsimran Kalra
3. Ms. Pallavi Bedi
V. Centre for Governance
1. Shri B.K. Taimni, Core Group Member
2. Shri Mahesh Kapoor, Core Group Member
VI. Pardarshita
1. Ms. Ritu Mehra, Chairperson
2. Shri Rajiv Kumar
B. OFFICIAL WITNESSES:
Ministry of Law and Justice
• Legislative Department
1. Dr. S.D. Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. Shri N.R. Battu, Additional Legislative Counsel
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
• Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances
1. Shri Shashi Shekhar, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Satish Kumar, Director
2. At the outset, Shri Harin Pathak, a Member of the Committee was voted to the Chair. He
welcomed the Members of the Committee and also the witnesses who had been invited for tendering
oral evidence on The Right of Citizens for Time Bound Delivery of Goods and Services and Redressal
of their Grievances Bill, 2011. He then requested the witnesses to place their views on the Bill, before
the Committee.
3. On the basis of his experience of dealing with the 73
rd and 74 th Amendments of the
Constitution, and the experience of functioning of Citizens’ Charters in various States,
Shri Shivaramakrishnan of Centre for Policy Research highlighted some structural issues which
according to him need to be considered while legislating a Central law on the subject. He pointed out

51
that several States already have such laws and efforts should be made to learn from their experience,
i.e. both the positive points as well as the shortcomings. Accordingly to him, putting in place an
overarching structure alone may not lead to the desired results. It was further pointed out that such
legislations like the Right to Education already have an inbuilt grievances redressal mechanism and,
therefore, the issue of multiplicity of agencies need to be kept in view. He also referred to the need
to have a single Window System as the fleet of GROs was too large. Ms. Yamini Aiyar, colleague of
Shri Sivaramakrishnan expressed her apprehension over the consequences of the likely overlapping
between the existing State Acts on the subject of Citizens’ Charters and proposed Central Bill providing
for an overarching structure in this regard.
4. Shri Nripendra Mishra of Public Interest Foundation raised some critical issues in his presentation
vis-a-vis the subject- matter of the present Bill. Without going into the question of legality/constitutionality,
he explained that the Bill in its present form may pave the way for likely jurisdictional conflict between
the Centre and States, which in turn, might affect the efficiency and performance of the Bill. In
support of his argument, he cited the example of Construction Workers’ Welfare Act, 1996, which is
a Central Act but the responsibility for its implementation has been assigned to the States. On the basis
of some empirical evidence, he tried to indicate that the functioning of the said Act has not been
effective due to the reluctance on the part of the States. He was apprehensive that the present Bill
having similar jurisdictional framework may meet the same end. Going into the details in this regard,
he also interpreted clause 51 of the present Bill and drew the conclusion that due to this clause, the
present Bill will co-exist with the prevailing States Acts on the subject. In such a situation, he opined
that harmonious synchronization between the Centre and State Acts would be an uphill task, which
ultimately might weaken the effectiveness of the Bill in practice. Other main issues that figured in his
presentation were definition of the term ‘complaint’ and linkage of the present Bill with the institutions
of Lokayuktas and Lokpal, which according to him was superfluous. According to him, the legislation
was needed only for the Central sphere.
5. Dr. Sanjeevan Bajaj, the representative of FICCI, in her presentation, primarily commented
upon the service delivery aspect of the Bill. She supported the Bill, provided that there was an inbuilt
mechanism to have time norm attached to various services so as to ensure measurable standards in
their delivery. For ensuring the implementability aspect of the Bill, she was of the view that the
monitoring part needs to be strengthened through a system of management audit in the lines of
financial audit.
6. Shri Madhavan of PRS, Legislative Research, while voicing his opinion on the Bill, raised
mainly five issues. Firstly, referring to Item 41 of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution viz.; the
‘State Public Services’, he was apprehensive whether Parliament had jurisdiction over defining some
procedures for States under the Bill such as, publication of Citizens’ Charters, structure for grievance
redressal, penalties for public officials, etc. Secondly, he highlighted the likely complications, which
may arise due to the multiplicity of redressal mechanisms. The other three issues raised by him were:
accessibility of grievance redressal mechanism to foreign nationals in certain cases, removal procedure
for Commissioners, both at the Central level and at the State level; and appeals in case of corrupt
practices to the Lokpal and the Lokayuktas.
7. Shri B.K. Taimni of IC Centre for Governance, while supporting the Bill in his presentation,
was of the view that its implementation and execution should be in line with the existing structure of
three level hierarchy as provided in the Consumer Protection Act so as to ensure the execution of the
objectives of this Bill in a shorter span and to save public expenditure. Other points suggested by him
were: need to shorten the title, inclusion of words ‘empowerment’, ‘Governance’ or ‘good Governance’
in the Statement of Objects and Reasons and the need for further elaboration in the definition of the
term ‘Head of the Department’, performance appraisal of the Centre and the States and provisions of
incentives to recognize good performance, etc.

52
8. Ms. Ritu Mehra of Pardarshita, drew the attention of the Committee over various terms
mentioned in the Bill, which in her view, require further elaboration so as to enhance the functional
efficacy of the Bill. In this context, she suggested that the terms like “substantially financed”,
“urgency” and “social sector” etc. in the Bill need to be comprehensively defined. She also suggested
that the quality and measures of the services, should be mentioned specifically in the clauses dealing
with delivery of services and the Facilitation Centres should be at the Block level in rural areas and
in the Municipal Ward level in urban areas.
9. The Members of the Committee then sought clarifications on some issues, which were
responded to in detail by the witnesses.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
11. The Committee adjourned at 4.29 
P.M.

53
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.30 P.M. on Monday, the 12 th March, 2012 in Committee Room, ‘E’,
Parliament House Annexe, Ground Floor, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ram Jethmalani
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
4. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Shailendra Kumar
6. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
7. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan
8. Shri Harin Pathak
9. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
10. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad
11. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
12. Shri Arun Subhash Chandra Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
A. NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES
I. Delhi Public Grievances Commission
1. Shri R. Naryanaswami, Chairman
2. Shri S.K. Jain, Member
3. Shri S.A. Awaradi, Secretary
II. 1. Shri Manjit Singh, IAS (Retd.)
2. Shri Gurvinder Singh
III. National Alliance for Maternal Health and Human Rights
Ms. Jashodhara Dasgupta
53

54
IV. Transparency International India
1. Admiral (Retd.) R.H. Tahiliani, Mentor
2. Shri S.K. Agarwal, Vice-Chairman
V. 1. Shri P.S. Krishnan, IAS (Retd.)
2. Dr. Christopher Lakra
3. Prof. Sushma Yadav
4. Dr. Idreez Qureshi
VI. Society for Justice
1. Shri Amar Singh, President
2. Prof. P.C. Sachdeva, Member
B. OFFICIAL WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES AND PENSIONS
• Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances
1. Shri P.K. Jha, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Satish Kumar, Director
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
• Legislative Department
Shrimati Sharda Jain; Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES AND PENSIONS
• Department of Personnel and Training
1. Shri P.K. Mishra, Secretary (P)
2. Dr. S.K. Sarkar, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Secretary
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
• Department of Legal Affairs
1. Shri M.K. Sharma; Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. Shri R.J.R. Kasibhatla, Deputy Legislative Assistant
2. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan was voted to the Chair as the Chairman of the Committee was
scheduled to join the Committee later. Thereafter, he welcomed the Members of the Committee and
also the witnesses who had been invited for tendering oral evidence on The Right of Citizens for Time
Bound Delivery of Goods and Services and Redressal of their Grievances Bill, 2011. He then requested
the witnesses to place their views on the Bill, before the Committee.
3. While lauding the introduction of the Bill, Admiral (Retd.) R.H. Tahiliani of Transparency
International emphasized on the need for implementing the scheme of the Bill with greater transparency
and honesty so as to ensure the time bound delivery of goods and services to the people. He was
also joined by his colleague, who suggested some measures to improve the effectiveness of the Bill.
4. Smt. Jasodhara Dasgupta of the National Alliance for Maternal Health and Human Rights, on
the basis of her experience in the field of maternal health services, made detailed presentation on the

55
subject matter of the Bill and suggested some measures to overcome the likely problems, which may
arise during the implementation of the Bill. The main suggestions floated by her were establishment
of a Jan Sahayata Kendra at Block level, appointment of an Ombudsperson at district level, effective
use of Information Technology for registering complaints, ensuring confidentiality of the complainant,
inclusion of academia in State level Grievance Redressal Officers.
5. In his presentation before the Committee, Shri P.S. Krisnan inter alia emphasized on the need
of recognizing the special needs of the SCs/STs/BCs, minorities, women, children and persons with
disabilities while formulating a Bill on the Citizens Charter.
6. Shri Amar Singh of Society for Justice in his presentation, mainly developed on the clauses
4, 8, 16, 33 and 45 of the proposed Bill. On clause 4, he suggested that a sub-clause may be included
to make provision for issuing of a proper receipt on behalf of the Public Authority while receive a
complaint/grievance. As for clause 8, he was of the view that this clause needs to be amended to
ensure the acknowledgement of the complaints received by a Designated Officer by him only. He also
suggested that retired defence officers may be considered for appointment as Grievance Redressal
Commissioner. Over the issue of punishment, he offered an innovative suggestion. He proposed that
a Public Authority who fails to provide time bound delivery of goods and services may be made liable
for penalty at the first time. If the authority does it second time then increment of the responsible
person may be stopped, and the third time, concerned person may be given compulsory retirement.
7. Shri R. Narayanaswami, Chairman, Delhi Public Grievance Commissioner made an elaborate
presentation on the Bill. He expressed his concern over a provision of the Bill, which makes it
mandatory for concerned authorities for providing goods and services effectively and efficiently with
acceptable levels of standards.” He argued that it would not be possible for a Grievance Redressal
Officer or a Designated Authority to look into the issues of standards within the 30 days available to
him for grievance redressal. On the penalties, he preferred imposition of penalty on per day basis
rather than a lump sum penalty. Apart from offering comments on various provisions of the Bill, he
also touched upon the federal issue associated with the jurisdictional coverage of the Bill. He
highlighted the need of examining the feasibility of legislating a model law in this regard.
8. Shri Manjeet Singh while deposing before the Committee offered some suggestions to strengthen
the provisions of the Bill. In his presentation he suggested that the bill should also accommodate the
need of the disabled persons through specific provisions.
Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and Officials of Public International Organizations
Bill, 2011.
9 . ***
10. * * *
(The witnesses then withdrew)
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
12. The Committee adjourned at 5.30 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

56
XXVIII
TWENTY-EIGHTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 18 th July, 2012, in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Parimal Nathwani
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
4. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Arun Yadav
6. Shri Shailendra Kumar
7. Adv. A. Sampath
8. Shri Lalu Prasad
9. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
10. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
11. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
12. Shri P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
13. Shri Kirti Azad
14. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
15. Shri Pinaki Misra
16. Shri Harin Pathak
17. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shri B.M.S. Rana, Deputy Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
2. The Chairman of the Committee, at the outset welcomed Members of the Committee to the
meeting and briefly recapitulated the progress made by the Committee in the examination of the Right
of Citizens for Time Bound Delivery of Goods and Services and Redressal of Their Grievances
Bill, 2011. Referring to the issues identified in the light of the suggestions received from public and
56

57
comments of the Government thereon, he requested the Members to express their views and
suggestions on the provisions of the Bill.
3. Members appreciated the intention of the Government in bringing forward a legislation for time
bound delivery of goods and services to citizens. However, some Members expressed their concern
about developing adequate infrastructure and meeting the expenditure likely to be incurred on establishing
an effective service delivery system. Some Members also felt that the penalty for failure in delivery
of goods and services by the designated official as proposed in the Bill, was too high and may be
amended.
4. After some discussion, it was decided to have benefit of the experience of some of the States
which have enacted similar law and which are being implemented. For this purpose, the Committee
directed the Secretariat to write to the Chief Secretaries of the States of Uttar Pradesh, Punjab,
Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka inviting them to appear before the Committee in its next meeting to
share experience in their respective States in implementing their law.
5. Members also desired that a comprehensive statement showing business transacted so far, the
suggestions received on the provisions of the Bill from individuals/organizations and the Comments of
the Government thereon may be prepared and circulated to the Committee for consideration.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee decided to meet next on the 1
st August, 2012.
8. The meeting adjourned at 4.15 P.M.

58
XXIX
TWENTY-NINTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 2.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 1 st August, 2012, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
4. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
5. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Shailendra Kumar
7. Shri S. Semmalai
8. Adv. A. Sampath
9. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
10. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
11. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
12. Shri P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
13. Shri Kirti Azad
14. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
15. Shri Pinaki Misra
16. Shri Harin Pathak
17. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director
Shri B.M.S. Rana, Deputy Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF MADHYA PRADESH
1. Shri Iqbal Singh Bains, Principal Secretary; Department of Public Service Management;
and
2. Shri Manohar Dubey, Deputy Secretary
58

59
II. REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF UTTAR PRADESH
Shri Prabhat Kumar Sarangi, Principal Secretary, Department of Personnel and Administrative
Reforms
III. REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF PUNJAB
1. Shri Rakesh Singh, Chief Secretary;
2. Shri S.C. Agrawal, Chief Comissioner; and
3. Shri K. Siva Prasad, Resident Commissioner.
IV. REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF KARNATAKA
Dr. Shalini Rajneesh, Principal Secretary, Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms.
V. REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE MINISTRY OF PPG AND PENSIONS, DEPARTMENT OF
ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS AND PUBLIC GRIEVANCES
1. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma, Deputy Secretary; and
2. Shrimati Shailja Joshi, Under Secretary.
VI. REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE LEGISLATIVE
DEPARTMENT
1. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel;
2. Shri N.R. Battu, Additional Legislative Counsel; and
3. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
2. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Government of Madhya Pradesh to the
meeting and requested them to present their views on the various provisions of the Rights of Citizens
for Time Bound Delivery of Goods and Services and Redressal of their Grievances Bill, 2011.
3. The Principal Secretary, Government of Madhya Pradesh made a power point presentation
highlighting the important features of the legislation being enforced in his State. He shared the
experience of the enforcement of the said law in the State with Members of the Committee. The
Witness opined that delivery of services and general grievance redressal cannot be addressed on the
same platform. He, while submitting the views of the State on the proposed legislation expressed an
apprehension as to whether a Central legislation was really needed to tackle the day-to-day State
matters. He responded to the queries raised by the Members of the Committee. The Chairman
requested him to send the replies in writing to questions raised which could not be replied to, during
the meeting.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
4. The Committee then heard the Principal Secretary, Government of Uttar Pradesh. The Principal
Secretary apprised the Committee on the various provisions of the Uttar Pradesh Janhit Guarantee
Adhiniyan, 2011 and informed that seventeen services have been identified in that legislation. As
regards the Right of Citizens for Time Bound Delivery of Goods and Services and Redressal of their
Grievances Bill, 2011, he opined that the system as proposed in the legislation would burden the States
financially. He highlighted how the State Government of Uttar Pradesh has been implementing the law
in force in their State. The Members sought certain clarifications which were responded to. The
Chairman requested him to send the replies in writing to questions which could not be replied to, in
the meeting.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
5. The Committee next heard the Chief Secretary and other representatives of the State Government
of Punjab. The Chief Secretary, in his presentation apprised the Committee of their Governments’

60
initiative and experiences in evolving the architecture for delivery of Citizen-Centric Services to the
people of Punjab by bringing about the Punjab Right to Services Act, 2011. Thereafter, the head of
the Punjab Right to Services Commission made a presentation on the conceptual frame work and the
provisions of the State Act. He informed that the State Government has no comments/ opinion, if the
Centre proposed to enact a law on services provided by the Central Government. However, with
regard to the States, since many of them have already found a model suitable to them, a Central
legislation for the States may not be required. Members raised queries on some issues arising out of
the presentation which were responded to by the witnesses.
6. Thereafter, the Committee heard the Principal Secretary, Department of Personnel and
Administrative Reforms, Government of Karnataka. The Principal Secretary, in her presentation
apprised the Committee of the need for all services of the Departments to come under the Lokayuktas
so that there may be uniformity. She also expressed the need for convergence of various options
available to the citizen. She mentioned about the system of reward/ punishment prevalent in the State
which had instilled efficiency into their Government’s functioning in the area of delivery of goods/
services. Members sought certain clarifications arising out of the presentation, which were responded
to by her.
(The witnesses then withdrew)
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The meeting adjourned at 4.50 
P.M.

61
XXX
THIRTIETH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 23 rd August, 2012, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1 Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Amar Singh
3. Shri Parimal Nathwani
4. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
6. Shri Bhupender Yadav
7. Ms. Anu Aga
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Arun Yadav
9. Kumari Meenakshi Natrajan
10. Shri Shailendra Kumar
11. Shri S. Semmalai
12. Adv. A. Sampath
13. Shri N.S.V . Chittan
14. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi
15. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
16. Shri P.T. Thomas (Idukki)
17. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
18. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
19. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shri B.M.S. Rana, Deputy Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer.
61

62
2. * * *
3. The Committee took up for consideration its draft Fifty-third Report on the Right of Citizens
for Time Bound Delivery of Goods and Services and Redressal of their Grievances Bill, 2011. The
Members expressed their views on the draft Report and adopted the same with some minor
typographical modifications. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy, Member of the Committee submitted a note
of dissent on the Report. The Committee decided to append the same as minutes of dissent.
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman and in his absence Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar to
present the Report in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Shailendra Kumar, and in his absence Shrimati Deepa
Dasmunsi to lay the same on the Table of the Lok Sabha, on Tuesday, the 28
th August, 2012.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The meeting adjourned at 3.07 
P.M.
*** Relates to some other matter.

63
ANNEXURES

65
ANNEXURE-A
26 Aug 2010
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
20 D EC., 2011
Bill No. 131 of 201 1
THE RIGHT OF CITIZENS FOR TIME BOUND DELIVERY OF GOODS
AND SERVICES AND REDRESSAL OF THEIR
GRIEV ANCES BILL, 2011
ARRANGEMENTS OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
RIGHT  TO SERVICE
3. Right to service.
CHAPTER III
PUBLICATION  OF C ITIZENS  C HARTER AND GRIEV ANCE R EDRESSAL  OFFICER  BY PUBLIC  A UTHORITY
4. Obligation of public authority to publish Citizens Charter.
5. Obligation of Head of Department for updating and verifying the Citizens Charter.
CHAPTER IV
ESTABLISHMENT  OF I NFORMATION  AND F ACILITATION  C ENTRE
6. Establishment of Information and Facilitation Centre.
CHAPTER V
APPOINTMENT  AND O BLIGATION OF G RIEV ANCE R EDRESS  O FFICERS  BY P UBLIC  A UTHORITY
7. Appointment and Obligations of Grievance Redress Officers, including for each
municipalities and Panchayat.
8. Acknowledgement of complaint by receipt thereof.

66
CLAUSES
9. Action to be taken by Grievance Redress Officer.
10. Forwarding of details of non-redressal of complaints to the designated authority.
CHAPTER VI
APPEAL  T HE D ESIGNATED A UTHORITY
11. Appeal.
CHAPTER VII
ESTABLISHMENT  OF S TATE P UBLIC  G RIEVANCE R EDRESSAL  C OMMISSION
12. Appeal to State Commission.
13. Constitution of State Public Grievance Redressal Commission.
14. Composition of State Commission.
15. Selection committee for appointment of State Commissioners.
16. Qualifications for appointment of State Commissioners.
17. Terms of office of Chief Commissioner and other Commissioners.
18. Staff, Salary and allowances of State Commission.
19. Filling up of vacancies.
20. Resignation and removal.
21. Powers of Commission and procedure before it.
22. Procedure of adjudication by State Public Grievance Redressal Commission.
23. Proceedings before Commission to be judicial proceedings.
24. Staff and officers to be public servants.
25. Time frame for disposal of appeals.
26. Power to issue directions and exercise original jurisdiction.
27. Burden of proof to be on Grievance Redressal Officer.
28. Where Grievance complained of is a result of Corrupt practices.
CHAPTER VIII
E
STABLISHMENT  OF THE C ENTRAL  P UBLIC  G RIEV ANCE R EDRESSAL  C OMMISSION
29. Appeal to Central Commission.
30. Constitution of Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission.
31. Composition of Central Commission.
32. Selection committee for appointment of Central Public Grievance Redress Commissioners.
33. Qualifications for appointment of Central Public Grievance Redress Commissioners.
34. Terms of office of Central Grievance Redress Commissioners.
35. Staff, Salary and allowances of Central Commission.

67
36. Filling up of vacancies.
37. Resignation and removal.
38. Powers of Central Commission and procedure before it.
39. Proceedings before Central Commission to be judicial proceedings.
40. Burden of proof to be on Grievance Redressal Officer.
41. Staff and officers to be public servants.
42. Time frame for disposal of Appeals.
43. Power to issue directions.
44. Where Grievance complained of is a result of Corrupt practices.
CHAPTER IX
P
ENALTIES AND C OMPENSATION
45. Penalty and compensation for mala fide  action.
CHAPTER X
REPORTING  OF R EDRESSAL  OF G RIEV ANCES BY P UBLIC  A UTHORITY
46. Reporting requirements.
CHAPTER XI
MISCELLANEOUS
47. Appeal against decision of State Commission or Central Commission.
48. Bar of jurisdiction of court.
49. Enforcement of orders by State Public Grievance Redressal Commission or the
Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission.
50. Protection for acts done in good faith.
51. Provisions to be in addition to existing laws.
52. Power to make rules.
53. Laying of rules.
54. Power to remove difficulties.

AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 131 of 201 1
THE RIGHT OF CITIZENS FOR TIME BOUND DELIVERY OF
GOODS AND SERVICES AND REDRESSAL OF THEIR
GRIEV ANCES BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to lay down an obligation upon every public authority to publish
citizens charter stating therein the time within which specified
goods shall be supplied and services be rendered and provide
for a grievance redressal mechanism for non-compliance of
citizens charter and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right of Citizens for Time
Bound Delivery of Goods and Services and Redressal of their
Grievances Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of
Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
69
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

70
Provided that the Central Government shall appoint such date
within six months from the date on which the Right of Citizens for
Time Bound Delivery of Goods and Services and Redressal of their
Grievances Bill, 2011 receives the assent of the President:
Provided further that different dates may be appointed for
different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision
to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to
the coming into force of that provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “action taken report” means a report furnished to the
complainant by the Grievance Redress Officer or the designated
authority or the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission
or the Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission in response
to a complaint or appeal, as the case may be;
(b) “appropriate Government” means in relation to a public
authority which is established, constituted, owned, controlled or
substantially financed by funds provided directly or indirectly—
(i) by the Central Government or the Union territory
administration, the Central Government;
(ii) by the States, the State Government;
(c) “Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission”
means the Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission
constituted under section 30;
(d) “Chief Commissioner” means the Chief Commissioner
of State Public Grievance Redressal Commission or the Central
Public Grievance Redressal Commission appointed under
section 13 or section 32, as the case may be;
(e) “Citizens Charter” means a document declaring the
functioning, obligations, duties, commitments of a public authority
for providing goods and services effectively and efficiently with
acceptable levels of standards, time limits and designation of
public servants for delivery and grievance redress as defined in
sub-section ( 1) of section 4;
(f) “complaint” means a complaint filed by a citizen
regarding any grievance relating to, or arising out of, any failure
in the delivery of goods or rendering of service pursuant to the
Citizens Charter, or in the functioning of a public authority, or
any violation of any law, policy, programme, order or scheme
but does not include grievance relating to the service matters of
a public servant whether serving or retired;
(g) “days” means the working days, referred to as the
timeline;
(h) “Designated Authority” means such officer or authority
outside the concerned public authority as may be prescribed by
the appropriate Government:
Definitions

71
Provided that in case an officer is designated as the
Designated Authority, such officer shall be above the rank of
the Grievance Redressal Officer referred to in sub-section ( 1) of
section 7;
(i) “Grievance Redress Officer” means a Grievance
Redress Officer appointed under section 7;
(j) “Head of the Department” means an officer designated
as such by the appropriate Government, as the head of a
Government Department or public authority;
(k) “Information and Facilitation Centre” means an
Information and Facilitation Centre, including customer care
centre, call centre, help desk, people’s support centre established
under section 6;
(l) “notification” means a notification published in the
Official Gazette;
(m) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made
under this Act;
(n) “public authority” means any authority or body or
institution of selfgovernment established or constituted,—
(i) by or under the Constitution;
(ii) by any other law made by Parliament;
(iii) by any other law made by State Legislature;
(iv) by notification issued or order made by the
appropriate Government, and includes any,—
(a) body owned, controlled or substantially
financed;
(b) non-Government organisation substantially
financed, directly or indirectly by funds provided
by the appropriate Government;
(c) an organisation or body corporate in its
capacity as an instrumentality of “State” as defined
under article 12 of the Constitution and rendering
services of public utility in India;
(d) a Government company as defined under
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956;
(e) any other company which supply goods
or render services in pursuance of an obligation
imposed under any Central or State Act or under
any licence or authorisation under any law for the
time being in force or by the Central or State
Government;
1 of 1956.

72
(v) by an agreement or memorandum of
understanding between the Government and any private
entity as Public-Private Partnership or otherwise;
(o) “service” means all the goods and services, including
functions, obligations, responsibility or duty, to be provided or rendered
by a public authority;
(p) “State Public Grievance Redressal Commission” means
the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission constituted under
section 13.
CHAPTER II
R
IGHT TO S ERVICE
3. Subject to the provisions of this Act, every individual citizen
shall have the right to time bound delivery of goods and provision for
services and redressal of grievances.
CHAPTER III
P
UBLICATION OF C ITIZENS C HARTER AND G RIEV ANCE R EDRESSAL O FFICER
BY PUBLIC AUTHORITIES
4. (1) Every public authority shall publish, within six months
of the commencement of this Act, a Citizens Charter specifying
therein all the category of goods supplied and services rendered by
it, the time within which such goods shall be supplied or services be
rendered.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained
in sub-section ( 1), the Citizens Charter shall provide all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the details of all the goods supplied and services
rendered by the public authority and the name of person or
agency through which such goods are supplied or services
rendered and timings during which such services are supplied or
services rendered;
(b) the conditions under which a person becomes entitled
for goods or services, and the class of persons who are entitled
to receive such goods and avail services;
(c) the quantitative and tangible parameters (including
weight, size, frequency) of the goods and services available to
the public;
(d) complaint redressal mechanism including the time
within which the complaint be disposed of and the officer of
the public authority to whom such complaint may be made;
(e) the name and addresses of individuals responsible for
the delivery of goods or rendering of services mentioned in ( a)
above;
Right to
service.
Obligation of
public authority
to publish
Citizens
Charter.

73
(f) any other functions, obligations, responsibility or duty
of the public authority is required or reasonably expected to
provide;
(g) any other information relevant to delivery of goods or
provision of services or such other information as may be
prescribed.
(3) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make
rules in relation to citizens charter and grievance redressal.
5. (1) The Head of the Department in each public authority shall
be responsible for updating and verifying the Citizens Charter every
year and the accuracy of the contents thereof.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the Head of the Department
of every public authority to ensure that the Citizens Charter is widely
disseminated to the public.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the Head of the Department
of every public authority to take steps in accordance with section 4
of the Right To Information Act, 2005 for providing relevant information
to the public enabling them to exercise their rights mandated under this
Act.
(4) Every Head of the Department shall ensure that all material
be disseminated taking into consideration the local language and the
most effective method of communication in that local area free of
cost.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section the expression
“disseminated” means making known and communicating the
information to the public through notice boards, newspapers, public
announcements, media broadcasts, the internet or any other means,
including inspection of offices of any public authority by any citizen.
(5) Every Head of the Department shall to the extent possible,
ensure that the Citizens Charter is made available at the website of the
public authority and in other electronic forms and shall be available
free of cost.
(6) Every Head of the Department shall ensure that a copy of
the Citizens Charter of the public authority duly certified by him is
submitted to appropriate bodies, including appropriate Central and State
Public Grievance Redress Commission, when it is published and
subsequently, every time that it is modified, updated or amended.
CHAPTER IV
E
STABLISHMENT OF I NFORMATION A ND F ACILITATION C ENTRE
6. (1) Every public authority shall establish Information
and Facilitation Centre for efficient and effective delivery of
services and redressal of grievances, which may include
establishment of customer care centre, call centre, help desk and
people’s support centre.
Establishment
of Information
and
Facilitation
Centre.
Obligation of
Head of the
Department
for updating
and verifying
the Citizens
Charter.
22 of 2005.

74
(2) Every Head of the Department of the public authority
shall be responsible for the development, improvement,
modernisation and reform in service delivery and redressal of
grievance system. It shall also include adoption of electronic
modes, internet, etc.
(3) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make
rules in relation to Information and Facilitation Centre.
CHAPTER V
A
PPOINTMENT A ND O BLIGATION OF G RIEV ANCE R EDRESS O FFICERS B Y
PUBLIC A UTHORITY
7. (1) Every public authority shall, within six months from the
date of the coming into force of this Act, designate as many officers
as may be necessary as Grievance Redress Officers in all administrative
units or offices at the Central, State, district and sub-district levels,
municipalities, Panchayats whereat supplies of goods or render services
to receive, enquire into and redress any complaints from citizens in the
manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Grievance Redress Officer so appointed shall
be at least one level above and be deemed to have admimistrative
control on the individual designated to deliver goods or render services
as per the Citizens Charter as defined in section 4.
(2) Every public authority shall, immediately on appointment or
designation of a Grievance Redress Officer,—
(a) give, through a public notice in a newspaper published
in Hindi or English language and in a newspaper published in an
Indian language in circulation in the area in which such service
provider is providing services, indicating therein the name of the
Grievance Redress Officer, his address and telephone number,
e-mail address, facsimile number and other means of contacting
him in respect of each area for which the Grievance Redress
Officer have been appointed or designated and thereafter give
such public notice at least once in twelve months in the same
manner:
Provided that in case of change of the name of the
Grievance Redress Officer, his address and telephone number,
e-mail address, facsimile number and other means of contacting
him shall be intimated by public notice, in the same manner
specified in this clause;
(b) display, at its each office, Information and Facilitation
Centre, call centre, customer care centre, help desk, People’s
Support Centre and at the sales outlets, website and at the
office of the Grievance Redress Officer and the appellate authority,
the name of the Grievance Redress Officer, their addresses and
telephone numbers, e-mail addresses, facsimile numbers and
other means of contacting them, in respect of each area for
Appointment
and
obligations of
Grievance
Redress
Officers,
including for
each
municipalities
and
Panchayat.

75
which the Grievance Redress Officer have been appointed or
designated.
(3) Every public authority shall appoint or designate such number
of Grievance Redress Officer under sub-section ( 1) and for such
areas, as may be considered by it necessary, for Grievance Redress
Officer being easily accessible and available for redressal of grievance
of the public.
(4) The Grievance Redress Officer shall provide all necessary
assistance to citizens in filing complaints.
(5) Where a complainant is unable to make a complaint in
writing, the Grievance Redress Officer shall render all reasonable
assistance to the person making the request orally to reduce the same
in writing.
8. All complaints shall, within two days of the making of the
complaint, be acknowledged by a receipt, issued in writing or through
electronic means or through text message or through telephone or
through any other means as may be prescribed, specifying the date,
time, place, unique complaint number and particulars of receiver of
complaint along with the stipulated time frame in accordance with its
Citizens Charter within which the complaint will be redressed.
9. (1) Upon receipt of a complaint as defined in clause ( f) of
section 2, it shall be the duty of the concerned Grievance Redress
Officer to ensure that,—
(a) the grievance is remedied in a time frame not exceeding
thirty days from the date of receipt of the complaint;
(b) the reason for the occurrence of the grievance is
identified and the responsibility of the defaulting office or
individual is fixed and the grievance is redressed satisfactorily
within thirty days from the date of receipt of the complaint by
the Grievance Redress Officer;
(c) where the grievance has occurred as a result of a
deficiency, negligence or malfeasance on the part of an office
or individual then the action is taken in accordance with conduct
rules and departmental procedures;
(d) where the Grievance Redress Officer is convinced
that the individual responsible for the delivery of the goods and
services has wilfully neglected to deliver the goods or services
or there exist prima facie grounds for a case under the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988, the Grievance Redress Officer can
make an observation to that effect along with a recommendation
for the penalty, including compensation to the complainant, to
be imposed, to the designated authority.
(2) The Grievance Redress Officer may seek the assistance of
any other officer required for the proper discharge of his duties or
may direct any other officer to take action to redress a complaint.
Acknowledge-
ment of
complaint
by receipt
thereof.
Action to be
taken by
Grievance
Redress
Officer.
49 of 1988.

76
(3) Any officer, whose assistance has been sought under sub-
section ( 2), shall render all assistance to the Grievance Redress Officer
seeking his assistance and for the purposes of any contravention of
the provisions of this Act, such other officer shall be deemed to be
a Grievance Redress Officer for the purposes of this Act.
(4) The Grievance Redress Officer shall ensure that the
complainant is informed in writing the manner in which the grievance
is redressed and shall give him a report in the form of an action taken
report.
10. The Grievance Redress Officer shall, immediately after the
expiry of the period of thirty days, report every complaint which has
not been redressed along with the details of the complainant, nature of
complaint, and reasons for non-redressal of complaints to the designated
authority.
CHAPTER VI
A
PPEAL TO T HE D ESIGNATED A UTHORITY
11. (1) Every complaint forwarded along with the details under
section 10 shall be deemed to have been filed by way of an appeal to
the designated authority.
(2) Any individual aggrieved by a decision of the concerned
Grievance Redress Officer or who has not received an action taken
report in respect of a complaint filed by him, may, if he so desires,
within thirty days from the expiry of such period or from the receipt
of such decision, prefer an appeal to the designated authority:
Provided that the designated authority may admit the appeal
after the expiry of thirty days if it is satisfied that the complainant was
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.
(3) The receipt of the appeal under sub-section ( 2) shall be
acknowledged by the office of the designated authority.
(4) The designated authority shall, for the purposes of its
functions under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person
and examining him on oath;
(b) discovery and production of any document or other
material object producible as evidence;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning of any public record;
(e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses;
(f) reviewing its decisions, directions and orders;
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed.
5 of 1908.
Forwarding
of details of
non-redressal
of complaints
to the
designated
Authority.
Appeal.

77
(5) The designated authority shall have original jurisdiction to
adjudicate upon every application made to it under this section 11.
(6) The designated authority shall not be bound by the procedure
laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by
the principles of natural justice and subject to the other provisions of
this Act and of any rules made thereunder, the Authority shall have the
power to regulate its own procedure.
(7) Every appeal filed under this section or complaint deemed to
by way of an appeal shall be disposed of by the designated authority
within thirty days from the date of receipt of such appeal:
Provided that an appeal of an urgent or immediate nature shall
be disposed of within the same day of the receipt of the appeal or
before the date on which the cause of action may cease to exist,
which shall not be later than thirty days from the date of receipt of
the appeal.
(8) The designated authority shall arrange to deliver copies of
the decisions to the parties concerned within a period of five working
days from the date of such decisions.
(9) The designated authority may impose penalty, including
compansation to the complainant, in deciding an appeal against
concerned officer for acting in a mala fide manner or having failed
to discharge their duties without any sufficient and reasonable cause:
Provided that the concerned officers of the public authority
shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard before any
penalty is imposed on them.
(10) Where it appears to the designated authority that the
grievance complained of is, prima facie, indicative or representative of
a corrupt act or practice in terms of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988, on the part of the individual officer of the the public
authority complained against, then, it shall record in writing such
evidence as may be found in support of such conclusion and shall
initiate the proceedings or in writing refer the same to the appropriate
authorities competent to take cognizance of such corrupt practice.
(11) The designated authority shall upon adjudication of a
complaint have the powers to issue directions requiring the concerned
officers of the public authority to take such steps as may be necessary
to secure compliance with the provisions of Citizens Charter.
CHAPTER VII
E
STABLISHMENT OF S TATE P UBLIC G RIEV ANCE R EDRESSAL C OMMISSION
12. (1) Any person who, does not receive a decision within the
time specified in Chapter V , or is aggrieved by a decision of the
designated authority, falling within the jurisdiction of the State
Government, may within thirty days from the expiry of such period
or from the receipt of such a decision prefer an appeal to the State
Public Grievance Redressal Commission:
Appeal to State
Commission.
5 of 1908.
49 of 1988.

78
Provided that the Commission may admit the appeal after the
expiry of thirty days if it is satisfied that the complainant was
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.
(2) The decision of the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission under this section shall be binding.
13. The State Government shall constitute, by notification, a
Commission to be known as “the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission” to exercise the jurisdiction, power and authority conferred
under this Act.
14. The State Public Grievance Redressal Commission shall
consist of,—
(a) a Chief Commissioner; and
(b) such number of Commissioners, not exceeding ten,
as may be prescribed, out of which at least one each shall be
from amongst Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Women.
15. (1) The Chief Commissioner and Commissioners shall be
appointed by the Governor on the recommendation of a Selection
Committee consisting of,—
(a) the Chief Minister, who shall be the Chairperson of
the Committee;
(b) the Leader of Opposition in the Legislative Assembly;
and
(c) a sitting judge of the High Court to be nominated by
the Chief Justice of the State.
(2) The selection committee shall select out of a panel of five
eligible candidates for each vacancy which shall be finalised by a
search committee consisting of such members as may be prescribed.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), the
Selection Committee may regulate its own procedure.
16. A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Chief
Commissioner or a Commissioner of the State Public Grievance
Redressal Commission unless,—
(a) he is, or has been an officer of the State Government
and has held the post in the rank of Secretary or the Principal
Secretary to that Government; or
(b) he is or has been a District Judge for at least ten
years; or
(c) he is or has been a Judge of the High Court of the
State; or
Constitution
of State
Public
Grievance
Redressal
Commission.
Composition
of State
Commission.
Selection
Committee
for
appointment
of State
Commissioners.
Qualifications
for
appointment
of State
Commissioners.

79
(d) he is an eminent person recognised for his work
towards public service in the area and who has worked for at
least fifteen years in the social sector with a postgraduate
degree in a relevant subject:
Provided that the State Government may prescribe criteria
in addition to the above for the appointment of the Chief
Commissioner and Commissioners.
17. (1) The Chief Commissioner and the Commissioners shall
hold office for a term of five years from the date on which they enter
upon office or until they attain the age of sixtyfive years whichever
is earlier.
(2) The Chief Commissioner and the Commissioners shall hold
office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon
his office and shall not be eligible for reappointment.
18. (1) The State Government shall provide the State Public
Grievance Redressal Commission with such officers and employees as
may be required for the discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The officers and employees so appointed under sub-
section ( 1) shall discharge their functions under the general
superintendence of the Chief Commissioner.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms
and conditions of service of,—
(a) the Chief Commissioner shall be the same as that of
an Election Commissioner; and
(b) the Commissioners shall be the same as that of the
Chief Secretary of the State:
Provided that if the Chief Commissioner or Commissioner,
at the time of his appointment is, in receipt of a pension, other
than a disability or wound pension in respect of any previous
service under the Government of India or the Government of
State, his salary in respect of the service as Chief Commissioner
or Commissioner shall be reduced by the amount of that pension,
including any portion of pension, which was commuted and
pension equivalent of other forms of retirement benefits, excluding
pension equivalent or retirement gratuity:
Provided further that where the Chief Commissioner or
Commissioner, if at the time of his appointment, is in receipt of
retirement benefits in respect of any previous service rendered
in a Corporation established by or under any Central Act or
State Act or a Government company owned or controlled by the
Central Government or the State Government, his salary in
respect of the service as a Chief Commissioner or the
Commissioner shall be reduced by the amount of pension
equivalent to the retirement benefits:
Terms of
office of
Chief
Commissioner
and other
Commissioners.
Staff, Salary
and allowances
of State
Commission.

80
Provided also that neither the salary and allowances nor
the other terms and conditions of service of the Chief
Commissioner or Commissioner shall be varied to their
disadvantage after appointment.
19. If, for any reason other than temporary absence, any
vacancy occurs in the office of the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission then the Chief Commissioner shall appoint another person
in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy and
the proceedings may be continued before the Commission from the
stage at which the vacancy is filled.
20. (1) Any member of the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the
Governor of the State with a copy to the Chief Commissioner, resign
his office.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the
Governor may by order remove from office the Chief Commissioner
or any Commissioner if the Chief Commissioner or a Commissioner,
as the case may be,—
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the
opinion of the Governor, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) engages during his term of office in any paid
employment outside the duties of his office; or
(d) is, in the opinion of the Governor, unfit to continue
in office by reason of infirmity of mind or body; or
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is
likely to affect prejudicially his functions as the Chief
Commissioner or as a Commissioner.
(3) The State Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure
for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the aforesaid
Chief Commissioner or Commissioners.
21. (1) The State Public Grievance Redressal Commission shall,
for the purposes of its functions under this Act, have the
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person
and examining him on oath;
(b) discovery and production of any document or other
material object producible as evidence;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning of any public record;
(e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses;
Filling up of
vacancies.
Resignation
and removal.
Power of
Commission
and
procedure
before it. 5 of 1908.

81
(f) reviewing its decisions, directions and orders;
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(2) The State Public Grievance Redressal Commission shall
not be bound by the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice
and subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules made
thereunder, the Commission shall have the power to regulate its own
procedure.
22. (1) The State Public Grievance Redressal Commission shall
have original jurisdiction to decide every appeal made to it under
section 12.
(2) The State Public Grievance Redressal Commission shall
arrange to deliver copies of the decision to the parties concerned
within a period of fifteen days from the date of such decision.
23. All proceedings before the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code and the
Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of
sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
24. The staff and officers of the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning
of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
25. (1) An appeal under section 12 shall be disposed of within
sixty days from the date of filing of the appeal:
Provided that an appeal of an urgent or immediate in nature
shall be disposed of within the same day of the receipt of the appeal
or before the date on which the cause of action may cease to exist,
which shall not be later than fifteen days from the date of receipt of
the appeal.
(2) The State Public Grievance Redressal Commission may
impose penalty, including compensation to the complainant, while
deciding an appeal against designated officer and Grievance Redress
Officers for acting in a mala fide manner or having failed to discharge
his duties without any sufficient and reasonable cause:
Provided that the concerned officers of the public authority
shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard before any
penalty is imposed on them under this section.
26. (1) The State Public Grievance Redressal Commission shall,
upon adjudication of a complaint, have the power to issue directions,—
(a) requiring the public authority to take such steps as
may be necessary to secure compliance with the provisions of
the Citizens Charter;
Procedure of
adjudication by
State Public
Grievance
Redressal
Commission.
Proceedings
before
Commission
to be judicial
proceedings.
Staff and
officers to
be public
servants.
Time frame for
disposal of
appeals.
Power to issue
directions
and exercise
original
jurisdiction.
5 of 1908.
45 of 1861.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.

82
(b) requiring the timely creation, updation and wide
dissemination of the Citizens Charter of the public authority.
(2) It shall be the duty of the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission to receive and inquire into a complaint from any person,—
(a) who has been unable to submit an appeal to the
designated authority;
(b) who has been refused redress of grievance under this
Act;
(c) whose complaint has not been disposed of within the
time limit specified;
(d) who has been denied access to the Citizens Charter
of the public authority either because the Charter was not
created by the public authority or is inadequate in any regard or
it is not widely disseminated to make people aware of it;
(e) in respect of any other matter relating to registering
and redressing of a complaint or appeal under this Act.
(3) The State Public Grievance Redressal Commission may,
suo motu , take notice of failure to deliver goods and services in
accordance with the provisions of this Act and refer such cases for
disposal to the Head of the Department of the Public Authority and in
such cases, an action taken report shall be sent by the Head of the
Department of the Public Authority to the State Commission within
thirty days from the date of such reference.
(4) Where the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission, is
satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to inquire into the matter,
it may initiate an inquiry suo motu in respect thereof.
27. In any appeal proceedings, the burden of proof to establish
that a non-redressal of complaint by the Grievance Redressal Officer
shall be on the Grievance Redress Officer who denied the request.
28. Where it appears to the Commission that the grievance
complained of is, prima facie , indicative of a corrupt act or practice
in terms of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, on the part of the
responsible officer of the public authority complained against, then, it
shall record such evidence as may be found in support of such
conclusion and shall refer the same to the appropriate authorities.
CHAPTER VIII
E
STABLISHMENT OF THE CENTRAL PUBLIC GRIEV ANCE REDRESSAL COMMISSION
29. (1) Any person who, does not receive a decision within the
time specified in Chapter V , or is aggrieved by a decision of the
designated authority falling within the jurisdiction of the Central
Government, may within thirty days from the expiry of such period
or from the receipt of such a decision prefer an appeal to the Central
Public Grievance Redressal Commission:
Burden of
proof to be
on Grievance
Redressal
Officer.
49 of 1988.
Where
Grievance
complained
of is a result
of corrupt
practices.
Appeal to
Central
Commission.

83
Provided that the Commission may admit the appeal after the
expiry of thirty days if it is satisfied that the complainant was
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.
(2) The decision of the Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission under this section shall be binding.
30. The Central Government shall Constitute, by notification,
a body to be known as “Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission” to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority
conferred under this Act.
31. The Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission shall
consist of,—
(a) the Chief Public Grievance Redress Commissioner;
and
(b) such number of Central Public Grievance Redress
Commissioners, not exceeding ten, as may be prescribed out of
which at least one each shall be from amongst Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Women.
32. (1) The Chief Public Grievance Redress Commissioner and
Central Public Grievance Redress Commissioners shall be appointed by
the President on the recommendation of a Committee consisting of,—
(a) the Prime Minister, who shall be the Chairperson of
the committee;
(b) the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha; and
(c) a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court to be nominated
by the Chief Justice of India.
(2) The Selection Committee shall select out of a panel of five
eligible candidates for each vacancy which shall be finalised by a
search committee consisting of such members as may be prescribed.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), the
Selection Committee may regulate its own procedure.
33. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a
Chief Commissioner or Commissioners of Central Public Grievance
Redress Commissioner unless,—
(a) he is, or has been an officer of the Central Government
and has held the post in the rank of Secretary to the Government
of India; or
(b) he is, or has been, in the rank a Chief Justice of a
High Court or a Judge of the Supreme Court;
(c) he is, an eminent person recognised for his work
towards public service in the area and who has worked for at
least twenty years in the social sector with a postgraduate
degree in a relevant subject:
Constitution
of Central
Public Grievance
Redressal
Commission.
Composition
of Central
Commission.
Selection
committee for
appointment
of Central
Public Grievance
Redress
Commissioners.
Qualifications
for appointment
of Central
Public Grievance
Redress
Commissioners.

84
Provided that the Central Government may prescribe criteria
in addition to the above for the appointment of the Chief
Commissioner and Commissioners.
34. (1) The Chief Public Grievance Redress Commissioner and
the Central Public Grievance Redress Commissioners shall hold office
for a term of five years from the date on which they enter upon the
office.
(2) The Chief Grievance Redress Commissioner shall hold office
for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his
office and shall not be eligible for reappointment.
35. (1) The Central Government shall provide the Central
Public Grievance Redressal Commission with such officers and
employees as may be required for the discharge of its functions
under this Act.
(2) The officers and employees so appointed under sub-
section ( 1) shall discharge their functions under the general
superintendence of the Chief Public Grievance Redress Commissioner.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and the other
terms and conditions of service of,—
(a) the Chief Public Grievance Redress Commissioner
shall be the same as that of the Chief Election Commissioner;
and
(b) the Central Public Grievance Redress Commissioner
shall be the same as that of an Election Commissioner:
Provided that if the Chief Public Grievance Redress
Commissioner or Central Public Grievance Redress
Commissioner, at the time of his appointment is, in receipt
of a pension, other than a disability or wound pension in
respect of any previous service under the Government of
India or the Government of State, his salary in respect of
the service as Chief Public Grievance Redress Commissioner
or Central Public Grievance Redress Commissioner shall
be reduced by the amount of that pension, including any
portion of pension, which was commuted and pension
equivalent of other forms of retirement benefits, excluding
pension equivalent or retirement gratuity:
Provided further that where the Chief Public
Grievance Redress Commissioner or Central Public
Grievance Redress Commissioner, if at the time of his
appointment, is in receipt of retirement benefits in respect
of any previous service rendered in a Corporation
established by or under any Central Act or State Act or a
Government company owned or controlled by the Central
Government or the State Government,  his salary in respect
of the service as a Chief Public Grievance Redress
Commissioner or the Central Public Grievance Redress
Terms of office
of Central
Grievance
Redress
Commissioners.
Staff, Salary
and allowances
of Central
Commission.

85
Commissioner shall be reduced by the amount of pension
equivalent to the retirement benefits:
Provided also that neither the salary and allowances
nor the other terms and conditions of service of the
members of the Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission shall be varied to their disadvantage after
appointment.
36. If, for any reason other than temporary absence, any
vacancy occurs in the office of the Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission then the Chief Public Grievance Redress Commissioner
shall appoint another person in accordance with the provisions of this
Act to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be continued before
the Commission from the stage at which the vacancy is filled.
37. (1) Any member of the Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the
President with a copy to the Chief Public Grievance Redress
Commissioner, resign his office.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the
President may by order remove from office the Chief Public Grievance
Redress Commissioner or any Central Public Grievance Redress
Commissioner if the Chief Public Grievance Redress Commissioner or
the Central Public Grievance Redress Commissioner, as the case may
be,—
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the
opinion of the President, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) engages during his term of office in any paid
employment outside the duties of his office; or
(d) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue
in office by reason of infirmity of mind or body; or
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is
likely to affect prejudicially his functions as the Chief Public
Grievance Redress Commissioner or a Central Public Grievance
Redress Commissioner.
(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure
for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the aforesaid
Chief Public Grievance Redress Commissioner or Central Public
Grievance Redress Commissioners.
38. (1) The Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission
shall, for the purposes of its functions under this Act, have the
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person
and examining him on oath;
Filling up of
vacancies.
Resignation and
removal.
Powers of
Central
Commission
and procedure
before it.5 of 1908.

86
(b) discovery and production of any document or other
material object producible as evidence;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning of any public record;
(e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses;
(f) reviewing its decisions, directions and orders;
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission shall
have original jurisdiction to adjudicate upon every application made to
it under section 29.
(3) The Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission shall
not be bound by the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice
and subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules made
thereunder, the Commission shall have the power to regulate its own
procedure.
(4) The Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission shall
arrange to deliver copies of the decision to the parties concerned
within a period of fifteen days from the date of such decision.
39. All proceedings before the Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code and the
Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of
sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
40. In any appeal proceedings, the burden of proof to establish
that a non-redressal of complaint by the Grievance Redressal Officer
shall be on the Grievance Redress Officer who denied the request.
41. The staff and officers of the Central Public Grievance
Redressal Commission shall be deemed to be public servants within
the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
42. (1) An appeal under section 29 shall be disposed of within
sixty days from the date of filing of the appeal:
Provided that an appeal of an urgent or immediate in nature
shall be disposed of within the same day of the receipt of the appeal
or before the date on which the cause of action may cease to exist,
which shall not be later than fifteen days from the date of receipt of
the appeal.
(2) The Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission may
impose penalty, including compensation to the complainant, in deciding
an appeal against designated officers and Grievance Redress Officers
for acting in a mala fide manner or having failed to discharge their
duties without any sufficient and reasonable cause:
Proceedings
before Central
Commission
to be judicial
proceedings.
5 of 1908.
45 of 1960.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1960.
Burden of proof
to be on
Grievance
Redressal Officer.
Staff and
officers to
be public
servants.
Time frame
for disposal
of appeals.

87
Provided that the concerned officers of the public authority
shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard before any
penalty is imposed on them.
43. (1) The Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission
shall, upon adjudication of a complaint, have the power to issue
directions,—
(a) requiring the public authority to take such steps as
may be necessary to secure compliance with the provisions of
the Citizens Charter;
(b) requiring the timely creation, updation and wide
dissemination of the Citizens Charter of the public authority.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission to receive and inquire into a complaint from any person,—
(a) who has been unable to submit an appeal to the
designated authority;
(b) who has been refused redress of grievance under this
Act;
(c) whose complaint has not been disposed of within the
time limit specified;
(d) who has been denied access to the Citizens Charter
of the public authority either because the Charter was not
created by the public authority or is inadequate in any regard or
it is not widely disseminated to make people aware of it;
(e) in respect of any other matter relating to registering
and redressing of a complaint or appeal under this Act.
(3) The Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission may,
suo motu , take notice of failure to deliver goods and services in
accordance with the provisions of this Act and refer such cases for
disposal to the Head of the Department of the Public Authority and in
such cases, an action taken report shall be sent by the Head of
Department of the Public Authority to the Central Commission within
thirty days from the date of such reference.
(4) Where the Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission,
is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to inquire into the matter,
it may initiate an inquiry suo motu in respect thereof.
44. Where it appears to the Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission that the grievance complained of is prima facie indicative
of a corrupt act or practice in terms of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988, on the part of the responsible officer of the public authority
complained against then it shall record such evidence as may be found
in support of such conclusion and shall refer the same to the appropriate
authorities.
Power to issue
directions and
exercise original
jurisdiction.
49 of 1988.
Where grievance
complained of is
a result of
corrupt practices.

88
CHAPTER IX
PENALTIES AND C OMPENSATION
45. (1) The designated authority, the State Public Grievance
Redressal Commission or the Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission, as the case may be, may impose a lump sum penalty
against designated official responsible for delivery of goods and services
or Grievance Redress Officer for their failure to deliver goods or
render services to which the applicant is entitled, which may extend
up to fifty thousand rupees which shall be recovered from the salary
of the official against whom penalty has been imposed.
(2) On imposition of the penalty under sub-section ( 1), the
appellate authority may, by order, direct that such portion of the
penalty imposed under the said section shall be awarded to the
appellant, as compensation, as it may deem fit:
Provided that the amount of such compensation awarded shall
not exceed the amount of penalty imposed under the said section.
(3) If any public servant is found guilty under sub-section ( 1),
the disciplinary authority shall initiate the disciplinary proceedings against
such officer of the public authority, who if proved to be guilty of a
mala fide action in respect of any provision of this Act, shall be liable
to such punishment including a penalty as the disciplinary authority
may decide.
CHAPTER X
R
EPORTING OF R EDRESSAL OF G RIEVANCES BY P UBLIC A UTHORITY
46. (1) Every public authority shall ensure that every Grievance
Redressal Officer keeps a record of complaints made to it or appeal
therein and the decisions on such complaints and appeals.
(2) Every public authority shall publish on its website, by the
15th day of every month or at such shorter intervals, as may be
prescribed, a report mentioning therein—
(a) the number of complaints received;
(b) the number of complaints pending;
(c) the number of complaints disposed of; and
(d) such other particulars, as may be prescribed, for
discharge of its functions under this Act.
CHAPTER XI
Miscellaneous
47. (1) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Central
Public Grievance Redressal Commission may prefer an apeal to the
Lokpal constituted under the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2011.
Penalty and
compensation
for mala fide
action.
Reporting
requirements.
Appeal against
decision of
Central
Commission
or State
Commission.

89
(2) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the State Public
Grievance Redressal Commission may prefer an appeal to the Lokayukta
constituted under the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2011.
(3) The time within which and the manner in which the appeal
may be filed under this section shall be such as may be prescribed by
the appropriate Government.
48. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to settle, decide or deal
with any question or to determine any matter which is by or under
this Act required to be settled, decided or dealt with or to be determined
by the Grievance Redressal Officer or the designated authority or the
State Public Grievance Redressal Commission or the Central Public
Grievance Redressal Commission.
49. Every order made by the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission or the Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission
may be enforced by the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission
or the Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission, as the case
may be, in the same manner as if it were a decree or order made by
a court in a suit pending therein and it shall be lawful for the State
Public Grievance Redressal Commission or the Central Public Grievance
Redressal Commission, as the case may be, to send, in the event of
its inability to execute it, such order to the court within the local limits
of whose jurisdiction,—
(a) in the case of a public authority not falling under
clauses ( b) and ( c), the place at which the main office of such
public authority is situated; or
(b) in the case of an order against a public authority
being a company, the registered office of the company is
situated; or
(c) in the case of an order against any other person, the
place where the person concerned voluntarily resides or carries
on business or personally works for gain is situated; and
thereupon, the court to which the order is so sent, shall execute the
orders as if it were a decree or order sent to it for execution.
50. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against any person for anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done under this Act or any rule made thereunder.
51. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in
derogation of, any other law for the time being in force.
52. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
Bar of
jurisdiction
of court.
Enforcement of
orders by State
Public Grievance
Redressal
Commission or
the Central
Public Grievance
Redressal
Commission.
Protection
for act done
in good faith.
Provisions to
be in addition
to existing
laws.
Power to
make rules.

90
(a) the officer or the authority to be designated as
Designated Authority under clause ( h) of section 2;
(b) other information under clause ( g) of sub-section ( 2)
of section 4;
(c) matters in relation to Citizens Charter under sub-
section ( 3) of section 4;
(d) matter in relation to the information and facilitation
centre, under sub-section ( 3) of section 6;
(e) the manner of inquiry into and redressal of grievance
of the complaints received from citizens under sub-section ( 1)
of section 7;
(f) the other means by which complaints may be made
under section 8;
(g) the other matters for which the designated authority
shall have power under clause ( g) of sub-section ( 4) of
section 11;
(h) the number of Commissioners of the State
Public Grievance Redressal Commission under clause ( b) of
section 14;
(i) the members of the search committee under sub-
section ( 2) of section 15;
(j) additional criteria in relation to selection of Chief
Commissioner and the Commissioners of the State Public
Grievance Redressal Commission under proviso to section 16;
(k) the procedure of investigation of misbehaviour or
incapacity for removal of the Chief Commissioners and other
Commissioners of, the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission under sub-section ( 3) of section 20;
(l) the other matters for which the State Public Grievance
Redressal Commission shall have the powers under clause ( g)
of sub-section ( 1) of section 21;
(m) the number of Commissioners of the Central
Public Grievance Redressal Commission under clause ( b) of
section 31;
(n) the members of the search committee under sub-
section ( 2) of section 32;
(o) additional criteria in relation to selection of Chief
Commissioner and the Commissioners of the Central Public
Grievance Redressal Commission under proviso to section 33;
(p) the procedure of investigation of misbehaviour or
incapacity for removal of the Chief Commissioner and other
Commissioners of, the Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission under sub-section ( 3
) of section 37;

91
(q) the other matters for which the Central Public Grievance
Redressal Commission shall have the powers under clause ( g)
of sub-section ( 1) of section 38;
(r) the time within which the record of complaints to the
public authority and the decisions on the complaints and appeals
shall be published on the website and other particulars under
sub-section ( 2) of section 46;
(s) the time within which and the manner in which appeal
may be filed under sub-section ( 3) of section 47;
(t) any other matter which is required to be or may be
prescribed under this Act.
53. (1) Every rule made by the Central Government shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to
the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
(2) Every rule made by the State Government shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
54. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
of this Act, the Central Government may , by order, published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the
expiry of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Laying of rules.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

92
92
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Citizen’s Charters were introduced in India in 1997, which was
voluntary in character. The main elements of the Citizens Charter were
to be published containing the details of services and the time period
for delivery of such services. These charters gradually spread from
Central Ministries and Departments to States and their Organisations.
However, a vast majority of them remained ineffective and dormant.
In order to improve Public Service Delivery, a service excellence
model called “Sevottam” was initiated in 2005 to give a new thrust to
the implementation of Citizens Charter, which has been successfully
piloted in a few chosen organisations of the Government of India and
States and is being upscaled considerably. Centralised Public Grievance
Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) was launched in 2007,
which is a web based portal for lodging complaints by the public. It
is now operational in all the Ministries and Departments of Government
of India along with about 6000 of their subordinate organisations.
Many States have also enacted Right to Public Service Delivery
Legislation in which a few important Public Services have been selected
for service delivery. It was felt that these efforts were noteworthy, but
in the absence of an overarching structure, their impact was diffused
and limited. In this context, it was felt that Rights based approach be
followed in this respect by making the Citizens Charter statutory and
endowing public with the right to get delivery of services within
stipulated time lines.
2. In view of the aforesaid, it has been felt necessary to enact
a comprehensive legislation, namely, the Right of Citizens for Time
Bound Delivery of Goods and Services and Redressal of their Grievances
Bill, 2011. The Bill, inter alia ,—
(a) confers right on every individual citizen to time bound
delivery of goods and provision for services and Redressal of
grievances;
(b) require every public authority to publish, within six
months of the commencement of the proposed legislation, a
Citizens Charter specifying therein the category of goods supplied
and services rendered by it, the time within which such goods
shall be supplied or services be rendered the name and addresses
of individuals responsible for the delivery of goods or rendering
of services;
(c) provide for obligation of the Head of the Department
for updating and verifying the Citizens Charter;
(d) require every Public Authority to establish information
and facilitation centre for efficient and effective delivery of

93
services and redressal of grievances, which may include
establishment of customer care centre, call centre, help desk
and people’s support centre;
(e) require every public authority to, within six months
from the date of the coming into force of the proposed legislation,
designate as many officers as may be necessary as Grievance
Redress Officers in all administrative units or offices at the
Central, State, district and sub-district levels, municipalities,
Panchayats whereat supplies of goods or render services to
receive, enquire into and redress any complaints from citizens
in the prescribed manner;
(f) require the concerned Grievance Redress Officer, upon
receipt of a complaint, to ensure that the grievance is remedied
in a timeframe not exceeding thirty days from the date of
receipt of the complaint;
(g) provides that any individual aggrieved by a decision of
the concerned Grievance Redress Officer or who has not received
an action taken report in respect of a complaint filed by him,
may, if he so desires, within thirty days from the expiry of
such period or from the receipt of such decision, prefer an
appeal to the Designated Authority who shall disposed of such
appeal within thirty days from the date of receipt of such appeal;
(h) provide for constitution of the State Public Grievance
Redressal Commission and the Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission consisting of Chief Commissioners and other
Commissioners;
(i) any person aggrieved by the decision of the Designated
Authority falling under the jurisdiction of the State Government
may prefer an appeal to the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission and any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Designated Authority falling under the jurisdiction of the Central
Government may prefer an appeal to the Central Public Grievance
Redressal Commission;
(j) confer power upon the Designated Authority, the State
Public Grievance Redressal Commission and the Central Public
Grievance Redressal Commission to impose a lump sum penalty,
including compensation to the complainant, against designated
official responsible for delivery of goods and services or Grievance
Redress Officer for their failure to deliver goods or render
services to which the applicant is entitled, which may extend up
to fifty thousand rupees which shall be recovered from the
salary of the official against whom penalty has been imposed;
(k) provides that on the imposition of the penalty, the
appellate authority may, by order, direct that such portion of the
penalty imposed under the proposed legislation shall be awarded
to the appellant, as compensation, not exceeding the amount of
penalty imposed, as it may deem fit;

94
(l) provides that if any public servant is found guilty of
offence, the disciplinary authority shall initiate the disciplinary
proceedings against such officer of the public authority, who if
proved to be guilty of a mala fide action in respect of any
provision of this Act, shall be liable to such punishment including
a penalty as the disciplinary authority may decide;
(m) provides that in any appeal proceedings, the burden
of proof to establish that a non-redressal of complaint by the
Grievance Redressal Officer shall be on the Grievance Redress
Officer who denied the request;
(n) provides that where it appears to the Designated
Authority or the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission
or the Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission that the
grievance complained of is prima facie indicative of a corrupt
act or practice in terms of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988, on the part of the responsible officer of the public
authority complained against then it shall record such evidence
as may be found in support of such conclusion and shall refer
the same to the appropriate authorities competent to take
cognizance of such corrupt practice;
(o) provides that any person aggrieved by the decision of
the Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission may prefer
an appeal to the Lokpal, and any person aggrieved by the
decision of the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission
may prefer an appeal to the Lokayukta, constituted under the
Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2011.
3. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions
contained in the Bill.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; V . NARAYANASAMY .
The 16th December, 2011.

95
95
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 1.— This clause provides for the short title, extent and
commencement of the proposed legislation.
Clasue 2.— This clause provides for definitions of various
expressions used in the proposed legislation, which, inter alia, include
“action taken report”, “appropriate Government”, “Citizens Charter”,
“days”, “Designated Authority”, “Grievance Redress Officer”, “Head
of Department”, “Information and Facilitation Centre”, “public authority”
and “service”, etc.
Clause 3.— This clause provides for right to service. It provides
that every individual citizen shall have the right to time bound delivery
of goods and provision for services and redressal of grievances.
Clause 4.— This clause provides for obligation of public authority
to publish Citizens Charter. It provides that every public authority shall
publish, within six months of the commencement of the proposed
legislation, a Citizens Charter specifying therein all the category of
goods supplied and services rendered by it, the time within which
such goods shall be supplied or services be rendered.
It further provides that without prejudice to the generality of the
provisions contained in sub-section ( 1), the Citizens Charter shall
provide all or any of—(a) all the details of goods supplied and services
rendered by the public authority and the name of person or agency
through which such goods are supplied or services rendered and
timings during which such services are supplied or services rendered;
(b) the conditions under which a person becomes entitled for goods
or services, and the class of persons who are entitled to receive such
goods and avail services; (c) the quantitative and tangible parameters
(including weight, size, frequency) of the goods and services available
to the public; (d) complaint redressal mechanism including the time
within which the complaint be disposed of and the officer of the
public authority to whom such complaint may be made; (e) the name
and addresses of individuals responsible for the delivery of goods or
rendering of services mentioned in (a) above; (f) any other functions,
obligations, responsibility or duty of the public authority is required or
reasonably expected to provide; (g) any other information relevant to
delivery of goods or provision of services or such other information
as may be prescribed.
It also provides that the appropriate Government may, by
notification, make rules in relation to citizens charter and grievance
redressal.
Clause 5.— This clause provides that obligation of Head of
Department for updating and verifying the Citizens Charter. It provides

96
that the Head of Department in each public authority shall be responsible
for updating and verifying the Citizens Charter every year and the
accuracy of the contents thereof and the responsibility of the Head of
the Department of every public authority to ensure that the Citizens
Charter is widely disseminated to the public.
It further provides that it shall be the responsibility of the Head
of Department of every public authority to take steps in accordance
with section 4 of the Right to Information Act, 2005 for providing
relevant information to the public enabling them to exercise their rights
under the proposed legislation.
It also provides that every Head of Department shall ensure that
all material be disseminated taking into consideration the local language
and the most effective method of communication in that local area
free of cost and every Head of Department shall to the extent possible,
ensure that the Citizens Charter is made available at the website of the
public authority and in other electronic forms and shall be available
free of cost.
It also provides that every Head of Department shall ensure that
a copy of the Citizens Charter of the public authority duly certified by
him is submitted to appropriate bodies, including appropriate Central
and State Public Grievance Redress Commission, when it is published
and subsequently, every time that it is modified, updated or amended.
Clause 6.— This clause provides for establishment of Information
and Facilitation Centre. It provides that every Public Authority shall
establish information and facilitation centre for efficient and effective
delivery of services and redressal of grievances, which may include
establishment of customer care centre, call centre, help desk and
people’s support centre.
It further provides that every Head of Department of the public
authority shall be responsible for the development, improvement,
modernisation and reform in service delivery and Redressal of grievance
system. It shall also include adoption of electronic modes, internet,
etc., and the appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules
in relation to Information and Facilitation Centre.
Clause 7.— This clause provides for appointment and Obligations
of Grievance Redress Officers, including for each municipalities and
Panchayat. It provides that every public authority shall, within six
months from the date of the coming into force of the proposed
legislation, designate as many officers as may be necessary as
Grievance Redress Officers in all administrative units or offices at the
Central, State, district and sub-district levels, municipalities, Panchayats
whereat supplies of goods or render services to receive, enquire into
and redress any complaints from citizens in the prescribed manner.
It further provides that the Grievance Redress Officer so
appointed shall be at least one level above and be deemed to have
administrative control on the individual designated to deliver goods or
render services as per the Citizens Charter and every public authority

97
shall, immediately on appointment or designation of a Grievance Redress
Officer, give a public notice in a newspaper published in Hindi or
English language and in a newspaper published in an Indian language
in circulation in the area in which such service provider is providing
services, indicating therein the name of the Grievance Redress Officer,
his address and telephone number, e-mail address, facsimile number
and other means of contacting him in respect of each area for which
the Grievance Redress Officer have been appointed or designated and
thereafter give such public notice at least once in twelve months in the
same manner and in case of change of the name of the Grievance
Redress Officer, his address and telephone number, e-mail address,
facsimile number and other means of contacting him shall be intimated
by public notice, in the same manner specified in this clause and
display it at its each office, Information and Facilitation Centre, Call
Centre, customer care centre, help desk, People’s Support Centre and
at the sales outlets, website and at the office of the Grievance Redress
Officer and the appellate authority, the name of the Grievance Redress
Officer, their addresses and telephone numbers, e-mail addresses,
facsimile numbers and other means of contacting them, in respect of
each area for which the Grievance Redress Officer have been appointed
or designated.
It also provides that every public authority shall appoint or
designate such number of Grievance Redress Officer for such areas,
as it may be considered by it necessary, for being easily accessible
and available for redressal of grievance of the public and the Grievance
Redress Officer shall provide all necessary assistance to citizens in
filing complaints and where a complainant is unable to make a complaint
in writing, the Grievance Redress Officer shall render all reasonable
assistance to the person making the request orally to reduce the same
in writing.
Clause 8.— This clause provides for acknowledgment of
complaint by receipt thereof. It provides that all complaints shall,
within two days of the making of the complaint, be acknowledged by
a receipt, issued in writing or through electronic means or through
text message or through telephone or through any other means as may
be prescribed, specifying the date, time, place, unique complaint number
and particulars of receiver of complaint along with the stipulated time-
frame in accordance with its Citizens Charter within which the complaint
will be redressed.
Clause 9.— This clause provides for action to be taken by
Grievance Redress Officer. It provides that on receipt of a complaint,
it shall be the duty of the concerned Grievance Redress Officer to
ensure,— (a) the grievance is remedied in a time frame not exceeding
thirty days from the date of receipt of the complaint; (b) the reason
for the occurrence of the grievance is identified and the responsibility
of the defaulting office or individual is fixed and the grievance is
redressed satisfactorily within thirty days from the date of receipt of
the complaint by the Grievance Redress Officer; (c) where the grievance
has occurred as a result of a deficiency, negligence or malfeasance on

98
the part of an office or individual that the action is taken in accordance
with conduct rules and departmental procedures; (d) where the
Grievance Redress Officer is convinced that the individual responsible
for the delivery of the goods and services has wilfully neglected to
deliver the good or service or there exist prima facie grounds for a
case under the Prevention of Corruption Act 1988, the Grievance
Redress Officer can make an observation to that effect along with a
recommendation for the penalty including compensation to the
complainant to be imposed, to the designated authority.
It further provides that the Grievance Redress Officer may seek
the assistance of any other officer required for the proper discharge
of his duties or may direct any other officer to take action to redress
a complaint and any officer, whose assistance has been sought under
sub-section (2), shall render all assistance to the Grievance Redress
Officer seeking his assistance and for the purposes of any contravention
of the provisions of the proposed legislation, such other officer shall
be deemed to be a Grievance Redress Officer for the purposes of the
proposed legislation and the Grievance Redress Officer shall ensure
that the complainant is informed in writing the manner in which the
grievance is redressed and shall give him a report in the form of an
action taken report.
Clause 10.— This clause provides for forwarding of details of
non redressal of complaints to the Head of Department of the Public
Authority. It provides that the Grievance Redress Officer shall,
immediately after the expiry of the period of thirty days, report every
complaint which has not been redressed along with the details of the
complainant, nature of complaint, and reasons for non redressal of
complaints to the designated authority.
Clause 11.— This clause provides for appeal. It provides that
every complaint forwarded along with the details shall be deemed to
have been filed by way of an appeal to designated authority.
It further provides that any individual aggrieved by a decision of
the concerned Grievance Redress Officer or who has not received an
action taken report in respect of a complaint filed by him, may, if he
so desires, within thirty days from the expiry of such period or from
the receipt of such decision, prefer an appeal to the designated
authority may admit the appeal after the expiry of thirty days if it is
satisfied that the complainant was prevented by sufficient cause from
filing the appeal in time and the receipt of the appeal shall be
acknowledged by the office of the designated authority.
It also provides that the designated authority shall, for the
purposes of its functions under the proposed legislation, have the same
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 in respect of—(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of
any person and examining him on oath; (b) discovery and production
of any document or other material object producible as evidence;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; (d) requisitioning of any public
record; (e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses;

99
(f) reviewing its decisions, directions and orders; (g) any other matter
which may be prescribed.
It also provides that the designated authority shall have original
jurisdiction to adjudicate upon every application made to it and The
Head of Department of the Public Authority shall not be bound by the
procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be
guided by the principles of natural justice and subject to the other
provisions of the proposed legislation and of any rules made thereunder,
the Authority shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
It also provides that every appeal filed or complaint deemed to
by way of an appeal shall be disposed of by the designated authority
within thirty days from the date of receipt of such appeal and an
appeal of an urgent or immediate nature shall be disposed of within the
same day of the receipt of the appeal or before the date on which the
cause of action may cease to exist, which shall not be later than thirty
days from the date of receipt of the appeal and the Head of Department
of the Public Authority shall arrange to deliver copies of the decisions
to the parties concerned within a period of five working days from the
date of such decisions.
It also provides that the designated authority may impose penalty
including compensation to the complainant in deciding an appeal against
concerned officer for acting in a mala fide manner or having failed
to discharge their duties without any sufficient and reasonable cause
and the concerned officers of the public authority shall be given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard before any penalty is imposed
on them.
Clause 12.— This clause provides for appeal to State
Commission. It provides that any person who, does not receive a
decision within the time specified in Chapter V , or is aggrieved by a
decision of the designated authority, falling within the jurisdiction of
the State Government, may within thirty days from the expiry of such
period or from the receipt of such a decision prefer an appeal to the
State Public Grievance Redressal Commission and the Commission
may admit the appeal after the expiry of thirty days if it is satisfied
that the complainant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the
appeal in time and the decision of the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission shall be binding.
Clause 13.— This clause provides for Constitution of State
Public Grievance Redressal Commission.It provides that the State
Government shall constitute, by notification, a Commission to be
known as “the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission” to
exercise the jurisdiction power, and authority conferred under the
proposed legislation.
Clause 14.— This clause provides for Composition of State
Commission. It provides that the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission shall consist of,—(a) a Chief Commissioner; and (b) such
number of Commissioners, not exceeding ten, as may be prescribed,

100
out of which atleast one each shall be from amongst Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Women.
Clause 15.— This clause provides for Selection Committee for
appointment of State Commissioners. It provides that the Chief
Commissioner and Commissioners shall be appointed by the Governor
on the recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of—
(a) the Chief Minister, who shall be the Chairperson of the Committee;
(b) the Leader of Opposition in the Legislative Assembly; and (c) a
sitting judge of the High Court to be nominated by the Chief Justice
of the State.
It further provides that the selection committee shall select out
of a panel of five eligible candidates for each vacancy which shall be
finalised by a search committee consisting of such prescribed members
and the selection committee may regulate its own procedure.
Clause 16.— This clause provides qualifications for appointment
of State Commissioners. It provides that a person shall not be qualified
for appointment as a Chief Commissioner or a Commissioner of the
State Public Grievance Redressal Commission unless— (a) he is, or
has been an officer of the State Government and has held the post in
the rank of Secretary or the Principal Secretary to that Government;
or (b) he is or has been a District Judge for at least ten years; or
(c) he is or has been a judge of the High Court of the State; or
(d) he is an eminent person recognised for his work towards public
service in the area and who has worked for at least fifteen years in
the social sector with a post graduate degree in a relevant subject; and
the State Government may prescribe criteria in addition to the above
for the appointment of the Chief Commissioner and Commissioners.
Clause 17.— This clause provides terms of office of Chief
Commissioner and other Commissioners. It provides that the Chief
Commissioner and the Commissioners shall hold office for a term of
five years from the date on which they enter upon office or until they
attain the age of sixty-five years whichever is earlier and the Chief
Commissioner and the Commissioners shall hold office for a term of
five years from the date on which he enters upon his office and shall
not be eligible for reappointment.
Clause 18.— This clause provides for staff, salary and allowances
of State Commission. It provides that the State Government shall
provide the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission with such
officers and employees as may be required for the discharge of its
functions under the proposed legislation.
It further provides that the officers and employees so appointed
shall discharge their functions under the general superintendence of the
Chief Commissioner and the salary and allowances payable to, and the
other terms and conditions of service of, the Chief Commissioner shall
be the same as that of an Election Commissioner; and the
Commissioners shall be the same as that of Chief Secretary of the

101
State and neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and
conditions of service of the Commissioners shall be varied to their
disadvantage after appointment.
Clause 19.— This clause provides for filling up of vacancies. It
provides that if, for any reason other than temporary absence, any
vacancy occurs in the office of the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission then the Chief Commissioner shall appoint another person
in accordance with the provisions of the proposed legislation to fill the
vacancy and the proceedings may be continued before the Commission
from the stage at which the vacancy is filled.
Clause 20.— This clause provides for resignation and removal.
It provides that any member of the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the
Governor of the State with a copy to the Chief Commissioner, resign
his office and the Governor may by order remove from office the
Chief Commissioner or any Commissioner if the Chief Commissioner
or a Commissioner, as the case may be—(a) is adjudged an insolvent;
or (b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the
Governor, involves moral turpitude; or (c) engages during his term of
office in any paid employment outside the duties of his office; or (d)
is, in the opinion of the Governor, unfit to continue in office by reason
of infirmity of mind or body; or (e) has acquired such financial or
other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as the
Chief Commissioner or as a Commissioner.
It further provides that the State Government may, by rules,
regulate the procedure for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity
of the aforesaid Chief Commissioner or Commissioners.
Clause 21.— This clause provides for Powers of Commission
and procedure before it. It provides that the State Public Grievance
Redressal Commission shall, for the purposes of its functions under
the proposed legislation, have the same powers as are vested in a civil
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him on oath; (b) discovery and production of any document
or other material object producible as evidence; (c) receiving evidence
on affidavits; (d) requisitioning of any public record; (e) issuing
commission for the examination of witnesses; (f) reviewing its decisions,
directions and orders; (g) any other matter which may be prescribed.
It further provides that the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission shall not be bound by the procedure laid down in the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by the principles of
natural justice and subject to the other provisions of the proposed
legislation and of any rules made thereunder, the Commission shall
have the power to regulate its own procedure.
Clause 22.— This clause provides for procedure of adjudication
by State Public Grievance Redressal Commission. It provides that the
State Public Grievance Redressal Commission shall have original

102
jurisdiction to decide every appeal made to it and the State Public
Grievance Redressal Commission shall arrange to deliver copies of the
decision to the parties concerned within a period of fifteen days from
the date of such decision.
Clause 23.— This clause provides that proceedings before
Commission to be judicial proceedings. It provides that all proceedings
before the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission shall be
deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193
and 228 of the Indian Penal Code and the Commission shall be
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Clause 24.— This clause provides for Staff and officers to be
public servants. It provides that the staff and officers of the State
Public Grievance Redressal Commission shall be deemed to be public
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 25.— This clause provides for time frame for disposal
of appeals. It provides that an appeal shall be disposed off within sixty
days from the date of filing of the appeal and an appeal of an urgent
or immediate in nature shall be disposed off within the same day of
the receipt of the appeal or before the date on which the cause of
action may cease to exist, which shall not be later than fifteen days
from the date of receipt of the appeal and the State Public Grievance
Redressal Commission may impose penalty including compensation to
the complainant while deciding an appeal against designated officer and
Grievance Redress Officers for acting in a mala fide manner or having
failed to discharge his duties without any sufficient and reasonable
cause and the concerned officers of the public authority shall be given
a reasonable opportunity of being heard before any penalty is imposed
on them.
Clause 26.— This clause provides for power to issue directions
and exercise original jurisdiction. It provides that the State Public
Grievance Redressal Commission shall, upon adjudication of a complaint,
have the power to issue directions—(a) requiring the public authority
to take such steps as may be necessary to secure compliance with the
provisions of the Citizens Charter; (b) requiring the timely creation,
updation and wide dissemination of the Citizens Charter of the public
authority.
It further provides that the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission to receive and inquire into a complaint from any person—
(a) who has been unable to submit an appeal to the designated
authority; (b) who has been refused redress of grievance under the
proposed legislation; (c) whose complaint has not been disposed off
within the time limit specified; (d) who has been denied access to the
Citizens Charter of the public authority either because the Charter was
not created by the Public Authority or is inadequate in any regard or
it is not widely disseminated to make people aware of it; (e) in respect
of any other matter relating to registering and redressing of a complaint
or appeal under the proposed legislation.

103
It also provides that the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission may, suo motu, take notice of failure to deliver goods and
services in accordance with the provisions of the proposed legislation
and refer such cases for disposal to the Head of Department of the
Public Authority and in such cases, an action taken report shall be sent
by the Head of Department of the Public Authority to the State
Commission within thirty days from the date of such reference and
the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission, is satisfied that
there are reasonable grounds to inquire into the matter, it may initiate
an inquiry suo motu in respect thereof.
Clause 27.— This clause provides that burden of proof to be
on Grievance Redressal Officer. It provides that in any appeal
proceedings, the burden of proof to establish that a non redressal of
complaint by the Grievance Redrssal Officer shall be on the Grievance
Redress Officer who denied the request.
Clause 28.— This clause provides for where Grievance
complained of is a result of Corrupt practices. It provides that if it
appears to the Commission that the grievance complained of is, prima
facie, indicative of a corrupt act or practice in terms of the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988, on the part of the responsible officer of the
public authority complained against, then, it shall record such evidence
as may be found in support of such conclusion and shall refer the
same to the appropriate authorities.
Clause 29.— This clause provides for appeal to the Central
Commission. It provides that any person who, does not receive a
decision within the time specified in Chapter V , or is aggrieved by a
decision of the designated authority falling within the jurisdiction of
Central Government, may within thirty days from the expiry of such
period or from the receipt of such a decision prefer an appeal to the
Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission; and the Commission
may admit the appeal after the expiry of thirty days if it is satisfied
that the complainant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the
appeal in time and the decision of the Central Public Grievance
Redressal Commission shall be binding.
Clause 30.— This clause provides for constitution of Central
Public Grievance Redressal Commission. It provides that the Central
Government shall constitute, by notification, a body to be known as
“Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission” to exercise the
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred under the proposed
legislation.
Clause 31.— This clause provides for Composition of the
Central Commission. It provides that the Central Public Grievance
Redressal Commission shall consist of—(a) the Chief Public Grievance
Redress Commissioner; and (b) such number of Central Public
Grievance Redress Commissioners, not exceeding ten, as may be
prescribed out of which at least one each shall be from amongst
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Women.

104
Clause 32.— This clause provides for Selection Committee for
appointment of the Central Public Grievance Redress Commissioners.
It provides that the Chief Public Grievance Redress Commissioner and
Central Public Grievance Redress Commissioners shall be appointed by
the President on the recommendation of a committee consisting of—
(a) the Prime Minister, who shall be the Chairperson of the committee;
(b) the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha; and (c) a sitting judge
of the Supreme Court to be nominated by the Chief Justice of India.
It also provides that the selection committee shall select out of a panel
of five eligible candidates for each vacancy which shall be finalised by
a search committee consisting of such prescribed member and the
Selection Committee may regulate its own procedure.
Clause 33.— This clause provides for qualifications for
appointment of Central Public Grievance Redress Commissioners.It
provides that a person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Chief
Commissioner or Commissioners of Central Public Grievance Redress
Commissioner unless—(a) he is, or has been an officer of the Central
Government and has held the post in the rank of Secretary to the
Government of India; or (b) he is or has been a Chief Justice of a
High Court or a Judge of the Supreme Court; (c) he is an eminent
person recognised for his work towards public service in the area and
who has worked for at least twenty years in the social sector with a
post graduate degree in a relevant subject and the Central Government
may prescribe criteria in addition to the above for the appointment of
the Chief Commissioner and Commissioners.
Clause 34.— This clause provides for terms of office of Central
Grievance Redress Commissioners. It provides that the Chief Public
Grievance Redress Commissioner and the Central Public Grievance
Redress Commissioners shall hold office for a term of five years from
the date on which they enters upon the office and the Chief Grievance
Redress Commissioner shall hold office for a term of five years from
the date on which he enter upon his office and shall not be eligible
for reappointment.
Clause 35.— This clause provides for staff, salary and allowances
of Central Commission. It provides that the Central Government shall
provide the Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission with such
officers and employees as may be required for the discharge of its
functions under the proposed legislation.
It further provides that the officers and employees so appointed
shall discharge their functions under the general superintendence of the
Chief Public Grievance Redress Commissioner and The salary and
allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service
of the the Chief Public Grievance Redress Commissioner shall be the
same as that of the Chief Election Commissioner; and the Central
Public Grievance Redress Commissioner shall be the same as that of
an Election Commissioner and neither the salary and allowances nor
the other terms and conditions of service of the members of the
Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission shall be varied to their
disadvantage after appointment.

105
Clause 36.— This clause provides for filling up of vacancies .
It provides that If, for any reason other than temporary absence, any
vacancy occurs in the office of the Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission then the Chief Public Grievance Redress Commissioner
shall appoint another person in accordance with the provisions of the
proposed legislation to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be
continued before the Commission from the stage at which the vacancy
is filled.
Clause 37.— This clause provides for Resignation and removal.
It provides that any member of the Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the
President with a copy to the Chief Public Grievance Redress
Commissioner, resign his office.
It further provides that the President may by order remove from
office the Chief Public Grievance Redress Commissioner or any Central
Public Grievance Redress Commissioner if the Chief Public Grievance
Redress Commissioner or the Central Public Grievance Redress
Commissioner, as the case may be,—(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the
President, involves moral turpitude; or (c) engages during his term of
office in any paid employment outside the duties of his office; or
(d) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in office by
reason of infirmity of mind or body; or (e) has acquired such financial
or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as the
Chief Public Grievance Redress Commissioner or a Central Public
Grievance Redress Commissioner.
It also provides that the Central Government may, by rules,
regulate the procedure for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity
of the aforesaid Chief Public Grievance Redress Commissioner or
Central Public Grievance Redress Commissioners.
Clause 38.— This clause provides for powers of Central
Commission and procedure before it. It provides that the Central
Public Grievance Redressal Commission shall, for the purposes of its
functions under the proposed legislation, have the same powers as are
vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in
respect of—(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person
and examining him on oath; (b) discovery and production of any
document or other material object producible as evidence; (c) receiving
evidence on affidavits; (d) requisitioning of any public record;
(e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses; (f) reviewing
its decisions, directions and orders; (g) any other matter which may
be prescribed.
It further provides that the Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission shall have original jurisdiction to adjudicate upon every
application made to it and the Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission shall not be bound by the procedure laid down in the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by the principles of
natural justice and subject to the other provisions of the proposed

106
legislation and of any rules made thereunder, the Commission shall
have the power to regulate its own procedure and the Central Public
Grievance Redressal Commission shall arrange to deliver copies of the
decision to the parties concerned within a period of fifteen days from
the date of such decision.
Clause 39.— This clause provides for proceedings before Central
Commission to be judicial proceedings. It provides that all proceedings
before the Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission shall be
deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193
and 228 of the Indian Penal Code and the Commission shall be
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Clause 40.— This clause provides that burden of proof to be
on Grievance Redressal Officer. It provides that in any appeal,
proceedings, the burden of proof to establish that a non redressal of
complaint by the Grievance Redressal Officer shall be on the Grievance
Redress Officer who denied the request.
Clause 41.— This clause provides that staff and officers to be
public servants. It provides that the staff and officers of the Central
Public Grievance Redressal Commission shall be deemed to be public
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 42.— This clause provides for time frame for disposal
of Appeals. It provides that an appeal shall be disposed of within sixty
days from the date of filing of the appeal and an appeal of an urgent
or immediate in nature shall be disposed of within the same day of the
receipt of the appeal or before the date on which the cause of action
may cease to exist, which shall not be later than fifteen days from the
date of receipt of the appeal.
It further provides that the Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission may impose penalty including compensation to the
complainant in deciding an appeal against designated officer and
Grievance Redress Officers for acting in a mala-fide manner or
having failed to discharge their duties without any sufficient and
reasonable cause and the concerned officers of the public authority
shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard before any
penalty is imposed on them.
Clause 43.— This clause provides for power to issue directions
and exercise original jurisdiction. It provides that the Central Public
Grievance Redressal Commission shall, upon adjudication of a complaint,
have the power to issue directions— (a) requiring the public authority
to take such steps as may be necessary to secure compliance with the
provisions of the Citizens Charter; (b) requiring the timely creation,
updation and wide dissemination of the Citizens Charter of the public
authority.
It further provides that it shall be the duty of the Central Public
Grievance Redressal Commission to receive and inquire into a complaint
from any person— (a) who has been unable to submit an appeal to

107
the designated authority; (b) who has been refused redress of grievance
under the proposed legislation (c) whose complaint has not been
disposed of within the time limit specified; (d) who has been denied
access to the Citizens Charter of the public authority either because
the Charter was not created by the Public Authority or is inadequate
in any regard or it is not widely disseminated to make people aware
of it; (e) in respect of any other matter relating to registering and
redressing of a complaint or appeal under the proposed legislation.
It also provides that the Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission may, suo motu, take notice of failure to deliver goods and
services in accordance with the provisions of the proposed legislation
and refer such cases for disposal to the Head of Department of the
Public Authority and in such cases, an action taken report shall be sent
by the Head of Department of the Public Authority to the Central
Commission within thirty days from the date of such reference and if
the Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission, is satisfied that
there are reasonable grounds to inquire into the matter, it may initiate
an inquiry suo motu in respect thereof.
Clause 44.— This clause provides for where Grievance
complained of is a result of Corrupt practices. It provides that where
it appears to the Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission that
the grievance complained of is prima facie indicative of a corrupt act
or practice in terms of the Prevention of Corruption Act 1988, on the
part of the responsible officer of the public authority complained
against then it shall record such evidence as may be found in support
of such conclusion and shall refer the same to the appropriate authorities.
Clause 45.— This clause provides for penalty and compensation
for mala-fide action. It provides that the designated authority, the
State Public Grievance Redressal Commission or the Central Public
Grievance Redressal Commission, as the case may be, may impose a
lump-sum penalty against designated official responsible for delivery of
goods and services or Grievance Redress Officer for their failure to
deliver goods or render services to which the applicant is entitled,
which may extend up to fifty thousand rupees which shall be recovered
from the salary of the official against whom penalty has been imposed.
It further provides that on imposition of the penalty, the appellate
authority may, by order, direct that such portion of the penalty
imposed under the said section shall be awarded to the appellant, as
compensation, as it may deem fit.
It also provides that the amount of such compensation awarded
shall not exceed the amount of penalty imposed under the said clause.
It also provides that If any public servant is found guilty under
sub-section (1), the disciplinary authority shall initiate the disciplinary
proceedings against such officer of the public authority, who if proved
to be guilty of a mala fide action in respect of any provision of the
proposed legislation, shall be liable to such punishment including a
penalty as the disciplinary authority may decide.

108
Clause 46.— This clause provides for reporting requirements. It
provides that every public authority shall ensure that every Grievance
Redress Officer keeps a record of complaints made to it or appeal
therein and the decisions on such complaints and appeals.
It further provides that every public authority shall publish on
its website, by the 15
th day of every month or at such shorter
intervals, as may be prescribed, a report mentioning therein— (a) the
number of complaints received; (b) number of complaints pending;
(c) number of complaints disposed of; and (d) such other particulars,
as may be prescribed, for discharge of its functions under the proposed
legislation.
Clause 47.— The clause provides the appeal against decision of
State Commission or Central Commission. It provides that any person
aggrieved by the decision of Central Public grievance Redressal
Commission may file appeal to Lokpal and against the decision of State
Public Grievance Redressal Commission may file appeal to Lokayukta
within the prescribed time and manner.
Clause 48.— This clause provides for bar of jurisdiction of
court. It provides that no civil court shall have jurisdiction to settle,
decide or deal with any question or to determine any matter which is
by or under the proposed legislation required to be settled, decided or
dealt with or to be determined by the Grievance Redress Officer or
the designated authority or the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission or the Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission.
Clause 49.— This clause provides that enforcement of orders
by the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission or the Central
Public Grievance Redressal Commission. It provides that every order
made by the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission or the
Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission may be enforced by
the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission or the Central Public
Grievance Redressal Commission, as the case may be, in the same
manner as if it were a decree or order made by a court in a suit
pending therein and it shall be lawful for the State Public Grievance
Redressal Commission or the Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission, as the case may be, to send, in the event of its inability
to execute it, such order to the court within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction—(a) in the case of a public authority not falling under
clauses (b) and (c), the place at which the main office of such public
authority is situated; or (b) in the case of an order against a public
authority being a company, the registered office of the company is
situated; or (c) in the case of an order against any other person, the
place where the person concerned voluntarily resides or carries on
business or personally works for gain is situated, and thereupon, the
court to which the order is so sent, shall execute the orders as if it
were a decree or order sent to it for execution.
Clause 50.— This clause provides for protection for act done
in good faith. It provides that no suit, prosecution or other legal
proceeding shall lie against any person for anything which is in good

109
faith done or intended to be done under the proposed legislation or any
rule made thereunder.
Clause 51.— This clause provides that provisions to be in
addition to existing laws. It provides that the provisions of the proposed
legislation shall be in addition to and not in derogation of, any other
law for the time being in force.
Clause 52.— This clause provides for power to make rules. It
provides that the appropriate Government may, by notification, make
rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. It
further specifies the matters in respect of which such rules may be
made.
Clause 53.— This clause provides for laying of rules. It provides
that every rule made by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament and every
rule made by the State Government shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Clause 54.— This clause provides for power to remove
difficulties. It provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to
the provisions of the proposed legislation, the Central Government
may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions
not inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation as may
appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty and no order shall
be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the
commencement of the proposed legislation and every order made
under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.

110
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (1) of clause 6 of the Bill requires every Public
Authority to establish an Information and Facilitation Centre and sub-
clause (2), thereof requires every Head of Department of the Public
Authority to develop, improve, modernize and reform the service
delivery and grievance redress system, including adoption of electronic
modes, internet, etc.
2. Clause 30 of the Bill provides for the establishment of an
institution to be called the ‘Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission’ to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority as may
be conferred by the Act.
3. Sub-clause (a) of clause 31 provide that the Central Public
Grievance Redressal Commission shall consisting of the Chief Public
Grievance Redressal Commissioner and such number of Central Public
Grievance Redress Commissioners, not exceeding ten, as may be
prescribed, Sub-clause (3) of clause 35 of the Bill providing that the
salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chief Public Grievance Redress Commissioner shall be
the same as that of the Chief Election Commissioner, and that of
Central Public Grievance Redress Commissioners shall be the same as
that of an Election Commissioner.
4. Sub-clause (1) of clause 35 of the said Bill provides for
appointment of other officers and employees as required for the
discharge of the functions of the Central Public Grievance Redress
Commission.
5. At this stage, it is not possible to give precise details or
estimates of the expenditure to be incurred either by the Central Public
Grievance Redressal Commission. It is however, expected that the Bill,
if enacted and brought into operation, would involve a Non-Plan and
Plan expenditure of about eleven crore of rupees for 2012-13.
6. The expenses of the Central Public Grievance Redressal
Commission including the salaries, allowances, and pensions payable to
or in respect of the Chief Public Grievance Commissioner, other
Commissioners and other officers or staff of the Central Public
Grievance Redressal Commission, shall be borne from the Consolidated
Fund of India, and any fees and other moneys taken by the Central
Public Grievance Redressal Commission shall form part of the Fund.
110

111
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Claude 51 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to
make rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause specifies the matters in respect of
which such rules may be made. These matters, inter alia , include—
(a) other information under item (g) of sub-clause (2) of clause 4;
(b) matters in relation to Citizens Charter under sub-clause (3) of
clause 4; (c) matter in relation to the information and facilitation
centre, under sub-clause (3) of clause 6; (d) the manner of inquiry
into and redressal of grievance of the complaints received from
citizens under sub-clause (1) of clause 7; (e) the other means by
which complaints may be made under clause 8; (f) the other matters
for which the Head of Department of public authority shall have
power under item (g) of sub-clause (3) of clause 11; (g) the number
of Commissioners of the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission
under item (b) of clause 15; (h) the members of the search committee
under sub-clause (2) of clause 15; (i) additional critaria in relation to
selection of Chief Commissioner and the Commissioners of the State
Public Grievance Redressal Commission under proviso to clause 16;
(j) the salary and allowances payable to, and the terms and conditions
of the services of the Chief Commissioners and other Commissioners
of the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission under sub-
clause (3) of clause 18; (k) the procedure of investigation of
misbehaviour or incapicity for removal of the Chief Commissioners
and other Commissioners of, the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission under sub-clause (3) of clause 20; (l) the other matters
for which the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission shall have
power under item (g) of sub-clause (1) of clause 21; (m) the number
of Commissioners of the Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission
under item (b) of clause 31; (n) the members of the search committee
under sub-clause (2) of clause 32; (o) additional critaria in relation to
selection of Chief Commissioner and the Commissioners of the Central
Public Grievance Redressal Commission under proviso to clause 33;
(p) the salary and allowances payable to, and the terms and conditions
of the services of the Chief Commissioners and other Commissioners
of the Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission under sub-
clause (3) of clause 35; (q) the procedure of investigation of
misbehaviour or incapicity for removal of the Chief Commissioners
and other Commissioners of, the State Public Grievance Redressal
Commission under sub-clause (3) of clause 37; (r) the other matters
for which the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission shall have
power under item (g) of sub-clause (1) of clause 38; (s) the time with
in which the record of complaints to the public authority and the
decisions on the complaints and appeals shall be published on the
website and other particulars under sub-clause (2) of clause 46;
111

112
(t) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed
under the proposed legislation.
2. Clause 52 of the Bill requires that every rule made by the
Central Government shall be laid before each House of Parliament and
every rule made by the State Government shall be laid before the State
Legislature, as soon as may be after it is made.
3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are
matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable
to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.

113
113
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to lay down an obligation upon every public authority to publish citizens charter
stating therein the time within which specified goods shall be supplied and
services be rendered and provide for a grievance redressal mechanism for
non-compliance of citizens charter and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
(Shri V . Narayanasamy, Minister for Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions )

114
ANNEXURE-B
114
Part-1: COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS ON THE BILL, RIGHT OF CITIZEN’S TO TIME
BOUND DELIVERY AND REDRESSAL OF THEIR GRIEVANCES BILL, 2011 (Bill no. 131
of 2011)
Memo-
randum
Memo-
randum
No. 2
Dr. Jayaprakash
Naryan – Foundation
for Democratic
Reforms – LOK
SATTA
NCPRI
1. The scope of the Bill should
not be restricted to citizens only
and should be broadened
2. Synergy between RTI Act
and this Bill be created by
merging the framework of the
two.
3. The integration of Electronic
Delivery of Services Bill and this
Bill.
4 Reward for outstanding
service delivery
1. Title of Bill should be shorter
2. Page 4, Clause 2 (h)
Designated Authority (means a
district level tribunal set up by
the appropriate government
which will have a jurisdiction to
hear complaints give directions,
compensation and impose penalty
in relation to all public authorities
located within the district. The
appointment, transfer and/or
1. We arc open to suggestion
to include clients (organizations.
bodies etc.) and even non-
citizens in the scope of this Bill.
2. The two legislations differ
in scope, mandate and subject
matter, and therefore, the
framework cannot be merged.
3. We are open to suggestion
that EDS Bill may be
harmoniously integrated with the
present Bill as the subject matter
of both the Bills relates to
improvement in Public Service
Delivery.
4. We are open to suggestion
that a reward system will act as
a catalyst for overall improvement
1. Cabinet has approved the
title of the Bill which is
comprehensive.
2. Designated Authority - The
proposed concept of designated
authority is too drastic and it
calls for creation of a new set-
up.
The definition approved by the
Cabinet regarding designated
authority is flexible and
decentralized. It has been left to
Sl. Name of Comments/suggestions Response of Government
No. organization/
individual
12 3 4

115
removal of the designated
authority must be with the
concurrence of the State/Central
Public Grievance Redressal
Commission, who would also be
the accepting authority for their
annual confidential reports)
3. Page 5 of the Bill:
‘Substantially financed’
Means substantially finance in
cash or kind, directly or
indirectly, by public resources
which would require the
submission of accounts, the
auditing of accounts or
restrictions on its use or
disposal.
4. Page 6 Chapter II [of the
prescribed measure and quantity]
5. Chapter III – Before the
finalization of the Citizens Charter
and Statement of Obligations for
each public authority a draft
citizens charter and statement of
obligation shall be prepared for
public discussion. This discussion
will be conducted in a
transparent and participatory
manner. It must involve at the
very least, a process of widely
publicising and seeking
suggestions and comments from
the public of the draft Citizens
Charter and Statement of
Obligation in conformity with the
procedure laid down under
Section 4 and the basis on which
any of the suggestions of the
public are rejected, shall also be
put in the public domain. This
process will also be followed
when the Citizens Charter is
reviewed every year as per
Section 5 of this Act.
12 3 4
the discretion of the appropriate
Government (State Government
or Central Government as the
case may be) to appoint
designated authorities as they
deem appropriate.
3. The suggestion in this regard
is too cumbersome. However,
there is need to clarify the
quantum involved to be taken as
substantially financed.
4. Section 4 of the Bill elaborates
all the details which take care of
all these concerns.
5. These details would be
covered under Rules and
Guidelines to be issued after the
Bill is enacted.
The Guidelines for Implementing
Sevottam, September 2011,
accessible at www.darpg.gov.in
already include the requirement
of stakeholder consultation and
Steps 3, 4 and 5 in Chapter 3
on ‘Charter Design and
Implementation process’ include
how stakeholder consultation is
to be planned, how input is to
be received, and how stakeholder
consultation results are to be
consolidated for the purpose of
finalization of service standards
for the Citizens Charter.

116
12 3 4
6. The [designation and contact
details] of the persons ...(and
the job chart of the staff)
7. Page 7 – [ (d) the qualitative
standards of the goods and
services available to the public]
8. Page 7 (i) Those matters
deemed urgent that shall be
redressed immediately upon
receipt  of the complaint and no
later than 24 hours
9. Page 7 (j) Those matters
for which mandatory
compensation is to be paid
6. While the contact details of
the person responsible for service
delivery are already a part of the
Citizens Charter framework, the
Job Card or Job Charts are
internal tools for enhancing
individual efficiency. These are
covered in the Capability Building
part and are not required to be
included in the Citizens Charter.
7. The quantitative as well as
qualitative standards for each and
every good and service included
in the Citizens Charter, are
already a part of the Sevottam
Compliant Citizens Charter being
implemented in Government of
India Ministries/Departments
since August, 2010. The concept
has been introduced in six social
sectors of all States/UTs also
through the two Workshops on
Capability Building for Sevottam
organized in November, 2011.
Earlier in June/July, 2009,
through the recommendations of
the Second ARC in its 12th
Report all State Governments and
Union Territory Administration
had been requested to consider
adoption of Sevottam for bringing
improvements in public service
delivery.
8. Proviso to Clause 11(7),
Clause 25 and Clause 42 already
take care of such concerns.
9. The provision for
compensation as approved by the
Cabinet is appropriate as it would
be left to the discretion of
competent authorities who will
act in a quasi-judicial manner.

117
12 3 4
10. Page 8 Chapter III clause 5
[ at all block and/or ward level
offices of the public authority]
11. Chapter IV Clause 6 (1)
after deleting the existing clause
on IFC [ The State Public
Grievance Redressal Commission
shall ensure the establishment of
Information and Facilitation
Centres at the block level in case
of rural areas and municipal
wards in case of urban areas]
12. [(4) The Information and
Facilitation Centre shall register
complaints filed by citizens and
forward these to the appropriate
Grievance Redress Officer]
[(5) The Information. And
Facilitation Centre shall provide
all necessary assistance to
citizens in filing complaints where
necessary and by assisting
citizens in tracking their
complaints.]
[(6) Every Information and
Facilitation Centre will have
facility for receiving complaints
either directly in person or
through post or through
dedicated phone lines established
or electronically through text
messages, emails or such other
means as may be prescribed.
13. [(7) The staff and the
Coordinator of the Information
and Facilitation Centre shall be
appointed by the State Public
Grievance Redressal Commission
in accordance with rules as may
be prescribed.]
10. This is not required as this
has been comprehensively dealt
with in Clause 5 of the Bill.
11. The provision as approved
by the Cabinet is providing for
an IFC at every level of public
authority. The suggestion is to
have block/ward level IFCs.
This is not needed as the Bill
already covers Blocks and
Municipalities as well as other
public authorities.
12. [(4), (5), (6)] The provisions
on the Information and
Facilitation Centres as approved
by the Union Cabinet under
Clause 6 is deemed as sufficient.
Further elaboration of the
functions and responsibilities of
the IFC etc., would be covered
under rules and guidelines to be
issued under the Bill, from time
to time.
13. The suggestion is not agreed
to in the light of provisions made
under Clause 6 of the Bill.

118
12 3 4
14. [(8) Any complaint regarding
non-registration of complaint or
any violation of the provisions
of the Act by the Information
and Facilitation Centre shall be
with the Designated Authority]
15. Page 10 Chapter V clause 8
[All complaint shall be made in
writing or through the electronic
means or through text message
or through telephone or through
any other means that may be
prescribed and be acknowledged
by a receipt with two days of
the making of the complaint.]
16. Page 10 Chapter V clause 9
(I) (b) last line last two
words of [public authority]
deleted.
17. Page 10 Chapter V clause 9
(d) add in line 3, after first word
‘services’ or has delayed such
delivery beyond the prescribed
time without any good reason,
or has delivered goods or
services that do not meet the
prescribed standards of quality
or measure.
18. Page 11 Chapter V , - clause
9 (4) inserted by the suggestion
clause 10 inserted words in line
[between immediately and after
not later than 24 hours]
19. Page 11 Chapter VI, Clause
11 (2) line 3 'thirty' days to be
deleted and replaced by [ninety]
as a time period of 30 days is
unduly short for the individual.
20. Page 12 Chapter VI Clause
11 (7) second proviso added as
14. The suggestion not agreed
to in view of provision under
Clause 8 of the Bill.
15. Clause 8 in the Bill as
approved by the Union Cabinet
is comprehensive and adequate.
16. Replacement of GRO by
‘public authority’ will render it
vague and non-specific, therefore,
is not agreed to.
17. The provision of the Bill
under Clause 9 (d) as approved
by the Union Cabinet takes ample
care of the concerns expressed
in this suggestion and as such it
is not agreed to.
18. Clause 9 (2) and 9 (3) of
the Bill as approved by the
Cabinet is sufficient. The
suggestion is not agreed to as it
is procedural in nature, and
therefore, is not required in the
Bill.
19. The provision as approved
by Cabinet is sufficient as the
proviso enables the designated
authority to admit appeals even
after thirty days
20. The existing proviso under.
clause 25 and 42 providing for

119
12 3 4
[ Provided further that the State/
Central Public Grievance
Commission may deem any
matter to be of an ‘urgent or
immediate’ nature and issue
directions for the grievance
to be redressed within 24
hours]
21. Page 13 Chapter VI clause
11 (9) – the phrase ‘including
compensation’ to be replaced by
[and/or award compensation]
In proviso to above, the suggestion
adds [Provided further that
certain categories of grievances
as laid down in the Citizens
Charter and Statement of
Obligation or prescribed by the
State/Central Public Grievance
Redressal Commission, will
mandatorily result in
compensation being made to the
complainant, the amount of
which will be determined by the
designated authority and be
appealable by the complainant to
the grievance commission]
22. Page 13 Chapter VI Clause
11 (12) added on officers and
staff to be provided to the
Designated Authority
23. Page 14 Chapter VII in
Clause 14 (b) ‘not exceeding ten’
[Deleted]
24. Page 14 Chapter VII below
Clause 15 (2) add [ The Search
Committee shall consist of such
persons of standing and having
special knowledge and expertise
in the matters relating to
grievances redress policy, public
administration, policy making and
an appeal of urgent or immediate
nature to be disposed of within
the same day of the receipt of
the appeal, as approved by the
Cabinet are sufficient.
21. The phrase and proviso in
clause 11 (9), as approved by
the Union Cabinet is sufficient
This suggestion is not agreed to
as explained above that
compensation would be decided
by the Competent Authority on a
case to case basis.
22. The suggestion is contrary
to provision of the Bill, regarding
Designated Authority as explained
in previous paragraph No.2, and
as such it is not agreed to.
23. The suggestion is not agreed
to as it cannot be made open
ended.
24. Clause 15 (2) as approved
by the Union Cabinet is
sufficient.

120
12 3 4
management, or any other related
matter]
25. Page 14 at the end of Clause
16 (d) add [ in academia or
journalism or other sectors
relevant to the prevention or
redressal of  grievances] :
[Provided that not more than half
the members of the commission
at any time should be from
among those coming under
category (a), (b) or ( c)
26. Page 15 Clause 17 (1) the
end clause ‘or until they attain
the age of sixty-five years
whichever is earlier’ [Delete]
27. Page 15 Clause 19 [the
temporary charge will be held
with the next senior most
commissioner till a permanent
appointment is made in
accordance with the law]
28. Page 17 Clause 25 (1) at
the end of the Proviso add
[Categories of grievances
qualifying as ‘urgent or
immediate’ shall be prescribed in
the Citizens Charter and
Statement of Obligations or by
the State/Central Public Grievance
Redressal Commission]
29. Page 17 Clause 25 (2)
‘including compensation’ to be
deleted and [p and/or award
compensation] to be added
30. On page 17 below proviso
to Clause 25 (2) add [ Provided
further that certain categories of
grievances as laid down in the
Citizens Charter and Statement
of Obligation or prescribed by
the State/Central Public Grievances
25. Clause 16 (d) as approved
by the Union Cabinet is deemed
sufficient
26. Clause 17 (1) as approved
by the Cabinet is appropriate
27. Clause 19 as approved by
the Cabinet is sufficient
28. The suggestion is a repetition
and is not agreed to as explained
in its earlier reference in
paragraphs above.
29. The suggestion is a repetition
and is not agreed to as explained
in its earlier reference in
paragraphs above.
30. The suggestion is a
repetition and is not agreed to as
explained in its earlier reference
in paragraphs above.

121
12 3 4
Redressal Commission, will
mandatorily result in
compensation being made to the
complainant
31. Page 19 below Clause 32
(2) add - [The Search Committee
shall consist of such persons of
standing and having special
knowledge and expertise in the
matters relating to grievance
redress policy, public
administration, policy making and
management, or any other related
matter.]
32. Page 19 Clause 33 (1) (c)
in second line after 'social sector'
add - [in academia or journalism
or other sectors relevant to the
prevention or redressal of
grievances] and delete
‘with a postgraduate degree in a
al relevant subject.’ And after
the deleted words add [ provided
that not more than half the
members of the Commission at
any time should be from among
those coming under category (a)
and (b) ]
33. Page 20 the first line of
Clause 34 (1) that reads as
'Provided that the Central
Government may prescribe
criteria it in addition to the
above for the appointment of
Chief Commissioner and
Commissioners’ be deleted for
reason that the Commission may
not be dominated by retired civil
servants and judges.
34. Page 21 at the end of the
second line in Clause 36 add
[ the temporary charge will be
held with the next senior most
Commissioner till a permanent
31. The suggestion is a
repetition and is not agreed to as
explained in its earlier reference
in paragraphs above.
32. The suggestion is a
repetition and is not agreed to as
explained in its earlier reference
in paragraphs above.
33. The suggestion is a
repetition and is not agreed to as
explained in its earlier reference
in paragraphs above.
34. The suggestion is a repetition
and is not agreed to as explained
in its earlier reference in
paragraphs above.

122
appointment is made with
accordance with the law]
35. Page 22 After Proviso to
Clause 42 (1) add [ Categories
of grievances qualifying as
‘urgent or immediate' shall be
laid down in the Citizens Charter
and Statement of Obligations or
prescribed by the State/Central
Public Grievance Redressal
Commission]
36. In Clause 42 (2) delete
‘including compensation’ and add
[and/or award compensation]
37. After proviso to Clause 42
(2) add [Provided further that
certain categories of grievances
as prescribed by the State/Central
Public Grievance Redressal
Commission will mandatorily
result in compensation being
made to the complainant.
38. Page 24 Chapter IX in
Clause 45 delete entire sub-
section (2) which reads ‘On
imposition of penalty under sub-
section (1) the appellate authority
may by order direct that such
portion of the penalty imposed
under the said section shall be
awarded to the appellant as
compensation as it may deem
fit. Provided that the amount of
such compensation awarded shall
not exceed the amount of penalty
imposed under the said section’
and replace it with [(2) Any
compensation awarded under this
Act shall be paid by the public
authority. The compensation.
amount may be recovered from
any penalty imposed upon the
concerned official, as prescribed
in this law]
12 3 4
35. The suggestion is a repetition
and is not agreed to as explained
in its earlier reference in
paragraphs above.
36. The suggestion is a
repetition and is not agreed to as
explained in its earlier reference
in paragraphs above.
37. The suggestion is a
repetition and is not agreed to as
explained in its earlier reference
in paragraphs above.
38. It is not agreed to as the
provision of the Bill penalizes the
guilty officer and compensation
is a part of the penalty to be
imposed on the guilty officer.

123
12 3 4
39. Page 24 Chapter X in
Clause 46 add sub-section 2 as
[(2) Every public authority shall
ensure that its website contains
a system for citizens to track
the progress on the complaints
filed by them using the unique
complaint number awarded to
their complaint.]
40. Page 25 Clause 47 (1) in
line 2 add [in matters relating to
allegations of corruption as per
section 44 of law]
41. Page 25 Clause 47 (2) after
the word ‘Commission’ add [in
matters relating to allegations of
corruption, as per section 28 of
the law]
42. And at the end of line 3
after ‘Lokpal and Lokayuktas
Act’, delete ‘2011’
1. Page 1 to 5 of Bill -
1.1 “an obligation on every
public authority to
publish and monitor
implementation  of
citizen charter” to be
added in the Bill
1.2 There should be
“mandatory audit of
compliance  with the
charter and auditors’
report should be
accessible by the public”
1.2.1 Emphasis should be on
prevention of grievances.
The additional
responsibility on the
GRO, for removal of
reasons for recurrence
of the similar grievance
39. The Clause 46 and its
proviso as approved by the
Union Cabinet is sufficient
40. The Clause 47 (1) as
approved by the Union Cabinet
sufficient
41. The Clause 47 (2) and its
proviso as approved by the
Union Cabinet is sufficient
42. It would be taken care of.
at the appropriate time
1. to 3.1 - Open to the
suggestion, while implementing
the Citizens Charter. The relevant
Rules and Guidelines can include
these.
Memo-
randum
No. 3
Shri Sanjeevan Bajaj,
CEO, FICCI Quality
Forum

124
12 3 4
in future, should also be
fixed. A clause of making
it obligatory to take
corrective and preventive
action should be added.
There should be a stern
action against officers
responsible for repetitive
grievances of similar
nature.
2.1 It should be mandatory
to display the citizen’s
charter or a summary
of its main provision
outside the office
premises in an area in
which service recipients
have free and easy
access.
3.1 The hours in which the
GRO will be available
should also be specified,
and regularly monitored
by the Head of the
Department.
3.2 Time taken to redress
grievance will vary with
simple cases taking less
time and complicated
cases requiring more
time. Therefore, fixing a
30 day limit for all types
of grievances serves no
purpose.
4.1 In clause 8, line 43 says
that the time-frame for
redress of grievances
will be mentioned in the
acknowledgement. Here,
it may be added “it is
obligatory to publish as
part of citizen’s charter
the various types of
grievances and the time-
frame for redress of
each type”.
3.2 The relevant Clauses and its
proviso as approved by the
Union Cabinet is sufficient
4.1 The Clause and its proviso
as approved by the Union Cabinet
is sufficient

125
12 3 4
4.2 For frivolous or false
complaints in which the
applicants may misuse
the provision of the
Bill to pressurize public
authority to deliver
services beyond entitle-
ment, some token
penalty or a deterrent
needs to be inbuilt to
prevent frivolous comp-
laints. This will en-
courage genuine comp-
laints only.
1. Section 2(f) and 2(k) -
definition of Complaint and
Public Authority – Definition of
complaint should be restricted
only to any failure in the delivery
of goods or rendering of services
as per the charter. And the
definition of Public Authority to
be restricted to the definition of
Authority under Right to
Information Act, 2005.
2. Section 3 on Rights to
Service –  Necessary insertions
be made in Section 3 for timely
rendering of services by  Public
Authority.
3. Section 4 dealing with
“Obligation of Public Authority
to publish Citizen Charter”  –
In Section 4, Sub Section 2 (a)
and (c) dealing with “details of
goods supplied and services
goods” can be clubbed together
because details would include
quantitative and tangible parameters.
4.2 As per the structure of the
Bill, frivolous or false complaints
would, generally, be taken care
of through various provisions of
the Bill, like written complaint,
enquiry into complaint by GRO
etc.
1. The definitions as approved
in Clause 2 by the Union Cabinet,
are appropriate.
2. Clause 3 as approved by
the Union Cabinet is appropriate,
as it gives the Rights of time
bound (i) delivery of goods,
(ii) and provision for services,
(iii) and redressal of their
grievances. As such the
suggestion is not accepted
3. Clause 4 (2) (a) and 4 (2)
(c), as approved by the Union
Cabinet, are appropriate. Clause
4 (2) (a) and (b) cannot be
clubbed as (a) asks for various
details on goods and services and
service agencies while 2(c)
requires specifying the parameters,
separately, against each good and
Memo-
randum
No. 4
Shri Anant Saran
Part-1: Comments and Suggestions on the Bill, Right of Citizen’s to Time Bound Delivery and Redressal
of their grievances Bill, 2011 (Bill No. 131 of 2011)

126
4. Section 8 dealing with
Acknowledgement of complaint
by receipt thereof  – In Section
8 acknowledgement may be
given through telephone also may
be deleted as it is difficult to
keep all records of acknowledge-
ment through telephone.
5. Section 8 dealing with
“Action to be taken by the
Grievance Redress Officer’  –
In Section 9 the word remedied
is not clear. It is observed that
wide power has been conferred
on the GRO to recommend a
penalty therefore, Government
should notify the specific nature
of penalty to be imposed in a
given case and lay down broad
guidelines in this regard.
6. Section 11 dealing with
“Appeal” – In Section 11 (1)
every complaint forwarded under
Section 7 shall be deemed to
have filed by way of an appeal
to the Head of the Department
of the Public Authority. This
means that even if the individual
has not preferred  an appeal, it
shall be presumed that an appeal
has been registered by virtue of
Section 11(1).
7. Section 25 (2) dealing with
time-frame for disposal of Bills
– As per Section 25 (2) the State
Public Grievances Redressal
Commission can impose penalty
but it is not clear whether it can
modify/set aside any penalty of
the order imposed in Section 11
(7) of the Bill. This may be
suitably amended.
12 3 4
service listed as per 2(a). As
such the suggestion
is not accepted.
4. Clause 8 as approved by the
Union Cabinet is appropriate as
clear facility for maintaining
records, through a Toll Free
Telephone number, is available
through SMS, and it has a wide
use. Therefore, the suggestion is
not accepted.
5. Clause 9 as approved by the
Union Cabinet is appropriate, as
penalty is to be decided on a
case to case basis through
judicial exercise of quasi powers.
6. Chapter VI Clause 11 is
providing an in-built appeal in
cases of grievances that have
not been redressed in the time
bound manner and are therefore
included in the monthly report
of the GRO. Therefore, Clause
11 as approved by the Union
Cabinet, is appropriate, and the
suggestion is not accepted.
7. The State Public Grievance
Redressal Commission has inherent
powers to modify/set aside any
penalty recommended by the
Grievance Redress Officer under
Clause 9(1) (d).

127
12 3 4
8. Burden of Proof to be on
Grievance Redressal Officer  –
Section 27 and Section 40 are
repetitive in nature and may be
considerably  modified to avoid
duplication.
9. Section 42 Sub Section 2
– It is not clear whether the
Central Public Grievances
Redressal Commission can
modify/set aside any penalty
order imposed under Section 11
(7). This may be considerably
modified.
10. Under Section 45 (1) the
Commission may impose “lump
sum penalty” against designated
officials. A term “lump sum” is
vague and needs to be specific.
11. Section 45 Sub Section 2
of the proposed draft Bill  –
Section 45 (2) deals with
disciplinary procedure against
officer proved guilty of mala fide
action. Here it may be inserted
that disciplinary authority may
impose such penalty as deemed
fit under CCS (CCA) Rules 1965.
This will result in double
jeopardy and is likely to be
struck down before Court of
Law.
12. Section 47 of the proposed
Bill – Section 47 stipulates that
no Civil Court shall have
jurisdiction in matters pertaining
to the Bill here Central
Administrative Tribunals may be
allowed to review the orders
issued by a Head of the Depart-
ment/Centre State Commission
against a public servant.
8. The two clauses are dealing
separately, with State Grievance
Redressal Commission and
Central Grievance Redressal
Commission, and are therefore,
they are not repetitive.
9. The Central Public Grievance
Redressal Commission has
inherent powers to modify/set
aside any penalty recommended
by the Grievance Redress Officer
under Clause 9(1) (d).
10. Clause 45 of the Bill as
approved by the Union Cabinet
is adequate and sufficient, as it
provides for imposition of penalty
'which may extend up to fifty
thousand rupees'. As such the
suggestion is not accepted.
11. Clause 45, as approved by
the Union Cabinet is appropriate,
as initiation of disciplinary
proceedings does not amount to
double jeopardy.
12 The Bill docs not cover
grievances relating to service
matters of a public servant
whether serving or retired.
Therefore, the provisions under
the Bill as approved by the Union
Cabinet is appropriate.

128
12 3 4
Memo-
randum
No. 5
Shri Sumant Parimal 1. There should be provision
for time bound delivery of judicial
services also.
2. A Nodal agency at the
Central and the State levels
should freeze Service Level
Agreements (SLAs) with all
Government departments for
meeting timelines for service
delivery as per citizen charter.
This nodal agency will develop
and submit nodal detailed
framework to the Central
Ministries and the State
Departments to ensure
standardisation and commitment
in the implementation of the
framework of service deliver.
3. Compliance with the various
SLAs as per published citizen to
be monitored, controlled and
reported through a Centralised
Information Technology Platform
and integrated information and
performance management plat-
form is needed for this purpose.
4. A stringent performance
management and reporting
framework needs to be evolved
the Bill gives a very generic
reporting and performance
monitoring guidelines need to be
developed and reporting and
monitoring parameters should be
developed and mandated to the
State and Central Departments.
5. The generic amount penalty
proposed in the Bill is alright as
1. The provisions of the Bill
relate to Services offered by
Public Authorities and redressal
of grievances.
All Public Authorities as defined
in the Bill would formulate their
citizens charters as per the
existing rules, laws, and
procedures prevailing therein.
2. The provision of a
mandatory Citizens Charter
detailing all Goods and Services
including time-limits and
standards, in the Bill, as approved
by the Union Cabinet is
sufficient.
3. The provision of a
mandatory Citizens Charter,
detailing all Goods and Services,
including time-limits and
Standards, in the Bill, as approved
by the Union Cabinet is
sufficient.
4. The suggested mechanism is
procedural in nature and has no
bearing upon the Bill.
5. The penalty and compen-
sation clause, as approved by

129
12 3 4
a standard penalty, but in certain
cases penalty should be as per
financial/social/economic impact
of denial or delay in services for
each  could be assessed as the
estimated loss suffered.
6. The entire process proposed
in the Bill would be converted
into a series of flow chart and
process maps indicating stake
holders in various processes at
various levels and inputs/outputs
at each level.
7. IT road map for imple-
menting the provisions in this
Bill at anytime, anywhere basis
could be developed to give wide
interface to general public.
8. There should be a
mechanism in the Bill to allocate
responsibilities at various levels
of transactions.
The existing provisions in the
Bill as mentioned should be
replaced by the following:
1.  Section 7(4) GRO shall
provide all necessary assistance
to citizens in filing complaints.
It is the liberty of complainant,
to submit his complaint by post,
by courier, by hand, by e-mail,
by fax or any electronic means,
and a receipt be n provided on
submission by hand.
2. Section 11 (9) The
designated authority shall impose
penalty in every appeal if found
any reason, including justified and
requested at compensation to the
complainant. If no penalty, a
reasoned order will be passed.
the Union Cabinet, is sufficient.
6. The process given in this
suggestion has got no bearing
upon the Bill and is therefore,
not accepted.
7. The process given in this
suggestion has got no bearing
upon the Bill, and is therefore,
not accepted
8. The suggestion has got no
bearing upon the Bill, and is
therefore, not accepted
1. Clauses 7 (4) and 7 (5) and
Clauses 6(1) and 6 (2) and (8)
as approved by the Union Cabinet
is sufficient as it includes the
obligation of the Public
Authorities to provide all
necessary information, guidance
and assistance to citizens through
the Information Facilitation
Centres and the Grievance
Redress Officer including
acknowledgement of complaint.
Suggestions No. 2 to 4 : The
Bill provides for imposition of
penalty by the competent
authority, in exercise of its quasi
judicial powers, on a case to
case basis, as per gravity of the
reasons for the complaint.
Therefore, the penalty related
Memo-
randum
No. 6
Shri Sanjay Kumar
Mishra, # 1224, Sector
19, Panchkula 134113

130
3. Section 25(2) The SPGR
shall impose penalty in every
appeal if found any reason,
including justified and requested
compensation to the complainant.
If no penalty, a reasoned order
will be passed.
4. Section 42(2) The CPGR
shall impose penalty in every
appeal if found any reason,
including justified and requested
compensation to the complainant.
If no penalty, a reasoned order
will be passed.
5. Section 45 (1): The SPGC/
CPGC, as the case may be, 
shall
impose a lump sum penalty. If
no penalty, a reasoned order will
be passed.
6. Section 45 (2): The appellate
authority 
shall direct.
7. Section 45 (3) and entry in
his ACR books as the disciplinary
authority may decide.
1. Grievance redress and
information mechanism is needed
at the block level to deal with,
confidential complaints and
grievances about public and
private health services in a
particular block.
2. Procedures for corrective
measures should be clearly
enunciated at each level with
defined parameters for grievance
clauses in the Bill as approved
by Union Cabinet are appropriate,
and the suggestions are not
accepted.
Suggestions No. 5, 6 and 7 :
Clause 45 (1) as approved by
the Union Cabinet is appropriate
and the suggestions are not
accepted in view of their
sweeping nature. Imposition of
penalty as per Bill is to be on a
case to case basis as per gravity
of the mala fide  intent and in
exercise of quasi judicial powers
by the appropriate authority.
1. Clause 6 of the Bill provides
that every public authority shall
establish information and
facilitation centre. This will be
applicable at the block level also.
Clause 7 of the Bill
provides that every public
authority shall designate officer
as Grievance Redress Officer in
all administrative units or offices
at Central, State, District and
sub-district levels, municipalities,
Panchayats.
2. The suggestion is a matter
of procedure for rules and
guidelines. No comments are
warranted at this stage.
12 3 4
Memo-
randum
No. 7
Ms. Jashodhara
Dasgupta, on behalf
of NAMHHR
Secretariat, C-152,
Golf View
Apartments, Saket,
New Delhi-17.

131
12 3 4
3. The provisions of the Bill,
as approved by the Cabinet, are
comprehensive and applies to
Health sector as well. Therefore,
suggestion is not acceptable.
4. The provisions of the Bill,
as approved by the Cabinet are
comprehensive and adequate As
such, suggestion is not
acceptable.
5, 6 and and 7: The provision of
information and facilitation centre
under Clause 6 of the Bill are
comprehensive and adequate. As
such, the suggestions are not
acceptable.
investigation, feedback loop,
corrective process, no fault
compensation and grievance
redress.
3. Responsibilities of Health
Department officials should be
defined in relation to GRO at
the district level with an
ombudsperson under the aegis
of a National Health Regulatory
and Development Authority.
4. Serious grievances and
unresolved cases should be
referred to the ombudsperson
who should initiate joint enquiries
involving an officially appointed
person/Commissioner plus one
representative of a local civil
society organization nominated
by the aggrieved person. The
complainant would be allowed
to involve family/community
members during this dialogue.
5. It is necessary to set up
Jan Sahayata Kendras (People’s
Facilitation Centres) that should
be co-located with GRO for
Grievance Redressal and install
IT enabled services.
6. Complaints received by the
Jan Sahayata Kendras must be
forwarded immediately and in
any case within the same day to
the appropriate CGRO or SGRO,
as the case may be, electronically
and details thereof to the
complainant.
7. The Jan Sahayata Kendras
must be managed by local CBOs,
women groups, faming groups,
trade unions and cooperative
societies and to bring the
grievance redressal system GRS
close to ordinary people.

132
8. The suggestion is a matter
of procedure for rules and
guidelines. No comments are
warranted at this stage.
9. The provision under Clause
4 of the Bill for framing and
publication of citizens charter are
comprehensive and adequate.
10. The Bill provides for that
an appeal of urgent or immediate
nature shall be disposed of within
the same day of the receipt of
the appeal.
11. The provisions of the
Bill, as approved by the Cabinet,
are comprehensive and adequate.
As such, suggestion is not
acceptable.
1. We are open to the
suggestion.
2. We are open to the
suggestion.
3. Clause 11(4)(a) as approved
by the Cabinet is appropriate and
reasonable. The suggestion is not
acceptable.
8. The work of the GRS in the
block/ward should be periodically
(say once in 6 months) reviewed
by the Community monitoring
committee.
9. All health facilities should
write up the citizen’s charter
detailing the services to be
provided.
10. Complaints of an urgent and/
immediate nature or where the
complaint concerns the life or
liberty of a person, shall be
disposed of within 5 days of the
receipt of the complaint.
11. The time-frame for redressal
has been given as ‘not more than
30 days’- with regards to health
services, many a times it may
be a matter of life or death and
therefore, needs a very specific
clause for health services related
denials and grievance.
1. In section 10 “under advice
to complainant” words should
be added at the end of section,
so that complainant himself may
not file appeal with designated
authority.
2. Section 4(2)(a) needs
correction by replacing underlined
‘services’ word with ‘goods’
3. Section 11(4)(a) providing for
summoning and enforcing
attendance of any person should
be made compulsorily applicable
only to Government officers
connected to processing of
complaint and issue raised
therein, and not to a complainant
as it may put up into a hardship.
12 3 4
Memo-
randum
No. 8
Shri J.P. Shah,
B-12, Amrapali,
Junagadh, Gujarat
jpshah50@yahoo.
co.in
Mob.09924106490

133
12 3 4
4. There should be minimum
number of Commissioners in
State/Central Commissions.
5. Maximum number of
Commissioners in Central
Commission should be increased
from 10 to 15. [Section 31(b)]
6. Section 45.1 provides for
maximum penalty of Rs.50000/-.
Minimum penalty amount of
Rs.5000/- [some percentage of
basic salary of defaulting officer]
per case should also be fixed.
7. No format for filing complaint
should be stipulated, only minimum
requirements should be insisted.
Complaints in hard copy or signed
scanned soft copy by email should
be acceptable.
8. Language of reply from
GRO or designated authority and
State Commissions should be in
the language of complaint/appeal.
9. Under Section 46 (2) to be
added:-
Amount of penalty imposed,
amount of penalty
recovered, number of
officers on whom  penalty
is imposed and recovered
and amount of un-recovered
penalty.
10. It should be provided that
not supplying on demand citizen
charter of his office free of cost
4. A reasonable framework in
terms of Central/State Public
Redress Commission for deciding
appeals has been provided in the
Bill.
5. A reasonable strength of
Commissioners for Central/State
Public Redress Commission has
been provided in the Bill.
6. The Bill provides for
imposition of penalty by the
competent authority, in exercise
of its quasi judicial powers, on a
case to case basis, as per gravity
of the reasons for the complaint.
Therefore, the penalty related
Clauses in the Bill as approved
by Union Cabinet are appro-
priate, and the suggestion is not
acceptable.
7. No format is required for
filing complaint.
8. Appropriate Government
may consider the suggestion.
9. Clause 46 (2) is
comprehensive and sub-clause
(2) (d) provides that the report
of public authority may mention
such other particulars, as may
be prescribed, for discharge of
his function under this Act.
10. Clause 4, 5 and 6 of the
Bill relating to publication of
citizens charter, its wide dis-

134
to citizens by GRO or IFC or
HOD will also attract penalty
provisions of this act.
11. Selection of Commissioners
and Chief Commissioners should
be based on open advertisement,
as recently followed by Central
Government for Information
Commissioners for CIC.
12. There should be time limit
of 3 days for complaints lodged
at IFC for onward submission
to GRO.
14. There are no provisions in
this act as to maximum time
limits to be decided while
preparing citizen charter.
15. Citizens charter for each
public authority should be
approved by a Committee
consisting of three senior most
officers.
16. Any Government office
receiving complaint under this
Act should forward to appropriate
GRO within 3 days of its receipt
under advice to complainant.
Delay beyond 3 days should
attract penalty per day of delay
against head of that office.
17. It should be provided in this
law that complainant can be
represented at hearings at
designated authority, State/Central
Public Redress Commission by
an agent.
semination to the public and the
role of information and facilitation
centre are comprehensive and
adequate. The suggestion is not
acceptable.
11. This is a procedural matter
that may be taken care of while
framing rules and guidelines.
12. Clause 6 and 7 of the Bill
regarding the role of information
and facilitation centre and the
Grievance Redress Officer in
facilitating filing of complaints
are comprehensive and adequate.
14. Clause 4 of the Bill provides
that that every public authority
shall publish a citizens charter
within six months of the
commencement of this Act.
15. Such matter may be an
internal process of the concerned
public authority.
16. Clause 8 of the Bill regarding
acknowledgement of complaint
by receipt thereof is
comprehensive and adequate.
The suggestion is not acceptable.
17. This is a procedural matter
that may be taken care of while
framing rules and guidelines.
12 3 4

135
12 3 4
18. Token filing fee of Rs.5/-
be levied by way of court fee
stamp or revenue stamp or postal
stamp or non-judicial stamp/
franking, cash, money order or
net banking for each complaint.
Paying filing fee will make
complainant a consumer under
Consumer Protection Act 1986.
19. Section 47 should be
presently deleted, which can be
inserted by amendment in future
when Lokpal and Lokayukta in
all States become a reality.
20. The name of the Act is too
lengthy and can be amended as
“RIGHT TO PUBIC SERVICES
ACT 2011”.
1. Suggestive Guidelines for
formulation of Citizens Charters
18. Under the Bill, redressal of
grievance of a citizen has been
taken as a statutory right of the
citizen; hence no fee is
chargeable for filing complaint.
19. The provision of appeal to
Lokpal and Lokayukta under
Clause 47 of the Bill which
contain findings of  the
Commission relating to
corruption, is appropriate. The
suggestion is not acceptable.
20. The title of the Bill is
comprehensive, as it relates to
the Rights of Citizens for Time
Bound Delivery of Goods and
Services and Redressal of Their
Grievances. Suggestion is not
acceptable.
1. Guidelines of Citizens
Charter in Government of India
are already available since 1997,
and are published in the form of
Compilation from time to time.
The last Compilation is of August,
2010. A Handbook on Citizens
Charter has also been brought
out by the Department in 2007.
From 2005 onwards Sevottam
Compliant Citizens Charter
Guidelines of June, 2010, August,
2010, and September, 2011 have
been brought out. All the above
Compilations and Guidelines are
accessible on the Department’s
website 
www.darpg.gov.in The
Guidelines may be reviewed and
revised after the enactment of
the Bill to include the additional
requirements.
Memo-
randum
No. 9
Shri S.K. Agarwal,
Vice Chairman,
Transparency
International, India,
India Secretariat,
Lajpat Nagar IV ,
New Delhi 110 024
e-mail
tiindia.newdelhi@
gmail.com

136
2. The Model Citizens Chmiers,
submitted in the suggestion, do
not meet all the requirements of
the Government of India
Guidelines on Sevottam
Complaint Citizens Charter as
contained in ‘Guidelines for
Implementation of Sevottam -
September 2011’. Further
additions will be required after
the enactment of this Bill.
1. Clause 11 (3) of the Bill is
adequate for acknowledgement of
appeal by the office of the
designated authority.
2. The penalty provision in the
Bill as approved by the Union
Cabinet is appropriate, because
under the Bill, penalty is to be
imposed on a case to case basis
after assessing the gravity as
well as the nature of the
complaint, and in exercise of
quasi judicial powers by the
competent authority. Therefore,
it cannot be made mandatory
on lines of the RTI Act, which
is merely requiring available
information to be sent to the
citizen. Grievances that are
required to be redressed under
the Bill are more complex than
RTI information. Therefore, the
suggestion is not accepted.
3. Clause 19 of the Bill as
approved by the Union Cabinet
is appropriate, because it calls
upon the Chief Commissioner to
‘appoint another person in
accordance with the provisions
of this Act to fill the vacancy’.
This in no way contradicts any
other Clause or provision in the
Bill.
2. Model Citizens Charters for
Police Primary Education,
Hospital, Ration Card,
1. Time frame for acknowledg-
ement of receipt of appeals under
11 (3) has not been defined, and
it should also be two days.
2. In the Clauses 11(9), 25(2)
42(2) for imposition of penalty,
the word ‘may’ should be
replaced by the word 'shall' as
in the RTI Act.
3. There is an ambiguity in the
Section 15/16 and Section 19 as
Section 19 indicates that the
Chief Commissioner can appoint
someone even as a
Commissioner against a vacancy.
This indication goes contrary to
Section 15/16 regarding
appointment of Commissioners
through a specified process.
12 3 4
Memo-
randum
No. 10
Shri Meghashyam
Rankireddy,
Organization for
Nation Empowerment
(ONE) Plot No. 18.,
Flat No.6 Coastal
Apartments,
Motinagar,
Hyderabad-500018
Andhra Pradesh

137
12 3 4
4. There is no time limit for
filling of a vacancy in the State
Public Grievance Redressal
Commission, A clause setting a
time limit for filling of a
vacancy, may be included in the
Bill.
5. Proper guidelines to be
issued for the Search Committee.
6. There is no provision of
action required to be taken if
appeals are not disposed of in
the time limit of 60 days.
1. Section 2 Definition - In
Section 2(e), add at the end of
the definition of “Citizens
Charters” the following words:
To include Additional Citizens
Charter for SCs/STs/OBCs/
Women/Children/Religious
Minorities/Citizens-with-
Disabilities’ in respect of goods
and services specifically
required for each of these
classes/categories in additional
to what they are entitled to
under common citizens charter.
2. Section 4 – The present
sub-section (1) of Section 4 may
be numbered as sub-section
“4(1) (i)” and the following new
provision may be added as sub-
section “4(1)(ii)”:- “4)1) (ii) (a)
Every public authority shall also
publish within the aforesaid time-
limit Additional Citizen Charters.
3. The present sub-section (2)
of Section 4 may be numbered
as “4 (2) (i)” and the following
4. This suggestion relates to a
procedural matter that will get
covered in the rules and
guidelines after the enactment of
this Bill.
5. After enactment of any Bill
by the Parliament, Rules and
Guidelines for its implementation
are invariably issued by the
Ministry/Department concerned.
6. The framework being created
by the Bill is for Time Bound
delivery of all activities included
therein. As such the suggestion
is not accepted.
1. The definition of the Citizens
Charter in the Bill as approved
by the Union Cabinet, is
comprehensive. No further
category -wise additions are
warranted.
2. The provision in the Bill as
approved by the Union Cabinet
is comprehensive and adequate.
3. The suggestions as made
cannot be part of the Bill. The
rules and guidelines can include
Memo-
randum
No. 11
Shri P.S. Krishnan,
IAS (Retd.)
Former Secretary,
Government of India

138
new provisions may be added:-
4. (2) (ii) Provision for specific
relevance and special significance
for SCs Citizen Charters.4. (2)
(iii) Measures for securing
Forest Rights, removing obstacles
to the effective functioning of
Panchayats in tribal areas
according to PESA. 4. (2) (iv)
Provision for specific relevance
and special significance for Other
Backward Classes/Socially and
Educationally Backward Classes/
and Backward Classes of
Religious Minorities Citizen
Charters for uplifting them.
4. In Section 5: The existing
sub-section 5(1) shall be
numbered as “5(1)(a)” and the
following additions may be made
in this sub-section after the
words "the citizens charter”.
Provision for Additional Citizens
Charters for SCs/ST s/BC/Women
and children and persons with
disabilities. A new sub-section
“5(1)(b)” be introduced as
follows:- 5 (1) (b) The Head of
Department will invite suggestions
for inclusion of goods and
services in the Citizens Charters
and for additional Citizens
Charters consideration thereof.
5. Section 14 and Section 31
Sub-Section (b) of Sections 14
and 31 may be amended as
follows: Provision for the posts in
the appointment of Chief
Commissioner and Commissioners
from SCs/STs/OBCs/Women
categories.
6. Sections 15 and 32 Add after
(c) of sub-section (1) of Section
15 and of sub-section (1) of
Section 32 the following: (d)
suitable provisions to enable the
concerned Public Authorities to
appropriately prepare and publish
citizens charters, specifically for
various categories. The relevant
Clauses and provisions in the Bill,
as approved by the Union Cabinet
are appropriate and as such the
suggestion is not accepted.
4. The suggestion is a matter
of procedure for rules and
guidelines. The relevant Clauses
and provisions in the Bill, as
approved by the Union Cabinet
are appropriate and as such the
suggestion is not accepted.
5. The composition of the
Commission as approved by the
Union Cabinet is adequate.
6. The provision in the Bill as
approved by the Union Cabinet
is comprehensive and adequate.
As such, the suggestion is not
12 3 4

139
Chairpersons of the National
Commission for Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes, Backward
Classes and Women”_In sub-
section (2) In  Sections 15 and
32, after the words “five eligible
candidates for each vacancy”,
following to be added: Keeping in
view the proportion of Schedules
Castes/Scheduled Tribes/Socially
and Educationally Backward
Classes/ including Backward
Classes of Religious Minorities and
Women candidates. After the
above additions in Sections 15 and
32, may be renumbered as sub-
section “(2) (b)” may be added
as follows: The members of
Search Committee shall contain 15
per cent of Scheduled Cases, 7.5
per cent of Scheduled Tribes and
27 per cent of Socially and
Educationally Backward Classes
(Backward Classes) including
Backward Classes of Religious
Minorities, rounded off to the
nearest integral number and
women who may belong to any
of these social categories or other
category.”
7. Add at the end of (a) of
Sections 16 and 33:- “who has
shown sympathetic and pro-
active understanding of the rights
of citizens and in particular
citizens belonging to Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes,
Socially and Educationally
Backward Classes (Backward
Classes) including Backward
Classes of, Religious Minorities,
their women, children and
persons-with-disabilities; and
women, children and persons-
with-disabilities not belonging to
these three social categories.”
8. Section 18 and Section 35 -
The first two provisos at sub-
12 3 4
accepted.
7. The provision in the Bill as
approved by the Union Cabinet
is comprehensive and adequate.
As such, the suggestion is not
accepted.
8. The provision in the Bill as
approved by the Union Cabinet

140
12 3 4
section (3) of Sections 18 and 35
may be substituted by the
following:- Provided that Chief
Commissioner and Commissioners,
who have retired from service
under the State and are eligible
for pension, shall not be paid any
salary or other remuneration but
shall have the status of Chief
Election Commissioner, Election
Commissioner: Chief Secretary, as
the case may be, and shall be
provided all functional facilities
only.”
9. Section 20 and Section 37:
In Sub-section (2) of Sections 20
and 37, at (b) add at the end after
the words “moral turpitude.” ‘or
of an offence under the Protection
of Civil Rights Act, 1955;
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities)
Act, 1986; the Employment of
Manual Scavengers and
Construction of Dry Latrines
(Prohibition) Act 1993; the Bonded
Labour System (Abolition) Act,
1976; the Dowry Prohibition Act,
1961 and the Protection of Women
from Domestic Violence, 2005”.
10. Section 52 - In (c) at
sub-section (2) of Section 52,
mention of sub-section (3) of
Section 4 seems to be a typo-
graphical error. It seems to need
to be corrected as sub-section (2)
of Section 4, or alternatively,
reference to sub-section may be
omitted and reference to Section 4
may be enough. In (c) at sub-
section (2) of Section 52, after the
words “citizens charter”, to be
added as under:- “and Additional
citizen charters”
Statement of Objects and
Reasons Additions may be made
in para 2 to bring out the
additional citizen charters.
is comprehensive and adequate.
As such, the suggestion is not
accepted
9. The provision in the Bill as
approved by the Union Cabinet
is comprehensive and adequate.
As such, the suggestion is not
accepted.
10. The provision in the Bill as
approved by the Union Cabinet
is comprehensive and adequate.
As such, the suggestion is not
accepted.

141
12 3 4
Memo-
randum
No. 12
Er. Amar Singh,
President, Society
for Justice (Regd.)
Regd. Office: 39,
Industrial Area, Under
Bridge Road, Rajpura,
Distt. Patiala, Punjab.
Recommendation for amendment
as under:-
(1) Insertion of Clause 4(2)(a)
as follows :-
Without prejudice to the
generality of the provisions
contained in sub-section (1), the
Citizens Charter shall provide all
or any of the following matters,
namely,
The designation of the
official competent to receive
the complaint/grievance on
behalf of the public
authority against a proper
receipt.
(2) Clause 8 to be amended to
include:-
Acknowledgment of
complaints by Grievance
Redress Officer
(3) Amendment in Clauses 16
and 33 of the Bill as follaws :-
(i) A provision for the officers
retired from Defence
services, as a qualification
for appointment as Chief
Commissioner or
Commissioners of State/
Central Public Grievance
Redressal Commission.
(ii) Debarring an eminent
person affiliated to any
political party from
appointment as State/
Central Commissioners
(iii) Deletion of proviso to
Clause 16 and 33 providing
that State Government/
(1) Clause 7(1) of the Bill
providing for officers being
designated as Grievance Redress
Officer and Clause 8 providing
for acknowledgement of
complaint by receipt thereof are
adequate.
(2) Clause 8 of the Bill providing
for acknowledgement of
complaint by receipt thereof and
particulars of receiver of
complaint is adequate.
(3) (i), (ii) and (iii)
Section 16 and 33 of the Bill
providing for qualification for
appointment of State/Central
Public Grievance Redressal
Commissioners are adequate.

142
12 3 4
Central Government may
prescribe criteria in addition
to those provided under
Clause 16 and 33.
(4) Amendment in Clause 45 of
the Bill as follows :-
Substitution of sub-
clause (3) of Clause 45 as
follows:
If any public servant is
found guilty under sub-
section (1) for the
second time, one annual
increment of the public
servant shall be stopped
by the disciplinary
authority. If the public
servant is found guilty
for the third time, he
shall be compulsorily
retired from the service
by the disciplinary
authority.
(1) The title of the Act can be
rechristened as Service Guarantee
Act and its Redressal.
(2) The phrase substantially
financed used under Section 2
(n) (iv)(A) needs to be defined
correctly.
(3) The phrase “goods” used in
the Bill needs to be defined.
(4) The role and duties of the
public authority responsible for
establishment of people’s support
(4) Section 45 (3) of the Bill
providing for disciplinary
proceedings against a delinquent
official, making him liable to
such punishment, including a
penalty, as disciplinary authority
may decide, is sufficient and a
reasonable deterrent.
Punishment need to be
commensurate with the gravity
of offence and no straightjacket
provision for punishment could
be made in the Bill.
(1) The title of the Bill is
comprehensive, covering Time
Bound delivery of goods and
Services and Redressal of
grievances of citizens
(2) There is a need to clarify
the quantum involved to be taken
as substantially financed.
(3) Clause 4(2) of the Bill
providing that the Citizens
Charter shall provide the details
of all the goods supplied by the
public authority is sufficient to
meet the requirement.
(4) Clause 6 (1) of the Bill
clearly defines the role and
duties of a public authority in
Memo-
randum
No. 13
Shri G.G . Hegde
Kadekodi, President
Consumer Protection
Council, CP Bazar,
SIRSI-581 401,
Karnataka.

143
12 3 4
centre under Section 6 (1), need
to be clarified.
(5) In Section 7(1), the word
Taluka should also be used.
(6) A clarification is needed for
requirement of fee or any format
for filing a complaint.
(7) A time frame for providing
an action taken report to the
complainant is required.
(8) Section 11 (9), penalty
amount is not mentioned.
(9) Under Section 15(3),
procedure needs to be prescribed
for the Selection Committee.
(10) Under Section 16 -
(i) serving officers should not
be appointed as Commissioners
(ii) Factors like integrity need
to be taken into account for
considering appointment as
Commissioners.
(iii) two posts should be
reserved for persons from social
sector.
(11) The following clauses should
be inserted to the Sec. 20 of the
Bill. viz.-
establishing information and
facilitation centre, including
establishment of customer care
centre, call centre, help desk and
people’s support centre.
(5) The word sub-district in the
Clause 7 (1) has been used in a
generic sense which covers
Taluka as well.
(6) No such requirement has
been laid down in the Bill.
(7) We are open to the
Suggestion.
(8) Clause 45 provides for
penalty and compensation to be
imposed or awarded, by the
designated authority as well.
(9) There could be no
straightjacket provisions for the
Committee in relation to
procedural aspects.
(10) (i), (ii) and (iii)
Clause 16 providing for
qualification for appointment of
Commissioners is comprehensive
and adequate.
(11) Clause 20 providing for
resignation and removal of
Commissioners is comprehensive
and adequate.

144
(a) if there are a lot of
complaints from Civil
Society Organizations and
the public.
(b) fails to protect the rights
of the citizens as assured in
the Act.
(12) In Section 25(1), appeals of
urgent nature need to be clarified.
(13) Section 26 (2), clarification
for the following is needed:-
(i) The meaning of any person -
is it limited to any citizen or
non-citizen?
(ii) Can a person file a
complaint directly or should it
come as a second appeal?
(1) Definition of Complaint
{Clause 2(f)}
(A) Issue: Broad Definition
The definition of a
complaint in the Bill is too
broad by covering grievance
arising out of functioning
of a public authority; or
violation of any  law,
policy, programme, order  or
scheme that can lead to a
broad range of complaints.
(B) Issue: Restricted to citizens
The Bill is confined to the
rights of citizens only.
Foreign nationals and other
persons may also be taken
into consideration.
(12) It is the discretion of the
Appellate Authority to decide the
nature of an appeal, whether an
urgent or ordinary.
(i) We arc open to the
suggestion for inclusion of clients
(organizations, bodies etc.) and
even non-citizens.
(ii) A person can approach the
Commission directly with a
complaint under the given
conditions.
(1) (A) The definition of
complaint in the Bill is
comprehensive, also relating to
the redressal of the grievances
of citizens, which goes beyond
service delivery.
(B) We are open to the
suggestion, as clients and non-
citizens may also be included.
12 3 4
Memo-
randum
No. 14
Shri M.R. Madhavan,
Head of Research,
PRS Legislative
Research, Centre for
Police Research,
Dharma Marg,
Chanakayapuri,
New Delhi.

145
12 3 4
(2) Removal of members of
the Central and State
Grievance Commissions
[Clause 20 and 37]
Issue: Removal procedure is
different from existing
laws
The removal process for the
Commissions’ members differs
from the process provided under
some existing laws and proposed
legislations.
The Bill does not provide
for any inquiry to be conducted
prior to the issuance of removal
order.
(3) Appellate Procedure
[Clause 47]
Issue: Lokpal and Lokayuktas
may not have been instituted.
The Lokpal and Lokayuktas
Bill, 2011 is currently pending in
Parliament and, therefore, the
Lokpal is yet to be instituted at
the Centre. A number of States
have also not established
Lokayuktas. In the absence of
these bodies, it is unclear which
body shall adjudicate over these
appeals.
(4) Publication of the Citizens
Charter [Clause 4(1)]
Issue: Failure to publish the
citizens charter
The Bill requires publication
of citizens charter by each
public authority within a specified
time-frame. However, there is no
provision in the Bill to ensure
(2) Clause 20(3) and 36(3)
providing that the State
Government/Central Government,
by rules, regulate the procedure
for the investigation of
misbehavior or incapacity of the
members State/Central Grievance
Commissions.
(3) As and when, Lokpal and
Lokayukta Bill comes into force,
appeal may be filed against the
decision of State/Central Public
Redressal Commission, which
contained the findings relating to
corruption under PC Act, 1988,
before Lokpal/Lokayukta.
(4) Clause 26 (2) (d)/43 (2) (d)
empowers the State/Central
Public Grievance Redressal
Commission to receive and
enquire into complaint from any
person, who has been denied
access to the citizens charter of
the public authority either
because the charter was not
created by the public authority
or is inadequate in any regard or

146
compliance with this requirement.
The Bill does not provide a
mechanism to complaint against
the failure to publish the citizens
charter.
(5) Multiplicity of Grievance
Redressal Forums
Multiplicity of grievance
redressal mechanisms may lead
to an overlap of jurisdictions of
other  Acts.
(6) Drafting Issues
[Clause 17(1) and 34(1)]:
a. Issue: No retirement age for
the Central Commissioners
Clause 17 provides a retirement
age for the State Chief Public
Grievance Commissioner and the
State Commissioners. However,
no retirement age has been
provided for the Central Chief
Public Grievance Commissioner
or the Central Commissioners.
(1) Clause 2 (f):
The definition of complaint
does not include grievances
related to service matters of a
public servant.
it is not widely disseminated to
make people aware of it.
(5) The Bill is comprehensive in
enforcing rights of citizens for
redressal of their grievances
arising out of any violation of
any law also.
We are open to a harmonious
integration of other related
legislation such as “The
Electronic Service Delivery Bill”.
(6) We are open to the
suggestion, as in Clause 34(1)
for Central Commissions the
language “or until they attain the
age of sixty five years whichever
is earlier,” has been omitted by
mistake, although for State
Commissioners, the above language
exists in the Bill.
(1) As the Bill fundamentally
relates to the rights of citizens
for time bound delivery of goods
and services and redressal of
their grievances, the grievances
arising out of service matters of
public servants have been
excluded from the purview of
the Bill.
Tribunals, such as Central
Administrative Tribunal (CAT),
have been set up to deal with
service matters of public servant.
12 3 4
Memo-
randum
No. 15
Shri M.V . Ruparelia,
A-503 Rashmi Utsav,
Near Jangid Estate
and Vijay Park, Mira
Road (East) Dist.
Thane-401101.

147
12 3 4
(2) Clause (2)(c) defines the
Central Public Grievance
Redressal Commission.
(3) Clause 26 (2)/Clause 43 (2)
empowers the State/Central
Public Redressal Commission to
receive and enquire into
complaint from any person, who
has been denied access to the
citizens charter of the public
authority either because the
charter was not created by the
public authority or is inadequate
in any regard or it is not widely
disseminated to make people
aware of it.
(4) Clause 5 lays down an
obligation upon the lead of the
Department of every public
authority to ensure that the
citizens charter is widely
disseminated to the public,
through notice boards, news-
papers, public announcement,
media broadcast, the internet or
any other means.
(5) The GROs appointed/
designated under Clause 7 of the
Bill would be responsible for the
respective areas of assignment.
(6) No specific mode is required
for submission of complaint.
(7) This is a procedural matters
and an appropriate mechanism
may be taken care of while
framing rules.
(2) Clause 2 (p):
State Public Grievance
Redress Commission is included
in definition but not Central
Grievance Redress Commission.
(3) Clause 4(1):
Some penalty should be
provided for not notifying citizen
charter within 6 months.
(4) Clause 5(6):
Copy of Citizen Charter
should be made available to all
Registered NGOs, working for
welfare of citizens.
(5) Clause 7(1) and (3):
Where more than one GRO
are nominated for one
department/office, one
coordinating GRO should also be
nominated.
(6) Clause 8:
There is no mention about mode
of submission of complaint.
(7) Clause 9(1), 9(4) and 46:
It would be better and helpful
to maintain a Register for all

148
complaints in which G.R. Officer
will record reasons for delay and
action taken by which complaint
was solved and put up this
register to Head of Department
to issue necessary instructions
to guard against such reasons
for delay etc.
(8) Clause 11:
No details are given as to
how Designated Authority will
be appointed.
(9) Clause 11(3):
No time limit is fixed for
acknowledgement of Appeal. This
may be done.
(10) Clause 22(2) and 38(4):
15 days to deliver decisions
by Commissions is on high side.
Only 5 days may be allowed.
(11) Clause 25 and 42(1):
60 days for disposal of
Appeal to Commissions is on
very high side. 30/45 days may
be allowed.
(12) Clause 45(1) and (3):
Designated Authority and
Commissions are given powers
of punishment. Some specific
powers for punishment may be
given to Grievance Redress
Officer also.
(13) Clause 52(1):
No time limit is fixed for
framing Rules. Please, give time
limit and penalty for not
complying by that time.
(8) This a procedural matter to
be prescribed by the appropriate
Government.
(9) The provision, Clause 11 (3),
is adequate for acknowledgement
of appeal by the office of the
designated authority.
(10) The provision for delivery
of copies of decision of the
Commission within 15 days to
the party concerned is reasonable.
(11) The provision for disposal
of appeal by Commission within
60 days is reasonable.
(12) The provisions of penalties
and compensation under Clause
45 are adequate and reasonable.
(13) The provisions of framing
rules under Clause 52(1) are
adequate and reasonable.
12 3 4

149
12 3 4
Memo-
randum
No. 16
CII (Confederation of
Indian Industry)
Chapter 1- Preliminary
1. In clause 2(c), the definition
of citizens charter should include
required level of standards in
place ‘acceptable’ level of
standards.
2. Definition of complaint
should include that a complaint
filed by a citizen or any other
person on his behalf authorized
bv him.
Chapter III – Publication of
citizens Charter and GRO by
Public Authorities
3. The HoD would ensure that
the whole process (comprising the
continuous interplay of people,
procedures, methods, machines,
measurements, funds, responsi-
bilities and information) together
guarantee the consistent delivery
of the intended output, that
satisfies the clients/customers.
4. The process/system should
be such it is fully capable of
delivering what the customers/
citizens value. The Head of the
Department is fully accountable -
the buck stops with him/her.
5. The ability of the
department, designated to deliver
certain public goods or services
should be continuously
strengthened, so as to ensure
total satisfaction of the citizens.
Chapter V Appointment and
obligation  of GRO by public
authority
5. If there is a grievance, the
Head of the department and his/
1. The definition of citizen
charter as contained in the Bill is
comprehensive and adequate.
The suggestion is not acceptable.
2. We are open to the
suggestion.
3. Clause 5 of the Bill, as
approved by the Cabinet, is
comprehensive. The suggestion,
being superfluous, is not
acceptable.
4 and 5: Clause 6 (2) of the Bill,
laying an obligation upon the HoD
for development, improvement,
modernisation and reform in
service delivery and redressal of
grievance system, including
adoption of electronic modes,
internet, etc. is comprehensive
and adequate. The suggestion is
not acceptable.
5. A dedicated framework in
the form of GRO has been
envisaged in the Bill to facilitate
a time bound redressal of
grievances.

150
her team must be the first point
of contact and redressal of the
dissatisfied citizen. That would
ensure two things: first, it would
alert the Head of the department
of potential process lapses or
areas that need improvement,
which the Heads and their teams
can then address suitably. Second,
it also introduces a culture of
continuous Improvement that is
so essential in ensuring consistent
citizen satisfaction.
6. Citizen satisfaction surveys
need to be done regularly and
frequently to measure the citizen
satisfaction. Departmental heads
would be measured on their
ability to lead teams that are
effectively servicing the people.
In respect of some services that
need inter-departmental colla-
boration, the heads of both
departments would be assessed
together. All people concerned
with a particular service output
need to be motivated to perform
their duties with professional
competence.
Chapter VI – Appeal to the
Designated authority .
7. The services to be provided
to the citizens should be within
a definite timeframe, already
publicized. The head of the
department is responsible for
providing the service. If there is
delay beyond the time fixed, the
citizen can go to a higher level
officer, already announced with
their contact detail. The response
should come within two weeks
otherwise the matter could be
referred to a designated court/
consumer court for redressal.
6. This is a matter of system
and procedure that may be taken
care of by the public authority/
Head of the Department while
framing rules and guidelines.
7. The Bill provides for a
statutory time bound framework
for disposal of appeal by an
authority designated for the
purpose which is comprehensive
and adequate. The suggestion is
not acceptable.
12 3 4

151
12 3 4
Memo-
randum
No. 17
Shri Manjit Singh,
IAS (Retd)
Address:
253, Sector 16-A,
Chandigarh.
(TeI. No. 0172-
2543253)
Section 1 (3)
1. “Six Months” mentioned in
the first provisio should desirably
be reduced to “three months”.
Section 2(b)
2. Additional word “appointed”
should be incorporated before the
word ‘established’ to read the
definition of “appropriate
Government”.
3. The words “substantially
financed” occurring in the
definition of “Appropriate
Government” needs to be defined.
Section 2 (e)
4. Second line of the definition
of the term “goods and services”
may be considered to be revised
as “goods or services”.
Section 2 (f)
5. In the definition of the term
“Complaint”, the term “service”
should desirably be defined.
1. The proviso providing that
the Central Government shall
appoint such date within six
months from the date on which
the Bill receives the assent of
the President is reasonable and
sufficient. The suggestion is not
acceptable.
2. The definition of the
appropriate Government in the
Bill is comprehensive and
adequate. Suggestion is not
acceptable.
3. The suggestion in this regard
is too cumbersome. However,
there is need to clarify the
quantum involved to be taken as
substantially financed.
4. The definition of the citizens
charter in the Bill is: a document
declaring the functioning,
obligations, duties, commitments
of a public authority for
providing goods and services
effectively and efficiently with
acceptable levels of standards,
time limits and designation of
public servants for delivery and
grievance redress as defined in
sub-section (1) of section 4, is
comprehensive and adequate.
The suggestion is not acceptable.
5. The term ‘service’ has been
adequately defined under Section
2 (o) of the Bill.

152
Section 4 (1)
6. In Section-Section (1), the
period of “six months” is
suggested to be reduced to “three
months”.
Section 5
7. In sub-sections (1), (2) and
(3), the words “each/every public
authority” need to be deleted
being superfluous.
Section 7 (1)
8. The period of six months
should desirably be reduced to
three months.
Section 9 (1) (a)
9. The word “at the earliest
but” should be incorporated in
clause (a) before the words “not
exceeding thirty days”.
In clause (d) of sub-section (1)
10. The words “or any other
Act” may be added after the
words “Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988”.
Section 1 1 (2)
11. Period of appeal is suggested
to be enhanced from 30 days to
60 days.
Section 12
12. The period of appeal to State
commission is to be enhanced
6. The time limit of six months
for publication of citizens charter
is reasonable and adequate. The
suggestion is not acceptable.
7. The suggestion is not
acceptable.
8. The time limit of six months
for an officer being designated
as GRO is reasonable and
sufficient. The suggestion is not
acceptable.
9. This is implied in the given
provision of the Bill.
10. Sub-clause (1) (d) of clause
9 of the Bill is comprehensive
and adequate. Suggestion is not
acceptable.
11. The appellate authority is
competent to admit an appeal
even after expiry of 30 days,
under proviso to clause 11 (2)
of the Bill.
12. The appellate authority is
competent to admit an appeal
12 3 4

153
12 3 4
from 30 days to 90 days.
Sections 14 and 32
13. It is suggested that one post
of commissioner should be
reserved for the persons with
disabilities who fulfils the laid-
down qualifications.
Section 20(2) (d)
14. This clause appears to be
against the letter and spirit of
the PWD Act, 1995. Accordingly,
this clause needs either to be
deleted or revised.
Section 29
15. The period of appeal to
Central Commission is to be
enhanced from 30 days to 90
days.
Section 32
16. It should be better if the
composition of search Committee
is defined and specifically laid
down—cabinet secretary can
head such a Committee.
(1) Synergy amongst Infor-
mation, Grievance Redressal
and Electronic Services frame-
work:
The Commission for overseeing
the implementation of RTI Act,
Grievance Redressal Bill, and the
Electronic Delivery of Services
Bill, would be the same. For
this RTI Act would need to be
amended.
even after expiry of 30 days,
under proviso to clause 12(1) of
the Bill.
13. The provision contained in
clause 14 and 32 are reasonable
and adequate. Suggestion is not
acceptable.
14. The provision contained in
clause 20 (2) (d) are reasonable
and adequate. Suggestion is not
acceptable.
15. The appellate authority is
competent to admit an appeal
even after expiry of 30 days,
under proviso to Section 29 (1)
of the Bill.
16. This is a matter of
procedure that may be taken care
of while framing rules and
guidelines.
(1) Synergy with RTI Act is not
a feasible suggestion as the scope,
mandate and the framework of
the Right to Information Act, 2005
and this Bill, 2011 differ.
However, synergy is possible with
Electronic Services Bill as both
relate to bringing about
improvements in public service
delivery and a significant part of
18 Dr. Jayaprakash
Narayan Foundation
for Democratic
Reforms – Lok Satta
Memorandum No. 18

154
(2) Scope of Citizen’s Charters
and (3) Local Ombudsmen
The scope has been defined
sharply to ensure that all goods
and services which are amenable
to timely delivery of services and
any violation of order, rule of
law pertaining to that department
are covered by the enforceable
charters. Organizations such as
non-governmental organizations,
companies etc., are given the
same rights as citizens in respect
of charters and redressal of
grievances. Grievances relating to
electronic services or goods and
services that do not have supply
constraints; those that require
physical works; and
1. Role of HOD in updating
of Charter to be specified
with mandatory requirement
of seeking views of public.
A team of not less than 3
persons representing of
stakeholders should be
involved in the updating of
the Charter. (Ref. Chapter
III, Clause 5(1), page 4 of
the Bill)
2. Use of Geographic
Information System (GIS)
for disseminating infor-
mation under the Bill: GIS
is a free and an open
source. It can be used for
recording of grievances
capability building of the
government agencies to deliver
goods and services in a time
bound manner is to be based on
electronic mode and related
infrastructure.
(2) As already stated in
response to Memorandum No.
1, we are open to suggestion to
include clients (organizations,
bodies etc.,) and even non-
citizens in the scope of the Bill.
A reasonable time-limit for
disposal of grievances/appeals at
various levels, has been provided
in the Bill.
The scope of Citizens Charter
as provided in the Bill, covers all
the goods and services delivered
by a public authority and the
time limits, delivery standards
and details of delivery officers
would be notified by the public
authorities.
1. This is a matter of procedure
to be included in Guidelines and
Rules under the Bill. In fact,
stakeholder consultation in the
formulation and review of
Citizens/Clients Charters is already
a part of Guidelines on Sevottam,
June, 2010, and Guidelines on
Implementation of Sevottam,
September, 2011, brought out by
Government of India.
2. Adoption of electronic modes,
internet etc., for public service
delivery, has been made a
responsibility of the HOD of
Public Authority under Clause
6(2). However, suggestion as
given would be considered at
12 3 4
19 OPEN SOURCE
GEOSPATIAL –
INDIA
C/o International
Institute of
Information
Technology,
Gachibowli,
Hyderabad 500 032,
Andhra Pradesh
Memorandum No. 19

155
12 3 4
digitally, and visualizing the
grievance along with
additional information as per
data base, for a quicker
analysis etc.
GIS maps and images can
be provided in the Charter
to give the geographical
location of the public
authority and the extent of
the area in its domain for
delivery of goods and
services.
For example, (a) the location
of a police station in a GIS
map of the area under its
control can be included in
the Citizens Charter. (b)
Escalation of grievance to
the next superior authority
for redress, can be facili-
tated through the use of
GIS.
(1) Definition of public
authority, citizen’s charter and
service should be limited:  The
definition of Citizens Charter,
Service and Public Authority
under the Bill is too wide and
deep, and covers in its ambit
the Executive, the Legislature and
the Judiciary. It also brings
organizations, bodies, govern-
ment owned companies, and all
contractors, suppliers, etc. under
the model, under its ambit. This
wide scope of the Bill will
generate too many complaints
Service should be defined as those
to be notified in the Schedule, as
has been done by many State
legislations on the subject.
As per clause 4(1) every public
authority is to publish its Citizens
Charter within six months,
the time of issue of rules and
guidelines.
(1) The definitions as approved
by the Union Cabinet are
appropriate. The definitions
adopted in the Bill are broad and
comprehensive with reference to
the Service and Citizens Charters,
in order to make it a truly rights
based Bill, ensuring full account-
ability. Hence, the suggestion is
not accepted.
20 Shri Satyananda
Mishra, Chief
Information
Commissioner
Memorandum No. 20

156
12 3 4
specifying with timelines the
goods supplied and services
rendered by it. Further the
definitions of Citizens Charter,
Service and Public Authority in
the Bill need to be limited
(2) As the decision making
process in the government is
often dispersed, it would be
impossible to identify individual
employees responsible for any
particular service.
(3) The proposed ‘designated
authority’ for hearing appeals to
be nominated a from outside the
public authority, is impractical.
(4) Based on experience in
implementing the RTI Act, 2005
for the last six years, the cost
of implementing the Bill to
service every grievance against
all public authorities is likely to
be huge.
(2) The Bill envisages clear cut
delineation of authorities with
assigned responsibilities. At the
bottom there will be notified
officers who will be responsible
for delivery of goods and
services. At the next level there
will be notified Grievance Redress
Officers. Hence, the contention
that responsibility fixing would not
be possible is not correct.
(3) The definition of designated
authority as approved by the
Union Cabinet, is flexible and
decentralized. It has been left to
the discretion of the appropriate
government (State Government
or Central Government as the
case may be) to appoint desig-
nated authority as they deem fit.
(4) No additional costs are
suggested in the Bill except for
the cost of establishing Infor-
mation and Facilitation Centres
and the Central and State Public
Grievances Redressal Commi-
ssions. Improvements in infras-
tructure and capability building
are already covered under various
government initiatives for the
application of ICT in governance
and service delivery. As such this
argument is not accepted.

157
12 3 4
21. FICCI Quality
Forum, New Delhi
1. As per the Title of the Bill,
it is applicable to ‘citizens’ only.
As there are ‘non-citizens’ also
who received services from
public authorities in India, the
term ‘citizen’ needs to be replaced
by a broader term that includes
businesses and non-citizens
2. (a) Implement and monitor
the Charter: Obligation of
Public Authorities should also
be to  implementation and
monitor their own Citizens
Charter and to identify areas
of non-compliance.
(b) Penalty for failure to
deliver even without
receipt of grievance:  After
identifying non-compliance,
the person(s) concerned
should be penalized, irres-
pective of whether public
grievance has been received
or not.
(c) Suo Moto action on
failure to deliver: The Bill
does provide for the Central
and the State Grievance
Commissions to take suo
moto notice of failure to
deliver, but it is not
obligatory for any public
authority to suo moto  take
notice of failure to deliver.
Audit of compliance with the
Charter, by each public
authorities, should be man-
datory, and the auditor's
report should be accessible
by the public.
1. We are open to suggestion
to include clients (organizations,
bodies etc) and even non-citizens
in the scope of this Bill.
(a) Attention is drawn to Clause
46(1) and 46 (2) of the Bill, in
which Public Authorities are
directed to publish a detailed
fortnightly report on imple-
mentation aspects, maintain
appropriate records etc. Further
details on this aspect would be
considered at the stage of issue
of rules/guideline, from time to
time
(b) Under the scope of the Bill,
an individual has got the right to
demand services as well as lodge
grievance in case of failure. This
is a sufficient and adequate
provision. As such, the contention
is not accepted.
(c) Under Clause 10, Grievance
Redress Officer has to submit a
report to the Designated Autho-
rity, on every un-redressed com-
plaint. Besides, Clause 46 (2) is
also relevant. Therefore, the
contention in the suggestion is
not accepted.
Memorandum No. 21 (Supplementary to Memo No. 3)

158
12 3 4
3. (a) Prevention of
grievances: Emphasis
should be on prevention of
grievances, and not just on
redress. The Bill is elaborate
on redress related aspects
only.
(b) Encouragement to
corrective action: A new
clause should be added to
encourage corrective and
preventive action to remove
common causes of repetitive
grievances.
4. Dissemination of Charter:
It should be mandatory to
display the citizen's charter
or a summary of its main
provision outside the office
premises in an area in which
service recipients have free
and easy access.
5. Contact details of GRO:
The hours in which the
GRO will be available should
also be specified, and
regularly monitored by the
Head of the Department.
The number of telephone line
indicated in the contact
details should be a
functional line.
6. Timelines for grievance
redress:
(a) Time taken to redress
grievance will vary with
simple cases taking less time
and complicated cases
requiring more time. There-
fore, fixing a 30 day limit
for all types of grievances
serves no purpose.
3 (a) The positive aspect of the
Bill, lies in delivery of services
as per stipulations in Citizens
Charter. Grievance Redress would
be a consequence of failure.
Thus, the Bill is balanced in this
respect. Therefore, the contention
in the suggestion is not accepted.
(b) We are open to suggestion
to include this as a part of the
Award Scheme that will serve
as a catalyst in the overall
improvement of service delivery.
The Award Scheme suggestion
has already been accepted earlier
in Memorandum No. 1.
4. There are separate provisions
in this regard in Clause 5. Thus,
the suggestion has been taken
care of.
5. Clause 7 has detailed
provisions regarding Grievance
Redress Officer. Procedural
matters will be taken care of at
rules/guidelines making stage.
6. The relevant Clauses and
their proviso as approved by the
Union Cabinet is sufficient. The
suggestion is not accepted.

159
12 3 4
(b) In clause 8, line 43 says
that the time-frame for
redress of grievances will
be mentioned in the
acknowledgement. Here, it
may be added “it is
obligatory to publish as part
of citizen’s charter the
various types of grievances
and the time frame for
redress of each type”.
7. For frivolous or false
complaints: No accountability is
included for false complaints
against service providers. Such
cases should attract a heavy
penalty to prevent overloading
of the system with frivolous
complaints.
1. In the UNDP suggestions
document:
(a) Lessons learnt from
International Experience of
Citizens Charters in the
United Kingdom, Australia,
Belgium, Canada, France,
Jamaica, Malaysia, Portugal,
and Spain are listed in the
first 6 pages.
(b) International Grievance
redressal institutions, in the
form of (i) Ombudsman
Office, (ii) Administrative
Courts, (iii) Appeal Boards
or Tribunals, have been
discussed
(c) Good practices examples of
grievance redressal bodies,
including steps such as–
(i) Strengthening of
capacity of service
providers,
7. As per the structure of the
Bill, frivolous or false complaints
would, generally, be taken care
of through various provisions of
the Bill, like written complaint,
enquiry into complaint by
GRO etc. The suggestion is not
accepted.
1. The Government of India
has already taken into consi-
deration, the experience of these
countries in the implementation
of the Citizens Charters, at the
time of drafting the ‘Right of
Citizens for Time Bound Delivery
of Goods and Services and
Redressal of their Grievances Bill,
2011.’ No further action on the
suggestion is required.
22. UNDP India
Memorandum No. 22

160
(ii) Civil Service Commi-
ssions for ensuring
integrity and perfor-
mance of civil ser-
vants,
(iii) A wareness campaigns
on grievance redress
procedures and sys-
tems, obtaining of feed-
back from public,
(iv) Standard Operating
Procedures and varying
time-frames
(d) Service Guarantees/Mini-
mum Service Standards from
UK, Indonesia, Germany are
included.
12 3 4

161
161
ANNEXURE-C
List of Organisations/Stakeholders heard during the study visit of the Committee
1. Kolkata Port Trust
2. United Bank of India
3. Allahabad Bank
4. UCO Bank
5. Coal India Ltd.
6. North Eastern Electric Power Corporation
7. North Eastern Hill University
8. Bongaigaon Refinery & Petrochemicals Limited
9. Assam Ashok Hotel Corporation Limited
10. Brahmaputra Board
11. Oil India Limited
12. Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited
13. North Eastern Handlooms & Handicrafts Development Corporation
14. State Governments of West Bengal, Meghalaya, Assam and Manipur
15. Bar Associations of West Bengal, Meghalaya, Assam and Manipur.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.