1 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ON  
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN  
THE 24TH REPORT ON "WORKING OF CENTRAL BUREAU OF  
INVESTIGATION (CBI)" 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 9TH MARCH, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA 9TH MARCH, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 2010/ PHALGUNA (SAKA 1931) 
37
 

2 
 
 
 
CS (P & L) -  
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE 
 
ON 
 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
ON 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ON  
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE  
24TH REPORT ON "WORKING OF CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION 
(CBI)" 
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 9TH MARCH, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 9TH MARCH, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 2010/ PHALGUNA (SAKA 1931) 


3 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
  
                                     
PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE    (i) 
 
2. Introduction                                                                                                                  (ii)                                      
  
3. R
EPORT  
(i) CHAPTER – I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH 
HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY. 
 
(ii) CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY. 
 
(iii) CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT 
OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY. 
 
(iv) CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT 
OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE 
NOT BEEN RECEIVED. 
 
 
*∗4. M INUTES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
 
 
∗ * To be appended at printing stage. 

4 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-10) 
 
1. Smt. Jayanthi Natarajan    Chairperson 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
3. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte 
5. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
6. Shri Virendra Bhatia  
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
8. Sardar Tarlochan Singh 
9. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
10. Shri H.K. Dua 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Bhajan Lal 
12. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
13. Smt. Deepa Dasmunsi 
14. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve 
15. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda 
16. Dr. Monazir Hassan 
17. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain  
18. Smt. Chandresh Kumari 
19. Shri Lalu Prasad 
20. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena 
21. Kumari Meenakshi Natrajan 
22. Shri Devji M. Patel 
23. Shri Harin Pathak 
24. Shri S. Semmalai 
25. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
26. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh 
27. Dr. (Smt.) Prabha Kishor Taviad 
28. Shri Manish Tewari 
29. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan 
30. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki) 
31. Vacant  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri K.P. Singh, Director 
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director 
Smt. Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director 
Smt. Catherine John L., Committee Officer 
 (i) 

5 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  
 I, the Chairperson of the Department related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized 
by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Thirty 
Seventh Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty fourth Report on "Working of 
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)". 
2. The Twenty fourth Report of the De partment related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public  Grievances, Law and Justice was presented to Rajya 
Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11
th March, 2008.  
3. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions furnished the 
Action Taken Note on the Twenty fourth Report of the Committee on 22 nd April, 
2009. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting 
held on 3rd March, 2010. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have  been printed in bold letters in the body of 
the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi; JAYANTHI NATARAJAN 
3rd March, 2010 Chairperson 
 Committee on Personnel,  
Public Grievances, Law and Justice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

6 
 
 
 
REPORT 
 This Action Taken Repor t of the Committee deals with the action 
taken by the Ministry of Personnel, P ublic Grievances and Pensions on 
the recommendations/ob servations of the Department Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law 
and Justice in its 24 th Report on "Working of Central Bureau of 
Investigation (CBI)". The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid 
on the table of Lok Sabha on 11th March, 2008.  
2. The Action taken replies have b een received from the Ministry of 
Personnel, Public Grie vances and Pensions in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the above mentioned Report. These replies 
have been categorised as follows :  
Chapter – I – The recommendations /observations which have been 
accepted by the Ministry in respect of paras 13.3.8.1 and 13.3.8.3.  The  
Committee is pleased to note th at the Ministry has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in Chapter – I of the Report.  
Chapter – II – The recommendations /observations which the Committee 
does not desire to pursue for now in  view of the replies given by the 
Ministry in respect of paras 13.2.11, 13. 3.8.2, 13.3.8.4.2, 13.3.8.5, 13.4.1, 
13.4.2, 13.4.3, 13.4.4, 13.6.1, 13.6 .3, 13.6.4, 13.6.5, 13.8.1, 13.8.2, 
14.5.2, 14.6.3, 14.6.4, 14.7.3, 14.7.4. 1, 15.7.1 and 16.4.1. The Committee 
is convinced with the explanations advanced by the Ministry and does not 
want to pursue them as of now.  
Chapter – III – The recommendations/o bservations in respect of which 
the Committee has not accepted replies given by the Ministry with regard 

7 
 
 
 
to paras 13.2.5, 13.2.6, 13.2.7, 13.2. 8, 13.2.9, 13.5.2, 13.5.3, 13.5.4, 
13.5.5, 16.6.2, 16.6.3, 16.9.20, 16.9.21, 16.9.22, 16.9.24 and 16.9.25. The 
Committee expresses its concern for not accept ing the recommendations 
of the Committee contained in Chapte r – III of this Report and desires 
that the Ministry should furnish logi cal explanations in respect of these 
recommendations.  
Chapter – IV – The recommendations/o bservations in respect of which 
final replies of the Ministr y have not been received  with regard to paras 
10, 11, 12, 13.2.10, 13.2.10.2, 13.2.10.3, 13.2.10.4, 13.3.6, 13.3.7, 13.7.1, 
13.7.2, 14.1, 14.2, 14.3, 14.3.1, 14.4, 14.7.2, 14.8.2, 14.8.3, 14.8.4, 
14.8.5, 14.8.7, 15.2, 15.3, 15.4, 15.5, 15.6, 15.8.2, 15.8.3, 16.2, 16.3 and 
16.7.6. The Committee observes that the Ministry has furnished either 
evasive or interim replies and the Committee desires that the Ministry 
should furnish action taken notes in respect of recommendations 
categorised in Chapter – IV.  
3. The recommendations/observa tions of the Co mmittee in its 
24
th Report, the ATRs furnished by the Ministry and the Committee’s 
further recommendations/observations  have been dealt with in the 
succeeding Chapters.  
4. The Committee notes with regret that while furnishing their ATRs, 
the Ministry did not follow the standard  pattern i.e. para wise replies to 
the recommendations of the Committee.  Instead, it resorted to short and 
inadequate replies by clubbing tw o or more recommendations and 
thereby not offering their commen ts on each concern raised by the 
Committee. While doing so, it missed several important issues on which 
the Committee expected the Ministry to  give comprehensive replies. The 
replies furnished by the Ministry to  the Committee's recommendations 

8 
 
 
 
vide paras 14.1 to 14.4, 13.4.1 to 13.4. 4, 13.6.1 to 13.6.5, 13.7.1, 13.7.2, 
14.6.3 & 14.6.4, 14.8.2 to 14.8.7, 15.2 to 15.6, 16.9.20 to 16.9.25, 13.5.2 
to 13.5.5, 10 to 12, 13.2.6 & 13.2.7, 13.2.8 & 13.2.9, 13.2.10 & 
13.2.10..4, 13.3.6 & 13.3.7, 16.2 & 16.3 and 16.6.2 & 16.6.3 can be cited 
in this regard. The Committee, theref ore, impresses upon the Ministry to 
come forward with categorical and co mprehensive replies. The same may 
be forwarded to this Committee wh ile sending their action taken note. 
The Ministry is also directed to send their replies to further observations 
made by the Committee in this report. 
5. The Committee calls for strict a dherence to its observations in the 
preceding paras. 

9 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH 
HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 
Recommendation/observation 
Shortage of manpower 
1. In view of the serious ma npower problem in  the CBI, the 
Committee recommends that the re quirement of prior approval of 
the Screening Committee constituted by the Govt., for filling of direct 
recruitment vacancies should be waived for CBI as a special case.             
[Para 13.3.8.1]  
1.1. The Committee notes that revival of such posts is a very 
lengthy process. It recommends that reduction of staff strength at 
any level on ground of austerity measure should not be resorted to in 
this premier investigating agency of the country. [Para 13.3.8.3]  
Action Taken Reply
 
1.2. The optimisation of direct recruitment scheme has been 
discontinued with effect from 31.3.200 9.  Therefore, no exemption from 
the Scheme would now be necessary. 
Committee’s further observation 
1.3. The Committee takes note of the reply. 
 

10 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH 
THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY 
THE MINISTRY 
Recommendation/observation 
Deputationist nature of the organisation 
1. The Committee is of the vi ew that while appointing the 
Director, CBI all things being equal, preference  should be given to 
the person with the prescribed qual ifications and who has experience 
working in the organization. It is of the opinion that  such a person 
will be well conversant with al l the departments and wings in the 
organisation and will be able to a ddress day to day problems arising 
in the organization, render effect ive leadership to the personnel and 
the organization and mould CBI int o a specialized agency.  [Para 
13.2.11]   
Action Taken Reply 
1.1. The appointment of Director, CB I is done as per the provisions of 
Section 26 of the CVC Act, 2003.  A Selection Committee headed by the 
Central Vigilance Commissione r and having the Vigilance 
Commissioners, and Secretaries of MHA and the Ministry 
administratively concerned with CBI as Members, recommends the 
appointment of the Director, CBI.  These provisions of the CVC Act 
further provide that while making any recommendation for appointment 
of Director, CBI the said Committee sh all take into consideration the 

11 
 
 
 
views of the outgoing Director a nd it shall recommend a panel of 
officers- 
a) on the basis of seniority, integrity and experience in the investigation 
of anti-corruption cases; and 
b) chosen from amongst officers belonging to the IPS. 
Committee’s further observation 
1.2. The Committee takes note of  the reply. However, the Committee 
feels that the post of Director, CBI should not be limited to officers 
belonging to the IPS only.  
Recommendation/observation 
Shortage of manpower 
2. The Committee recommends that  the DCBI, being  the head of 
the organisation should be made a full-fledged member of the CBI 
Selection Committee for choosing all officers for induction into the 
CBI. As he is fully aware of the re quirements of the organisation, he 
can be the right person to assess the suitability of an officer for the 
CBI. [Para 13.3.8.2] 
Action Taken Reply 
2.1. As regards the Committee’s r ecommendation that Director, CBI 
should be made a full-fledged Member  of the CBI Selection Committee, 
it is submitted that as per the rele vant provisions of the CVC Act, 
appointment/induction etc. of officer s by the CBI Selec tion Committee is 
done keeping in view the recommendations of the Director, CBI. 
Committee’s further observation 
2.2. The Committee takes note of the reply. 
 

12 
 
 
 
Recommendation/observation 
Shortage of manpower 
3. In view of the above, the Co mmittee is of th e opinion that 
general recruitment by UPSC and allotment by  option of residuary 
personnel makes the status of CB I reduced to an ordinary police 
force. It strongly feels that CBI needs professionals and experts in 
various fields and not the general category of personnel, following the 
colonial mode of recruitment at var ious cadres/levels should be made 
by CBI itself based on the requirem ents of the organization. [Para 
13.3.8.4.2]      
3.1. The Committee recommends th at the Ministry should examine 
this proposal in all seriousnes s and adopt necessary steps to 
implement the proposal of CBI.  [Para 13.3.8.5]   
Action Taken Reply 
3.2. As per the existing Recruitment Ru les, posts require d to be filled 
up by promotion in various categories of Group “A” posts like JD, DIG, 
SP, DSP and certain posts in Prosecu tion/Technical Cadres etc. require 
consultation with UPSC, which is a st atutory requirement. Chairman or 
Member, UPSC functions as the Chairm an of the respective DPCs.   In 
order to expedite the process, st eps like making an assessment of the 
vacancies in advance and sending pr oposals to UPSC well in time are 
taken. Similar endeavour is being made for Group “A” posts like Addl. 
SP, Dy.SP, PP etc. under deputation qu ota that are also filled through 
UPSC and direct recruitment of Prosecutors by the UPSC. 
3.3. As UPSC is a constitutional body with a well defined mandate 
providing consultation with the Commission as a statutory requirement, it 
has not been considered feasible to dispense with the same. 

13 
 
 
 
 
Committee’s further observation 
3.4. The Committee takes note of the reply. 
Recommendation/observation 
Training 
4. The Committee is of the opinion that the unfailing strength of 
CBI has been, and will always be , its personnel. It feels that 
specialised investigation an d professional upgradation of skills is the 
need of the hour. Therefore, it  is of the opinion that holistic 
development and quality upgradation of human resources should be 
given utmost priority while defining  institutional priorities, goals and 
objectives. [Para 13.4.1] 
4.1. The Committee is of the op inion that long  term planning 
should be envisaged to ensure that each and every personnel in CBI 
is trained to realize their full pote ntial and to ensure that they are 
capable of rendering their duti es effectively. The Committee 
recommends that the Training Centres in CBI should be given 
adequate funds and all facilities and attempts should be made to 
increase the number of such centres  and resources crunch should not 
be a reason to affect the training aspect of the CBI personnel. [Para 
13.4.2] 
4.2. The Committee recommends that  training should not only be 
confined to entry-level personnel, rather it should be expanded to 
middle and senior level officials also. Training module should be 
upgraded and modernised taking cue from the best in the world, and 
a sound research base should be developed in this regard. The 
Committee further recommends th at mandatory in-service training 

14 
 
 
 
should be laid down as pre-conditio n for promotion. It recommends 
that adequate funds should be granted without fail for training 
purposes and that zealous steps sh ould be taken to develop the CBI 
Academy into a training centre of excellence in the world. [Para 
13.4.3] 
4.3. The Committee further recomm ends that as regards training 
in technical field, the inputs from  experts in the re spective fields 
should be made use of, by utilizing their expertise as guest faculty. 
This will enable the CBI person nel to be updated of the latest 
technological advancements and innovations. Moreover, the 
Committee recommends that the permanent faculty in CBI should be 
periodically sent for systematic sp ecialized training to enhance their 
knowledge. [Para 13.4.4]    
Action Taken Reply 
4.4. Constant improvement and upgrad ing the expertise and skills of its 
officers has been a priority area for the CBI.  For this purpose, specialized 
training is imparted both at CBI A cademy, Ghaziabad, and on-the-job 
training at Regional Training Centre s at Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata 
and also through CBI Academy’s School  of e-learning.   A Plan scheme 
for Modernization of CBI’s Training Ce ntres is already in  place for this 
purpose that aims at enha ncing the training faciliti es and infrastructure at 
the CBI Academy and the Training Centres. 
4.5. From January to November 2008, the CBI Academy and the three 
Regional Training Centres conducted 112 training Courses in which 2936 
officers of CBI, CPOs, Defence, State Police, and PSUs participated.   
 
 

15 
 
 
 
Committee's further observation 
4.6. The Committee takes note of th e reply. It is, however, not clear 
from the reply to what  extent the concerns ra ised by the Committee in 
paras 13.4.2 to 13.4.4 have been take n into account while planning & 
conducting the training programmes by CBI. The Committee, accordingly,  
desires that a detailed reply be given while submitting the ATN.  
Recommendation/observation 
Shortage of residential accommodation 
5. The Committee is of the opin ion that in order to ensure 
optimum productivity in an organisation, effort s should be made by 
the organisation to ensure that th ere is a well th ought out support 
network within the system. This includes providing basic amenities to 
the personnel and their families.  This would ensure maximum 
workforce satisfaction and l ess stress levels. The Committee 
recommends that since the pers onnel in CBI investigate and 
prosecute high profile offenders who are resourceful and mighty, at 
the risk of their life and their families too, steps should be taken to 
ensure that their families have a roof over their heads and are well 
protected. This is more so importan t because the job nature of the 
CBI personnel demands frequent outstation travels for long 
durations.   [Para 13.6.1]   
5.1. The Committee notes that the satisfaction level in terms of 
residential accommodation in CBI is  about 27 percent and feels that 
it needs to be raised to at least 60-70 percent. It observes that the 
initiatives taken by the Govt. in this regard are inadequate and ad 
hoc and falls far short of a holistic situation.  [Para 13.6.3]            
5.2. In view of the above,  the Committee recommends the 
following:- 

16 
 
 
 
(i)  CBI may be allowed to pu rchase ready built flats in all 
metropolitan cities where the satisfaction level is below the 
prescribed norms and requisite fu nds for the same should be 
provided; and 
(ii)  Budget allocation under this Head should be enhanced 
considerably and all proposals forwarded by the CBI should be 
expeditiously processed.  [Para 13.6.4]       
5.3. The Committee strongly re commends that serious efforts 
should be made in a time boun d and systematic manner in this 
regard. [Para 13.6.5]                            
Action Taken Reply 
5.4. At present CBI Pool Quarters are available at 22 different locations 
and the overall satisfaction level as per information as on 31.1.2009 was 
27.58%.  This compares well with the overall Central Government 
employees who do not have their ow n separate pool.  Efforts are being 
made to augment the satisfaction level of residence in all the Branches of 
CBI. Towards achieving this objec tive, proposals for residential 
accommodation received from the CBI in  this regard are at different 
stages of process.   
Committee’s further observation 
5.5. The Committee takes note of  the reply. The Committee desires 
that the proposals received from CBI in this regard should be 
considered and implemented witho ut delay. Keepin g in view the 
complicated job performed by the officials of CBI, the issue of 
accommodation to its employees shou ld not be compar ed with Central 
Government employees. The Co mmittee, therefore, urges the 

17 
 
 
 
Government and CBI to enhance the satisfaction level as recommended 
by the Committee. 
Recommendation/observation 
Social Security 
6. The Committee opines that keeping in view the hectic job 
nature of the CBI personnel, prop er recreational facilities and 
library services should be provided to them. [Para 13.8.1]   
Action Taken Reply 
6.1. CBI has reported that a full fledge d Library is available in the Head 
Office.  However, no institutional recreation/library facilities are 
available in other offi ces of CBI.  Efforts ar e on to provide such 
infrastructure in other Branches / Units.  
Committee’s further observation 
6.2. The Committee notes that such facilities should be provided to 
the personnel so that it is a relie f from demanding responsibilities/ 
duties/tasks performed by them.   
Recommendation/observation 
Social Security 
7. The Committee recommends that serious thought should be 
given to grant the CBI personnel a nd their families multi-utilitarian 
Scale and greater medical and clinic al access, keeping in view their 
hectic job profile and work related st ress characteristic to their job. 
The Committee feels that this would  go a long way to incentivise and 
galvanize the proactive performance of the personnel in CBI. [Para 
13.8.2] 
 

18 
 
 
 
Action Taken Reply 
 
7.1. The medical and clinical facilitie s available to the CBI officers and 
their families are at present the sa me as provided to  other Central 
Government employees by the Ministry of Health and F.W. 
Committee’s further observation 
7.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.  
Recommendation/observation 
Construction of CBI Headquarters 
8. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the 
Ministry should ensure that constr uction of CBI HQ Building takes 
place within the stipulated period. [Para 14.5.2]    
Action Taken Reply 
8.1. Although the approval of th e Cabinet had been obtained for 
construction of CBI Head Office build ing based on the estimates of the 
CPWD, at CBI’s request the work ha d been awarded to NBCC.  A MOU 
has been entered into between the CBI and the NBCC according to which 
the NBCC will complete the project in 30 months. Rs. 11 crores was 
released for the project during the financial year 2007-08 and the entire 
allocated budget of Rs.25 crores for the year 2008-09 has already been 
released.  In order to effectively m onitor the progress of construction, a 
Project Monitoring Committee has been constituted consisting of 
representatives from CBI as well as  DoPT, along with an expert 
consultant from IIT, Delhi. 
 
 

19 
 
 
 
Committee’s further observation 
8.2. The Committee is pleased to no te the action t aken in this regard 
and hopes that the construction of the much awaited building will be 
completed on time.  
Recommendation/observation 
Cyber Crimes 
9. The Committee is of the opin ion that cyber crimes breach 
boundaries of States and that it is very difficult, rather impossible to 
fix the jurisdiction of an individual State to take cognizance of the 
matter.  Moreover, the nature of cyber crimes is very complex and 
technical and the State police personn el may not be fully equipped to 
deal with them. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the 
existing law should be amended to  enable the Central Bureau of 
Investigation to undertake invest igation into cyber crimes without 
going for the lengthy process of  obtaining the sanction of 
Governments of the States in such cases. [Para 14.6.3] 
9.1. The Committee further recomm ends that the Cyber Crime 
Unit, which is presently functioning in CBI, should be adequately 
supported by a well-equipped technic al unit with adequate cyber 
investigation/forensic tools and related infrastructure.  Further, 
prevention of cyber crimes should also be given top priority.  In 
order to ensure prevention of such intrusions, the Committee 
recommends that CBI should be given the requisite legal mandate 
and should be equippe d to monitor the cyber traffic traversing 
through various gateways in the country.  [Para 14.6.4] 
 
 

20 
 
 
 
Action Taken Reply 
9.2. CBI already has a Cyber Crim e Investigation Cell with in-house 
expertise, in Cyber Crime Investiga tion and if necessary, CBI has been 
trying to fulfill this mandate within  its existing resources.  The Cyber 
Crimes Investigation Cell compris es one SP, 2 DSPs, 1 Inspector, Sub-
Inspector and Head Constable each and 2 Constables.  The Cell is 
equipped with 5 Desktop Computer s and one Laptop with Broadband 
Internet connection.  A few posts of Inspector, SIs and supporting clerical 
staff are however, at present vacant. 
9.3. As per the provisions of In formation Technology Act, 2000, CBI 
has jurisdiction to take up investigati on of cyber crimes in all the Union 
Territories.   In order to take up the investigation of cyber crimes 
occurring in the States, concurrence of the State Government concerned 
is required under section 6 of DSPE Act.    
Committee’s further observation 
9.4. The Committee desires that the existing vacancies in the Cyber 
Crime Investigation Cell should be filled up without undue delay.  
Recommendation/observation 
International Crimes 
10. The Committee further reco mmends that separate wings 
should be created in CBI to deal wi th matters in specialised sectors 
such as Banking, Insurance, Airline s, and Revenue etc.  Such wings 
should be comprised of competent personnel who are professionals in 
their respective fields. They should be grante d pay and emoluments 
commensurate to their knowledge and expertise. [Para 14.7.3]      
 

21 
 
 
 
Action Taken Reply 
10.1. High priority is being accorded  to economic crimes in CBI.  There 
is a separate Division called the Economic Offences Division in CBI, 
which is headed by an officer of the rank of Special Director/Addl. 
Director.  He has four JDs under him who specialize in supervision of the 
investigation of different types of economic crimes.  One of these JDs 
heads Bank Fraud and Securities Ce ll, which specializes in the 
investigation of Bank fraud cases.   
Committee’s further observation 
10.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.  
Recommendation/observation 
Anti Terrorism Division 
11. The Committee feels that in the present scenario when our 
country faces the grave challenge of terrorism, proper attention 
should be given to the prevention  and management of terrorist 
threats/attacks.  This would also in volve ensuring conviction in such 
cases without delay.  The Committee strongly feels that CBI is the 
organization, which is well equipped for such operations, 
investigation and prosecution.  Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that a separate Anti terrorism Division should be 
created in CBI and that highly advan ced training and infrastructure/ 
equipments should be provided to them. [Para 14.7.4.1] 
Action Taken Reply 
11.1. With the passage of time the role of CBI has expanded 
considerably on account of case s being entrusted by the State 
Governments and by the Constitutiona l Courts. In the recent past, a 
number of cases of terror ism, organized crimes, human trafficking etc. 

22 
 
 
 
have been entrusted to the CBI. CBI has a separate Special Crimes 
Division to deal with the conventi onal crimes and cases of terrorism, 
Bomb blast, etc. 
Committee’s further observation 
11.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.  
Recommendation/observation 
Internal Vigilance machinery 
12. The Committee observes that there have been many instances 
wherein there has been misuse of power by the CBI personnel.  It 
feels that such occurrences earn a bad reputation for this premier 
organization. The Committee feels that independence and 
accountability are two sides of the sa me coin. Therefore, it is of the 
opinion that while there is a need to  grant greater autonomy to CBI, 
proper care should be taken to ensure accountability also. The 
Committee recommends that effective and stringent vigilance 
machinery should be envisaged and se t up in CBI to ensure that such 
incidents do not occur in future.  It further recommends that 
stringent punitive action should be taken against the delinquent 
personnel. [Para 15.7.1] 
Action Taken Reply
 
12.1. There is a well-organised intern al vigilance set up to ensure high 
integrity standards in CBI. The set up is headed by Joint Director (Policy) 
who functions as CVO directly under the control of Director, CBI. The 
Internal Vigilance Unit has two DIsG and 7 Supdts. of Police.  During the 
year 2008, Preliminary Enquiries wer e instituted against 6 officers and 
Regular cases instituted against 5 offi cers of CBI.  Regular departmental 

23 
 
 
 
action in 19 new cases was institute d while 31 cases were disposed off 
during the year 2008. 
Committee’s further observation 
12.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.  
Recommendation/observation 
Directorate of Prosecution 
13. The Committee strongly feels th at the decision as to whether 
prosecution should be initiated aga inst the accused on the basis of 
evidence gathered during the invest igation and whether the case 
under consideration is sustainable in Court should be left solely to 
the Directorate of Prosecution. The Committee is of the view that the 
Prosecutors are the best judge in t his regard and any interference in 
this process should be avoided to the extent possible.  [Para 16.4.1]    
Action Taken Reply 
13.1. As per the scheme provided unde r section 173 CrPC read with 
section 36 CrPC, the Investigating O fficer/Officer-in-charge of police 
station or senior Police Officer superv ising his functions, is required to 
decide, depending upon the evidence collected, whether to launch 
prosecution against the accused or not.  However, law officers assist in 
properly assessing the evidences collect ed during investigation. It is a 
team effort of the Investigating Officers as well as the Law Officers. 
Committee’s further observation 
13.2. The Committee takes note of the reply.  
 

24 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN 
RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS 
NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
Recommendation/observation 
Deputationist nature of the organisation 
1. The Committee does not agree with the proposition/argument 
that deputation is encouraged in CBI in order to prevent vested 
interests. It is of the considered  opinion that this is devoid of 
justification and feels that in an organization like CBI, esprit d’ corps 
and departmental loyalty are indispensable. [Para 13.2.5] 
1.1. The Committee observes that deputation at the inceptional 
stage of the CBI was an unavoidabl e necessity owing to shortage of 
officers. Its continuation today is an avoidable luxury owing to 
availability of adequate numbers of competent departmental officers, 
whose numbers can be replenished  through recourse to direct 
recruitment. [Para 13.2.6] 
1.2. The Committee understands that  officers coming on deputation 
from the States may not be aware or  be familiar with the nuances of 
specialized investigation that CBI personnel eng age in. This leads to 
logjams in decision-making in as much as a lot of time gets consumed 
in the process of deputationist of ficers getting familiarized with the 
various methods of investigation adopted in CBI. [Para 13.2.7]   
 

25 
 
 
 
Action Taken Reply 
1.3. Induction of officers on deputa tion from outside th e CBI brings in 
the experience and much wider exposur e in dealing with investigation of 
various kinds of complex crimes.  Induction of these officers also 
improves the coordination an d interaction with the State Police, which is 
important for successful investigation of cases.   
Committee's further recommendation 
1.4. The Committee reiterates its recommendations and directs the 
Ministry to reconsider and inform the  Committee of the outcome in this 
regard. 
Recommendation/observation 
2. The Committee also notes that the departmental officers are 
not the decision-making class with in the CBI and that all important 
posts within the CBI are manned by IPS deputationist officers. 
Further, the promotiona l prospects for departmental officers have 
been progressively worsened over th e last three decades to make the 
CBI the least attractive option fo r potential young officers in the 
open market. [Para 13.2.8]    
2.1. The Committee observes that while departmental officers have 
acquired commendable professional  competence, even expertise in 
niche areas like securities an d finance transactions, defence 
purchase-related transactions, abuse of official position-related 
decisions, custodial death-related  cases, fake encounter-related 
matters, most of the officers on deputation, to some extent, lag behind 
in dealing with such ma tters. It has also come to the notice of the 
Committee that officers without sufficient experience of service and 

26 
 
 
 
knowledge are inducted on deputati on for complicated job in CBI. 
[Para 13.2.9]  
Action Taken Reply 
2.2. Induction of officers from differ ent States and disciplines enhances 
the capability and efficiency of  the CBI.  Since the methods and 
principles of investigation of th e State Police forces and CBI are 
common, and given a common criminal justice system, the present 
system of having a mix of CBI offi cers and deputationists has stood the 
test of time. Abolition of deputatio n of investigating and supervisory 
officers will not be desirable. 
Committee’s further observation
 
2.3. The Committee takes note of th e reply furnished by the Ministry. 
However, the Committee feels that due consideration was not given to 
the recommendations of  the Committee regarding deputation, as is 
apparent from the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committee does 
not concur with the proposition th at State police personnel have 
expertise investigating complicated matters which are routinely dealt 
with by CBI personnel.  The Committee is of the opinion that by the 
time the deputationists  gain sufficient exper tise, their term of 
deputation is likely to be over  and they return  to their parent 
organization, which in turn affe cts the smooth functioning of CBI. 
Therefore, the Committee is of th e firm view that less dependence 
should be placed on deputation.  
Recommendation/observation 
Special Incentive Allowance 
3. The Committee is of the view  that since the defence counsels 
are paid exorbitant fees by the a ccused who are weal thy and mighty, 

27 
 
 
 
the CBI counsels should also be paid the best incentives so that they 
too are motivated to put in their best expertise and knowledge and 
maintain high professional standards. [Para 13.5.2] 
3.1. The Committee recommends that Special Incentive Allowances 
should also be granted to the prosec ution and technical staff so as to 
attract best talent. This would ensure that finest talent is attracted to 
its fold and that the motivation levels of the staff are kept high. It also 
recommends that Training Allowances should be granted to all ranks 
of the staff in the CBI Academy. [Para 13.5.3] 
3.2. The Committee recommends  that an enabling mechanism 
should be put in place for periodic  review of applicable TA/DA rates 
on a six-monthly basis to prec lude incurment of losses by CBI 
officers in the course of their duties on outstation visits. [Para 13.5.4] 
3.3. The Committee endorses the recommendation made by the 
Committee set up in CBI to study “Empowerment of the 
Investigating Officers” in 2005, th at a suitable method should be 
found to reimburse the IOs, the ex penditure incurred by them on 
local transport utilized for performance of official duty and that on 
submission of TA bills along with Case Diaries, the Branch SP may 
satisfy himself about the correctne ss of the claim made and then 
reimburse the expenditure incurred on local transport by the IO. The 
Committee also concurs with the recommendations of the 
abovementioned Committee regarding the perks to be granted to the 
IOs. [Para 13.5.5] 
Action Taken Reply
 
3.4. The proposal of CBI for grant of Special Incentive Allowance to all 
CBI personnel, irrespective of ranks /cadres had been referred to the 
Ministry of Finance but th e same has not been agr eed to.   The TA and 

28 
 
 
 
DA rates applicable to all Central Government employees have recently 
been revised upwards at the recomm endations of the Sixth Central Pay 
Commission.  CBI had also sent a pr oposal for purchase of laptops and 
Mobile Phones for empowering the Inve stigating Officers and the same 
has been sanctioned. 
Committee’s further observation 
3.5. The Committee had time and again proposed grant of Special 
Incentive Allowance to the techni cal staff in CB I irrespective of 
ranks/cadre.  It is disturbing to note that the Ministry of Finance has 
not agreed to the proposal as is app arent from the reply furnished by 
the Ministry.  The Committee strongly feels that the CBI is a specialized 
investigating Agency and that special incentives should be granted to 
the CBI personnel, keeping in view  the technical and professional 
nature of the duties they engage in.  
3.6. The Committee, therefore, fur ther recommends that the issue 
may be taken up again with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee is, 
however, constrained to note that the Ministry has not offered any 
comments regarding better incentives  for the counsels employed by 
CBI. The same may be furnished in the ATN.   
Recommendation/observation 
Establishment of exclusive Special Courts 
4. Taking into account the num ber of cases pending disposal, the 
Committee also feels that there is an urgent need to significantly 
increase the number of exclusive co urts for conducting trial of CBI 
cases, or else the number of pe nding cases would accumulate.  [Para 
16.6.2]      

29 
 
 
 
4.1. The Committee takes serious vi ew of the submission made by 
CBI that in 438 cases, charges ha ve not been framed even after 10 
years. The Committee recommends th at targets should be fixed on a 
time to time basis, and that whol e hearted efforts should be made to 
meet the targets. The Committee is of the considered opinion that the 
maximum time limit for disposal of  a case from trial should not be 
more than one year in ordinary circumstances. [Para 16.6.3]     
Action Taken Reply 
4.2. CBI has reported that a larg e number of cases were pending in 
various Courts throughout India, some for more than 10 years. At present, 
there are only 40 Courts of Special  Judges and 10 courts of Special 
Magistrates all over country for exclus ive trial of CBI cases. Proposals of 
CBI for setting up of more Special Courts, whenever received, are 
considered by the Government on th e basis of norms fixed for the 
purpose.   
 4.3. Regarding expeditious dispos al of trials there are provisions 
already provided in the Prevention  of Corruption Act, 1988. However, 
there is no specific time frame pr ovided under law for completion of trial 
in criminal cases. 
Committee’s further observation 
4.4. The Committee reiterates its re commendations and strongly feels 
that the issue of speedier disposal of cases has to be examined in a 
holistic manner. Had the present arra ngement been satisfactory, there 
would have not been such a pendency. The Committee, therefore, would 
like to be informed what measures are being taken in this regard. There 
is definitely a need for early dispos al of cases and that can be done by 

30 
 
 
 
prescribing maximum time limit. The Committee observes that if 
required, the relevant laws may be amended. 
Recommendation/observation 
Need for separate enactment for CBI 
5. The unanimous view, which em erged during discussions of the 
Committee, was that the CBI wa s initially granted powers under the 
DSPE Act, 1946. But, after the comm encement of the Constitution in 
1950, CBI is included as Entry 8 in  the Union List.  Moreover, in 
view of Entries 1, 9 and 93 of the Union List; Entry 1 of the State List 
and Entries 1, 2, 3 and 4 of the Concurrent List, the Committee is of 
the considered opinion that the Constitution grants express powers to 
the Central Government to make an d implement law, giving powers 
to the CBI to take cognizance of crimes. The Committee is of the view 
that the founding fathers of the Constitution had contemplated a 
well-defined scheme, according to which Union Government/ CBI is 
not, in any way, debarred constitu tionally from taking suo-motu 
cognizance of offences. [Para 16.9.20] 
5.1. The Committee is of the opi nion that though the Constitution 
granted a unique status to CBI, the powers given to CBI under the 
DSPE Act were not upgraded or amended after the commencement 
of the Constitution in tune with the correspo nding Entries in the 
Union List, State List and Concurre nt List. The Committee is of the 
opinion that not granting ample powers to CBI amounts to degrading 
the status of the investigation age ncy that was enlisted in the Union 
List by the framers of our Consti tution as “Central Bureau of 
Intelligence and Investigation”.   Th e Committee is of the view that 

31 
 
 
 
CBI is the only agency in India wh ich has acquired and accumulated 
the necessary expertise in successf ully investigating wide hues of 
transnational, terrorist and organi sed crimes and that enacting an 
enabling legislation for CBI will be  a major step towards evolving 
CBI into an independent and accountable agency which specializes in 
investigation and prosecution. [Para 16.9.21]                        
5.2. The Committee notes that in the United States of America 
(USA), the federal States have th eir own Constitution and yet they 
have subjected themselves to the ju risdiction of the Federal Bureau 
of Investigation (FBI), which is a Central agency.  It understands that 
police and public order is a State s ubject in the USA too and that in 
all cases involving a federal offence in the USA, the FBI and the local 
police have concurrent jurisdiction; but the moment the FBI steps in, 
the local police stops investigation.  In India, the situation is different 
in that its polity is quasi-federa l in nature. Therefore, the Committee 
sees no reason to prevent granting  of powers to CBI under a suitable 
comprehensive legislation. Taking  into account these aspects, the 
Committee finds no coherent reaso n to debar the apposite legal 
empowerment of CBI. [Para 16.9.22]     
5.3. The Committee feels that much manpower and finances have 
been expended till date to condu ct studies/debates regarding the 
feasibility of a Central Law Enforcement Agency or granting powers 
to CBI.  But the Committee is disturbed to note that nothing fruitful 
has come out so far.    It feels that  it is high time concrete action is 
taken in this direction, rather than  engaging in further debates/ 
discussions.  The Committee is of the considered view that the moot 
point is not whether CBI should be granted powers under a 

32 
 
 
 
comprehensive statute; but rather, when it is going to be 
materialized.  The Committee is of the opinion that since the various 
provisions of the Constitution mandates concurring powers to CBI, it 
is in public interest  that, in this era of successive waves of terrorist 
attacks and highly technical crimes, a statute is enacted, without 
much ado, granting to the CBI, powers which are enshrined in the 
Constitution, so that such crimes are tackled in a more consistent and 
effective manner.  [Para 16.9.24]             
5.4. The Committee is of the view that such an Act of Parliament 
will empower Union Government to address the present environment 
of violence and crimes, which threaten the very fabric of Indian 
democracy, with more powers and accountability. This will rectify 
the present situation wherein the Union Government is handicapped, 
in the name of federalism, from ma king use of the intelligence they 
gather, thereby failing to prevent the occurrence of crimes and 
punishing the criminals, while the framers of the Constitution had 
unambiguously visualized the present need and provided the 
Concurrent powers as per Entries 1 to 4 of List III of the Seventh 
Schedule. [Para 16.9.25] 
Action Taken Reply
 
5.5. A separate enactmen t for CBI is already in  existence namely the 
DSPE Act, 1946.  CBI de rives its powers from th e said Act as amended 
by CVC Act, 2003. This mechanism vi z. the CBI’s functioning under the 
DSPE Act has allowed CBI to mainta in its reputation of a premier 
investigating agency of the country  functioning with credibility and 
impartiality.  Since a separate Act namely the DSPE Act is already in 

33 
 
 
 
place for regulating the functioning of the CBI, it has so far not been felt 
necessary to have another statute for this purpose. 
5.6. Police being a State subject under the Constitution, it is the State 
police, which have the ma ndate to investigate criminal cases irrespective 
of their complexity and ramificat ions. Under the DSPE Act 1946, CBI 
cannot take over the invest igation of such crimes suo motu, irrespective 
of their gravity and ramifications. Th e State Governments are required to 
give their consent to enable CBI to ta ke over investigation. CBI, thus, has 
adequate powers under the present legi slation where the autonomy of the 
State Government is respected, but at  the same time, their cooperation is 
available to CBI. 
5.7. As regards the Committee’s ob servations regarding enabling the 
CBI to take over certain cases suo motu  on the pattern of the FBI and/or 
setting of a specialised central  agency for the purpose, the 
recommendations made by the Madhava Menon Committee in this regard 
are under consideration of the Gove rnment (MHA) in consultation with 
other Ministries/Departments/organisations. 
Committee’s further observation 
5.8. The Committee is surprised to  note that the recommendations of 
this Committee vide paras 16.9.20 to  16.9.25 did not make any impact 
on the thinking of th e Ministry. The Ministry, in their reply, did not 
make any comments on the recommen dations of the Committee; rather 
stated the factual position which th ey consider was final. The intention 
of the Committee was to stimulate the thinking of  the Ministry to the 
concerns raised by the Committ ee. The Committee expected the 
Ministry to give categorical replies to those concerns. The Committee, 

34 
 
 
 
therefore, impresses upon the Minis try to give their categorical and 
complete reply to these recommendations while furnishing their ATN. 
5.9. The Committee has recommended enabling CBI to take over 
certain cases suo-motu and has no t recommended for setting of a 
specialized central agency.  In fact, the Committee emphasizes that 
creation of another agency will lead to overlapping of jurisdictions, 
conflict of interests, demand for more resources which are already 
scarce, lack of synergy and creation of massive infrastructure and 
allied facilities, which may not give the desired results . Therefore, the 
Committee is of the firm opinion that the issue of separate enactment 
should be given due consideratio n and positive concrete action should 
be taken in this regard. 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN 
RESPECT OF WHICH F INAL REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
Recommendation/observation 
1. The Committee feels that these attribute to increase in the 
workload of the already overbur dened CBI. The Committee notes 
that the expansion of CBI mandate  has not been accompanied by 
commensurate expansion and augmentation of the infrastructure and 
resources within CBI. Therefore, th e Committee strongly feels that 
strengthening the CBI in terms of resources and legal mandate is the 
remedy to this problem. [Para 10] 
1.1. The Committee is of the o pinion that creati on of more and 
more agencies would, apart from involving more resources, which 
are already scarce, lead to overla pping of jurisdictions, conflict of 
interests, under-utilization of hum an resources and lack of synergy, 
which would be detrimen tal to the cause of our criminal justice 
system. Furthermore, huge expenditure that will be incurred for 
creation of massive infrastructure and allied facilities all over the 
country may not give the desired results.  [Para 11]           
1.2. In view of the above, th e Committee is of the unanimous 
opinion that the need of the hour is  to strengthen the CBI in terms of 
legal mandate, infrastructure and resources. [Para 12] 

36 
 
 
 
Action Taken Reply 
1.3. Although the CBI had been  originally constituted as 
an Investigation Agency of Gove rnment of India to undertake 
investigation into corruption relate d cases, over the years it has been 
entrusted with investigation of Ec onomic and Conventional Crimes. The 
Constitutional Courts have also been  entrusting number of cases to CBI 
for investigation.  The functioning of  the CBI has been revamped and re-
organised as a result of which th ree distinctive divisions – Anti-
Corruption Division, Economic Offe nces Division and Special Crime 
Division have been established.  Thus  the functions and operations of the 
CBI have been enlarged.  
Committee’s further observation 
1.4. The Committee feels that suffici ent thought and analysis has not 
been given to the recommendations made by the Committee with regard 
to strengthening CBI in terms of legal ma ndate. The Committee 
reiterates its opinion that though  the Constitution granted a unique 
status to CBI, the powers given to  CBI under the DSPE Act were not 
upgraded or amended after the co mmencement of the Constitution in 
tune with the corresponding Entries in the Union List, State List and 
Concurrent List. 
1.5. The Committee notes that the Ministry, in its reply, has admitted 
that the functions and operations of  the CBI have been enlarged. The 
Committee fails to understand how su ch a premier organization can 
function efficiently and to its full po tential, when it is lacking in terms 
of legal backing. 
Recommendation/observation 
Deputationist nature of the organisation 
2. The Committee notes that at present there are prospects of 
absorption into CBI fo r deputationists personne l. This result in 

37 
 
 
 
junior deputationists, on absorption, being promoted to higher ranks 
while the direct recruits continue to stagnate at much lower ranks, 
resulting in conseque ntial demoralization. Furthermore, there are 
high chances of the deputationist s resorting to the policy of 
appeasement in order to be abso rbed into the organisation. The 
Committee apprehends that such tendencies may divert the attention 
of the officers from their job on hand since they are more prone to 
giving greater attention to th eir personal career gains. [Para 
13.2.10]       
2.1.  The issue of deputation in CBI repeatedly came to the centre 
stage during the deliberations of the Committee. The Members of the 
Committee were of the opinion that  the deputation quota should be 
prescribed with reference to the nature of the jo b and that the 
number of deputationists at the juni or levels particularly, should be 
relatively small, so that the intere sts of the cadre officers would not 
be detrimentally affected.  [Para 13.2.10.2] 
2.2. Taking into account the abovementioned aspects, the 
Committee is of the op inion that the deputation ists bring in varied 
experience with them because of their exposure to different kind of 
situations in their parent department. At the same time, the 
Committee strongly feels that less  dependence should be placed on 
deputation and that the deputation po licy should be so framed that it 
does not adversely affect the pr omotion prospects of direct CBI 
officers. [Para 13.2.10.3] 
2.3. The Committee recommends that  in the event of vacancies not 
being filled up in the deputationist  cadre, those vacancies should be 
filled up by seeking recruitment fr om the permanent cadre of CBI. 
The Committee further recommends that the deputationist who are 
serving in CBI at present, or till a particular time limit to be fixed by 

38 
 
 
 
the Govt., should be given the op tion to be absorbed in the 
organisation. [Para 13.2.10.4] 
Action Taken Reply 
2.4. As regards filling up of vacancies , continuous efforts are made to 
fill up the vacancies in all ranks, especia lly at investigating officer level.  
However, occurrence and filling up of vacancies is a continuous process.  
The number keeps on varying dependi ng on the induction, promotion, 
retirement and repatriation of the officers.   
2.5. CBI needs to remain a deputatio n-based organization in the interest 
of quality of work and experience of  the officers coming on deputation.  
As regards the career prospects of the cadre officers of the CBI, 
recruitment rules of va rious ranks are being su itably amended to make 
future career progression better for the departmental officers. 
2.6. As against 932 vacancies in vari ous lower ranks in CBI as on 1-1-
2008, 325 vacancies have been f illed up till 30- 11-2008 through 
promotion, direct recruitment and deputation.  However, 607 vacancies in 
these ranks still exist.  CBI is ma king all out efforts to fill up the 
remaining vacancies too.  However, not much could be done for want of 
approval of Screening Co mmittee for vacancies under direct recruitment 
quota and due to non-receipt of dossiers from Staff Selection 
Commission.  
Committee's further recommendation 
2.7. The Committee reiterates its  recommendations. The Committee 
expresses its dissatisfaction over the progress made by CBI in filling up 
of vacancies. The Committee, accordingly, directs both the Ministry and 
CBI to expedite and inform the Committee of the measures taken in this 
regard alongwith the upto date status.  

39 
 
 
 
Recommendation/observation 
Shortage of manpower 
3. The Committee expresses d eep concern over the prevailing 
vacancies in CBI. It is of the op inion that the large number of 
vacancies is bound to result in severe strain on the existing 
manpower who are hard pressed to deliver positive results and that it 
is detrimental to professional excellence and efficiency. The 
Committee feels that despite rep eated recommendations by this 
Committee in its previous Reports on the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, adequate 
steps have not so far been taken to  overcome this persisting problem. 
It is of the view that if this situ ation is allowed to continue for long, 
there could be serious repercussion s on the functioning of CBI and 
that this needs a serious and positive thinking on the part of Central 
Government. [Para 13.3.6]  
3.1. The Committee recommends that the Government should 
augment its efforts to make suitab le amendments in the relevant RR 
and that steps should be taken on a war-footing basis to fill up the 
vacancies within three months. The Govt. should also take necessary 
action for need-based augmentation  in staff strength in the CBI so 
that it can rise up to the people’s expectations. [Para 13.3.7]  
Action Taken Reply
 
3.2. Continuous efforts are being ma de to fill up the vacancies in all 
ranks, especially at investigating of ficer level.  Occurrence and filling up 
of vacancies is a continuous pro cess.  The number keeps on varying 
depending on the induction, promotion,  retirement and repatriation of the 
officers. 

40 
 
 
 
The following steps are being take n to ensure speedy filling up of 
vacancies in different ranks:  
• Recruitment rules are being rationalised. 
• Efforts are also on to induct more officers on deputation. 
• An incentive allowance to the executive cadres of CBI @ 25% 
upto Sr. SP level and @ 15% for officers above that rank has been 
approved. 
Committee’s further observation 
3.3. The Committee's observations to  the preceding paras (i.e. 13.2.10 
to 13.10.4) may be referred. The Co mmittee, however, notes the replies 
furnished by the Ministry and feel s that vacancies are too high in a 
premier investigation agency such as CBI. The Committee recommends 
that a concrete plan should be worked  out to fill vacancies in a phased 
manner.  As regards non receipt of dossiers from SSC is concerned, the 
Committee recommends that there sho uld be greater co-ordination 
between the agencies which are un der the administrative control of 
DoPT and DoPT should take a pivotal role in the matter.  
Recommendation/observation 
Postings and transfers 
4. The Committee feels that po stings and transfers have an 
important bearing on the morale of  personnel and is of the opinion 
that the welfare of the staff and thei r families should also be kept in 
mind while affecting the same. Since  unfair postings and transfers 
have a demoralizing effect on the personnel, the transfer policy of the 
organization should be transparent and should be applied without 
exception. The Committee endorses the recommendation made by 

41 
 
 
 
the Committee formed in CBI to study the “Empowerment of IOs” in 
2005 that while transferring official s, academic session should always 
be taken into consideration so that the academics of their children do 
not suffer at any cost.  [Para 13.7.1] 
4.1. Regarding shortage of of ficers in North-East, Jammu & 
Kashmir and Port-Blair, the Committee feels that this problem 
should be addressed in a holistic manner and recommends that the 
Govt. should chalk out an effective solution to this problem, by 
granting special financial packages/facilities etc. to the personnel who 
are posted in such areas/terrains . The Committee recommends that 
the policy of compulsory rotation sh ould be implemented to tackle 
this problem. [Para 13.7.2] 
Action Taken Reply 
4.2. All transfers and postings in CBI are made in strict compliance 
with the prescribed guidelines fra med by CBI in this regard.  Due 
attention is being paid for issuing the transfer orders in the month of 
January and February so that the pe rsonnel can plan their movement well 
in advance as per the commencement of the academic session.  
4.3. The financial and other benefits  available to CBI personnel are the 
same as those applicable to central government employees. 
Committee’s further observation 
4.4. The Committee is constrained to note that the Ministry has not 
replied to the recommendations vide paras 13.7.1 and 13.7.2 in 
comprehensive manner. It has rathe r given an evasive and incomplete 
reply. The thrust of Committee's re commendation in first para was the 
effect of unfair postings and transf er causing demoralising  effect on 
the personnel and in the second para was shortage  of officers in North 

42 
 
 
 
East and Jammu & Kashmir regions  which, as per the Committee, 
needed to be addressed in a holist ic manner. The Ministry's reply that 
financial benefits are equivalent to those of Central Government 
employees does not suggest  a solutio n. Had this been so, there would 
have not been any shortage. Nor did the Ministry offer any comments 
on the issue of rotation as a sol ution to this problem. The Committee 
feels that the transfer policy in CBI needs to be  reviewed. The 
Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Ministry to give a 
comprehensive reply in respect of both the paras in its ATN. 
Recommendation/observation 
Infrastructural Facilities 
5. The Committee recommends th at such gadgets (i.e. mobile 
phones and laptop) shou ld be made available  to them to ensure 
smooth, timely and proper execution of their delicate work, which is 
usually on a 24X7 basis. [Para 14.1] 
5.1. The Committee recommends that CBI should have a strong in-
house Research and Development W ing. The Committee is not in 
favour of outsourcing any job entr usted to CBI, ke eping in view the 
confidential nature of the work done in the organization. It 
recommends that specialized depart ments consisting of specialized 
professional personnel should be created in the organization itself to 
deal with specialized sectors such  as banking, airlines, insurance, 
revenue, terror etc. [Para 14.2] 
5.2. As far as forensic support is concerned, the Committee feels 
that there is an urgent need to provide forensic support exclusively to 
the CBI. Moreover, the technical staff should be granted special 
incentives because the Committee notes that they are engaged in 

43 
 
 
 
highly technical assignments whic h involve analyzing every minute 
detail in a case and arriving at logical conclusions. [Para 14.3] 
5.3. The Committee not es that at present, th e CBI is dependent on 
Forensic labs which are established and controlled by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs. The Committee could gather that this results in delay 
in procuring scientific verdict in the cases which are referred to these 
labs by CBI, thereby resulting in piling up of cases. The Committee is 
of the opinion that quic k disposal of cases refer red to the labs has to 
be ensured stringently and that it is more so important because 
without scientific evidence to substantiate the case put forward by the 
prosecution, conviction cannot be ensured. Therefore, the Committee 
strongly recommends that the CB I should be equipped with Forensic 
labs which are exclusively at th e disposal of CBI and which are 
manned by the CBI personnel, wh o are technically trained for the 
same. This will ensure effective monitoring of the progress of the 
forensic cases referred to it and th ereby, quick disposal of cases.  
[Para 14.3.1] 
5.4. The Committee recommends that concrete steps should be 
taken to attract highly qualified tech nical staff to the organisation, 
for whom there is no dearth of employment opportunities in the 
private sector or abroad. Furthermo re, adequate training should be 
given to them so that they can hone  their skills in such a way that it 
aids in effective investigation and successful prosecution. [Para 14.4] 
Action Taken Reply
 
5.5. CBI has requested for and h as been sanctioned 400 Laptops and 
965 Mobile Phones in the financial year 2008-09 for the Investigating and 
Supervisory Officers of CBI under the Plan scheme ‘e-Governance’.   

44 
 
 
 
5.6. As regards the forensic support system, the CBI already has CFSL, 
which is a scientific de partment under the admini strative control of CBI 
and overall control of the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
Committee’s further observation 
5.7. The Committee takes note of  the reply. The Committee is 
constrained to note that the Minist ry has not offered any comments 
with respect to para 14.1 and 14.2. The Committee, therefore,  directs 
the Ministry to offer para wise comments along with  the action taken, 
while furnishing their ATN.  
Recommendation/observation 
International Crimes 
6. The Committee feels that in this era, in dept h knowledge of 
international law, procedure and various treaties is inevitable. In this 
background, the Committee is of  the view that CBI failed in 
obtaining successful conviction in  many cases having international 
ramifications because of non-expertis e of CBI in such cases. In order 
to achieve this objective, the Committee recommends that a separate 
wing i.e., “International Crimes Di vision” should be carved out in 
CBI with well-trained personnel,  which would cater to matters 
connected with INTERPOL, extradition and international crimes. 
[Para 14.7.2] 
Action Taken Reply 
6.1. It has been reported by th e CBI that keeping in view the 
multifarious role being performed by NCB-India, also known as Interpol 
Wing of CBI and to make it a vibr ant and useful support unit for CBI, 
State Police Forces, other Law Enforcement Agencies, MHA and MEA in 
the area of internationa l police cooperation, it has been reorganized as 

45 
 
 
 
International Police Cooperation Unit (IP CU).  It would consist of two 
distinct though interlinked sub-un its called National Central Bureau 
(NCB)- India and International Po lice Cooperation Cell (IPCC).  CBI 
feels that there is  need to upgrade this Unit in terms of equipments, 
manpower and training for which they  would be submitting a detailed 
proposal to MHA. 
Committee’s further observation 
6.2. The Committee would like to be  apprised of the proposal being 
submitted to MHA and also the action taken by that Ministry, if any. 
Recommendation/observation 
Modernization 
7. The Committee recommends  that latest gadgets and 
equipments should be procured to  ensure efficient and effective 
functioning of the organisation. It  feels that fine-tuning between man 
and machine would definitely enhan ce the technical ca pability of the 
organisation. [Para 14.8.2] 
7.1. The Committee recommends that adequate facilities and 
amenities should be provided to the CBI personnel so that they can 
put in their best in the discharge of the onerous responsibilities. More 
funds should be allocated for modernization and proper review of the 
work done in this regard should be  taken up on a regular basis. 
Stress should not only be limited to allocation; rather optimum 
utilisation of the available funds ne eds to be ensured. Proposals for 
modernisation should be worked ou t and if needed, experts in these 
fields should be involved in framin g such projects/proposals. [Para 
14.8.3] 

46 
 
 
 
7.2. The Committee is happy to note  that such proactive steps have 
been taken in this regard and recommends that its findings should be 
thoroughly examined and implemen ted in a time bound manner.                  
[Para 14.8.4] 
7.3. The Committee is of the opinio n that if we aspire to raise CBI 
to international standards, world-class gadgetry should also be 
provided to the personnel. The Comm ittee, therefore, recommends 
that the IOs in CBI should be gi ven latest equipments such as 
Blackberry type (Broadband) mobile  phone which are the latest for 
the time being, laptop with int ernet mobile connectivity and pen-
drive etc. so that they are equ ipped with sufficient ammunition to 
improve their work performance and output. [Para 14.8.5]  
7.4. The Committee recommends that the consolidated plan 
document for modernizat ion of CBI, which is  awaited, should be 
prepared and implemented at the ea rliest. The Committee is of the 
opinion that much more needs to be done regarding modernization in 
terms of investigation, interrogat ion and training. It recommends 
that advanced logistics and supp ort facilities should be made 
available to the personnel wi thout delay. The Committee 
recommends that steps should be  taken to establish a paperless 
environment and is of the opinion that utilizing automated workflow 
systems would improve job efficiency. [Para 14.8.7] 
Action Taken Reply
 
7.5. Two Plan Schemes – one for Modernization of CBI Training 
Centres and the other for e-Govern ance, are already in place for 
improving the facilities a nd infrastructure, including providing of latest 
gadgets to the Investigati ng Officers.  Budgetary fu nds to the tune of Rs. 

47 
 
 
 
1.06 crores and Rs. 3.08 crores respec tively have been provided for the 
above-mentioned Plan schemes in the financial year 2008-09. 
Committee's further recommendation 
7.6. The Committee is constrained to note that the reply furnished by 
the Ministry to the recommendations given above, does not cover all the 
issues raised by the Committee. It is incomplete in as much as it does 
not give any information/comments to recommendations vide paras 
14.8.3, 14.8.4 and 14.8.5. The Commi ttee therefore impresses upon the 
Ministry to furnish its detailed comm ents on the issu es raised therein, 
while furnishing its ATN.  
Recommendation/observation 
Financial and Administrative Empowerment 
8. The Committee recommends that  keeping in view the need for 
functional independence of the CBI, it is imperative that financial 
powers are commensurate with the requirement of efficient and 
smooth functioning of the organisation. [Para 15.2] 
8.1. The Committee could gather that this proposal has been 
implemented. The Committee reco mmends that more financial 
powers should be vested with the DCBI, so that expenditure incurred 
on activities such as training, pu rchase of computers etc. does not 
suffer, owing to lack of funds. [Para 15.3] 
8.2. The Committee strongly feel s that the DCBI should be given 
the same status as that of his counterparts heading similar 
international organisations such as FBI. It is of the opinion that it is 
but inevitable that the Director of the premier investigation agency in 
the country should exercise pow ers and autonomy, which are at par 
with those exercised by his count erparts. The DCBI should be given 

48 
 
 
 
appropriate powers and discretion to take on the spot decisions 
regarding vital proposals for improvement of infrastructure, 
methods of investigation, etc. [Para 15.4] 
8.3. The Committee notes that th e sad state of a ffairs which is 
prevalent now is that cases a re being referred to CBI without 
granting adequate funds required to meet the investigation and 
prosecution expenses. The Committee is  of the opinion that it is high 
time that concrete steps are taken to ensure that in the 
Ministries/Departments of the Central Governments, annual 
projections/estimates should be ca lculated/made as to how many 
cases are likely to arise which m ay be referred for investigation by 
agencies such as CBI. Thereafter, in accordance with the projections, 
adequate budgetary provisions sh ould be made and such amount 
should be made available to the in vestigation agency as and when 
cases are referred to it. The Co mmittee recommends that a separate 
budgetary head should be provided for such expenses. [Para 15.5] 
8.4. The Committee is also of th e view that the expenses incurred 
by the investigation agency in the investigation and prosecution of a 
case should be met by the conc erned Department/ Ministry. Such a 
system will ensure that  the investigation and prosecution will not 
suffer on account of shortage of  funds and that the targets are 
achieved within the prescribed time limit. [Para 15.6] 
Action Taken Reply 
8.5. Financial powers in respect of certain items were delegated to the 
Director, CBI in 2007.  Another proposal for enhancement of the 
financial powers of DCBI further is  under examination in consultation 
with the CBI. 

49 
 
 
 
8.6. Budget grants are appr oved depending up on requirement, 
utilization and projection for the future  on realistic estimates.  Budget 
proposals from CBI too are addressed accordingly and allocations are 
made by the Ministry of Finance keeping in view the relevant 
instructions. 
Committee’s further observation 
8.7. It appears from the reply rece ived from the Mini stry that the 
Ministry has not paid any attention to the Committee's suggestions.  
The intention of the Committee is tha t CBI enjoys au tonomy, both in 
respect of functions and financia l matters. The Committee, vide its 
recommendations in paras 15.5 & 15.6,  made vital suggestions. The 
Ministry did not take any trouble to  ponder over these suggestions and 
bring such suggestions before the Ministry of Finance. The Committee, 
therefore, urges the Mini stry of Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions to examine the issue in consultation with the Finance 
Ministry and inform the Committee of their findings and outcome 
thereof. 
Recommendation/observation 
Transparency 
9. The Committee recommends that  the information displayed in 
the website of CBI should be update d periodically in spirit with 
Section 4 of the Right to Information Act, 2005. [Para 15.8.2] 
9.1. Some Members of the Comm ittee raised concern over the 
publicity resorted to by CBI at the initial stages of investigation of 
cases.  They opined that such publicity tarnish the image of the 
accused especially in case of poli tical persons and innocent persons, 
ruining their public image forever, though ultimately they may be 

50 
 
 
 
acquitted. The Committee is of the opinion that utmost care and 
caution should be exercised in such ca ses to avoid media trial.   [Para 
15.8.3]  
Action Taken Reply 
9.2. Appropriate information, as per requirement of “Right to 
Information Act-2005”, is being updated regularly  on the CBI website. 
CBI has a well laid down publicity policy in place.  Every material that 
goes out of CBI for publicity through a designated Publ icity Officer has 
the approval of Director, CBI.  While  doing so, every care is taken not to 
disclose the name, particulars of  any person, whether a political 
personality, a bureaucrat or a common ma n, before the offence is proved 
against them. However, as per procedures laid down in criminal laws, 
every action of the investigating agency  is being reported to the Court of 
law starting with submission of FIR. The Courts being public places, CBI 
has no control if any material is got hold of by the media.  Also, there are 
other interested parties in a crim inal case who leak out selected 
material/information to the medi a on which CBI has no control 
whatsoever.   
Committee’s further observation 
9.3. The Committee notes that the reply does not reflect the concern 
raised by the Committee regarding me dia trial at the initial stages of 
investigation. The Committee feels that a duly laid down procedure 
should be followed wherein adequate information is made available in 
the public domain and at the same time, avoid undue harassment of the 
parties involved in the investigation. 
 
 
 

51 
 
 
 
Recommendation/observation 
Directorate of Prosecution 
10. The CBI, in its written reply, has stated that as the present 
system having separate prosecutio n wing i.e. the Directorate of 
Prosecution has not yielded the desi red results but on the other hand 
has resulted in dilution of pros ecution efforts, CBI would urge 
adoption of recommendation made  by Committee on Reforms on 
Criminal Justice headed by Dr. Justice V.S. Malimath wherein it was 
proposed that the police officer of  the rank of Director General of 
Police/IGP may be designated as Direct or of Prosecution.  It was also 
stated that this would facilitate an effective co-ordination between the 
investigation and prosecution offi cers and that in order to ensure 
accountability of both the wings of  criminal justice system, Director 
may be vested with the power to call for the reports from prosecutors 
as well as from Superintendent of Police and take action in case of 
defaults/lapses.  [Para 16.2] 
10.1. The Committee is of  the view that efficien t prosecution is sine 
qua non for proper administration  of justice and that there is 
requirement of seamless co-ordination between the prosecution and 
investigation wings. The Committee  feels that th e Head of the 
Directorate of Prosecution should in variably be a lawyer who is well 
versed in the various nuances of substantive and procedural law and 
who has practical knowledge of arguing cases in a Court of 
law.  [Para 16.3]                   
Action Taken Reply
 
10.2. The existing system was put in place keeping in view the decisions 
of the Supreme Court in the Vineet  Narain Case and the views of the 

52 
 
 
 
Independent Review Committee.  The Directorate of Prosecution, CBI is 
headed by a Joint Secretary/Additiona l Secretary level officer of the 
Ministry of Law having the requisite  law experience and is working 
reasonably well. A proposal is howev er, under considera tion to establish 
an independent Directorate of Pr osecution for both the CBI and the 
Enforcement Directorate. 
Committee’s further observation 
10.3. The Committee may be apprised of the outcome of the 
consideration of the proposal. 
Recommendation/observation
 
Delay in prosecution sanction 
11. The Committee feels that once  the investigating agency comes 
to the conclusion that prosecution  is necessary and Director of 
Prosecution also concurs, there should not be any delay for any 
reason other than the merits of prosecution itself. The Committee 
accordingly desires that the Minist ry should make all concerted 
efforts to ensure that the concer ned Departments, Ministries of the 
Central Government or State Government accord necessary sanction 
for prosecution within a period of 15 days.  The Comm ittee is of the 
considered opinion that if the sancti on is not granted within a period 
of 15 days, it should be  “deemed sanction” a nd the CBI should file 
the charge sheet in the Court and proceed further according to the 
law of the land.  [Para 16.7.6]        
Action Taken Reply 
11.1. As per Section 8 (f) of the CVC Act, 2003, CVC has power to 
review progress of cases pending wi th the competent authority for 
sanction of prosecution under the P.C. Act, 1988. CBI furnishes 

53 
 
 
 
periodical reports on cases pending for sanction for prosecution and cases 
under Prevention and Corruption Ac t, 1988 in which sanctions are 
pending are brought to the notice of CVC durin g the monthly CVC-CBI 
review meeting. Hon’ble Supreme C ourt, in Vineet Narain case has 
ordered that " Time limit of three months for grant of sanction for 
prosecution must be strictly adhered  to. However, additional time of one 
month may be allowed where consulta tion is required with the Attorney 
General (AG) or any other law officer in the AG’s office.”  In pursuance 
of these directions, CVC and DoPT have  issued instruction to expedite 
grant of sanctions in respect of  public servants removable by the 
President of India.      
Committee’s further observation 
11.2. The Committee notes that no action has been taken regarding the 
recommendation of the Committee re garding "deemed sanction." The 
Committee feels that such a provision would ensure speedy disposal of 
cases. 
…………….. 