 1 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
ON 
 
 
 
THE HINDU SUCCESSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 13th May, 2005) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON  13th May, 2005) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MAY, 2005/ VAISAKHA, 1926 (SAKA) 
7 


 2 
 
CS (P & L)-13 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, 
LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
ON 
 
 
THE HINDU SUCCESSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 13th May, 2005) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 13th May, 2005) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MAY, 2005/ VAISAKHA, 1926 (SAKA)


 3 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)    
                                                                             
2. INTRODUCTION   (ii)- (iii)        
  
3. REPORT 1-40   
  
                                                                                                                                                            
4. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE    
 
5. A
NNEXURES: 
 
A. The Hindu Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2004 (as 
introduced in Lok Sabha);                                                
        
B. Views/suggestions of indi viduals/organisations on the 
Hindu Succession (Amendment) B ill, 2004 and comments of 
Government thereon;  
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (2004-05) 
 
   1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan    Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
3. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte 
4. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
5. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
6. Dr. P.C. Alexander 
7. Shri Tariq Anwar 
8. Shri Raashid Alvi 
9. Vacant 
10. Vacant 
 
 LOK SABHA 
11. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq 
12. Smt. Bhavani Rajenthiran 
13. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
14. Justice (Retd.) N.Y. Hanumanthappa 
15. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
16. Smt. Kiran Maheshwari 
17. Shri Dahyabhai V. Patel 
18. Shri Brajesh Pathak 
19. Shri Harin Pathak 
20. Shri V. Radhakrishnan 
21. Shri Vishwendra Singh 
22. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki 
23. Prof. Vijaya Kumar Malhotra 
24. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
25. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
26. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
27. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
28. Shri Ramchandra Paswan 
29. Vacant 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary 
Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
(i)

 5 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
I, The Chairman of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Seventh Report on 
the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2004∗. 
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to  the Department Re lated Parliamentary 
Standing Committees, the Chai rman, Rajya Sabha referred ∗∗ the Hindu Succession 
(Amendment) Bill, 2004 as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 20 th December, 2004 for 
examination and report. 
3. The Committee considered the Bill  in five sittings held on 3 rd & 16 th February, 
19th & 27th April and 10th May, 2005. 
4. The Committee heard the oral evidence of  the Secretary, Legislative Department, 
Ministry of Law and Justice in its sitting held on 3rd February 2005. 
5. The Committee heard the views of the prominent Non-governmental 
Organisations (NGOs) and eminent experts on the Bill in its sittings held on 16 th 
February and 19th April, 2005. 
6.  In its sitting held on 27 th April, 2005 the Committee took up clause-by clause 
consideration of the Bill. 
7. In its sitting held on 10 th May, 2005 the Committee considered the draft Report on 
the Bill and adopted the same. 
8. In the said sitting, the Committee also deci ded that the evidence tendered before it 
may be laid on the table of both the Houses of Parliament. 
9. In the course of its de liberations, the Committee has made use of the background 
note on the Bill received from the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department); 
Hindu Succession Act, 1956; 174 th Report of the Law Commission of India on ‘Property 
                                                 
∗ Published in the Gazette of India (Extraordinary) Part-II, Section 2, dated the 20 th December, 2004.  
∗∗ Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II. (No 41884) dated the 27 th December, 2004. 
 

 6 
 
Rights of Women : Proposed Reforms under th e Hindu Law’; suggestions received from 
organizations/experts; comments of the Ministry on the views received from 
organizations/experts. 
 
10. For facility of reference and convenien ce, observations and recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
11. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the 
contributions made by experts/organizati ons who deposed before the Committee and 
submitted their valuable suggestions on the Bill. 
 
E.M. SUDARSANA NATCHIAPPAN 
Chairman 
NEW DELHI:
 Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
May 10 , 2005  Law and Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 7 
 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY 
1.0 The Constitution of India enshrines th e principle of gender equality in its 
Preamble and Parts III, IV and IVA pe rtaining to Fundamental Rights, 
Fundamental Duties and Directive Princi ples respectively. The Constitution not 
only grants equality to women, but also em powers the State to adopt measures of 
positive discrimination in favour of wome n. However, there ex ists a wide gap 
between the goals enunciated in the Cons titution and the ground reality in respect 
of the position of women in the socio-economic fabric of India.  
1.1. Gender disparity manifests itself in various forms, especially with regard to 
effective rights in property. To quote from Mulla: Principles of Hindu Law1: 
 "The law of inheritance was of late r growth and, in general, applied 
only to property held in absolute seve ralty as distinguished from property 
held by the joint family . The fundamental conception of the Hindu joint 
family is a common male ancestor with  his lineal descendants in the male 
line. Even under early Hindu law, the rights of sons were recognised and 
they acquired equal interest with the father in the ancestral property as 
coparceners." (page 277). 
1.2. The 174 th Report of the Law Commission of India on 'Property Rights of 
Women: Proposed reforms under the Hindu Law', states that the discrimination 
against women is particularly in  relation to laws governing the 
inheritance/succession of property amongst the members of a joint Hindu family.  
Historical Overview  
1.3. The disparity in the property rights on the basis of gender is deep rooted 
and can be traced back to the ancient times. Traditiona l Hindu inheritance laws 
                                                 
1 Mulla : Principles of Hindu Law, Eighteenth Edition, by Satyajeet A Desai (Vol II); Butterworths, India, 
New Delhi 2001. 

 8 
 
evolved from the ancient texts of Dharmashastras and the various commentaries 
and legal treatises on them. In particular, the Mitakshara and the Dayabhaga legal 
doctrines, dated around the twelfth centur y AD govern the inheritance practices 
among the Hindus. Dayabhaga prevails in eastern India comprising West Bengal 
and the adjoining areas, wh ereas in most of northern and parts of western India 
Mitakshara law is prevalent. In other parts of western India, the Mayukha school 
is prevalent while in parts of southern India, the Marumakkatayam, Aliyasantana 
and Nambudri systems prevail.  
1.4. Amongst Hindus, broad distincti on can be made between two types of 
property, i.e., ancestral/joint family property and separate/self acquired property. 
Joint family property is generally inherite d from the male line of descent and also 
consists of property that is jointly acquir ed or is acquired separately but merged 
into the joint property. The Law Commission Report (ibid) states as below: 
 "Under the Mitakshara law, on birth, the son acquires a right and 
interest in the family pr operty. According to this school, a son, grandson 
and a great grandson constitute a class of  coparceners, based on birth in the 
family. No female is a memb er of the coparcenary in Mitakshara law. 
Under the Mitakshara system, joint family property devolves by 
survivorship within the coparcenary. This means that with every birth or 
death of a male in the family, the share of every other surviving male either 
gets diminished or enlarged (para 1.3.2; page 2). 
 The Mitakshara law also recognises inheritance by succession but 
only to the property separately owned by an individual male or female. 
Females are included as heirs to  this kind of property by Mitakshara law 
(para 1.3.3; page 2).. 
Under the Dayabhaga law, succession rather than survivorship is the 
rule. Neither sons nor daughters beco me coparceners at birth nor do they 
have rights in the family property durin g their father's lifetime. However, 

 9 
 
on his death, they inherit as tenant s-in-common. Daughters also get equal 
share along with their brothers. Sin ce this ownership arises only on the 
extinction of the father's ownership, none of them can compel the father to 
partition the property in his lifetime and th e latter is free to give or sell the 
property without their consent. As females could be coparceners, they could 
also act as Kartas and manage the property on behalf of the other members 
in the Dayabhaga school (para 1.3.4; page 2)." 
1.5. In the face of such multiplicity of succession laws diverse in their nature, 
property laws continued to be complex and discriminatory against women. The 
social reform movement during the pre- independence period raised the issue of 
gender discrimination and a number of ameliorative steps were initiated. The 
principal reform that was called for, and one which became a pressing necessity in 
view of changed social and economic conditions, was that in succession there 
should be equitable distribution betwee n male and female heirs and the Hindu 
women's limited estate shou ld be enlarged in to full ownership. As per the Law 
Commission Report ( ibid), the earliest legislation bringing females into the 
scheme of inheritance is the Hindu Law of Inheritanc e Act, 1929. Subsequently, 
the Hindu Women's Right to Property Act, 1937 brought significant changes in the 
law of partition, alienation of property, inheritance a nd adoption. Although better 
rights were given to women in respect of property, it was found to be incoherent 
and defective in many respects and gave ri se to a number of anomalies. In 1941, 
the Hindu Law Committee was set up under th e Chairmanship of Shri B.N. Rau, 
which strongly recommended that a comple te code of Hindu law be prepared, 
covering inheritance, marriage and other aspects. The Hindu Code Bill as framed 
by the Committee was introduced in the Le gislative Assembly in April 1947. 
However, in the face of stiff resistance from various orthodox sections of the 
society, the Bill was shelved in 1951. The then Prime Mini ster of India, expressed 
his unequivocal commitment to carry ou t reforms to remove disparities and 

 10 
 
disabilities suffered by Hin du women. Finally, after much effort, the Hindu 
Succession Act, 1956 was enacte d and came into force on 17 th June, 1956. 
According to Mulla (ibid):  
 "Fragmentary legislation in the form of number of uncoordinated 
rules did not prove a satisfactory remedy.......A uniform and comprehensive 
system of inheritance recognising e quable distribution between male and 
female heirs and contained in a series  of coherent propositions carefully 
considered and authoritatively stat ed was, therefore, a long felt 
desideratum." (page 278-279).  
Constitutional provisions guaranteeing gender equality 
1.6. The framers of the Indian Constitutio n took note of the adverse condition of 
women in society and a number of provisi ons and safeguards were included in the 
Constitution to ward off gend er inequality. In this cont ext, Articles 14, 15(2), (3) 
and 16 of the Constitution can be mentioned. These provisions are part of the 
Fundamental Rights guaranteed  by the Constitution. Part IV containing Directive 
Principles of State Policy further endorse s the principle of gender equality which 
the State has to follow in matters of gov ernance. Similarly, Part IVA of the 
Constitution enshrining the Fundamental Duties states that: 
"It shall be the duty of every citizen of India -  
(e) .........; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women;...." 
The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 
1.7. The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (HSA) amends and codifies the law 
relating to intestate succession among Hindus and aims to lay down a uniform law 
of succession whereby attempt has been ma de to ensure equality of inheritance 
rights between sons and daughters. It app lies to all Hindus including Buddhists, 
Jains and Sikhs. It lays down a uniform and comprehensive system of inheritance 
and applies to those governed by the Mitakshara and the Dayabahga Schools as 

 11 
 
well as the various schools existing in South India such as Murumakkattayam, 
Aliyasantans, Nambudri, etc. The Hindu Succession  Act reformed the Hindu 
personal law and gave woman greater prope rty rights, allowing her full ownership 
rights instead of limited rights in prop erty. The daughters were also granted 
property rights in their father's estate. In the matter of succession to the property of 
a Hindu male dying intestate, the Act lays down a set of general rules in sections 8 
to 13. Sections 15 and 16  of the Act contain separate general rules affecting 
succession to the property of a female intestate. 
Succession to property of a male intestate 
1.8. As per succession to property of a ma le intestate laid do wn by the Act, the 
two systems of inheritance to the separate or self-acquired property, which hitherto 
prevailed under Mitakshara and Dayabhaga Schools, are abolished and a uniform 
system came into operation as propounded  in section 8 of the Act. The three 
classes of heirs recognised by Mitakshara, i.e., Gotraja Sapindas, Samanodakas 
and Bandhus  and the three classes of heirs recognised by Dayabhaga, i.e., 
Sapindas, Sakulyas and Bandhus cease to exist in case of devolution taking place 
after the coming into force of the Act. Th e heirs are divided, instead, into four 
classes or categories. These are: 
(i) heirs in Class I of the Schedule; 
(ii) heirs in Class II of the Schedule; 
(iii) agnates; and 
(iv) cognates 
1.9. The Schedule to the Act provides th e following twelve relations as Class I 
heirs: 
(i) son;  
(ii) daughter;  

 12 
 
(iii) widow;  
(iv) mother;  
(v) son of a pre-deceased son;  
(vi) daughter of a pre-deceased son;  
(vii) son of a pre-deceased daughter;  
(viii) daughter of a pre-deceased daughter;  
(ix) widow of a pre-deceased son;  
(x) son of a pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased son;  
(xi) daughter of a pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased son; and  
(xii) widow of a pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased son. 
1.10. Of these, mother, widow, son a nd daughter are primary heirs. In the 
absence of Class I heirs, the property de volves on Class II heirs and in their 
absence first on agnates and then on cognates.  
Critique of Hindu Succession Act from a gender perspective 
1.11. Some sections of the Act came under criticism evoki ng controversy as 
being favourable to continue inequality on the basis of gender. One such provision 
has been the retention of the Mitakshara coparcenary with only males as 
coparceners. As per the Law Commissi on Report, copar cenary constitutes a 
narrower body of persons with in a joint family and consis ts of father, son, son's 
son and son's son's son. Th us ancestral property conti nues to be governed by a 
wholly patrilineal regime, wherein property descends only through the male line as 
only the male members of a joint Hindu fa mily have an interest by birth in the 
coparcenary property. Coparcenary property, in contradistinction with the absolute 
or separate property of an individua l coparcener, devolv e upon surviving 
coparceners in the family, according to the rule of de volution by survivorship. 

 13 
 
Since a woman could not be a coparcener, she was not entitled to a share in the 
ancestral property by birth.  
1.12. However, attempt was made to partia lly remove this disparity. Section 6 of 
the Act, although it does not interfere with the special rights of those who are 
members of a Mitakshara coparcenary, recognises, without abolishing joint family 
property, the right upon the death of a c oparcener, of certain of his preferential 
heirs to claim an interest in the property  that would have been allotted to such 
coparcener if a partition of the joint fa mily property had in  fact taken place 
immediately before his deat h ('notional' partition). To elaborate this further, the 
share of the deceased male in  the joint property and th e shares of his heirs are 
ascertained under th e assumption of a 'notional' partition ( i.e., as if the partition 
had taken place just prior to his death) . Thus, section 6 of the Act, while 
recognising the rule of de volution by survivorship among the members of the 
coparcenary, makes an exception to the ru le in the proviso.  According to the 
proviso, if the deceased has left him surviving a female relative specified in Class 
I of Schedule I, or a male relative specif ied in that Class who claims through such 
female relative, the intere st of the d eceased in the Mitakshara coparcenary 
property shall devolve by te stamentary or intestate su ccession under this Act as 
mentioned above, and not by survivorship.  
1.13. Notwithstanding these facts, the direct  interest in the coparcenary held by 
male members by virtue of birth remains unaffected. It affects only the interest 
they hold in th e share of the deceased. A son's sh are in the property in case the 
father dies intestate would be in addition to the share he has on birth. A man has 
full testamentary power over all his pr operty, including his interest in the 
coparcenary. 
1.14. Thus, non inclusion of  women as coparceners in the joint family property 
under the Mitakshara system as reflected in sec tion 6 of the Hindu Succession 
Act, 1956 relating to devolution of interest in coparcenary property has been under 

 14 
 
criticism for being violative of equal rights of women guaranteed under the 
Constitution in relation to prop erty rights. This meant that females cannot inherit 
ancestral property as males do. If a joint family gets divided, each male coparcener 
takes his share and females get nothing. On ly when one of the coparceners dies, a 
female gets a share of his interest as an heir to the deceased.  
1.15. It has been further obse rved that as per the proviso  to Section 6 of the Act, 
the interest of the de ceased male in the Mitakshara coparcenary devolve by 
intestate succession firstly upon the heirs specified in Class I of Schedule I. As 
mentioned above, under this Schedule, th ere are only four primary heirs, namely, 
son, daughter, widow and mother. For th e remaining eight, the principle of 
representation goes up to two degrees in th e male line of descent as mentioned in 
para 6 (v), (vi), (x) and (xi ). But in the female line of descent, it goes only upto 
one degree as mentioned in para 6 (vii) and (viii). Thus, the son's son's son and the 
son's son's daughter get a share but a da ughter's daughter's son and daughter's 
daughter's daughter do not get anything.  
1.16. Further, as per section 23 of the Ac t, married daughter has been denied the 
right to residence in the parental home unless widowed, deserted or separated from 
her husband and female heir has been dise ntitled to ask for partition in respect of 
dwelling house wholly occupied by memb ers of the joint fa mily until the male 
heirs choose to divide thei r respective shares therein. These provisions have been 
identified as major sources of disabilities thrust by law on women. 
1.17. Another source of controversy was th e establishment of the right to will 
away property. A man has full testamentary  power over all his property, including 
his interest in the coprcenary. As per the Law Commission Report,  
 ".....The Act gave  a weapon to a man to deprive a woman of the 
rights she earlier had under certain schools of Hindu law." 

 15 
 
The legal right of Hi ndus to bequeath property by way of will was conferred by 
the Indian Succession Act, 1925.  
State Amendment Acts 
1.18. To overcome these lacunae and make  the law gender neutral, a number of 
State Amendments as mentioned below ha ve been made in the Act effecting 
changes in the law relating to Mitakshara coparcenary declaring the daughter to be 
a coparcener in a Joint Hindu family: 
(i) The Hindu Succession (Andhra Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1986; 
(ii) The Hindu Succession (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 1990; 
(iii) The Hindu Succession (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1994; and 
(iv) The Hindu Succession (Maharashtra Amendment) Act, 1986. 
1.19. On the other hand, w ith the enactment of the Ke rala Joint Hindu Family 
System (Abolition) Act, 1975, the State of Kerala has totally abolished the right to 
property by birth of males and put an en d to the Joint Hindu family system. The 
consequence of the derecognition of the members of the fam ily, irrespective of 
their sex, who are governed by the Mitakshara law, is that th ey have become 
tenants-in-common of the joint family property and became full owners of their 
share. 
Examination by the Law Commission of India 
1.20. As per the Background Note of the Ministry, the Law Commission of India 
made a suo motu study of sections 6 and 23 of  the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 
and submitted its 174 th Report to the Union Government in May, 2000. In July 
2001, the National Commission for Women also made certain recommendations 
suggesting amendments to th e aforesaid Act, which had been referred to the Law 
Commission of India for study and report. 

 16 
 
1.21. The Law Commission of India afte r holding wide ranging consultations 
gave its recommendations in its 174 th Report (ibid) relating to amendments to the 
Hindu Succession Act, 1956 in the form of a draft Bill titled the Hindu Succession 
(Amendment) Bill, 2000. The Central Go vernment after consulting the State 
Governments and other concerned Ministri es/Departments of the Government of 
India decided to accept the recommendations  of the Law Commission of India. 
Accordingly, the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2004 (Annexure-A) has 
been introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 20th of December, 2004.  
Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Bill, 
2004 
1.22. The Statement of Objects and Reasons  of the aforesaid Bill is as follows: 
 "The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 has amended and codified the law 
relating to intestate succession am ong Hindus. The Act brought about 
changes in the law of succession among Hindus and gave rights which were 
till then unknown in rela tion to women's propert y. However, it does not 
interfere with the special rights of  those who are members of Hindu 
Mitakshara coparcenary except to provid e rules for devolution of the 
interest of a deceased male in certai n cases. The Act lays down a uniform 
and comprehensive system of inheritance and applies, inter alia, to persons 
governed by the Mitakshara and Dayabhaga schools and also to those 
governed previously by the Murumakkattayam, Aliyasantana and 
Nambudri laws. The Act applies to every person who is a Hindu by religion 
in any of its forms or developments including a Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a 
follower of the Brahmo, Prarthana or Arya Samaj; or to any person who is 
Buddhist, Jain or Sikh by religion; or to any other person who is not a 
Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by relig ion. In the case of a testamentary 
disposition, this Act does not apply an d the interest of the deceased is 
governed by the Indian Succession Act, 1925. 

 17 
 
 Section 6 of the Act deals with devolution of interest of a male 
Hindu in coparcenary property and re cognises the rule of devolution by 
survivorship among the members of th e coparcenary. The retention of the 
Mitakshara coparcenary property without including the females in it means 
that the females cannot inherit in  ancestral property as their male 
counterparts do. The law by excludi ng the daughter from participating in 
the coparcenary ownership not only contributes to her discrimination on the 
ground of gender but also has le d to opression and negation of her 
fundamental right of equality guara nteed by the Constitution. Having 
regard to the need to tender social ju stice to women, the States of Andhra 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Maharashtra have made necessary 
changes in the law giving equa l right to daughters in Hindu Mitakshara 
coparcenary property. The Kerala Legi slature has enacted the Kerala Joint 
Hindu Family System (Abolition) Act, 1975. 
 It is proposed to remove the disc rimination as contained in section 6 
of the Hindu Succession Ac t, 1956 by giving equal rights to daughters in 
the Hindu Mitakshara coparcenary property as the sons have. Section 23 of 
the Act disentitles a female heir to as k for partition in respect of a dwelling 
house wholly occupied by a joint fa mily until the male heirs choose to 
divide their respective shares therein. It is also proposed to omit the said 
section so as to remove the disability  on female heirs contained in that 
section. 
 The above proposals are based on the recommendations of the Law 
Commission of India as contained in its 174th Report on "Property Rights of 
Women: Proposed Reform under the Hindu Law". 
1.23. The Bill was referred to the Depart ment Related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, La w and Justice on the 27 th 
December 2004 for examination and report. 

 18 
 
CHAPTER II 
CLAUSE-WISE CONSIDERATION OF THE BILL 
2.0 The Hindu Succession (Amendment) B ill, 2004 seeks to make two major 
amendments in the Hindu Succession Act, 1956. First, it is proposed to remove the 
gender discrimination in section 6 of the or iginal Act. Second, it proposes to omit 
section 23 of the original Act, which disentitles a female heir to ask for partition in 
respect of a dwelling house, wholly occupied by a joint family, until the male heirs 
choose to divide their respective shares therein.  
2.1 The Committee undertook clause-by-clau se consideration of the Bill in the 
presence of the Secretary, Legislative De partment; the Secretary, Department of 
Legal Affairs and the representatives from these respective Departments of 
Ministry of Law and Justice. 
Clause 2 
2.2. This clause seeks to substitute sec tion 6 of the Hindu Su ccession Act, 1956 
with a new section. The table below repr oduces the aforesaid section of the Act, 
alongwith the amendments as introduced by the Bill: 
 
The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 
 
The Hindu Succession (Amendment) Bill, 
2004 
 
6. Devolution of interest in 
coparcenary property. - When a 
male Hindu dies after the 
commencement of this Act, having 
at the time of his death an interest 
in a Mitakshara coparcenary 
property, his interest in the property 
shall devolve by survivorship upon 
the surviving members of the 
coparcenary and not in accordance 
with this Act: 
Provided that, if the deceased had 
left him surviving a female relative 
specified in class I of the Schedule 
 
2. For section 6 of the Hindu Succession Act, 
1956 (hereinafter referred  to as the principal 
Act), the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
‘6. (1) On and from the commencement of the 
Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2004, in a 
joint Hindu family governed by the Mitakshara 
law, the daughter of a coparcener shall,- 
(a) also by birth become a coparcener in her 
own right; the same manner as the son here; 
(b) have the same rights in the coparcenary 
property as she would have had if she had been 
a son; 
(c) be subject to the same liabilities and 

 19 
 
or a male relative specified in that 
class who claims through such 
female relative, the interest of the 
deceased in the Mitakshara 
coparcenary propert y shall devolve 
by testamentary or intestate 
succession, as the case may be and 
not by survivorship. 
Explanation 1. – For the purpose of 
this section, the interest of a Hindu 
Mitakshara coparcener shall be 
deemed to be the share in the 
property that would have been 
allotted to him if a partition of the 
property had taken place 
immediately before his death, 
irrespective of whether he was 
entitled to claim partition or not. 
Explanation 2. – Nothing contained 
in the proviso to this section shall 
be construed as enabling a person 
who has separated himself from the 
coparcenary before the death of the 
deceased or any of his heirs to 
claim on intestacy a share in the 
interest referred to therein.  
disabilities in respect of the said coparcenary 
property as that of a son, 
and any reference to a Hindu Mitakshara 
coparcener shall be deemed to include a 
reference to a daughter: 
Provided that nothing c ontained in this sub-
section shall apply to a daughter married before 
the commencement of the Hindu Succession 
(Amendment) Act, 2004. 
(2) Any property to which a female Hindu 
becomes entitled by virtue of sub-section (1) 
shall be held by her w ith the incidents of 
coparcenary ownership and shall be regarded, 
notwithstanding anything c ontained in this Act 
or any other law for the time being in force in, 
as property capable of being disposed of by her 
by will or other testamentary disposition. 
(3) Where a Hindu dies after the 
commencement of the Hindu Succession 
(Amendment) Act, 2004, his interest in the 
property of a Joint Hindu family governed by 
the Mitakshara law, shall devolve by 
testamentary or intestate succession, as the case 
may be, under this Act and not by survivorship, 
and the coparcenary property shall be deemed 
to have been divided as if a partition had taken 
place and,- 
(a) the daughter is allotted the same share as is 
allotted to a son; 
(b) the share of the pre-deceased son or a pre-
deceased daughter, as they would have got had 
they been alive at the ti me of partition, shall be 
allotted to the surviving child of such pre-
deceased son or of such pre-deceased daughter; 
and 
(c) the share of the pre-deceased child of a pre-
deceased son or of a pr e-deceased daughter, as 
such child would have got  had he or she been 
alive at the time of the partition, shall be 
allotted to the child of such pre-deceased child 
of the pre-deceased son or a pre-deceased 
daughter, as the case may be. 
Explanation.- For the purpose of this sub-
section, the interest of a Hindu Mitakshara 
coparcener shall be deemed to be the share in 
the property that would have been allotted to 

 20 
 
him if a partition of the property had taken 
place immediately before his death, irrespective 
of whether he was entitled to claim partition or 
not. 
(4) After the commencement of the Hindu 
Succession (Amendment) Act, 2004, no court 
shall recognize any right to proceed against a 
son, grandson or great grandson for the 
recovery of any debt due from his father, 
grandfather or great gr andfather on the ground 
of the pious obligation under the Hindu law, of 
such son, grandson or great-grandson to 
discharge any such debt; 
Provided that in case of any debt contracted 
before the commencement of the Hindu 
Succession (Amendment ) Act, 2004, nothing 
contained in this sub-section shall affect- 
(a) the right of any creditor to proceed against 
the son, grandson or great-grandson, as the case 
may be; or 
(b) any alienation made in respect of or in 
satisfaction of, any such debt, and any such 
right or alienation shall be enforceable under 
the rule of pious obligat ion in the same manner 
and to the same extent as it would have been 
enforceable as if the Hindu Succession 
(Amendment) Act, 2004 had not been enacted. 
Expalnation.- For the purposes of clause (a), the 
expression “son”, “grandson” or “great-
grandson” shall be deemed to refer to the son, 
grandson or great-grandson, as the case may be, 
who was born or adopted prior to the 
commencement of the Hindu Succession 
(Amendment) Act, 2004. 
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall apply 
to a partition, which has been effected before 
the commencement of the Hindu Succession 
(Amendment) Act, 2004.’  
 
 
Amended section 6(1) as proposed by the Bill 
2.3. This section seeks to make the daught er a coparcener by birth in a joint 
Hindu family governed by the Mitakshara law, subject to the same liabilities in 
respect of the said coparcenary property as that of a son. 

 21 
 
2.4. Proviso to section 6(1) states that nothing contained in this sub-section, i.e., 
making daughter coparcener in the Mitakshara Hindu joint family  property, shall 
apply to a daughter married before commencement of th e Hindu Succession 
(Amendment) Act, 2004. As stated in the Background Note furnished by the 
Legislative Department, it is proposed to gi ve benefit of the provision of this Bill 
to married daughters, only after the co mmencement of the proposed amending 
legislation. 
Suggestions of the Law Commission 
2.5. The States of Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra and Karnataka 
have amended the provisions of th e HSA effecting changes in the Mitakshara 
coparcenary of the Hindu undivided family, by making the daughter a coparcener, 
whereas the State of Kerala has totally ab olished the right by birth and put an end 
to the Joint Hindu Family system. The Law Commission, in its 174th Report, 2000, 
stated that it was first inc lined to recommend ad option of the Kerala model in its 
entirety, which appeared to be fair to women. But, on further examination, it 
became clear that if the join t Hindu family is abolishe d and there are only male 
coparceners, then only th ey would hold as tenants in common and women would 
not get anything more than what they are already entitle d to by inheritance under 
section 6 of the HSA. So, the Commission wa s of the view that it would be better 
to first make daughters coparceners like s ons so that they are entitled to and get 
their share(s) on partition or on the d eath of the male coparcener and hold 
thereafter as tenants in common. 
2.6. On the issue of distinction be tween already married and unmarried 
daughters, the Law Commission Report stated as below: 
“The Commission wanted to do aw ay with the dis tinction between 
married and unmarried daughters, but, af ter a great deal of deliberation, it 
was decided that it should be retained  as a married daughter has already 
received gifts at the time of marriage which, though not commensurate with 
the son’s share, is often substantial. Keeping this in mind, the distinction 

 22 
 
between daughters already married be fore the commencement of the Act, 
and those married thereafter, appears to be reasonable and further would 
prevent heart burning and tension in th e family. A daughter who is married 
after the commencement of the Act will have already become a coparcener 
and entitled to her share in the ancestr al property. So, she may not receive 
any substantial family gifts at the time of her marriage. Hopefully, this will 
result in the death of the evil of dowry system.” 
 
Views/opinion submitted before the Committee  
2.7. Divergent views emerged on the proposed amendment of the Hindu 
Succession Act. Various memoranda were received, reflecting these views. While 
deposing before the Committee, one of th e witnesses was of th e opinion that the 
proposed Bill would enhance the share of daughters by making them coparceners, 
on the same basis as sons in the Mitakshara coparcenary. But in doing so, it will 
alter the share of other Class I female heirs of the deceased, such as the deceased’s 
mother and widow. In States where the wife  is not entitled to a share on partition, 
making daughters coparceners will not only  reduce the widow’s share to less than 
that under the unamended HS A, it will reduce it to less than a daughter’s share. 
This is because the deceased man’s ‘notio nal’ share in the coparcenary, in which 
the widow gets a part, will decline. Thus, while the amendment will benefit 
daughters, it will disadvantage the widows. The deceased’s mother’s share will be 
affected similarly, the extent depending on whether or not the state entitles her to a 
share on partition in the Mitakshara joint family property. In this context, the Law 
Commission Report, while commenting on the four Hindu Succession (State 
Amendment) Acts i.e., Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,  Karnataka and Maharashtra, 
states that these Acts have conferre d equal coparcenary rights on sons and 
daughters, thus preserving the right by birth and extendi ng it to daughters also in 
the Mitakshara Coparcenary. This has the indire ct effect of reducing the widow’s 

 23 
 
successional share because if the number of coparceners increases the interest of 
the husband will decrease. 
2.8. Further, it was argued by some of th e witnesses who appeared before the 
Committee, that the Mitakshara coparcenary is an arch aic institution – a leftover 
of a bygone era. Its retention, as propo sed in the Bill, will leave many inequalities 
and anomalies, especially on the gr ound of gender, and disadvantage some 
categories of women. Therefore, it was opined that the Mitakshara coparcenary 
system should be abolished altogether. That would bri ng about uniformity across 
all categories of property and all categories of Class I female heirs.  
2.9. Commenting on the proviso to this section,  one of the experts stated that 
while these rights will apply to all daughte rs in the long r un, at the time of 
amendment, it is discriminatory toward s daughters who are already married. In 
fact, the married daughters' share (like that of the widow in Tamil Nadu, Andhra 
Pradesh and Karnataka) will d ecline. There appears no pe rsuasive justification for 
the blanket exclusion of married daughter. Even if the parents have given her gifts 
in marriage, these are seldom equivalent in  value to inheritance shares and rarely 
include immovable property. On the same lines, it was argued by some others that 
this provision was unjust, not only because many women may not have received a 
share in the property at the time of marriage, but also because the amount that may 
have been received or  expenditure incurred at the tim e of marriage, can certainly 
not be equated to equal rights in property. 
2.10. On the other hand, opinion emerged that creating any right  in favour of a 
married daughter in the Hi ndu Undivided Family proper ty would disturb peace in 
the family and bring in litig ation from a married daughte r, as she would be under 
pressure from her in-laws’ to get her share from the parental property by means of 
partition. 
Comments of the Ministry 
2.11. Commenting on this sub-section,  the Ministry stated as below: 

 24 
 
“The Government considers that abolition of the Hindu Mitakshara 
Coparcenary system will affect the se ntiments and religious feelings of 
cross sections of the Hindu soci ety and may adversely affect the 
preservation and sanctity of the age ol d system. Hence, the suggestion is 
not acceptable to the Government.”    
2.12. In respect of proviso to this sectio n, the Ministry responded that any change 
in the existing law may elicit some critici sm and may be unsuitable to certain 
people. However, a general policy perspective to bring in equal rights to women in 
coparcenary property, cannot be avoided. Further, when a Bill changing a system 
has to be brought in, it has to demarcate the difference by a cut off date. It should 
be in the larger interest, causing mini mum inequality. The op inion furnished by 
the Ministry in this regard is reproduced below: 
“In so far as extending the ame ndments to married  women, it is 
worthwhile to mention here that Law Commission of India, in its 174 th 
Report, has adequately considered th e matter ……. married daughters have 
already received substantial gifts from the parents and that the family has 
already spent considerable money on marriage expenses,…… The proposal 
to apply the law to unmarried daught ers is just and reasonable and will 
cause minimum disturban ce to the settled transactions and less family 
disputes and unrest. Hence, the Gove rnment does not consider that any 
change in the Bill is called for.”  
 
Recommendations of the Committee 
2.13. The Committee suggests that in the amended sectio n 6, sub section (1), 
clause(a), the words 'also' and 'here' may be deleted. 
2.14. In section 6, sub sectio n (1), clause (c), the words ' and disabilities' may 
be deleted and the words 'of a coparcener'  be inserted after the word 
'daughter' in line 9, to make the meaning more clear. 

 25 
 
2.15. The Committee takes no te of the fact that a distinction has been made 
between married and unmarried daughters while granting them the status of 
coparceners in the Mitakshara joint family system. Da ughters married before 
commencement of the Hindu Succession  (Amendment) Act, 2004 will not get 
the benefit of this amendment. Dive rgent views were expressed regarding 
inclusion of daughters married before commencement of the aforesaid Act, 
into the new scheme of things. It wa s submitted before the Committee that in 
the long run these rights will apply to  all daughters, though they are at 
present excluded, giving rise to dissati sfaction among a section of the general 
public.  
In view of the foregoing, the Commi ttee recommends that Government 
should work out some means to compen sate the already married daughters, 
who are not likely to get the status of coparceners in the Mitakshara joint 
family property. In the absence of su ch a measure, a whole generation of 
women, contemporary to th e passage of this import ant enactment, will lose 
out their property rights, while their fello w sisters, just by the virtue of being 
unmarried, will get the full benefit. 
The Committee, in this context, r ecommends that for those undivided 
Hindu joint family governed by the Mitakshara system, where partition has 
not taken place at the time of commen cement of the Act, the already married 
daughters should be given the status of coparceners. This way, a large section 
of already married women could be br ought under the purv iew of the Bill, 
without the fear of increased litigation.  
 
General observations of the Committee  
2.16. The Committee is of the view th at Hindu Succession (Amendment) Bill, 
2004 is a step in the righ t direction. Laws reflect th e face of society and its 
evolution over the time. To respond to the needs of a dynamic social system, 
laws have to be changed and amended, at regular intervals. In this context, 

 26 
 
the Committee feels that the aforesaid Bill, brought forth after nearly fifty 
years of enactment of the Hindu Succ ession Act, 1956, has a historical 
relevance and can go a long way in estab lishing gender parity in the property 
laws, governing the Hindu society. 
 At the same time, the Committee take s note of the fact that the joint 
family system is a unique feature of the Indian society. Though not 
impervious to various inadequacies a nd anomalies, the jo int family system 
has been in existence since time imme morial and is continuing, with many 
changes in its structure and ideology, to keep pace with the changing needs of 
the time. While noting the concern re garding discrimination against women 
in the patrilineal, patriarchal joint family set up, the Committee comprehends 
that strong public sentiment is atta ched with the join t family system. 
Moreover, it is beyond th e scope of the present B ill to consider any step 
regarding abolition of the joint family system in the Hindu households. As 
regards the demand to abolish the Mitakshara joint family system, the 
Government may initiate a detailed study,  to examine the rel evance of such a 
system in the present context and take steps accordingly. 
 As far as the basic objective of the Bill to remove gender 
discriminatory practices in the proper ty laws of the Hindus, the Committee 
welcomes the amendment in section 6 of the Bill, whereby daughters have 
been given the status of coparceners in the Mitakshara joint family system. 
However, the Committee feel s that the position of ot her Class I female heirs 
should not suffer as a result of this  move. In this context, the Committee 
recommends that Government should examine this concern and make 
suitable provisions to ensure that no in justice is done to the other female 
heirs, especially the widows.  
Amended Section 6(2) as proposed by the Bill 
2.17. This part of the Bill seeks to give  full testamentary power to a Hindu 
female in respect of her coparcenary ownership in the joint family property. 

 27 
 
Recommendation of the Committee 
2.18. The Committee suggests  that the words ' will or other ' in line 14 of the 
Bill may be deleted. Testamentary disposition itself means will. Therefore, the 
use of both the words, which are synonymous, are not called for. 
 
Amended Section 6(3) as proposed by the Bill 
2.19. This part seeks to lay down th at after commencement of the proposed 
legislation, if a male Hindu dies, his intere st (‘notional’ share) in the property of a 
joint Hindu family governed by the Mitakshara law shall devolve by testamentary 
or intestate succession, as the case may be, as per the provisions of the Hindu 
Succession Act, 1956 and not by survivorship.  
2.20. Section 8 of the Hi ndu Succession Act, 1956 lays  down general rules of 
succession in case of a Hindu male dying intestate, whereby his interest would 
devolve firstly to the relativ es specified in Class I of the Schedule, and in the 
absence of Class I heirs to the Class II heirs,  thereafter to the agnates and lastly to 
the cognates. Class I heirs include twelve  categories of relatives, of whom there 
are only four primary heirs, namely, mother, widow, son and daughter. The 
remaining eight represent one or the othe r person who would have been a primary 
heir, if he or she had not died before enactment of the Bill. Of these, the son's son's 
sons and son's son's daughters have been included as Class I heirs, but a daughter's 
daughter's sons and daughter's  daughter's daughters have  been placed as Class II 
heirs. This aspect of the Hindu Successi on Act has been criticiz ed as a source of 
infirmity and gender discrimination.  
  
Views submitted before the Committee 
2.21. It was submitted before the Committee  that the proposed  Bill leaves this 
provision untouched and does not seek to amend this sub-section, which violates 
the principle of gender justice and equality. In this context, one of the memoranda 
submitted to the Committee stated as below: 

 28 
 
"There are inequalities in the Hind u Succession Act in generational 
depth, to which heirs of predecease d sons and predecease d daughters have 
claims in a man's 'notional' share. The heirs of the predeceased son are 
traced to two generations after him, and include both children and widows; 
those of the predeceased daughter go to only one generation after her, and 
exclude the husband. The 2004 Bill leaves this inequality intact." 
2.22. Another submission on the same  l i n e s  w a s  a l s o  m a d e  b e f o r e  t h e  
Committee. To quote from the memoranda received: 
"The rules of succession of a de ceased coparcener's share also 
discriminate against women as can be seen in the Schedul e to section 8 of 
the Hindu Succession Act, 1956. Under th e Act, if one of the primary heirs 
is already dead, their heirs inherit. Thus, for example, if the son or daughter 
has already died, their children can i nherit the property of their grand 
parents. However, though the princi ple of representation goes up to two 
degrees in the male line of descent, in the female line of descent it goes 
only upto one degree. Accordingly, the deceased's son's son's sons and son's 
son's daughters get share, but a deceas ed's daughter's daughter's son and 
daughter's daughter's daughter does not get anything. These distinctions 
between male and female heirs should be removed." 
 
General observation of the Committee 
2.23. The Committee is of the view that within the scope of the present Bill, 
all measures should be adopted to ensure that gender discrimination in 
matters of inheritance of joint family  property are uprooted, so that the 
amendments proposed by the Bill brin g about far-reaching  changes in the 
Indian society. The Committee agrees wi th the observation made by the Law 
Commission in this regard that this s ub-section of the Bill contains gender 
bias, whereby the principle of represen tation among Class I heirs goes upto 
two degrees in the male line of descent, but in the female line of descent, it 

 29 
 
goes upto only one degree. Further, thou gh the Bill seeks to make substantial 
amendment in section 6 of the Hind u Succession Act, 1956, the proposed 
proviso to sub-section 3 has been left untouched. 
 
Recommendation of the Committee 
2.24. In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommends that the Schedule 
to section 8 of the Act should be amended accordingly, to endorse the 
principle of gender justice and equality.  The Schedule may be re-drafted as 
below: 
THE SCHEDULE 
HEIRS IN CLASS I AND CLASS II 
Class I 
1. Son; 
2. Daughter; 
3. Widow; 
4. Mother; 
5. Son of a pre-deceased son; 
6. Daughter of a pre-deceased son; 
7. Son of a pre-deceased daughter; 
8. Daughter of a pre-deceased daughter; 
9. Widow of a pre-deceased son; 
10. Son of a pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased son; 
11. Daughter of a pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased son; 
12. Widow of a pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased son; 
13. Son of a pre-deceased daughter of a pre-deceased daughter; and 
14. Daughter of a pre-deceased daughter of a pre-deceased daughter 
 
Further, the Ministry should examine whether the four categories of 
heirs mentioned in Class II, i.e., (i) so n's daughter's son (ii) son's daughter's 
daughter (iii) daughter's son' s son and (iv) daughter's  son's daughter, can be 
identified as Class I heirs.  
The Committee is of the view that the proposed change would take care 
of the anomalies mentioned in the aforesaid proviso and remove grievances of 

 30 
 
a large section of the people  who has been pointing ou t that this proviso is a 
major source of infirmity. 
 
Amended Section 6(4) as proposed by the Bill 
2.25. This part of the Bill seek s to abrogate the concept of pious obligation. It 
states that the right to proceed against a son, grandson or gr eat-grandson for the 
recovery of any debt due fro m his father, grandfather or  great-grandfather, on the 
ground of pious obligation, will not  be recognised by any court after 
commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2004.  
2.26. The Committee deliberated at length on the issue relating to ' pious 
obligation'. As per the concept of a Hindu joint family under the Mitakshara 
school of law, it was ordinarily joint, not only in estate but in religious matters as 
well. According to Mulla: Principles of Hindu Law (Vol II, page 277): 
"The law of heirship had close connection with th e doctrine - 'He 
who inherits the property, also offers the pinda. It was based upon the 
principle of consanguinity." 
2.27. During oral evidence of expert s before the Committee, strong views 
emerged in the context of continuation of the joint family system. It was reiterated 
that the principle of 'pious obligation' is  integral to the concept of joint family 
system and the abrogation of one leads to the disintegra tion of the other. To quote 
from the proceeding of the meeting dated 27 April 2005: 
"Once there is the abolition of pious  obligation, naturally there is no 
joint family at all....He ( son) is giving the pinda at a particular time; he is 
also clearing all the debts of the family; he is managing the joint family and 
seeing to it that all his sisters are ma rried properly......he also sees to it that 
all his younger brothers are settled in life properly.......If there is a debt 
incurred by the family, that debt would be cleared by the joint family.......If 
you want the daughter to have certain rights in the property, she should also 
have certain liabilities." 

 31 
 
2.28. Further, as per the principles of 'p ious obligation', the debts of a deceased 
coparcener will devolve upon his heirs in th e coparcenary, i.e., son, grandson and 
great grandson. The rights of a creditor of  the deceased would not be affected by 
his death. In this context,  it is pertinent to mention here that the Kerala Joint 
Family System (Abolition) Act, 1975 abrogated the doctrine of pious obligation of 
the son. However, the other four State Amendment Acts mentioned supra 
(generally referred to as the Andhra model) which conferred coparcenary rights on 
unmarried daughters are silent in this regard except that the daughter as a 
coparcener is bound by the common liabilities and presumably can become a karta 
in the joint family.  
 
View of the Law Commission 
2.29. The Law Commission, in its 174 th Report, recommended a combination of 
the Andhra and Kerala models, the synthe sis of which, it was believed, would be 
in keeping with justice, equity an d family harmony. Thus, it has been 
recommended to abrogate the doctrine of pious obligation while making the 
daughter coparcener in the full sense.  
  
Views submitted before the Committee 
2.30. On this issue, one of the witn esses expressed the following opinion: 
"Firstly, we feel that the religious obligations and economic factors 
should be separated. The issue of pinda should be separated from the issue 
of clearing debts. The issue of cleari ng debt is an economic one, while the 
issue of pinda is a religious one."  
2.31. Further: 
"......as far as pious obligation is  concerned......If you want the 
daughters to be given equal right as coparceners, then there can be equal 
sharing of economic burden. As far as pious obligation is concerned, 
daughters should also have  the right to give the pinda. They should not be 

 32 
 
deprived of religious rights. If they ar e given all obligations, they must also 
have the obligation of economic burden." 
 
Recommendation of the Committee 
2.32. The Committee sugge sts that the word ' solely' should be added before 
the words on the ground of the pious obligation in line 37 of the Bill. There 
may be other conditions fo r which the son may be proceeded against in case 
of father's debt, for example, if he has got rights on the es tate of his father. 
So, insertion of the word 'solely' will ensure that it is only the concept of pious 
obligation, which has been abrogated as a condition to proceed against the 
son, grandson or great-grandson. 
 
General observation of the Committee 
2.33. The Committee observ es that the Hindu Undivi ded Family system is a 
unique feature of the Indian society an d the concept of pi ous obligation acts 
as a thread which binds the family  together and prevents it from 
disintegration. Pious obligation includes  both spiritual as well as material 
aspects and makes the heir(s) respons ible/liable for spiritual duties, like 
performing the last rites of the deceased, paying ba ck debts accrued by the 
deceased and also fulfilling other responsib ilities left incomplete in respect of 
the joint family. Once pious obligation is abrogated, the concept of joint 
family also suffers a blow.  
However, the Committee is consciou s of the changing socio-economic 
scenario whereby nuclear families have become a viable alternative in the 
context of urbanisation. Mobility of th e population due to  the needs of the 
present day, such as for education a nd employment, cannot be overlooked. 
The concept of joint family should also evolve and shed off the features which 
have become anachronistic.  The concept of joint family no longer involves 
joint residence. Similarly, the concep t of pious obligation, whereby son, 

 33 
 
grandson and great grandson  were responsible to fulf ill their responsibilities 
towards the joint fa mily, can be done away wi th. Instead, a much more 
practical concept would be to make all the primary heirs liable/responsible to 
fulfill all such duties. The Committee feel s that Section 6(1)(c), which states 
that daughters who have be en made coparceners, will be subject to the same 
liabilities in respect of the said coparcenary property, as that of a son, would 
take care of the concern of the Committee. 
 
Amended Section 6(5) as proposed by the Bill 
2.34. This part mentions that nothing contained in the ame nded section 6 shall 
apply to a partition, which has been effected before commencement of the Hindu 
Succession (Amendment) Act, 2004. 
2.35. During the course of deliberation on the Bill, the Committee pondered on 
the concept of 'partition' as referred to in the aforesai d part. When the Secretary 
(Legislative Department) was asked as to the validity of partition effected through 
oral means, he replied that it depends upo n the facts of the particular case. The 
Secretary stated as below: 
"Sub Section (5) ( of the Bill ) says that nothing contained in this 
section shall apply to a partition,  which has been effected before 
commencement of the Act. So, people may not have a chance of effecting 
registered partition or going to the court and getting it registered."  
2.36. Further, the Secretary, Department  of Legal Affairs stated as below: 
".....under the present legal position, it is not necessary that a partition 
should be registered. There is no legal requirement. There can be oral partition 
also." 
 
Recommendation of the Committee 
2.37. The Committee recommends that th e term 'partition' should be 
properly defined, leaving no scope for an y arbitrary interpretation. Partition, 

 34 
 
for all practical purposes, should be regi stered or should have been effected 
by a decree of the court. In cases where or al partition is recognised, it should 
be backed by proper documentary evidence. 
 
Subject to above, clause 2 is adopted. 
 
Clause 3 
2.38. This clause seeks to  omit section 23 of the Hindu Suc cession Act, 1956. 
Section 23 of the Act reads as under: 
"Section 23. Special provision respectin g dwelling houses:- Where a Hindu 
intestate has left surviving him or her bo th male and female heirs specified in 
Class I of the Schedule and his or her prop erty includes a dwelling  house wholly 
occupied by members of his or her family, then, notwith standing anything 
contained in this Act, the right of any su ch female heir to claim partition of the 
dwelling house shall not arise until the male heirs choose to divide their respective 
shares therein; but the female heir shall be entitled to a right of residence therein: 
 Provided that where such female heir is a daughter, she shall be entitled to a 
right of residence in the dwelling house only if she is unmarried or has been 
deserted by or has separated from her husband or is a widow." 
2.39. According to Mulla: Principles of Hindu Law (Vol II, page 450): 
"The object of the special provision is to prevent female heirs and, 
particularly a daughter of the intestat e, from creating a situation in which 
partition of the family house may enta il a forced sale of it or otherwise 
cause hardship to the son or sons of the intestate where it may not be 
possible for the son or sons to buy o ff the share of the female heir who 
insists on actual partition of it......It woul d seem that the right of a female 
heir to demand partition may be deferred and remain in abeyance under this 
section till the lifetime of the male heirs enumerated in Class I of the 

 35 
 
Schedule or the last surv ivor of them, unless a pa rtition of the dwelling 
house is sought by any one of them before such time." 
 
Views of the Law Commission 
2.40. The Law Commission while examining the aforesaid section of the Act in 
its 174th Report, commented as below: 
"Another apparent inequity under the Hindu Succession Act as per 
Section 23, is the provision denying  a married daughter the right to 
residence in the parental home unless widowed, deserted or separated from 
her husband and further denying any daughter the right to demand her share 
in the house if occupied by male family  members. This right is not denied 
to a son. The main object of the sec tion is said to be the primacy of the 
rights of the family against that of an individual by imposing a restriction 
on partition. " 
2.41. However, the Law Commission quoted a recent Supreme Court judgment 
whereby it was endorsed that the idea of this section is to prevent fragmentation 
and disintegration of the dwelling house at the instance of the female heirs to the 
detriment of male heirs in occupation of the house, thus rendering the male heir 
homeless/shelterless. 
2.42. The Law Commission, in its 174
th Report, stated that once a daughter is 
made a coparcener on the same footing as a son, her right as a coparcener should 
be real in spirit and content. To quote from the Report: 
"We are also of the view that S ection 23 of the Hindu Succession 
Act, 1956, which places re strictions on the daught er to claim partition of 
the dwelling house, shou ld be deleted altogether. We recommend 
accordingly."  
 
 
 

 36 
 
Views submitted before the Committee 
2.43. Views from cross sections of the so ciety were received by the Committee, 
which widely differed in their interpre tation of the proposed omission of this 
section in the Bill. While some sections acclaimed this propos ed amendment, the 
others opined that this is violative of the traditional Hindu laws.  
 
Comments of the Ministry 
2.44. The Ministry in its reply stated as below: 
"India is bound to implement the United Nation Convention on 
Elimination of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). Article 14 of 
the Constitution guarantees e quality before law and equal protection of the 
law within the territory of India. Clause (1) of article 15 of the Constitution, 
inter alia, provides that the State shall not  discriminate against any citizen 
solely on the ground of sex. Hence,  the proposal to remove the gender 
discriminatory provisions in th e Hindu Succession Act, 1956 is 
constitutionally valid and is aimed at  giving equal ri ghts to women in 
Hindu Mitakshara Coparcenary property. Omission of section 23 of the Act 
will enable Hindu women to  seek partition of dwe lling house occupied by 
the family members as at present, onl y in case the male members choose to 
seek partition, the female members w ould be entitled to have the partition 
of the dwelling house. Th e amendments are a much needed social reform 
and meet the demands of the Hin du women's community. Hence, the 
suggestion to drop the proposal cannot be accepted.  
 
General observation of the Committee 
2.45. The Committee feels that this am endment will remove one of the major 
anomalies in the inheritance rights, as  propounded by the Hindu Succession 
Act, 1956. It will make the daughters, who have been made coparceners in the 

 37 
 
joint Hindu family system , equal claimant in resp ect of dwelling house. 
Objection has been raised in certain quarters that if the proposed amendment 
is enacted, it would give rise to frag mentation in the joint family property. 
The Committee feel that such appreh ension is unfounded and endorses 
inequality between the sexes. If restricti on on partition is to be imposed by 
giving primacy to the rights of the fam ily, against that of an individual, it 
should be applicable to both the sons and daughters alike. Thus omission of 
the section 23 of the aforesaid Act is in keeping with the changing needs of the 
time. 
 
Clause 3 is adopted without any change. 
  
Clause 4 
2.46. This clause of the B ill seeks to give the right of  testamentary disposition to 
both the men and women in case of any property, which is capable of being 
disposed of by him or by her, in accorda nce with the provisions of the Indian 
Succession Act, 1925. The following tabl e shows the amendment in section 30 of 
the Act: 
 
The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 Th e Hindu Succession (Amendment) 
Bill, 2004 
Section 30. Testamentary succession. - 
Any Hindu may dispose of by will or 
other testamentary disposition any 
property, which is capable of being so 
disposed of by him, in accordance with 
the provisions of th e Indian Succession 
Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), or any other 
law for the time being in force and 
applicable to Hindus. 
Explanation.- The interest of a male 
Hindu in a Mitakshara coparcenary 
property or the intere st of a member of 
a tarwad, tavazhi, illom, kutamba or 
4. In section 30 of the principal Act, for 
the words "disposed of by him", the 
words "disposed of by him or by her" 
shall be substituted. 

 38 
 
kavaru in the property of the tarwad, 
tavazhi, illom, kutamba or kavaru shall, 
notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act or in any other law for the time 
being in force, be deemed to be 
property capable of being disposed of 
by him or by her within the meaning of 
this section. 
 
2.47. In this context Mulla: Principles of Hindu  Law (Vol II, page 465),  states 
that under Mitakshara law, no coparcener, not even a father, can dispose of by will 
his undivided coparcenary interest even if the other coparceners consent to the 
disposition, the reason being that at the moment of his death the right of 
survivorship (of the other c oparceners) is in conflict w ith the right to will. Then, 
the title by survivorship, being the pr ior title, takes precedence. However, the 
aforesaid section of the Hindu Succession  Act, 1956 abrogated that rule of 
Mitakshara law, which lays down in  explicit terms that such  interest is to be 
deemed to be property cap able of being disposed of  by will, notwithstanding 
anything contained in any provision of the Act or any other law for the time being 
in force. It introduced in to the statute the concept th at any Hindu may dispose of, 
by will, any property capable of disposition (this includes his undivided interest in 
a Mitakshara coparcenary property) in accordance with th e provisions of the 
Indian Succession Act, 1925. Thus, it guara ntees the coparcener's right to will 
away his interest in the joint family property.  
 
Views of the Law Commission 
2.48. The Law Commission's 174 th Report states that the right to will away 
property was traditionally unknown to Hindus. To quote from the Report: 
"The legal right of Hi ndus to bequeath proper ty by way of will was 
conferred by the Indian Succession Act,  1925. None of the clauses of 1925 
Act apply to Hindus excep t wills.....coparcener under Mitakshara law had 
no power to dispose of his coparcenary in terest by gift or bequest, so as to 

 39 
 
defeat the right of the other memb ers. The coparcenary system even 
restricted the rights of the Karta to alienate property, thereby safeguarding 
the rights of all members of the fam ily, including infants and children, to 
being maintained from the joint family property." 
2.49. The Law Commission's above Report stat es that the Act gave a weapon to a 
man to deprive a woman of the rights sh e earlier had under certain schools of 
Hindu law. This is ironical as this testam entary right is often inversely related to 
the right of his daughter by succession. It can also defeat a widow's right. There is, 
thus, a diminution in the status of a wife/widow. The Law Commission observed 
that both the Kerala and Andhra models of Amendments fail to protect the share of 
the daughter, mother or widow from bein g defeated, by making a testamentary 
disposition in favour of another, or by alienation. To quote from the Report: 
"As noticed earlier, quite often fath ers will away their property so 
that the daughter does not get a shar e even in his self-acquired property. 
Apart from this, quite often persons w ill away their property to people who 
are not relatives, thus totally depriv ing the children and legal heirs who 
have legitimate expectation. Consequently, there has been a strong demand 
for placing a restriction on the right of testamentary di sposition. But after 
due deliberation, the Commission is no t inclined to the placing of any 
restrictions on the right of a Hindu deceased to will away property." 
 
Views submitted before the Committee 
2.50. While deposing before the Committee,  one of the experts was of the view 
that the notion of Hindu fa mily is already being un dermined by allowing the 
concept of will to exist.   
2.51. As per a memorandum submitted to the Committee, the Bill leaves 
untouched a person's unrestric ted testamentary rights over his/her property. In 
principle, this right is gender-neutral si nce both the sexes enjo y it, but in practice 
(given male bias in our so ciety) the provision can be used to disinherit female 

 40 
 
heirs. In fact, the man can will away not only his separa te property but also his 
'notional' share in the coparcenary. Th is could totally disinherit the widow in 
States where she gets no share on partition.  Partial restriction on testamentary 
rights is thus important so that female he irs inherit at least part of the property 
through intestate devolution. Opinion has, thus, been e xpressed that testamentary 
rights should be partially restricted (e.g. restrictions on half or 1/3 rd of the 
property, which would devolve intestate) while allo wing full freedom of will in 
the rest. 
General observation of the Committee 
2.52. The Committee takes note of the fact that partial restriction to 
testamentary rights has b een demanded from certain quarters. It is of the 
opinion that the Ministry may examine in detail the feasibility of such a move 
and take steps accordingly.  
 
 Subject to above, clause 4 is adopted. 
 
Clause 1, Enacting formula and Title 
2.53. Clause 1, the Enacting formula a nd the Title were ad opted with some 
changes which were of consequential or drafting nature, namely, the figure “2004” 
and the words “fifty fifth” to be subs tituted by the figure “2005 and the words” 
Fifty-sixth”, figure respectively. 
 
 
 
 

 41 
 
CHAPTER III 
MISCELLANEOUS ISSUES 
 
3.0 While deliberating on the Bill, the Committee considered the principal Act, 
i.e., the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 and suggested certain modifications/changes 
as discussed below.  
Section 4(2) of the principal Act 
3.1. This section states as below: 
"For the removal of doubts it is here by declared that nothing contained in 
this Act shall be deemed to affect the provisions of any law for the time 
being in force providing fo r prevention of fragmentation of the agricultural 
holdings or for the fixation of ceilings  or for the devolution of tenancy 
rights in respect of such holdings." 
 
Views pertaining to this sub-section 
3.2 Divergent views on the interpreta tion of this sub-section emerged. 
According to Mulla: Principles of Hindu Law(Vol II, page 299): 
"It is sometimes said that the Act does not apply to agricultural lands 
but that would not be a correct propos ition. Sub Section (2) relates only to 
certain specified matters and subject to that, the provisions of the Act must 
govern succession to agricultural lands too. 
Considerable legislati on by various States, ai med at prevention of 
fragmentation of agricultural holdings and securing their consolidation, and 
for the purpose of fixing ceilings and devolution of hold ings, has found 
place on the statute-book in recent years and this section is not intended to 
override or disturb such legislation. Land policy in different States, though 
founded on the concept of a socialist welfare state, cannot be expected to be 
uniform and sub-s (2), therefore, le aves such legislation relating to 

 42 
 
agricultural land undisturb ed.......it may be said that this provision detracts 
from the fundamental objective of unifor mity of legislation. However, the 
explanation is that what is aimed at is a uniform law for all Hindus and not 
necessarily a uniform law for all forms of property." 
3.3. One of the memoranda  submitted to the Committee argued that agricultural 
land is the most important form of rural property in India; and ensuring gender-
equal rights in it is important, not only for gender justice but also for economic 
and social advancement.  
3.4. Further, analysing this section of  the Act, the memorandum argued as 
below: 
"Interest in tenancy land devolves according to the order of 
devolution specified in th e tenurial laws, which vary  from State to State. 
Broadly, the States fall into three ca tegories, (i) in southern and most of 
central and eastern States, tenurial la ws are silent on devolution. So, 
inheritance can be assumed to follow the 'personal law'. (ii) in a few States, 
tenurial laws explicitly note that the HS A or 'personal law' will apply. (iii) 
in the northwestern States of Haryan a, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Delhi, 
Uttar Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir, the tenurial laws do specify the order 
of devolution, and one that is gender- unequal. Here (retai ning vestiges of 
the old Mitakshara system) primacy is given to male lineal descendents in 
the male line of descent and women co me very low in the order of heirs. 
Also, a woman gets only a limited estate, and loses the land if she remarries 
(as a widow) or fails to cultivate it for a year or two. Moreover, in UP and 
Delhi, a 'tenant' is defined so broadl y that this unequal order of devolution 
effectively covers all agricultural land." 
3.5. Another memorandum received by the Committee states as below: 
 "The proposed changes do not addr ess the crucial issue of women's 
equal rights in agricultural land. We , therefore, recommend an amendment, 
which states clearly that the HSA gr anting women equal rights in property, 

 43 
 
will apply to agricultural land and will override any laws to the contrary. 
We, therefore, recommend that the ex isting section 4(2) of the Hindu 
Succession Act, 1956, be deleted." 
3.6. It was further argued that a clause should be introduced  in the Act to the 
effect that the amended Hindu Su ccession Act would override any gender 
discriminatory clauses in State tenurial laws, currently in place. 
 
Comments of the Ministry 
3.7. The subject "Land, that is to sa y, rights in or over land; land tenures 
including the relation of land lord and tenant and collecti on of rents; transfer and 
alienation of agricultural land; land improvement and agricultural loans; 
colonization" is a subject falling under th e State List in the Seventh Schedule to 
the Constitution of India. Hence, in case a State legislation occupies the field, the 
provisions of sub-section (2) of secti on 4 of the Hindu Su ccession Act, 1956 
clarify that the State Law shall preva il in the matter of succession also. The 
petitioners should address the State Gove rnments to get necessary amending law 
passed by the State Legislatures. Any deleti on of sub-section (2) of section 4 will 
not change the legal position.  
3.8. As regards the questio n of providing a provision regarding overriding effect 
on tenurial laws, the proposed legislation,  being a concurrent subject and tenurial 
laws being a State subject, the State Legi slatures may have to be approached for 
making necessary laws in the matter. Th e remedy lies in pursuing the matter with 
the State Governments, to put the tenurial laws in consonance with the provisions 
of the HSA, 1956. Omission of section 4(2) may not achieve the purpose. 
 
General observation of the Committee 
3.9. The Committee takes note of the fact that objections have been raised 
from various quarters regarding continuation of section 4(2) of the Act. In 
this context, while deliberati ng on the Bill, the Comm ittee made reference to 

 44 
 
the Government of India Act, 1935. In the Concurrent List, i.e., List III, 
Entry 7 of the aforesaid Act regarding succession, states "Save as regards 
agricultural land". But in the Constitu tion of India, entry 5 of List III 
pertaining to Concurrent List, do es not mention "Save as regards 
agricultural land". Similarly, what is st ated about devolution in Entry 21 in 
List II of the 1935 Act, is also omi tted in Entry 18 of List II of the 
Constitution of India. To quote from the deliberation of the Committee: 
"Therefore, this proviso helps to have pre-Constitutional 
powers, that is powers conferred by  the Act of 1935. No doubt, it was 
necessary at that time because ther e were land reforms .....this proviso 
was needed for protecting the in terests of land reforms and 
agricultural reforms." 
3.10. The Committee feels that in th e present day circumstances, where 
legislations have been undergoing progr essive changes, there is no need to 
retain this sub-section, which become s a barrier in establishing gender 
equality. Keeping in view the ab ove-mentioned facts, the Committee 
recommends that Government may consid er to incorporate this amendment 
in the present Bill, deleting section 4( 2) from the original Act. Otherwise, a 
subsequent amending legislation may be brought in to address this issue. 
 
Sections 14, 15 and 16 of the principal Act 
3.11. Section 14 of the principal Act deals with 'Property of a female Hindu to be 
her absolute property'; 
 Section 15 pertains to 'General rule s of succession in the case of female 
Hindus'; and 
 Section 16 mentions 'O rder of succession and manner of distribution among 
heirs of a female Hindu'. 

 45 
 
General observation of the Committee 
3.12. While deliberating on the clauses of the B ill, the Committee expressed 
the view that the aforesaid sections of the Act have lost their relevance in view 
of the proposed amendments  in the present Bill. Thes e sections should be re-
examined and reframed so that the provisions enunciated by these do not run 
contrary to the Am endment Bill. The Ministry ma y look into the matter and 
take appropriate steps accordingly. 
 
Section 24 of the original Act 
3.13. This section seeks to  prevent certain sections  of widows from inheriting 
property of the intestate if she has remarried. According to this section: 
"Certain widows re-marrying ma y not inherit as widows.- Any 
heir who is related to an intestate as  the widow of a predeceased son, the 
widow of a predeceased son of a predeceased son or the widow of a brother 
shall not be entitled to succeed to the property of the intestate as such 
widow, if on the date the succession opens, she has re-married." 
3.14. According to Mulla: Principles of Hindu Law (Vol II, page 453) , the 
following can be stated: 
"The reason is that a widow succ eeds as the surviving half of her 
husband, and she ceases to be so by remarriage." 
General observation of the Committee 
3.15. While deliberating on the clauses of the B ill, the Committee expressed 
the following views on the aforesaid section of the Act: 
".....the right of a widow who rema rries is denied, whereas, the 
right of a widower who remarries is protected......We are making a 

 46 
 
distinction between a widower who remarries and his right is not 
affected. But the widow who remarries is denied the right."  
3.16. In the light of what has been stated above, the Committee is of the view 
that Government should examine the justification behind maintaining the 
aforesaid section of the Act in the cont ext of modern times, whereby focus is 
on maintaining gender equa lity and making the laws  of the land gender 
neutral. The Committee feels that the aforesaid section may be omitted from 
the body of the Act. Government may in clude this amendment in the present 
Bill or else a subsequent legislation may be brought in, to cover all such 
issues, not covered under the present Bill. 
 
 
 

 47 
 
RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF  
THE DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
XIX 
NINETEENTH MEETING 
 The Department Related Parliament ary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M.  on Thursday, the 3 rd 
February, 2005, in Committee Room   ’A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT  
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
3. Shri Ram Nath Kovind  
4. Dr. P.C. Alexander  
5. Shri Raashid Alvi 
 
LOK SABHA 
6. Justice (Retd.) N.Y. Hanumanthappa 
7. Shri Harin Pathak  
8. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan  
9. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki   
10. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
11. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
 
WITNESSES 
I. Representatives of the Legislativ e Department, Ministry of Law and 
 Justice 
 1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary  
 2. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Joint Secretary 
 3. Shri N.K. Ambastha, Deputy Legislative Counsel 
 
 

 48 
 
II. Representatives of Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions 
 1. Shri A.N. Tiwari, Secretary 
 2. Shri R. Ramanujam, Joint Secretary 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
 
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Legislative 
Department, Ministry of Law and Justice and his colleagues to the meeting. 
3. Thereafter, the Secretary made a presentation on the Hindu Succession 
(Amendment) Bill, 2004. He opined that the system of coparcenary property in the 
Mitakshara system was discriminatory to wards women and that the Bill had been 
brought forward to implement the recommendations in the 174th Report of the Law 
Commission of India on the subject. He deposed that many women’s organisations 
had raised the demand that there should not be any di scrimination on the basis of 
gender in respect of inheritance of prope rty and that as per the provisions of the 
present Bill, a woman would be  a coparcener in her own ri ght. He also stated that 
the Bill would enable women to be absolute owner of the property which entitled 
her to dispose of the property and to dema nd partition. He clarified that the Bill 
would not apply to women married befo re the commencement of the law and 
partitions made before its commenceme nt. The Members of the Committee were 
also of the view that the Bill should not be given retrospective effect. 
4. The witnesses respo nded to the queries raised by the Committee.   
 ( The witnesses then withdrew) 
5. *  *  * 
6. *  *  * ∗ 
 
                                                 
∗ *** Relates to some other matters. 

 49 
 
7. *  *  * 
8. *  *  * ∗ 
9. A verbatim record of the procee dings of the meeting was kept.   
10. The Committee adjourned at 1.41 P.M. 
 
                                                 
∗ *** Relates to some other matters. 

 50 
 
XXII 
TWENTY-SECOND MEETING                                                                   
 The Department Related Parliament ary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at  11.00 A.M. to 1.35 P.M. and again 
from 2.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 16 th February, 2005, in Room No. ’53’, First 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT  
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
3. Dr. P.C. Alexander   
4. Shri Tariq Anwar 
5. Shri Raashid Alvi 
 
LOK SABHA 
6. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq 
7. Justice (Retd.) N.Y. Hanumanthappa 
8. Shri Harin  Pathak  
9. Shri Bhupendrasinh Solanki  
10. Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra 
11. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
 
WITNESSES 
I. Representative of Institute of Economic Growth, University of Delhi 
 1. Prof. Bina Agarwal  
 2. Advocate Shruti Pandey 
3. Advocate Poonam Verma 
 
II. Representative of the Legislativ e Department, Mini stry of Law and 
 Justice 
 Shri T.K. Vishwanathan, Secretary 
  
III. Representative of Commonwealth  Human Rights In itiative (CHRI), 
Delhi 
 Ms. Charmaine Rodrigues 

 51 
 
IV. Representative of Non-Governme ntal Organisation ‘Parivartan’ 
 Shri Arvind Kezriwal 
V. Representatives of Department of Administrative Reforms and Public 
Grievances, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions  
 Shri P.I. Suvrathan, Additional Secretary 
 
VI. Representatives of  National Capital Region Planning Board, New Delhi 
Dr. P.K. Mishra, Member-Secretary 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary 
Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
 
2. The Chairman welcomed the witnesses to the mee ting and invited them to 
make a presentation on the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2004. 
3 The witnesses pointed out that the in stant Bill was silent  on the issue of 
inheritance of agricultural land by wome n. They emphasized that the need to 
abolish the Mitakshara system was sine qui non  with equality for women which 
was envisaged in the Constitution of Indi a and the Treaty on Discrimination 
against Women of which India was signa tory. They deposed that equality for 
women should not be sacrific ed for the sake of unity of  the joint family and that 
along with abolishing joint family syst em, the testation rights should also be 
restricted. While replying to a query raised by the Committee on the issue of 
“pinda”, they stated that the religious obligations and economic factors related to it 
should be separated. They clarified that there was a possibility that if a daughter 
did not want to undertake the pious obligation, she can forego her share. 
4. They highlighted the fact that re garding agriculture, it was the women who 
were actively engaged in it and men had m oved out of it. But, the irony was that 
women could not take the credit for it beca use credit went to the title holder. They 

 52 
 
asserted that clause 4(2) of the Bill should be delete d since it restricted women’s 
rights in tenancy laws and that agricultu ral land should also be brought under its 
purview. They suggested that if a kart a sold property for the wedding of the 
daughter, and if the family could prove it, then the married daughter should not be 
given share in the ancestral property. 
5. The witnesses respo nded to the queries raised by the Committee.  
 (The witnesses withdrew) 
6. *  *  *  
7. *  *  * 
8. *  *  * 
9. *  *  * 
10. *  *  * 
11. *  *  * 
12. *  *  * 
13. *  *  *
∗ 
14. A verbatim record of the procee dings of the meeting was kept.   
15. The Committee adjourned at 4.20 P.M. 
 
                                                 
∗ *** Relates to some other matters. 

 53 
 
XXXII 
THIRTY-SECOND MEETING                                                                    
 The Department Related Parliament ary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice me t at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 19 th April, 
2005, in Room No.  ’63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT  
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan    Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
3. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
4. Shri Ram Jethmalani    
5. Dr. P.C. Alexander 
6.    Shri Raashid Alvi   
   
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri N.Y. Hanumanthappa 
8. Shri Shailendra Kumar  
9.  Shri Dahyabhai V. Patel 
10. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan   
11. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
12. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
13. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
 
WITNESSES 
I. Representatives of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other 
Backward Classes  
1. Shri P. Madhu, Member, Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri J. Seelam, Member, Rajya Sabha  
3. Dr. M. Jagannath, Member, Rajya Sabha 
4. Shri R.S. Gavai, Member, Rajya Sabha 
5. Shri Gandhi Azad, Member, Rajya Sabha  
6. Shri Thawar Chand Gehlot, Member, Lok Sabha 
7. Shri Nandi Yellaiah, Member, Lok Sabha 
 
 
 

 54 
 
II. Representatives of the Ministry of  Personnel, Public Grievances and 
 Pensions 
1. Shri A.N. Tiwari, Secretary 
2. Shri R. Ramanujam, Joint Secretary 
 
III. Representatives of All India Democratic Women’s Association 
 1. Ms. Subhasini Ali  
 2. Ms. Kirti Singh, Advocate 
 
IV. Representatives of the Legislativ e Department, Ministry of Law and 
 Justice  
Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel  
 SECRETARIAT 
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
 
2. *  *  *  
3. *  *  * 
4. *  *  *
∗ 
5. The Chairman welcomed the witnesses to depose on the Hindu Succession 
(Amendment) Bill, 2004. 
6. The witnesses sought for the abolition of the Mitakshara Joint Hindu 
Family System and for granting equal rights for married and unmarried women 
under the instant Bill. They deposed that th e B.N.Rau Committee had 
recommended abolition of the Mitakshara System and that in the first Hindu Code 
Bill which was piloted by Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, it was recommended that the joint 
family system might be abolished. 
7. The witnesses clarified the points raised by the Committee. 
 ( The witnesses then withdrew). 
8. A verbatim record of the procee dings of the meeting was kept.   
9. The Committee adjourned at 5.55 P.M. 
                                                 
∗ *** Relates to some other matters. 

 55 
 
XXXI 
 
THIRTY- FOURTH MEETING                                                                   
 
 The Department Related Parliament ary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice me t at 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 27 th 
April, 2005, in Room No.‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT  
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan    Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak  
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani    
4.   Dr. P.C. Alexander   
5.   Shri Raashid Alvi  
 
LOK SABHA 
6. Smt. Bhavani Rajenthiran 
7. Shri N.Y. Hanumanthappa 
8. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
9. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan   
10. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
11. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
 
WITNESSES 
I. Representatives of the Ministry of  Personnel, Public Grievances and 
 Pensions 
1. Smt. Manjulika Gautam, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R. Ramanujam, Joint Secretary 
 
II. Representatives of the Legislativ e Department, Ministry of Law and 
Justice  
1. Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Secretary 
2. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel 
 

 56 
 
 
III. Representatives of the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law 
and  Justice  
   1. Shri R.L. Meena, Secretary 
   2. Shri R.L. Koli, Joint Secretary 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary 
Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
 
2. *  *  * ∗ 
3. The Members of the Committee were of the unanimous view that equal 
rights should be granted to women in inheritance of property. After some 
discussion, the Committee adopted clause 2 to 4 of the Bill. Clause 1, Enacting 
formula and the Title of the Bill were also adopted. 
4. The Committee adjourned at 5.31 P.M. 
 
 
 
                                                 
∗ *** Relates to some other matters. 

 57 
 
XXXVI 
THIRTY-SIXTH MEETING 
 The Department Related Parliament ary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice me t at 5.15 P.M. on Tuesday, the 10 th May, 
2005, in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
1. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan    Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
4.  Dr. P.C. Alexander   
5.  Shri Tariq Anwar 
6. Shri Raashid Alvi 
 
LOK SABHA 
7. Dr. Shafiqurrahman Barq 
8. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
9. Shri Varkala Radhakrishnan  
10. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
11. Shri Ramchandra Paswan   
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
Shri Surinder Kumar Watts, Deputy Secretary 
Shri H.C. Sethi, Under Secretary 
Shri Vinoy Kumar Pathak, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee considered its draft Seventh Report on the Hindu 
Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2004 and dr aft Eighth Report on the Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Back ward Classes (Reservation in Posts and 
Services) Bill, 2004.  After some disc ussion the Committee adopted its Seventh 
Report and decided to hold further discussi on on its Eighth Report in its next 
meeting. 
3. The Committee adjourned at 6.05 P.M. 