REPORT NO. 
68
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Pausha, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SIXTY EIGHTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2014) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2014)  
Action Taken Replies of the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the th
60  Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in

CS (P&L)-135
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
SIXTY EIGHTH REPORT
Action Taken Replies of the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
60th Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Pausha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )-(vi)
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—47
(i) C HAPTER -I
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry .... 2—15
(ii) C HAPTER -II
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the replies given by the Ministry ......................................... 16—28
(iii) C HAPTER -III
Recommendations/Observations in respect  of which  Committee  has not
accepted replies of the Ministry ............................................................................ 29—40
(iv) C HAPTER -IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of  which final replies  of the
Ministry have not been received ........................................................................... 41—47
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ......................... 48—51
6. R ELEVANT M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. 53—56
7. A PPENDIX
List of Reports Presented by the Committee .......................................................... 57—63

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 31 st August, 2013)
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Ram Jethmalani
4. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan
7. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
8. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
9. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri T. R. Baalu
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
15. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
16. Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda
17. Shri Shailendra Kumar
18. Shri Jitender Singh Malik
19. Shri Arjun Meghwal
20. Shri Pinaki Misra
21. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
22. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
23. Shri S. Semmalai
24. Shri S.D. “Shariq”
25. Shrimati Meena Singh
26. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
27. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
28. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
29. Shri Madhusudan Yadav
30. Vacant
31. Vacant

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chaterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report
on its behalf, do hereby present this Sixty-eighth Report on Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Sixty-eighth Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.
2. The Sixtieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha
on 2
nd May, 2013.
3. The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions furnished the Action Taken Reply
on the Sixtieth Report of the Committee on 27 th August, 2013. The Committee considered the draft
Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on 3 rd January, 2014.
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold and italics letters in the body of the Report.
SHANTARAM NAIK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
3rd January, 2014 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
Pausha 13, 1935 on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice

ACRONYMS
A A Appellate Authority
ADB Asian Development Bank
AIG American International Group
AIS Automatic Identification System
AR&PG Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances
ARC Administrative Reforms Commission
CBI Central Bureau of Investigation
CFSL Central Forensic Science Laboratory
CGA Controller General of Accounts
C&AG Comptroller and Auditor General of India
CGAR Core Group on Administrative Reforms
CGHS Central Government Health Scheme
CGLE Combined Graduate Level Examination
CIC Central Information Commission
CoS Committee of Secretaries
CPWD Central Public Works Department
CSS Central Secretariat Service
CVC Central Vigilance Commission
CVO Chief Vigilance Officer
DARPG Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances
DA VP Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity
DGS&D Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals
DFFT Domestic Funding of Foreign Training
DFID Department for International Development
DIG Deputy Inspector General
DoPT Department of Personnel and Training
DPC Departmental Promotion Committee
DSPE Delhi Special Police Establishment
EASY Empanelment and Appraisal System
(iv)

FAO Food and Agriculture Organisation
GFR General Financial Rule
GoM Group of Ministers
IAS Indian Administrative Service
IFD Integrated Finance Division
IFS Indian Forest Service
ILO International Labour Organization
IPS Indian Police Service
ISG Indian School of Government
LBSNAA Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration
LDCE Limited Departmental Competitive Examination
MC&IT Ministry of Communication and Information Technology
MEA Ministry of External Affairs
MGNREGA Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs
NCGG National Centre for Good Governance
NeGP-HR National e-Governance Plan-Human Resource
NGO Non-Government Organisation
NIA National Investigation Agency
NIC National Informatics Centre
NICSI National Informatics Centre Services Incorporated
NLS National Law School
NIAR National Institute of Administrative Research
OBC Other Backward Classes
OECD Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
OMR Optical Mark Recognition
PAO Pay and Accounts Office
PPP Public Private Partnership
RTI Right to Information
SAU Scientific Aid Units
SIU Staff Inspection Unit
SC Schedule Castes
SPIO State Public Information Officer
(v)

SSC Staff Selection Commission
ST Schedule Tribes
TAFSU T echnical and Forensic Support Units
UPSC Union Public Service Commission
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNPAN United Nations Public Administration Network
UNICEF United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund
WHO World Health Organisation
(vi)

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions on the recommendations/observations of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice in its
60
th Report on the Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry. The Report was presented to Rajya
Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 3 rd May, 2013.
2. The Action Taken Replies have been received from the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions in respect of the recommendations contained in the above mentioned Report, vide, their
communication dated 27 th August, 2013. These replies have been categorised as follows :
Chapter–I : The recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Ministry
i.e., in respect of paras 2.16, 2.22, 2.28, 2.31, 3.3., 3.7, 3.8, 3.10, 3.12, 3.18, 3.28, 3.30,
3.34, 3.35, 3.43, 3.53, 3.56, 3.58, 3.63, 3.70, 3.72, 3.74, 3.82, 3.85, 3.87, 3.89, 3.91, 4.9,
4.25, 4.29, 4.51, 4.59, 4.61, 4.71, 4.73 and 4.85 of the Report. The Committee is pleased to
note that the Ministry has accepted these recommendations.
Chapter–II : The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the replies given by the Ministry i.e., in respect of paras 3.24, 3.32, 3.37,
3.41, 3.67, 3.76, 3.78, 3.93, 4.7, 4.11, 4.15, 4.23, 4.27, 4.31, 4.44, 4.55, 4.63, 4.66, 4.68,
4.75 and 4.77 of the Report. The Committee is convinced with the explanations advanced by
the Ministry and does not wish to pursue them as of now.
Chapter–III : The recommendations/observations in respect of which Committee has not
accepted replies given by the Ministry i.e., with regard to paras 3.39, 3.49, 3.51, 4.5, 4.6,
4.13, 4.17, 4.19, 4.20, 4.33, 4.36, 4.38, 4.41, 4.42, 4.45, 4.48 and 4.83 of the Report. The
Committee expresses its concern for not accepting the recommendations of the Committee
dealt with in Chapter–III of this Report and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical
explanation in respect of these recommendations.
Chapter–IV : The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the
Ministry have not been received i.e., with regard to paras 3.51, 3.31, 3.22, 3.35, 3.26, 3.23,
3.45, 4.57, 4.79 and 4.81 of the Report, the Committee observes that the Ministry has
furnished evasive or interim replies in response to these recommendations. The Committee
desires that the Ministry should furnish action taken notes in respect of the recommendations
dealt with in Chapter–IV of this report.
3. The recommendations/observations of the Committee in its 60
th Report, the ATRs furnished by
the Ministry and the Committee’s further recommendations/observations have been dealt with in the
succeeding Chapters.

2
2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
Reduced allocation made to the Ministry
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee takes note of the shortfall in allocation of R45.34 crores on the Plan
side and R55.85 crores on the Non-Plan side, made to the Ministry. The Committee hopes that
such reduced allocation should not adversely affect the implementation of important schemes/
projects of the Ministry.
(Para 2.16)
Action Taken Reply
1.1 The allocation was reduced by the Ministry of Finance based on the pace of expenditure and
mandatory cut imposed by the Ministry of Finance to maintain economy in the expenditure under Plan
and Non-Plan side. However, this Ministry has noted the Committee’s observation and will make
utmost efforts to ensure that the reduced allocation will not affect the implementation of important
schemes/projects. The Ministry will keep in mind the recommendation of the Committee while
projecting funds at RE stage and will also ensure additional allocation to various schemes based on
the requirement/need basis by making re-appropriation from the schemes where funds were under-
utilized or projecting the requirement under Supplementary Demands for Grants so that the reduced
allocation is not adversely affecting the implementation of the schemes.
Committee’s further observation
1.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Under-utilization of the allocations made during the last three years
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee takes note of the slow progress made on crucial Schemes like Propagation
of Right to Information Act and Plan Scheme for Administrative Reforms. The Committee is
of the view that non-utilization of the allocated amount is totally undesirable and that the
funds earmarked should be spent optimally. In this context, the Committee recommends that
steps should be taken to ensure that proper periodic monitoring and evaluation are done by
the Ministry so that allocated funds are utilized for the desired objectives. The Committee also
emphasizes upon the need for prudent financial management and chalking out realistic plans.
(Para 2.22)
Action Taken Reply
2.1 Keeping in view the observations of the Committee, the pace of expenditure under various
schemes is being monitored every week in the Senior Officers Meeting under the Chairmanship of

3
Secretary (P). Moreover, AS & FA (Home) also undertakes periodical review of the expenditure by
convening meetings with the Heads of various Departments/Organizations. Thus, the Ministry has
constantly keep watch on the trend of expenditure under various schemes and accordingly urge the
Departments/Organizations concerned to make the optimum utilization of the funds allocated by
chalking out realistic implementation plans for various schemes.
Committee’s further observation
2.2 The Committee takes note of the reply and hopes that the steps taken in this regard prove
to be fruitful in achieving optimum utilization of the allocated funds.
DEMAND NO. 80
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee notes the allocations made by the Ministry to UPSC.
(Para 2.28)
Action Taken Reply
3.1 The comments of the Committee have been noted.
Committee’s further observation
3.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Reasons for Surrenders, Lapses and Actual Utilizations
Recommendation/observation
4. The Committee notes the utilization of the amount allocated to UPSC.
(Para 2.31)
Action Taken Reply
4.1 The comments of the Committee have been noted.
Committee’s further observation
4.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING
National Training Policy, 2012
Recommendation/Observation
5. The Committee appreciates the new training policy framed by the Ministry. The Committee
recognizes the importance of training in the scheme of personnel administration and hopes
that the implementation of this policy would effectively bridge, through training, the likely
gaps, between the present roles performed by the Government employees and future roles to
be executed by them. The Committee also expects an improved efficiency in Government’s
functioning as a result of the implementation of the new training policy.
(Para 3.3)

4
Action Taken Reply
5.1 The observation of the Committee has been noted.
Committee’s further observation
5.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Training for All
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee appreciates that the actual rate of achievement of this Scheme is
higher than the target set. The Committee desires that the Department of Personnel and
Training may impress upon the Ministries/Departments to adopt a systematic approach to
training, with a view to impart training to the personnel not only at the Service entry level,
but also at certain specified intervals in the course of an employee’s career.
(Para 3.7)
Action Taken Reply
6.2 National Training Policy, 2012 stipulates that training shall be imparted to all Government
servants at the time of their entry into service as well as at appropriate intervals in the course of their
career. It also emphasizes Ministries/Department shall adopt a systematic approach to Training. The
policy document has already been circulated to all the Ministries/Departments of the Central Government
vide OM dated 19.01.2012.
Committee’s further observation
6.3 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
7. The Committee is also happy to note that the State Administrative Training
Institutions are given adequate support under this Scheme. The Committee hopes that
such a multi-dimensional approach towards training would help in improving the
responsiveness of Government employees towards citizens’ need too besides efficiency.
The Committee strongly recommends that the aspect of responsiveness to citizens needs
should be taken due care of under the new training initiative.
(Para 3.8)
Action Taken Reply
7.1 Heads of State Administrative Training Institutions have been requested to create module on
Responsiveness to Citizens/Public Service Delivery and conduct programme on the two significant
citizen centric initiatives.
Committee’s further observation
7.2 The Committee takes note of the reply and desires to be apprised of the follow up action
taken in this regard.

5
IT enabled System Empanelment and Appraisal System
Recommendation/Observation
8. The Committee appreciates this initiative of the Ministry and hopes that this software
would enable expediting the empanelment process.
(Para 3.10)
Action Taken Reply
8.1 The software developed for assisting in the empanelment process-Empanelment and Appraisal
System (EASY) is in place and the software is being used by this Department for generating/receiving
data electronically from Cadre Controlling Authorities in connection with empanelment for JS level at
Centre.
Committee’s further observation
8.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Appointment on Compassionate Ground
Recommendation/Observation
9. The Committee takes note of the modification made by the Department in the Scheme
for appointment on compassionate ground. The Committee hopes that this would enable the
Government to function more realistically in making compassionate appointments.
(Para 3.12)
Action Taken Reply
9.1 The Comments of the Ministry have been noted. It may be noted that the Ministry has notified
consolidated instructions on Compassionate Appointments on 16.1.2013 followed by FAQs on 30.5.2013
to facilitate easier understanding of all instructions by the cadre authorities as well as families desiring
Compassionate Appointments.
Committee’s further observation
9.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Vigilance clearance for promotion
Recommendation/Observation
10. The Committee takes note of the comprehensive review of vigilance clearance
requirements for promotion, undertaken by the Ministry.
(Para 3.18)
Action Taken Reply
10.1 The comments of the Committee have been noted.
Committee’s further observation
10.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.

6
On-line software to collect annual data for representation of SCs, STs, OBCs and Persons with
Disability
Recommendation/Observation
11. The Committee applauds the initiative of the Department to collect data in electronic
form regarding representation of SCs/STs/OBCs and persons with disability and hopes that
availability of compiled data would help in framing and implementing policies for them, in
future.
(Para 3.28)
Action Taken Reply
11.1 The process of on-line collection of data was initiated in the month of October, 2012 on trial
basis. The process is new and in nascent stage. Workshops have been organized in January, 2013 to
acquaint the Ministries/Departments with the process of filling up on-line data. This Department is
providing continuous support to the end users either telephonically or otherwise. The process of on-
line collection of data has been demonstrated and explained before the Ministry of Railways on
23.05.2013 in a workshop organized by them which was attended by the representatives of various
Railway Zones and other field units. Efforts are being made to further smoothen the process for
expeditious submission of on-line data by the Ministries/Departments.
Committee’s further observation
11.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Competency Framework for Civil Services
Recommendation/Observation
12. While appreciating the efforts made by the Department to put in place a competency
framework for improving the decision making processes in the administration, the Committee
would like to emphasize upon the imperative need to impart to the Members of the Civil
Services, core human values and empathy to the problems faced by common man.
(Para 3.30)
Action Taken Reply
12.1 The comments of the Committee have been noted.
Committee’s further observation
12.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Implementation of RTI Act
Recommendation/Observation
13. The Committee recognizes the difficulties faced in this regard and would like to urge
the Ministry to initiate/strengthen efforts at the grass root level, by involving volunteers/
NGOs who operate in such distant areas. The Ministry may also adequately equip such entities,
by making available to them necessary resources which are needed for catering to such areas.
(Para 3.34)

7
Action Taken Reply
13.1 The observation of the Committee has been noted. With a view to initiate/strengthen the efforts
at the grass root level, it has been proposed to enhance the role of Administrative Training Institutes
in this regard.
Committee’s further observation
13.2 The Committee takes note of the reply and desires to be apprised of the updated status of
the proposal in the Ministry’s Action taken note.
Recommendation/Observation
14. The Committee is unhappy to note that the attendance in the training programmes
organized by DoPT for Information Commissioners at NLSIU, Bangalore was very poor. The
Committee feels that this issue has to be addressed by the Ministry and appropriate action
may be taken to ensure the success of such programmes.
(Para 3.35)
Action Taken Reply
14.1 The observation/recommendation are noted for taking appropriate action.
Committee’s further observation
14.2 The Committee takes note of the reply and desires to be apprised of the follow up action
taken on this issue, in the Ministry’s Action taken note.
Domestic Funding of Foreign Training (DFFT) Scheme
Recommendation/Observation
15. The Committee takes note of the updated status of this Scheme and hopes that the
Officers, who have benefited from the training programmes, by gaining exposure to international
best practices, would contribute immensely to effective policy making and proficient
administration.
(Para 3.43)
Action Taken Reply
15.1 The observation of the Committee has been noted.
Committee’s further observation
15.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS
Study on Social Accountability Mechanisms
Recommendation/observation
16. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry is giving importance to Social
Accountability Mechanisms. In the present era of enhanced transparency in governance and

8
greater awareness in the  public about their entitlements and rights, social accountability has
assumed greater importance. The Committee hopes that such a mechanism would improve
citizens’ interaction with the administration, thereby, empowering them and also improving
service quality.
(Para 3.53)
Action Taken Reply
16.1 A study was initiated by the Department entitled “Social Accountability Mechanisms” which
would explore ways and means of enhancing the ability of citizens (especially the poor and marginalized)
to engage with public servants and politicians in a more informed, direct and constructive manner so
that the services under the National Programmes were effectively delivered. The National Institute of
Administrative Research  (NIAR), a unit of Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration
(LBSNAA) Mussoorie, was entrusted with the assignment for developing necessary generic tools/
framework relating to Social Accountability which could also be adopted in various social sector
schemes/programmes of the Government of India.
16.2 Committee of Secretaries (CoS) considered mainstreaming the Social Accountability Tools in all
the Social Sector Schemes of the Government, run by the Government of India, including PPP
Projects, in the meeting held on 06.01.2012. As per the decision taken in the meeting, Ministry of
Rural Development furnished a detailed note on Social Accountability Measures under MGNREGA. The
note was further circulated to all the concerned Ministries/Departments with the request to furnish
their comments to this Department based on their own schemes/experiences.
Committee’s further observation
16.3 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Central Public Grievance Redressal Commission
Recommendation/Observation
17. The Committee is pleased to note that many of the recommendations made by it in the
53rd Report have been accepted and acted upon. It hopes that the novel idea proposed in the
legislation would enhance the legal capacity of the citizens to seek fulfillment of their rights
and improve redressal of their grievances.
(Para 3.56)
Action Taken Reply
17.1 The observation of the Committee has been noted.
Committee’s further observation
17.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
India-Commonwealth Symposium on Public Service Excellence
Recommendation/Observation
18. The Committee recognizes this initiative of the Department
(Para 3.58)

9
Action Taken Reply
18.1 Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances, Government of India, in
collaboration with Commonwealth Secretariat had proposed to institute an annual International Programme
“India-Commonwealth Symposium on Public Service Excellence”.
18.2 Ministry of External Affairs while being supportive of the idea of the DARPG for instituting
an annual Symposium on Public Service Excellence, expressed their view that there is no need to
restrict the symposium to members of the Commonwealth, as the bulk of that membership comprises
small States and whose experience of public administration would have limited value for India. MEA
had further advised that it would be appropriate to do so under the ‘India’ brand name and after
identifying relevant countries from all across the world, who may be able to contribute more
constructively to such an annual event.
18.3 In view of the given consideration, DARPG now proposes to institute an “ India-International
Symposium on Public Service Excellence ” which would be a global annual event with the aim to
promote professionalism and the visibility of public service across the globe by sharing experience in
public administration. The Symposium will also foster the spirit of excellence in Public Administration
and in doing so, to acknowledge recognize and disseminate the innovative and extraordinary achievements
and remarkable done by civil servants and public sector institutions in improving public service
governance and delivery, and the quality of life of citizens and communities. Around 48 countries
across the globe plus European Union, which could sponsor entries on the theme of their choice, have
been identified for participation in the programme.
18.4 The programme will be an annual event of three days and will be organized on 24, 25 and
26 November every year in New Delhi, including one day learning journey opportunity.
18.5 W ith the active support of Ministry of External Affairs, the set of countries identified for
participation in the programme and International Organizations viz., World Bank, Asian Development
Bank (ADB) , Department for International Development (DFID) , Food and Agriculture Organisation
(FAO), International Labour Organization (ILO), Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations Public Administration
Network (UNPAN), United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF) and World
Health Organisation (WHO), etc. will be invited to participate in the programme. The members from
the International Organizations would be invited as Observer to provide global or other insight and to
share the lessons learnt on the themes identified for the programme.
18.6 Necessary clearances from Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Home Affairs from
political angle and security angle are being obtained respectively followed by the approval of Cabinet
Secretary.
Committee’s further observation
18.7 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Plan Scheme on Administrative Reforms
Modernization of Government Offices
Recommendation/Observation
19. The Committee appreciates the initiatives made by the Ministry for improving the work
environment through cost effective and space efficient measures.
(Para 3.63)

10
Action Taken Reply
19.1 Noted for compliance.
Committee’s further observation
19.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
National Conference on e-Governance
Recommendation/Observation
20. The Committee is happy to note that the Department proposes to hold these Annual
Conferences in the Twelfth Five Year Plan also.
(Para 3.70)
Action Taken Reply
20.1 Noted for compliance. 16
th Conference was organized in Jaipur, Rajasthan during 11-12
February 2013. Activities for 17 th Conference have also been commenced.
Committee’s further observation
20.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Master Training Plan under NeGP
Recommendation/Observation
21. The Committee is pleased to note the steps taken by the Department to ensure
technology driven governance.
(Para 3.72)
Action Taken Reply
21.1 Noted for compliance. Training was organized on pilot basis in March, 2013 for Central
Government officials from the level of Assistant to Joint Secretary.
Committee’s further observation
21.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
NeGP-HR, Training Awareness Assessment and Organization structure
Recommendation/Observation
22. The Committee takes note of the initiatives undertaken by the Department.
(Para 3.74)
Action Taken Reply
22.1 Noted for Compliance. Activities are indicated in detail on the above para 3.70 & 3.72.

11
Committee’s further observation
22.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Proposal for setting up of National Centre for Land Governance
Recommendation/Observation
23. The Committee appreciates the above mentioned initiatives of the Department.
(Para 3.82)
Action Taken Reply
23.1 Noted.
Committee’s further observation
23.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
DEPARTMENT OF PENSION AND PENSIONERS’ WELFARE
Pensioners’ Portal
Recommendation/Observation
24. The Committee appreciates these initiatives of the Department.
(Para 3.85)
Action Taken Reply
24.1 Noted.
Committee’s further observation
24.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
25. The Committee is pleased to note the initiatives made by the Department to promote
the welfare of pensioners.
(Para 3.87)
Action Taken Reply
25.1 Noted.
Committee’s further observation
25.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Reduction in mandatory Service tenure for pension

12
Recommendation/Observation
26. The Committee takes note of the reduction made in the qualifying service period for
the entitlement for full pension.
(Para 3.89)
Action Taken Reply
26.1 Noted.
Committee’s further observation
26.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Pensioners’ Associations
Recommendation/Observation
27. The Committee is of the view that more Pensioners’ Associations should be extended
such support and benefits and that the Department should consider this aspect urgently.
(Para 3.91)
Action Taken Reply
27.1 The proposal for identification of 20 more Pensioners’ Association has been agreed to in
principle by IFD. Further action for inviting proposals from willing Pensioners’ Associations by way
of advertisement through DA VP in print media has been initiated.
Committee’s further observation
27.2 The Committee takes note of the reply and desires to be apprised of the outcome of the
action initiated.
CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION
Chief Vigilance Officers
Recommendation/Observation
28. The Committee is pleased to note the step taken by DoPT in respect of grant or denial
of sanction in cases of disagreement between the CVC/CBI and Sanctioning/Disciplinary
Authority and hopes that it would reduce the delay in the decision making process for
prosecution sanction. The Committee takes note of the fact that five such cases have already
been disposed of.
(Para 4.9)
Action Taken Reply
28.1 The observation of the Committee is noted.
Committee’s further observation
28.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.

13
Performance of the Chief Technical Examiner’s Unit
Recommendation/Observation
29. The Committee appreciates the efforts made in this regard.
(Para 4.25)
Action Taken Reply
29.1 The observation of the Committee is noted.
Committee’s further observation
29.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Conviction rate
Recommendation/Observation
30. The Committee notes the conviction rate in CBI cases.
(Para 4.29)
Action Taken Reply
30.1 The comments of the Committee have been noted.
Committee’s further observation
30.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION
Initiatives during 2011-12
Recommendation/Observation
31. The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by CIC.
(Para 4.51)
Action Taken Reply
31.1 Comments of the Committee have been noted. The CIC in future too, will continue making
efforts in this direction.
Committee’s further observation
31.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
32. The Committee takes note of the effort made by CIC to rationalize work allocation.
(Para 4.59)

14
Action Taken Reply
32.1 The CIC will continue reviewing the allocation policy as and when required.
Committee’s further observation
32.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Priority to appeals/complaints
Recommendation/Observation
33. The Committee appreciates the initiative made by CIC.
(Para 4.61)
Action Taken Reply
33.1 The CIC is following its resolution in this regard.
Committee’s further observation
33.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
UNION PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION
Notification regarding Civil Services Examination, 2013
Recommendation/Observation
34. The Committee takes note of the corrective measures taken in this regard and hopes
that the modifications notified later have adequately addressed the concerns raised.
(Para 4.71)
Action Taken Reply
34.1 Since it has been the Government’s decision, the Commission has no comments.
Committee’s further observation
34.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Reduction of time in conducting Civil Services Exam
Recommendation/Observation
35. The Committee appreciates the steps taken by UPSC to reduce the time taken from the
stage of notification of the examination to the declaration of final results in the Civil Services
Exam.
(Para 4.73)
Action Taken Reply
35.1 The Commission thankfully acknowledges the appreciation of the Committee and would like to
mention that efforts will be on for further reducing the time circle.

15
Committee’s further observation
35.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Examination Malpractices
Recommendation/Observation
36. The Committee appreciates the steps taken by SSC to tackle malpractices during
examination.
(Para 4.85)
Action Taken Reply
36.1 Commission is grateful for appreciation and will continue to take all measures possible to
ensure that examinations are conducted in most objective, fair, impartial and transparent manner and
only merit is rewarded.
Committee’s further observation
36.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.

16
16
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
Under-utilization of the allocations made during the last three years
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee feels disappointed over the non-utilization of the amount allocated. The
Committee feels that such delays reflect upon improper planning and therefore, would like to
impress upon the Ministry to take appropriate corrective steps so as to check the recurrence
of such instances.
(Para 2.24)
Action Taken Reply
1.1 The observations of the Committee are being complied with earnestly. A system of regular
monitoring has been set up with CBI wherein progress on scheme and expenditure is reviewed for
expediting the progress. A meeting has been held on 11.7.2013 to review the progress.
1.2 CBI’s plan scheme for ‘TAFSU’ was approved on 08.02.2011 at a total outlay of R3.89 crore
over the years 2010-11 and 2011-12; and thereafter, matter was processed for purchase of various
items. Accordingly, with the approval of IFD/MHA approvals were issued on 11.3.2011 for R2,35,70,128/-
for purchase of various items and on 30.3.2011 for R1,54,00,000/- for purchase of 22 four wheelers
and two wheelers each. As the scheme itself was approved during the last quarter of the financial year
2010-11 and that the approved items for purchase including vehicles required necessary codal
formalities, despite best efforts by CBI funds could be utilized only to the tune of R57.18 lakh. It may
be noted that the final grants under this head was only R60.30 lakh for the FY 2010-11. The rest
amount was surrendered.
1.3 At the very outset of this FY 2013-14, CBI had been impressed upon to furnish their all plan
proposals, including ‘TAFSU’ to ensure a timely approval and therefore complete utilization of the
allocated funds. In response, CBI’s proposal for purchase of various items for TAFSU at a total
expenditure of R1.20 crore is with IFD for consideration.
Committee’s further observation
1.4 The Committee takes note of the reply and is optimistic that the steps taken by the Ministry
would yield the desired outcome.
Implementation of RTI Act
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee takes note of the components of the above mentioned Scheme and the
key achievements of the programmes under the Scheme. The Committee appreciates the
initiatives in this area, like training given to State Public Information Officers (SPIOs) and

17
Appellate Authorities (AAs), on-line certificate course on RTI, RTI Song and Logo, awareness
generation programmes in rural areas of 6 States, RTI Fellowships, Internships offered to
students to analyse RTI applications received by the Ministries/Departments, RTI Cells, Task
Force on suo-motu disclosure, etc. The Committee recommends Government to continue these
initiatives and even add to them so that the pace of implementation of the RTI Act speedened.
(Para 3.32)
Action Taken Reply
2.1 It has been decided with the approval of the competent authority to continue with the Plan
scheme ‘Propagation of RTI Act-Improving Transparency and Accountability in Government through
effective implementation of RTI Act’ during the Twelfth Plan period.
Committee’s further observation
2.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Vacancies in various Ministries/Departments under the CSS
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee takes serious note of the vacancies existing in the Ministries/Departments
and holds the view that in this era of work force reduction, the Government cannot afford to
have such large number of vacancies. The Committee is apprehensive that in the long run,
this would adversely affect the smooth functioning of the administration. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that urgent steps should be taken to ascertain the reasons for the
vacancies and to effectively address them so that the vacancies are filled up, without further
ado. Further, the Committee would like to impress upon DoPT to assume a proactive role so
that the vacancies are filled up in the right earnest.
(Para 3.37)
Action Taken Reply
3.1 As regards recommendations of the Committee, the following position is furnished:-
3.2 Director:– Regular promotions to this grade have been made for the year 2012.
3.3 Deputy Secretary :– Due to an ongoing litigation now pending in High Court of Delhi, arising
out of Garima Singh’s case, no regular promotions to this grade could be made beyond the Select List
Year 2010. As a result of Garima Singh’s case, the Under Secretary Select List, 2003, from which
regular promotion to the grade of Deputy Secretary is to be made, has become disputed. No further
regular promotions are possible till settlement of the litigation.
3.4 Pending regular promotion, ad-hoc promotions are being made to the grade to fill up the
vacancies from time to time since July, 2012. As on 1.6.2013, there are 39 vacancies in the grades
of Director/DS. These vacancies will be filled up shortly by ad-hoc promotion to the grade of Deputy
Secretary. Thereafter, the vacancies arising from month to month will be filled up by ad-hoc promotion
to the grade of Deputy Secretary from the panel already drawn.
3.5 Under Secretary:– Earlier, regular promotion to this grade had been held up beyond the Select
List year 2008 due to protracted litigation. After settlement of the litigation, Select Lists of Grade-I
of CSS (Under Secretary) for the years 2009 and 2010 were issued in November, 2012. A proposal
for preparation of the Select List for the 2011 has already been sent to the UPSC for convening the

18
meeting of the DPC and it is expected that the Select List will be issued soon. Action for preparation
of the Select Lists for the years 2012 and 2013 has been initiated.
3.6 Meanwhile, to address the shortage of officers in the grade of Under Secretary in the
Ministries/Departments, ad-hoc promotions have been made and all vacancies till December, 2012 have
been filled up. The physical vacancies as on 1.6.2013 will be filled up shortly by making ad-hoc
promotions to the grade.
3.7 Section Officer(SO) :– The vacancies in the grade of SO are filled up 50% by promotion on
the basis of seniority(SQ) and 50% by Limited Departmental Competitive Examination (LDCE), Regular
promotions to the grade of SO both by SQ and LDCE have been made up to 2008.
3.8 Further regular promotions (SQ) to this grade beyond the Select List Year 2008 would be made
soon after the regulations for preparation of Select List for SO grade in pursuance of CSS Rules, 2009
are notified. The relevant regulations are likely to be notified shortly.
3.9 Preparatory action for issuance of the Select Lists for SO Grade for the years 2009 and 2010
are complete. As soon as the regulations are notified, the zone of promotion for SO SL 2009 and 2010
will be issued and the Cadre Units will be asked to hold DPCs.
3.10 The results of written part of LDCE for the years 2009, 2010 and 2011 have been declared
by the UPSC. It is expected that the final results will be declared within next two months. Thereafter,
the vacancies in this grade will be filled up.
3.11 Assistants’ Grade :– The 744 vacancies in this grade are to be filled up by direct recruit on
the basis of the Combined Graduate Level Examination (CGLE), 2012 conducted by the Staff Selection
Commission(SSC). The results of CGLE 2012 have been declared and nomination of selected
candidates is awaited. On receipt of nominations, the candidates will be allocated to various Ministries/
Departments, thus wiping out the vacancies.
3.12 This Department has been taking all possible action to fill up the vacancies in all grades of
CSS and has taken note of observations/recommendations of the Department Related Parliamentary
Standing Committee for compliance.
Committee’s further observation
3.13 The Committee takes note of the reply.
National Centre for Good Governance
Recommendation/Observation
4. The Committee is of the considered view that multiplicity of agencies need not necessarily
result in enhanced output in the administration. Since LBSNAA is already involved in training
and research activities and could be entrusted with similar endeavour, the Committee desires
that the Ministry may have a re-look into the desirability and necessity of the National Centre
for Good Governance.
(Para 3.41)
Action Taken Reply
4.1 The suggestions of the Committee have been noted. The Ministry is considering whether an
existing institution preferably in Delhi, may be upgraded and rechristened as the Indian School of
National Centre for Good Governance (NCGG). In this regard, a proposal that the National Institute

19
of Administrative Research (NIAR), an autonomous society under the aegis of the Lal Bahadur Shastri
National Academy of Administration (LBSNAA), Mussoorie, may be shifted to NCR and upgraded to
accommodate the proposed Indian School of Government (ISG), is under consideration of the
Government.
Committee’s further observation
4.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Plan Scheme on Administrative Reforms
Pilot Projects on Administrative Reforms
National e-Governance Plan e-Office Mode Project
Recommendation/Observation
5. The Committee desires that more Ministries/Departments may be covered in the year
2013-14 under this Project and hopes that the transition to a paper less office will become a
reality in all Ministries/Departments in the coming years.
(Para 3.67)
Action Taken Reply
5.1 Matter has been referred to CoS in view of following constraints being faced by DARPG in
implementation of e-Office:
● DARPG is facilitating activities relating to e-of fice implementation. However, its success
is subject to willingness and preparedness of the user Department/Ministry in terms of
infrastructure [ i.e. putting in place the required infrastructure in the form of computers,
UPS, scanners, network and bandwidth within a timeframe]. Procurement through DGS&D
is taking a lot of time and as per extant orders NIC’s attached corporation i.e. NICSI
cannot be given orders on nomination basis.
● DARPG also has to depend entirely on NIC for development of secured, bug free, e-
Office modules and its timely implementation including resolution of problems faced by
Ministries/Departments.
● For successful implementation of e-Office (paperless office) at least employees who are
working on files should be computer literate and have basic knowledge of e-Governance.
● Further, there is a need of a separate Order by Department of Expenditure for legal
validity of e-office transactions. DARPG has written several letters to Department of
Expenditure for the purpose. In a recent meeting held on 02.04.2013, chaired by Hon’ble
MC&IT, D/o Expenditure informed that guidelines for IFDs would be issued by them.
However, they are consulting CGA and C&AG on the issues relating to legal validity for
Pay and Accounts Offices(PAO) which may take time.
5.2 Based on the feedback obtained during the four e-Office Monitoring Committee meetings of
phase 1 Ministries/Departments (11
th May, 2012, 09 th July, 2012, 21 st September, 2012 and 4 th January,
2013), under the chairmanship of Secretary(AR&PG), it is felt that project should be reviewed
regularly by the highest authorities of the implementing Ministries/Departments.

20
Committee’s further observation
5.3 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Fostering Good Governance
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee hopes that such a multi-dimensional Body would examine the existing
systems and procedures and recommend necessary changes with a view to effecting reforms
in governance.
(Para 3.76)
Action Taken Reply
6.1 The Second Administrative Reforms Commission (2
nd ARC) was constituted under the
Chairmanship of Shri Veerappa Moily for preparing a detailed blueprint for revamping the public
administrative system. The Commission submitted 15 Reports to the Government for consideration.
6.2 The procedure prescribed for processing of the recommendations made by ARC is that the
recommendations are first considered by the concerned administrative ministries/departments. Their
views are then considered by the Core Group on Administrative Reforms (CGAR) headed by the
Cabinet Secretary. Subsequently, they are placed before the Group of Ministers (GoM) for its
consideration. The views and recommendations of the GoM are then submitted for the information/
directions of the Prime Minister.
6.3 Core Group on Administrative Reforms under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary has
finished examination of all the 15 reports.
6.4 Decisions of approved reports have been communicated to concerned Ministries/Departments
and States/UTs. Accepted recommendations of 2
nd ARC are at various stages of implementation.
6.5 Any other reforms measure is generally considered by Committee of Secretaries (CoS) chaired
by Cabinet Secretary.
Committee’s further observation
6.6 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Study on the evaluation of the functions of the Deputy Commissioners/District Collector
Recommendation/Observation
7. The Committee welcomes the step to make an impact assessment study and hopes that
it would contribute to strengthening the process of administrative reforms.
(Para 3.78)
Action Taken Reply
7.1 The study titled ‘Evaluation/Impact Assessment of the Functions of District Collectors in
States’ has been awarded to National Institute of Administrative Research (NIAR), Lal Bahadur Shastri
National Academy of Administration (LBSNAA), Mussoorie, at the cost of R76.93 lakh.
The following outcome is expected out of the study –

21
● To list out the duties and functions of Collectors.
● To indicate competency/skills required for handling this job.
● To provide data in best practices and innovations at various levels.
● To suggest support system for the office of Collector to make it more effective.
● To suggest innovations/project management concepts in handling the job more effectively.
● Assessing, through available data bases, the Collector’s efficiency in decision-making and
leadership of the District team.
● To gauge, through inputs like programme expenditures, the Collector’s involvement in
piloting the flagship schemes of the Government.
7.2 NIAR has completed their pilot study of Bijnor District of Uttar Pradesh and Nashik District
of Maharashtra and submitted their findings before this Department on 16 th May, 2013. Several District
Collectors were also invited for this meeting to have a discussion on the draft findings.
Committee’s further observation
7.3 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Pensioners’ Associations
Recommendation/Observation
8. The Committee desires that the Department may take considerate view in this regard
and co-ordinate with the hospitals to extend the desired health benefits to pensioners.
(Para 3.93)
Action Taken Reply
8.1 The issue relates to Ministry of Health and Family Welfare who have stated that CGHS has
empanelled a large number of private hospitals, diagnostic centres and imaging centres in different
CGHS covered cities to provide healthcare facilities for its beneficiaries. However, in a few cities the
number of empanelled hospitals may not be adequate to cater to the large number of beneficiaries.
With a view to ensure the availability of good quality hospitals on CGHS panel, the Department has
introduced continuous empanelment scheme in all CGHS cities at the existing terms and conditions
vide Office Memorandum dated 14
th February, 2013. In order to make the system smooth, powers
for empanelment of private hospitals and diagnostic/imaging centres have also been delegated to the
field level committees headed by the Additional Directors, CGHS of the respective cities. They may
now be able to empanel more number of eligible private hospitals, diagnostic centres and imaging
centres in their respective cities for the CGHS beneficiaries.
Committee’s further observation
8.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION
Chief Vigilance Officers
Recommendation/Observation
9. The Committee desires that the CVC should closely monitor the disposal of cases by

22
CVOs and that necessary assistance/guidance may be given to CVOs to ensure zero pendency,
keeping in view the need for quick and effective action. Most importantly, the Committee
would like the network of the CVOs in the Government Departments/Organizations to be truly
effective, meeting the purpose for which the institution has been set up. For this purpose,
there should be the requisite and desired support and protection from the CVC to enable the
CVOs to discharge their functions objectively and fearlessly.
(Para 4.7)
Action Taken Reply
9.1 The Commission monitors the vigilance work done by CVOs through the monthly reports/
annual reports submitted by CVOs. Pendency of various items of work are monitored/reviewed and
the CVOs are directed to expedite the pendency.
9.2 Further in order to review the performance of CVOs, the Commission holds annual zonal/
sectoral meetings with CVOs of the organization. These meetings provide an opportunity to CVOs to
seek Commission’s guidelines on various issues relating to vigilance administration. In addition the
Commission also holds meetings with CVOs of the organizations from time to time. In these meetings
matters relating to pendencies/disposals of cases and any difficulties faced by the CVOs during
discharge of their official duties are discussed.
9.3 The Commission has been emphasizing on capacity building as a major aspect of improving
vigilance administration in the organization. In order to enable CVOs to perform their duties efficiently
the Commission organizes Induction training programmes for CVOs in the Commissiom.
9.4 The Commission has issued circular vide No.163/06 dated 28.03.2006 on protection against
victimization of officials of the vigilance units of various Ministries/Departments/Organizations which,
inter alia , provides that Central Vigilance Commissioner as accepting authority of ACR of CVOs, is
in position to moderate, if necessary, any biased reporting against the CVO. Further, the Commission
has also been careful and cautious while talking cognizance of complaints against the CVOs.
Committee’s further observation
9.5 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
10. The Committee takes note of the issues flagged by CVC for delays and pendency of
complaints for investigation. The Committee urges the DoPT to address these issues. The
Committee directs DoPT to ensure that technically competent officers are made available to
CVC to carry out investigations and apprise the Committee of the action taken in this regard.
The Committee impress upon the Ministry as well as the CVC to take stern action against
suspect officials who are non-cooperative and who intentionally delay the investigation process.
(Para 4.11)
Action Taken Reply
10.1 The technical staff and officers of the CVC are appointed by the Commission itself in accordance
with the prescribed Recruitment Rules. DoPT has no role in appointment of technical staff in CVC.
Departmental action against CBI personnel
Recommendation/Observation
11. The Committee is disturbed to note that 15 cases of departmental action are pending

23
for more than four years. The Committee strongly feels that unless quick action/decision is
taken, the purport and the impact of the departmental action gets diluted. The Committee
desires that it may be apprised of the reasons for the pendency in the Ministry’s Action taken
reply.
(Para 4.15)
Action Taken Reply
11.1 The status with regard to the pending cases is as given at Annexure-I.
11.2 In respect of the cases pending for more than four years, 3 cases have been disposed off after
issuing the penalty order, in another 4 cases, after receipt of the CO’s representation on the advice
of the UPSC, the final penalty order will be served. 2 cases have been submitted to the UPSC for
their statutory advice. 1 case is being considered for closure. And the remaining 5 cases are at an
advanced stage of completing the proceedings.
11.3 Process of dealing with Disciplinary Proceeding cases involve compliance of mandatory stages
which are time consuming. This involves getting comments of Charged Officer on Inquiry Officer’s
Report, taking Competent Authority’s approval on the tentative penalty, consultation with UPSC for
determination of quantum of penalty, taking comments of Charged Officer on the views of UPSC and
then taking Competent Authority’s approval which is PM.
11.4 This long procedure most of the time causes delay.
11.5 It is also being brought to the kind notice of the Committee that with the dismissal of Review
Petition in S.K. Kapoor Vs UoI, the Hon’ble Supreme Court ordered that a copy of the UPSC advice
is to be served on the Charged Officer, and obtain his comments before the final penalty order is
served. Thus, another stage has been added in finalization of the disciplinary proceeding case.
11.6 Department recognizes the fact that the delay in disposing off the disciplinary proceedings
would defeat the very purpose of initiating the said proceedings. In order to minimize the delays, the
disposal of the disciplinary proceeding cases are being closely monitored on a regular basis.
Committee’s further observation
11.7 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Budgetary Allocation to be made “Charged”
Recommendation/Observation
12. The Committee recommends that CVC should be granted a separate Demand No. and
also a separate major head for Budget on Grant/Allocation for the Commission. The Committee
would like to impress upon the Ministry that the shortfall in funds should not adversely affect
the functioning of CVC, whose mandate is expected to increase in the proposed Lokpal regime.
In Committee’s view, it is high time that the CVC is given more attention and is strengthened.
(Para 4.23)
Action Taken Reply
12.1 The proposal for a separate Demand No. for CVC has been approved by the Prime Minister.
Further orders are awaited from the Ministry of Finance.
Committee’s further observation
12.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.

24
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
Recommendation/observation
13. The Committee takes note of the shortfall in the allocation made. It would like to
impress upon the Ministry that adequate care should be taken to ensure that shortage of funds
would not be a roadblock in the modernization and effective functioning of CBI.
(Para 4.27)
Action Taken Reply
13.1 This Ministry has projected the requirement of CBI under various schemes to the Ministry of
Finance and Planning Commission. However, actual allocations under BE & RE had to be reduced on
the basis of pace of expenditure and overall reduced allocation by Planning Commission/Ministry of
Finance. Nevertheless, this Ministry has ensured that the reduced allocation under various schemes of
CBI is not becoming a road block for the modernisation and effective functioning of CBI by providing
funds to CBI schemes through re-appropriation/Supplementary Demands for Grants etc.
13.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Anti-Human Trafficking Cell
Recommendation/Observation
14. The Committee desires that the consideration of the proposal may be expedited and
that the genuine demand made by CBI may be acceded to timely.
(Para 4.31)
Action Taken Reply
14.1 This proposal is being dealt with in the CBI’s proposal for ‘Strengthening of CBI’ by creation
of 2063 posts. The clarification received from CBI on the queries of IFD like time line for creation of
these posts, financial implication for the creation of these posts in the respective year along with number
of posts proposed to be created in each year, present strength (post-wise details) of CBI in the matter
has been examined and the file has been submitted to Department of Expenditure through IFD.
Committee’s further observation
14.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
15. The Committee takes cognizance of the above deposition of the Director, CBI. In this
regard, the Committee strongly feels that a delinquent official/ personnel should be meted out
disciplinary action, irrespective of whether he is a deputationist or cadre personnel. The
argument, that punitive action is taken against cadre personnel, while a deputationist is
merely repatriated to his parent Department, in itself, is indicative that unequal working
conditions prevail in the organization for the departmental personnel vis-a-vis the deputationists.
The Committee does not see this as a healthy trend. In Committee’s view, the above
statement of Director, CBI reflects only the state of helplessness in relation to the situation
of manpower in the CBI which is not a desirable situation. The Committee also desires that
Cadre personnel/officers should be given a major role in policy making.
(Para 4.44)

25
Action Taken Reply
● It is submitted that CBI is even-handed and fair in taking action against delinquencies of
its officers, be it deputationists or direct recruits. The action against an officer is taken
after weighing the gravity of the allegations and the merit of evidence available for
substantiation of the impugned allegations. In such cases where the evidence is not
preponderant enough to substantiate the charges, the direct recruits are given non-
sensitive assignments for certain duration and deputationist are repatriated to in their
parent cadres, if need be, in the best interest of the organisation. The salient guiding
principle is always to maintain impeccable conduct , unexceptionable probity and integrity
in the Bureau. It would be appreciated that departmental action would not serve any
purpose where allegations relate to personal foibles or where evidence is exiguous. Only
where provable evidence is available, regular departmental action is taken.
● It is humbly requested that the Hon’ble committee may kindly note the context in which
Director, CBI has made his deposition. It may be appreciated that considering sensitivity
of assignments and need for maintenance of utmost integrity within CBI, whenever there
is a hint of doubtful integrity without sufficient actionable evidence in respect of any of
its officers, the Bureau warns and counsels such officers but where their conduct proves
refractory it is compelled to take prophylactic action. In such cases, while it is easy to
repatriate a deputationist, it is difficult to find a non-sensitive assignment within CBI to
park a departmental officer.
● At the cost of belabouring the point, it is once again reiterated that equity animates all
the policies and practices of CBI.
● The proposed changes in the Recruitment Rules would increase the percentage of
departmental officers and reduce dependence on deputation.
15.1 W ith respect to the Committee’s recommendations that the cadre officers should be given a
major role in policy making, it is submitted that a cadre officer is posted at AIG(Policy) in CBI. Also,
AIG(P.II), who looks after internal vigilance in CBI is also a departmental officer.
Committee’s further observation
15.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Submission of RTI Returns
Recommendation/Observation
16. The Committee emphasizes upon the need for timely submission of the quarterly
returns by all Public Authorities. The Committee opines that this issue requires immediate
attention and action on the part of the respective Organizations and their nodal Ministries/
Departments.
(Para 4.55)
Action Taken Reply
16.1 CIC on its part has been pursuing this matter with the Ministries/Departments under whose
jurisdiction the defaulter Public Authorities lie. During and after the end of the financial year
2012-13 when it was observed that a huge number of Public Authorities have defaulted in submission
of quarterly returns, the matter has been pursued by CIC at different levels. For instance, Secretary,
CIC has written two DO letters No.19/1/2012-CICMoRe dated 15
th January, 2013 and 15 th May, 2013

26
to the Secretaries of various Ministries/Departments under whom Public Authorities were found as
defaulters. Apart from above, Chief Information Commissioner has also written DO letter of even
number dated 29 th April, 2013 to Cabinet Secretary requesting intervention in the matter. The matter
of pending reports has also been pursued telephonically with some defaulting Departments. This has
resulted in positive response from many Public Authorities and it is noticed that the percentage of
defaulter Public Authorities has reduced from 61%(1423/2327) from 29
th April, 2013 to 41% (961/
2328) to 27 th May, 2013.
16.2 Cabinet Secretary had vide letter dated the 7 th May, 2013 requested Secretaries of Ministries/
Departments of India to ensure that the Public Authorities under their control submit the annual returns
along with arrears through the website of Central Information Commission.
16.3 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Appeals/Complaints in the Commission
Recommendation/Observation
17. The Committee hopes that this step would address the problem of pendency of appeals
and complaints.
(Para 4.63)
Action Taken Reply
17.1 The Commission is making all efforts to maximize disposal of the cases filed before it. It is
regularly reviewing the workload amongst the ICs and reallocates the pending cases amongst them.
The Commission is now disclosing its pendency through http://www.cic.gov.in on run time basis so
as to monitor and manage it judiciously.
Committee’s further observation
17.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Application of RTI Act to entities under PPP arrangement
Recommendation/Observation
18. The Committee is of the view that the role and responsibility of the PPP entity for
implementing the RTI Act should be clarified, in order to bring in greater transparency in
implementation of such projects. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take
appropriate action in this regard .
(Para 4.66)
Action Taken Reply
18.1 Government has issued guidelines on suo moto disclosure u/s 4 of RTI Act, 2005 vide O.M.
1/6/2011-IR dated the 15.04.2013. In regard to Public Private Partnerships, the following guidelines
are applicable:
18.2 ‘If public services are proposed to be provided through a Public Private Partnership (PPP), all
information relating to the PPPs must be disclosed in the public domain by the Public Authority
entering into the PPP contract/concession agreement. This may include details of the Special Purpose
Vehicle(SPV), if any set up, detailed project reports, concession agreements, operation and maintenance

27
manuals and other documents generated as part of the implementation of the PPP project. The
documents under the ambit of the exemption from disclosure of information u/s 8(1)(d) and 8(1)(j)
of RTI Act would not be disclosed suo moto . Further, information about fees, tolls, or other kinds
of revenue that may be collected under authorization from the Government, information in respect of
outputs and outcomes, process of selection of the private sector party may also be proactively
disclosed. All payments made under PPP project may also be disclosed in a period manner along with
the purpose of making such payment”.
Committee’s further observation
18.3 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Vacancies in CIC
Recommendation/Observation
19. The Committee hopes that the vacancies would be filled up without delay.
(Para 4.68)
Action Taken Reply
19.1 At present 136 posts in CIC are filled up against the sanctioned strength of 160 which includes
142 regular posts of legal retainers and 16 multi-tasking staff on outsourced basis. After issue of
notification of Recruitment Rules in respect of US, SO, Assistants, Sr.PPS, PS, PA, UDC by DoPT,
the Commission has started the recruitment process, initially by filling up the posts on deputation basis.
The posts were advertised in the Employment News and also uploaded in the internet and circulated
to all the Ministries. Applications were received and scrutinized and offer letters were sent to the
selected persons, i.e., four SOs, four Assistants and two PAs. Only one SO and one Assistant have
joined the Commission.
19.2 So far as filling up the posts of the US and the PPS (Group ‘A’) is concerned, further action
is being taken as advised by UPSC.
19.3 The Recruitment Rules for the remaining three posts of Registrar, Assistant Library and
Information Officer and Hindi Translator have also been finalized.
19.4 At present 136 posts are filled up in CIC in the following manner:–
Regular (including 5 co-terminus) 31
Outsourced 85
Contract 20
Vacant 24
Total Sanctioned Posts 160
Committee’s further observation
19.5 The Committee takes note of the reply.

28
Uploading scanned OMR answer sheets
Recommendation/Observation
20. The Committee desires that the UPSC may consider uploading the scanned OMR
answer sheets of the candidates in the website. This, in the opinion of the Committee, would
enhance the credibility of UPSC.
(Para 4.75)
Action Taken Reply
20.1 The observation of the Committee has been noted. The Commission has been presently
providing copies of OMR answer-sheets to the candidates on demand, after the completion of the
entire process of the examination and may consider the observation of the Committee from feasibility
angle.
Committee’s further observation
20.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.
Delays in issue of offer of appointments to candidates
Recommendation/Observation
21. The Committee desires that DoPT should take a pro-active role in this regard and
ensure that the delay is minimized to the extent possible.
(Para 4.77)
Action Taken Reply
21.1 This Department has already written to all Ministries/Departments vide O.M. No.39011/6/2012-
Estt.(B) dated 16.08.2012 reiterating to follow extant instructions to ensure that offer of appointment
is issued to the candidates recommended by the UPSC without delay.
Committee’s further observation
21.2 The Committee takes note of the reply.

29
29
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
Recruitment
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee desires that the Ministry may furnish the data on such contractual
appointments, including appointments as Consultants, prevailing in the Ministries/Departments
as well as in other Central Government Offices and the amount spent annually on account of
their salaries. The Committee may also be apprised of the impact of such appointments on the
efficiency of the administration. The Committee recommends the Ministry to study the
magnitude of such appointments, their causes and impact on the performance.
(Para 3.39)
Action Taken Reply
1.1 Regular appointment to a post is required to be made in terms of the provisions contained in
the RRs for the post. In terms of provisions in Rule 163 of GFR, the Ministries or Departments may
hire external professionals, consultancy firms or consultants for a specific job, which is well defined
in terms of content and time frame for its completion or outsource certain services. As per Rule 165
of GFR engagement of consultants may be resorted to in situations requiring high quality services for
which the concerned Ministry/Department does not have requisite expertise. Approval of the competent
authority should be obtained before engaging consultant(s).
1.2 The details on contractual appointments made in various Ministries/Departments are not
maintained in this Ministry. However, so far Department of Personnel and Training is concerned,
Shrimati Maya Devi Srinivasan, Sr. PPS (Retd.) was appointed as Consultant for three months
(01.04.2013) to 30.06.2013) and further extended the term from 01.07.2013 to 31.12.2013. The
monthly expenditure on account of her salary is Rs.19,735/- plus DA as admissible.
Committee’s further observation
1.3 The Committee does recognize the need to engage consultants for availing high quality
services for which, the concerned Ministry/Department does not have requisite expertise. However,
many instances of re-appointments made on the pretext of consultancy have come to the knowledge
of the Committeee. The Committee strongly feels that such instances/tendencies should not be
encouraged.
1.4 As regards the other issue, the Committee is aware of the filling up of posts by contractual
appointments and is of the view that such a trend is not feasible for an efficient and robust
administration. The Committee feels that such appointments give room to arbitrary exercise of
discretion in the appointment process. Since DoPT is the nodal Department for recruitment and
appointment of personnel, the Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry should
study the reasons for and magnitude of such appointments and their impact on the performance
output of the concerned Organisation.

30
Post-retirement jobs
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee takes note of such concerns and feels that the possibility of Senior
Officials who hold vital and sensitive posts while in Government, being influenced by extraneous
factors related to their intention to take up post-retirement jobs, cannot be ignored. In order
to avoid the incidence of such considerations, the Committee desires that the Ministry may
consider this aspect in depth and come out with fresh guidelines on the subject in consultation
with concerned stake holders. The Committee recommends that this exercise be done within
a definite timeframe of six months.
(Para 3.49)
Action Taken Reply
2.1 With the initiation of Establishment Division of this Department, the Committee of Secretaries
(CoS) held a meeting on 21/5/2013 on the issue of evolving tighter standards of post-retirement
employment and conduct of personnel employed by sensitive organizations. Comments of Service
Division of this Department on the minutes of the CoS meeting is as under:–
(a) The concerns voiced in the minutes of the CoS held on 21.5.2013 on the subject mainly
focus on the apprehension relating to such conduct of officers working in sensitive
security organization, who may divulge sensitive information held by them while in
Government service, after retirement. It may be pointed out that the power of Central
Government for according permission for post retirement employment is exercised by the
respective Cadre Controlling Authorities of the three AIS i.e. DoPT in respect of IAS,
Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of IPS and Ministry of Environment and Forest in
respect of IFS.
(b) Since all posts in security/sensitive organization are generally manned by officers belonging
to IPS, it would be appropriate if Ministry of Home Affairs, who exercises the powers
of the Central Government while according permission to undertake post retirement
employment to IPS officers formulates additional guidelines incorporating the concern
highlighted in the CoS note in respect of IPS officers. The same guidelines could be
adopted by this Department and Ministry of Environment and Forest, while dealing with
stray cases of officers belonging to IAS and IFS respectively, who had worked in a
sensitive organization prior to superannuation.
(c) In regard to the suggestion of regulation of post retirement employment for a period of
two years instead of the existing 1 year, it may be mentioned that the issue was proposed
earlier as desired by the Hon’ble MOS(PP). However, the Hon’ble Prime Minister has not
approved the proposal. It was conveyed to this Department that ‘the existing policy for
post retirement employment in respect of AIS officers may be continued.
2.2 It would not be possible to regulate conduct of superannuated AIS officers through the
AIS(Conduct) Rules as these Rules are only applicable to the officers who are member of the service
and hence they do not apply to a retired AIS officers.
Committee’s further observation
2.3 The Committee desires that the additional guidelines proposed to be devised regarding
permission to undertake post retirement employment are formulated without delay.

31
Contesting Residents Welfare Association elections
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee desires that DoPT may look into this matter and restore the status quo
ante in this regard.
(Para 3.51)
Action Taken Reply
3.1 The matter is under examination.
Committee’s further observation
3.2 The Committee solicits an early resolution of this matter.
Chief Vigilance Officers
Recommendation/Observation
4. The Committee is not satisfied with the current situation that only six Departments of
the Government of India have full time CVOs. The Committee is of the considered view that
CVOs play a vital role in the vigilance mechanism of an Organisation. In order to ensure
financial transparency and accountability, appointment of full time CVOs is an absolute
necessity, so that they can devote their entire time to strengthen the vigilance mechanism and
also ensure timely disposal of complaints received.
(Para 4.5)
4. The Committee strongly recommends that CVC should pursue the matter vigorously
with all the remaining Departments/Ministries and that DoPT should impress upon the Ministries
to take urgent steps to appoint full time CVOs.
(Para 4.6)
Action Taken Reply
4.1 The CVOs in the Ministries/Departments are directly appointed by the Ministries/Departments
in consultation with CVC. However, the CVC vide DoPT’s reference dated 31.12.2012, has been
requested to give their views on full time CVOs in Ministries/Departments. The CVC was reminded
on 05.03.2013 and 11.4.2013 to expedite the matter. CVC has been reminded again on 04.07.2013 for
its views. The views of CVC are still awaited.
4.2 It may be mentioned in this context that on the basis of analysis of the information/data
collected from various Ministries/Departments, DoPT has issued guidelines dated 30
th November, 2012
to various Ministries/Departments. A copy of the said guidelines is placed below. The said guidelines
include, inter alia , the following guideline regarding strengthening of vigilance set up in Ministries/
Departments:–
“iv. From the inputs received from the Ministries/Departments, it has been observed that in
some Ministries/Departments where the numbers of complaints/DP cases are very high but the
CVO is part time and the officers/staff in the vigilance unit are not sufficient. Therefore, each
Ministry/Department should conduct an SIU study of its Vigilance Division so that officers/
staff may be posted as per requirement vis-à-vis volume of work.”

32
Committee’s further observation
4.3 The Committee emphasises the importance of having full time CVOs in all Departments
and recommends that DoPT should take up the matter vigorously with the CVC. The Committee
desires to be apprised of the response received from the Ministries/Departments regarding the SIU
study of their respective Vigilance Division.
Recommendation/Observation
5. The Committee is disappointed to note that, as reflected in the Annual Report of CVC,
in some of the cases, either the due consultation process with the Commission have not been
followed despite the fact the suspected public servants were falling within the categories where
consultation with Commission was mandated or the advice had only partly been acted upon or
were badly delayed. The Committee also notes that there have been instances where the advice
of the Commission has been diluted considerably without approaching the Commission for
reconsideration of its advice. The Committee feels that such instances undermine the mandate
of the CVC and accordingly desires that suitable steps may be taken to prevent such
incidences. The Committee accordingly, directs the Ministry to take corrective measures in
consultation with the CVC
(Para 4.13)
Action Taken Reply
5.1 The disciplinary proceedings involving vigilance angle is initiated in consultation with CVC.
However, after inquiry, etc., if the disciplinary authority holds a different view in the matter than as
advised by CVC in some cases, the decision is taken by the disciplinary authority after following the
prescribed mechanism for disagreement. The mechanism is provided precisely for the purpose that the
advice tendered by the CVC is not undermined.
Committee’s further observation
5.2 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry. The thrust of the
Committee’s concern was non-adherence to the due consultation process with CVC in certain cases
and the Committee is disappointed to note that the Ministry has not responded to the specific
concern of the Committee. The Committee, therefore, directs the Ministry to furnish the details of
the corrective measures taken by the Ministry in this regard, in its Action taken note.
Integrity Pact
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee urges CVC to diligently take up the matter of adoption of Integrity
Pact in all Ministries/Departments/CPSEs/Organizations.
(Para 4.17).
Action Taken Reply
6.1 The Commission has been emphasizing/promoting transparency and fair play in the functioning
of the Government organizations. As a part of systemic improvements in vigilance administration, the
Commission has been advocating transparency, equity and competitiveness in public procurements
also. The Commission issued guidelines in this regard to the organizations under its advisory jurisdiction
to incorporate adoption of Integrity Pact as part of tendering process in all major procurements by
them voluntarily.

33
6.2 After issue of Commission guidelines on Integrity Pact, Ministry of Finance, Department of
Expenditure vide O.M. No.14(12)/2008-E-II(A) dated 19 th July, 2011 has also issued circular for
implementation of Integrity Pact in Ministries/Departments/Organizations. Subsequently, Department of
Public Enterprises has issued guidelines vide No.DPE/13(12)/11-Fin. Dated 09/09/2011 for adopted of
IPA by all Central PSUs. After issuance of guidelines on integrity Pact by Deptt. of expenditure, it has
become mandatory for all Ministries/Departments/Organizations of Government of India to implement
integrity pact.
Committee’s further observation
6.3 The Committee desires that the Ministry may furnish the action taken by it to ensure,
oversee and monitor that the Integrity Pact is mandatorily adopted by all Ministries/Departments.
Vacancies in CVC
Recommendation/Observation
7. The Committee recommends that DoPT should take a proactive role in the matter and
look into the reasons for non-filling up of vacancies and address the issue on an urgent basis.
If vacancies remain unfilled for want of personnel on deputation, they may be filled up by
resorting to the method of promotion.
(Para 4.19)
Action Taken Reply
7.1 DoPT provides personnel at senior level only under Central Staffing Scheme from amongst the
officers available in the offer list. Every effort is made by DoPT to provide panel of officers to CVC
for filling up the vacancies depending on the availability of officers on offer. All other posts in the
Commission are filled up by the Commission itself.
Committee’s further observation
7.2 The Committee feels that the Ministry’s response does not address the issue of non-filling
of vacancies for want of personnel on deputation. Since the existence of vacancies is not desirable
in a crucial agency such as CVC, the Committee recommends that in the event of non-availability
of officers on offer on deputation, vacancies may be filled by promotion without undue delay. The
Committee also urges the Ministry to coordinate with the CVC in the matter of vacancies to be
filled up by the cadre personnel.
Recommendation/Observation
8. The Ministry may also explore the possibility of granting special incentives to the CVC
personnel to attract more talent, keeping in view the sensitive and technical nature of cases
dealt with by them. The Committee desires that adequate steps should be taken to ensure that
the cadre personnel in the CVC get timely promotions.
(Para 4.20)
Action Taken Reply
8.1 Any proposal received from the Commission in this matter will be appropriately examined by
DoPT. The promotions in CVC of personnel borne on the cadre of the CVC are directly handled by
them and DoPT has no role in the matter.

34
Committee’s further observation
8.2 The Committee is of the considered view that the timely promotions of cadre personnel in
CVC should not suffer due to the induction of personnel on deputation. The Committee desires that
the Ministry should adequately address this concern.
Forensic support
Recommendation/Observation
9. Taking into account the sensitive nature of the cases dealt with by CBI, the Committee
advocates the need for full-fledged forensic labs at the disposal of CBI.
(Para 4.33)
Action Taken Reply
i. CFSL (CBI) was created in the year 1966 as a combined forensic laboratory for Delhi Police
and CBI, under the MHA and under the administrative control of CBI. This laboratory was established
with the view to provide forensic support to Delhi Police, CBI and neighbouring States, other central
law enforcement agencies and judiciary. NIA is also included recently in the clientele of CFSL (CBI).
ii. Present Plan scheme of CFSL:
(a) CBI has sent a proposal on 15.4.2013 to Joint Secretary(P.M), MHA, New Delhi for
construction of “State of Art CFSL(CBI) building at Ghaziabad” at an estimated cost of
Rs.136 crore as a step towards capacity building of CFSL(CBI) to cater to the needs of
forensic services of CBI and other Law Enforcement Agencies.
(b) Creation of Scientific Aid Units(SAU) of CFSL at Metros was approved by the
Planning Commission during the Eleventh Five Year Plan. Chennai and Mumbai Units have
been opened and started accepting cases during the plan period itself. Kolkata Unit work
remained incomplete because the estimate provided by CPWD Kolkata was not approved
by MHA. Now the file has been sent to MHA (with the recommendation of the
independent appraiser and the SFC note) for the approval to continue the plan in the
Twelfth Five Year Plan on 14.6.2013. The fund allocated R3.5 crore for plan in this FY
2013-14 can be utilized only after the approval of the Planning Commission.
Kolkata Unit, is therefore, expected to be completed by March, 2015.
(c) Automation: Efforts have been made to optimize the manpower and resources by making
the automation of the CFSL work processes with the help of the System Division, CBI.
iii. The sanctioned strength, available manpower and the vacant position of CFSL is as follows:
Rank Manpower
Sanctioned A vailable V acant
12 3 4
Director 1 1 –
Principal Scientific Officer (Admn.) 1 1 –
Senior Scientific Officer Gr. I 10 10 –
Senior Scientific Officer Gr. II 33 20 13

35
12 3 4
Senior Scientific Assistant 20 10 10
Scientific Assistant 25 15 10
Laboratory Assistant 29 25 4
Laboratory Attendant 16 7 9
Filling up of these vacancies would assist in expeditious case reporting from the CFSL (CBI).
Committee’s further observation
9.1 The main objective of the Committee’s recommendation was to ensure that CBI gets
adequate forensic support through full-fledged labs at its disposal. The Committee finds the
situation of CBI sharing forensic labs with other organizations/entities, not advisable. The Committee,
further, takes serious note of the vacancies prevailing in CFSL at the Scientific and Technical levels
which constitute crucial manpower in the specialized agency. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that urgent steps should be taken to ensure that the vacancies are filled up without delay.
Vacancies in CBI
Recommendation/Observation
10. The Committee recognizes the difficulties faced by CBI in getting Officers/personnel on
deputation. However, the Committee had, on earlier occasions, in its 24
th, 38 th and 51 st Reports
recommended that if vacancies prevail due to non-availability of officers on deputation, these
may be filled up by taking recourse to direct recruitment or promotion. However, the
Committee is unhappy to note that not much has been done in this direction. The Committee
wishes to drive home the point that a premier investigating agency such as CBI should have
an independent and proficient departmental Cadre of its own, rather than being dependent on
the States and other Organisations to spare their officers/personnel for deputation in CBI.
(Para 4.36)
Action Taken Reply
● In accordance with the recommendations of various Parliamentary Committees, provisions
for direct recruitment have been incorporated in the new RRs to ensure that the Bureau
becomes not only more competent professionally but also to ensure improved career
progression of the departmental officers. Once the above recommendations are implemented
by way of notification of new RRs, CBI would have a solid backbone of directly
recruited officers.
● In pursuance with the committee’s observations that vacancies prevailing in CBI due to
non-availability of officers on deputation may be filled by taking recourse to direct
recruitment or promotion efforts are underway to fill all the vacancies in deputation quota
by conducting DPCs wherever sufficient number of officers is available in feeder grade.
Moreover, direct recruitment as per the proposed RRs is to be done only at the rank of
SIs which would be done through SSC.
● In line with the earlier submission of Director CBI before the Committee, it is stated that
an organisation like CBI has to maintain impeccable conduct, unexceptionable probity and

36
integrity in the Bureau. While CBI is even-handed and fair in taking action against
delinquencies of its officers, be it deputationists or direct recruits, in cases where
allegations relate to personal foibles or where evidence is exiguous or not preponderant
enough to substantiate the charges, it is easy to repatriate deputationists, while it is
difficult to find a non-sensitive assignment within CBI to park a departmental officer.
(Also refer reply to para 4.44)
Recommendation/Observation
11. The Committee fails to understand as to how the vacancy position can be expected to
improve by not resorting to direct recruitment at such levels.
(Para 4.38)
Action Taken Reply
● In the proposed Recruitment Rules the direct recruitment of Sub Inspectors is being
enhanced from 50% to 70%.
● Similarly at the level of Dy. SP, the promotion quota under the RRs when notified would
be 80% vis-à-vis 40% as per existing RRs which would not only obviate need for
deputation at this level but also provide better promotional avenues to departmental
officers.
Committee’s further observation
11.1 The Committee takes note of the Ministry’s reply that direct recruitment as per the proposed
Recruitment Rules is to be done only at the rank of SIs. The Committee is not pleased to note that
not much thought has been given to the concern expressed by the Committee regarding non-
resorting to direct recruitment at the level of Deputy Superintendent of Police. The Committee
strongly feels that such direct recruitment is needed to ensure that competent and meritorious
personnel are inducted as officers in CBI who can render effective supervision and who can further
strengthen the cadre of directly recruited officers in CBI.
Paras 4.41, 4.42 and 4.46
Recommendation/Observation
12. The Committee is unable to comprehend the reason for fixing such a high percentage
as the quota for deputation in the ranks from Constable to Joint Director. The Committee is
apprehensive that the policy of not opting for direct recruitment in the ranks of Constable and
Dy. SP would, in the long run, lead to a situation wherein CBI would be totally dependent on
other Departments/States for their personnel. Therefore, the Committee recommends that this
policy should be re-looked and the Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this
regard in the Ministry’s Action Taken Reply.
(Para 4.41)
Action Taken Reply
● In accordance with various recommendations of the Committee, the Department has
taken action to revise the Recruitment Rules. In the revised RRs no deputation has been
proposed at the level of Head Constable, Assistant Sub Inspector, Sub Inspector, Additional
Superintendent of Police and Senior Superintendent of Police.

37
● Also, there is reduced deputation at the level of Deputy Superintendent of Police and
Superintendent of Police. The table below gives deputation quota in CBI as per the
existing RRs and proposed RRs:
Rank Existing RRs Proposed RRs
JD 80% 80%
DIG 75% 75%
Sr. SP 0% No deputation
SP 60% 50%
ASP 10% No deputation
Dy. SP 50% 10%
Inspr. 50% 50%
SI 0% No deputation
ASI 25% No deputation
HC 20% No deputation
Const. 60% 100% Deputation/absorption
● As is evident from the table above, the deputation quota has been substantially decreased
in the proposed RRs and is high only in the senior supervisory ranks of DIG and above.
In the rank of SP, it is limited to 50% only.
● In the rank of Constables, the proposed RRs have provision for 100% by deputation/
absorption. This would mean that while intake of Constable in CBI will be only through
deputation mode, the eligible, efficient and deserving among them would be absorbed and
become permanently a part of CBI. It is only that direct recruitment of constables is being
dispensed with because it is a very long drawn, expensive and extensive exercise which
is neither pragmatic nor desirable for a small organization like CBI having a very small
sanctioned strength of Constabulary.
● Further, it is stressed that CBI not only deals with corruption cases, but a variety of
offences that include threat to national security, national economy, violation of human
rights and conventional crimes having interstate and international linkages. Due to this
diversity of cases that the Bureau handles, an eclectic mix of competent, efficient,
sedulous and sapient officers with rich and diverse experience at supervisory ranks is
required, not only to supervise investigation of intricate and sensitive cases but also to
handle their diverse ramifications. It is in this backdrop that the deputation quota at Senior
Executive ranks has been kept high.
● Moreover, officers coming from diverse background bring in fresh ideas and varied skill-
sets with them. The cross-breeding of these ideas with those of direct recruit officers
leads to enunciation of strategies and tactics that have proved immensely successful in
unravelling convoluted cases.
Moreover, when deputationists officers go back to their respective cadres, they take back the
best practices in CBI and rich experience of working in premier investigating agency of the country.
This experience can be used by the State Police to build their own capacity in investigation of
corruption or other cases leading to less demand for CBI investigation in many matters.

38
Recommendation/Observation
13. The Committee does recognize the utility and the desirability to have deputation as one
of the channel to have manpower in the CBI. Deputationists bring in a different exposure into
the organization. But, the Committee is more than convinced that the organization should
never be dominant by the deputationists as such a state would never be congenial for the
functioning of the CBI in the desired spirit. The CBI should have strong cadres of their own
at all levels so that it can implement its procedures and practices discretely, uniformly,
confidently and with a continuity.
(Para 4.42)
Action Taken Reply
13.1 We have noted the observations of the Committee and as explained at para 4.41 above, the
Recruitment Rules are being revised to reduce dependence on the deputation at various levels, improve
the career progression of the Departmental Officers and to benefit from the experience of the
deputationists especially in the supervisory ranks.
Recommendation/Observation
14. Taking into account the above mentioned facts, the Committee strongly recommends
that sincere efforts should be made to ensure that the departmental personnel get adequate
promotional avenues and that their expertise and knowledge should be optimally utilized.
(Para 4.46)
Action Taken Reply
● In accordance with the recommendations of various Parliamentary Committees, provisions
for direct recruitment have been incorporated in the new RRs to ensure that the Bureau
becomes not only more competent professionally but also to ensure improved career
progression of the departmental officers. Once the above recommendations are implemented
by way of notification of new RRs, CBI would have a solid backbone of directly
recruited officers.
● Also, efforts are underway to fill all the vacancies in deputation quota by conducting
DPCs wherever sufficient number of officers is available in feeder grade. Moreover,
direct recruitment as per the proposed RRs is to be done only at the rank of SIs which
would be done through SSC.
Committee’s further observation
14.1 The Committee takes note of the evasive reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committee
had recommended that the policy of not opting for direct recruitment in the ranks of Constable
and Dy. SP should be relooked. However, the Ministry has not touched upon this aspect in its reply.
The Committee takes strong exception to such evasiveness and directs the Ministry to furnish, in
this regard, a cogent reply in its Action Taken Note.
14.2 Further, the Committee takes note of the Ministry’s reply for fixing high percentage as
quota for deputation in higher ranks. The Committee is of the opinion that the presence of cadre
officers in higher ranks is essential to render effective supervision of the lower ranks since they
are more familiar with and have better experience and exposure to the procedures and the
protocol involved in successful prosecution and investigation, as compared to the deputationists.
The Committee strongly feels that the cadre officers’ rising to higher posts would serve as a

39
motivating factor for them. Therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry should re-consider
the high percentage prescribed as quota for deputation, especially from the level of DIG and
above.
Recommendation/Observation
15. Further, the Committee is disappointed to note that as reflected in the Annual Report
of CBI, deputationist officers in the rank of SP were directly promoted as DIG, whereas cadre
officers in the rank of SP were promoted as SSP only which is a lower rank. Should the
Committee derive that the departmental officer is placed at a disadvantageous position,
although he is having an obvious edge over the deputationist, in terms of 54 skill, experience
and expertise, owing to his continuous exposure to specialized investigation which is regularly
being done in CBI?
(Para 4.45)
Action Taken Reply
● Deputationist officers in CBI in the rank of SP are primarily from IPS whose promotions
are governed as per All India Service rules. The IPS SPs before being promoted as DIG
become SSP albeit only for a year. Similarly, the promotions of cadre officers of CBI are
governed by their RRs which are duly approved by the Government. Moreover, the non-
IPS SPs in CBI are not eligible for promotion while on deputation to CBI and get
promoted to their next ranks as per the rules governing their parent cadre.
15.1 Further, the rules governing promotions in various services including that in CBI are approved
by the DoPT and Ministry of Law which has to take a holistic view to ensure that there is inter-
service parity amongst kindred services.
Committee’s further observation
15.2 The Committee takes note of the different eligibility criteria existing for promotion of cadre
officers and deputationists in CBI. The Committee does not find this to be a desirable situation and
is apprehensive that such discrepancies could lower the morale of the cadre officers. Therefore, it
recommends that the Ministry should consider this anomaly, while amending the Recruitment
Rules.
Statutory back-up for CBI
Recommendation/Observation
16. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in its 56
th Report that in the event
of enacting a fresh statute for CBI not found to be feasible, requisite amendments may be
made in the DSPE Act, 1946.
(Para 4.48)
Action Taken Reply
16.1 The Group of Ministers (GoM) constituted by the Government to consider the matter
relating to an appropriate law being made to provide for the independence of the Central Bureau
of Investigation (CBI) and its functional autonomy, has considered the matter at length and
recommended amendments to the DSPE Act, 1946 which has been approved by the Cabinet on
27.06.2013.

40
Committee’s further observation
16.2 The Committee takes note of the action taken in this regard. The Committee desires that
the amendments in the DSPE Act, 1946 which were approved by Cabinet, may be made, without
further delay.
Enactment for SSC
Recommendation/Observation
17. The Committee recommends that in view of the need felt/proposal for enhancing the
mandate of SSC, action be taken to lend statutory support to the SSC.
(Para 4.83)
Action Taken Reply
17.1 The Government may like to take a view on the issue.
Committee’s further observation
17.2 The Committee reiterates its recommendation and feels that lending statutory support to
SSC, whose mandate has been stretched over the recent years, would enhance its efficiency.

41
41
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
Cadre Strength of IAS
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee is unhappy to note the large number of vacancies prevailing in the IAS
Cadre. The Committee is convinced that civil servants form the crucial component in the
administration, both at the Centre and the States, as they are mainly responsible for the
framing and implementation of important and vital policies of Government. Hence, vacancies
in this cadre will certainly hamper administrative efficiency. The Committee takes note of the
Ministry’s reply that it is closely monitoring the progress of recruitment under the promotion
quota of IAS. The Committee desires that the Department should take an active role in this
regard to rectify the situation at the earliest.
(Para 3.15)
Action Taken Reply
1.1 Over the years the cadre strength of the IAS of the States/Joint Cadres has shown an
increasing trend resulting in the increase in total cadre strength in the past few years for the country
as a whole. There has been a lower intake of the Direct Recruit IAS Officer during the years 1996
to 2006. The increased intake of the Direct Recruit IAS Officers from 2007 onwards was not enough
to fill up the gap. However because of the big expansion in the strength of various cadres of IAS
and less recruitment during the period preceding years the gap in the cadre strength of IAS and actual
intake in the service has increased enormously.
1.2 As a measure to fill up the gap in the direct recruitment quota of the service, this department
has gradually increased in the annual intake to the service, which would be clear from the table given
below, which indicates the annual intake to the service during the last 15 years:–
Sl. No. Examination Number of
Name vacancies
12 3
1. CSE-1998 55
2. CSE-1999 56
3. CSE-2000 59
4. CSE-2001 59
5. CSE-2002 70
6. CSE-2003 89

42
12 3
7. CSE-2004 91
8. CSE-2005 87
9. CSE-2006 89
10. CSE-2007 111
11. CSE-2008 120
12. CSE-2009 131
13. CSE-2010 151
14. CSE-2011 170
15. CSE-2012 180
1.3 It is relevant to add here that the Baswan committee, constituted for the purpose of giving a
report regarding various issues concerning the cadre management of Indian administrative service has
recommended that it would not be appropriate to increase the annual intake to the IAS beyond 180
because in future a larger intake will create cadre management problems. Further, while conveying
approval to this Department’s proposal of determination of 180 vacancies to be filled in IAS through
CSE-2013, Hon’ble Prime Minister has directed this Department to consider the issue of shortage of
IAS officers in the light of the following suggestions given by this Deptt.
(i) To have a far more strict and stringent process of cadre review and to allow only such
increases in cadre strength as are absolutely essential and limiting the increase to about
5% (in each 5 year cycle of cadre review); and
(ii) To de-cadre a large number of posts from the IAS in the commercial and economic
sectors which have become redundant due to liberalization.
1.4 Further, taking note of the Committee’s observations, this Department has made concerted
efforts to reduce the gap/shortages in Promotion quota during the last one year and as a result, the
deficit/gap in the promotion quota which stood at 47.75% as on 1.1.2012 has been reduced to 29.67%
as on 1.1.2013.
1.5 It may be appreciated that action relating to filling up promotion/selection quota vacancies
through convening meetings of the Selection Committee falls under the purview of the concerned State
Government as well as the UPSC. This Deptt.’s role is confined primarily to determination of
vacancies for a particular SL year. Shortage of IAS Officers in promotion quota is due to delay in
filling up vacancies on account of delay in conducting selection committee meetings, which can be
attributed due to various reasons, the primary one of which is the litigation regarding the seniority of
State Civil Service Officers.
1.6 However, recognizing the need to sensitize the State Governments and to monitor the progress
of recruitment in the Promotion Quota of IAS, meetings with the Principal Secretaries of the State
Governments would be convened twice during the year to pursue with the State Governments to speed
up/expedite the recruitment process.
Committee’s further observation
1.7 The Committee takes note of the factors elaborated upon by the Ministry, responsible for the
vacancies prevailing in the IAS Cadre. The Committee has noted that the deficit/gap in the

43
promotion quota which stood at 47.75% as on 1.1.2012 has been reduced to 29.67% as on 1.1.2013.
The Committee recommends that the DoPT should take effective steps to further reduce the deficit.
The Committee also desires that the DoPT should take a proactive role to ensure that the
recruitment process in the promotion quota of IAS is expedited.
Special Recruitment Drive
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee acknowledges the fact that the reservation policy in Government sector
is, in a way, instrumental in inclusive growth. The Committee strongly feels that the full
benefits of the policy would accrue to the deserving persons only if the policy is implemented
in its true letter and spirit, as per the constitutional mandate. Keeping in view this reality, the
Committee recommends that the Department should chalk out a multi-pronged strategy to
ensure that the reserved vacancies are given wide publicity in regional and vernacular
languages also and the capacity building measures are strengthened.
(Para 3.21)
Action Taken Reply
2.1 The instructions already exist that reserved vacancies are not only to be reported to the Local
Employment Exchange but also to other Employment Exchanges, in case sufficient number of reserved
candidates are not available from the Local Employment Exchanges. Instructions further provide to
announce reserved vacancies in the AIR Stations located in areas with concentration of SCs and STs
population. Further, instructions also exist to advertise vacancies in Employment News (which is
published in regional languages also) published by the Publication Division of the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting. To further ensure that the SC/ST vacancies are widely circulated and
securing more candidates belonging to these categories, a list of SC and ST Organizations (State-wise)
have been identified and such reserved vacancies are also required to be reported to them.
Committee’s further observation
2.2 The Committee recognizes the fact that instructions regarding giving publicity and availability
of information about reserved vacancies already exist. However, the Committee is doubtful as to
whether the benefits of reservation have actually percolated to the beneficiaries. In this regard, the
Committee recommends that DoPT should take a proactive role and co-ordinate with the respective
Ministries/Departments/Agencies to ensure that the backlog of reserved vacancies is filled up.
Paras 3.2.2, 3.25 and 3.26
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in its 56
th Report that the Department
of Personnel and Training should oversee, monitor, execute and implement the reservation
policy and should also prevail upon the various Central Recruiting Agencies and other concerned
Departments so that they take all possible steps to ensure that the backlog vacancies are filled
up without delay.
(Para 3.22)
Action Taken Reply
3.1 Under the Allocation of Business Rules, each Department/Ministry is to see whether instructions

44
on reservations are being implemented in true perspective. Often, the cases involving Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes are submitted to the Minister-in-charge for seeking his directions.
3.2 It is also submitted that as per the provisions of Transaction of Business Rules and Allocation
of Business Rules, all Departments/Ministries are equal and the Department of Personnel and Training
has no power of superintendence over other Ministries to monitor the implementation of reservation
policy. This is why each Ministry/Department is entrusted to monitor and implementation of reservation
policy in their Department/Ministry/Attached and Subordinate offices and organizations under their
administrative control. It is also submitted that grievance of SCs and STs are taken care of by the
Ministry/Department itself.
3.3 To ensure that the instructions on reservation are implemented properly, each Ministry/
Department has a liaison officer separately for SCs and STs. He is required to bring out any lapses/
shortcoming in implementation of orders on reservation directly to Secretary/Additional Secretary of
the Ministry/Department concerned.
3.4 Department of Personnel and Training has issued instructions from time to time that:
“If sufficient number of suitable SC/ST/OBC candidates do not become available to fill up the
vacancies reserved for them in the first attempt of recruitment, a second attempt should be
made for recruiting suitable candidates belonging to the concerned category in the same
recruitment year or as early as possible before the next recruitment year so that the backlog
reserved vacancies are not created. If, even after making such efforts, the reserved vacancies
are not filled and backlog reserved vacancies are carried forward to the subsequent recruitment
year, concerted efforts should be made to fill up the backlog reserved vacancies as soon as
possible”.
3.5 The Department of Personnel and Training have been launching Special Recruitment Drives to
fill up the backlog reservation vacancies of SCs and STs from time to time, in a time-framed manner.
The last such Drive was concluded in March, 2012 to fill up the backlog reserved vacancies of SCs,
STs and OBCs. As per information received from various Ministries/Department, there were 75,552
backlog reserved vacancies of SCs, STs and OBCs out of which 48,034 have been filled up.
Special Recruitment Drive for Persons with Disabilities
Recommendation/Observation
4. The Committee feels that the success rate of the Special Drive which is 39.78%, is
quite low.
(Para 3.25)
4.1 The Committee is disheartened to note that in spite of the existence of vacancies for
persons with disabilities and the availability of persons with good amount of skill and talent,
the vacancies continue to remain unfilled. The Committee would like to impress upon the
Ministry to give due thought and consideration to this situation and to come out with a definite
action plan to address this problem.
(Para 3.26)
Action Taken Reply
4.2 Achievement of the Special Recruitment Drive up to 30
th June, 2011 as reported by the
Ministries/Departments was submitted to the Cabinet through a Cabinet Note. The Cabinet in its
meeting held on 04.01.2012 considered the Cabinet Note and gave direction to complete the process
of filling up the backlog vacancies by 31
st March, 2012 by all Departments and also to institutionalize

45
a mechanism for enhancing the employability of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribe, Other Backward
Classes and differently abled persons after discussions among the Department of Personnel and
Training, Ministry of Tribal Affairs and the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.
4.3 The achievement of the Drive concluded on 31.03.2012 was analyzed and the areas of concern
for less employability and measures to address the problems have been considered. The Cabinet has
been apprised of the achievement of the Special Recruitment Drive and related issues.
Committee’s further observation
4.4 The Committee desires that DoPT, apart from issuing necessary instructions, should
monitor their implementation periodically and take up with the concerned Ministries/Departments
the non-adherence thereof, if any, and take adequate rectifying action. The Committee also
recommends that DoPT may have a re-look at the strategy for launching Special Recruitment
Drives, in order to enhance its success percentage.
Special Recruitment Drive
Recommendation/Observation
5. In this regard, the Committee also feels that the DoPT should play a proactive role and
ensure the appointment of Liaison Officer in respect of matters relating to representation of
SCs and STs, in all Ministries/Departments, without any further delay. The Committee strongly
feels that DoPT should also put in place a mechanism for monitoring that ensures filling up
of the reserved vacancies and also the back log, if any, that arises in the course of time.
(Para 3.23)
Action Taken Reply
5.1 The Department of Personnel and Training has issued instructions from time to time for
appointment of a separate Liaison Officer for SCs and STs in each Ministry/Department and with
further instructions that the copy of appointment of Liaison Officer in this regard should be endorsed
to DoPT for information. It is primarily the responsibility of the Liaison Officer to ensure that
reserved/backlog vacancies are reported and filled up in time. Meetings are also conducted with the
Liaison Officers from time to time in connection with filling up of reserved/backlog vacancies of SCs
and STs in their respective Departments.
Committee’s further observation
5.2 The Committee desires that the Ministry should take necessary follow-up action to ensure
that its instruction regarding appointment of Liaison Officer are adhered to scrupulously. The
Ministry could also devise an action plan to co-ordinate with the Liaison Officers regarding the
occurrence and filling up of reserved vacancies and the hurdles faced by the concerned Ministry/
Department in filling up the vacancies. The Committee feels that DoPT can appropriately aid the
Ministry/Department to overcome such hurdles.
Overstay while on deputation
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee reiterates its recommendation and desires that it may be apprised of
the cases where, disciplinary action or adverse civil service consequences were meted out to
the officers, for overstaying on deputation. The Committee is of the view that the DoPT should

46
monitor cases of deputation which violate the prescribed guidelines (instead of the concerned
Department/Organisation) so that their compliance is strictly ensured.
(Para 3.45)
Action Taken Reply
6.1 In reference to the views of the Committee, instructions have been issued to Ministries/
Departments for monitoring the deputations. As regards the desire of the Hon’ble Committee for data
on any disciplinary proceedings or other actions against the employees for overstay, it is stated that
as no centralized data is maintained.
6.2 The number of deputations at any time is very large. The offices from which the deputationists
proceed and the borrowing department are scattered all over India. The powers are delegated for
smooth functioning of administration; therefore the Ministries/Departments are the correct agencies to
monitor it.
Committee’s further observation
6.3 The Committee is of the considered view that DoPT should play a larger role in the issue
of overstaying on deputation. The Committee feels that leaving the process at the hands of the
concerned Ministry/Department could give room to exercise of arbitrary discretionary powers in the
process of deciding on deputation, extending period of deputation etc. The DoPT may consider
mandating an annual statement, from each Ministry/Department, on the officers on deputation,
and on the punitive action taken so far, for overstaying on deputation.
Submission of RTI Returns
Recommendation/Observation
7. Keeping in view the importance of the need to streamline the process of submission of
the quarterly returns to the CIC, the Committee desires that the Ministry may consider the
proposal and take necessary action in this regard.
(Para 4.57)
Action Taken Reply
7.1 There are more than 4000 Public Authorities and it might be very difficult to ensure that all
Public Authorities adopt RTI-MIS fully, though it is desirable. All efforts would be made for timely
collection of statistics from Ministries.
Committee’s further observation
7.2 The Committee takes note of the reply and desires that suitable action may be taken to
ensure that all Public Authorities adopt RTI-MIS fully, may be in a phased manner, in order to
ensure that the quarterly returns are submitted without delay.
Paras 4.79 and 4.81
Organizational restructuring of SSC
Recommendation/Observation
8. Keeping in view the commendable performance of SSC in the last three years, the

47
Committee recommends the speeding up of the process of consideration of the proposal on
organizational restructuring of SSC.
(Para 4.79).
8.1 In this regard, the Committee strongly feels that SSC should be given the necessary
manpower and funds, particularly since organisations which currently do not fall within the
mandate of SSC, also seek its assistance to recruit its personnel, which proves its credibility
and efficiency.
(Para 4.81)
Action Taken Reply
8.2 On the proposal of SSC on restructuring/creation/upgradation of staff in SSC Headquarters, the
Commission has noted the decision of the Government communicated to it vide letters dated
3
rd October and 13 th November, 2010 and 27 th May, 2013. The Commission would request that DoPT
may take up the matter with department of expenditure once again for expediting SIU study and take
up creation/filling up of the posts recommended by SIU. Pending SIU study the vacancies in the
Commission and its regional offices at various levels may be filled up immediately.
Committee’s further observation
8.3 The Committee desires that DoPT should urgently take up the matter of restructuring/
creation/upgradation of staff in SSC Headquarters, with the Department of Expenditure and also
take necessary action to fill up the vacancies in SSC at various levels.

48
48
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
1. The Committee takes note of the reply. (Para 1.2)
2. The Committee takes note of the reply and hopes that the steps taken in this regard
prove to be fruitful in achieving optimum utilization of the allocated funds. (Para 2.2)
3. The Committee takes note of the reply. (Paras 3.2, 4.2, 5.2, 6.3)
4. The Committee takes note of the reply and desires to be apprised of the follow up
action taken in this regard. (Para 7.2)
5. The Committee takes note of the reply. (Paras 8.2, 9.2, 10.2, 11.2, 12.2)
6. The Committee takes note of the reply and desires to be apprised of the updated status
of the proposal in the Ministry’s Action taken note. (Para 13.2)
7. The Committee takes note of the reply and desires to be apprised of the follow up
action taken on this issue, in the Ministry’s Action taken note. (Para 14.2)
8. The Committee takes note of the reply. (Paras 15.2, 16.3, 17.2, 18.7, 19.2, 20.2, 21.2,
22.2, 23.2, 24.2, 25.2, 26.2)
9. The Committee takes note of the reply and desires to be apprised of the outcome of
the action initiated. (Para 27.2)
10. The Committee takes note of the reply. (Paras 28.2, 29.2, 30.2, 31.2, 32.2,
33.2, 34.2, 35.2, 36.2)
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURUSE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES GIVEN BY THE MINISTRY
1. The Committee takes note of the reply and is optimistic that the steps taken by the
Ministry would yield the desired outcome. (Para 1.4)
2. The Committee takes note of the reply. (Paras 2.2, 3.13, 4.2, 5.3, 6.6, 7.3, 8.2, 9.5,
11.7, 12.2, 13.2, 14.2, 15.2, 16.3, 17.2, 18.3,
19.5, 20.2, 21.2)
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
1. The Committee does recognize the need to engage consultants for availing high quality
services for which, the concerned Ministry/Department does not have requisite expertise.

49
However, many instances of re-appointments made on the pretext of consultancy have come
to the knowledge of the Committeee. The Committee strongly feels that such instances/
tendencies should not be encouraged. (Para 1.3)
2. As regards the other issue, the Committee is aware of the filling up of posts by
contractual appointments and is of the view that such a trend is not feasible for an efficient
and robust administration. The Committee feels that such appointments give room to arbitrary
exercise of discretion in the appointment process. Since DoPT is the nodal Department for
recruitment and appointment of personnel, the Committee reiterates its recommendation that
the Ministry should study the reasons for and magnitude of such appointments and their
impact on the performance output of the concerned Organisation. (Para 1.4)
3. The Committee desires that the additional guidelines proposed to be devised regarding
permission to undertake post retirement employment are formulated without delay.
(Para 2.3)
4. The Committee solicits an early resolution of this matter. (Para 3.2)
5. The Committee emphasises the importance of having full time CVOs in all Departments
and recommends that DoPT should take up the matter vigorously with the CVC. The Committee
desires to be apprised of the response received from the Ministries/Departments regarding the
SIU study of their respective Vigilance Division. (Para 4.3)
6. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry. The thrust of
the Committee’s concern was non-adherence to the due consultation process with CVC in
certain cases and the Committee is disappointed to note that the Ministry has not responded
to the specific concern of the Committee. The Committee, therefore, directs the Ministry to
furnish the details of the corrective measures taken by the Ministry in this regard, in its
Action taken note. (Para 5.2)
7. The Committee desires that the Ministry may furnish the action taken by it to ensure,
oversee and monitor that the Integrity Pact is mandatorily adopted by all Ministries/Departments.
(Para 6.3)
8. The Committee feels that the Ministry’s response does not address the issue of non-
filling of vacancies for want of personnel on deputation. Since the existence of vacancies is not
desirable in a crucial agency such as CVC, the Committee recommends that in the event of
non-availability of officers on offer on deputation, vacancies may be filled by promotion without
undue delay. The Committee also urges the Ministry to coordinate with the CVC in the matter
of vacancies to be filled up by the cadre personnel. (Para 7.2)
9. The Committee is of the considered view that the timely promotions of cadre personnel
in CVC should not suffer due to the induction of personnel on deputation. The Committee
desires that the Ministry should adequately address this concern. (Para 8.2)
10. The main objective of the Committee’s recommendation was to ensure that CBI gets
adequate forensic support through full-fledged labs at its disposal. The Committee finds the
situation of CBI sharing forensic labs with other organizations/entities, not advisable. The
Committee, further, takes serious note of the vacancies prevailing in CFSL at the Scientific
and Technical levels which constitute crucial manpower in the specialized agency. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that urgent steps should be taken to ensure that the vacancies are
filled up without delay. (Para 9.1)
11. The Committee takes note of the Ministry’s reply that direct recruitment as per the proposed
Recruitment Rules is to be done only at the rank of SIs. The Committee is not pleased to note that
not much thought has been given to the concern expressed by the Committee regarding non-

50
resorting to direct recruitment at the level of Deputy Superintendent of Police. The Committee
strongly feels that such direct recruitment is needed to ensure that competent and meritorious
personnel are inducted as officers in CBI who can render effective  supervision and who can
further strengthen the cadre of directly recruited officers in CBI. (Para 11.1)
12. The Committee takes note of the evasive reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committee
had recommended that the policy of not opting for direct recruitment in the ranks of
Constable and Dy. SP should be relooked. However, the Ministry has not touched upon this
aspect in its reply. The Committee takes strong exception to such evasiveness and directs the
Ministry to furnish, in this regard, a cogent reply in its Action Taken Note. (Para 14.1)
13. Further, the Committee takes note of the Ministry’s reply for fixing high percentage
as quota for deputation in higher ranks. The Committee is of the opinion that the presence
of cadre officers in higher ranks is essential to render effective supervision of the lower ranks
since they are more familiar with and have better experience and exposure to the procedures
and the protocol involved in successful prosecution and investigation, as compared to the
deputationists. The Committee strongly feels that the cadre officers’ rising to higher posts
would serve as a motivating factor for them. Therefore, the Committee desires that the
Ministry should re-consider the high percentage prescribed as quota for deputation, especially
from the level of DIG and above. (Para 14.2)
14. The Committee takes note of the different eligibility criteria existing for promotion of
cadre officers and deputationists in CBI. The Committee does not find this to be a desirable
situation and is apprehensive that such discrepancies could lower the morale of the cadre
officers. Therefore, it recommends that the Ministry should consider this anomaly, while
amending the Recruitment Rules. (Para 15.2)
15. The Committee takes note of the action taken in this regard. The Committee desires
that the amendments in the DSPE Act, 1946 which were approved by Cabinet, may be made,
without further delay. (Para 16.2)
16. The Committee reiterates its recommendation and feels that lending statutory support
to SSC, whose mandate has been stretched over the recent years, would enhance its efficiency.
(Para 17.2)
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HA VE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
1. The Committee takes note of the factors elaborated upon by the Ministry, responsible
for the vacancies prevailing in the IAS Cadre. The Committee has noted that the deficit/gap
in the promotion quota which stood at 47.75% as on 1.1.2012 has been reduced to 29.67% as
on 1.1.2013. The Committee recommends that the DoPT should take effective steps to further
reduce the deficit. The Committee also desires that the DoPT should take a proactive role to
ensure that the recruitment process in the promotion quota of IAS is expedited. (Para 1.7)
2. The Committee recognizes the fact that instructions regarding giving publicity and
availability of information about reserved vacancies already exist. However, the Committee is
doubtful as to whether the benefits of reservation have actually percolated to the beneficiaries.
In this regard, the Committee recommends that DoPT should take a proactive role and co-
ordinate with the respective Ministries/Departments/Agencies to ensure that the backlog of
reserved vacancies is filled up. (Para 2.2)

51
3. The Committee desires that DoPT, apart from issuing necessary instructions, should
monitor their implementation periodically and take up with the concerned Ministries/Departments
the non-adherence thereof, if any, and take adequate rectifying action. The Committee also
recommends that DoPT may have a re-look at the strategy for launching Special Recruitment
Drives, in order to enhance its success percentage. (Para 4.4)
4. The Committee desires that the Ministry should take necessary follow-up action to
ensure that its instruction regarding appointment of Liaison Officer are adhered to scrupulously.
The Ministry could also devise an action plan to co-ordinate with the Liaison Officers regarding
the occurrence and filling up of reserved vacancies and the hurdles faced by the concerned
Ministry/Department in filling up the vacancies. The Committee feels that DoPT can appropriately
aid the Ministry/Department to overcome such hurdles. (Para 5.2)
5. The Committee is of the considered view that DoPT should play a larger role in the
issue of overstaying on deputation. The Committee feels that leaving the process at the hands
of the concerned Ministry/Department could give room to exercise of arbitrary discretionary
powers in the process of deciding on deputation, extending period of deputation etc. The DoPT
may consider mandating an annual statement, from each Ministry/Department, on the officers
on deputation, and on the punitive action taken so far, for overstaying on deputation.
(Para 6.3)
6. The Committee takes note of the reply and desires that suitable action may be taken
to ensure that all Public Authorities adopt RTI-MIS fully, may be in a phased manner, in order
to ensure that the quarterly returns are submitted without delay. (Para 7.2)
7. The Committee desires that DoPT should urgently take up the matter of restructuring/
creation/upgradation of staff in SSC Headquarters, with the Department of Expenditure and
also take necessary action to fill up the vacancies in SSC at various levels. (Para 8.3)

MINUTES

55
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances,
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 3 rd January, 2014 in Committee Room No. ‘D’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shantaram Naik — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Anu Aga
3. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
4. Shri T.R. Baalu
5. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
6. Shri N.V .S. Chitthan
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Arjun Meghwal
9. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
10. Shri S. Semmalai
11. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh
12. Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Joint Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Director
Shri Ashok K. Sahoo, Joint Director
Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director
LIST OF WITNESSES
***
2 . ***
3 . ***
4 . ***
5 . ***
6 . ***
*** Relate to some other matters.

7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
(Witnesses then withdrew)
12. The Committee then considered the draft Sixty-seventh and Sixty-eighth Reports on the
“Infrastructure Development and Strengthening of Subordinate Courts” and “Action Taken Replies of
the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 60
th Report on Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions” and adopted the
same.
13. * * *
14. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was kept.
15. The meeting adjourned at 4.10 
P.M.
*** Relate to some other matters.

57
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
Report on Demands for Grants
(2004-05) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
Report on Demands for Grants
(2004-05) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice
Report on the Right to
Information Bill, 2004
Report on the Andhra Pradesh
Legislative Council Bill, 2004
Report on Demands for Grants
(2005-06) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
Report on Demands for Grants
(2005-06) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice
Report on the Hindu Succession
(Amendment) Bill, 2004
Report on the Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and Other
Backward Classes (Reservation
in Posts and Services) Bill, 2004
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
26.08.2004 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.08.2004
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.03.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 21.03.2005
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
24.03.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 24.03.2005
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
20.04.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 20.04.2005
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
13.05.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 13.05.2005
Presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha on 29
th  June, 2005 and
forwarded to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok
Sabha on 29
th June, 2005
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
26.07.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.07.2005
23.08.2004
-do-
16.03.2005
22.03.2005
11.04.2005
-do-
10.05.2005
07.06.2005
203
203
204
204
204
204
204
204
APPENDIX
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL,
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE
LIST OF REPORTS PRESENTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Report
No.
1
Subject of the Report
2
Date of
Presentation
4
Date of
Adoption
3
Session
No.
5

58
12 4 35
9th
10th
11th
12th
13th
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
28.07.2005
02.08.2005
02.08.2005
23.08.2005
27.10.2005
17.05.2006
-do-
02.08.2006
09.11.2006
27.02.2007
08.05.2007
Report on the Arbitration and
Conciliation (Amendment) Bill,
2003
Report on the High Court and
Supreme Court Judges (Salaries
and Conditions of Service)
Amendment Bill, 2005
Report on the National Tax
Tribunal Bill, 2004
Report on the Contempt of
Courts (Amendment) Bill, 2004
Report on the Prevention of
Child Marriage Bill, 2004
Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice
Report on the Representation of
the People (Amendment) Bill,
2006
Report on the Administrative
Tribunals (Amendment) Bill,
2006.
Report on the Electoral Reforms
(Disqualification of persons from
contesting elections on framing
of charges against them for
certain offences)
Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2005
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2005
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.08.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.08.2005
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.11.2005 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.11.2005
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
22.05.2006 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 22.05.2006
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2006 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2006
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
05.12.2006 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 05.12.2006
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
15.03.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 15.03.2007
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
10.05.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 14.05.2007
205
205
205
205
206
207
207
208
208
208
209

59
12 4 35
20th
21st
22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th
27th
28th
29th
Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice.
Report on the Judges (Inquiry)
Bill, 2006, Ministry of Law and
Justice (Department of Justice)
Report on the Gram Nyayalayas
Bill, 2007, Ministry of Law and
Justice, Legislative Department
Report on the Government’s
Policy of Appointment on
Compassionate Ground Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions (Department of
Personnel and Training)
Report on Working of Central
Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions
(Department of Personnel and
Training)
Report on Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
Report on Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice
Report on Action Taken Replies
on Law’s Delays : Arrears in
Courts (85
th Report of Home
Affairs)
Report on The Supreme Court
(Number of Judges) Amendment
Bill, 2008
Report on Public Grievances
Redressal Mechanism
08.05.2007
01.08.2007
29.08.2007
06.09.2007
04.03.2008
24.04.2008
-do-
-do-
01.08.2008
21.10.2008
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
10.05.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 14.05.2007
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.08.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.08.2007
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
06.09.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 06.09.2007
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
07.09.2007 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 07.09.2007
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
11.03.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 11.03.2008
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.04.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.04.2008
-do-
-do-
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha on 04.08.2008.Laid on
the Tables of the Rajya Sabha and
Lok Sabha on 22
nd October, 2008
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
23.10.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 23.10.2008
209
210
210
210
213
213
213
213
214
214

60
12 4 35
30th
31st
32nd
33rd
34th
35th
36th
37th
Report on Constraints Being
Faced by Kendriya Bhandar
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 25
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2008-09)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 26
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2008-09)
of the Ministry of Law and
Justice
Report on the Representation of
the People (Second Amendment)
Bill, 2008
Report on the High Court and
Supreme Court Judges (Salaries
and Conditions of Service)
Amendment Bill, 2008
Report on the “Action Taken
Replies of the Government
on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the
29
th Report of the Committee on
“Public Grievances Redressal
Mechanism”
Report on “The Constitution
(One Hundred and Eighth
Amendment) Bill, 2008”
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 24
th Report on
“Working of Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI)”
21.10.2008
16.12.2008
16.12.2008
16.02.2009
16.02.2009
14.12.2009
14.12.2009
03.03.2010
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
23.10.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 23.10.2008
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
19.12.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 19.12.2008
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
19.12.2008 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 19.12.2008
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
18.02.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 18.02.2009
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
18.02.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 18.02.2009
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2009
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2009 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2009
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
9.03.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 9.03.2010
214
214
214
215
215
218
218
219

61
12 4 35
Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice
Report on The Personal Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2010
Report on Action Taken Replies
of the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 23
rd Report of
the Committee on “Government’s
Policy of Appointment on
Compassionate Ground”
Report on Action Taken Replies of
the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 30th Report of
the Committee on “Constraints
Being Faced by Kendriya Bhandar”
Report on Action Taken Replies
of the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 38
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2010-11)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions
Report on The Constitution (One
Hundred and Fourteenth
Amendment) Bill, 2010
Report on The Marriage Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2010
Report on The Public Interest
Disclosure and Protection to
Persons Making the Disclosures
Bill, 2010
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.04.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.04.2010
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
04.08.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 04.08.2010
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.11.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.11.2010
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
9.12.2010 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 9.12.2010
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
1.03.2011 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 1.03.2011
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha on 09.06.2011. Laid on
the Tables of the Rajya Sabha on
11.08.2011 and Lok Sabha on 10.08.11
38
th
39th
40th
41st
42nd
43rd
44th
45th
46th
27.04.2010
-do-
29.07.2010
-do-
16.11.2010
-do-
07.12.2010
02.02.2011
11.05.2011
219
219
220
220
221
221
221
222
223

62
12 4 35
Report on the Judicial Standards
and Accountability Bill, 2010
Report on the Lokpal Bill, 2011
The Administrators-General
(Amendment) Bill, 2011
The Prevention of Bribery of
Foreign Public Officials and
Officials of Public International
Organisations Bill, 2011
Report on Demands for Grants
(2012-13) of the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions
Report on Demands for Grants
(2012-13) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice
Report on The Right of Citizens
for Time Bound Delivery of Goods
and Services and Redressal of their
Grievances Bill, 2011
Report on The Administrative
Tribunals (Amendment) Bill,
2012
Report on The Registration of
Births and Deaths (Amendment)
Bill, 2012
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 51
st Report on
Demands for Grants (2012-13)
of the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions
47
th
48th
49th
50th
51st
52nd
53rd
54th
55th
56th
25.08.2011
07.12.2011
24.01.2012
26.03.2012
15.05.2012
-do-
23.08.2012
11.12.2012
22.02.2013
13.03.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
30.08.2011 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 30.08.2011
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
9.12.2011 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 9.12.2011
Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha on 02.02.2012. Laid to
Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on
20.03.2012
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
29.03.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 29.03.2012
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.05.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 21.05.2012
-do-
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
28.08.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 28.08.2012
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2012 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2012
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
27.02.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 27.02.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.03.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 20.03.2013
223
224
224
225
225
225
226
227
228
228

63
12 4 35
Action Taken Replies of the
Government on the
Recommendations/ Observations
contained in the 52
nd Report on
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of
the Ministry of Law and Justice
Report on Demands for Grants
(2013-14) of the Ministry of
Law and Justice
The Readjustment of
Representation of Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes in
Parliamentary and Assembly
Constituencies Bill, 2013
Report on the Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions
Report on the “Electoral Reforms-
Code of Conduct for Political
Parties and Anti Defection Law”
Report on the “S tatus of Women
Government Employees, Service
Conditions, Protection against
exploitation, Incentives and other
related Issues”
Report on the Rajasthan
Legislative Council Bill, 2013
Report on the Judicial
Appointments Commission Bill,
2013
Report on the Representation of
the People (Second Amendment
and Validation) Bill, 2013
Report on the Right to Information
(Amendment) Bill, 2013
Report on the Infrastructure
Development and Strengthening
of Subordinate Courts
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
21.03.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 20.03.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
25.04.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.04.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
2.05.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 2.05.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
3.05.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 3.05.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
26.08.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 26.08.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
30.08.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 30.08.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
09.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 09.12.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
09.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 09.12.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
09.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 09.12.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
17.12.2013 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 17.12.2013
Presented to Rajya Sabha on
06.02.2014 and Laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 06.02.2014
57
th
58th
59th
60th
61st
62nd
63rd
64th
65th
66th
67th
13.03.2013
23.04.2013
29.04.2013
02.04.2013
19.08.2013
29.08.2013
27.11.2013
27.11.2013
06.12.2013
13.12.2013
03.02.2014
228
228
228
228
229
229
230
230
230
230
231

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.