 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021 / Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
  
ONE HUNDRED ELEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
STRENGTHENING OF GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM OF 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th December, 2021) 
REPORT NO 
111 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajya sabha.nic.in 
E-mail : rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in 

CS (P & L) - --- 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021 / Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
ONE HUNDRED ELEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
STRENGTHENING OF GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM OF 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th December, 2021) 
 (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th December, 2021) 

C O N T E N T S 
   PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)  
2. INTRODUCTION (ii) - (iii) 
3. ACRONYMS    (iv)  
4. REPORT 1 - 14 
 CHAPTER 1 
 INTRODUCTION 1-3 
 CHAPTER 2  
 GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM (CPGRAMS)-OBSERVATIONS  
         AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 4-14  
 5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE                                        15-17                 
 6.  RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                       18-20 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
6. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
7. Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
8. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
9. Shri P. Wilson 
10. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
12. Shri Pradan Baruah 
13. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
14. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
15. Shri Vinod Chavda 
16. Shrimati Veena Devi 
17. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
18. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
19. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal 'Nishank' 
20. Shri Kanumuru Raghu Rama Krishna Raju  
21. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
22. Shri Malook Nagar 
23. Shri Suresh Pujari 
24. Shri A. Raja  
25. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pawan Rajenimbalkar 
26. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
27. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
28. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
29. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
30. Shri B. Manickam Tagore 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Director 
3. Shri Amit Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Mohammad Amin Ansari, Deputy Director 
6. Ms. I.V. Rajya Laxmi, Assistant Committee Officer 
(i) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been 
authorized by the Committ ee on its behalf, do hereby pres ent the One Hundred 
Eleventh Report on the Subject ‘Strengthening of Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism of Government of India’. 
2.  The Committee identified the subject to examine the grievance redressal 
machinery of the Government of India and to identify the shortcomings therein 
and to suggest measures so as to facilitate effective and efficient redressal of 
public grievances. The subject was inter -alia notified in Parliamentary Bulletin 
Part-II No.60314, dated 10th December, 2020. 
3.  The Committee held intensive deliberations with the Secretary, 
Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances on 9 th 
December, 2020 and 18 th January, 2021. During the meetings, the Committee 
discussed the structure of grievance redressal  machinery in India , the present 
system of grievance redressal, loopholes in its working and measures 
contemplated by the Department to  improve the system further . 
4.  While considering the Subject, the Committee mainly relied upon the 
following documents/information:-  
(i) Background notes, power point presentations of Department of  
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances;  
(ii) Rep lies furnished by Department of Administrative Reforms and Public 
Grievances to the questionnaires furnished by the Secretariat;  
(iii) Website of the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public 
Grievances.   
(ii) 
  

(iv)  News articles, editorials and material from the internet.  
5.     The Committee wishes to place on record its gratitude to the Secretary, 
Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances for furnishing 
necessary information/ documents and renderi ng valuable assistance to the 
Committee in its deliberations.  
6. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
7. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on 
the  8th December,2021. 
 
 
New Delhi         SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
8th December, 2021                                 Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Committee on Personnel Public Grievances  
Law and Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (iii) 

ACRONYMS 
 
AR&PG   Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances 
 
ATR   Action Taken Report 
 
 
BSNL   Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited 
 
 
CPGRAMS Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
DARPG  Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances 
DPG                     Directorate of Public Grievances (DPG) 
HOD  Head of Department 
JK-IGRAMS Jammu and Kashmir Integrated Grievance Redress and Monitoring 
System   
J&K   Jammu and Kashmir 
MOS PP  Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
OM   Office Memorandum 
PG   Public Grievance 
PMO  Prime Minister’s Office 
RTI   Right to Information  
SMS  Short Message Service` 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (iv) 
 
 

1 
 
Chapter 1 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice has taken up the subject ‘ Strengthening of 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism of Government of India ’ for detailed 
examination. The Committee believes that an efficient and effective grievance 
redressal mechanism ensures accountability and increases citizen satisfaction, 
both of which are key elements of good governance.  
1.2 The Committee is conscious of the fact that lack of an ef fective 
mechanism for the redressal of grievances is one of the weaknesses of 
national governance today. Hence, the Committee has embarked on a journey 
to identify the major hindrances affecting the redressal process and to suggest 
suitable reforms.  
1.3 The Committee held intensive deliberations with the Secretary, 
Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances on 9 th 
December, 2020 and 18 th January, 2021. During the meetings, the Committee 
discussed the structure of grievance redressal mechanis m in the country, the 
present system of grievance redressal, loopholes in its working and measures 
contemplated by the Department to improve the system further.  
Grievance Redressal Mechanism of the Government of India  at the Apex 
Level 
1.4 The grievances of public are received at various points in the Government 
of India . There are primarily two designated nodal agencies in the Central 
Government handling these grievances. These agencies are:- 
(i) Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances, Ministry 
of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions; 

2 
 
(ii) Directorate of Public Grievances, Cabinet Secretariat. 
Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances 
1.5  Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances is the nodal 
agency in respect  of policy initiatives on public grievances redress mechanism 
and citizen centric initiatives. The role of Department of Administrative 
Reforms and Public Grievances consists primarily to undertake such citizen -
centric initiatives in the fields of administ ration reforms and public grievances 
in the Government so as to enable the Government machinery to deliver quality 
public services to the citizen in a hassle-free manner and eliminate the causes of 
grievance. 
Directorate of Public Grievances (DPG) 
1.6  Based on the review of the public grievance redress machinery in 
Government of India carried out in 1987, the Directorate of Public Grievances 
was set up in the Cabinet Secretariat with effect from 01.04.88. This Directorate 
was set up initially to look into individual complaints pertaining to four Central 
Government Departments which were more prone to public complaints. 
Subsequently, more Departments having larger public interface were added to 
its purview and presently this Directorate is handling grievance s pertaining to 
16 Central Government Organisations. 
1.7  The Directorate was envisaged as an appellate body investigating 
grievances selectively and particularly those where the complainant had failed 
to get redress at the hands of internal machinery and the hierarchical authorities. 
Unlike the Department of AR& PG, Directorate of Public Grievances has been 
empowered to call for the files and officers for discussion to see that grievance 
handling has been done in a fair, objective and just manner. Wherever the 
Directorate is satisfied that the grievance has not be en dealt in such a manner, it 
makes suitable recommendations for consideration and adoption by the 

3 
 
concerned Ministry/Department which are required to be implemented within a 
period of one month. 
Public Grievance Redress Mechanism in Central  Government/ Ministries/ 
Departments/ Organisations: 
1.8 The Public Grievance Redress Mechanism functions in Government of 
India on a decentralized basis. The Central Government 
Ministries/Departments, their attached and subordinate offices and the 
autonomous bodies dealing with substantive functions as per Allo cations of 
Business Rules, 1961 have their respective grievance redress machinery. An 
officer of the level of Joint Secretary is required to be designated as Director of 
Grievances of the Ministry/Department/Organisation. The Directors of 
Grievances are empowered to call for f iles/reports and take decisions or review 
decisions already taken, in consultation with Secretary/HOD even in those areas 
which do not fall within his/her domain/charge. 
1.9 The functioning of Public Grievance Redress Machineries in various 
Ministries/Departments/Organisations is regularly reviewed by a Standing 
Committee of Secretaries under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary with 
Additional Secretary Department of Administrative Reforms and Public 
Grievances as member-secretary. 
  

4 
 
Chapter 2 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism (CPGRAMS)-Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee 
2.1 The Allocation of Business Rules, 1961, allocates to D epartment of 
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances, inter alia, the responsibility for 
Policy, Coordination and Monitoring of issues relating to (a) Redress of Public 
Grievances in general and (b) Grievances pertaining to Central Government 
Agencies, in particular. In accordance with the federal principle of governance, 
the grievances relating to States are forwarded to concerned State Government 
for appropriate action.   Towards this end, DARPG has established the 
Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS). 
2.2 CPGRAMS is  an online  portal available to public 24x7 to lodge their 
grievances against the authorities . Public grievance mechanism of Prime 
Minister’s Office ( PMO), the President’s Secretariat, the Directorate of Public 
Grievances (Cabinet Secretariat), Department of Administ rative Reforms & 
Public Grievances (DARPG) and that of Department of Pensioners’ portal, have 
been duly integrated through CPGRAMS, enabling grievances lodged to any of 
these entities to be transferred to the Central Ministries/  Departments and State 
Governments online through CPGRAMS. All grievance officers have role based 
login access to CPGRAMS. The CPGRAMS interlinks 87 Central Ministries/  
Departments and 37 States / UTs. There are about 65,000 sub -ordinate offices 
created and linked in CPGRAMS.  
2.3 CPGRAMS also facilitates tracking grievances through  a system 
generated unique registration number. The system enables Ministries/  
Departments to take appropriate action and upload the Action Taken Report 
(ATR) on the system which can be viewed by the citi zens online with the help 
of the unique registration number. The grievances received manually are also 
digitized and uploaded on the system. 

5 
 
2.4 Public grievances usually come in two forms (i) Through the CPGRAMS; 
and (ii) through post. The grievances received by post are digitized and sent 
both through the System as well as by post to the Ministry/  Department/ State 
Government concerned.  However, there are certain issues which do not fall 
within the scope for grie vance redressal such as sub-judice cases or any matter 
concerning judgment given by any court; p ersonal and  family disputes; RTI 
matters; a nything that impacts upon territorial integrity of the country or 
friendly relat ions with other countries; and s uggestions. These kinds of 
representation are filed without taking any action on them. 
2.5 There are certain guidelines issued by the central Government for 
redressal of grievances, which are as under:- 
(i) A grievance received is disposed within a period of two mo nths 
and in case of delay, an interim reply with reasons for delay should 
be furnished.  
 
(ii) A well reasoned speaking reply should be furnished while closing a 
grievance and relevant documents to be uploaded. 
 
(iii) Each Ministry/  Department should have a Director of Public 
Grievances who can be approached in case the grievances are not 
redressed or the complainant is not satisfied. 
 
2.6 The Committee is of the considered opinion that the grievance 
redressal mechanism of an organisation is an instrument to measure  its 
efficiency and effectiveness as it provides important feedback on the 
working of that organisation. However, it is also important to understand 
that governance is an area where the citizen too has a specific role to play 
at every given point. The Comm ittee notes that, i n their eagerness to 
comply with established instructions, grievances are increasingly being 
disposed of by some departments or organisations simply with the 
suggestion to approach another agency, sometimes a subordinate office.  In 

6 
 
some cases, the grievance is being re -sent to the agency against which the 
complaint is made and in some o thers, the online grievances are being 
disposed with the advice to take the grievance to the portal of the agency or 
some complaint committee. The Committ ee notes that DARPG has 
instructed the Ministries/Departments to give valid reasons for closure. 
However, in many cases this is not being done. The Committee impresses 
upon the Ministries/Departments to strictly comply with the instructions 
issued by Depar tment of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances 
from time to time in respect of grievance redressal. 
2.7 Details of percentage of disposal of grievances received through 
CPGRAMS is as under: 
Receipt and disposal of grievances received on CPGRAMS as on 30-11-2019: 
Year Receipts Disposal 
Percentage of 
disposal 
2016 1483165 1229428 82.89% 
2017 1866121 1772668 94.99% 
2018 1577500 1498519 94.99% 
2019 1735438 1495898 86.19% 
 
2.8 From the above, it is clear that the r ate of disposal has kept pace with 
number of grievances received.  DARPG is holding Review meetings regularly 
with various Ministries/ Departments/ Organisations for monitoring the 
pendency / disposal of public grievances. High rate of disposal  has been  
achieved as steps have been taken to put in place a strong grievance redressal 
mechanism. Also, an Analysis to help identification of the problem areas in 
which modifications of policies and procedures could be undertaken with a 
view to making the deliver y of services easier and more expeditious was done. 

7 
 
This called for review of existing policies/procedures to bring about systemic 
changes to reduce the cause of public grievances as far as possible. 
 2.9 With this objective a Grievance Analysis Study was conducted through 
Quality Council of India (in 2015 -2017) for identifying grievance prone areas, 
undertake root cause analysis and recommend systemic reforms in respect of 
top 40 grievance receiving Ministries/Departments/ Organizations. Reports of 
the St udy were duly circulated to the concerned Ministries/ 
Departments/Organizations with recommendations for reforms. Some of the 
notable reforms introduced as a result of the study are: automatic refunds on 
cancellation of Railway Tickets, Single Window Pensi on through disbursing 
Banks, intensive mechanized cleaning of coaches, e -verification of Income Tax 
Returns, expeditious Income Tax Returns upto Rs.50,000/-,  etc 
Evolution of CPGRAMS: 
2.10 CPGRAMS is being evaluated continuously and reforms have been 
undertaken by the Government from time to time . So far , CPGRAMS has 
implemented 6 versions; each new version is an up -gradation of the previous 
version. A new version of CPGRAMS Reforms, version 7.0, has been launched 
and implemented by DARPG on a pilot basis in the Department of Posts on 25 th 
September, 2019, followed by the launch and implementation of the new 
version in Departments of Telecommunications and Financial Services 
(Banking & Insura nce Division) on 05 th November, 2019, whereby petitioners 
can click on an icon to lodge a grievance.  
2.11 CPGRAMS 7.0 includes a guided registration process for the citizen 
through drop -down menu/ questionnaire and enables automatic forwarding of 
the grievance to the concerned field office/ sub -ordinate office where it would 
be resolved. These Reforms will result in reduction in redress time of a public 
grievance. For example, in Department of Posts , the Reforms enabled Mapping 
to 1.5 lakh Post Offices to whom the grievances are now auto forwarded  with 
no manual intervention. This has resulted faster redressal of the complaint  

8 
 
2.12  The Committee appreciates the Department for sparing no efforts in 
strengthening the grievance redressal system. The Committee opines that  
having a grievance redressal platform is one thing, demonstrating the right 
intentions is another thing. Thus, the Committee recommends that the 
following goals should also be on radar of the Department while developing 
the next versi on of CPGRAMS, namely, Opening channels for effective 
communication, Promoting productive relationship, Mitigating and 
preventing adverse impact on stakeholder caused by department’s 
operations, and more importantly Making stakeholders part of the process. 
Workflow in CPGRAMS:- 
 
2.13 Workflow in CPGRAMS starts with  One Time Registration with mobile 
or email authentication. These Grievances can be tracked through unique 
registration number. People can select the concerned Ministry / Department/ 
State and file the grievance. A unique Registration number is generated and 
conveyed to the applicant through SMS/ email. Grievance directly goes to the 
concerned nodal/grievance officer. Intimation on email an d SMS is made as 
soon as grievance is disposed. Feedback facility is also available on CPGRAMS 
on disposal quality. An Appeal mechanism has also been provided if 
complainant is not satisfied with the resolution. 
Citizen Registration
Grievance Officer
Citizen
View Status
Give Feedback
Appeal

9 
 
Integration with the State Government Portals: 
2.14 CPGRAMS integration with state portal  has also b een taken up by 
DARPG. As on date 12 States/UTs portals namely, J&K, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Uttrakhand, Meghalaya, Goa, 
Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh have been Integrated with CPGRAMS 
portal. The integration of r emaining State portals, is under process. CPGRAMS 
also intended to integrate districts by mapping district level offices and 
grievance officers in CPGRAMS. J&K is the first State to achieve this 
integration. JK-IGRAMS integrates the grievances from the Cen tralized Public 
Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) at the top with the last 
mile district level offices at the bottom. 260 Departments / Offices and 1724 
District level Offices have been linked in the grievance redressal system of the 
UT. 
2.15 The Committee has observed that many grievances received on 
CPGRAMS are related to State governments.  Some grievances received on 
CPGRAMS revealed that in several of these cases, the petitioner was asked 
to approach the State government and the griev ance was disposed rather 
than forwarded. There was no redressal.  The Committee recommends that 
CPGRAMS should play  the role of facilitator for the public without 
impinging on the nature of federalism. The performance of States on the 
portal can be left to  them but the facilitation responsibility of the Centre 
cannot be shed when a public grievance is registered, and there is a 
jurisdictional conflict involved. 
2.16 The Committee is pleased to note that DARPG is gradually making 
way for One Nation –One Grievance Redressal Portal. However, the 
Committee recommends the Department to ensure that certain features  
are incorporated while integrating CPGRAMS with State Portals, namely, 
identifying right stakeholders for redressal , Facility of auto forwarding 

10 
 
delayed or specific kind of grievances to right team/ person  and creating a 
dashboard for monitoring grievance statistics on regular basis including 
features for logging and presenting root cause analysis  and trend analysis. 
Performance of CPGRAMS: 
2.17 Major areas of grievances as recorded in CPGRAMS are employee 
related grievances, harassment/ atrocities/ corruption, civic amenities, labour 
issues etc. The top ten Ministries/Departments which have received largest 
number of grievances during the last five years are as under: 
Consolidated for last last 5 Years (01.01.2016 to 31.12.2020)  
 
Ministry/ Department Received Disposed Percentage Of 
Disposals 
 
Department of Financial Services 
(Banking Division)  
 
579845 574926 99.15 
Department of 
Telecommunications  
 
354189 356208 100.57 
Ministry of Railways (Railway 
Board)  
 
263282 269144 102.23 
Department of Posts  
 
220560 218860 99.23 
Ministry of Labour and 
Employment  
 
198430 197995 99.78 
Central Board of Direct Taxes 
(Income Tax)  
 
186457 185520 99.50 
Ministry of Home Affairs  
 
151785 155631 102.53 
Department of Personnel and 
Training  
 
139714 139391 99.77 
Department of Health & Family 
Welfare  
 
114715 115734 100.89 
Department of Agriculture, 
Cooperation and Farmers Welfare 
  
107192 85862 80.10 
 

11 
 
2.18 To follow up the action taken on the grievances, review meetings are held 
periodically with all Ministries / Departments for expeditious disposal of 
grievances received in CPGRAMS. To evaluate quality of disposal a feedback 
mechanism is available in C PGRAMS. The citizen gets intimation on email/ 
SMS as soon as his grievance is disposed. The citizen has the option of 
feedback regarding the redressal of the grievance. DAPRPG also engaged 
BSNL to measure citizen satisfaction on the grie vances disposed dur ing 
30/3/2020 to 30/5/2020 under COVID -19 category in CPGRAMS. 68% of the 
citizens who gave their feedback said their grievance was resolved of which 
90% were satisfied with the redressal. Further to evaluate quality of disposal a 
feedback mechanism is ava ilable in CPGRAMS. The citizen gets intimation on 
email/ SMS as soon as his grievance is disposed. The citizen has the option of 
feedback regarding the redressal of the grievance. So far, 7,72,355 feed backs 
have been received in the CPGRAMS. 
2.19 The Committee recommends the Department that feedback and 
suggestions on the performance of grievance redressal system should be 
taken from the public in order to improve the effectiveness, efficiency and 
credibility of grievance redress mechanism and gri evance prevention 
possibilities. Best suggestions should be rewarded and their implementation 
and value addition should be highlighted for improving the credibility of 
the system. 
2.20 DARPG has issued the OM dated 6th January, 1997 to all Ministries and 
Departments for setting up social audit panel or other such machinery for 
examining areas of public interface and recommending essential changes in 
procedures to make them people friendly. However, over the period after 
introduction of citizen charters and CPGRAMS, the objective is being 
addressed through continuous evaluation/updation of citizen charters and by 
analysing grievances received in CPGRAMS for systemic reforms. 

12 
 
2.21 The Committe e recommends the Department to s trengthen public 
interface mechanism s for redress like lok adalats and jan sunvais, 
wherever feasible, taking it to the doorstep of the people needing redress. 
This can be decided in the light of complaints as well as the very field of 
policy, as and when it is location specific.  
2.22 The C ommittee notes that CPGRAMS has not been uniformly 
operationalized in all organizations. Besides, wide variations are apparent 
across the Ministries/ Departments and other organizations in respect of 
the extent of commitment, framework and processes instit uted and the 
capacity to handle grievances. Some organizations have not taken any 
initiative in this regard. Efficiency and effectiveness of the administrative 
processes and polices are directly dependant on the state of public 
grievances in any organisati on. Timely ventilation and redressal of 
grievances are necessary for any citizen friendly administration. Therefore, 
the Committee recommends that there should be an overall 
review/evaluation of the procedure of handling grievances of  the 
Ministries/ Departments/ Organisations in the Government of India. 
Proactive measures taken by DARPG for handling of COVID -19 related 
Public Grievances received in CPGRAMS. 
2.23` DARPG has created a separate category 'COVID -19' for 
capturing/lodging of public grievances by citizens in CPGRAMS on 
01.04.2020. The Stipulated time for redressal of COVID -19 grievances was 
brought down from 60 days for normal grievances to 3 days for COVID -19 
related public grievances. Instructions were issued to all the 
Ministries/departments as well as States and UTs accordingly. COVID -19 PG 
cases were classified into 11 categories    and every Grievanc e has been 
monitored Department-wise/ State/ Distri ct-wise on the portal. Auto -generated 
email reminders were being sent for all cases pending b eyond 3 days on 
COVID-19 public grievances. The MOS PP launched the National Dashboard 

13 
 
for 'COVID -19' for exclusive monitoring of COVID -19 public grievances on 
March 30, 2020 itself. Work without break to break VIRUS chain in mission 
mode, collaborative c oncerted actions and resolved to rise to the occasion to 
meet the challenges & Intensive Review Meetings were held with nodal 
Officers of States/Central Ministries. Press Statements/Infographics and Tweets 
were issued. Daily Reports were sent to Empowered Group 10 / 5 Category 
wise disposal and pendency, DARPG coordinated with other Empowered 
Groups, and District Collectors in cases of Food and Migrant labor. 
2.24 DARPG has , in collaboration with BSNL , operationalized a Feed Back 
Call Center  on disposed CO VID-19 related public grievances received in 
CPGRAMS. The Feedback Call Centres sought  feedback from individual 
citizens on citizen satisfaction on 1.28 lac COVID -19 Public Grievances that 
were filed on CPGRAMS for the period 30/3/2020 to 30/5/2020. Feedback call-
centres operated in Hindi, English, Gujarati, Marathi, Punjabi, Kannada, 
Konkani, Malayalam, Tamil, Telugu, Oriya, Bengali, Assamese and Rajasthani. 
The Number of Calls made for feedback by the feedback call center were 
89,240. The feedback  given were by 43,825 citizens. 68% of the citizens who 
gave their feedback said that their grievance s were  resolved. While 90% of 
these  citizens were  satisfied with the redressal, 4% were dis -satisfied and 6% 
did not comment 
2.25 The Committee recommends the Department to create a Dashboard 
on the website pertaining to grievance redressal comprising performance 
indicators such a s average complaints per day, disposal rate, average 
disposal time, Excellent/ Satisfactory Feedback, Complaint shared from 
different channels. 
2.26 The Committee recommends DARPG to impress upon Ministries 
/Departments to undertake a regular review of grievances, which are raised 
in print and electronic media and include the analysis in the quarterly 

14 
 
report submitted to the DARPG. It sh ould also ensure that the review 
undertaken by them and the action taken on the suggestions are put on its 
website. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
Chapter 2 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism (CPGRAMS) -Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee 
 
1.  The Committee is of the considered opinion that the grievance redressal  
mechanism of an organisation is an instrument to measure its efficiency and 
effectiveness as it provides important feedback on the working of that organisation. 
However, it is also important to understand that governance is an area where the 
citizen too has a specific role to play at every given point. The Committee notes that, in 
their eagerness to comply with established instructions, grievances are increasingly 
being disposed of by some departments or organisations simply with the suggestion to 
approach another agency, sometimes a subordinate office.  In some cases, the grievance 
is being re-sent to the agency against which the complaint is made and in some others, 
the online grievances are being disposed with the advice to take the grievance to the 
portal of the agency or some complaint committee. The Committee notes that DARPG 
has instructed the Ministries/Departments to give valid reasons for closure. However, in 
many cases this is not being done. The Committee impresses upon the 
Ministries/Departments to strictly comply with the instructions issued by Department 
of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances from time to time in respect of 
grievance redressal.                                                                                                   (Para 2.6)                                                                                                                                         
2. The Committee appreciates the Department for sparing no efforts in 
strengthening the grievance redressal system. The Committee opines that having a 
grievance redressal platform is one thing, demonstrating the right intentions is another 
thing. Thus, the Committee recommends that the following goals should also be on radar 
of the Department while dev eloping the next version of CPGRAMS, namely, Opening 
channels for effective communication, Promoting productive relationship, Mitigating 
and preventing adverse impact on stakeholder caused by department’s operations, and 
more importantly Making stakeholders part of the process.                               (Para 2.12)                                                                                                                                                                                  
3. The Committee has observed that many grievances received on CPGRAMS are 
related to State governments.  Some grievances received on CPGRAMS revealed that in 
several of these cases, the petitioner was asked to approach the State government and 

16 
 
the grievance was disposed rather than forwarded. There was no redressal.  The 
Committee recommends that CPGRAMS should play the role of facilitator for the 
public without impinging on the nature of federalism. The performance of States on the 
portal can be left to them  but the facilitation responsibility of the Centre cannot be shed 
when a public grievance is registered, and there is a jurisdictional conflict involved.    
                                                                                                                                    (Para 2.15)                                                
4. The Committee is pleased to note that DARPG is gradually making way for One 
Nation –One Grievance Redressal Portal. However, the Committee recommends the 
Department t o ensure that certain features are incorporated while integrating 
CPGRAMS with State Portals, namely, identifying right stakeholders for redressal , 
Facility of auto forwarding delayed or specific kind of grievances to right team/ person 
and creating a dashboard for monitoring grievance statistics on regular basis including 
features for logging and presenting root cause analysis  and trend analysis.     (Para 2.16) 
5. The Committee recommends the Department that feedback and suggestions on 
the performance of grievance redressal system should be taken from the public in order 
to improve the effectiveness, efficiency and credibility of grievance redress  mechanism 
and grievance prevention possibilities. Best suggestions should be rewarded and their 
implementation and value addition should be highlighted for improving the credibility 
of the system.                                                                                                            (Para 2.19)                                                                  
6. The Committee recommends the Department to strengthen public interface 
mechanisms for redress like lok adalats and jan sunvais,  wherever feasible, taking it to 
the doorstep of the people needing redress. This can be decided in the light of 
complaints as well as the very field of policy, as and when it is location specific.  
                                                                                                                                   (Para 2.21) 
7. The Committee notes that CPGRAMS has not been uniformly operationalized  in 
all organizations. Besides, wide variations are apparent across the Ministries/ 
Departments and other organizations in respect of the extent of commitment, 
framework and processes instituted and the capacity to handle grievances. Some 
organizations have not taken any initiative in this regard. Efficiency and effectiveness of 
the administrative processes and polices are directly dependant on the state of public 
grievances in any organisation. Timely ventilation and redressal of grievances are 
necessary f or any citizen friendly administration. Therefore, the Committee 

17 
 
recommends that there should be an overall review/evaluation of the procedure of 
handling grievances of the Ministries/ Departments/ Organisations in the Government 
of India.                                                                                                                     (Para 2.22) 
8. The Committee recommends the Department to create a Dashboard on the 
website pertaining to grievance redressal comprising performance indicat ors such as 
average complaints per day, disposal rate, average disposal time, Excellent/ Satisfactory 
Feedback, Complaint shared from different channels.                                        (Para 2.25) 
9. The Committee recommends DARPG to impress upon M inistries /Departments 
to undertake a regular review of grievances, which are raised in print and electronic 
media and include the analysis in the quarterly report submitted to the DARPG. It 
should also ensure that the review undertaken by them and the act ion taken on the 
suggestions are put on its website.                                                                         (Para 2.26)                                                  
 
****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

19 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
                  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
       
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 03:00 PM on the 8th December, 2021 
in Room No. 62, Parliament House, New Delhi – 110001.   
MEMBERS PRESENT 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
(ii) Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
(iii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
(iv) Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(v) Shri Shiv Pratap Shukla 
(vi) Shri P.Wilson 
(vii) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
LOK SABHA 
(viii) Shrimati Veena Devi 
(ix) Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
(x) Shri Kanumuru Raghu Rama Krishna Raju 
(xi) Shri Malook Nagar 
(xii) Shri Suresh Pujari 
(xiii) Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
(xiv) Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
 
SECRETARIAT 
           Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Director 
 Shri Amit Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
          Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
 Shri Mohd. Amin Ansari, Deputy Director 
 
 

20 
 
WITNESSES 
I. *             *                  * 
II.        *             *                  * 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman apprised the Members about the agenda for 
the meeting, i.e.,  
(i)  consideration & adoption of draft 108 th, 109 th, 110 th and 111 th reports of 
the Committee and  
(ii)       *             *                  * 
 
3. The Committee unanimously adopted all draft Reports and decided to 
present those Reports to Parliament on 10 th December, 2021.  The Chairman 
nominated Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar & Dr. Sasmit Patra for 
presenting the reports in Rajy a Sabha and Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari & Shri 
Jasbir Singh Gill for laying the reports in Lok Sabha.  
 
4. *             *                  * 
 
5. *             *                  * 
 
6. *             *                  * 
 
7. *             *                  * 
 
8. *             *                  * 
 
9. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10.      The meeting adjourned at 04.51 PM.  
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________  
***relate to other matters 