1 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND 
 JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
February, 2024 / Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
143 
 
ONE HUNDRED FORTY-THIRD REPORT 
ON THE SUBJECT 
"REVIEW OF THE WORKING OF LEGAL AID UNDER THE 
LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITIES ACT, 1987" 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 07thFebruary, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 07th February, 2024) 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-MAIL: rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in  
WEBSITE: http://sansad.in/rs 

3 
 
C O N T E N T S 
      
SR. 
NO. 
 
TOPIC PAGE 
1 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 4 
2 INTRODUCTION 6 
3 ACRONYMS 8 
4 REPORT 9 
5 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 20 
6 RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
24 
 
                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
5. Shri Sanjay Raut 
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
7. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
8. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
9. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
10. Shri P. Wilson 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Pradan Baruah 
14. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
15. Shri Vinod Chavda 
16. Shrimati Veena Devi 
17. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
18. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
19. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru  
20. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
21. Shri Malook Nagar 
22. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
23. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
24. Shri A. Raja  
25. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
26. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
27. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
28. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
29. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
30.      Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 

5 
 
31.  Vacant 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Smt. Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
Shri Prabhakar Singh, Under Secretary 
 
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been 
authorized by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby pres ent the One Hundred 
Forty-Third Report on the Subject „Review of the working of Legal Aid under 
the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987'.  
 
2. While examining the Subject the Committee held extensive deliberations 
with the stakeholders and heard the views of Secretary, Department of Justice; 
and Member Secretary, NALSA. The Committee also visited Tihar Jail, at Delhi 
and District Prison Gurugram (Bhondsi Jail) to have an on -the-spot assessment 
of legal aid provided to the undertrials. The Committee also had an opportunity 
to have the benefit of interaction with the Hon‟ble Dr. Justice D. Y. 
Chandrachud, Chief Justice of I ndia & Patron -in-Chief, NALSA; Hon'ble Mr. 
Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul, the then Executive Chairman, NALSA; and 
Hon‟ble Mr. Justice Sanjiv Khanna, Judge Supreme Court of India on the 
subject on 23.03.2023.  
 
3.  While considering the Subject, the Committee mainly relied upon the 
following documents/information:-  
(i) Background note on the subject furnished by the Department of 
Justice, Ministry of Law & Justice and NALSA; and 
(ii) Written submission made by Shri P. Wilson, Member of the 
Committee. 
 
4.     The Committee wishes to place on record its gratitude to  the Department 
of Justice (Ministry of Law & Justice), Government of India and NALSA for 
furnishing necessary information/documents and rendering valuable assistance 
to the Committee in its deliberations.  
 
5.  For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 

7 
 
6. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on 
the 6th February, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi         SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
7th February, 2024                          Chairman, 
             Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
 Committee on Personnel Public Grievances  
   Law and Justice 
 
  

8 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ADR Alternative dispute resolution 
LADCS Legal Aid Defense Counsel System 
NALSA National Legal Services Authority  
NCRB National Crime Records Bureau  
PLV Para-legal volunteers 
State LSAs State Legal Services Authorities  
 
  

9 
 
R E P O R T 
NALSA - AN INTRODUCTION  
1. Article 39A of the Constitution of India provides for free legal aid to the 
poor and weaker sections of the society and ensures justice for all. Also, 
Articles 14 and 22 (1) of the Constitution also make it obligatory for the State to 
ensure equality befor e law and a legal system which promotes justice on the 
basis of equal opportunity to all. In this background, the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987 was enacted by the Parliament, which came into force on 
9th November, 1995 to establish a nationwide netw ork for providing free and 
competent legal services to the weaker sections of the society on the basis of 
equal opportunity. 
2. The National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) is an apex organisation 
of Legal Services Authorities. It is tasked with framing o f legal aid policies and 
programmes and monitoring legal aid activities across the country. In every 
State, a State Legal Services Authority and in every High Court, a High Court 
Legal Services Committee has been constituted. District Legal Services 
Authorities, Taluk Legal Services Committees have been constituted in the 
Districts and most of the Taluks, respectively, to give effect to the policies and 
directions of the NALSA and to provide free legal services to the people and 
conduct Lok Adalats in the State. Supreme Court Legal Services Committee has 
been constituted to administer and implement the legal services programme 
insofar as it relates to the Supreme Court of India. 
 
FUNCTIONS AND ACTIVITIES OF NALSA 
 
3. Functions of Legal Services Institutions:  NALSA lays down the 
policies, principles, guidelines and frame effective and economical schemes for 
the State Legal Services Authorities to implement throughout the country. The 
main functions of NALSA are listed as under:  
 
i. The principal objective of NALSA is to provide free and competent legal 
services to the weaker sections of the society and to ensure that 
opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen because of 
socio-economic or other barriers;  
ii. To organize Lok Adalats for amicable settlement of disputes; 

10 
 
iii. To create legal awareness about the rights of the weaker and marginalized 
sections of the society, undertaking social justice litigations etc.; 
iv. To implement the Schemes and policy directions of NALS A through 
strategic and preventive Legal Services Programmes. 
 
4. Activities of Legal Services Authorities: The various activities 
conducted by the Legal Services Authorities are as follows: 
 
i. Legal aid and advice : Legal assistance in the form of representa tion 
through lawyers before the courts is provided to eligible categories. The 
term „Court‟ includes judicial courts, tribunal and any authority 
discharging any judicial or quasi - judicial functions. Legal advice is also 
provided through basic units such as “Front Offices” and “Legal Services 
Clinics”. Through these basic units free legal services in the form of legal 
advice, drafting of notices, replies, petitions etc. are also provided. Legal 
assistance is provided in civil as well as criminal matters. In  case of non-
legal problems, matters are referred to relevant government departments, 
and while doing so the required assistance is provided in the form of 
drafting of applications, filling up of forms etc.  
 
ii. Legal Services Outreach activities : Legal Servi ces reach out to people 
through various outreach tools with an overarching objective to dolegal 
empowerment of weaker and marginalised sections. Such outreach 
activities are conducted through legal awareness programmes, legal 
empowerment camps, campaigns f or a particular period with specific 
objectives, students legal literacy clubs, Legal services clinics of law 
colleges, print and electronic media and legal aid vehicles.  
 
iii. Alternative Dispute Resolution Mechanisms : Legal Services 
Authorities are also impl ementing alternative dispute resolution 
mechanisms such as “Lok Adalat” and “Mediation”. Lok Adalat is 
popularly known as People‟s court. Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 
has given statutory recognition to it. In Lok Adalat, cases are disposed of 
on the basis of amicable settlement between the parties. Cases pending in 
the courts as well as cases at pre -litigation stages are taken up and settled 
through Lok Adalats. Litigants do not have to incur any expenditure for 
getting their cases settled in the Lo k Adalats. This mode of settlement is 

11 
 
free of charge for people. Legal Services Authorities have developed 
capacities to conduct Pan India Lok Adalat, called as National Lok 
Adalat, on the same day across the country.  Similarly, Mediation is also 
being im plemented by Legal Services Authorities. With the onset of 
Covid-19 pandemic, Legal Services Authorities swiftly adapted to 
technological tools and shifted most of their activities to virtual 
platforms. The traditional ADR mechanisms were also shifted to v irtual 
platforms in the form of E-Lok Adalats and online mediations. 
 
iv. Victim Compensation Schemes : Legal Services Authorities are also 
implementing Victim Compensation Schemes for payment of 
compensation to the victims of crime. Victim Compensation Fund is  
primarily provided by the State governments. This function is being 
performed by Legal Services Authorities in pursuance to amendments 
brought in 2009 in the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973. 
 
5. Features of the legal aid system: The features of legal aid sy stem in 
India are as follows:  
 
i. Women, Children, persons in custody, victims of disaster, Scheduled 
Caste and Scheduled Tribes, an industrial workman, are eligible for free 
legal aid irrespective of their income. Apart from this, people having 
income less than ₹5,00,000/ per annum can av ail legal aid in Supreme 
Court and those having annual income upto amount upto a prescribed 
limit can avail legal aid in District and High Courts.  
ii. Legal Services Institutions are manned by judicial officers at all levels. 
iii. Counsel assignment system is prim arily followed in which Legal aid 
lawyers are paid on a case -to-case basis. In counsel assignment system, 
lawyers also take private cases. Recently, NALSA has also introduced 
system of Legal Aid Defence Counsel at all the Districts throughout the 
country, which includes dedicated full time experienced lawyers who 
will deal with cases of legal aid beneficiaries in criminal matters. The 
Legal Aid Defence Counsel System was initially introduced on pilot 
basis in 13 Districts in India. Subsequently, it was repl icated in 365 
districts. Now, all the remaining districts in India have been given 
necessary directions to take steps to implement the Legal Aid Defence 
Counsel System in their respective districts by 31.03.2023. Legal Aid 

12 
 
Defence Counsel System which is o n the lines of Public Defender 
system to enhance quality of legal representation in Criminal matters. In 
this system, lawyers engaged deal exclusively with criminal legal aided 
cases. Under this system, a Chief Legal Aid Defence Counsel having a 
minimum ex perience of 10 years, two Deputy(s) having a minimum 
experience of 7 years each, are to be engaged on contract basis. 
Advantages of Legal aid Defense Counsel System vis -a vis assigned 
counsel system are as follows: 
 Availability and accessibility of Legal Aid Defense counsel 
 Effective and efficient representation by seasoned lawyers 
 Timely and effective Client Consultations 
 Effective monitoring of legal aided cases 
 Professional management of legal aid work in criminal matters 
 Enhanced responsiveness leading to updating of legal aid 
seekers about the progress of their cases 
 
iv. Alternative Dispute Resolution mechanisms, implemented by Legal 
Services Authorities, are free of cost to the litigants, and Online E -Lok 
Adalats have been introduced to enable people to a vail ADR forum 
from their homes/workplaces only. 
v. Specific schemes have been formulated for provision of legal services 
to a wide range of beneficiaries. 
vi. Free Legal aid services in court cases includes all incidental expenses, 
apart from free legal representation through legal aid lawyers. 
vii. Legal assistance is available to all persons in custody at all stages of a 
criminal proceeding including pre-arrest, arrest, remand stages.   
viii. Jail Legal aid Clinics are established in almost all the prisons across the 
country to provide legal assistance to the prisoners. 
ix. Legal Empowerment programmes are carried out by Legal Services 
Authorities through various tools to enhance the capacities of weaker 
and marginalised sections of people.  
 
BUDGET 
 
6. The Central Government allocates funds to NALSA on a financial year 
basis for carrying out its functions provided under the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987. NALSA further allocates the said funds to the State 

13 
 
Legal Services Authorities. In turn, the State Legal Services Authorities allocate 
the received funds to District Legal Services Authorities and others. At the State 
level, salaries and other expenses are mainly paid by the State Governments. 
 
7. The details of funds allocated by the Central Govt.  for carrying out legal 
aid programmes by NALSA during the last four financial years and the ongoing 
financial year are as under:-  
 
Financial Year Grants-in-aid Allocated 
(Rs. in Crores) 
2019-20 140.00 
2020-21 100.00 
2021-22 145.00 
2022-23 190.00 
2023-24 200 (BE) 
 
 
DELIBERATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
Lack of Awareness and Legal Education 
8. A critical issue contributing to the justice gap is the lack of awareness 
among those who require legal aid. Insufficient legal education leaves  people 
unaware of their rights and the available avenues for legal assistance. India 
Justice Report 2019 1 reveals that since 1995, only 15 million individuals have 
availed themselves of legal aid, despite over 80 percent of the population being 
eligible for such assistance.  
9. Further, the data from the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) once 
again highlights the disproportionate representation of marginalized 
communities in Indian jails compared to their share of the population. Nearly 
two-thirds of th ese individuals are undertrials, implying that many of them, 
despite not being proven guilty, end up relinquishing their freedoms simply due 
                                           
1 https://indiajusticereport.org/files/IJR_2019_Full_Report.pdf 

14 
 
to an inability to afford bail or enlist the services of a competent lawyer for their 
defense. 
10. Therefore, empow ering individuals through education and creating 
awareness about their rights and the role of legal aid is essential to bridge 
this informational gap.  Accordingly, the Committee is of  the view that 
Government may take  an extensive mass media campaign to ed ucate the 
eligible population about the legal aid avenues available for them to get 
justice.  
11. Further, the Committee expresses its concern on the  plight of 
vulnerable sections where NALSA should have been involved effectively. 
As per the data available  in the public domain, out of total number of 
prisoners in the country, approximately 70 percent  are under trials. The 
Committee was further given to understand that  a large number of under 
trial prisoners have spent more time in jail than the actual sente nce 
prescribed under the relevant Sections/Acts in case  if they have been 
convicted. A large number of prisoners are unable to arrange bail due to 
non- furnishing of personal bail bonds/surety. In view of this , the 
Committee recommends that NALSA should study and evaluate these 
types of cases and assist them on priority. 
Budgetary Constraints and Allocations 
12. Despite the critical role of the National Legal Services Authority 
(NALSA) in promoting legal aid, budgetary constraints pose a significant 
hurdle. The Grant-in-aid to NALSA has remained almost static over the past 
few years. NALSA has time and again conveyed to the Committee that such 
meagre levels of grant impact the legal services planned to be offered by them.  
13. The decline in funds allocated to NALSA despite economic and 
population growth underscores the need for a comprehensive re -evaluation of 
budgetary priorities. Allocating a meager amount for legal aid, particularly 
when compared with other budgetary allocations, hampers the effectiveness  of 
the legal aid system. 
14. It is an admitted fact that the prevalent social and economic disparity 
in the country is eroding the democratic ob jective of 'justice for all'. A s 
majority of our population lack s legal awareness and necessary means to 
approach the courts, they are compelled to suffer in silence. Legal aid is an 

15 
 
obligation of the State and right s of the Citizen,  accordingly, it should be 
provided in the true spirit as envisaged in the Constitution.  
15. In this regard, the Committee observes t hat the majo rity of the 
Indian population are  eligible for legal aid. However, as per 'India Justice 
Report, 20192' published by the Tata Trust, per capita free legal aid spend 
in India is just 0.75 paise per annum (in 2017 -18), which is perhaps among 
the lowest in the world. Though funding legal services authorities is also  
one of  the responsibilities of States, there is a dire need to significantly 
enhance the expenditure on this front. Therefore, the Committee strongly 
recommends that Grant -in-aid to NALSA may be substantially increased 
in order to carry out the activities as planned by them.  
Role of Lawyers and Compensation 
16. The reluctance of many lawyers to provide pro bono services further  
compounds the challenges in ensuring access to justice. While some lawyers do 
contribute, the need for more legal professionals willing to offer their services 
without charge remains a pressing concern. Enhancing incentives or support 
systems for lawyers engaging in pro bono work is crucial. 
17. While lawyers play a central role in providing legal aid, the current 
compensation structure, with nominal honorariums, poses challenges in  
attracting experienced professionals. Lawyers with a minimum of three year s of 
experience have the option to volunteer for at least two years by approaching 
the local authority. However, these lawyers are prohibited from charging fees 
for their representation. Instead, they receive a nominal honorarium from the 
authority's fund. This honorarium is notably minimal, ranging from as little as 
1,500 rupees in small towns to a maximum of Rs. 7,500 in specific cities. 
18. The meager compensation provided for the services rendered poses a 
challenge in attracting top -tier talent with a g enuine commitment to working in 
this field. Consequently, this issue directly impacts citizens who rely on these 
legal services as their sole option and hope for justice, thereby undermining the 
intended purpose of providing free legal aid to the underprivileged. 
19. Therefore, t he Committee is of the view that Bar Council of India 
should make mandatory appearance of every lawyer in at least in one 
                                           
2 https://indiajusticereport.org/files/IJR_2019_Full_Report.pdf 

16 
 
probono work in a year to enabl e him to secure any relief fund  from All 
India/State Bar Council. 
20. Further, the Committee is also of the view that designated Senior 
Advocates in all High Courts/Supreme Court may come together to form a 
panel for doing pro-bono works and undertake such works. In each District 
Judiciary, H igh Courts and in Supreme Court , the Advoc ates / Bar 
Association can involve advocates in pro -bono works by rotation and 
Association can monitor the same.  
21. The Committee also suggests that District Judiciary/High 
Courts/Supreme Court can encourage these advocates by giving them 
merit certifica tes based upon their contributions to the pro -bono works 
done by them and such merit certificates could be utilized while assessing 
their individual merits. The probono work done by a lawyer may be taken 
into consideration for assessing his/her merit when they apply for any 
judicial posts, law officers post including  appointment of High Court 
Judges and Supreme Court Judges , consideration of designation of Senior 
Advocates etc.  
22. As regard fees, it is being observed that panel lawyers are not being 
adequately compensated and their remuneration has remained stagnant for 
years together. This affects the quality of legal aid service provided to the 
clients. This also often leads to lawy ers found harassing beneficiaries or 
demanding ‘fees’ from them. The Committee accordingly, recommends 
NALSA to compensate lawyers adequately, so that they are able to sustain 
themselves and remain motivated in their job. While ensuring this, a robust 
system of monitoring the efficacy and accountability of legal aid services 
provided to the beneficiaries may also be put in place by NALSA. 
Challenges in Lok Adalats 
23. Lok Adalats are being organized by NALSA and State LSAs for 
amicable settlement of dispute s. Though Lok Adalats are designed to 
expedite case resolution, they encounter challenges due to their limited 
powers compared to regular courts. They also don't have to adhere to any 
proper procedures. Further, they cannot compel the parties to appear for  
the proceedings. Many times one of the parties does not appear for the 
hearing and then there is a de lay in the disposal. Therefore, there is a need 
to have a relook into the powers and procedures of conducting Lok Adalats 

17 
 
for making them more effective and efficient. The Lok Adalats should have 
powers to ensure the presence of parties for finding the scope of an 
amicable settlement.  
24. Thus Strengthening and streamlining Lok Adalats becomes 
imperative to make them more ef fective in resolving disputes efficiently.  
Lok Adalats often suffer from inadequate infrastructure, facilities, staff 
and training. This affects their efficiency and quality of service. 
Accordingly, the Committee feels that Lok Adalats need to be provided 
with adequate infrastructure, equipment, staff and training. They also need 
to adopt modern technology and methods to streamline their processes and 
reduce delays. 
Underutilization of Para-legal Volunteers 
25. Para-legal volunteers (PLVs) are trained perso ns who assist the legal 
services authorities and the Lok Adalats in providing free legal aid to the needy 
people. They act as a bridge between the legal system and the common man. 
However, PLVs are underutilized in India due to various reasons, such as lac k 
of proper training and capacity building; lack of monitoring and accountability; 
lack of recognition and incentives; and lack of awareness and trust in them. 
26. To overcome these challenges and enhance the utilization of PLVs 
Committee feels that some immediate measures should be taken like 
providing regular and comprehensive training and capacity building of 
PLVs. They should also be provided with adequate resources and support 
to perform their duties effectively . PLVs should  be paid or compensated 
adequately for their work , so that they remain interested in their work . 
They should also receive recognition and appreciation from the legal 
system and the society. This would enhance their motivation and 
commitment to serve the people.  Further, the legal services authorities and 
the Lok Adalats should conduct awareness campaigns and outreach 
programs to inform and educate the people about the role and functions of 
PLVs. In turn, the PLVs  should also build trust and rapport with the 
people and address their concerns and grievances. 
Increased Access to Legal-Aid to the Prisoners 
27. During the visits  by the Committee to Tihar Jail on 08.11.2021 and to 
Bhondsi Jail, Gurugram on 15.11.2022 it was observed that the Legal Aid to the 

18 
 
Prisoners were not adequate. When the attendance r egister of these volunteers 
was verified, it was found that sufficient Legal Aid volunteers were not posted 
for the Lega l aid to the Prisoners. Further, when the prisoners interacted with 
the Committee, it was found that adequate Legal aid was not given to them.  
Therefore, a comprehensive exercise needs to be conducted by NALSA to make 
access to legal aid to all Prisoners as an inclusionary exercise without any 
hassle.  
28. The Committee is , therefore,  of the view that a ccess to justice , 
especially to the undertrials  is still limited, sufficient time for consultation 
and a centralised application process is vital for seeking help. A centralised 
application process will provide for prompt allocation of counsel and would 
enable them to seek their legal remedies with minimal delay. 
Legal Aid Defence Counsel Scheme 
29. To provide competent, effective and efficient legal aid and to make legal 
services more professional, NALSA has developed a legal aid delivery -based 
model i.e. „Legal Aid Defen se Counsel System‟ (LADCS) for proving legal aid 
in criminal matters on the lines of public defender system in the developed 
countries. LADCS has been introduced to provide representation in all type of 
criminal matters through engagement of full -time retainer lawyers, exclusively 
dealing with legal aid criminal cases in 676 Districts across the country. 
Presently, a Legal Aid seeker is assigned a lawyer from the panel of lawyers 
maintained in the district.  These panel lawyers also have private practice an d 
often it has come to light that they are unable to devote sufficient time to the 
legal aid cases.  Therefore, Legal Aid Defence Counsel System aims to set up 
office of Defence Counsel System just like office of prosecution in line of 
public defender syst em prevailing in developed countries. The Lawyers 
appointed under the Defence Counsel System will devote entire time to the 
criminal legal aid cases assigned to them on retainership basis on monthly 
salary and they are prohibited from taking up any private  practice. This will 
directly result in increasing the quality and efficiency in service provided to the 
legal aid beneficiary. 
30. The Legal Aid Defence Counsel Scheme (LADCS) engages full -time 
experienced lawyers to exclusively devote their effort to pro vide legal aid, 
assistance and representation to the beneficiaries in criminal matters. This 
is a paradigm shift in the manner in which the legal aid is provided in the 

19 
 
country, whereas earlier cases were assigned to the empanelled lawyers 
who also had a p rivate practice. The Committee appreciates such scheme 
and hope that it will improve the quality of legal aid to the beneficiary. It is 
also expected that competent and dedicated lawyers are empanelled 
through a transparent selection process for manning this Scheme. 
Manning the NALSA 
31. The Sanctioned posts for NALSA is 34 and as on 31.12.2022 it was 
functioning with in-position strength of 20 only. The activities of NALSA have 
increased manifold since its inception. It has framed various Schemes to achieve 
the objectives of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987. NALSA has been 
doing various programmes/campaigns for reaching out and empowering the 
weaker sections of society. 
 
32. Due to shortage of staff, particularly at the lower level, NALSA has been 
facing difficulties to execute and monitor all the schemes and programmes, 
maintaining data and for maintenance of proper accounts and other proper 
records.  Accordingly, they have been requesting the Department of Justice, 
with the approval of the then Hon'ble Executive Chairman, NALSA for creation 
of additional 40 posts for the smooth function of the Authority.  
 
33. The Committee notes that NALSA's activities have increased 
manifold since its inception and it is actively engaged in taking the legal aid 
movement in India to every nook and corner. However, its existing 
sanctioned staff strength of 34 only is too low considering its mandate and 
reach. Accordingly, the Committee recommends the Government to 
sanction additional 40 posts as requested by them. 
 
34. The Committee further recommends the NALSA to take proactive 
steps to fill up the vacant posts, in accordance with their respective RRs, on 
regular basis and not to allow piling up of unfilled vacancies. 
 
*** 
 
  

20 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
LACK OF AWARENESS AND LEGAL EDUCATION 
1. Therefore, empowering individuals through education and creating 
awareness about their rights and the role of legal aid is essential to bridge 
this informational gap. Accordingly, the Committee is of the view that 
Government may take an extensive mass media campaign to educate the 
eligible population about the legal aid avenues available for them to get 
justice. (Para 10) 
2. Further, the Committee expresses its concern on the plight of 
vulnerable sections, where NALSA should have been involved effectively. 
As per the data available in the public domain, out of total number of 
prisoners in the country, approximately 70 percent are under trials. The 
Committee was further given to understand that a large numbe r of under 
trial prisoners have spent more time in jail than the actual sentence 
prescribed under the relevant Sections/Acts in case if they have been 
convicted. A large number of prisoners are unable to arrange bail due to 
non- furnishing of personal bail  bonds/surety. In view of this, the 
Committee recommends that NALSA should study and evaluate these 
types of cases and assist them on priority. (Para 11) 
BUDGETARY CONSTRAINTS AND ALLOCATIONS 
3. It is an admitted fact that the prevalent social and economic disparity 
in the country is eroding the democratic objective of 'justice for all'. As 
majority of our population lacks legal awareness and necessary means to 
approach the courts, they are compelled to suffer in silence. Legal aid is an 
obligation of the S tate and rights of the Citizen, accordingly, it should be 
provided in the true spirit as envisaged in the Constitution. (Para 14) 
4. In this regard, the Committee observes that the majority of the 
Indian population are eligible for legal aid. However, as p er 'India Justice 
Report, 20193' published by the Tata Trust, per capita free legal aid spend 
in India is just 0.75 paise per annum (in 2017 -18), which is perhaps among 
the lowest in the world. Though funding legal services authorities is also 
                                           
3 https://indiajusticereport.org/files/IJR_2019_Full_Report.pdf 

21 
 
one of the r esponsibilities of States, there is a dire need to significantly 
enhance the expenditure on this front. Therefore, the Committee strongly 
recommends that Grant -in-aid to NALSA may be substantially increased 
in order to carry out the activities as planned by them. (Para 15) 
ROLE OF LAWYERS AND COMPENSATION 
5. Therefore, the Committee is of the view that Bar Council of India 
should make mandatory appearance of every lawyer in at least in one 
probono work in a year to enable him to secure any relief fund from All 
India/State Bar Council. (Para 19) 
6. Further, the Committee is also of the view that designated Senior 
Advocates in all High Courts/Supreme Court may come together to form a 
panel for doing pro-bono works and undertake such works. In each District 
Judiciary, High Courts and in Supreme Courts, the Advocates / Bar 
Association can involve advocates in pro -bono works by rotation and 
Association can monitor the same. (Para 20) 
7. The Committee also suggests that District Judiciary/High 
Courts/Supreme Court can encourage these advocates by giving them 
merit certificates based upon their contributions to the pro -bono works 
done by them and such merit certificates could be utilized wh ile assessing 
their individual merits. The probono work done by a lawyer may be taken 
into consideration for assessing his/her merit when they apply for any 
judicial posts, law officers post including appointment of High Court 
Judges and Supreme Court Judg es, consideration of designation of Senior 
Advocates. (Para 21) 
8. As regard fees, it is being observed that panel lawyers are not being 
adequately compensated and their remuneration has remained stagnant for 
years together. This affects the quality of leg al aid service provided to the 
clients. This also often leads to lawyers found harassing beneficiaries or 
demanding ‘fees’ from them. The Committee accordingly, recommends 
NALSA to compensate lawyers adequately, so that they are able to sustain 
themselves and remain motivated in their job. While ensuring this, a robust 
system of monitoring the efficacy and accountability of legal aid services 
provided to the beneficiaries may also be put in place by NALSA. (Para 22) 
 

22 
 
CHALLENGES IN LOK ADALATS 
10. Lok Adalat s are being organized by NALSA and State LSAs for 
amicable settlement of disputes . Though Lok Adalats are designed to 
expedite case resolution, they encounter challenges due to their limited 
powers compared to regular courts. They also don't have to adhere  to any 
proper procedures. Further, they cannot compel the parties to appear for 
the proceedings. Many times one of the parties does not appear for the 
hearing and then there is a delay in the disposal. Therefore, there is a need 
to have a relook into the powers and procedures of conducting Lok Adalats 
for making them more effective and efficient. The Lok Adalats should have 
powers to ensure the presence of parties for finding the scope of an 
amicable settlement. (Para 23) 
11. Thus Strengthening and streaml ining Lok Adalats becomes 
imperative to make them more effective in resolving disputes efficiently. 
Lok Adalats often suffer from inadequate infrastructure, facilities, staff 
and training. This affects their efficiency and quality of service. 
Accordingly, the Committee feels that Lok Adalats need to be provided 
with adequate infrastructure, equipment, staff and training. They also need 
to adopt modern technology and methods to streamline their processes and 
reduce delays. (Para 24) 
UNDERUTILIZATION OF PARA-LEGAL VOLUNTEERS 
12. To overcome these challenges and enhance the utilization of PLVs 
Committee feels that some immediate measures should be taken like 
providing regular and comprehensive training and capacity building of 
PLVs. They should also be provided  with adequate resources and support 
to perform their duties effectively. PLVs should be paid or compensated 
adequately for their work, so that they remain interested in their work. 
They should also receive recognition and appreciation from the legal 
system and the society. This would enhance their motivation and 
commitment to serve the people. Further, the legal services authorities and 
the Lok Adalats should conduct awareness campaigns and outreach 
programs to inform and educate the people about the role and functions of 
PLVs. In turn, the PLVs should also build trust and rapport with the 
people and address their concerns and grievances. (Para 26) 
 

23 
 
INCREASED ACCESS TO LEGAL-AID TO THE PRISONERS 
13. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that access to justice, 
especially to the undertrials is still limited, sufficient time for consultation 
and a centralised application process is vital for seeking help. A centralised 
application process will provide for prompt allocation of counsel and would 
enable them to seek their legal remedies with minimal delay. (Para 28) 
LEGAL AID DEFENCE COUNSEL SCHEME 
14. The Legal Aid Defence Counsel Scheme (LADCS) engages full -time 
experienced lawyers to exclusively devote t heir effort to provide legal aid, 
assistance and representation to the beneficiaries in criminal matters. This 
is a paradigm shift in the manner in which the legal aid is provided in the 
country, whereas earlier cases were assigned to the empanelled lawyer s 
who also had a private practice. The Committee appreciates such scheme 
and hope that it will improve the quality of legal aid to the beneficiary. It is 
also expected that competent and dedicated lawyers are empanelled 
through a transparent selection process for manning this Scheme. (Para 30) 
MANNING THE NALSA 
15. The Committee notes that NALSA's activities have increased 
manifold since its inception and it is actively engaged in taking the legal aid 
movement in India to every nook and corner. However, its  existing 
sanctioned staff strength of 34 only is too low considering its mandate and 
reach. Accordingly, the Committee recommends the Government to 
sanction additional 40 posts as requested by them. (Para 33) 
 
16. The Committee further recommends the NALS A to take proactive 
steps to fill up the vacant posts, in accordance with their respective RRs, on 
regular basis and not to allow piling up of unfilled vacancies. (Para 34) 
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING  
 
          The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 1.00 PM on Tuesday, 06.02.2024, in 
Committee Room No.4, Block „A‟, Parliament House Annexe Extension 
Building, New Delhi.  
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
i. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi      -        Chairman 
          Rajya Sabha 
ii. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
iii. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
iv. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
v. Shri Sanjay Raut 
vi. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
vii. Shri K.R.Suresh Reddy 
viii. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
ix. Shri Vivek K.Tankha 
 Lok Sabha 
x. Shri Malook Nagar 
xi. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
xii. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
xiii. Shri A.Raja 
xiv. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
xv. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
2. Smt.Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya, Additional Director 
3. Shri Abhyuday Singh Shekhawat, OSD to the Vice-President of India 
4. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
5. Shri Prabhakar Singh, Under Secretary 

26 
 
 2.          At the outset, the Chairman welcomed all the Members to the meeting 
of the  Committee and apprised them about the agenda of the meeting, i.e. 
consideration and adoption of the following draft reports of the Committee: 
i. *                                                        *                                                      * 
ii. *                                                        *                                                      * 
iii. 143rd Report on the subject "Review of the working of Legal Aid under 
the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987";  and   
iv. *                                                        *                                                      * 
3.          The Committee unanimously adopted all the draft Reports and decided 
to present those Reports to both Houses of Parliament on 07 th February, 2024.  
The Committee authorized Shri Vivek K.  Tankha and, in his absence, Shri P. 
Wilson to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Raghu Rama Krishna 
Raju Kanumuru and, in his absence, Shri Malook Nagar to lay the reports in 
Lok Sabha.  
5.      The meeting adjourned at 2.15 PM. 
  
  
New Delhi                                                                    P. NARAYANAN 
      6th February, 2024                                                               DIRECTOR    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             
*pertains to other matters 