 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA            45 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
  
FORTY FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
THE MARRIAGE LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 04.03.2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 04.03.2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA)      
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:rsc-pers@sansad.nic.in 
 
 

CS (P & L) - 89 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES,  
LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
 
  
FORTY FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
THE MARRIAGE LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 1ST MARCH, 2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 1ST MARCH, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA) 

 
 
CONTENTS 
   
  PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. I NTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... (iii) 
3. R EPORT ....................................................................................................................... 1-15 
4. R ELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE ........................................ 17-28 
5. A NNEXURE .................................................................................................................... 29-58 
 A. The Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2010 .................................................... 31-40 
 B.        Comments of the Mi nistry of Law and Justice (Legislative
Department) on the views/suggestions contained in memoranda 
 submitted by individuals/organisations/experts on the provisions   
 of the Bill  .................................................................................................. 
 
41-58 
 
   
 ....  
    
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan   ––    Chairperson  
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Shri Shanta ram Laxman Naik 
 3. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
 4. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte 
 5. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
 6. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
 7. Shri Amar Singh 
 8. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
 9. Shri O. T. Lepcha 
 *10. Vacant 
  LOK  SABHA 
 11.  Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
 12.  Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi 
 13.  Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve 
 14.  Shri D.B. Chandre Gowda 
 15.  Dr. Monazir Hassan 
 16.  Shri Arjun Munda 
 17.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 18.  Shrimati Chandresh Kumari 
 19.  Shri Bhajan Lal 
 20.  Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena 
 21.  Ms. Meenakshi Natarajan 
 22.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
 23.  Shri Harin Pathak 
 24.  Shri Lalu Prasad 
 25.  Shri S. Semmalai 
 26.  Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh 
 27.  Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
 28.  Shri Manish Tewari 
 29.  Shri R. Thamaraiselvan 
 30.  Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki) 
 31.  Vacant 
 
*Vacancy caused due to death of Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy on the 5th December, 2010 
 
 

  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary 
  Shri K.P. Singh, Director 
  Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director  
  Shrimati Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director  
  Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorised by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby 
present the Forty Fifth Report on The Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2010. The Bill seeks to 
amend the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and the Special Marriage Act, 1954 to provide for irretrievable 
breakdown of Marriage as a new ground for grant of a decree of divorce. 
2.   In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee, 
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred the Bill , as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 4th 
August, 2010 and pending therein, to this Committee on the 23rd August, 2010 for examination and 
report. 
3.  Keeping in view the importance of the Bill, the Committee decided to issue a press communique 
to solicit views/suggestions from desirous individuals/organisations on the provisions of the Bill. 
Accordingly, a press communique was issued in national and local newspapers and dailies, in 
response to which memoranda containing suggestions were received, from various organizations / 
individuals / experts, by the Committee. 
4.   The Committee heard the oral  evidence of the Secretaries of the Legislative Department, 
Ministry of Law and Justice and Ministry of Women and Child Development on the provisions of the 
Bill in its meeting held on 17th September, 2010 and 28th September, 2010 respectively. The 
Committee also heard the views/suggestions of various women organizations/individuals/experts on 
the provisions of the Bill on 11th and 16th November, 2010. 
5.   While considering the Bill, the Committee took note of the following documents/information 
placed before it : –– 
(i) Background note on the Bill submitted by the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative 
Department); 
(ii) Views/suggestions contained in the memoranda received from various 
organizations/institutions/individuals/experts on the provisions of the Bill and the 
comments of the Legislative Department thereon; 
(iii) Views expressed during the oral evidence tendered before the Committee by the 
stakeholders such as representatives of NGOs/women’s organizations/individuals; and 
(iv) Other research material/d ocuments related to the Bill. 
7.  The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 2nd February, 2011. 
8.  For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
  JAYANTHI NATARAJAN
 
NEW DELHI; Chairperson, 
2
nd
 February, 2011 Committee on Personnel, 
   Public Grievances, Law and Justice 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-I 
  The Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2010 was introduced* in the Rajya Sabha on the 4th 
August, 2010. It was referred @ by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice on the 23rd 
August, 2010 for examination and report. 
2.   The Bill (Annexure-A) seeks to amend the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and the Special Marriage 
Act, 1954 to provide for irretrievable breakdown of Marriage as a new ground for grant of a decree of 
divorce; and also to provide certain safeguards to protect the interests of wife and children and do 
away with the waiting period of six months for moving a joint petition for grant of divorce by mutual 
consent. 
3.  The Statement of Objects and Reasons, appended to the Bill inter-alia reads as under:- 
 “The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 was enacted on the 18th May, 1955 to amend and codify 
the law relating to marriage among Hindus. Similarly, the Special Marriage Act, 1954 was 
enacted on the 9th October, 1954 to provide a speci al form of marriage in certain cases, for the 
registration of such and certain other marriages and for divorce. The provisions of the said Acts 
have proved to be inadequate to deal with  the issue where there has been irretrievable 
breakdown of marriage and therefore a need has been felt for certain amendments therein.” 
 “Having regard to the recommendations of the Law Commission of India and the 
observations of the Hon’ble Supreme Court as aforesaid and the demand from various quarters, 
it is proposed to amend the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and the Special Marriage Act, 1954 so as 
to provide for irretrievable breakdown of marriage as a ground of divorce thereunder subject to 
certain safeguards to the wife and affected children.” 
4.  With this objective in view, the Bill pr oposes to make the following amendments:- 
(a) to insert section 13C in the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and section 28A in the Special 
Marriage Act, 1954 to provide for divorce on the ground of irretrievable breakdown of 
marriage. 
(b) to insert section 13 D in the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and section 28B in the Special 
Marriage Act, 1954 to provide for a right to wife to oppose the petition for divorce on 
account of irretrievable breakdown of marri age on the grounds of grave financial 
hardship. 
(c) to insert section 13E in the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and section 28C in the Special 
Marriage Act, 1954 to ensure provision of adequate maintenance to children born out of 
the marriage consistently with the financial capacity of such parties to the marriage before 
granting a decree of divorce on the ground of irretrievable breakdown of marriage; and 
 
* Published in Gazette of India (Extraordinary) Part-II Section 2 dated the 4th August, 2010.  
@ Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II (No.47173) dated the 4th August, 2010. 
 

(d) to amend sub-section (2) of section 13B of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and sub-section 
(2) of section 28 of the Special Marriage Act,  1954 so as to do away with the waiting 
period of six months for moving a joint motion after filing a petition for grant of divorce 
on the ground of mutual consent. 
5.  The background note on the Bill submitted to the Committee by the Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Legislative Department) states that the history of the development of the Hindu Law has shown that it 
was never static and had changed from time to time so as to meet the challenges and the changing 
requirements of different times. The Special Marriage Act, 1954, being a civil law and applicable to 
all, has to necessarily keep pace with any reform in the field of matrimonial laws. 
5.1   Initially, the grounds available for divorce under sub-section (l) of section 13 of the Hindu 
Marriage Act, 1955 were limited to adultery, conversion to another religion, incurably of unsound 
mind for a continuous period of not less than three years, suffering from virulent and incurable form 
of leprosy for a period of not less than three years, suffering from venereal disease in a communicable 
form for a period of not less than  three years, renouncement of the world and not heard of as being 
alive for a period of seven years. 
6.  The Department further info rms that in the year 1974, a need was felt that it would be 
reasonable and desirable to liber alize divorce provisions and on the basis of the Law Commission’s 
recommendation, the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976 was enacted to include “cruelty” and 
“desertion” as new grounds for grant of a decree of  divorce under section 13 of the Hindu Marriage 
Act, 1955 and also to provide divorce by mutual consent by way of a new section 13B of the said Act. 
6.1  The grounds for divorce presently available un der both these enactments are mainly of three 
categories. The first category is based on the traditional theory of matrimonial fault. The second is 
based on the theory of frustration by reason of sp ecified circumstances. The third is the theory of 
consent. There is, however, no ground in these Acts which expressly provides for divorce on the 
ground of irretrievable breakdown of marriage. 
6.2   Subsequently, keeping in view various decisions of courts holding that it would be unreasonable 
and inhuman to compel parties to keep up the facade of marriage even though the rift between them is 
complete and there are no prospect s of them ever living together as  husband and wife etc., “the Law 
Commission of India in its 71st Report on The Hindu Marri age Act, 1955 - Irretrievable Break Down 
of Marriage as a Ground of Divorce”, submitted on 7th April, 1978, has recommended insertion of a 
new section 13C for divorce on the ground of irretr ievable breakdown of marriage. While the said 
report was being considered in consultation with the State Governments and Union territories, several 
decisions of the Supreme Court including Miss Joden Diengdeh Vs. S.S. Chopra (reported in AIR 
1985 SC 935) and Navin Kohli V/s. Neelu Kohli  (reported in AIR 2006 SC 1675), recommended 
insertion of irretrievable breakdown of Marriage as a ground for grant of divorce. Pursuant to the 
above referred decisions of the Supreme Court, the Law Commission of India took up study of the 
subject and after examining the extant legislation and various judgments of the Supreme Court and 
High Courts on the s ubject, has recommended in  its 2l7th report on “Irretr ievable Break Down of 
Marriage - another Ground for Divorce” submitted on  30th March, 2009, incl usion of Irretrievable 
Break Down of Marriage as a ground for grant of divorce. 

6.3  The recommendations of the Law Commission of In dia have been considered and it is felt that 
the provisions of the aforesaid Acts have proved to  be inadequate to deal with the issue where there 
has been irretrievable breakdown of marriage and therefore, amendments to the said Acts are 
necessary. 
7.   The Department asserts that accordingly, the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill 2010 has been 
prepared to provide irretrievable breakdown of ma rriage as a new ground for grant of a decree of 
divorce by inserting new section l3C. It is also proposed to insert new section l3D to provide for a 
right to wife to oppose the petition for irretrievable breakdown of marriage on the ground of hardship. 
With a view to protect the interests of children born out of marriage, it is also proposed to provide 
adequate safeguards by inserting a new section l3E for ensuring provision of adequate maintenance to 
children before a decree for divorce on the grou nd of irretrievable breakdown of marriage can be 
granted. Similar amendments are also proposed in  the Special Marriage Act, 1954 by inserting new 
sections 28A, 28Band 28C. It is also proposed to amend sub-section (2) of section l3B of the Hindu 
Marriage Act, 1955 and sub-section (2) of section 28  of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, respectively, 
by doing away with the waiting period of six months for moving a joint motion after filing a petition 
under section l3B for grant of divorce of the ground of mutual consent. 
8.   The Committee heard the presentation of the S ecretary, Legislative Department of the Ministry 
of Law and Justice on the Bill on the 17th Septem ber, 2010 and recorded the views of Secretary, 
Ministry of Women and Child Development during its meeting held on the 28th September, 2010 on 
the Bill. 
9.  In order to have a broader view on the Bill, the Committee decided to invite views/ suggestions 
from desirous individuals/ organizations. Accordingly, a press release was issued inviting 
views/suggestions from individuals/organizations. In response to the press release published in major 
English and Hindi dailies and newspapers on the 18th September, 2010 a number of representations 
were received. 
10.  The Committee examined the representations  received on the Bill. Having analyzed these 
representations, some of them were identified to be considered as memoranda containing pertinent 
suggestions/comments on the various aspects of the Bill. Some significant issues raised in such 
memoranda have been summarized in the succeeding  Chapter. Some select  memoranda were also 
forwarded to the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legis lative Department) for their comments. The list of 
these memoranda along with the gist of views and suggestions and corresponding comments of the 
Ministry of Law and Justice on such views/suggestions is placed at Annexure.... 
11.   Given the far reaching legal and social impli cations of the Bill, the Committee decided to hear 
the views of all important stakeholders on the Bill so as to have a deep insight of the subject matter of 
the Bill. For this purpose, the Committee invited various non-official witnesses 
(individuals/organizations) to appear before the Committee for tendering oral evidence. The 
Committee heard the views of National Commission for Women and some NGOs namely MAJLIS, 
(Center for Women’s Rights Disc ourse & Legal Initiative), Gender and Human Rights Society, 
Lawyers’ Collective and Women’s Rights Initiatives, Mothers and Sisters Initiatives, All India 
Democratic Women’s Organization, Save Family Foundation, Children’s Rights Initiative for Shared 
Parenting (CRISP) and Mr. S.R. Abrol, a concerned individual. 

 
CHAPTER II 
  The major points raised in the memoranda rece ived from the individuals and organizations are 
summarized as follows: 
(1) It is important to introduce breakdown of a marriage as an independent ground of divorce 
in totality and not as part of it. 
(2) The legislature needs to understand that under the changed socio-economic conditions of 
the society, the women have come forward to accept the challenges and they have tried to 
become self-reliant. They no longer want to live at the mercy of their husbands. 
(3) If the proposed legislation is passed, there will be a total of 6 sections under which a 
Hindu woman can claim maintenance leading to unnecessary complications and 
duplication of law. 
(4) The proposed legislation is silent on the issue of child custody. In the best interest of 
children, a separation between husband and wife should also include provisions on 
mechanism to deal child custody matters. Child custody and visitation rights should also 
be decided before granting divorce, while deciding maintenance of the child under this 
Bill. 
(5) Wife has right to oppose petition on ground s of ‘financial hardship ’. It clearly ignores 
large number of cases where husbands have  filed for maintenan ce under Hindu Marriage 
Act from wife. 
(6) The proposed legislation is silent on what will happen to the pending cases like Domestic 
Violence Act, 498A IPC, Child Custody, CrPC 125 and any other Civil and Criminal 
cases and has left scope for future litigations. It should ensure that all proposed litigation 
between the parties are settled before granting divorce. 
(7) Just to think that women only are weak and need protection and it is always the men who 
are harassing a wife shows complete disconnect from the ground realities. 
(8) The proposed provision that Courts can st ay the case until approp riate arrangements are 
made will lead to legal extortion with the help of lawyers and vengeful women. This will 
force husbands to ‘buy’ divorce regardless of, who at fault, is. This proposed amendment 
will widely be misused. 
(9) The current concept of gender neutrality like that of Section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act 
which takes into consideration that both the husband and the wife can face financial 
hardship has been totally ignored in the proposed amendment. 
(10)  The term ‘financial hardship’ should be defined because otherwise this will lead to a 
subjective interpretation of this term and will ultimately turn into a tool for extortion and 
will be used to block a divorce till the unreas onable financial demands of the respondent 
are fulfilled. 

(11)  Provisions for all the ornaments and other cash/ goods that the wife received for the 
marriage as gifts shall be returned to the husband in the event of divorce. 
(12)  If property like flat, land etc. is purch ased with husband’s money, ownership of same 
should be granted to the husband. In case wife has contributed for same out of her 
earnings, joint ownership must be granted by the court, proportional to investment. Also 
the benefits under any insurance policy including health insurance, should be decided 
proportional to investment. 
(13)  All court cases should be decided in less than 3 years. Cases filed by Senior citizens (60 
years or more) should be given priority in a ll courts. Vacancies of judges should be filled 
up urgently and additional judges appointed to clear pending cases. Special courts should 
be set up to hear cases for divorce. 
(14)  At least a minimum of 6 month’s time is required for separation with a minimum of 3 
sittings with both the parties. This time period is required to calm the initial force of 
decision of separation. 
(15)  The compensation to the wife should be at least 70% of total income of husband or more. 
The total income should include all allowances, perks, incentives and monthly salary. The 
initial compensation should be made Rs. 50,000/- in rural areas and Rs. 1,00,000/- in 
Urban areas. The compensation should be stopped if she remarries or stays in relation 
with another person  to restrict adultery. 
(16)  The laws should be made in simple language to be understood by everybody. 
(17)  Issues such as, whether it has been a long term or short term marriage, whether the wife is 
a wage earner and also a home maker or merely a home maker, and which of the spouses 
is desirous of obtaining a divorce and is keen to move on in life become key concerns in 
this discourse. Other factors such as age and class also play a part. 
(18)  A discussion over women’s right to matrimonial home and property should proceed 
alongside the discussion on irretrievable breakdown of marriage so that certain safeguards 
can be built into the proposed legislation to secure women’s rights. 
(19)  Unless women are treated as equals in a marriage and given the same financial and other 
security that men have on its breakdown, it would be discriminatory to further liberalize 
the grounds of divorce. 
(20)  Equal rights to wife in the property acqui red by the couple during the subsistence of the 
marriage and equal division of the marital property upon separation has to be legally 
provided. 
(21)  It must be ensured that a provision is made that women with children have a house/ place 
of residence. 
(22)  The laws relating to maintenance for women and children must be strengthened to ensure 
that women/children receive an adequate amount of maintenance sufficient enough for 
them to live in a lifestyle which is similar to the one they were used to in the marital 

home. Special laws for disclosure of income of the Husbands and shifting of onus of proof 
in these cases will have to be considered. Ways and means to lessen the discretion of the 
judiciary in these matters must be thought of as women and children have invariably been 
awarded very low maintenance amounts by a large number of Courts. 
(23)  The Government has to enact a law to enforce and recover maintenance amounts. Apart 
from this a fund will have to be created from which maintenance can be immediately 
given to the wife and children. In several countries separate enforcement agencies have 
been created to recover maintenance amounts. It is a duty of the State to see that women 
and children are not left to fend for themselves in these cases. 
(24)  Entitlements from the state should be made essential for deserted/separated/divorced 
women and children in cases in which th ere is no property or  cases in which no 
maintenance can be granted because of poverty and/or other reasons. 
(25)  Sub section (2) of section 13B of Hin du Marriage Act, 1955 and the sub-section (2) of 
section 28 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 needs to be removed since the waiting period 
of six months for moving a joint motion after filing a petition for grant of divorce on the 
ground of mutual consent serves no purpos e but creates unnecessary bad blood and 
acrimony in the two families. 
(26)  The role of NGOs may be incorporated in  helping getting divorce in case of irretrievably 
broken down marriages. The NGOs after providing counseling to both the sides, may give 
their opinion in the courts. 
(27)  The role of the advocates in the above said cases may be minimized as it is seen from 
experiences that they make all sorts of efforts to delay divorces. 
(28)  It makes a very sad commentary on the ad ministrators of a Welfare State, that the 
concerned wife should be required to oppose the divorce in spite of irretrievable grounds 
and prefer to continue to live in a miserable condition because there is none to help her to 
nullify the likely hardships (Mainly Financial). Though these days, there may be some 
wives who might be misusing the laws to their advantage, by and large it is the husbands 
who are blameworthy and hence we must orient our actions keeping only this aspect in 
view. The Welfare State must be the first to go to the help of the aggrieved wife instead of 
providing this power to her to oppose to remain forever in the miserable condition. 
(29)  When a case comes to the stage of the co urt of law, there is already a break in the 
relationship by way of the place of residence and the consequential financial hardship has 
already started on the part of the wife and the children if they have gone with their mother. 
This necessarily needs immediate and urgent attention of the court. 
(30)  Let the divorce be granted immediately on the filing of the case but if the wrong doer is 
not so severely punished that other prospective wrong doers must shudder in their hearts 
even at the very thought of doing anything wrong to anybody, then this provision will be 
misused by unscrupulous people. So, the mutual consent needs to be dissected thoroughly. 
(31)  The Bill is just another gender biased law open to massive misuse. This Bill does not care 
that a child would be forced to be brought up in a broken family, and a father would not 

have any legal right, even to save his own marriage, under this Bill, even for the sake of 
his own child. 
(32) Providing the wife with all the control in a divorce case will only help in alienating father 
from their children. 
(33)  The Bill essentially grants freedom and ha ppiness to wives through a divorce but is totally 
silent on how the false and frivolous cases that are filed by wives be dealt with, even when 
the wife gets the divorce and happily remarries. 
(34)  There would be cases where the husband is all wiling to save his marriage, so that his 
child can have both the parents, but under the present format of the Bill, the husband will 
not have any legal remedy to save his own marriage, even for the sake of his own child. 
(35)  A Gender neutral shared child custody and parenting law must be drafted and 
implemented nationwide before this Marriage Laws Amendment Bill is even 
contemplated. The repercussion of the amendments of this will be that after the quick 
divorce the wife will have little interest in even attending court hearings thereby alienating 
the child forever from the haple ss father. Alternately a separate section can be inserted 
explicitly stating that child custody cases must be resolved to the satisfaction of both the 
parties before divorce is granted. 
(36)  Provide a clear and objective definition of “Financial Hardship” so that this term is not 
interpreted in a wrong way and divorces are not sold by wives. All other maintenance 
cases filed by the wife, like Section 24, CrPC 125, Domestic Violence etc., should not be 
allowed to continue, blocking the judicial dockets, as the relief sought in all of them, will 
also be available in this Bill. 
(37)  Create objective parameters for calculating  financial assistance like tenure of the marriage 
and relative sacrifice made by the parties in the marriage. 
(38)  Reduce separation period from 3 years to 1 year under Section 13C - Petition for divorce 
only after 1 year of marriage. 
(39)  Include condition of closing child custody litigation before granting divorce under Section 
13C, so that rights of child to seek the involvement of both the parents are not taken away 
from it. 
(40)  The proposed Bill totally ignores the Law Commission’s 71st report and gives no 
reasonable justification of choosing the peri od of separation as 3 years instead of 5 years 
as suggested by Law Commission’s 71st report. It  is extremely unfortunate that it seems 
that such a Bill and a clause has been hurriedly introduced, without any public debate. 
(41)  This Bill would be widely misused as the husband will be forced to ‘buy’ a divorce, while 
the wife can choose to walk out, at her whims and fancies. Moreover this Bill totally 
excludes the possibility that the husband can  also face financial hardship. The current 
concept of gender neutrality like that of Section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act which takes 
into consideration that both, the husband and the wife can face financial hardship has been 
totally ignored in this Bill. 

(42)  The Government is forcing a Divorce on an unwilling husband just because the wife want 
it and thus the husbands will have absolutely no legal remedy, relief or right, even to 
oppose the same, even for the sake of his children. 
(43)  This Bill is totally unconstitutional and it takes away all the rights of the husband, even to 
defend himself or even to save his own marriage. A wife would stay away from the 
husband and would automatically get a divorce by default after 3 years, without any fault 
of the husband who would also have no right or say altogether, or even have any right to 
defend him. 
(44)  Interestingly, this Bill is totally silent on the rampant misuse ,of 498A. At present, under 
Mutual Divorce format, the wife goes for quashing of all cases before grant of divorce, 
under mutual consent. However as per the pr esent format of this Bill, the 498A cases 
would continue for years on. Thus the Bill should have a provision to quash cases between 
the parties before grant of divorce under 13C as it happens presently. 
(45)  That special provision should be made in the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2010, to 
ensure that both spouses may oppose the grant of a decree on the ground that the 
dissolution of the marriage will result in grave financial hardship to them and that it would 
in all the circumstances be wrong to dissolve the marriage, with the amount of financial 
hardship, being decided by the Court, based on the merits of the case. 
(46)  It is suggested that the father must be assigned the care and custody  of child(s) where the 
mother has been proved unable to maintain them, is of a dubious behavior, has lost her 
rapport in society on the basis of a corroborated evidence and facts. 
(47)  “Irretrievable Br eakdown” should be spelt out clearly and may include the following:- 
z That the respondent has behaved in such a way that the petitioner cannot reasonably 
be expected to live with the respondent; 
z That the respondent has deserted the petitioner for a continuous period of at least 
three years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition; 
z That the parties to the marriage have lived apart for a continuous period of at least 
two years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition. 
z That no reasonable probability remains of the spouses again living together as 
husband or wife for mutual comfort and support. 
(48)  Where the petition is based on the “living apart” facts, the court may refuse to pass a 
decree if the dissolution of the marriage will result in “grave financial or other hardship to 
the respondent” and that “it would in all the circumstances be wrong to dissolve the 
marriage.” 
(49)  A decree of divorce may be refused if the court feels that there is a reasonable likelihood 
of resumption of cohabitation. 
(50)  Introducing irretrievable breakdown of ma rriage as a ground for divorce in the Hindu 
Marriage Act and the Special Marriage Act at this time, would cause irreparable harm to 

women because of the absence of any laws governing division of matrimonial property. A 
woman’s negotiating power and her rights to her matrimonial property would be severely 
diluted. As such provisions for safeguarding economic security for women will have to be 
built into the proposed legislation. 
(51)  The proposed Bill only speaks of maintena nce to children and is silent on the issue 
relating to division of property. 
(52)  In such situations where the woman is vulnerable, we expect that the courts would refrain 
from granting an ex-parte decree. 
(53) ‘Irretrievable breakdown of marriage’ as a ground for divorce in a marriage and the power 
given to the wife in such a situation should be applicable to all religions and not 
specifically Hindu. 
(54) All grants by the Government, whether in te rms of land or housing, should be in the name 
of both the spouses. 
(55)  Quashing all cases between the husband and wife while granting divorces under 
Irretrievable Breakdown Marriage, would immedi ately reduce the cror e of pending cases 
in courts and will provide relief to crores of aged mothers and sisters condemned to a 
lifetime of judicial apathy in Indian courts due the Indian gender laws. 
(56)  Reconsider the stipulated time period of th ree years of ‘living apart’ to a lesser duration 
keeping in mind the objective to mitigate the ordeal for an estranged couple. 
(57)  Include ‘living in the same household’ as ‘living apart’. This will ensure that facts and 
circumstances typical to each case will be given adequate space and consideration. 
(58)  For divorce on irretrievable breakdown of marriage or divorce on any other ground, 
introduce as a precondition in the law, distribution of marital assets based on ‘community 
of property’. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-III 
Deliberations of the Committee 
  The Committee heard the presentation of the Secr etary, Legislative Department of the Ministry 
of Law and Justice on the Bill on 17th September, 201 0 and recorded the views of Secretary, Ministry 
of Women and Child Development during its meeting held on 28th September, 2010 on the Bill. Apart 
from it, the Committee received inputs from the non-official witnesses namely National Commission 
for Women and some NGOs/individuals during its meetings on the 11th and 16th November, 2010 in 
Delhi. 
Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice) 
2.   The Committee heard the Secretary, Legislativ e Department of the Ministry of Law and Justice 
on 17th September, 2010. The Secretary while giving an extensive power-point presentation on the 
Bill apprised the Committee of the circumstances that necessitated the introduction of the Bill and also 
the various provisions of the Bill. The Secretary, Legislative Department assured the Committee that 
provisions of right to wife to oppose the divor ce on the ground of financial hardships and provisions 
regarding the maintenance to children have been incorporated in the proposed Bill to safeguard the 
interests of women and children while introducin g irretrievable breakdown of marriage as a new 
ground for granting the divorce. 
Ministry of Women and Child Development 
3.   The Committee heard the views of Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development 
during its meeting on 28th September, 2010. The Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child 
Development apprised the Committee that the Ministry supports the Bill as it finds that inclusion of 
irretrievable breakdown of Marriage as a new ground for divorce is a facilitative provision in cases 
where the Marriage between the parties has broken down irretrievably and completely and prevent the 
multiplicity of litigations. 
4.  However, the Secretary indicated some issues th at need to be addressed if the rights of women 
and children are to be protected after the enactment of Bill. The issues are: 
z The proposed Bill cast a greater responsibility on the courts particularly in case of the 
interpretation the situation of “irretrievable breakdown”. Thus Courts have to exercise 
care and caution in cases where th ey feel that the husband has deserted or abandoned the 
wife and filed a petition under this section after living separately for three years. 
z In situation where the woman is vulnerable the courts should refrain from granting ex-
parte decree. 
z The provision of section 13(E) of  the proposed Bill should be interpreted as or an express 
‘inclusion’ may be made in the provision to include the children adopted by the parties to 
the marriage. 
z The waiting period of six months after the pr esentation of a petition for grant of divorce 
should not be abolished because it provides the parties the time to change their mind vis-
a-vis the petition of divorce. 

Non-Official Witnesses 
5.   Given the wider legal and social implications of the Bill, the Committee decided to consider the 
views of all stakeholders on the Bill. For the purpose, the Committee invited some 
individuals/organizations to appear before the Co mmittee for tendering oral evidence. The Committee 
heard the following non-official witnesses (Individuals/Organizations) :- 
z National Commission for Women 
z MAJLIS, Center for Women’s Rights Discourse & Legal Initiative 
z Gender Human Rights Society 
z Lawyers Collective Women’s Rights Initiative 
z Mothers and Sisters Initiative 
z All India Democratic Women’s Association 
z Save Family Foundation 
z Children’s Rights Initiative for Shared Parenting (CRISP) 
z Shri SR Abrol, a concerned individual. 
6.  Committee’s deliberations with the above- mentioned organizations/individuals witnessed 
divergent opinions on the provisions of the Bill and other matters associated with the matrimonial 
disputes. The issues that emerged during the Committees’ interaction with them may be categorized 
under the following points; 
On the Bill 
¾ New Grounds for the divorce is in larger social interest 
¾ Section 13D (safeguard interest of wife/children) 
(i) Should be gender neutral 
(ii) Term Financial hardship should be defined 
(iii) Apprehensions that this provisions may lead to eventuality buying of a divorce by 
the husband as many a times, wives are also at fault. 
¾ To define the term “Irretrievable Breakdown of Marriage”. 
¾ Retention of the waiting period of six months. 
¾ Reduction of the time period of separation mandated for seeking divorce. 
Other Related Matters 
z The Bill should provide for division of matrimonial property. 
z The Bill should provide for custody of children and visitation rights. 
z Time period may be fixed for disposal of petition for divorce under the new ground. 

z Law to provide for recovery of maintenance. 
z To ensure that there are no ex-parte orders of divorce. 
z In foreign countries where th e provision for irretrievable breakdown of marriage as a 
ground for divorce is prevailed, there are suffi cient laws to protect the economic interests 
of women. 
z Entitlement from the State should be essential for separated women where there is no 
property and no maintenance can be granted. 
z Proposed amendments tend to further weaken the plight of women/children in rural India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-IV 
Committee’s Observations/Recommendations 
  Having analysed the various provisions of the Bill and having considered the written 
submissions received by the Committee and the view s of the witnesses who tendered their oral 
evidence, the Committee is of the view that the subject matter of the Bill and the amendments 
proposed therein are of immense public importance with wide ranging legal and social consequences. 
The Committee, however, is in agreement with the broad objective of the Bill, i.e., introduction of 
‘irretrievable breakdown of marriage’ as a new ground for grant of a decree of divorce. The 
Committee is also in agreement with the thought that if a marriage has ceased to subsist and has 
reached a stage where it is not felt possible to bring b ack together the parties to the marriage, it would 
be in the interest of all if the marriage is dissolved. 
2.  However, the Committee though being in agreemen t with the rationale behind the Bill, feels that 
some of its clauses which have vital implications need to be reviewed. The Committee strongly feels 
that there are certain vital social and legal issues on  the subject that need to be addressed before this 
new ground of divorce is introduced. 
Clauses 2 and 6 of the Bill 
(Doing away with the waiting period of 6 months before moving a joint motion in case of divorce 
by mutual consent) 
3.  While deliberating on the Bill, the Comm ittee has come across a strong view expressing 
apprehension about the likely adverse social impact in doing away with the cooling off period of 6 
months for moving a joint motion after filing a petition for grant of divorce by mutual consent. The 
Committee during its deliberations has not come across any view expressing hardship over the 
existing provisions providing for a cooling off period in case of divorce by mutual consent. The 
existing provision of law seems to function well as  it provides an opportunity to the parties to a 
marriage to think coolly before finally moving jointly for divorce. The Committee also does not see 
much linkage between this amendment and the main objective of the Bill, i.e., introduction of a 
new ground for grant of a decree of  divorce. The Committee, therefore,  is of the view that the 
existing provisions of law for divorce by mutual consent are fair and reasonable and the 
prevailing cooling off period be retained so as  to protect and preserv e the institution of 
marriage. The Committee, accordingly, is not in agreement with clauses 2 and 6 of the Bill. 
Clauses 3 and 7 of the Bill 
(Introduction of irretrievable breakdown of marriage as a new ground of divorce) 
4.  The Committee during the course of its interaction on the Bill with the various stakeholders did 
not come across much resistance per se to inclusion of irretrievable breakdown of marriage as a new 
ground of divorce. The Committee too is of the opinion that there is no point in prolonging a marriage 
where parties to the marriage are unable to live as  husband and wife. But the written/oral submissions 
made before the Committee have brought forth serious apprehensions regarding the likely misuse of 
the proposed new ground of divorce, as formulated in  the Bill, against women, particularly those in 
the rural areas. Going by the provisions of the Bill, the proposed Section 13C(l) of the Hindu Marriage 
Act, 1955 and Section 28A(1) of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 simply provide that either party to a 

marriage may file a petition for dissolution of marriage by a decree of divorce on the ground that the 
marriage has broken down irretrievably. One condition prescribed in the Bill for grant of a decree of 
divorce on this ground is that the court hearing the petition has to be satisfied that the parties to the 
marriage have lived apart for a continuous period of not less than 3 years. Thereafter, if the court is 
satisfied on the basis of ‘all the evidence’ that the marriage has broken down irretrievably, it shall 
grant a decree of divorce. In the opinion of the Committee, the Bill should provide for some more 
safeguards so that the new ground for divorce is not misused by either party to the marriage. In the 
Committee’s view, it is important to note that ei ther party to the marriage can ‘move a petition for 
divorce under this new ground and as the provisions of the Bill presently stand, there is no bar to 
court’s granting decree of divorce, ex-parte. In this backdrop, the Committee has serious apprehension 
with regard to the misuse of this ground, particularly against the women in rural areas where women 
are not so well aware. The Committee, accordingly, recommends  that the Bill should provide for 
some safeguards so that the new ground for divorce is not misused.  The Committee also 
recommends that the Government may consider de fining the term “irretrievable breakdown of 
marriage” in the Bill so that some uniform st andards are followed in  dealing with divorce 
petitions by the Courts. 
5.   Coming to the protection of the rights of wife and children, the Committee again is not satisfied 
with the provisions of the Bill in this regard. As per the proposed section 13D(l) of the Hindu 
Marriage, 1955 and Section 28B(1) of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, a wife has been given a right to 
oppose grant of decree of divorce if the same results in ‘grave financial hardship’ to her and ‘it would 
in all circumstances be wrong to dissolve the marriage’. The Committee notes that the term ‘grave 
financial hardship’ appearing here is capable of  varied interpretation. Further, it may be 
difficult for the wife to satisfy the court that it  would ‘in all circumstan ces be wrong to dissolve 
the marriage’. Not only this, the provisions of th e Bill talk of ‘grave’ financial hardship, i.e., 
divorce may not be allowed on this ground if the wife is being subjected to a ‘grave’ financial 
hardship. Does it mean that court may proceed with the grant of a decree of divorce on this 
ground despite the fact that the wife may be  put to ‘financial hardship’ and not “grave” 
financial hardship? The Committee, accordingly,  recommends that the term “grave financial 
hardship” may be defined so that there is  less of ambiguity. The Committee further 
recommends a review of these provisions of the Bill so that the in terests of the women are better 
safeguarded in the divorce proceedings in the court. 
6.  In the similar manner, the Committee also does not find acceptable the provisions of the Bill 
relating to restrictions on decree for divorce affecting children. As per the proposed Section 13E 
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and Section 28C in the Special Marriage Act, 1954, the court, before 
passing a decree of divorce under the new ground, has to satisfy itself that adequate provisions for 
maintenance of ‘children born out of the marriage’ has been made consistently with the financial 
capacity of the parties to the marriage. The Committee finds that the pr oposed Bill covers only 
those children who are born out of the marriage, thereby leaving out the case of  ‘adopted’ 
children. The Committee would like th e Government to clear their position with regard to the 
adopted children also in the Bill. 
7.  During the course of its deliberations on the Bill, the Committee’s attention has been drawn to 
another very vital aspect of the Matrimonial Law which relates to the rights of the wife to matrimonial 
property in case of divorce. Quite a few of the wome n’s organizations have emphasized on this aspect 

before the Committee and demanded that while granting divorce, it needs to be ensured that the 
women get their share atleast in the assets/properties which the parties to the marriage have acquired 
during the subsistence of the marriage. The Committee finds logic in this demand of the various 
women’s organizations. It is generally seen that in ma jority of cases women are left with very little to 
fall back upon after the divorce and quite often they also have to bear the burden of the children born 
out of the wedlock. In such situations, it seems qui te natural for women to feel cheated when they are 
left to their fate without any roof or financial support although during the subsistence of marriage they 
might have contributed in varied forms in the matrimonial family in the prime of their age. This is 
more true in case of working women. Accordingly, the Committee feels that there should be some 
effective legal mechanism so that the women atle ast get their share in the matrimonial property 
which has been acquired during the subsistence of marriage. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends the Government to make adequate pr ovisions in the Matrimonial Law to ensure 
that the courts, while adjudicati ng on divorce petitions, also decide upon women’s share in the 
matrimonial property while granting divorce so that they are not deprived of the 
assets/properties in which they have contri buted during the continuance of marriage. The 
Committee is strongly of the view that liberalization of the laws of  divorce should essentially be 
accompanied with appropriate provisions recognizin g the legitimate rights of the women on the 
matrimonial property/assets atleast, in which they have their share of contribution. 
8.  The Committee, accordingly, despite be ing in agreement with the rationale of 
the Bill, i.e., adding ‘irretrievable breakdown of marriage’ as a new ground of divorce, is not in 
agreement with the various clauses of the Bill, be it doing away with the cooling off period in 
case of divorce by mutual consent or the conditions enumerated in the Bill for granting divorce 
on the ground of ‘irretrievable breakdown of marriage’.The Committee feels that these 
provisions are liable to be misused against women. The Committee, accordingly, recommends 
that the Government should reconsider the various clauses of the Bill keeping in view the 
Committee’s apprehensions and suggestions and a revised comprehensive Bill may be brought 
thereafter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

I 
FIRST MEETING 
  The Department-Related Parliamentary Stan ding Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 17th September, 2010 in Committee Room ‘C’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT 
 1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan        ––       Chairperson 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Shri Balavant alias Bal Apte  
 3. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
  LOK SABHA 
 4. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
 5. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve 
 6. Dr. Monazir Hassan 
 7. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 8. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena 
 9. Shri Devji M.Patel 
 10. Shri S. Semmalai 
 11. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh 
 12. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
 13. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki) 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri K.P. Singh, Director 
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director  
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES 
  MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) 
 1. Shri V.K. Bhasin, Secretary 
 2.  Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary 
 3.  Ms. Veena Kothavale, Deputy Legislative Counsel 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the newly constituted Committee and 
informed them that The Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2010 introduced in Rajya Sabha and 
pending therein, has been referred to the Committee by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on the 
23rd August, 2010 for examination and report within two months. The Chairperson further informed 
the Members that the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with Hon’ble Speaker, Lok 
Sabha has referred The Constitution (One Hundred and Fourteenth Amendment) Bill, 2010 and The 
Public Interest Disclosure and Protection to Person s Making the Disclosures Bill, 2010 introduced in 

Lok Sabha, to the Committee for examination and report within three months. The Committee then 
decided to issue Press Communique on the Bills, inviting views/suggestions from the interested 
individuals/organizations/stakeholders and accordingly , authorized the Secretariat to issue the Press 
Communique. 
3.  Thereafter, the Chairperson requested the Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of Law 
and Justice to make presentation on The Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2010. The Secretary, 
Legislative Department, while highlighting the salient features of the Bill, apprised the Committee of 
the reasons and circumstances which necessitated the introduction of the Bill . The Secretary apprised 
the Committee that the Bill seeks to amend The Hi ndu Marriage Act, 1955 and The Special Marriage 
Act, 1954 to provide for “irretrievable breakdown of marriage” as a new ground for grant of a decree 
of divorce. Thereafter, the Secretary made a power point presentation on the Bill with the help of 
slides. 
4.   The Members sought clarifications on various  aspects of the Bill and sh ared their views on its 
socio-legal implications. The Secretary responded to  some of the queries. Th e Chairperson directed 
the Secretary to furnish written replies within a week’s time on the issues which were not responded to 
in the meeting. 
  (The witnesses then withdrew). 
5.  Thereafter, the Committee decided to hear the views of the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development and the Chairperson of National Commission for Women on the various provisions of 
the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2010. The Committee also decided to seek the views/comments 
of the State Governments and Union Territories on the Bill. The Secretariat was, accordingly, 
authorized to seek the permission of the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for this purpose. 
6.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
7.  The Committee adjourned at 12.00 Noon. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

II 
SECOND MEETING 
  The Department-Related Parliamentary Stan ding Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
Law and Justice met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 28th September, 2010 in Room No. 074, 
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan     ––      Chairperson 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Shri Shantara m Laxman Naik  
 3. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
 4. Shri O. T. Lepcha 
 5. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
  LOK SABHA 
 6. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
 7. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi 
 8. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve 
 9. Shri. D.B. Chandre Gowda 
 10. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena 
 11. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan 
 12. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh 
 13. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki) 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri K.P. Singh, Director 
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director  
Shrimati Catherine John L., Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES 
  MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT 
 1.  Shri D.K. Sikri, Secretary 
 2.  Shri Subhir Kumar, Additional Secretary 
 3.  Ms. Sangeeta Varma, Economic Advisor 
 4.  Shrimati Kalyani Chandra, Director 
  MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) 
 1.  Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary 
 2.  Ms. Veena Kothavale, Deputy Legislative Counsel 

2.   At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed  the Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child 
Development, Additional Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice and other 
officers of both the Ministries on behalf of the Committee. The Chairperson also welcomed the new 
Members appointed on the Committee in the second phase with effect from 21st September, 2010. 
Then, she requested the Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development to present the views of 
the Ministry on the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2010. 
3.   The Secretary, while making a presentation on the Bill apprised the Committee that his Ministry 
supports the proposed Bill and considers the in clusion of the “irretrievable breakdown of the 
Marriage” as a new ground for granting the decree of divorce as a facilitative provision in cases where 
the marriage between the parties has broken down irretrievably and completely. While acknowledging 
the difficulty in laying down the precise parameters for granting the decree of divorce on this ground, 
the Secretary emphasized upon need for the judiciary to implement the law judiciously and effectively 
so that justice is not denied to any party. The Secretary also highlighted the fact that in order to realize 
the objectives of this Bill, the Courts would have to exercise due care and caution so that women’s 
interests were protected and they were not put to a disadvantageous position. 
4.  The Members sought clar ifications from the Secretary vis-a-vis the points made by him during 
his presentation and shared their views on the variou s aspects of the Bill. The Secretary responded to 
some of the queries. The Chairperson of the Comm ittee also requested the Additional Secretary, 
Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice to clarify on some of the queries relating to his 
Department, pertaining to the legislation, raised by the Members on the Bill. He, then, responded to 
queries of the Members. 
  ( The witnesses then withdrew) 
5.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6.  The Committee adjourned at 11.41 
A.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RECORD OF DISCUSSION 
  The Department-Related Parliamentary Stan ding Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 11th November, 2010 in Committee Room ‘A’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan     ––      Chairperson 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
  LOK  SABHA 
 2. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 3. Shri Bhajan Lal 
 4. Shri S. Semmalai 
 5. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
 6. Shri Manish Tewari 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri K.P. Singh, Director 
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director  
Smt. Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director  
Smt. Catherine John L., Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES 
 I.  National Commission for Women, Delhi  
1.  Dr. Girija Vyas, Chairperson 
2.  Smt. Yasmeen Abrar, Mambers 
3.  Smt. Zohra Chatterjee, Member Secretary 
 II. MAJLIS, Mumbai  
  Ms. Flavia Agnes, Director 
 III. Gender Human Rights Society, Delhi  
  Shri Sandeep Bhartia, President 
 IV.  Lawyers Collective Women’s Rights Initiative, Delhi 
  Ms. Nilima Dutta 
 V. Mother and Sisters Initiative  and Rakshak Foundation, Delhi 
  Mrs. Kiran Kukreja, Spokesperson 
 B. REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE  
  DEPARTMENT)  
  1.  Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary 
  2.  Mrs. Veena Kothavale,  Deputy Legislative Counsel 

2.   The Chairperson of the Committee welc omed the Members of the Committee and the 
Chairperson, National Commission for Women and other witnesses. When requested to apprise the 
Committee of the views of the Commission on the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2010, the 
Chairperson of the National Commission for Women made a brief presentation before the Committee 
on the Bill. She highlighted the complex issues arising out of the said Bill which needed to be 
addressed if the Bill is to be made an effective legislation. 
2.1   Raising the issues like ensuring adequate maintenance to the women, relevance of separation 
period required for seeking divorce and cooling-off period prescribed under the Marriage Laws 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010, she urged upon the Committee that these issues should be addressed 
properly while introducing the “irretrievable breakd own” as a new ground for grant of divorce. The 
Members also sought clarifications from the witnesses. 
3.   Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of other witnesses, namely, the representatives of 
MAJLIS, Gender Human Rights’ Society, Mothers and Sisters Initiative and the Lawyers Collective 
Womens’ Rights Initiative. 
3.1   The representative of MAJLIS while deposing before the Committee expressed her 
apprehensions on the inclusion of “irretrievable breakdown” of Marriage as a new ground for divorce 
without ensuring the laws pertaining to women’s rights on the matrimonial property. She further 
added that in most of the countries where such ground  of divorce is in place, adequate laws regarding 
the division of property along with an effective enforcement mechanism are also in place so that 
women’s rights could be protected effectively after divorce. 
3.2.   The representative of Gender Human Rights’ Society, on the other hand, emphasized upon the 
need of making the provisions of maintenance under 13D gender neutral and opined that financial 
hardship can be faced by the husband also, and that it is not the wife only who is always deprived. 
3.3.   The representative of Lawyers Collective Women Right Initiative argued that in view of the 
likely financial and social hardship for women the irretrievable breakdown of marriage should not be 
included as a new ground for divorce until a law, giving wives equal rights in any property acquired 
by the couple during the subsistence of the marriage, is enacted. 
3.4.   The representative of Mothers and Sisters Initiative also raised the issued of gender neutrality 
vis-a-vis the proposed Bill. She opined that maintenance should be given according to the needs and 
not as demanded by the wife. 
4.   The Committee took note of the issues raised  by the witnesses. Thereafter, the Members of the 
Committee sought clarifications from the witnesses. The witnesses replied to the queries sought by the 
Hon’ble Members. 
  (The witnesses then withdrew) 
5.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the discussions was kept. 
6.  The Committee adjourned at 4.27 
P.M. 
 
 
 

IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
  The Department-Related Parliamentary Stan ding Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 16th November, 2010 in Room No. ‘62’, First Floor, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT 
 1. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik    ––     In the Chair 
  RAJYA SABHA  
 2. Shri O.T. Lepcha 
  LOK SABHA  
 3. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi 
 4. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
 5. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena  
 6. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan  
 7. Shri S. Semmalai 
 8. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh  
 9. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad  
 10. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan 
 11. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki) 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri K.P. Singh, Director 
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director  
Smt. Niangkhannem Guite, Assistant Director  
Smt. Catherine John L., Committee Officer 
A.  WITNESSES  
 I. All India Democratic Womens Association, Delhi  
1.  Smt. Kirti Singh, Vice President and Legal Convenor 
2.  Smt. Asha Lata, Assistant Secretary 
 II. Save Family Foundation, Delhi  
1. Shri Wasif Ali 
2. Shri Abhimanyu Veer Singh 
 III. Children Right Initiative  for Shared Parenting, Delhi 
1.  Shri Kumar Jagirdar 
2.  Smt. Ekta Singh 
 IV.  Shri S.R. Abrol, Delhi 

B.  REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE, LEGISLATIVE  
  DEPARTMENT  
1.  Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary 
2.  Mrs. Veena Kothavale, Deputy Legislative Counsel 
The Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2010 
2.   In the absence of Chairperson of the Committee Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik chaired the 
meeting. He welcomed the Members of the Committee and witnesses who were invited to appear 
before the Committee for tendering oral evidence on the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2010. 
Thereafter, he requested the witnesses to appr ise the Committee of their views on the Bill. The 
witnesses, then, made brief presentations before the Committee on the various provisions of the Bill. 
3.   Despite acknowledging the need for inclusion of irretrievable breakdown of marriage as a new 
ground for granting divorce, the representative of the All India Democratic Women Association 
(AIDW A) expressed their concern about the likely adverse consequences of the Bill on the women 
community. Referring to the issue of division of matrimonial, property, the representatives of AIDWA 
emphasized upon the need to ensure the women’s right to share in the matrimonial property before the 
enactment of the proposed Bill. They also emphasised that the divorced/separated women should be 
entitled for Government’s support in case of poor families where there are no properties to be divided. 
4.  The representative of the Save Family Foundation, albeit, welcomed the inclusion of 
irretrievable breakdown of marriage as a new ground for divorce. He expressed his disagreement over 
the present form of the Bill which according to him was not in accordance with the principle of gender 
neutrality. 
5.   Representatives of the Children Right Initiative for Shared Parenting, in their presentation drew 
the attention of the Committee to the fact that the present Bill does not deal with matters like custody 
of the children visitation rights, etc. He felt that the present Bill is based on the flawed presumption 
that the child is best taken care by the mother only. 
6.   Shri S.R. Abrol, while deposing before the Committee, appreciated the inclusion of irretrievable 
breakdown of marriage as a new ground for granting di vorce. He stated that the Bill should be passed 
as the changes it proposes in the Marriage Laws are the need of the hour. 
7.  The Committee took note of the issues raised by the witnesses. The Members, then sought 
clarifications from the witnesses which were responded in detail. 
  (The witnesses then withdrew) 
8.  * * * 
9.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the discussions was kept. 
10.  The Committee adjourned at 4.44 
P.M. 
 
***Relate to some other matters. 
 
 

VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
  The Department-Related Parliamentary Stan ding Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
Law and Justice met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 2nd February, 2011 in Committee Room ‘A’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan     ––      Chairperson 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Shri Shanta ram Laxman Naik 
 3. Shri Ram Vilas Paswan 
 4. Shri O.T. Lepcha 
  LOK SABHA 
 5. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
 6. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunsi  
 7. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve 
 8. Dr. Monazir Hassan 
 9. Shrimati Chandresh Kumari  
 10. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena  
 11. Shri S. Semmalai 
 12. Shri Vijay Bahadur Singh  
 13. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad  
 14. Shri Manish Tewari 
 15. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan  
 16. Adv. P.T. Thomas (Idukki) 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri K.P. Singh, Director 
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Joint Director  
Smt. Catherine John L., Committee Officer 
  MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
  
z Department of Justice 
1.  Smt. Neela Gangadharan, Secretary 
2.  Smt. Snehlata Srivastava, Joint Secretary 
3.  Shri S.C. Srivastava, Joint Secretary 
  z Legislative Department 
   Dr. G.N. Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel 
  z Department of Legal  Affairs 

   Shri D. Bhardwaj, Additional Legislative Counsel 
2.  * * * 
3.  * * * 
4.  * * * 
5.  The Committee, thereafter, considered and adopted the draft 45th Report on The Marriage Laws 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010 without any changes. 
6.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
7.  The Committee adjourned at 4.05 
P.M. to meet again on the 14th February, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
***Relate to some other matters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE - A 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 of 1955 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
insertion of new 
sections 13C, 13D 
and 13E. 
Divorce on ground  
of irretrievable 
breakdown of 
marriage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. XLI of 2010 
THE MARRIAGE LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
A 
BILL 
Further to amend the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and the Special 
Marriage Act, 1954. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:– 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Marriage Laws (Amendment) 
Act, 2010. 
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENTS TO THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT, 1955 
2.  In the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (hereafter in this Chapter 
referred to as the Hindu Marriage Act), in section 13B, in sub-
section ( 2), for the words, brackets and figure “On the motion of 
both the parties made not earlier than six months after the date of 
the presentation of the petition referred to in sub-section ( 1) and not 
later than eighteen months after the said date, if the petition is not 
withdrawn in the meantime”, the words, brackets and figure “Upon 
receipt of a petition under sub-section (1)” shall be substituted. 
3. After section 13B of the, Hindu Marriage Act, the following 
sections shall be inserted, namely:– 
 '13C (1) A petition for the dissolution of marriage by a decree of 
divorce may be presented to the district court by either party to a 
marriage [whether solemnized before of after the commencement of 
the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 2010], on the ground that the 
marriage has broken down irretrievably. 
 (2) The court hearing a petition referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title  and 
commencement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 13B. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wife's right to 
oppose petition on 
ground of hardship. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not hold the marriage to have broken down irretrievable unless it is 
satisfied that the parties to the marriage have lived apart for a 
continuous period of not less than three years immediately 
preceding the presentation of the petition. 
 (3) If the court is satisfied, on the evidence, as to the fact mentioned 
in sub-section (2), then, unless it is satisfied on all the evidence that 
the marriage has not broken down irretrievably, it shall, subject to 
the provisions of this Act, grant a decree of divorce. 
 (4) In considering for the purpose of sub-section ( 2), whether the 
period for which the parties to a marriage have lived apart has been 
continuous, no account shall be taken of any one period (not 
exceeding three months’ in all) during which the parties resumed 
living with each other, but no other period during which the parties 
lived with each other shall count as part of the period for which the 
parties to the marriage lived apart. 
 ( 5) For the purposes of sub-sections ( 2) and (4), a husband and 
wife shall be treated as living apart unless they are living with each 
other in the same household, and reference in this section to the 
parties to a marriage living with each other shall be construed as 
reference to their living with each other in the same household. 
 13D. ( 1) Where the wife is the respondent to a petition for the 
dissolution of marriage by a decree of divorce under section 13C, 
she may oppose the grant of a decree on the ground that the 
dissolution of the marriage will result in grave financial hardship to 
her and that it would in all the circumstances be wrong to dissolve 
the marriage. 
 ( 2) Where the grant of a decree is opposed by virtue of this 
section, then,—- 
 ( a) if the court finds that the petitioner is entitled to rely on the 
ground set out in section 13C; and 
 ( b) if, apart from this section, the court would grant a decree on 
the petition, the court shall consider all the circumstances, including 
the conduct of the parties to the marriage and the interests of those 
parties and of any children or other persons concerned, and if, the 
court is of the opinion that the dissolution of the marriage shall 
result in grave financial hardship to the respondent and that it 
would, in all the circumstances, be wrong to dissolve the marriage, 
it shall dismiss the petition, or in an appropriate case stay the 
proceedings until arrangements have been made to its satisfaction to 
eliminate the hardship.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 of 1954 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new 
sections. 28A, 28B 
and 28C. 
Divorce on ground  
of irretrievable 
breakdown of 
marriage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 E. The court shall not pass a decree of divorce under section 
13C unless the court is satisfied that adequate provision for the 
maintenance of children born out of the marriage has been made 
consistently with the financial capacity of the parties to the 
marriage. 
 Explanation.— In this section, the expression “children” 
means– 
 ( a) minor children; 
 ( b) unmarried or widowed daughters who have not the financial 
resources to support themselves; and 
 ( c) children who, because of special condition of their physical 
or mental health, need looking after and do not have the financial 
resources to support themselves.’ . 
4.  In section 21 A of the Hindu Marriage Act, in sub-section ( 1), 
after the word and figures “sectio n 13”, at both the places where 
they occur, the words, figures and letter “or section l3C” shall be 
inserted.      
5.  In section 23 of the Hindu Marriage Act, in sub-section ( 1), in 
clause (a), after the word and figure “section 5”, the words, figures 
and letter “or in cases where the petition is presented under section 
13C” shall be inserted. 
CHAPTER III 
A
MENDMENTS TO THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT, 1954 
6.  In the Special Marriage Act, 1954 (hereafter in this Chapter 
referred to as the Special Marriage Act), in section 28, in sub-
section ( 2), for the words, brackets and figure “On the motion of 
both the parties made not earlier than six months after the date of 
the presentation of the petition referred to in sub-section ( 1) and not 
later than eighteen months after the said date, if the petition is not 
withdrawn in the meantime” the words, brackets and figure “Upon 
receipt of a petition under sub-section (1)” shall be substituted. 
7.  After section 28 of the Special Marriage Act, the following 
sections shall be inserted, namely:–– 
 ‘28A. ( 1) A petition for the dissolution of marriage by a decree 
of divorce may be presented to the district court by either party to a 
marriage [whether solemnized before or after the commencement of 
the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 2010]  on the ground that the 
marriage has broken down irretrievably.        
 ( 2) The court hearing a petition referred to in sub-section ( 1) 
Restriction on 
decree for divorce 
affecting children. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 21A.  
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 23.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 28. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wife’s right to 
oppose petition on 
ground of hardship.
 
shall not hold the marriage to have broken down irretrievably unless 
it is satisfied that the parties to the marriage have lived apart for a 
continuous period of not less than three years immediately 
preceding the presentation of the petition. 
 ( 3) If the court is satisfied, on the evidence, as to the fact 
mentioned in sub-section ( 2), then, unless it is satisfied on all the 
evidence that the marriage has not broken down irretrievably, it 
shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, grant a decree of divorce. 
 ( 4) In considering, for the purpose of sub-section ( 2), whether 
the period for which the parties to a marriage have lived apart has 
been continuous, no account shall be taken of anyone period (not 
exceeding three months in all) during which the parties resumed 
living with each other, but no other period during which the parties 
lived with each other shall count as part of the period for which the 
parties to the marriage lived apart. 
 ( 5) For the purposes of sub-sections ( 2) and (4), a husband and 
wife shall be treated as living apart unless they are living with each 
other in the same household, and reference in this section to the 
parties to a marriage living with each other shall be construed as 
reference to their living with each other in the same household. 
 28B. ( 1) Where the wife is the respondent to a petition for the 
dissolution of marriage by a decree of divorce under section 28A, 
she may oppose the grant of a decree on the ground that the 
dissolution of the marriage will result in grave financial hardship to 
her and that it would, in all the circumstances, be wrong to dissolve 
the marriage. 
 ( 2) Where the grant of a decree is opposed by virtue of this 
section, then,– 
 ( a) if the court finds that the petitioner is entitled to rely on the 
ground set out in section 28A; and 
 ( b) if apart from this section th e court would grant a decree on 
the petition, the court shall consider all the circumstances, including 
the conduct of the parties to the marriage and the interests of those 
parties and of any children or other persons concerned, and if, the 
court is of the opinion that the dissolution of the marriage shall 
result in grave financial hardship to the respondent and that it would 
in all the circum stances be wrong to dissolve the marriage, it shall 
dismiss the petition, or in an appropriate case stay the proceedings 
until arrangements have been made to its satisfaction to eliminate 
the hardship. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 28C. The court shall not pass a decree of divorce under section 
28A unless the court is satisfied that adequate provision for the 
maintenance of children born out of the marriage has been made 
consistently with the financial capacity of the parties to the 
marriage. 
 Explanation.- In this section, the expression “children” means– 
 ( a)  minor children; 
 ( b)  unmarried or widowed daughters who have not the 
financial resources to support themselves; and 
 ( c) children who, because of speci al condition of their physical 
or mental health, need looking after and do not have the financial 
resources to support themselves.’. 
8.  In section 40A of the Special Marriage Act, in sub-section ( 1), 
after the word and figures “sectio n 27”, at both the places where 
they occur, the words, figures and letter “or section 28A” shall be 
inserted. 
 
 
 
Restriction on 
decree for divorce 
affecting children. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 40A. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
  The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 was enacted on the 18th May, 1955 to amend and codify the law 
relating to marriage among Hindus. Similarly, the Special Marriage Act, 1954 was enacted on the 9th 
October, 1954 to provide a special form of marriag e in certain cases, for the registration of such and 
certain other marriages and for divorce. The provisions of the said Acts have proved to be inadequate 
to deal with the issue where there has been irretr ievable breakdown of marriage and therefore a need 
has been felt for certain amendments therein. 
2.   In view of the demand from various quarters for making irretrievable breakdown of marriage as 
a ground for divorce under the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, the Central Government referred the matter 
to the Law Commission of India for its consideration. The Law Commission in its 71st Report titled 
“The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 –– Irretrievable Breakdown of Ma rriage as a Ground of Divorce” 
submitted in April, 1978 had examined the issue in detail and recommended amendments to the Hindu 
Marriage Act, 1955 to make irretrievable breakdown of marriage as a new ground for granting a 
decreee of divorce among the Hindus. Accordingly, a Bill, namely, the Marriage Laws (Amendment) 
Bill, 1981, further to amend the Hindu Marriage Ac t, 1955 and the Special Marriage Act, 1954, was 
introduced in Lok Sabha on the 27th February, 1981. However, before the Bill could be considered 
and passed by Lok Sabha, the Seventh Lok Sabha was dissolved on 31st December, 1984, and hence 
the Bill lapsed. 
3.   Subsequently, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Ms. Jorden Diengdeh vs. S.S. Chopra  (AIR 1985 
SC 935) had pointed out the necessity to introduc e irretrievable breakdown of marriage and mutual 
cosent as grounds for grant of divorce in all cases. Similarly in Naveen Kohli vs. Neelu Kohli  (AIR 
2006 SC 1675), the Hon’ble Supreme Court recomended to the Union of India to seriously consider 
bringing an amendment in the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 to incorporate irretrievable breakdown of 
marriage as a ground for divorce. 
4.   Further, the 18th Law Commission of India suo motu took up the mater and in its 217th Report 
titled ‘Irretrievable Breakd own of Marriage –– Another Ground  for Divorce’ presented to the 
Government in March, 2009 r ecommended that ‘Irre trievable break down of marriage’ should be 
incorporated as another ground for grant of a decree of divorce under the aforesaid Acts. 
5.   Having regard to the recommendations of the Law Commission of India and the observations of 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court as af oresaid and the demand from various quarters, it is proposed to 
amend the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and the Special Marriage Act, 1954 so as to provide for 
irretrievable breakdown of marriage as a ground of di vroce thereunder subject to certain safeguards to 
the wife and affected children. 
6.   At present, a petition for grant of a decre ee of divorce on the ground of mutual consent could be 
presented by both the parties to the marriage together before the court under sub-section ( 1) of section 
13B of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and similarly under sub-section ( 1) of section 28 of the Special 
Marriage Act, 1954. Under sub-section ( 2) of section 13 B and that of section 28 respectively, the 
parties have to move a motion jointly not earlier than  six months after the date of presentation of the 
petition referred in sub-section ( 1) and not later than eighteen months after the said date for the said 
purpose. It has been observed that in several cases one of the parties do not turn up for filing the 
motion jointly with the other party under sub-section ( 2) of section 13 B of the Hindu Marriage Act, 

1955 or under sub-section ( 2) of section 28 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, as the case may be, 
leading the party desirous of obtaining a decree of divorce hapless and remediless. In order to mitigate 
such hardships and to allow divorce in cases of complete failure of such marriages, it is proposed to 
amend sub-section (2) of section 13B of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and sub-section (2) of section 
28 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, respective1y,  by doing away with the aforesaid condition of 
moving motion subsequently. 
7.   In case the wife happens to be the respondent in respect of a petition for grant of a decree of 
divorce on the ground of irretrievable breakdown of  marriage under the proposed new section 13C of 
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 or under the proposed new section 28Aof the Special Marriage Act, 
1954, as the case may be, the wife is entitled to oppose the grant of a decree of divorce on the ground 
that a dissolution of the marriage will result in grave financial hardship to her. Similarly, provision has 
been made to restrict grant of a decree of di vorce on the ground of irretrievable breakdown of 
marriage if the court is satisfied that adecuate provi sion for the maintence of children born out of the 
marriage has not been made consistently with the financial capacity of the parties to the marriage. 
8.  The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
 
N
EW DELHI;                                                                        M. VEERAPPAMOILY. 
The 13th July, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Divorce by mutual 
consent. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to transfer 
petitions in certain 
cases. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Decree in 
proceedings. 
ANNEXURE 
Extracts from the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 
(25 0F 1955) 
* * * * * 
13B. (1)* * * *
 *  
 ( 2) On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than six 
months after the date of the presentation of the petition referred to in 
sub-section (1) and not later than eighteen months after the said date, if 
the petition is not withdrawn in the meantime, the court shall, on being 
satisfied, after hearing the parties an d after making such inquiry as it 
thinks fit, that a marriage has been  solemnized and that the averments 
in the petition are true, pass a decr ee of divorce declaring the marriage 
to be dissolved with effect from the date of the decree. 
* * * * *  
21A. (1) Where– 
 ( a) a petition under this Act as been presented to a district court 
having jurisdiction by a party to a marriage praying for a decree for 
judicial separation under section 10 or for a decree of divorce under 
section 13, and 
 ( b) another petition under this Act has been presented thereafter 
by the other party to the marriage praying for a decree for judicial 
separation under section 10 or for a decree of divorce under section 13 
on any ground, whether in the same district court or in a different 
district court, in the same State or in a different State, the petitions 
shall be dealt with as specified in sub-section (2). 
23.  ( 1) In any proceeding under this Act, whether defended or not, 
if the court is satisfied that—  
 ( a) any of the grounds for granting relief exists and the 
petitioner except in cases where th e relief is sought by him on the 
ground specified in sub-clause ( a), sub-clause ( b) or sub-clause ( c) of 
clause (ii) of section 5 is not in any way taking advantage of his or her 
own wrong or disability for the purpose of such relief and 
* * * * *  
then, and in such a case, but not ot herwise, the court shall decree such 
relief accordingly. 
* * * * *  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EXTRACTS FROM THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT, 1954 
(43 0F 1954) 
* * * * * 
28. (1)* * * *
 *  
 ( 2) On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than six 
months after the date of the presentation of the petition referred to in 
sub-section (1) and not later than eighteen months after the said date, if 
the petition is not withdrawn in the meantime, the district court shall, 
on being satisfied, after hearing the parties and after making such 
inquiry as it thinks fit, that a marriage has been solemnized under this 
Act, and that the averments in the petition are true, pass a decree 
declaring the marriage to be dissolved with effect from the date of the 
decree. 
* * * * *  
40A. (1) Where– 
 (a) a petition under this Act has been presented to the district 
court having jurisdiction by a party to the marriage praying for a 
decree for judicial separation under section 23 or for a decree of 
divorce under section 27, and 
 (b) another petition under this Act has been presented thereafter 
by the other party to the marriage praying for decree for judicial 
separation under section 23, or for decree of divorce under section 27 
on any ground whether in the same district court or in a different 
district court, in the same State or in a different State, the petition shall 
be dealt with as specified in sub-section (2). 
* * * * *  
 
 
 
 
Divorce by mutual 
consent. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to transfer 
petitions in certain 
cases.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RAJYA  SABHA 
–––––– 
A 
BIIL 
further to amend the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, and the Special Marriage Act, 1954. 
–––––– 
(Shri M. Veerappa Moily, Minister of Law and Justice) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE - B 
Government of India  
Ministry of Law and Justice  
Legislative Department 
Part:- 1: COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS ON THE BILL 
Clause No. 
SI. 
No. 
Memo. 
No. 
Name of organiza- 
tion/individual 
Comments/suggestions  Response of Government  
1 2 3 4 5 
 
1. 1. Shri Vijender Kumar,  After considering arguments 
  Professor of Law, for and against the introduction 
  Head-Centre for  of irretrievable break down of 
  Family Law and  marriage as a ground for grant 
  Commonwealth  of divorce and considering 
  Fellow, NALSAR, decided cases of the High 
  Hyderabad. Courts and the Supreme Court  
 
The suggestions are supportive 
of the proposed amendments 
and hence, no comments are 
called for. 
and also after examining the Family laws 
of other countries like Australia, New 
Zealand, USSR, Canada, Sweden, 
England and Wales which recognises 
irretrievable break down of marriage, has 
suggested amendments to provide 
irretrievable breakdown or marriage as a 
ground for grant of divorce in the largest 
social interest. 
2. 2. Shri S. Raguraman,  (1) Strongly opposes proposed 
  4, Southpark Street,  amendments on the following 
  Singarayar Colony,  grounds ––  
  Narimedu,  
  Madurai - 625 002.          
(a) Proposed amendment is not gender 
neutral; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) there are total six sections under 
 
 
 
(a) Irretrievable, breakdown of 
marriage is a ground of divorce 
available to both genders and is 
neutral in its application. 
Keeping in view the societal 
and ground realities, certain 
safeguards are provided for 
wife and children as a special 
measure and the courts are 
given necessary powers to 
ensure such safeguards; 
 
(b) The proposed section 13 D 

which a Hindu woman can claim 
maintenance and section 13D duplicates 
Maintenance Laws leading to 
unnecessary complication and 
duplication of laws; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(c) Increases discrimination against 
father in child custody cases as no 
mechanism is included to deal with child 
custody matters; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(d) controversial sections as section 13 D 
ignores cases where husbands have filed 
maintenance cases against wife;  
 
 
 
(e) oppose to intention of the Supreme 
Court and the Bill is silent on what will 
happen to pending cases filed under 
Domestic Violence Act, 498A IPC, child 
custody, 125 CrPC and other civil and 
criminal cases;  
is intended to confer a right to 
the wife to oppose petitions on 
the ground of grave financial 
hardship and not to take 
recourse under it to seek 
maintenance. Though 
provisions for maintenance are 
available under various laws 
the wife is entitled for 
maintenance under anyone law 
as per the requirements of that 
law and not under all the laws 
simultaneously. It depends 
upon as to which law is 
involved in getting appropriate 
remedies. Moreover, sufficient 
safeguards in this regard are 
available in section 60 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; 
(c) both husband and wife have 
equal rights to have custody of 
the children as both are natural 
guardians. However, between 
the two who should have 
custody of the child depends 
on the facts and circumstances 
and age of the child in each 
case, the paramount 
consideration being the welfare 
of the child; 
(d) keeping in view, the 
societal and ground realities, 
section 13D has been provided 
as a special measure to 
safeguard the interest of the 
wife and the children. It is 
positive discrimination towards 
gender equality. 
(e) the proposed amendments 
are in consonance with the 
views expressed by the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the 
case of Naveen Kohli Vs. 
Neelu Kohli (AIR 2006 SC 

 
 
 
 
 
(f) no public debate or opinion was 
sought; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(g) Bill does not cater to every section of 
society; 
 
 
 
 
 
(h) no study was done regarding impact 
of the Bill. 
 
 
 
1675) and not opposed to its 
intention as claimed. The cases 
filed under other laws shall be 
dealt in accordance with those 
laws and have no bearing on 
the divorce proceedings under 
the proposed amendments. 
(f) the proposed amendments 
are based on the 71st report of 
the Law Commission of India 
which, after making wide 
research in the matter, had 
recommended introduction of 
irretrievable breakdown of 
marriage as a ground of 
divorce. Moreover, the 
proposed amendments are on 
the same lines as that of the 
Marriage Laws (Amendment) 
Bill, 1981 which was 
introduced in Lok Sabha on the 
27th February, 1981 but, later 
lapsed due to dissolution of the 
House. As the proposed 
amendments have been known 
to the public more than 30 
years, there is no justification 
in the said argument. 
(g) there is no legislative intent 
to cater to every section of the 
society as it has been a 
consistent policy of the 
Government not to interfere in 
the personal laws of minority 
communities unless there is 
demand from large cross 
section of that society; 
(h) necessary study and 
research have been made by 
the Law Commission of India 
before making 
recommendation for 
introduction of irretrievable 
breakdown of marriage as a 

 
 
(2) Has made suggestions for making the 
following amendments in the Bill- 
 
(a) amend 13D to make the law gender 
neutral; 
 
 
 
(b) put a condition for finishing all 
litigations before divorce is granted; 
 
 
 
 
 
(c) fresh process be initiated as no public 
opinion was obtained. 
ground of divorce. 
 
(2) 
 
(a) The provisions are gender 
neutral. However, as section 
13D has been provided as a 
special measure to safeguard 
the interest of wife and 
children; 
(b) the cases filed under other 
laws are to be decided in 
accordance with the provisions 
of those laws and have no 
bearing on grant of divorce 
under the proposed 
amendments. Therefore, the 
suggestion may not be 
acceptable; 
(c) as already stated above that 
the proposed amendments are 
in the air for more than 30 
years, the suggestion may not 
be acceptable. Further this will 
be taken care of by Parliament 
which reflects the will of the 
people; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
3. 3. Shri.Pushpal  Is of the view that section 13
  Swarnkar,  D ( l) is discriminatory and that 
  Mukt Nagar,  the proposed amendments will 
  Padmanabhpur,  be widely misused and has 
  Durg, suggested the following steps 
  Chhattisgarh-491 001. to be taken- 
 
(a) that special provision should be made 
in the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 
2010 to meet the case of your petitioner to 
ensure that both spouses may oppose the 
grant of a decree on the ground that the 
dissolution of the marriage will result in 
grave financial hardship to them— 
 
 
(b) that special provisions be made in the 
Bill so that all litigation between parties 
are quashed before divorce is granted— 
including but not limited to child 
custody— 
(a) as already stated above, 
there is no legislative intent in 
this regard as section 13D has 
been provided as a special 
measure to safeguard the 
interest of wife and children, 
keeping in view societal and 
ground realities; 
 
 
(b) The cases filed under other 
laws are to be decided in 
accordance with the provisions 
of those laws and have no 
bearing on grant of divorce 
under the proposed 
amendments. Therefore, the 
suggestion may not be 
acceptable; 
 
4. 4. Shri Sumit Kumar,  Strongly opposes the Bill and 
  H- No. 1351, is of the view that section 13D  
  Sector 22 B,  is unconstitutional and has 
  Chandigarh - 160022. adverse repercussions and has
   made recommendations as 
   under- 
 
(a) protection under section 13D must be 
extended to either spouses; 
 
 
 
(a) there is no legislative intent 
in this regard as section 13D 
has been provided as a special 
measure to safeguard the 
interest of wife and children; 
 

(b) Objective definition of the word 
“Financial Hardship”; 
 
 
 
(c) child custody and visitation rights 
should also be decided while granting 
divorce; 
 
 
 
(d) condition of finishing all pending 
litigation before divorce is granted; 
 (b) the term ‘financial 
hardship’ is quite explicit and 
does not appear to require 
defining as it varies from case 
to case. Any precise definition 
will defeat the purpose; 
(c ) child custody and visitation 
rights are matters to be decided 
by courts based on the facts 
and circumstances of each 
case, the welfare of the child 
being of paramount 
importance; 
(d) as cases filed under other 
laws are to be decided in 
accordance with the provisions 
of those laws and have no 
bearing on grant of divorce 
under the proposed 
amendments, the suggestion 
may not be acceptable. 
5. 8.  Shri S.R. Abrol, Fully supports the Bill and 
  L - 2 - 91 B, DDA, suggest that NGOs should be 
  LIG, Kalkaji, given roles for providing 
  New Delhi-110 019. counselling and the role of 
   advocates should be minimized. 
As fully supports the Bill, no 
comments are required. NGOs 
can however play a vital role, 
in a non statutory manner.
 
6. 9. Shri Puneet Nagar, Welcomes the Bill but is 
  (address not mentioned)  sceptical about section 13D that 
   it would delay the matter and 
   prevent timely relief. 
Supports the Bill and hence, no 
comments are required. 
7. 10. Shri Madhusudan V. Providing right to wife only is 
  Sutrave, Business  unfair and the rights should be
  Head, Varivaan  given to either of the spouses 
  Pharma & Biotech  as hardship and breakdovm of 
  Solutions. marriage can occur to any of 
   the spouse.  
Keeping in view, the societal 
and ground realities, section 
13D has been provided as a 
special measure to safeguard 
the interest of the wife and the 
child and there is no legislative 
intent to provide otherwise. 
8. 11. Shri Vasant Narayan  Welcomes the Bill but suggests 
  Deshmukh, Wing  that while granting divorce, the 
  Commander (retd.) same court must deal with the 
  (address not  criminal matters, if any, in 
  mentioned) respect of the same parties. 
As cases filed under other laws 
are to be decided in accordance 
with the provisions of those 
laws and have no bearing on 
grant of divorce under the 

proposed amendments. Hence 
the suggestion may not be 
acceptable. 
9. 12. Mrs. Ekta Singh  (a)  A gender neutral shared 
  (Paul), Member, custody and parenting law 
  Child Rights Initiative  must be drafted and 
  for Shared Parenting, implemented nationwide before 
  Delhi NCR Unit, this Marriage Law Amendment 
  2nd Floor, H -33/40,  Bill is even contemplated. The 
  DLF Phase I, representation of the 
  Gurgaon - 122 002. amendments of this will be that  
(a) The suggestion may not be 
acceptable as child custody and 
visitation rights are matters to 
be decided by courts on the 
basis of facts and 
circumstances of each case. 
after the quick divorce the wife will have 
little interest in even attending court 
hearings thereby alienating the child 
forever from the hapless father. 
Alternately a separate section can be 
inserted explicitly stating that child 
custody cases must be resolved to the 
satisfaction of both parties before divorce 
is granted. 
 
(b) amend section 13D and making it 
gender neutral and allowing both the 
husband and wife to pray for ‘Financial 
Hardship’. 
(b) certain safeguards have 
been provided in section 13D 
to protect the interests of wife 
and children as a special 
measure, keeping in view the 
societal and ground realities 
and as such, there is no 
legislative intent to provide 
otherwise; 
(c) providing a clear and objective 
definition of ‘Financi al Hardship’ so that 
this term is not interpreted in a wrong 
way and divorces are not sold by wives. 
All other maintenance cases filed by wife, 
like section 24, Cr PC 125, DV etc. 
should not be allowed to continue, 
blocking the judicial dockets, as the relief 
sought in all of them, will also be 
available in this Bill only. 
(c) the term ‘Financial 
Hardship’ is quite explicit and 
does not appear to require 
defining; Any precise 
definition is also not possible 
as no general yardsticks could 
be formulated. Financial 
hardship will vary from case to 
case. 
(d) creating objective parameters for 
calculating financial assistance like tenure 
of the marriage and relative sacrifice 
(d) The suggestion will be 
taken care of by the court bases 
on the evidence and hence no 
legislative provision is 

made by the parties in the marriage.   necessary. 
(e) reduce separation period from 3 years 
to 1 year under section 13C petition for 
divorce only after 1 year of marriage. 
(e) The period of separation of 
three years has been 
recommended by the Law 
Commission of India on the 
basis of research made by it 
and the same has been 
provided in the Bill. Therefore, 
the suggestion may not be 
accepted; 
(f) include condition of 
finishing/quashing all litigation before 
divorce is granted so that both parties can 
live peacefully and that judicial burden 
can be reduced. 
(f) As the cases filed under 
other laws are to be decided in 
accordance with the provisions 
of those laws and have no 
bearing on grant of divorce 
under the proposed 
amendments, the suggestion 
may not be acceptable. 
(g) condition of closing child custody 
litigation before granting divorce under 
section l3C, so that rights of child to seek 
the involvement of both parents are not 
taken away from it. 
(g) The suggestion may not be 
accepted as child custody and 
visitation rights are matters to 
be decided by courts on the 
basis of facts and 
circumstances of each case. 
10. 13. Gender Human  States that ––  
  Rights Society,  (a) the proposed Bill totally 
  (Regd.) C 5/8,  ignores the Law Commission’s 
  Mangala Apartments,  71st Report and gives no 
  53, I.P.Extension, reasonable justification of 
  Delhi - 110092 choosing the period of separa- 
 
(a) The Bill as well as the 
period of separation of 3 years 
are in accordance with the 
recommendations made by the 
Law Commission of India in 
its 71st Report.; 
tion as three years inst ead of five years, 
that too without any public debate and 
suggests to make it 5 years; 
 
(b) The Bill excludes the possibility that a 
woman can also be a cause of marital 
discord and financial hardship can also be 
faced by the husband and therefore, 
suggests to make section 13D (1) 
Gender-neutral; 
(b) No doubt, in some rare 
cases, financial hardship will 
be faced by the husband, 
However, keeping in view, the 
societal and ground realities, 
section l3D has been provided 
as a special measure to 
safeguard the interest of the 

wife and children and there is 
no legislative intent to provide 
otherwise. 
 (c) Suggests for insertion of section l3E 
to provide for the child custody and 
visitation right; 
(c) The suggestion may not be 
accepted as child custody and 
visitation rights are matters to 
be decided by courts on the 
basis of facts and 
circumstances of each case. 
 (d) States that the Bill is totally 
unconstitutional and suggests that special 
c l a u s e  s h o u l d  b e  i n s e r t e d  i n  t h e  B i l l  s o  
that all litigation between parties are 
quashed before divorce is granted. 
(d) Factually incorrect 
quashing of other cases filed 
under other laws is not feasible 
as those cases are to be decided 
in accordance with the 
provisions of those laws by the 
competent courts before which 
they are pending and have no 
bearing on grant of divorce 
under the proposed 
amendments. Hence, the 
suggestion may not acceptable. 
11. 14. Majlis Manch , Majlis  (a) Section 13D is vague and 
  A/2 Bldg. 4, Golden  does not serve the purpose of 
  Valley, Kalina market,  safeguarding women’s 
  Santacruz East,  economic rights and prevents 
  Mumbai - 400 098. her from becoming destitute. In  
western countries where irretrievable 
breakdown of marriage is a ground for 
divorce, there are detailed laws for division 
of matrimonial property; 
 
(a)  Section 13D has been 
provided as a special measure 
to safeguard the interest of the 
wife and the child. It is too 
early to say that the said 
section will not serve the 
purpose of safeguarding 
women’s economic rights and 
prevent her from becoming 
destitute; 
(b) the waiting period of 6 months before 
a petition for mutual consent divorce is 
decreed should not be abolished as it will 
cause inconceivable hardship to woman. 
(b) the purpose of removing 
the waiting period of 6 months 
before a petition for mutual 
consent divorce is decreed is to 
remove the hardship caused to 
the parties. It may be noted that 
the parties to the marriage have 
lived apart. It is a precondition 
for filing a petition for grant of 
decree of divorce on mutual 
consent that for at least one 
year prior to filing the petition 
and they have come to a 

mutual understanding when a 
joint petition is filed. Hence the 
parties should not be allowed 
to question their own decision 
after filing the petition. 
12. 15 Shri Arnab Ganguly,  Strongly protests against the Bill 
  President, INSAAF, and makes following 
  808 Kinwest Pkwy  suggestions-  
  Apt 74, Irving Tx, (a) amend section 13 D to make 
  75063, USA law gender-neutral; 
 
 
(a) Keeping in view, the 
societal and ground realities, 
section 13D has been provided 
as a special measure to 
safeguard the interest of the 
wife and the child and there is 
no legislative intent to provide 
otherwise. 
 (b) objective definition of ‘Financial 
Hardship’; 
(b) the term ‘Financial 
Hardship’ is quite explicit and 
does not appear to require 
defining; 
 (c) condition of finishing all litigation 
before divorce is granted; 
(c) as cases filed under other 
laws are to be decided in 
accordance with the provisions 
of those laws and have no 
bearing on grant of divorce 
under the proposed 
amendments, the suggestion 
may not be acceptable. 
13. 16. Shri Abhishek Goyal,  Supports the Bill and raises 
  A - 13, Satellite  concern that section 13D 
  Center, Vastrapur,  should be made gender-neutral.
  Ahmedabad - 380 015. 
Keeping in view, the societal 
and ground realities, section 
13D has been provided as a 
special measure to safeguard 
the interest of the wife and the 
child and there is no legislative 
intent to provide otherwise. 
14. 17. Shri Baljinder Kaur, Suggests to insert section 13E 
  W/o Nb Sub balwant  to provide for child custody 
  Singh; Plot No.138/2, rights of father.  
  Kanshipuri, Tehsil &   
  District Jammu,   
  Jammu and   
  Kashmir - 181 101. 
The suggestion may not be 
acceptable as child custody and 
visitation rights are matters to 
be decided by courts on the 
basis of facts and 
circumstances of each case. 

15. 18. Save Family  Makes the following 
  Foundation (Regd.), recommendations-  
  C-8, Mansa Ram  (a) section 13 D( l) should be 
  Oark, Opposite  reworded to make it gender-
  Mohan garden,  neutral;  
  Uttam Nagar,  
  New Delhi-110 059.  
 
 
(a) Keeping in view, the 
societal and ground realities, 
section 13D has been provided 
as a special measure to 
safeguard the interest of the 
wife and the child and there is 
no legislative intent to provide 
otherwise; 
(b) section 13C (2) should be reworded to 
provide for presentation of petition after 
one year of marriage;  
(b) the suggestion may not be 
acceptable because it is already 
covered under section 14;
(c) section 13C (2) (a) should be inserted 
to provide for disposal of petition within a 
period of six months.               
(c) in view of reconciliatory 
procedure relating to family 
law matters, the suggestion is 
not feasible. 
(d) section 13D should  be reworded to 
provide for stay of proceedings until all 
other litigations between the parties are 
decided; 
(d) as other cases filed under 
other laws are to be decided in 
accordance with the provisions 
of those laws and have no 
bearing on grant of divorce 
under the proposed 
amendments. Hence the 
suggestion may not be 
acceptable. 
 (e) section l3E shou ld be reworded to 
provide that all matters relating to 
maintenance alimony and child 
custody/welfare are decided before 
granting divorce.          
(e) the suggestion may not be 
acceptable as  child custody 
matters are to be decided by 
courts on the basis of facts and 
circumstances of each case. 
16. 19 National Commission  Suggests that the Bill should 
  for Women provide for the following 
   safeguards–– 
The recommendations made 
are almost covered in the Bill 
except for division of 
matrimonial property. As the 
issue relating to division of 
matrimonial property is outside 
the scope and purview of the 
present Bill, the suggestion 
may not be acceptable. 
(a) what constitut es ‘irretrievable 
breakdown’ should be clearly spelt out; 
 

(b) should provide for division of 
matrimonial property; 
 
Also suggest that nationwide 
consultations may be organised to 
deliberate and discuss on impact of the 
Bill, what constitutes fair and reasonable 
settlement at the time of di- vorce, etc. 
 
17. 20. (Name and Address  Supports the Bill while drawing 
  not mentioned) attention that the provisions of 
   the Bill are not misused. 
No comments are called for. 
18. 21. Ms. Ankita Tomar, While supporting the Bill 
  C - 101, NASC  suggests that the ground of 
  Complex, Pusa, irretrievable breakdown should 
  New Delhi-110012. be made applicable to all 
   religions. Also suggest that the 
   waiting period of six months 
   should not be reduced. 
The suggestion may not be 
acceptable as there is no 
legislative intent to make the 
Bill applicable to all religions. 
The provisions of the Bill are 
applicable to Hindu Marriages 
and Civil Marriages and hence 
it applies to all marriages 
which are not relating to 
Muslims, Christians, Parsis and 
Jews by religion as it has been 
a consistent policy of the 
Government not to interfere in 
the personal laws of minority 
communities unless there is 
demand from a large cross 
section of the concerned 
community society; 
19. 23. All India Democratic  1. A law must be enacted to give 
  Women’s Welfare  wives equal rights in any 
  Association, 15,  property acquired by the couple 
  Talkotara Road, during the subsistence of the 
  New Delhi-110 001. marriage. This law allow equal 
   division of the marital property 
   upon separation. 
1. As the issue relating to 
division of matrimonial 
property is outside the scope 
and purview of the present Bill, 
the suggestion may not be 
acceptable. 
2. It must be ensured that a provision is to 
be made that women with children have a 
house/place of residence. 
2. The suggestions are outside 
the purview and scope of the 
present amendments and 
hence, no comments are 
required. 
3. The laws relating to maintenance for 
women and children must be strengthened 
3. The proposed section 13A is 
intended to confer a right on 

to ensure that women/children receive an 
adequate amount of maintenance which 
will be sufficient for them to live in a 
lifestyle which is similar to the one they 
were used to in the marital home. Special 
laws for disclosure of income of the 
husbands and shifting of onus of proof in 
these cases will have to be considered. 
Ways and means to lessen the discretion 
of the judiciary in these matters must be 
thought of as women and children have 
invariably been awarded very low 
amounts by a large number of Courts. 
the wife to oppose petitions on 
the ground of grave financial 
hardship and not to take 
recourse under it to seek 
maintenance. Other 
suggestions are outside the 
purview and scope of the 
present amendments and 
hence, no comments are 
required. 
4. The Government has to enact a law to 
enforce and recover maintenance 
amounts. Apart from this a fund will have 
to be created from which maintenance can 
be immediately given to the wife and 
children. In several countries separate 
enforcement agencies have been created 
to recover maintenance amounts. It is a 
duty of the State to see that women and 
children are not left to fend themselves in 
these cases. 
4. Sufficient safeguards are 
available in section 60 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
5. Entitlements from the state should be 
made essential for 
deserted/separated/divorced women and 
children in cases in which there is no 
property or cases in which no 
maintenance can be granted because of 
poverty and/or other reasons. 
5. Suggestions are outside the 
purview and scope of the 
present amendments and 
hence, no comments are 
required. 
6. All grants by the government, whether 
in terms of land or housing, should be in 
the name of both the spouses. 
6. Suggestions are outside the 
purview and scope of the 
present amendments and 
hence, no comments are 
required. 
20. 24 Ms. Jayna Kathari,  Has suggested certain 
  Director, amendments in the Bill as 
  The Centre for Law  under-  
  and Policy Research,  (a) to provide for maintenance, 
  Bangalore expenses, child support and 
   custody; 
 
 
(a) provision for maintenance 
of children has already been 
included. However, the issue 

relating to child custody is to 
be decided by the Court on the 
basis of facts and 
circumstances of each case and 
the age of the child, the 
paramount consideration being 
the welfare of the child. 
 (b) to reduce the pe riod of separation 
from three years to one year: 
(b) A period of separation of 
three years has been 
recommended by the Law 
Commission of India on the 
basis of research made by it 
and the same has been 
provided in the Bill. Therefore, 
the suggestion may not be 
accepted; 
 (c) non-cohabiting should also be 
included in living separately; 
(c) The provisions of section 
l3C (5) make it very clear that 
the husband and wife shall be 
treated as living apart only if 
they are not living in the same 
household. Therefore, there is 
no legislative intent to include 
non-cohabiting if the husband 
and wife are living in the same 
household; 
(d) the term “irretrievable breakdown of 
marriage” should be defined. 
(d) the provisions of section 
13C explicitly makes clear 
what the term “irretrievable 
breakdown of marriage”. 
Therefore, definition of the 
term “irretrievable breakdown 
of marriage” is not required; 
 (e) guidelines for grant of maintenance. (e) As the quantum of 
maintenance to be awarded by 
the Court varies from case to 
case on the basis of evidence 
adduced by the parties in that 
behalf, the same cannot be 
included in the Bill. 
(f) Application of the Bill to  other (f) The Bill covers all 
communities except those who 

legislations. belong to Muslim. Christian, 
Parsi or Jain by religion. As it 
has been a consistent policy of 
the Government not to interfere 
in the personal laws of 
minority communities unless 
there is a demand in this regard 
from a large cross-section of 
that society. Hence, the 
suggestion may not be 
acceptable. 
21. 25. Save Indian Family  Makes the following 
  Organisation, B-180, suggestions:––  
  Janata Colony,  (a) Section 13D(l) should be 
  Jaipur-4, Rajasthan made gender neutral; 
 
(a) certain safeguards have 
been provided in section 13D 
to protect the interests of wife 
and children as a special 
measure, keeping in view the 
societal and ground realities 
and as such, there is no 
legislative intent to provide 
otherwise; 
 (b) section l3E shou ld be reworded to 
provide for child custody and provision 
for visitation; 
(b) as the child custody and 
visitation rights are to be 
decided by the Court on the 
basis of facts and 
circumstances of each case, the 
suggestion may not be 
acceptable; 
 (c) “Financial Hardship” should be 
defined. 
(c) the meaning of “Financial 
Hardship” is quite explicit and 
the need to define it is not felt. 
22. 26. Mothers and Sister s  Makes the following 
  Initiative (MASI),   suggestions:-  
  B -7/204 Sector 4,  (a) Section 13D(l) should be
  Rohini, Delhi-110085. made gender neutral; 
 
 
(a) certain safeguards have 
been provided in section l3D to 
protect the interests of wife and 
children as a special measure, 
keeping in view the societal 
and ground realities and as 
such, there is no legislative 
intent to provide otherwise; 

 (b) section 13 E shou ld be reworded to 
provide for child custody and provision 
for visitation;  
(b) as the child custody and 
visitation rights are to be 
decided by the Court on the 
basis of facts and 
circumstances of each case, the 
suggestion may not be 
acceptable; 
 (c) “Financial Hardship” should be 
defined. 
(c) the meaning of “Financial 
Hardship” is quite explicit and 
the need to define it is not felt. 
23. 27. Shri Kamal Vikram,  Makes the following 
  President,  suggestions -  
  Bhavya Foundation. (a) Section 13D(1) should be 
   made gender neutral;  
(a) certain safeguards have 
been provided in section 13D 
to protect the interests of wife 
and children as a special 
measure, keeping in view the 
societal and ground realities 
and as such, there is no 
legislative intent to provide 
otherwise; 
 (b) section 13E shoul d be reworded to 
provide for child custody and provision 
for visitation; 
(b) as the child custody and 
visitation rights are to be 
decided by the Court on the 
basis of facts and 
circumstances of each case, the 
suggestion not be acceptable; 
 (c) “Financial Hardship” should be 
defined. 
(c) the meaning of “Financial 
Hardship” is quite explicit and 
the need to define it is not felt. 
24. 28. Ms. Mita  Fully supports the Bill and feels 
  Bhattacharjee, DGM, that the proposed amendments 
  New India Assurance  will empower women and 
  Company Ltd., Head  encourage them to control their 
  Office, Mumbai. lives. 
No comments required. 
25. 29. Save Indian Family  (a) Expresses strong 
  Foundation displeasure at the apathy meted  
(a) certain safeguards have 
been provided in section 13D 
to protect the interests of wife 
and children as a special 
measure, keeping in view the 
societal and ground realities 
and as such, there is no 
legislative intent to provide 
otherwise; 

out by the Government in the Bill as 
section 13D will force the husbands to 
buy divorce and is not gender neutral; 
 
 (b) child custody and visitation rights 
should also be decided alongwith granting 
divorce. 
(b) as the child custody and 
visitation rights are to be 
decided by the Court on the 
basis of facts and 
circumstances of each case, the 
suggestion may not be 
acceptable; 
26. 30. Shri Siby Thomas,  Has made certain suggestions 
  Vadakkechooravelil,  regarding factors to be 
  Kallara South P.O.,  considered by courts relating to 
  Kerala. irretrievable breakdown of 
   marriage, misuse of section 
   498A, etc. 
The suggestions are outside the 
purview and scope of the 
present amendments and 
hence, no comments are 
required. 
 
Part - II OTHER ISSUES NOT COVERED BY THE BILL 
 
SI. 
No. 
Memo 
No. 
Name of organiza- 
tion/individual 
Comments/suggestions 
1 2 3 4 
 
Response of Government 
                     5 
1. 5. Shri R.R. Shenoy, Has suggested that instead of 
  H-10, Natraj Society,  making fresh law, the existing 
  Panchpakhadi,  law should be strengthened and 
  Thane - 400 602.  has made certain suggestions 
  Maharashtra including criteria to be 
   considered while granting 
   divorce and radical changes 
   that should be brought in the 
   present judicial enforcement 
   system. 
The suggestions are outside the 
purview and scope of the 
present amendments and 
hence, no comments are 
required. 
2. 6. Shri Dipak Pachkude, He has argued for 
  402 - Shrama  strengthening of existing laws 
  Saphalya, Opposite  and has made   certain 
  Aaram Baug Estate, suggestions such as  grounds 
  Veer Savarkar Marg,  on which divorce may be 
  Thane - 400 602.  granted, procedure to be  
  Maharashtra. followed before passing final 
   order, etc. 
The suggestions are outside the 
purview and scope of the 
present amendments and 
hence, no comments are 
required. 

3. 7. Ms. Flavia Agnes  As at the time of divorce, 
  Director, MAILIS, Women’s non-economic 
  A - 2/4, Golden Valley,  contribution is not taken into 
  Opposite Canara Bank,  account, has demanded that 
  Kalina Market,  women’s right to matrimonial 
  Mumbai - 400 098. property should go along side 
   irretrievable breakdown of 
   marriage so that safeguards for 
   women can be built into the 
   provision. 
The suggestions are outside the 
purview and scope of the 
present amendments and 
hence, no comments are 
required. 
4. 22. Dr.Gajju Ram Malik,  Has made suggestions regarding 
  Manager, Jai Siksha  increasing the age of marriage 
  Evam Manav Sewa  to 25 years for girls and 30 
  Sansthan, 46,  years for boys.  
  Narotam Kunj, Near   
  Madhu Nagar, Agra.  
The suggestions are outside the 
purview and  scope of the 
present amendments and 
hence, no comments are 
required. 
5. 31. Ms. Indira Jaisingh, The ground for irretrievable 
  The Lawyers  breakdown of marriage should 
  Collective -Women’s  not be introduced at the present 
  Right Initiative,  movement as it will result in 
  New Delhi. grate  financial  and  social hardship for  
 
women and children. Therefore, a law 
must be enacted to give wives equal 
rights in any property acquired by the 
couple during the subsistence of the 
marriage, etc.   
 
Financial Hardship has already 
been taken care of vide section 
13D. Divorce on the ground of 
irretrievable breakdown of 
marriage does not cause social 
hardship which is different 
from the social hardship caused 
by other grounds of divorce. 
As the suggestions are outside 
the purview and scope of the 
present amendments, no 
comments are required. 
 
 