 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
December, 2023 / Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
140 
 
ONE HUNDRED FORTIETH REPORT 
ON THE SUBJECT 
"APPOINTMENT OF NOTARIES" 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11thDecember, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11thDecember, 2023) 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-MAIL: rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in  
WEBSITE: https://sansad.in/rs 

3 
 
C O N T E N T S 
      
SR. 
NO. 
 
TOPIC PAGE 
1 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 4 
2 INTRODUCTION 5 
3 ACRONYMS 7 
4 REPORT  
I.    NOTARIES - AN OVERVIEW 8 
II.  VIEWS OF THE STAKEHOLDERS 13 
III. DELIBERATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF 
THE COMMITTEE 
17 
5 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 24 
6 RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
28 
 
                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
5. Shri Sanjay Raut 
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
7. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
8. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
9. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
10. Shri P. Wilson 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Pradan Baruah 
14. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
15. Shri Vinod Chavda 
16. Shrimati Veena Devi 
17. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
18. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
19. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru  
20. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
21. Shri Malook Nagar 
22. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
23. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
24. Shri A. Raja  
25. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
26. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
27. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
28. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
29. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
30.      Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
31.  Vacant 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri M. C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Smt. Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya, Additional Director 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
Shri Prabhakar Singh, Committee Officer 
 
_____________________________________________ 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been 
authorized by the Committee on its behalf, do hereby present the One Hundred 
Fortieth Report on the Subject ‘ Appointment of  Notaries'. The subject was, 
inter-alia, identified and notified by the Committee in Parliamentary Bulletin 
Part-II No. 62570 dated 6th December, 2022. 
 
2. The Committee heard the various stakeholders on the subject, viz., the 
Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law & Justice, Govt. of India) on 
05.04.2023 and 23.08.2023 ; Bar Council of India (BCI) on 27.07.2023 ; and 
Notaries Association Gujarat and Federation of Bar Associations of Tamilnadu 
& Pondicherry on 15.09.2023. 
 
3.  While considering the Sub ject, the Committee mainly relied upon the 
following documents/information:-  
(i) Background note on the subject furnished by the Department of 
Legal Affairs; 
(ii)  Presentations made by the Law Secretary in the meetings of the 
Committee;  
(iii) Replies to the Questionna ires on the subject furnished by the 
Department of Legal Affairs; 
(iv) Written replies furnished by the Department of Legal Affairs to 
the queries of the Members of the Committee raised during the 
meetings of the Committee;  
(v) Written submission made by the Gauhati High Court Bar 
Association, Gauhati High Court; Notaries Association Gujarat; 
Federation of Bar Associations of Tamilnadu & Pondicherry and 
Notaries Association of Tamil Nadu 
(vi) The Notaries Act, 1952; and 
(vii) The Notaries Rules, 1956. 
 
 

6 
 
4.     The Committee wishes to place on record its gratitude to the Department 
of Legal Affairs  (Ministry of Law & Justice), Government of India for 
furnishing necessary information/documents and rendering valuable assistance 
to the Committee in its deliberations.  
 
5.  For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
6. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on 
the 7th December, 2023. 
 
 
New Delhi         SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
11th December, 2023                                 Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Committee on Personnel Public Grievances  
Law and Justice 
 
  

7 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AIBE All India Bar Examination  
BCI Bar Council of India 
DOLA Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of  Law & Justice, Govt. of India 
JAG Judge Advocate General 
LL.B. Bachelor of Laws 
NOAP Notary Online Application Portal 
OBC Other Backward Classes 
SC Scheduled Castes 
ST Scheduled Tribes 
UTs Union Territories  
  

8 
 
R E P O R T 
I. NOTARIES - AN OVERVIEW 
 
Historical Background 
 
1.0 1Notary, also called  a notary public, is a public official whose chief 
function in common-law countries is to authenticate contracts, deeds, and other 
documents by an appropriate certificate with a notarial  seal. In ancient times, 
notaries recorded matters of judicial importance and important private 
transactions or events where an official authenticated record was necessary or 
advisable.  
 
1.1 The profession of notaries in India is presen tly regulated by the Notaries 
Act, 1952, and the Notaries Rules, 1956. Before India's independence, the 
Master of Faculties in England appointed notaries in India to perform all 
recognized notarial functions. After India attained independence, it became 
necessary to empower the Central and State Governments to appoint notaries. 
Therefore, a bill on the subject was introduced in the Parliament on 19 th April 
1951, passed by both Houses of Parliament, and received the assent of the 
President. It came on the St atue Book as the Notaries Act, 1952 (53 of 1952) 
and came into force on 14.02.1956. Subsequently, in exercise of the powers 
conferred by section 15 of the Notaries Act, 1952, the Central Government 
made the Notaries Rules, 1956, to carry out the purpose of  the Notaries Act, 
1952. 
 
1.2 The Notaries Act is a Central Act but the subject "Legal Profession" falls 
in the Concurrent List of the Constitution. Hence, the Central and State 
Governments are administratively competent to appoint notaries.  
 
Relevance of Notaries under various other Legislation 
 
1.3 Besides the Notaries Act, 1952 role of notaries has been prescribed under 
some other legislation also. A list of such legislations is as under: 
 
                                                           
1 https://www.britannica.com/topic/notary 

9 
 
▪ The Evidence Act, 1872 : Section 85 (Presumption as to power-of-
attorney) 
▪ The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973: Section 297 (Authorities 
before whom affidavits may be sworn) 
▪ The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 : Section 139 (Oath on affidavit 
by whom to be administered)  
▪ The Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881:   Section 99 (Noting), 
Section 100 (Protest), Section 101 (Contents of Protest), Section 102 
(Notice of Protest), and Section 103 (Payment for Honour) 
▪ The Registration Act, 1908:  Section 33 (Power -of-attorney 
recognizable for purposes of section 32) 
▪ The Indian Stamps Act, 1899:  Section 42 (Notarial Act), Section 50 
(Protest of Bill or Note), and Section 51 (Protest by the Master of a 
Ship) 
 
Key provisions of the Notaries Act, 1952 and the Notaries Rules, 1956 
 
Powers to appoint notaries 
 
1.4 Section 3 of the Notaries Act, 1952, vests in the Central Government the 
power to appoint any legal practitioners or persons who possess the prescribed 
qualifications as notaries for the whole or any part of India. Similarly, the said 
section also empowers the State Government to appoint notaries for the whole 
or any part of the State. The maximum number of notaries to be appointed by 
the Central and State Governments is specified in the Schedule of the Notaries 
Rules, 1956.  
 
Eligibility for appointment as a Notary 
 
1.5 Rule 3 of the Notaries Rules, 1956 prescribes eligibility criteria for 
appointment as a Notary. As per the said rule, the qualifications are as follows: 
 
(i) At least ten years of practice as an Advocate; or, 
(ii) At least seven years of practice as an Advocate for a person 
belonging to SC/ST and OBC, or, 
(iii) At least seven years of practice as an Advocate for a woman or, 

10 
 
(iv) A person who had been a member of the Indian Legal Service 
under the Central Government or, 
(v) A person who had been at least for ten year s - (i) a member of 
Judicial Service; or (ii) held an office under the Central 
Government or a State Government requiring special knowledge of 
law after enrolment as an advocate; or (iii) held an office in the 
department of Judge Advocate General (JAG) or the legal 
department of the armed forces. 
 
Duties performed by Notaries 
 
1.6 The functions of notaries are provided under section 8 of the Notaries 
Act, 1952, which are as follows: 
 
(i) verify, authenticate, certify, or attest the execution of any 
instrument; 
(ii) present any promissory note, hundi, or bill of exchange for 
acceptance or payment or demand better security; 
(iii) note or protest the dishonor by non -acceptance or non -payment of 
any promissory note, hundi, or bill of exchange or protest for better 
security or prepare acts of honor under the Negotiable Instruments 
Act, 1881 (XXVI of 1881), or serve notice of such note or protest; 
(iv) note and draw up ship's protest, boat's protest, or protest relating to 
demurrage and other commercial matters; 
(v) administer the oath to, or take affidavit from, any person; 
(vi) prepare bottomry and respondentia bonds, charter parties, and other 
mercantile documents; 
(vii) prepare, attest, or authenticate any instrument intended to take 
effect in any country or place outside India in such form and  
language as may conform to the law of the place where such deed 
is entitled to operate; 
(viii) translate, and verify the translation of any document from one 
language into another; 
(ix) act as a Commissioner to record evidence in any civil or criminal 
trial if so directed by any court or authority; 
(x) act as an arbitrator, mediator, or conciliator, if so required. 
 

11 
 
1.7 The Government has informed that as per annual returns received – 
notaries perform almost all the above functions, albeit in varying degrees. 
However, a s ignificant volume of their work is related to verifying or 
authenticating the execution of an instrument and administering oaths or taking 
affidavits from any person. 
 
Powers of the Central Government to make rules 
 
1.8 Section 15 of the Notaries Act vests in the Central Government's power 
to make rules to carry out the purposes of the Act. In exercising this power, the 
Central Government has made the Notaries Rules, 1956. The said Rules provide 
for, among other things, q ualifications for appointment as a notary; form and 
manner of submission of application for appointment as a notary; process to be 
followed for appointment of a notary; extension of area of practice; fees to be 
paid for issue and renewal of certificate of practice and extension of area; fees 
payable to a notary for doing any notarial act; transaction of business by a 
notary; action on allegations of professional or other misconduct of a notary; 
etc. 
 
Procedure followed for appointment of central notaries 
 
1.9 The Government, in their submission before the Committee, has informed 
that presently, the following procedure is being followed for the appointment of 
central public notaries:  
 
(i) Receipt of online applications:  Online applications are invited from 
the candidates eligible for appointment as notaries on the Notary 
Online Application Portal (NOAP) at 
https://notary.legalaffairs.gov.in. 
 
(ii) Interview of the candidates:   The Interview Boards, constituted for 
the purpose under Rule 7A of the Notaries Rules, 1956, assess the 
suitability or otherwise of the candidates through interviews in terms 
of their personality, basic legal knowledge, awareness of the roles and 
functions expected of them as notaries.  
 

12 
 
(iii) Verification of documents:  To ascertain whether the candidate 
fulfills the eligibility criteria, the following documents of the 
applicants are verified – (i) High School/Class X Certificate; LLB 
Degree Certificate; Enrolment Certificate issued by the Bar C ouncil; 
Caste/Disability Certificate (wherever applicable); and Aadhar Card. 
 
(iv) Final selection :  Based on the Interview Boards' recommendation, 
candidates are selected for appointment as notaries. After completing 
all formalities, certificates of practice a re issued to the successful 
candidates. 
  
Period of validity of the Certificate of Practice 
 
1.10 Section 5 of the Notaries Act provides for issuing or renewing the 
certificate of practice to the notaries. Notaries may be entitled to practice for 
five years, which may be renewed for five years. There is no restriction on the 
number of times a notary can renew their certificate of practice. 
 
--- 
 
  

13 
 
II. VIEWS OF THE STAKEHOLDERS 
 
2.0 During the deliberations of the Committee, the Committee interacted with 
various stakeholders related to this subject, viz., the Department of Legal 
Affairs (Ministry of Law & Justice, Govt. of India)  on 05.04.2023 and 
23.08.2023, Bar Council of India (BCI)  on 27.07.2023 , and Notaries 
Associations on 15.09.2023 . The Committee a lso invited suggestions, in 
writing, from all the High Court Bar Associations. The gist of the views 
expressed by these stakeholders is as follows: 
 
Bar Council of India (BCI) 
 
▪ Lack of Transparency in Appointments: The appointment process should 
be made tr ansparent and accessible to all aspirants and applicants. This 
can be achieved by the prominent publication of the proposal recruiting 
notaries online and offline mode. There are complaints of nepotism and 
favouritism in the appointment process that should  be addressed 
appropriately. 
▪ Qualification Criteria and the Role of the Bar Council of India: The 
appointment criteria for notaries are reasonable, but involving the Bar 
Council of India is essential. The BCI regulates the legal profession, 
maintains ethical standards, and ensures the competence of advocates. By 
involving the BCI in the appointment process, the credibility and 
reliability of notaries can be strengthened, as it verifies candidates are 
duly enrolled advocates with good standing. 
▪ Inclusivity and Diversity: The Act should provide for inclusivity and 
diversity to enrich the notarial system and address the diverse legal needs. 
▪ Adherence to Section 85 of the Indian Evidence Act: BCI proposed a 
regulatory system for notaries that oversees and s creens their conduct as 
Notary in conformity with the provisions of the Notaries Act and rules 
and provisions contained in section 85 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 
and other provisions of law. 
▪ Technology Integration: Technological advancements in the le gal sector 
require notaries to handle electronic transactions, digital documents, and 
online notarization with proper training. 
 

14 
 
▪ Renewal Process and Periodic Review of Notaries: The Act should 
provide for notary license renewal after five years of performa nce 
evaluation to ensure that notaries maintain the required standards 
throughout their tenure. 
▪ Coordination with Bar Councils and Specialization: The BCI can foster 
coordination between Bar Councils and Notary authorities to ensure 
notaries possess adequate legal knowledge and stay up -to-date with legal 
developments. 
▪ Ethical Guidelines and Accountability: The Notaries Act should establish 
a comprehensive ethics code for notaries, with the BCI ensuring 
implementation and promoting accountability through regular publication 
and transparency. 
▪ Designated Areas Needed: There must be designated areas for the seats of 
Notaries in every Court Complex and other tribunals and Quasi -Judicial 
Forums. 
▪ Need for Regulatory Mechanism: A strict regulatory mechanism 
regarding the performance and activities of Notaries must be 
implemented to weed out malpractices, undesirable people, and 
objectionable activities happening in notary-related functions. 
 
Notaries Associations  
 
▪ The present system of appointment of notaries is 'ad  hoc', and it needs to 
be reformed. 
▪ Many notaries who are given the certificate of practice have experience 
as an advocate on paper only. Thus, the eligibility criteria should include 
having experience of 100 cases practiced in the court. 
▪ Appointment of notaries should be based on a written examination 
followed by an interview. There is a general perception that one can 
become a notary if they have some sort of influence. This image needs to 
be corrected. 
▪ Another significant issue is the in ordinate delay in renewing the 
certificate of practice. As notaries cannot practice without a certificate of 
practice, inordinate delay in renewal leads to loss of practice, income, and 
reputation. Thus, in case of delay in renewal of the certificate of pr actice 
beyond a specific time limit, they may be allowed to carry out their 
practice. 

15 
 
▪ The fees for notarial acts have not been revised for the past nine years. 
The present fees are not in tandem with the current rate of inflation. 
Accordingly, the fee should be revised regularly, and it should be in sync 
with the level of inflation. 
▪ Presently, the number of notaries sanctioned for different states is very 
low. It should be in accordance with the population/litigations in that 
area. 
▪ In appointment of Notarie s, all sections of society, including women and 
differently-abled people, should be given due representation in appointing 
notaries. 
▪ Every notarized document must bear the certificate number and 
corresponding entry in the ledger/register maintained by the public 
Notary. Also, records maintained by the notaries should be digitalized to 
avoid fraud, deceit, and tempering of records. 
▪ Those notaries who are not submitting the periodic report with the 
registrar should be suspended from practicing till submission of the report 
with acceptable reasons for delay. 
 
High Court Bar Association 
 
▪ The cap on the maximum number of notaries in the State should be 
reviewed/revisited in view of the burgeoning population and exponential 
growth of commercial activities in the S tate, creating a need for notarial 
services and the appointment of more notaries. 
▪ The existing fees/rates be reviewed/revised and enhanced in tune with the 
high cost of living and all-round escalation of prices. 
▪ Penal provisions in the rules should be made  to rein in those notaries 
charging excessive fees. 
▪ Renewal of the certificate of practice of notaries should be made 
automatic subject to being fit to perform duties entrusted by removing the 
discretionary powers given to the government. 
 
Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law & Justice, Govt. of India 
 
2.1 In their presentation before the Committee, the Department informed that 
the Notary Online Portal has been entirely revamped. Entire functions like 
appointment, renewal, extension/change of area, annual returns, etc., are being 

16 
 
brought on one portal to ensure efficient management of the entire gamut of 
functions related to Notaries. 
In the future, the Department contemplates the following steps for making the 
entire process of appointment of notari es and related matters more robust and 
fast: 
▪ to make the whole process faceless, i.e., without any human intervention 
▪ make the entire process easy and user-friendly 
▪ Issuing of certificates in electronic form 
 
--- 
 
  

17 
 
III. DELIBERATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE  
 
3.0 The Committee, during the course of deliberations on this subject, 
interacted with many stakeholders. In such deliberations, many issues and 
concerns arose before the Committee. Accordingly, those is sues and the 
recommendations of the Committee have been dealt with in the succeeding 
paras.  
Raising the stature of Notaries in India 
3.1 It is an undeniable fact that Notary Public is an essential office in our 
judicial system. The functions of notaries p rescribed under Section 8 of the 
Notaries Act, 1952 are very elaborate and important. The documents 
authenticated by the Notary have prima facie validity and are presumed genuine 
everywhere. However, it is also a sad truth that over the years, the notaries ' 
profession in India has degraded substantially. There have been instances where 
notaries have been operating from cars and taxis and have been criticized for 
lowering the dignity of the legal profession. Notaries have been known to issue 
false certificates, which can lead to fraud and other legal issues. Even though 
fees have been prescribed in the Rules, notaries charge exorbitant fees. Further, 
the notary profession in India is largely unregulated, which leads to 
malpractices and unethical behaviour. 
3.2 To overcome this challenge, first, there is a dire need to make the 
notaries' profession more attractive so that competent lawyers are attracted to 
this field. Presently, lawyers having a good practice  do not prefer to be a notary 
public.   
3.3 Notaries do not receive any remuneration or pay from the 
government. The only source of their income is the fees they charge from 
their client. The fees to be payable to a notary for doing any notarial act 
are prescribed under Rule 10 of the Notaries Rules , 1956. The prescribed 
fee is meagre, and it was last updated in the year 2014. Thus, there is a 
need to appropriately raise the fees commensurate with inflation so that the 
notaries can have a decent standard of living. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends that the government  to increase the fee payable to notaries 
and make it inflation -linked. It should be revised at regular intervals, 
preferably every five year.  

18 
 
Appointment of Notaries 
3.4 The present interview-based appointment system for notaries nee ds more 
transparency and objectivity. There is no objective criterion for holding 
interviews for the selection of notaries. Given the number of applications, 
hardly 2 -4 minutes are given to each candidate, and about 200 applicants are 
interviewed daily. Th e entire process of conducting Interview looks ritualistic. 
Thus, the entire process of appointment of notaries requires a relook. 
3.5 The government of India has already dispensed interviews for Group B 
and C to stamp out corruption in appointment and to make the selection process 
objective and fair.  
3.6 The Committee accordingly recommends doing away with interview -
based appointment of notaries. Instead, the selection should be based on an 
objective type written examination along the lines of the All India Bar 
Examination (AIBE) conducted by the Bar Counc il of India (BCI). In fact, 
the Central Government may consider using the same examination i.e. 
AIBE, which is conducted twice a year by the BCI, for getting the panel of 
central notaries.  
Sanctioned Strength of Notaries 
3.7 The maximum number of notaries  to be appointed by the Central 
Government and the State/UT government is prescribed in the schedule to the 
Notaries Rules, 1956. Further, rule 8(4A) of these rules provides for the 
enhancement of the quota of notaries in the states/UTs inter alia consider ing 
their population. However, in their replies to the Committee’s questionnaire, the 
Department of Legal Affairs informed that the sanctioned strength of notaries 
for states/UTs is determined based on the number of applications received for 
appointment as a notary.  
3.8 It is observed that the number of notaries is limited and unevenly 
distributed across the country, leading to difficulties in accessing notarial 
services, especially in rural and remote areas. 
3.9 Accordingly, it is the considered view of the Committee that the 
criteria for deciding the sanctioned strength of notaries in a state is very 
vague and lacks objectivity at all. The sanctioned strength of notaries in a 
particular state should be determined on the basis of its population, volume 

19 
 
of litigation, economic and commercial activities in that state, etc., and it 
should be reviewed regularly.  
Qualification for Appointment of Notaries 
3.10 Rule 3 of the Notaries Rules, 1956, inter alia, stipulates 10 years of 
practice as a qualification (7 years for women, SCs, STs, OBCs, etc.). However, 
the stakeholders have informed the Committee that there are many instances 
where applicants having no exp erience of practicing in courts are appointed as 
notaries based on their years of enrolment as advocates.  
3.11 On this, the Committee opines that the 10 years of practice as 
eligibility for the appointment is on the higher side, and it should be 
reduced to 5 years to attract young aspirant lawyers to this profession. At 
the same time, it should also be made mandatory for the applicant to have 
appeared in at least 100 cases.  
Renewal of certificate of practice 
3.12 As per Section 5 of the Notaries Act, 1952 , every public notary has to 
apply for renewal of his/her certificate of practice before the expiry of the 
previous term. The renewal is done for a period of 5 years. For renewal of the 
certificate of practice, the notaries have to apply to the Department of Legal 
Affairs along with the prescribed fees. On approval of the Competent Authority, 
the renewal certificate is issued. 
3.13 Various stakeholders, in their deposition before the Committee, have 
informed that even after timely submission of the renewal application, there are 
huge delays in the disposal of their application. Because of this, many notaries 
find themselves without a certificate of practice, and legally, they can’t carry 
out their work. Accordingly, they lose their practice, income, and reputation.  
3.14 Almost all the stakeholders flagged the  issue of delay in the renewal 
of certificate of practice. They all brought to the notice of the Committee 
that there are allegations of corruption and misuse of discretion in the 
renewal process. On the  renewal process, the Committee think that it is 
being done only  to know about the antecedents of the applicant and to 
ensure that the applicant is alive and nobody else is practicing in their 
place.  The Committee is, therefore, of the view that renewal of certificate 
of practice every five years should be done away with. After their 

20 
 
appointment, notaries may be allowed to practice till a particular age 
prescribed by the government. As the government has the power to 
suspend or remove notaries on a complaint received against them, this will 
empower the government to tame the erring/defaulting notaries. In order 
to access the antecedent of the notaries and confirm they are alive, the 
Committee desires that a system like online self -certification or otherwise  
may be suitably devised by the government. 
Use of technology in appointment and notarial work 
3.15 Presently, the Notary Portal of the Department of Legal Affairs 
(https://notary.legalaffairs.gov.in/) is used for submitting applications and 
declaring results only. With the advancement of technology, the 
Department needs to harness its full potential for making significant 
improvements in the appointment process. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the g overnment make this portal a one -stop place for 
advertising vacancies of notaries, making applications, submitting fees, 
publishing results, and downloading e -certificates of practice. The entire 
process of renewal of the certificate of practice should be made through 
this portal only. Further, the annual returns under rule 14 of the Notaries 
Rules, 1956, should also be filled online through this portal. 
3.16 Additionally, the general public should be provided with a state -wise 
list of public notaries, updated on a real -time basis, for verifying the 
credentials of notaries.  The public may also be allowed to raise 
grievances/complaints against notaries through this portal. In the long run, 
the services of this portal may be extended to the States and UTs so that the 
common public can access central and state notaries in one place.  
3.17 Notaries should be equipped to handle electronic transactions, digital 
documents, and online notarization. For this training of notaries should be 
made.  
Diversity in notaries' profession 
3.18 Currently, there is no provision for reservation in the appointment of 
notaries, though such categories (SC, ST, OBC, Women, Physically 
Challenged) are given 3 years of relaxation in qualification. The Department, in 
their submission before the Committee, has informed that they do not maintain 
category-wise data of notaries as the same is not required under the rules. 

21 
 
3.19 On this issue, the Committee feels that notaries' profession should 
reflect the diversity of the State in which they are appointed. This will 
further enrich the notarial profession and the legal system. Accordingly, it 
is recommended that the government should appropriately give 
representation to SCs, STs, OBCs, Women, Physically Challenged, 
Minorities, etc., in the appointment of notaries. Further, at the application 
stage, the candidate should be asked to furnish their category so that the 
Department maintains category -wise data. Accordingly, the rules may be 
amended to that extent.  
Designated areas for sitting of notaries 
3.20 The Bombay High Court, in Writ Petition No. 4947 of 2021, has 
observed that notaries have been found notarising documents from public 
vehicles and t axis, raising concerns about the legal profession’s dignity. On 
visiting court premises in different parts of the country, it can be seen that 
notaries roam all around the premises and even notarize documents from their 
vehicles parked outside the court.  
3.21 Accordingly, the Committee recommends the government  to ensure 
designated areas for the sitting of notaries in every Court complex from 
where they can do their notarial work in a dignified manner.  
Change of Notarial Year for furnishing the annual return 
3.22 Public notaries have to send their annual returns in the month of January 
each year. In the return, they are required to furnish details of notarial work 
done during the preceding year and the amount of fees received. Some notary 
associations have  demanded that the Notarial year (January to December) be 
changed to (April to March) coinciding with the financial year, to save them 
from the hardship they face in calculating and submitting their returns. 
3.23 The demand for changing the Notarial  Year from calendar year to 
financial year seems logical, and this will help the notaries to synchronize 
their returns with that of Income Tax returns. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends changing the Notarial Year from Calendar to Financial Year.   
Notarizing of documents  

22 
 
3.24 The notarial work is largely paper-based and manual, which increases the 
risk of fraud, forgery, and tampering of documents. There is a lack of 
digitisation, standardisation, and verification of notarial records and certificates. 
3.25 Further, t here are complaints that the  Public Notaries notarize the 
document without even taking a cursory look at it, sometimes the documents are 
antedated, and some notaries  are alleged to have attested blank pages. To 
overcome this, there is a need  to reform and strengthen the Notary Public 
activity in India to prevent the fabrication of false documents affecting the 
credibility and legality of business transactions. The falsification of documents 
is today’s foremost problem in scores of legal dispu tes, whether civil or 
criminal. 
3.26 The notarial work should be modernised and digitised, and the use of 
electronic signatures, stamps, and seals should be encouraged. The notarial 
records and certificates should be stored and maintained in a centralised 
online database, which can be accessed and verified by the concerned 
authorities and parties. The notaries should also adopt uniform formats 
and standards for their documents and certificates. 
3.27 The Committee accordingly, recommends the government to en sure 
that all public notaries maintain a digital register to keep records of 
documents notarised by them. Digitalizing records  will help avoid fraud, 
deceit, and tampering of records. The concept of digital signature should be 
introduced so that records are not antedated and to identify such notaries 
who indulge in fabrication or falsification of documents. 
Training of Notaries 
3.28 The notaries in India are not adeq uately trained and supervised, and there 
is no mechanism for ensuring their accountability and quality of service. There 
is also a lack of awareness and clarity among the public about the role and 
functions of notaries. 
3.29 Thus the Committee is of the vi ew that the notaries should be 
provided with regular training and guidance, and their performance and 
conduct should be monitored and evaluated by an appropriate 
government/authority. Also, some ethical and professional standards 
should be laid out by such government/authority to which notaries should 

23 
 
adhere to. Further,  any complaints or grievances against the  Notaries 
should be promptly addressed and resolved. 
*** 
  

24 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
 
DELIBERATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
Raising the stature of Notaries in India 
1. Notaries do not receive any remuneration or pay from the 
government. The only source of their income is the fees they charge from 
their client. The fees to be payable to a notary for doing any notarial act 
are prescribed under Rule 10 of the Notaries Rules , 1956. The prescribed 
fee is meagre, and it was last updated in the year 2014. Thus, there is a 
need to appropriately raise the fees commensurate with inflation so that 
the notaries can have a decent standard of living. Accordingly, the 
Committee recommends that the government to increase the fee payable 
to notaries and make it inflation -linked. It should be revised at regular 
intervals, preferably every five year. (Para 3.3) 
Appointment of Notaries 
2. The Committee accordingly recommends doing away with 
interview-based appointment of notaries. Instead, the selection should be 
based on an objective type written examination along the lines of the All 
India Bar Examination (AIBE) conducted by the Bar Council of India 
(BCI). In fact, the Central Government may  consider using the same 
examination i.e. AIBE, which is conducted twice a year by the BCI, for 
getting the panel of central notaries. (Para3.6) 
Sanctioned Strength of Notaries 
3. It is the considered view of the Committee that the criteria for 
deciding the sanctioned strength of notaries in a state is very vague and 
lacks objectivity at all. The sanctioned strength of notaries in a particular 
state should be determined on the basis of its population, volume of 
litigation, economic and commercial activities  in that state, etc., and it 
should be reviewed regularly.(Para 3.9) 
 
 

25 
 
Qualification for Appointment of Notaries 
4. On this, the Committee opines that the 10 years of practice as 
eligibility for the appointment is on the higher side, and it should be 
reduced to 5 years to attract young aspirant lawyers to this profession. At 
the same time, it should also be made mandatory for the applicant to have 
appeared in at least 100 cases. (Para 3.11) 
Renewal of certificate of practice 
5. Almost all the stakeholders flagged the issue of delay in the renewal 
of certificate of practice. They all brought to the notice of the Committee 
that there are allegations of corruption and misuse of discretion in the 
renewal process. On the renewal process, the Committee think that  it is 
being done only to know about the antecedents of the applicant and to 
ensure that the applicant is alive and nobody else is practicing in their 
place.  The Committee is, therefore, of the view that renewal of certificate 
of practice every five years  should be done away with. After their 
appointment, notaries may be allowed to practice till a particular age 
prescribed by the government. As the government has the power to 
suspend or remove notaries on a complaint received against them, this will 
empower the government to tame the erring/defaulting notaries. In order 
to access the antecedent of the notaries and confirm they are alive, the 
Committee desires that a system like online self -certification or otherwise 
may be suitably devised by the government. (Para 3.14) 
Use of technology in appointment and notarial work 
6. Presently, the Notary Portal of the Department of Legal Affairs 
(https://notary.legalaffairs.gov.in/) is used for submitting applications and 
declaring results only. With the advancement of technology, the 
Department needs to harness its full potential for making significant 
improvements in the appointment process. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the government make this po rtal a one -stop place for 
advertising vacancies of notaries, making applications, submitting fees, 
publishing results, and downloading e -certificates of practice. The entire 
process of renewal of the certificate of practice should be made through 
this portal only. Further, the annual returns under rule 14 of the Notaries 
Rules, 1956, should also be filled online through this portal. (Para 3.15) 

26 
 
7. Additionally, the general public should be provided with a state -wise 
list of public notaries, updated on a rea l-time basis, for verifying the 
credentials of notaries.  The public may also be allowed to raise 
grievances/complaints against notaries through this portal. In the long run, 
the services of this portal may be extended to the States and UTs so that the 
common public can access central and state notaries in one place. (Para 
3.16) 
8. Notaries should be equipped to handle electronic transactions, digital 
documents, and online notarization. For this training of notaries should be 
made. (Para 3.17) 
Diversity in notaries' profession 
9. On this issue, the Committee feels that notaries' profession should 
reflect the diversity of the State in which they are appointed. This will 
further enrich the notarial profession and the legal system. Accordingly, it 
is recommende d that the government should appropriately give 
representation to SCs, STs, OBCs, Women, Physically Challenged, 
Minorities, etc., in the appointment of notaries. Further, at the application 
stage, the candidate should be asked to furnish their category so that the 
Department maintains category -wise data. Accordingly, the rules may be 
amended to that extent. (Para 3.19) 
Designated areas for sitting of notaries 
10. The Committee recommends the government to ensure designated 
areas for the sitting of notaries in every Court complex from where they 
can do their notarial work in a dignified manner. (Para 3.21) 
Change of Notarial Year for furnishing the annual return 
11. The demand for changing the Notarial Year from calendar year to 
financial year seems logical, and this will help the notaries to synchronize 
their returns with that of Income Tax returns. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommends changing the Notarial Year fro m Calendar to Financial Year.   
(Para 3.23) 
 
 

27 
 
Notarizing of documents  
12. The notarial work should be modernised and digitised, and the use of 
electronic signatures, stamps, and seals should be encouraged. The notarial 
records and certificates should be s tored and maintained in a centralised 
online database, which can be accessed and verified by the concerned 
authorities and parties. The notaries should also adopt uniform formats 
and standards for their documents and certificates. (Para 3.26) 
13. The Committee accordingly, recommends the government to ensure 
that all public notaries maintain a digital register to keep records of 
documents notarised by them. Digitalizing records  will help avoid fraud, 
deceit, and tampering of records. The concept of digital signature should be 
introduced so that records are not antedated and to identify such notaries 
who indulge in fabrication or falsification of documents. (Para3.27) 
Training of Notaries 
14. Thus the Committee is of the view that the notaries should be  
provided with regular training and guidance, and their performance and 
conduct should be monitored and evaluated by an appropriate 
government/authority. Also, some ethical and professional standards 
should be laid out by such government/authority to which  notaries should 
adhere to. Further, any complaints or grievances against the Notaries 
should be promptly addressed and resolved. (Para 3.29) 
--- 
  

28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

29 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE                  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
XV 
FIFTEENTH MEETING  
 
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 4.00 PM on Wednesday, the 
05.04.2023 in Committee Room No. - 3, Block – ‘A’, Parliament House 
Annexe Extension, New Delhi-110001.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(iii) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
(iv) Shrimati Darshana Singh 
(v) Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
(vi) Shri P. Wilson 
 
Lok Sabha 
(vii) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
(viii) Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
(ix) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
(x) Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
(xi) Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Abhyuday Singh Shekhawat, OSD to the Vice-President of India 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
 
 
 

30 
 
WITNESSES 
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 
(i) Dr. Niten Chandra, Secretary  
(ii) Shrimati Sunita Anand, Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser 
(iii) Shri Sudarshan K., Additional  Government Advocate 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting and 
apprised them on the subject selected by the committee - ' The Appointment of 
Notaries', for detailed deliberation. He then briefed the Members rega rding the 
Notaries Act 1952, and the Notaries rules 1956, two important enactments 
which govern the qualification, appointment and functions of the Notaries. The 
Chairman observed that the Committee has chosen this subject owing to the 
slow pace of appointment of Notaries in the country and to examine holistically 
the factors responsible for delay in appointment and filling up of vacancies and 
accordingly propose reforms. The Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs has 
been called to hear the views of the Government on these issues. 
 
 (on arrival of witnesses) 
 
 3. On arrival of the Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs and his team, the 
Chairman first welcomed them and asked them to brief the Committee about the 
process of appointment of Notaries and all ot her related aspects. He also asked 
the Secretary to apprise the Committee of the bottlenecks responsible for the 
delay in the process of appointment. 
 
4. The Secretary in his introductory remarks, informed that both the Central 
and State governments has powers to appoint Notaries. He then elaborated on 
the modernised process newly adopted by the department in selecting the 
Notaries. 
 
5. Thereafter, Joint Secretary further elaborated on the ongoing process of 
appointment of Notaries, NOAP (Notary Online Application Process), 
eligibility, vacancies, applications received and shortlisted, the process 
completed till date and the roadmap prepared by the departmen t for conducting 
the appointment process.   
6.  Thereafter, the Chairman and Members of the Committee sought 
clarifications from the Department on various issues, including the role and 

31 
 
functions of the Notaries, the difference in the functioning of the No taries 
appointed by the Central and State governments, mode of identification or 
differentiation of  state and central notaries, justification for fixing up of ten 
years of experience for qualifying as a Notary, the purpose behind fixing up of 5 
years tenu re for the Notaries, details on the reservation policies in the 
appointment of the Notaries, parameters followed in the attestation of 
documents etc. 
 
7.  The Committee also sought information on the percentage of applications 
received and allowed by the d epartment, and the criteria followed for accepting 
or rejecting the applications received. The Committee also enquired about the 
infrastructural and monetary assistance provided by the government for the 
Notaries appointed, the monitoring of the proficienc y of Notaries appointed in 
translating the documents to regional languages etc.  
 
8.  The Chairman, further sought clarification from the department 
regarding the mode of appointment process and the effectiveness of going to 
each State for conducting interviews and verification of documents of the 
applicants, the time consumption for compl eting the process, the number of 
Notaries whose terms have expired and are due for renewal and the criteria 
followed in renewing their tenure. The Chairman also sought clarification as to 
how the proportion of the notaries are fixed for each state or regio n and the 
mechanism in place for monitoring Notaries, the fee charged by them for 
attesting documents and the last fee fixed and revised, what is the criterion for 
fixing the number of Notaries in a State, steps taken for weeding out fake 
Notaries.  
 
9.   The Secretary replied to some of the queries. He inter-alia informed 
about the role and functions of the Notaries. Regarding difference between State 
and Central Notaries he informed that while State Notaries had jurisdiction 
within the State, Central Nota ries has jurisdiction beyond the boundaries of 
State or even outside the country for international transactions. Regarding   
vacancies, he stated that the vacancies are adjusted in proportion to the 
applications received.   
 
 

32 
 
10.  The Chairman directed the  Secretary to furnish detailed information on 
the queries raised by the Committee in writing. 
 
(witnesses then withdrew) 
 
11. Thereafter, the Committee discussed its future programme and decided to 
undertake a study visit to Kohima (Nagaland), Shillong  (Meghalaya) and 
Itanagar (Arunachal Pradesh) from 9 th to 13 th May, 2023 and authorized the 
Chairman to seek the permission of Hon'ble Chairman for the proposed study 
visit.  
 
12. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
13. The meeting adjourned at 5.42 PM. 
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN 
5th April, 2023                                                                                  DIRECTOR    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

33 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND 
JUSTICE                  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
XX 
TWENTIETH MEETING  
          The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 4.00 PM on Thursday, 27.07.2023, in 
Committee Room No. - 4, Block – ‘A’, Parliament House Annexe Extension, 
New Delhi.  
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
i. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi      -        Chairman 
          Rajya Sabha 
ii. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
iii. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
iv. Shri Kanakmedala Ravindra Kumar 
v. Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
vi. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
vii. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
viii. Shri P. Wilson 
Lok Sabha 
ix. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
x. Shrimati Veena Devi 
xi. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
xii. Shri Malook Nagar 
xiii. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
xiv. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
xv. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
xvi. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
SECRETARIAT 
I. Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary  
II. Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
III. Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 

34 
 
IV. Shri Abhyuday Singh Shekhawat, OSD to the Vice-President of India 
V. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
VI. Shri Prabhakar Singh, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
BAR COUNCIL OF INDIA 
1. Shri Manan Kumar Mishra, Chairman ; 
2. Shri S. Prabakaran, Vice Chairman ; 
3. Shri Apurba Kumar Sharma, Chairman Executive Committee ; 
4. Shri Ved Prakash Sharma, Co-Chairman ; 
5. Shri Jayant D. Jaibhave, Member ; 
6. Prof. (Dr.) R. Venkata Rao, Vice Chancellor of BCI Trust University, 
Goa ; 
7. Shri Srimanto Sen, Secretary ; 
8. Shri Ashok Kumar Pandey, Joint Secretary ; and 
9. Dr. Nivedita Choudhary, Asstt. Professor of Law, IIULER, Goa. 
  
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee. He then apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear 
the Chairman, Bar Council of India (BCI) on the subject *                  *                  
*     and ‘Appointment of Notaries’. 
  
(on arrival of the witnesses) 
 3.      The Chairman welcomed Shri Manan Kumar Mishra, Chairman and other 
officials of the Bar Council of India. Thereafter, the Chairman apprised them *       
*          *  the Committee seeks recent views of the Council on that subject and 
also on the subject of 'Appointment of Notaries'.    
4.      *                                                    *                                                    * 
5.      The Co-Chairman, BCI then informed the Committee about the lack of 
transparency in the appointment of Notaries and suggested that Bar Council 
should have the power of appointment of Notaries, regulation of their ethics and 
conduct by amending the Notaries act. He also suggested for the digitalization 
of Notarisation process and proper training of Notaries for the same. 
 
 
*pertains to other matters 

35 
 
6.      The Chairman and Members raised queries and sought clarifications  
 *                                                    *                                                    * 
.He also suggested for revamping of whole process of appointment of Notaries. 
 7.      The Officials of the Bar Council of India replied to some of the queries. 
The Chairman then thanked all the witnesses and asked them to furnish replies 
to the queries which were not answered during the meeting, in writing.   
 (witnesses then withdrew) 
  
8.      A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
9.      The meeting adjourned at 4.50 PM. 
  
  
 
New Delhi                                                                   P. NARAYANAN 
27th July, 2023                                                                             DIRECTOR  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*pertains to other matters 
 
 

36 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND 
JUSTICE                  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
XXII 
TWENTY SECOND MEETING  
  
          The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 3.00 PM on Wednesday, the 
23.08.2023 in Committee Ro om No. - 4, Block – ‘A’, Parliament House 
Annexe Extension, New Delhi-110001.  
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
i. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi      -        Chairman 
         Rajya Sabha 
ii. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
iii. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
iv. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
v. Shri P. Wilson 
Lok Sabha 
vi. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
vii. Smt. Veena Devi 
viii. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
ix. Shri Raghu Ramakrishna Raju Kanumuru 
x. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
xi. Smt. Sandhya Ray 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri MC.Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Abhyuday Singh Shekhawat, OSD to the Vice-President of India 
      Shri Prabhakar Singh, Committee Officer 
  

37 
 
WITNESSES 
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 
i. Dr. Niten Chandra, Secretary  
ii. Shrimati Sunita Anand, Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser 
  
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting and 
reiterated that the subject - 'The Appointment of Notaries' has been selected by 
the committee for detailed deliberation owing to the slow pace of appointment 
of Notaries in the country and to examine holistically the factors responsible for 
delay in appointment and filling up of vacancies and accordingly propose 
reforms. The Chairman informed that though the Law Secretary was heard by 
the Committee in its previous meeting held on this issu e on 5 th April, 2023, the 
deliberations on the subject with the Government remained inconclusive. 
 Therefore, as decided by the Committee in that meeting, Law Secretary has 
again been invited to make a presentation on the subject and put forward the 
Ministry's views.  
  
 (on arrival of witnesses) 
  
 3.      On arrival of the Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs and his team, the 
Chairman first welcomed them and asked them to dwell more on reforms 
required in the system, especially with regard to reforms r equired in the 
eligibility criteria, appointment process, control over the appointed Notaries, 
etc.  The Chairman also asked them to enlighten the Committee about the 
procedure followed during the scrutiny of applications and documents 
submitted by the candidates, the grounds on which the applications are accepted 
or rejected, and details of interview guidelines.  
  
4.      The Secretary in his introductory remarks briefly recapitulated the 
discussions of earlier meeting and informed that they will give inf ormation on 
the exact role, functions, and working of notaries apart from the progress they 
have made regarding the concern of the Committee over slow appointment of 
the notaries.   
  

38 
 
5.      Thereafter, Joint Secretary elaborated on the  detailed procedure  being 
followed for appointment of Notaries (which includes online interview now), 
qualification requirement regarding the appointment of the notary and also the 
relaxation which is applicable for SC/ST/OBC/Women/PwD, the reasons for 
delay in filling up of  pending vacancies, the duties and relevance of Notaries 
and the concurrent powers of both Central and State Governments in 
appointment of Notaries.  
6.       Thereafter, the Chairman and Members of the Committee sought 
clarifications from the Department on various issues, including the future action 
plan of the department for completion of appointment and filling up of all 
pending vacancies of the Notaries and the reasons for delay in the appointment, 
selection criteria being followed by the Interview Board in selection, reasons for 
such stiff parameters and exhaustive system for appointment of Notaries, 
justification for fixing up of ten years of experience for qualifying as a Notary, 
and such vague selection criteria in appointment.  
  
7.       The Committee also raised concern over the geographical limitation in 
operation of the Notaries, the fee being charged by Notaries as per their whims 
and fancies, need for revamping the entire Notaries Act, the competence and 
composition of Interview Board to choose  candidates for Notary Public and the 
immediate need of digitization of complete details of Notary Public all across 
the country for easy access to citizens.  
  
8.      The Chairman, further sought information on the reforms proposed in the 
report prepared  by the lawyers in the Notaries Act, criteria for assigning the 
strength of notaries in a particular State,  exact number of people appointed on 
the basis of relaxation for SCs, STs and OBCs, the need of interview at all for 
appointment as a Notary public, and the number of legal practitioners appointed 
to the post. The Chairman further informed that the Committee would like to 
hear the stakeholders, like Notaries association of Delhi, in the next meeting. 
  
9.      The Secretary and Joint Secretary replied to some of the queries. They 
inter-alia informed about the duties performed by the Notaries and their 
relevance, the switch to online interview process, and the detailed procedure 
followed in the appointment of Notaries. They further elaborated on the five  
considerations kept in mind while identifying competent persons from among 
the applications and how vacancies are identified.  

39 
 
  
10.     The Chairman directed the Secretary to furnish detailed information on 
the queries raised by the Committee in writing. 
  
(witnesses then withdrew) 
  
11.    A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
12.    The meeting adjourned at 4.35 PM. 
  
  
  
  New Delhi                                                                              P. NARAYANAN 
 23rdAugust,2023                                                                   DIRECTOR  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE                  
RECORD NOTE OF DISCUSSION 
  
          The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 3.00 PM on Friday, 15.09.2023, in 
Committee Room No. - 4, Block – ‘A’, Parliament House Annexe Extension, 
New Delhi-110001.  
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
i. Shri Vivek K. Tankha  -        In-Chair 
          Rajya Sabha 
ii. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
iii. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
iv. Shri P. Wilson 
Lok Sabha 
v. Shrimati Veena Devi 
vi. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
vii. Shri Malook Nagar 
viii. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
SECRETARIAT 
I. Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
II. Smt. Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya, Addl. Director  
III. Shri Abhyuday Singh Shekhawat, OSD to the Vice-President of India 
IV. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
V. Shri Prabhakar Singh, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
FEDERATION OF BAR ASSOCIATION OF TAMIL NADU & 
PONDICHERRY 
1. Shri N. Marappan, Chairman ; 
2. Shri K. Murali Babu, Treasurer ; 
3. Shri S. Balamurugan, Zonal Secretary & Addl. Public Prosecutor ; and 
4. Shri B. Balaji, Notary Public. 

41 
 
NOTARIES ASSOCIATION GUJARAT 
1. Shri Dhiresh T. Shah, President ; and 
2. Shri Ratilal Vaghasia, Senior Vice-President. 
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 
1. Ms. Sunita Anand, Joint Secretary & Legal Adviser; and 
2. Shri Rajeev Kumar, Deputy Secretary. 
 2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the  meeting of the 
Committee. He then apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear 
the views of the representatives of the Federation of Bar Associations of Tamil 
Nadu and Pondicherry and Notaries Association of Gujarat on the subject 
‘Appointment of Notaries’.  
 (on arrival of witnesses) 
  
 3.      The Chairman welcomed the office bearers of the Federation of Bar 
Associations of Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry and Notaries Association of 
Gujarat and the representatives of the Department of Legal Affa irs to the 
meeting. Thereafter, the Chairman requested them to enlighten the Committee 
about the working conditions and practical difficulties being faced by the 
Notaries. He also informed that the Committee seeks their views to the make the 
process of appointment of Notaries fair and transparent and enable the Notaries 
to discharge their legal responsibilities more efficiently. 
  
4.      The office bearers of the Federation of Bar Associations of Tamil Nadu 
and Pondicherry in their presentation suggested to increase the number of of 
Notary Public appointed considering the increase in the population of the 
country. They further suggested the young eligible advocates,  differently-abled 
persons and women may be given priority in appointments. They also 
demanded that the minimum experience required as an advocate for women and 
SC/ST candidates may be increased from seven to ten years and the renewal of 
period of Notary Public may be enhanced to 25 years. Further, they advocated 
for the increase in fee payable t o Notary Public and the powers of the Notary 
Public may be enhanced to administer any oath or affirmation and to take or 
attest any affidavit and statutory declaration. They also suggested that records 
should be digitally maintained by the Notary Public to  avoid any fraud or 
tampering of records and that the Notary Public may be declared a Gazetted 

42 
 
officer to effectively serve the needy people. They were of the view that an 
official website of existing Notary Public In India containing all details of 
notary should be maintained and updated regularly. 
5.      After that, President of Notaries Association Gujarat, made his 
presentation before the committee highlighting the lacunae in appointment of 
Notaries like lack of written examination, no verification of the applicants in 
which court the applicant has practiced in reality before applying for the office 
of Notary public, delay in timely renewal of Certificate of Practice as a Notary.  
6.       Thereafter, the Chairman and Members of the Committee sought 
clarifications from the representatives of the both the Associations on various 
issues, regarding the checking of background of the lawyers through the Bar 
Council before granting a license for the Notary Public, the scope of work of the 
Notary Public and the  measure and method to increase the fees for Notary 
Public . Some members also inquired whether any reservation system is being   
followed or not while appointing the Notary Public. 
  
7.      The office bearers of both the Associations replied to some of the queries.  
The Chairman then, thanked both the Associations for their suggestions and 
requested them to provide further information on the queries of the Members 
and suggestions, if any, in writing to the Committee. 
  
(witnesses then withdrew) 
  
8.      A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
9.      The meeting adjourned at 3.56 PM. 
  
  
  
New Delhi                                                INDIRA CHATURVEDI VAIDYA   
15th September, 2023                                      ADDITIONAL   DIRECTOR 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE                  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
V 
FIFTH MEETING  
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 4.00 PM on Thursday, 07.12.2023, in 
Committee Room C, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
(xii) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 Rajya Sabha 
(xiii) Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(xiv) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
(xv) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
(xvi) Shrimati Darshana Singh 
(xvii) Shri P. Wilson 
Lok Sabha 
(xviii) Shri Malook Nagar 
(xix) Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
(xx) Shrimati Veena Devi 
(xxi) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
(xxii) Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
(xxiii) Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
(xxiv) Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
(xxv) Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
(xxvi) Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
3. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
 
2.           At the outset, the Chairman welcomed all the Members to the meeting 
of the Committee and apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. 
consideration and adoption of the following draft reports of the Committee: 

44 
 
(i) *                                   *                                                    * 
(ii) *                                   *                                                    *                                                                        
(iii) *                                   *                                                    * 
(iv) *                                   *                                                    * 
(v) *                                   *                                                    * 
(vi) *                                   *                                                    * 
(vii) 140th Report on "Appointment of Notaries". 
3. The Committee unanimously adopted all the draft Reports and decided 
to present those Reports to both Houses of Parliament  on 11th December, 2023.  
The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence Shri P. Wilson and 
Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and 
Shri Malook Nagar and in his absence Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju 
Kanumuru for laying the reports in Lok Sabha.  
4.      *                                              *                                                     * 
5.      The meeting adjourned at 4.30 PM. 
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN 
7th December, 2023                                                                          DIRECTOR   
 