 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND 
 JUSTICE 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
February, 2024 / Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
142 
 
ONE HUNDRED FORTY-SECOND REPORT 
ON THE SUBJECT 
"STRENGTHENING LEGAL EDUCATION IN VIEW OF 
EMERGING CHALLENGES BEFORE THE LEGAL PROFESSION" 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 07th February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 07thFebruary, 2024) 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-MAIL: rs-cpers@sansad.nic.in  
WEBSITE: http://sansad.in/rs 

3 
 
C O N T E N T S 
      
SR. 
NO. 
 
TOPIC PAGE 
1 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 4 
2 INTRODUCTION 6 
3 ACRONYMS 8 
4 REPORT  
I.    HISTORICAL CONTEXT 10 
II. REGULATING LEGAL EDUCATION IN INDIA  16 
III. CURRICULUM 30 
IV. RESEARCH IN LEGAL EDUCATION 42 
V. TECHNOLOGY WITH RELEVANCE TO LEGAL 
EDUCATION 
49 
VI.  EFFECT OF GLOBALIZATION IN LEGAL EDUCATION 52 
5 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 56 
6 RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
64 
 
                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
4. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
5. Shri Sanjay Raut 
6. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
7. Shri K. R. Suresh Reddy  
8. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
9. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
10. Shri P. Wilson 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
12. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
13. Shri Pradan Baruah 
14. Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
15. Shri Vinod Chavda 
16. Shrimati Veena Devi 
17. Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
18. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
19. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru  
20. Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 
21. Shri Malook Nagar 
22. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
23. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
24. Shri A. Raja  
25. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
26. Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
27. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 

5 
 
28. Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
29. Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
30.      Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
31.  Vacant 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Smt. Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
Shri Prabhakar Singh, Under Secretary 
Smt. Naina Gupta, Assistant Research Officer 
 
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, having been authorized by the 
Committee on its behalf, do hereby present the One Hundred Forty-Second Report 
on the Subject „Strengthening Legal Education in view of emerging challenges 
before the Legal Profession'.  
 
2. While examining the Subject t he Committee  held extensive deliberations 
with the stakeholders and heard the views of following experts/institutions: 
(i) Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice; 
(ii) Bar Council of India; 
(iii) University Grants Commission; 
(iv) National Assessment and Accreditation Council; 
(v) Professor (Dr.) Usha Tandon, Dean & Head, Faculty of Law, 
University of Delhi;   
(vi) Professor (Dr.) G. S. Bajpai, Vice -Chancellor, National Law 
University, Delhi;  
(vii) Professor (Dr.) C. Raj Kumar, Vice -Chancellor, O. P. Jindal Global 
University;  
(viii) Prof. (Dr.) Faizan Mustafa, Former Vice -Chancellor NALSAR 
University, Hyderabad; 
(ix) Prof.(Dr.) Ranbir Singh,  Founder and former Vice -Chancellor 
National Law University, Delhi; 
(x) Smt. Mridula Mishra, Former Judge Patna High Court and Vice -
Chancellor Chanakya National Law University, Patna; 
(xi) Shri M. Sathyanarayanan, Former Judge High Court of Madras; and 
(xii) Shri R. Balasubramanian, Senior Advocate. 
 
3.  The Committee mainly relied upon the following documents/information  
while examining the subject:-  
(i) Background note on the subject furnished by the Department of 
Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law & Justice; 

7 
 
(ii) Presentations and written submission made by the witnesses listed 
above at para 2 above; and  
(iii) Written submission made by Shri P. Wilson, member of the 
Committee. 
 
4.     The Committee wishes to place on record its gratitude to the Department of 
Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law & Justice), Government of India for furnishing 
necessary information/documents and rendering valuable assistance to the 
Committee in its deliberations.  
 
5.  For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of 
the Report. 
 
6. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 
6th February, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi         SUSHIL KUMAR MODI 
07th February, 2024                          Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Committee on Personnel Public Grievances  
Law and Justice 
 
  

8 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ADR Alternative Dispute Resolution 
AIBE All India Bar Examination  
AICTE All India Council for Technical Education 
AI Artificial Intelligence  
BCI Bar Council of India  
CDC Curriculum Development Committee / Curriculum Development Centre 
CLE Centres of Legal Education  
HECI Higher Education Commission of India  
HEI Higher Education Institutions 
IIULER India International University of Legal Education and Research 
IRAHE Independent Regulatory Authority for Higher Education  
LCI Law Commission of India 
LEI Legal Education Institutions  
LL.B Bachelor of Law  
LL.M Master of Law 
MCI Medical Education Commission 
NAAC National Assessment and Accreditation Council  
NALSAR National Academy of Legal Studies and Research 

9 
 
NCLER National Council for Legal Education & Research  
NEP New Education Policy 
NKC National Knowledge Commission  
NLS National Law School 
NLU National Law University 
NMC National Medical Commission  
ODR Online Dispute Resolution 
PHD Doctor of Philosophy 
PPP Public-private partnerships  
UGC University Grants Commission  
  

10 
 
Chapter –I 
HISTORICAL CONTEXT 
Introduction 1 
1.0 The legal education is fundamental to the very foundation of the legal and 
judicial system in the country. Legal education is a science which imparts to 
students the knowledge of certain principles and provisions of law to enable them 
to enter the legal profes sion. I t equips the students with necessary skills and 
capabilities to understand the complex process of enactment, enforcement and 
interpretation of law. Law and legal education are inter-related concepts.  
1.2 The main objective of legal education is to impart budding lawyers with 
vision inter-alia to uphold the rule of law and  to secure equitable justice to all 
citizens irrespective of their caste, creed, religion or sex . Legal education in India 
had its roots in English History  as it has been in existence even before the 
independence. This heritage has had a profound effect on the development of legal 
education, on the evolution of legal institutions, and on the outlook on law in India. 
Origin of Legal Education in India 
1.3 The origin of Legal education in India revolves around the Vedic era 
whereby the concept of Dharma was the source of legal structure. It was merely a 
self-learning process as there was no trace of formal legal education. In the past the 
Kings or the ruler used to adjudicate the matters by their own notion of Justice. 
Sometimes the kings used to appoint senior people to adjudicate the matters who 
were well acquainted with the concept of Dharma. Dharma stands for natural law, 
civil and moral law, justice, virtue, merit, duty, morality and quality. 2 
Vedic Period 
1.4 In ancient India, the Vedas were the main source of law, and also were the 
guiding principles of human behavior and human conduct. They elucidate the early 
                                                           
1 Background note & https://ir.ide.go.jp/records/33159 
2 https://hal.science/hal-04188649/document 

11 
 
conceptual underpinnings of Vedic law whi ch are absolutely central for 
understanding the emerging legal system as a whole. 3 
1.5 Legal education during the Vedic period was primarily imparted through an 
oral tradition. Mainly the sages heard the commands of the God and explained 
those commands of  God to their disciples. Thus, Vedas were also known as the 
Shruti. The disciples also remembered these commands and preached them to the 
common people and these were known as Smritis. Goutama, Buddhayana, 
Apastambh were some of the well known Smritis and were considered most 
ancient expositions of law. 
1.6 The legal knowledge during this period was embedded in the broader Vedic 
literature, particularly in texts known as Dharma Shastras. Dharma Shastras are 
ancient legal and ethical texts that provide guide lines on righteous living, social 
duties, and legal principles. Some prominent Dharma Shastras include Manu 
Smriti (Laws of Manu), Yajnavalkya Smriti, and Narada Smriti. 
Ancient India  
1.7 The Cholas and Chalukyas were two powerful dynasties in ancient Ind ia, 
and both made significant contributions to the development of legal systems during 
their respective periods. 
1.8 The Chola judicial system was the forerunner of the present Indian judicial 
system. The principle of “All are equal before law” or the present „Rule of law‟ 
was pursued in the Chola kingdom. As the product of customs and social training 
self legislating citizens law had become the guiding factor in the Chola empire. 
Those self made laws of the citizens of the Chola Empire through ages and  on 
humanitarian grounds had brought in notable changes in the Chola kingdom. The 
law code was unwritten and judgments were pronounced on traditional basis.4 
1.9 The Hindu legal system owes much to the Sanskrit work Mitakshara by 
Vijnaneshwara in the  court of Western Chalukya King Vikramaditya VI. Perhaps 
the greatest work in legal literature, Mitakshara is a commentary on Yajnavalkya 
                                                           
3 https://hal.science/hal-04188649/document 
4 https://www.jetir.org/papers/JETIR1902C46.pdf 

12 
 
and is a treatise on law based on earlier writings and has found acceptance in most 
parts of India.5 
Medieval India 
1.10 After the Hindu rulers, the Indian subcontinent was ruled by the Mughals. 
Babar Invaded India in 1525 and from that era a sudden change in the judicial 
system was observed. In this era, law was mainly based on Quran and Hadith. For 
the first time in India the  Mughals established the system of courts by following 
the formal procedure. The change in the legal system of India mainly during this 
period gave emergence of legal experts who were known as Vakils. There were 
Mughal Codes like Figh -E-Firoz Shahai and an d Fatwa-E-Alamgiri which mainly 
provided for the maintenance of code of conduct of the Vakils. 
1.11 The Maratha kingdom founded by Chhatrapati Shivaji was another powerful 
regional kingdom to arise out of a sustained opposition to Mughal rule. 6 The 
judicial system under Shivaji was simple, primitive and crude. The system was 
founded on ancient Hindu rules. The highest court was „Hazar Majils‟ of the court 
of the king.   The Panchayats handled disputes between various parties in the 
communities and the criminal cases were decided by the village „Patel‟. 
British India 
1.12 In British India the development of legal education mainly took place by 
establishment of various Charters in different times by the Colonial Government. 
Adalat system in India formally started in 1772, but development reached to a level 
during 1833 after establishment of Law commission in India to codify the laws.  7 
The Charter Act, 1833 enacted by the British Parliament, vested for the first -time 
legislative power in a single authority, namely, the Governor -General in Council 8 
as the said Act provided for the addition of a fourth ordinary Member to the 
Governor General in Council for India who was to be a legal expert in the making 
of laws. Lord Macaulay was appointed as the fourth ordinary Member and was 
                                                           
5 https://www.multidisciplinaryjournals.org/assets/archives/2017/vol2issue5/2-5-133-246.pdf 
6 https://ncert.nic.in/ncerts/l/gess110.pdf 
7 https://www.iilsindia.com/blogs/development-of-legal-education-in-india/ 
8 https://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/about-department/early-begginnings/ 

13 
 
entitled to participate in the meetings of the Governor General in Council for 
making of laws.9 
Establishment of British Courts 
1.13 Prior to the War of Independence of 1857, the occupied area and territories 
in India were governed by the East India Company under the grant of special 
charters of the British Parliament. The Company had, from time to time, been 
granted the power to establish its own courts and make laws not only for the 
servants of the Company, but also for the inhabitants of India living in Company -
occupied areas. By the end of the eighteenth century, Company government in 
India had established its own courts in all the three presidencies (now called states) 
of Calcutta, Bombay, and Madras. The law they followed was mainly English. The 
establishment of the recorders courts and supreme courts in the three presidency 
towns provided the initial impetus fo r the advent of professional lawyers. In 1861, 
these courts were amalgamated into a single high court in each presidency.10 
Development of Law Schools 
1.14 Modern legal education in India began with the establishment of the 
Government Law College at Bombay in 1855. There was increasing need of Indian 
advocates, thus, 11 during the same period and organized along the same lines, 
schools were started in Calcutta and Madras as well.  It was to furnish the law 
students so that they can help the lower courts and Hi gh Courts by enlisting 
themselves as Vakils or by becoming judicial officers. There was no tradition of 
legal research and academic legal training. 12  These three universities, set up in the 
cities of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay, formally introduced legal education as a 
subject for teaching which marked the beginning of the era of legal education in 
India. 13 
                                                           
9https://legislative.gov.in/introduction/#:~:text=The%20Charter%20Act%201833%20which,and%20codification%2
0of%20Indian%20Laws. 
10 LEGAL EDUCATION IN INDIA Author(s): Arjun P. Aggarwal (JSTOR)  
11 Ibid 
12 http://probono-india.in/Indian-Society/Paper/37_Legal%20Education%20in%20India%20%20Book.pdf  
13 http://sarins.org/lectures/legal-education-in-india-past-present-and-future-justice-as-anand/ 

14 
 
1.15 In 1868, in the province of Punjab, the law classes were started by the 
Anjuman-I-Punjab, which was taken over by the Punjab University in 1870. The 
duration of the course was 2 -years and education was given in two separate 
classes, one in English and the other in Urdu. It was in 1874 that the foundation for 
legal education was laid in the former state of Travancore. Vernacular classes in 
law were held to train the applicants for the posts in the police department. In 
1875, a law school was started and judg e of the Sadar court was appointed as 
professor of law in the law school.  
1.16 The development of legal education in the 18th century in Bengal 
significantly affected and characterized the growth and development of the system 
in other parts of the country . 14 In 1885 Justice Muthuswamy Iyer proposed a 
necessity of setting up formal colleges for imparting legal education based on 
scientific method. 15  The number of institutions which taught law gradually 
increased. In the year 1886 -87, there were seventeen law  schools with 1673 
students. In the year 1896 -97, there were thirty four law schools with 3020 
students. 16  However, there was no uniform pattern of legal education in the 
country. Also, the main purpose of university legal education was not to teach law 
as a science or as a branch of learning, but merely to impart knowledge of certain 
principles and provisions of law. 17 
After Independence 
1.17 There was tremendous growth of law colleges during 1947 -1960. However, 
this was not based on any rational planning and Law schools were opened 
indiscriminately without enough resources. This resulted in law colleges without 
any infrastructure, viz., building or libraries, full time teachers or facilities for 
professional training, or even the final sanction from the un iversity concerned.18 A 
                                                           
14 https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/288451985.pdf 
15 https://www.iilsindia.com/blogs/development-of-legal-education-in-
india/#:~:text=Adalat%20system%20in%20India%20formally,program%20with%20traditional%20leacture%20met
hod. 
16 Legal Education in India- Arjun p aggarwal 
17 https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/288451985.pdf 
18 https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/288451985.pdf 

15 
 
major development during this period was the coming into operation of the 
Advocates Act, 1961 which constituted the Bar Council of India (BCI). 19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
19 https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/288451985.pdf 

16 
 
Chapter - II 
REGULATING LEGAL EDUCATION IN INDIA 
2.0 The main regulatory bodies responsible for maintaining the quality of legal 
education in India are the University Grants Commission (UGC) and the Bar 
Council of India (BCI). The UGC is a statutory body that coordinates and 
determines the standards of higher educati on in India, including legal education. 
The BCI is a statutory body established under the Advocates Act, 1961, which has 
the power to prescribe standards of professional conduct and etiquette for 
advocates, to exercise disciplinary jurisdiction over the bar, and to set standards for 
legal education and grant recognition to universities whose degree in law will serve 
as a qualification for enrolment as an advocate. 
 
2.1 The BCI mainly plays its role in Indian legal education through the Legal 
Education Commi ttee, which consists of five members of the BCI and five co -
opted members to represent the judiciary, the Law ministry, the University Grants 
Commission and academia. The Legal Education Committee visits and inspects 
universities/law colleges in the countr y as part of its statutory function of 
promoting legal education and laying down standards in consultation with the 
universities and the state bar councils. 
 
Role of University Grants Commission 
2.2 The University Grants Commission is a statutory organization under the 
Ministry of Education, Government of India, established by an Act of Parliament 
in 1956 for the promotion and co -ordination of University education and for the 
determination and maintenance of standards of teaching, examination and r esearch 
in Universities, and for the purpose of performing its functions under this Act. In 
addition to providing grants to eligible universities and colleges, the Commission 
also advises the Central and State Governments on the measures which are 
necessary for the development of Higher Education.20 
 
 
                                                           
20 Brief overview of UGC & NAAC 

17 
 
The Advocates Act, 1961 vis-à-vis UGC 
  
2.3 The University Grants Commission Act, 1956, enacted under entry 66 of 
List I of the VII Schedule, does not provide exclusively for maintaining „standards 
of legal edu cation‟. Further, Entry 25 of List III „Education, including technical 
education, medical education and Universities, subject to the provisions of Entries 
63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I, vocational and technical training of Labour‟ read with 
Entry 65 of List I paves way for an independent statute to be enacted by the 
Parliament on imparting professional legal education. Thus, under Entry 66 of List 
I of Schedule VII obligation may also be imposed on the UGC for  "coordination 
and determination of standards in i nstitutions of Higher Education or research and 
scientific and technical institutions". All these aspects fall outside the jurisdiction 
of the Advocates Act, 1961, as it seeks to regulate the professional dimension of 
lawyers rather than legal education. I n other words, Advocates Act, 1961, comes 
into play only after completing the required legal educational qualifications. To 
recapitulate, the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Advocates Act, 1961 
may be read as under:- 
  
(1)  the establishment of an All India Bar Council and common roll of advocates, 
and advocate on the common roll having a right to practice in any part of 
the country and in any Court, including the Supreme Court; 
(2)  the integration of the bar into a single class of legal practitioners known as 
advocates; 
(3)  the prescription of a uniform qualification for the admission of persons to 
be advocates; 
(4)  the division of advocates into senior advocates and other advocates based 
on  merit; 
(5)  the creation of autonomous Bar Councils, one for the whole of India and one 
for each State. 
 
2.4 While the Advocates Act empowers the BCI to promote legal education and 
to lay down the standards of such education in consultation with the universities 
and state bar councils, the UGC Act, 1956 imposed a mandate on the UGC to take 
all such measures as they deem fit for the promotion and co -ordination of 

18 
 
university education and for the determination and maintenance of standards of 
teaching examination and research in universities. 
Role of Bar Council of India 
2.5 The Bar Council of India, a statutory body under the Advocates Act, 1961 is 
entrusted with the function of promoting legal education in the country and 
recognition of Universities whose degree in law shall be a qualification for 
enrolment as an advocate.21 
 
2.6 In this regard Sections 7(1)(h) and (i) of the Advocates Act, 1961 provides 
as follows:- 
  
“Functions of Bar Council of India .— (1) The functions of the Bar council 
of India shall be— 
… 
  
(h) to promote legal education and to lay down standards of such education 
in consultation with the Universities in India imparting such education and 
the State Bar Councils; 
  
(i) to recognise Universities whose degree in law shall be a qualification for 
enrolment as an advocate and for th at purpose to visit and inspect 
Universities or cause the State Bar Councils to visit and inspect Universities 
in accordance with such directions as it may give in this behalf; 
 
 …….” 
 
2.7 In 1962, following BCI orders, all Universities imparting legal edu cation 
changed over from the two -year to the three -year program in law and revised the 
                                                           
21 Background Note 

19 
 
curriculum as prescribed by the BCI. The Bar Council of India further established 
three supplementary organs to achieve its statutory mandate. 22 
(a)Legal Education Committee - In order to promote legal education and in 
order to lay down the standards of such education, the BCI, under the provision 
of section 10 (2) (b) of the Advocates Act, 1961 has constituted the Legal 
Education Committee.23  
 
As per the extant Rules/Regulations, the Legal Education Committee is chaired 
by a former Judge of Supreme Court. Further, there are 2 sitting Chief Justices 
of High Courts, 5 noted academicians including 4 Vice -Chancellors of NLU‟s 
and premier Govt. Universities  and Senior Advocates, apart from 5 members of 
the Bar Council of India. The Council invites and consults other academicians 
and jurists to participate in the important meetings relating to policy matters, as 
required under the Advocates Act, 1961. 
 
(b) Bar Council of India Trust : The Bar Council of India also created a public 
charitable organization, namely, The Bar Council of India Trust in 1974. This 
trust was created to maintain professional standards and to effect improvements 
in legal education. In this regard, the Trust intended to establish Law Schools of 
excellence and to promote legal research 
(c) Directorate of Legal Education : The Bar Council of India, in 2010 also 
established a Directorate of Legal Education in 2010. 24 
 
2.8 However, the BCI has also faced criticism and challenges in its role as the 
regulator of legal education. Some of the issues that have been raised are the lack 
of uniformity and quality in legal education across the country, the inadequacy and 
inefficiency of the inspection and recognition process, the resistance and non -
cooperation from some of the state bar councils and universities, the controversy 
                                                           
22  LEGAL EDUCATION IN INDIA: AN ANALYTICAL STUDY Article in International Journal of Humanities 
and Social Science 
23 Background Note 
24 LEGAL EDUCATION IN INDIA: AN ANALYTICAL STUDY Article in International Journal of Humanities 
and Social Science 

20 
 
and litigation over the validity and necessity of the AIBE, and the lack of 
innovation and reform in the curriculum and pedagogy of legal education. 
 
The Rules of Legal Education, 2008 
 
2.9 The Bar Council of India has framed Rules under Part -IV of the BCI Rules, 
2008 to maintain and raise the standard of legal education of the University and 
Colleges imparting  legal education. The Rules are quite specific about the 
minimum requirements vis-à-vis infrastructure, minimum library requirement as 
books and library are very essence of legal education and provides for requirement 
of qualified core faculty to impart legal education.  
 
2.10 The Rules as per the policy of the Government provides for imparting legal 
education in English and/or in full or in part instruction in any language apart from 
English and allows students to appear in semester exam in any regional la nguage 
other than English.25 
 
Curriculum Development Committee (CDC) 
 
2.11 The Bar Council of India, in 2010, also formed its first Curriculum 
Development Committee (CDC) for the purpose of facilitating Universities and 
Institutions to formulate the course design in various courses in Law and other 
allied subjects. The Committee has emphasized the faculty autonomy in designing 
and conducting the courses in the University 26 
 
All India Bar Exam 
  
2.12 All India Bar Examination (AIBE) has been introduced by the  Bar Council 
of India with effect from year 2010 which requires the law graduates to clear it 
within two years of enrolment in order to further continue in practice. The exam is 
held in 11 regional languages including English as per the policy of the 
Government, to promote and make accessible law and practice to maximum 
                                                           
25 Background Note 
26  LEGAL EDUCATION IN INDIA: AN ANALYTICAL STUDY Article in International 
Journal of Humanities and Social Science 

21 
 
regions of the country and to make it convenient for those who practice in regional 
languages.27 
2.13 While the BCI continued to regulate legal education throughout the 1970s 
and 1980s, the UGC, established through the University Grants Commission Act, 
1956 (UGC Act), too had a say in legal education by virtue of section 12 of the 
UGC Act, which authorized UGC to take steps for the „promotion and co -
ordination of University education and for the determination and maintenance of 
standards of teaching, examination and research in universities‟. While the BCI 
continued to set standards of legal education, UGC norms validated the degree 
programmes offered in the law colleges of the country28 
 
Curriculum Development Centre (CDC) 
2.14 The UGC, in 1990 constituted a Curriculum Development Centre (CDC) 
with Professor Upendra Baxi as Chairman, for designing new curriculum in law 
with a view to promote human resources development. The CDC recognized three 
main challenges facing legal education: modernization of syllabi in order to make 
it socially relevant, multi -disciplinary enrichment of law curricula and 
corresponding pedagogic modifications. The CDC prepared a detailed curriculum 
and syllabi for a number of courses . 29 
National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) 
2.15 National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) was established by 
the UGC in September 1994 at Bangalore for evaluating the performance of the 
Universities and Colleges in the Country. NAAC's mandate includes the task of 
performance evaluation, assessment and accreditation of universities and colleges 
in the country. The philosophy of NAAC is based on objective and continuous 
improvement rather than being punitive or judg mental, so that all institutions of 
                                                           
27 Background Note 
28 Law and Regulations on Legal Education in India Before, During and After COVID-19 with a 
Post-COVID-19 Manifesto, S.G. Sreejith1 
29 LEGAL EDUCATION IN INDIA: AN ANALYTICAL STUDY Article in International Journal of Humanities 
and Social Science 

22 
 
higher learning are empowered to maximize their resources, opportunities and 
capabilities.30 
Consultation Committee of UGC and BCI 
2.16 Law Commission in its 184 th Report analyses at length the quality of 
consultation envisaged between BCI and the Universities under Section 7(1)(h) of 
the Advocates Act, 1961. The Report notes that the responsibility of BCI in 
ensuring „...standards of legal education...‟, and that of  UGC in ensuring 
„...standards of education...‟ are, in fact, not in conflict with each other, but have to 
be harmoniously construed. Section 7(1)(h), in providing for consultation between 
BCI and UGC, advances the proposition that both the statutory bodie s share 
common goals vis-à-vis regulation of professional legal education.  
2.17 The Report stipulates that the requirement of Section 7(1)(f) is, in fact, 
„effective consultation‟ between BCI and the Universities, thereby increasing the 
involvement of the members of academia in regulating legal education. There are, 
obviously, practical and logistical difficulties in BCI consulting the huge number 
of Universities and other institutions imparting legal education. The LCI Report, 
therefore, recommends that i nstead of requiring „effective consultation‟ with each 
University, the Advocates Act should instead be suitably amended to enable BCI to 
consult a representative body, which body, in turn, should be constituted by UGC, 
thus ensuring that both BCI and UGC r emain equal partners in regulating legal 
education.31 
2.18 Thus, there is the conjoint responsibility which BCI and UGC share towards 
the regulation of the standards of legal education. It is the consultative relationship 
between BCI and UGC which forms the  backbone of regulation of legal education 
standards in India.  
2.19 Further, the Supreme Court of India has played a vital role in the functioning 
of Legal Education in India through its interventions time to time as the functions 
of BCI as well as the UG C have always remained under the scrutiny of an apex 
court. The Hon„ble Supreme Court has prevented BCI for ultravires acts and 
                                                           
30 Brief overview of UGC & NAAC 
31 UGC background note 

23 
 
directed UGC to use its power for the maintenance of the uniformity of the 
standards. 32 
Views of witness deposing before the Committee on the role of BCI to regulate 
legal education 
2.20 During the course of deliberation on the subject the Committee heard the 
views of many stakeholders including noted academic institutions, academicians 
and experts in the field of legal education. The opinion of some of them on the 
issue of role of BCI in regulating legal education in India is as under:  
Prof. C. Raj Kumar, Vice Chancellor, O.P. Jindal Global University 
2.21 The Bar Council of India should consider establishing the National Council 
for Legal Education & Research (NCLER) with adequate representation from all 
stakeholders in legal education and the legal profession. Such a council could be 
chaired by the Chief Justice of India with the BCI Chairman as its member -
secretary. The council should have all stakeholders, including legal academia, 
judges, lawyers from both the litigating and corporate bar as well as academics 
from humanities and social sciences. 
Prof. G. S. Bajpai, Vice Chancellor, National Law University, Delhi 
2.22 Currently, Bar Council of India is the only regulatory body overseeing legal 
education in the country. UGC has a role in governance of Higher Education 
Institutes; however its role remains unclear. This leaves a large gap and uncertainty 
in regulation of legal education especially in relation to Post Graduate Courses and 
Doctoral Studies. There is a strong need for a single autonomous regulatory body, 
with representation from all states; overseeing legal education at all levels can go a 
long way in the qualitative im provement of legal education in India. A single 
regulatory body can be helpful for following reasons: 
(i)  Single regulator would be flexible and responsive to emerging challenges 
and allows scope for innovation and experiments in Legal Education. 
                                                           
32 LEGAL EDUCATION IN INDIA: AN ANALYTICAL STUDY Article in International Journal of Humanities 
and Social Science 

24 
 
(ii)  It will be easy for a single regulator to identify the new and effective 
parameters to undertake continuous evaluations of the law schools across 
the country and the courses offered. 
(iii)  It will help in avoiding one size fits all approaches towards the le gal 
education system, which fails to tackle emerging issues effectively. 
(iv)  It is also an essential requirement for implementation of NEP which 
envisages legal education in regional languages. Developing qualitative 
course content in regional languages is a primary requirement for 
implementation of NEP and that can be realized only through a single 
regulatory body with regional representations. 
Prof. Ranbir Singh, Former Vice Chancellor, NALSAR Hyderabad, NLU 
Delhi 
2.23 Redefining the role of the Bar Cou ncil of India (BCI) and granting it more 
powers is a topic that can be debated and considered from different perspectives. 
Some points of consideration are: 
2.24 Enhancing Professional Standards: Granting more powers to the BCI can 
enable it to enforce stricter professional standards within the legal profession. This 
can include setting higher educational requirements for aspiring lawyers, 
conducting regular assessments or examinations to ensure competence, and 
implementing a robust system for quality enhan cement. By having more authority, 
the BCI can play a crucial role in maintaining the integrity and quality of the legal 
profession. 
2.25 Uniformity in Legal Education: The BCI can be empowered to establish and 
enforce uniform standards for legal education across the country. This can help 
ensure consistency in curriculum, teaching methodologies, and infrastructure in 
law schools. By setting rigorous standards and monitoring compliance, the BCI can 
contribute to raising the overall quality of legal education  and promoting a level 
playing field for students across different institutions. 
 
 

25 
 
Prof. Faizan Mustafa, Former Vice Chancellor NALSAR Hyderabad 
2.26 The BCI powers should only extend to regulating that aspect of legal 
education that is intrinsically conne cted with the practice of law at the Bar. Some 
of the regulatory functions that are presently being performed by the BCI, and 
which do not relate directly to practice at the Bar should be devolved to another 
authority. This authority should ideally be a standing committee on legal education 
under the proposed Higher Education Commission or be a separate commission 
like MCI or Medical Education Commission. 
University Grant Commission 
2.27 Law Commission in its 184 th Report analyses at length the quality of 
consultation envisaged between BCI and the Universities under Section 7(1)(h) of 
the Advocates Act, 1961. The Report notes that the responsibility of BCI in 
ensuring „…standards of legal education…‟, and that of UG C in ensuring 
„…standards of education…‟ are, in fact, not in conflict with each other, but have 
to be harmoniously construed. Section 7(1)(h), in providing for consultation 
between BCI and UGC, advances the proposition that both the statutory bodies 
share common goals vis -à-vis regulation of professional legal education. The 
Report stipulates that the requirement of Section 7(1)(f) is, in fact, „effective 
consultation‟ between BCI and the Universities, thereby increasing the 
involvement of the members of a cademia in regulating legal education. There are, 
obviously, practical and logistical difficulties in BCI consulting the huge number 
of Universities and other institutions imparting legal education. The LCI Report, 
therefore, recommends that instead of req uiring „effective consultation‟ with each 
University, the Advocates Act should instead be suitably amended to enable BCI to 
consult a representative body, which body, in turn, should be constituted by UGC, 
thus ensuring that both BCI and UGC remain equal p artners in regulating legal 
education. Accordingly, National Council for Legal Education and Research to be 
established under Higher Education Commission of India (HECI). 
Hon'ble Justice Smt.  Mridula Mishra (Retd.) 
2.28 The Bar Council is Regulatory Body,  which has too many functions. An 
empowered Autonomous Committee of Academicians, Chief Justices, Eminent 
Lawyers, and renounced persons in the field of law, be established, known as 

26 
 
National Council for Legal Educations & Research to bring objectivity int o system 
to close down at least 500 mediocre, dubious and sub-standard law collages. 
Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law & Justice, Government of India 
2.29 During their deposition before the Committee the Law Secretary had put 
forth following iss ues with regard to the regulatory framework in India for 
bringing more reforms in legal education:- 
i. It is felt that the Advocate Act, 1961 was enacted decades ago and is not 
keeping pace with time. Various bottlenecks have creeped into the system, 
resulting in inefficient delivery of quality legal services and the same is also 
linked to legal education. 
ii. Restructuring and revamping of the regulatory system of legal education 
needs to be undertaken. 
iii. A flexible and dynamic legislative framework underlining leg al education is 
essential to meet the new and emerging challenges. 
iv. The provisions of the Advocates Act, 1961 require a relook on the lines of 
the National Medical Commission Act, 2019 (NMC) so that National 
Council for Legal Education may be constituted to  advise and monitor the 
Directorates of Legal Education in the States. At present the legal education 
committee of the BCI consists of a Chairman, 25 members and 10 special 
invitees. This is far more than what is prescribed in the Advocates Act, 
1961. 
v. An u mbrella legislation to declare all the National Law Universities as 
institutes of public importance. 
vi. The National Council for Legal Education to decide courses/programmes of 
law courses at levels of LL.B, LL.M and Ph.D.   
2.30 Accordingly, the Government h as recommended following suggestions in 
this regard: 
i. A dedicated and detailed study of legal education system and legal 
profession prevailing in developed countries like UK, USA, Japan, France, 
Germany etc. may be carried out and necessary changes in our l egal 
education system and legal profession may be brought, keeping into 

27 
 
consideration the socio-economic and ethics of our country. For this purpose 
a team of legal experts may be constituted to give its report in a time bound 
manner after study of legal e ducation system and profession in leading 
foreign jurisdictions. 
ii. Thereafter, a new legislation in place of the Advocates Act, 1961 may be 
brought on the lines of the National Medical Commission Act, 2019 (NMC), 
keeping in view the fact that the Advocates A ct, 1961 was enacted decades 
ago and is not keeping pace with the time. 
iii. A flexible and robust legislative framework on the subject of legal education 
and legal profession can only enable law students and legal professionals to 
compete at global level. 
Recommendations of the National Knowledge Commission 
 
2.31 The National Knowledge Commission (NKC) under the Chairmanship of 
Shri Sam Pitroda submitted its report on 15.10.2007 on the issues related to 
knowledge concepts, recognition of legal education as an important constituent of 
professional education. 
2.32 The NKC recommended for setting up of a new regulatory mechanism under 
the Independent Regulatory Authority for Higher Education (IRAHE), vested with 
powers to deal with all aspects of legal educatio n and whose decisions are binding 
on the institutions teaching law and on the Union and State Governments. 
2.33 The NKC had further stated that at the time of enactment of the Advocates 
Act, 1961, it was envisaged that legal education would only produce la wyers for 
the courts and accordingly the BCI had been entrusted with the limited role of 
promoting legal education and laying down minimum standards of legal education 
required for students who 'are entitled to practice'.   In the last fifty years, and 
particularly after, liberalization in 1991, the entire concept of legal education has 
changed considerably. Today, legal education has to meet not only, the 
requirements of the Bar but also the emerging needs of trade, commerce, industry 
and IT, in the context  of growing globalisation of the profession. In light of the 
changed scenario in last fifty years and the existing gaps and deficiencies in overall 
quality, it is clear that the BCI neither has the power under the Advocates Act, 
1961 nor the expertise to m eet the new challenges both domestically and 

28 
 
internationally. It is, therefore, necessary to constitute a new regulatory mechanism 
with a vision consisting of social and international goals, to comprehensively deal 
with all aspects of legal education. The BCI would however continue to exercise 
its powers to recommend minimum standards required for practice in the courts. 
Further, the BCI would continue to enjoy its powers of discipline so far as the 
members of the Bar are concerned. 
Deliberations and recommendations of the Committee 
2.34 The Advocates Act, 1961 was enacted with a limited view of legal 
education producing only lawyers for courts. However, over the years legal 
education has not remained confined to a limited role of producing lawyers 
only. Tod ay law graduates pursue a range of career beyond the courtroom 
practice. So, the Legal curriculum in education institutions needs to be 
designed in a manner that enables the development of skills required for 
pursuing diverse legal professions and not just courtroom practice. Thus there 
is no sense in the BCI having regulatory powers over the entire spectrum of 
legal education. Further, the BCI has neither power not expertise to meet the 
challenges of the ever changing globalized world. This view has also b een 
expounded by the Na tional Knowledge Commission. Also t here is a near 
unanimity amongst all the expert witnesses who appeared  before the 
Committee, on this particular issue.  
2.35 Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the BCI's powers to 
regulate legal education should be limited to the extent of acquiring basic 
eligibility for practicing at the Bar. For other regulatory functions  related to 
higher education in Law i.e. Post graduation and  above, which are presently 
being performed by the BCI, and which are not related directly to practice at 
the Bar should be entrusted to an independent Authority, the National 
Council for Legal Education and Research to be established under the 
proposed Higher Education Commission of India.  
2.36 Many of the stakeholders have also raised serious concern about the 
manner in which the BCI has used the power to inspect law colleges and 
granting them recognition which has led to a reckless proliferation of 
substandard law colleges in the country. Accordingly, the Committee is of the 

29 
 
view that while granting recognition to new colleges due consideration should 
be given to quality over quantity. It is imperative for the BCI to take urgent 
and effective measures to curb the proliferation of substandard law colleges in 
India and to ensure the quality and excellence of legal education and 
profession in the country. 
Reservation policies in all Universities and Colleges including National Law 
Universities. 
 
2.37 The Committee observed that the National Law Universities situated across 
the country are not properly implementing reservations for SC/ST/OBC‟s while 
admitting the Students in UG and PG courses especially with regard to  All India 
Seats. One of the Committee members, Shri P. Wilson has also been writing letters 
to all the Chancellors of the National Law Universities highlighting this issue and 
requesting implementation of reservations in All India Seats, as per Government of 
India policy. 
 
2.38 The Committee feels that reservation policies in student admissions and 
faculty recruitment must be rigorously followed to encourage participation 
from disadvantaged communities by all Universities, colleges and educational 
institutions, as per the policy of Governmen t of India. The Committee 
recommends that the Bar Council of India should oversee the implementation 
of reservations in the Universities including the National Law Universities, 
colleges and other law institutions and consider withdrawing their 
recognition, if they fail to adhere to. 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 
Chapter-III 
CURRICULUM 
Introduction 
3.0 The Bar Council of India informed the Committee that the Curriculum is 
designed to provide practical experience and understanding of legal procedures 
through compulsory clinical education in areas like Drafting, Pleading and 
Conveyance, Professional Ethics, Alternative Dispute Resolution  (ADR), Moot 
Court, and Internship. Practical visits to police stations, courts, women cells, and 
jails are encouraged to facilitate hands -on learning. Recently, the Bar Council of 
India has made Mediation a compulsory subject, aiming to enhance ADR 
techniques and encourage qualified advocates to resolve disputes at the grassroots 
level, thereby addressing the issue of pending cases. The syllabus an d norms for 
legal education are established in consultation with universities, and the 
government policy allows for imparting legal education in English or any regional 
language. 
3.1 The Bar Council also organizes seminars and workshops with eminent 
jurists and publishes journals like the Indian Bar Review to foster interest and 
knowledge in the legal community. Enforcement of these rules ensures that law 
graduates are well -prepared with professional skills, contributing to the 
advancement of the legal profession in India.  
3.2 The Committee was informed by the UGC that Legal education in India is 
offered in 4 broad formats: 
 3-year LLB: Allows graduates from any stream to pursue a law degree and 
become a lawyer. 
 
 5-year LLB (Integrated Course): Enables students to pursue a both a   degree 
of law and graduation in an integrated course of 5 years from the  same college 
 
 LLM (Master in law): A two year program, available for law graduates, it 
exponentially expands professional prospects  

31 
 
 
 Ph.D. in law: Available to post -graduate law students, it enables them to 
specialize in any stream of law and opens opportunities beyond litigation or 
judicial exam preparation. 
 
Regulation of Curriculum 
 
3.3 The BCI often prescribes a core curriculum and subjects that must be taught 
in law schools as per UGC guidelines, while universities may have their own 
academic autonomy to design and modify their courses as u niversities are 
autonomous bodies governed by their respective Acts.  
 
3.4 In general, curriculum under different programmes is offered by universities 
after obtaining due approvals of their statutory authorities and councils and 
respective regulatory authorities, wherever applicable. Conflicts can arise when 
universities deviate from the BCI's guidelines or introduc e additional subjects or 
variations in the curriculum. BCI also informed that it faces various challenges in 
regulating legal education, primarily due to the division of responsibilities between 
the Council and the universities/state governments. One major  difficulty is the 
hiring of qualified faculties in many law schools, leading to a need for improving 
the availability of LL.M. degree holders who can teach LL.B. courses. 
 
Recommendation 
 
3.5 The Committee feels that  the existing colleges and universities across 
the country adopt different curriculum and syllabus as prescribed by the 
affiliating Universities. This creates unevenness among the law students who 
pass out from different colleges and Universities.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the role of BCI should be redefined and  the uniform 
curriculum should be laid by the Bar Council of India for undergraduate 
courses in all the law colleges/ Universities.  For Post graduation and above, 
the uniform curric ulum should be laid by an independent Authority as 
recommended by the Committee.  
 
 

32 
 
REVISION OF LL.B AND LL.M COURSES 
 
3.6 The BCI informed the Committee that it has taken many steps from time to 
time to revise the curriculum. The Bar Council of India may,  from time to time, 
appoint Curriculum Development Committee (CDC) to design various courses in 
both liberal discipline and law. The CDC in designing such courses take into 
account the Report on various subjects submitted to UGC or AICTE by its 
Curriculum Design Committees. Universities are free to use the CDC Report of 
UGC/AICTE. Legal education curriculum has been restructured by the Bar 
Council of India to become globally competitive, adopting best practices and 
embracing new technologies for wider acces s to justice and timely delivery of 
justice. 
3.7 The Committee was however, apprised by various stakeholders that the 
current law curriculum in the form of one -size-fits-all model is woefully 
inadequate for building institutional capacities for the develop ment of an 
enlightened and efficient judicial system. The revision of LL.B (Bachelor of Laws) 
and LL.M (Master of Laws) courses can be beneficial to ensure that legal 
education remains relevant, up -to-date, and meets the evolving needs of the legal 
profession. Emphasis could be laid on imparting essential judicial skills through 
courses on judicial process, juridical studies, judicial ethics, statutory interpretation 
and judging. Thus, the Committee received various suggestions for revising the 
present courses which are as follows: 
 Integration of Interdisciplinary Subjects 
 
The legal field intersects with various disciplines such as technology, 
economics, public policy, and environmental studies. Revising the courses to 
include interdisciplinary subjects can  provide students with a broader 
perspective and equip them with  knowledge and skills needed to address 
complex legal issues in a multidisciplinary manner. 
 
 Integration of Technology and Legal Research Skills 
 

33 
 
Technology has transformed the legal profession, and legal education should 
reflect this reality. The revision of courses can include training in legal 
research using online databases, electronic case management systems, and 
emerging legal technologies. This can equip students with the skills needed to 
navigate digital landscape. 
 
 Practical Skills Training 
 
 Traditional legal education has often faced criticism for its heavy emphasis 
on theoretical concepts, leaving students ill -prepared for the practical 
challenges they will face in their leg al careers. To address this gap between 
theory and practice, it is essential to enhance practical training and provide 
experiential learning opportunities.  A fifty per cent component of legal 
education should include practical training, such as moot courts 
Practical training is crucial for law students to develop essential legal skills, 
including legal research, writing, negotiation, and advocacy. By engaging in 
hands-on experiences, students can bridge the gap between theory and 
practice, gaining a deeper understanding of the legal profession. Practical 
training also helps students in developing self -confidence, ethical awareness, 
and the ability to handle real-world legal challenges. 
 Apprenticeship and payment of Stipends during internship 
There should be one -year mandatory apprenticeship before enrollment as 
advocates. The Advocates Act, 1961 may also need to be revisited in 
consultation with Universities, senior members of the Bar and Bench to 
consider re-introducing one-year mandatory apprenticeship.  
The law students who undergo internships with the seniors should be paid 
with stipends in order to encourage the students and also to take care of their 
logistic expenses during internship. Bar council can request the Advocates 
community to be liberal to these young law students. 
 
 

34 
 
 Incorporating Moot Court Competitions 
Moot court competitions which are already a part of BCI Legal Education 
Rules provide an excellent platform for students to apply legal theory in a 
simulated courtroom setting. By participating in these competitions, students 
gain invaluable experience in legal research, oral advocacy, and critical 
thinking. Moot courts can enhance students' ability to construct persuasive 
legal arguments and effectively communicate complex legal concepts. 
 Promoting Clinical Legal Education 
 
Emphasis and support in practical training programs by UGC in the 
establishment of legal aid clinics to develop essential legal skills in students 
can also bridge the gap between theory and practice. Clinical legal education 
enables the learners to connect with the community and understand ground 
realities through field work. Clinical programs within law schools offer 
students an immersive learning experience, allowing them to work directly 
with clients under the supervision of faculty members. These programs give 
students the chance to engage in real legal cases, conduct research, draft legal 
documents, and represent clients in court.  
Clinical programs provide students with a unique opportunity to app ly legal 
theory to real cases, bridging the gap between classroom learning and 
professional practice. It enhances practical skills, cultivate professionalism 
and ethical responsibility. All Universities imparting Legal Education must 
conduct such programs.  Through these programs, students can gain 
confidence, and understand the ethical responsibilities inherent in the legal 
profession. 
The National Law School Legal Services Clinic in Bangalore, India, stands 
as a remarkable example of the positive impact of  clinical legal education. 
This clinic offers legal services to underserved populations, providing law 
students with an immersive learning experience. Under the supervision of 
experienced faculty and practitioners, students handle real cases, advocate for 
clients, and work towards resolving legal issues. This practical exposure 
equips students with the skills and empathy needed to be effective legal 

35 
 
professionals. The clinic has witnessed the transformative impact of practical 
experience on law students. Th rough the programs being imparted there, 
students learn to bridge the gap between theory and practice, develop a strong 
sense of social responsibility, and contribute meaningfully to the cause of 
justice." 
Expanding opportunities for clinical legal educati on is paramount for the 
holistic development of law students and the legal profession. By offering 
hands-on experience and fostering practical skills, clinical programs enable 
students to apply legal principles in real -world settings. This immersive 
learning experience enhances their understanding of the law, promotes 
inclusivity, and contributes to the delivery of justice. 
 Through successful initiatives like the National Law School Legal Services 
Clinic, we can witness the transformative power of clinical  legal education 
and advocate for its integration into legal curricula worldwide. BCI informed 
the Committee that it will urge and ensure that all Universities mandatorily 
engage in such clinical Legal Education as it‟s already covered under BCI 
Legal Educational Rules. 
 Thrust on ADR Methods in Legal Education 
Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) and Clinical Legal Education share 
overlapping goals of advancing social justice.   Teaching and practicing ADR 
and clinical legal education are crucial to the development of a social justice 
consciousness in law students and to the preparation of competent and ethical 
law graduates.  The clinical programs that teach and practice ADR can 
inform, improve, and reform not only legal education, but also over time the 
practice of law and the legal profession as well, thereby furthering the social 
justice goals of the global clinical movement.   There has been an increasing 
thrust on ADR methods i n legal education due to their growing significance 
in the legal profession. Some reasons why ADR methods are being 
emphasized in legal education: 
 

36 
 
 These methods provide quicker, cost -effective, and less adversarial 
ways of resolving disputes., students ar e exposed to practical skills that are 
directly  
 By emphasizing ADR in legal education, future lawyers can 
contribute to reducing court congestion and increasing access to justice. 
 ADR encourages students to understand and integrate insights from 
different disciplines, broadening their perspectives and fostering a more 
comprehensive approach to dispute resolution. 
 ADR equips students with the necessary advocacy skills specific to 
these methods they effectively represent their clients' interests while 
maintaining a problem -solving approach and respecting the principles of 
fairness and equity. 
Recommendations: 
3.8 The Committee feels that as the legal landscape continues to evolve at a 
rapid pace, it has become imperative that legal education keeps pace with 
these changes. Comprehensive curriculum reform is necessary to ensure that 
future lawyers are well -prepared t o address emerging legal challenges. The 
curriculum must develop all aspects and capabilities of learners; and make 
education more well -rounded, useful, and fulfilling to the learner. It should 
enable learners to be ethical, rational, compassionate and pre pare them for a 
gainful and fulfilling employment. There has to be innovative approaches 
towards curriculum development and course structuring that will provide a 
sharper and specialized focus towards training and capacity building for the 
future juridical officers. 
3.9 The Committee recommends that topics such as Law and Medicine, 
Sports Law, Energy Law, Tech Law/Cyber Law, Commercial & Investment 
Arbitrations, Securities Law, Telecom laws, banking laws must not only be 
included but must be given mandatory  status as the interdisciplinary subjects 
are the need of the hour. Government and Universities should work in tandem 
with BCI to ensure the comprehensive inclusion of the emerging areas in the 
curriculum of undergraduate courses . For Post graduation and a bove, 

37 
 
independent body with experts from different fields  shall ensure the inclusion 
of these emerging areas in the curriculum. 
3.10 The Committee further recommends that the Universities should work 
with BCI to incorporate more of practical training progr ams like moot court 
competitions, where students can apply legal theory in a simulated courtroom 
setting, enhancing oral advocacy and critical thinking skills. BCI's Legal 
Education Rules must be adhered to by all Universities to ensure that clinical 
programs are introduced, providing students with immersive experiences to 
work directly with clients, conduct research, draft legal documents, and 
represent clients under faculty supervision. 
3.11 The Committee recommends that for every academic year, the 
undergraduate law student should mandatorily go for a two months 
apprenticeship for getting enrolled as an advocate. Thus the Advocates Act, 
1961 may be revisited in this regard in consultation with Universities, senior 
members of the Bar and Bench. The Committee also recommends that the law 
students who undergo internships with the seniors should be paid with 
stipends to encourage them and also to take care of their logistic expenses 
during internship. 
3.12 The Committee also recommends that a joint committee of senior 
academicians and practitioners at the Bar and the Bench should be 
constituted to review the curriculum periodically. By implementing these 
changes, law graduates will be better equipped to tackle the legal challenges of 
the 21st century, serve th eir clients effectively, and contribute to the 
development of the legal profession. 
3.13 The Committee  also feels that Government support is crucial in 
allocating resources and funding for practical training programs, ensuring 
that students have access to diverse and enriching experiences. Government 
funding should also be provided for specialized courses in legal tech, e -
discovery, and ODR. 
 
Structural and Financial issues 

38 
 
3.14 Financing the infrastructural needs of law universities is essential to provide  
students with a conducive learning environment and to facilitate high -quality legal 
education. The Committee was suggested the following for financing the needs of 
law universities: 
Government funding: Governments at the national, state, and local levels can 
allocate budgetary resources specifically for the development and maintenance 
of law universities' infrastructure. Governments can increase funding for the 
construction of new buildings, renovation of existing facilities, and procurement 
of necessary equipment and technology. Additionally, governments can provide 
grants or subsidies to cover operational expenses and maintenance costs. 
Public-private partnerships (PPPs):  Law universities can explore 
partnerships with private entities to finance infrastru cture projects. PPPs can 
involve private investment in the construction, renovation, or management of 
university infrastructure in exchange for long -term revenue-sharing agreements 
or other mutually beneficial arrangements. This approach can help leverage 
private sector expertise and resources to meet infrastructure needs. 
Alumni contributions: Alumni of law universities can play a significant role in 
financing infrastructure. Establishing strong alumni networks and engaging 
alumni in fundraising campaigns can generate financial support for 
infrastructure development projects. Alumni can be approached for donations, 
sponsorships, and contributions to specific infrastructure initiatives. Alumni 
involvement can also extend to providing expertise and networking  
opportunities for career development and internship programs. 
Corporate sponsorships and partnerships : Law universities can seek 
corporate sponsorships or enter into partnerships with businesses and 
organizations that have an interest in legal education. Corporations can provide 
financial support for infrastructure projects, scholarships, research grants, or 
endowed professorships in exchange for visibility, recruitment opportunities, 
and collaborative initiatives with the university. Such partnerships can  be 
mutually beneficial and help bridge the gap between academia and the legal 
industry. 

39 
 
Philanthropic foundations and grants : Law universities can explore 
philanthropic foundations and grants that support educational institutions. 
Various foundations and organizations provide grants, scholarships, and 
funding for infrastructure development in higher education. Law universities 
can identify and apply for grants that specifically focus on infrastructure 
improvements and align with the mission and values of the university. 
Student fees and tuition : Law universities can allocate a portion of student 
fees and tuition towards infrastructure development and maintenance. It is 
important to strike a balance between affordable education and ensuring 
adequate resources for infrastructure. Clear communication with students about 
the utilization of their fees for infrastructure improvements can help generate 
support for such initiatives. 
Research funding and grants : Law universities can actively pursue research 
funding a nd grants from governmental agencies, research organizations, and 
funding bodies. These funds can be utilized not only for research projects but 
also for infrastructure development related to research facilities, libraries, and 
technology infrastructure. 
Crowdfunding and community support : Law universities can explore 
crowdfunding platforms and community engagement initiatives to raise funds 
for infrastructure development. These platforms allow individuals, alumni, and 
the public to contribute small or larg e amounts towards specific infrastructure 
projects. Engaging the local community and garnering their support for the 
university's infrastructure needs can also be a valuable source of funding. 
Recommendation 
3.15 The Committee feels that it is important for law universities to have a 
strategic and comprehensive approach to financing infrastructure needs, 
combining multiple funding sources, and prioritizing projects based on 
immediate needs and long -term goals. Effe ctive financial planning, 
collaboration with stakeholders, and transparent utilization of funds are 
crucial for successful infrastructure development in law universities. The 

40 
 
government can consider providing financial support and allocating necessary 
resources, if needed/requested for the academy.  
 
NAAC Accreditation: 
3.16 Accreditation is recognition for institutions acknowledging their standards of 
Quality achievement or maintenance.   This recognition pays way to obtain 
appreciations (fiscal and non -fiscal) from different organizations and amongst the 
stake-holders. It is feasible to implement accreditation in the context of Law 
colleges and Law Universities.   Law colleges approach NAAC for 
Accreditation.  The Legal Education Institutions (LEI) like any other Higher 
Education Institutions (HEI) registers in NAAC portal.  When metrics for 
accreditation of LEI focuses on the process, procedures, outcomes and 
achievements of LEI in their specific domain, the accreditation is more pertinent. 
3.17 There are thr ee Law Universities, and twenty Law colleges holding valid 
accreditation.  Though NAAC accredits the institution, the accreditation comes 
with validity.   The validity of accreditation is usually 5 years, beyond which 
accreditation expires.  
Difficulties an d limitations faced by law institutes, law colleges, and law 
universities during site inspections for NAAC accreditation: 
3.18 The Committee was informed that NAAC levies profession institution‟s fee 
for Legal Education Institutions as well.   While a normal college is being charged 
with Rs.2,00,000/ - as assessment fee, law college is being charged with Rs. 
6,00,000/-as assessment fee since it is a professional institution.     
3.19 As the present accreditation system is robust with data driven approach, 
institutions that were not in habit of record keeping, faces the issue to supplement 
or establish their claims of quality.  This is a generic problem with all institutions 
approaching for accreditation and more an issue with Legal Education 
Institutions.   
3.20 There are persisting hesitation amongst legal Education institutions to 
volunteer to NAAC accreditation process mainly due to lack of awareness about 

41 
 
the process and lack of obligation, motivation or incentives to accredited law 
colleges. 
Challenges f aced by NAAC when accrediting law institutes, law colleges, or 
law universities: 
3.21 NAAC apprised the Committee that with the present work flow, there is no 
specific challenge in accrediting Law College or University.   But, with the thought 
of making accreditation mandatory for Legal Education Institutions there needs to 
be more number of awareness programs about NAAC accreditation amongst Legal 
Education Institutions and more Assessors needs to be inducted in the system for 
accreditation. 
Recommendation  
3.22 The Committee feels that NAAC shall re -look the rule of levying  Rs. 
6,00,000/-as assessment fee to Legal Education Institutions.  NAAC shall also 
hold more frequent and wider awareness programs and hand holding 
exercises that shall address the hesitation amongst legal Education institutions 
to volunteer for NAAC accreditation.   Policy level decisions are required for 
making accreditation obligatory and motivations and incentives needs to be 
designed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
Chapter  IV 
 RESEARCH IN LEGAL EDUCATION 
Importance of Research in Legal Education  
4.0 Legal education plays a crucial role in preparing future lawyers to meet the 
evolving challenges of the legal profession. To ensure the competence and social 
engagement of legal professionals, it is essential to embrace research and 
innovation within legal education institutions. Research serves as the cornerstone 
of knowledge acquisition and understanding in the legal field. By fostering a 
culture of exploration, supporting faculty research, and crea ting opportunities for 
students to engage in legal research, law students can develop several essential 
skills and attributes, including: 
 
a. Critical Thinking : Research challenges students to critically analyze legal 
concepts, statutes, and precedents, fo stering their ability to identify underlying 
issues, assess arguments, and propose innovative solutions. 
 
b. Analytical Abilities: Through research, students learn to navigate vast amounts 
of legal information, interpret complex texts, and synthesize diver se viewpoints, 
honing their analytical skills essential for effective legal analysis and reasoning. 
 
c. Contribution to Legal Development : Research allows students to delve deep 
into legal scholarship, enabling them to explore emerging legal trends, evaluate the 
impact of recent case law, and propose novel legal theories. Such contributions 
help shape the development of the law and push the boundaries of legal 
knowledge. 
 
4.1 There is tremendous significance of research and innovation in legal 
education as research-based legal education empowers students to become active 
contributors to the legal discourse. It equips them with the skills necessary to 
dissect complex legal problems, analyze precedents, and propose innovative 
solutions, ensuring their readiness for the challenges of the legal profession.33 
 
                                                           
33 BCI on Legal Education, July, 2023. (page 41-42, 65) 

43 
 
Research in the field of Legal Education  
 
4.2 The Committee during its deliberation on the subject was informed that there 
is a lack of field -oriented legal research in our country. Legal institutions are not 
able to maintain standards, either in terms of teaching or facilities or infrastructure 
or research. Out of the 1700 law schools, there are a very few law schools which 
are serious research institutions and where keen interest is shown in research in the 
field of legal education.  Majority of the law faculty in the law schools in India do 
not have  the competence, abilities, interest and inclination to make serious and 
significant contributions to teaching or research.   
4.3 The Committee was further informed that adequate financial assistance is 
not given to Centres of Legal Education (CLE) due to which students are attracted 
to foreign universities for higher legal education and for enhancing their 
knowledge.34 Funding to legal intuitions is less as compared to other technical and 
management institutes i.e. IITs and IIMs respectively.   
 
Role of BCI  
 
4.4 The BCI also informed the Committee that National Law Schools (NLS) and 
Institutions like IIULER, Goa are institutions dedicated exclusively to legal 
education and research. NLUs and IIULER often offer a more specialized and 
updated curriculum that reflects contemporary legal trends and challenges. They 
may have a stronger emphasis on experiential learning, research, and practical 
skills. They have better infrastructure and facilities, including modern classrooms, 
libraries, research centres, moot co urtrooms, and other resources that contribute to 
a conducive learning environment. 
 
4.5 However, regular Law Colleges are conventional institutions that offer law 
programs as part of their broader curriculum. They may not be exclusively focused 
on legal ed ucation and might offer a range of other courses. Regular law colleges 
may offer a more traditional curriculum and may not be as adaptable to rapid 
changes in the legal field. Regular law colleges may have varying levels of 
                                                           
34  Brief Note on Legal Education by DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS (Page 7)  
 

44 
 
infrastructure and facilities, a nd some may face limitations in providing state -of-
the-art amenities. 
 
4.6 The BCI apprised the Committee that it encourages faculty and students to 
engage in legal research and it has further resolved to conduct workshops and 
seminars to raise awareness among Universities about the transformative impact of 
research-oriented legal education. BCI also provides guidelines for revising and 
updating the curriculum for law colleges to align it more closely with the changing 
legal landscape. Law schools are requ ested by BCI to introduce legal tech courses 
to provide students with a deep understanding of the technological tools used in the 
legal industry. 
 
4.7 The BCI further informed that it faces certain problems due to the matters 
related to the standard of tea ching, Ph.D and research in legal education being 
under the purview of UGC, universities, or the Department of Higher Education, 
Ministry of Education. The BCI, thus informed that it needs support from the 
government and universities, to establish research  grants and publication 
opportunities to incentivize law teachers to engage in scholarly activities and 
contribute to legal research. Further, it requires the cooperation from the 
government and universities to allocate dedicated research funding and resou rces 
to support faculty research initiatives in legal education institutions. 35 
 
Role of UGC 
 
4.8 The University Grants Commission Act 1956 imposes a mandate on the 
UGC to take all such steps as they think fit "for the promotion and co-ordination of 
university education and for the determination and maintenance of standards of 
teaching, examination and research in universities".  
 
4.9 It was informed to the Committee that in NEP -2020, there is mention of 
Higher Education Commission of India (HECI) with four verticals.  UGC desires 
that there should be one more vertical of National Council for Legal Education and 
                                                           
35Bci on legal education, August. 

45 
 
Research to be established under Higher Education Commission o f India which 
may be a small setup to coordinate the entire legal education. 
 
4.10 It was also informed that the current state of infrastructure for conducting 
research, education, and the law system is mixed. There are some law universities 
and colleges that have excellent infrastructure, but there are also many that do not. 
The government has been working to improve the infrastructure for legal 
education, but more needs to be done. 
Emerging Areas of Specialization 
4.11 Law, which was once considered to b e a conservative and traditional 
profession, has transformed into a dynamic and innovative field. One of the biggest 
changes that have taken place is the diversification of the legal profession as it has 
transformed into a dynamic and innovative field, wit h emerging areas of 
specialization. Emerging areas in legal education reflect the evolving demands of 
the global legal landscape. Cyber Law, Intellectual Property Law, Sports Law, 
Environmental Law and International Law are some of the merging areas of 
specialization.36 
 
 The Committee also received the following view points from the stakeholders 
during its meetings: 
 
4.12 There is a need to make legal academia more appealing, which includes 
financial incentives, career development opportunities, research inf rastructure and 
a more harmonious ecosystem. There is a need to develop research capacities in 
our law schools.  
 
4.13 A National Council for Legal Education and Research (NCLER) as an 
autonomous body needs to be established within the BCI, which is well -
represented by eminent academicians of law in addition to members representing 
the Bar, law firms, think-tanks, policy-institutes, and the government. 
 
                                                           
36 https://srmuniversity.ac.in/blog/best-law-university-in-north-india/ 

46 
 
4.14 There is a requirement to have an apex body for guiding the research and 
other areas of innovation in legal field like Indian Council of Social Sciences and 
Research. 
 
4.15 There is a need to redefine the role of the Bar Council of India as it needs to 
look into the standardisation of the degrees being provided. There is also a need to 
strengthen the curriculum and reform the Bar examination in order to improve the 
writing and research skills of the students.    
 
4.16 There is a need to improve the infrastructure and the culture of research as 
infrastructure in the colleges and universities is not suffic ient for conducting 
research. 
 
4.17 There is a need to d evelop programmes for enhancing communication and 
research skills for lawyers and students through systematic and organized training 
at State level institutions of excellence.   Trainers along with the faculty have to be 
trained for which Faculty development programmes are a must.  
 
4.18 Assessment of the merits of the teachers and the methodologies relating to 
standards of teaching. Ph.D., and research in legal education should not only fall 
under the purview of the UGC but the Bar Council also must be made a part of the 
coordination, so that research in legal education improves by leaps and bounds. 
 
Recommendations: 
 
4.19 The Committee feels that there is a need to prioritize and promote 
research in the field of legal education in India to improve the quality of legal 
knowledge and education for students and professionals. The Union and State 
Governments as well as the Universities should lay stress on the research 
works in the field of legal educatio n and encourage law graduates to pursue 
higher education and knowledge in India rather than seeking education 
abroad. 
 
4.20 The Committee further feels that there is a need to recruit world class 
global faculty who are top researchers in the field of law a nd can combine 

47 
 
sound teaching methods with established track records of research. For this, it 
is imperative that we need to make legal academia an appealing career option 
for bright young lawyers through financial incentives, career development 
opportunities within the law schools.  
 
4.21 The Committee recommends that the Government and Universities 
should collaborate with the Bar Council of India (BCI) to allocate dedicated 
research funding and resources to support faculty research initiatives in legal 
education institutions. BCI can provide guidelines and recommendations to 
Universities regarding the incorporation of research activities in the legal 
curriculum of undergraduate courses . By fostering cooperation between the 
Government, Universities, and the  BCI, legal education institutions can 
effectively strengthen their research and innovation endeavors.  For Post 
graduation and above, an independent body as already recommended by the 
Committee shall lay guidelines regarding the incorporation of research 
activities in the curriculum. 
 
4.22 The Committee observes that the Law schools in India majorly follow 
the traditional approach of theoretical learning while only a select few 
National Law Universities possess the requisite physical infrastructure for 
conducting research. With the demand of more adaptive lawyers, that too in 
an ever more digitized legal industry, a hands -on approach to such 
infrastructure and financial assistance in lieu of the same is much needed. The 
introduction of proper research fa cilities, as well as specialized infrastructure 
for conducting training and workshops, is a need as it inculcates the necessary 
skills to ace the changing legal field. Digital libraries and online research tools 
are increasingly becoming the need in order to keep up with changes in the 
field. 
 
4.23 The Committee feels that there is a need to develop programmes for 
enhancing communication and research skills for lawyers and students 
through systematic and organized training at State level institutions of 
excellence. 
 

48 
 
4.24 The Committee feels that as legal practice becomes more interconnected 
and complex, legal education must adapt to prepare students for emerging 
challenges and opportunities. There is a pressing need to provide young law 
graduates with market -oriented and socially relevant   legal education.  Even 
though ‘traditional’ legal fields like criminal law, family law and law of 
contract continue to remain popular to this day, contemporary 
important  fields like arbitration, mediation, space law, trade law, intellectual 
property law, energy law, bankruptcy law, corporate law, media law, cyber 
law and sports law have emerged as significant areas in recent years. Thus, it 
is important to develop expertise in the newer areas of law, while ensuring 
that law graduates are properly sensitized towards the morals and ethics, 
which are badly needed in the legal profession today.  There is a need to have 
theme-oriented research centres on the lines of such centres in other 
institutions in India and abroad.37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
37 Delhi university Note 

49 
 
Chapter –V 
TECHNOLOGY WITH RELEVANCE TO LEGAL EDUCATION 
 
Introduction 
 
5.0 The rise of technology has transformed nearly every aspect of our lives, 
from the way we communicate to the way we work. The legal education is no 
exception. Technology has changed the future of legal education in many ways. 
The advent of technological innovations has opened new avenues for legal 
education, empowering law students and  faculty with tools and platforms that 
enhance the learning experience manifold. The technolo gical transformation of 
legal education, including computer -based, interactive, and online modes of 
instruction, represents one of the most dramatic technological revolutions in 
history. 
 
5.1 Online learning is the most crucial significant change in the fu ture of legal 
education as it has enabled students to access lectures, case studies, and legal 
databases from anywhere, at any time. Webinars, podcasts, and e-learning modules 
have also fostered engagement and knowledge sharing apart from making legal 
education more inclusive. Moreover, this education system aims to ensure that 
teaching opportunities are available to all people equally within a single 
educational framework. 
5.2 Furthermore, technology has facilitated experiential learning through 
simulated courtroom environments and virtual internships whereby students 
develop practical skills in a controlled yet realistic setting. AI -powered tools, like 
legal research platforms, chatbots, virtual assistants and contract analysis software, 
significantly expedite time-consuming tasks.  
5.3 However, this integration of law and technology has also highlighted 
concerns like the digital divide, infrastructure gaps, data privacy, and the need for 
effective regulatory frameworks. As technology  continues to shape the  legal 
landscape, it is important for law schools to prepare students to navigate these 
complex legal and ethical issues that arise in this rapidly evolving field.  

50 
 
 
5.4 The Committee during its deliberation on the subject was informed that the 
legal profession has experienced a significant transformation due to technological 
advancements, necessitating the integration of technology-focused courses into law 
school curricula.  
5.5 However, m any law schools have not been able to keep pace with the 
changing le gal landscape and advancements in technology, resulting in a gap 
between theoretical knowledge and practical skills . As a result, law schools must 
adapt their curricula to include courses that familiarize students with emerging 
technologies. This integrati on will enable students to leverage legal research 
databases, case management software, and other cutting -edge tools that streamline 
legal processes and improve efficiency. 
Recommendations 
 
5.6 The Committee feels that onslaught of technological innovation and 
globalization of the society and education has made the scene quite 
complicated for the legal education deliveries in India. It is important that law 
schools address the impact of technology on the legal profession  more broadly 
which includes exploring the legal and ethical implications of emerging 
technologies, such as blockchain and smart contracts, and understanding how 
these technologies are changing the way legal services are provided.  
5.7 The Committee recomm ends that Law graduates must be made more 
conversant with emerging technologies like Artificial Intelligence (AI), block 
chain and other IT related tools, which in the years ahead, will certainly have 
a bearing on how law is practiced.   Thus, it is importa nt to develop expertise 
in the newer areas of law.  
 
5.8 The Committee during its deliberation on the subject  was also informed that 
the Bar Council of India has introduced all subjects like Block - Chains, 
technology, Electronic-Discovery, Cyber-Security, Robotic, Artificial Intelligence 
and Bio -Ethics in its Model Law School India International University of Legal 
Education and Research, G oa as part of their degree, certificate and diploma 

51 
 
courses and shall further ensure that all Law Universities also include the same 
courses from the next academic calendar, if they have already not done so.  
5.9 It has already planned to guide law schools  in integrating technology -
focused courses, focusing on AI, blockchain, and automation which will enhance 
faculty understanding, collaborate with legal professionals, and offer practical 
training, internships, and online dispute resolution courses. However , Government 
funding should be provided for specialized courses in legal tech, e -discovery, and 
ODR. 
Recommendations 
 
5.10 The Committee recommends that BCI can establish guidelines and 
recommendations for integrating technology -focused courses such as legal 
tech, e -discovery, and online dispute resolution, into law school curricula  of 
undergraduate courses. For Post graduation and above, an independent body 
with experts from different fields shall establish guidelines for integrating 
technology-focused courses. By incorporating technology-focused courses, law 
schools can ensure that their students are well -prepared to leverage emerging 
technologies, streamline legal processes, and provide innovative solutions to 
their clients. This comprehensive approach  will empower law graduates to 
adapt, excel, and make a significant impact in the evolving practice of law. 
BCI and the independent body can also establish a review and evaluation 
mechanism to assess the effectiveness of technology-focused courses and make 
necessary improvements based on feedback from students, faculty, and legal 
professionals for undergraduate and postgraduate courses respectively. 
5.11 Government funding and grants can be provided to law schools that 
actively promote technology integratio n and offer specialized courses in legal 
tech, e -discovery, and online dispute resolution. Thus, the Committee feels 
that collaborative efforts from legal educators, practitioners, and 
policymakers are needed to ensure that legal education in India meets t he 
needs of society and the legal profession.  
 
 

52 
 
Chapter -VI 
EFFECT OF GLOBALIZATION IN LEGAL EDUCATION 
 
6.0 In our interconnected world, the impact of globalization on the legal 
profession cannot be overstated. Globalization has had a significant impact on 
legal education, bringing about several changes and opportunities. Lawyers today 
are increasingly required to navigate the complexities of international law and 
cross-border legal issues.  To effectively address this need, legal education must 
evolve an d equip aspiring lawyers with a deep understanding of international 
perspectives. 
6.1 Internationalization of legal curriculum : Globalization has led to an 
increased emphasis on international and comparative law in legal education. Law 
schools have recogni zed the need to incorporate courses that cover transnational 
legal issues, international human rights, international trade law, and other areas of 
global importance. This broadens students' understanding of the law and prepares 
them to navigate the complexities of the global legal landscape. 
6.2 Exchange programs and study abroad opportunities : Globalization has 
facilitated the establishment of exchange programs and study abroad opportunities 
for law students. These programs enable students to spend a semester or a year 
studying at a foreign law school, immersing themselves in a different legal system 
and culture. Such experiences enhance students' cross -cultural understanding, 
language skills, and ability to work in diverse and international environments. 
6.3 Collaboration and research partnerships : Globalization has fostered 
collaboration and research partnerships between law schools across different 
countries. Faculty members can engage in joint research projects, conferences, and 
publications, contri buting to the advancement of legal scholarship. These 
collaborations promote the exchange of ideas, methodologies, and best practices in 
legal education and research. 
6.4 Technology-enabled learning : Globalization has facilitated the use of 
technology in l egal education. Online platforms, virtual classrooms, and digital 

53 
 
resources enable law schools to deliver courses and engage with students from 
different parts of the world. This enhances access to legal education and promotes 
global connectivity among students and faculty. 
6.5 Professional networking and career opportunities : Globalization has 
expanded career opportunities for law graduates. Legal professionals can work in 
international law firms, multinational corporations, international organizations, and 
government agencies that deal with cross -border legal issues. Globalization has 
created a demand for legal professionals with expertise in international law and the 
ability to work in diverse legal environments. 
6.6 Exposure to diverse legal systems an d perspectives : Globalization 
exposes law students to diverse legal systems and perspectives. They learn to 
appreciate different legal traditions, cultural norms, and approaches to law. This 
exposure fosters a broader understanding of legal issues, enhances critical thinking, 
and promotes adaptability in a globalized legal profession. 
6.7 Mobility of legal professionals: Globalization has facilitated the mobility of 
legal professionals across borders. Lawyers can pursue opportunities to work in 
different countries, representing clients in international transactions, cross -border 
disputes, and multinational legal matters. This mobility requires a comprehensive 
understanding of legal systems and the ability to navigate complex international 
legal frameworks. 
6.8 Ethical challenges and cultural sensitivity : Globalization brings ethical 
challenges that legal education must address. Students need to be educated on the 
ethical implications of operating in a globalized legal environment, including 
issues of cultural  sensitivity, diversity, and social responsibility. Law schools can 
incorporate courses and discussions that explore these ethical dimensions to 
prepare students for the realities of a global legal practice.38 
6.9 While globalization has brought numerous benefits to legal education, it also 
presents challenges such as the need to ensure cultural sensitivity, maintain 
regulatory standards, and address inequalities in access to legal education. The 
                                                           
38 Prof. Ranbir Singh  

54 
 
most challenging task is to strike a proper balance to ensure that students are taught 
a fair mix of courses that give them knowledge and training in Indian law, but at 
the same time prepare them for facing the challenges of globalization, whereby 
domestic legal mechanisms interact with both international and foreign  legal 
systems. Law schools need to adapt their curricula, teaching methodologies, and 
institutional frameworks to meet the demands of globalization and prepare students 
for the evolving global legal landscape. There is also a need for having a global 
and diverse focus in hiring faculty for Indian law schools. 
 The Committee during its deliberation on the subject was informed that Legal 
education curriculum has been restructured by the Bar Council of India to 
become globally competitive, adopting best practi ces and embracing new 
technologies for wider access to justice and timely delivery of justice.  
6.10 One crucial step towards achieving this goal is the incorporation of 
international law courses into the curriculum. Topics such as international trade 
law, international human rights law, and international arbitration can provide 
students with a solid foundation for handling global legal challenges. Hague 
Academy of International Law offers valuable resources, and BCI plans to 
establish a similar academy in India. 
6.11 The Committee during its deliberation on the subject was suggested that, to 
truly succeed in a globalized legal environment, lawyers must possess a strong 
command of both English and legal English. English serves as the lingua franca of 
international legal communication and a lawyer's ability to navigate and articulate 
legal concepts in English is essential. Therefore, legal education should emphasize 
the development of language skills, particularly in the context of international law. 
This incl udes enhancing students' proficiency in legal English, enabling them to 
draft international legal agreements, engage in cross -border negotiations, and 
effectively communicate with clients and colleagues from different jurisdictions.  
6.12 As the world beco mes increasingly interconnected, lawyers must adapt to 
the demands of a globalized legal environment. By incorporating international law 
courses, promoting international exchange programs, and encouraging exposure to 
different legal systems, legal educatio n can equip aspiring lawyers with the 
necessary skills and perspectives to thrive in this new era.  

55 
 
Recommendation: 
6.13 The Committee feels that w ith India’s increasing role in global context  
there is a need to produce legal luminaries who can advise for protecting 
India’s interest as well as ensure fair, just and reasonable dealing in the 
international sphere. L egal education need to be upgraded and enhanced to 
prepare young lawyers for global challenges. There is n eed to have a global 
curriculum, global faculty, global degrees, and global interaction. 
6.14 The Committee recommends that law c ourses should cater to the needs 
of present -day cross -border issues. Introduction to different legal cultures, 
private international law, Sustainable Development are s ome of the special 
courses which need to be made essential in course curriculum.  
6.15 The Committee further recommends that both Student exchange and 
faculty exchange programmes with Indian and Foreign institutions should be 
encouraged to gain perspective s of other legal systems and fields. To 
encourage participation in international exchange programs, the BCI and the 
government can offer scholarships and grants to financially support the 
students who wish to engage in global legal education. The governmen t, 
universities, and the BCI should also continuously evaluate the effectiveness of 
international law courses and exchange programs to make necessary 
improvements and ensure their relevance in a changing global landscape. 
6.16 By implementing these strategies and fostering cooperation between the 
government, universities, and the BCI, legal education can successfully equip 
aspiring lawyers with the international perspectives, language skills, and 
cultural sensitivity needed to thrive in an interconnected wo rld. Through 
these efforts, the legal profession can contribute effectively to global legal 
challenges and promote justice on an international scale. 
  

56 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
REGULATING LEGAL EDUCATION IN INDIA 
1. The Advocates Act, 1961 was enacted with a limited view of legal 
education producing only lawyers for courts. However, over the years legal 
education has not remained confined to a limited role of producing lawyers 
only. Today law graduates pursue a range of career beyond the courtroom 
practice. So, the Legal curriculum in education institutions needs to be 
designed in a manner that enables the development of skills required for 
pursuing diverse legal professions and not just courtroom practice. Thus there 
is no sense in the BCI having regulatory powers over the entire spectrum of 
legal education. Further, the BCI has neither power not expertise to meet the 
challenges of the ever changing globalized world. This view has also been 
expounded by the National Kn owledge Commission. Also there is a near 
unanimity amongst all the expert witnesses who appeared before the 
Committee, on this particular issue.  (Para 2.34) 
2. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the BCI's powers to 
regulate legal education should be limited to the extent of acquiring basic 
eligibility for practicing at the Bar. For other regulatory functions related to 
higher education in Law i.e. Post graduation and above, which are presently 
being performed by the BCI, and which are not related d irectly to practice at 
the Bar should be entrusted to an independent Authority, the National 
Council for Legal Education and Research to be established under the 
proposed Higher Education Commission of India. (Para 2.35) 
3. Many of the stakeholders have also raised serious concern about the 
manner in which the BCI has used the power to inspect law colleges and 
granting them recognition which has led to a reckless proliferation of 
substandard law colleges in the country. Accordingly, the Committee is of th e 
view that while granting recognition to new colleges due consideration should 
be given to quality over quantity. It is imperative for the BCI to take urgent 
and effective measures to curb the proliferation of substandard law colleges in 
India and to ensu re the quality and excellence of legal education and 
profession in the country. (Para 2.36) 

57 
 
4. The Committee feels that reservation policies in student admissions and 
faculty recruitment must be rigorously followed to encourage participation 
from disadvantaged communities by all Universities, colleges and educational 
institutions, as per the policy of Government of India. The Committee 
recommends that the Bar Council of India should oversee the implementation 
of reservations in the Universities including th e National Law Universities, 
colleges and other law institutions and consider withdrawing their 
recognition, if they fail to adhere to. (Para 2.38) 
CURRICULUM 
5. The Committee feels that  the existing colleges and universities across 
the country adopt diffe rent curriculum and syllabus as prescribed by the 
affiliating Universities. This creates unevenness among the law students who 
pass out from different colleges and Universities.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the role of BCI should be redefined and  the uniform 
curriculum should be laid by the Bar Council of India for undergraduate 
courses in all the law colleges/ Universities.  For Post graduation and above, 
the unifor m curriculum should be laid by an independent Authority as 
recommended by the Committee. (Para 3.5) 
6. The Committee feels that as the legal landscape continues to evolve at a 
rapid pace, it has become imperative that legal education keeps pace with 
these changes. Comprehensive curriculum reform is necessary to ensure that 
future lawyers are well -prepared to address emerging legal challenges. The 
curriculum must develop all aspects and capabilities of learners; and make 
education more well -rounded, useful, and fulfilling to the learner. It should 
enable learners to be ethical, rational, compassionate and prepare them for a 
gainful and fulfilling employment. There has to be innovative approaches 
towards curriculum development and course structuring that will provide a 
sharper and specialized focus towards training and capacity building for the 
future juridical officers. (Para 3.8) 
7. The Committee recommends that topics such as Law and Medicine, 
Sports Law, Energy Law, Tech Law/Cyber Law, Commercial & Investme nt 
Arbitrations, Securities Law, Telecom laws, banking laws must not only be 

58 
 
included but must be given mandatory status as the interdisciplinary subjects 
are the need of the hour. Government and Universities should work in tandem 
with BCI to ensure the co mprehensive inclusion of the emerging areas in the 
curriculum of undergraduate courses. For Post graduation and above, 
independent body with experts from different fields shall ensure the inclusion 
of these emerging areas in the curriculum.(Para 3.9) 
8. The Committee further recommends that the Universities should work 
with BCI to incorporate more of practical training programs like moot court 
competitions, where students can apply legal theory in a simulated courtroom 
setting, enhancing oral advocacy and c ritical thinking skills. BCI's Legal 
Education Rules must be adhered to by all Universities to ensure that clinical 
programs are introduced, providing students with immersive experiences to 
work directly with clients, conduct research, draft legal document s, and 
represent clients under faculty supervision. (Para 3.10) 
9. The Committee recommends that for every academic year, the 
undergraduate law student should mandatorily go for a two months 
apprenticeship for getting enrolled as an advocate. Thus the Advo cates Act, 
1961 may be revisited in this regard in consultation with Universities, senior 
members of the Bar and Bench. The Committee also recommends that the law 
students who undergo internships with the seniors should be paid with 
stipends to encourage t hem and also to take care of their logistic expenses 
during internship. (Para 3.11) 
10. The Committee also recommends that a joint committee of senior 
academicians and practitioners at the Bar and the Bench should be 
constituted to review the curriculum pe riodically. By implementing these 
changes, law graduates will be better equipped to tackle the legal challenges of 
the 21st century, serve their clients effectively, and contribute to the 
development of the legal profession. (Para 3.12) 
11. The Committee  also feels that Government support is crucial in 
allocating resources and funding for practical training programs, ensuring 
that students have access to diverse and enriching experiences. Government 

59 
 
funding should also be provided for specialized courses in  legal tech, e -
discovery, and ODR. (Para 3.13) 
12. The Committee feels that it is important for law universities to have a 
strategic and comprehensive approach to financing infrastructure needs, 
combining multiple funding sources, and prioritizing projects  based on 
immediate needs and long -term goals. Effective financial planning, 
collaboration with stakeholders, and transparent utilization of funds are 
crucial for successful infrastructure development in law universities. The 
government can consider providing financial support and allocating necessary 
resources, if needed/requested for the academy. (Para 3.15) 
 
13. The Committee feels that NAAC shall re -look the rule of levying  Rs. 
6,00,000/-as assessment fee to Legal Education Institutions.  NAAC shall also 
hold more frequent and wider awareness programs and hand holding 
exercises that shall address the hesitation amongst legal Education institutions 
to volunteer for NAAC accreditation.   Policy level decisions are required for 
making accreditation obliga tory and motivations and incentives needs to be 
designed. (Para 3.22) 
RESEARCH IN LEGAL EDUCATION 
 
14. The Committee feels that there is a need to prioritize and promote 
research in the field of legal education in India to improve the quality of legal 
knowledge and education for students and professionals. The Union and State 
Governments as well as the Universities should lay stress on the research 
works in the field of legal education and encourage law graduates to pursue 
higher education and knowledge in India rather than seeking education 
abroad. (Para 4.19) 
 
15. The Committee further feels that there is a need to recruit world class 
global faculty who are top researchers in the field of law and can combine 
sound teaching methods with established track records of research. For this, it 
is imperative that we need to  make legal academia an appealing career option 

60 
 
for bright young lawyers through financial incentives, career development 
opportunities within the law schools. (Para 4.20) 
 
16. The Committee recommends that the Government and Universities 
should collaborate with the Bar Council of India (BCI) to allocate dedicated 
research funding and resources to support faculty research initiatives in legal 
education institutions. BCI can provide guidelines and recommendations to 
Universities regarding the incorporation o f research activities in the legal 
curriculum of undergraduate courses.  By fostering cooperation between the 
Government, Universities, and the BCI, legal education institutions can 
effectively strengthen their research and innovation endeavors. For Post 
graduation and above, an independent body as already recommended by the 
Committee shall lay guidelines regarding the incorporation of research 
activities in the curriculum.(Para 4.21) 
 
17. The Committee observes that the Law schools in India majorly follow 
the traditional approach of theoretical learning while only a select few 
National Law Universities possess the requisite physical infrastructure for 
conducting research. With the demand of more adaptive lawyers, that too in 
an ever more digitized legal indu stry, a hands -on approach to such 
infrastructure and financial assistance in lieu of the same is much needed. The 
introduction of proper research facilities, as well as specialized infrastructure 
for conducting training and workshops, is a need as it inculcates the necessary 
skills to ace the changing legal field. Digital libraries and online research tools 
are increasingly becoming the need in order to keep up with changes in the 
field. (Para 4.22) 
 
18. The Committee feels that there is a need to develop programmes for 
enhancing communication and research skills for lawyers and students 
through systematic and organized training at State level institutions of 
excellence. (Para 4.23) 
 
19. The Committee feels that as legal practice becomes more interconnected 
and complex, legal education must adapt to prepare students for emerging 
challenges and opportunities. There is a pressing need to provide young law 

61 
 
graduates with market -oriented and socially relevant   legal education.  Even 
though ‘traditional’ legal fie lds like criminal law, family law and law of 
contract continue to remain popular to this day, contemporary 
important  fields like arbitration, mediation, space law, trade law, intellectual 
property law, energy law, bankruptcy law, corporate law, media law,  cyber 
law and sports law have emerged as significant areas in recent years. Thus, it 
is important to develop expertise in the newer areas of law, while ensuring 
that law graduates are properly sensitized towards the morals and ethics, 
which are badly need ed in the legal profession today.  There is a need to have 
theme-oriented research centres on the lines of such centres in other 
institutions in India and abroad.39 (Para 4.24) 
TECHNOLOGY WITH RELEVANCE TO LEGAL EDUCATION 
 
20. The Committee feels that onslaught of technological innovation and 
globalization of the society and education has made the scene quite 
complicated for the legal education deliveries in India. It is important that law 
schools address the impact of technology on the legal profession  more broadly 
which includes exploring the legal and ethical implications of emerging 
technologies, such as blockchain and smart contracts, and understanding how 
these technologies are changing the way legal services are provided. (Para 5.6) 
21. The Committee recommends that Law graduates must be made more 
conversant with emerging technologies like Artificial Intelligence (AI), block 
chain and other IT related tools, which in the years ahead, will certainly have 
a bearing on how law is practiced.  Thus, it is important to develop expertise 
in the newer areas of law. (Para 5.7) 
 
22. The Committee recommends that BCI can establish guidelines and 
recommendations for integrating technology -focused courses such as legal 
tech, e -discovery, and online dispute resol ution, into law school curricula of 
undergraduate courses. For Post graduation and above, an independent body 
with experts from different fields shall establish guidelines for integrating 
technology-focused courses. By incorporating technology-focused courses, law 
schools can ensure that their students are well -prepared to leverage emerging 
                                                           
39 Delhi university Note 

62 
 
technologies, streamline legal processes, and provide innovative solutions to 
their clients. This comprehensive approach will empower law graduates to 
adapt, excel, and make a significant impact in the evolving practice of law. 
BCI and the independent body can also establish a review and evaluation 
mechanism to assess the effectiveness of technology-focused courses and make 
necessary improvements based on feedback from st udents, faculty, and legal 
professionals for undergraduate and postgraduate courses respectively. (Para 
5.10) 
23. Government funding and grants can be provided to law schools that 
actively promote technology integration and offer specialized courses in leg al 
tech, e -discovery, and online dispute resolution. Thus, the Committee feels 
that collaborative efforts from legal educators, practitioners, and 
policymakers are needed to ensure that legal education in India meets the 
needs of society and the legal profession. (Para 5.11) 
EFFECT OF GLOBALIZATION IN LEGAL EDUCATION 
24. The Committee feels that w ith India’s increasing role in global context  
there is a need to produce legal luminaries who can advise for protecting 
India’s interest as well as ensure fair, just and reasonable dealing in the 
international sphere. L egal education need to be upgraded and enhanced to 
prepare young lawyers for global challenges. There is n eed to have a global 
curriculum, global faculty, global degrees, and global interaction. (Para 6.13) 
25. The Committee recommends that law c ourses should cater to the needs 
of present -day cross -border issues. Introduction to different legal cultures, 
private international law, Sustainable Development are some of the special 
courses which need to be made essential in course curriculum. (Para 6.14) 
26. The Committee further recommends that both Student exchange and 
faculty exchange programmes with Indian and Foreign institutions should be 
encouraged to gain perspectives of other legal systems and fi elds. To 
encourage participation in international exchange programs, the BCI and the 
government can offer scholarships and grants to financially support the 
students who wish to engage in global legal education. The government, 

63 
 
universities, and the BCI should also continuously evaluate the effectiveness of 
international law courses and exchange programs to make necessary 
improvements and ensure their relevance in a changing global landscape. 
(Para6.15) 
27. By implementing these strategies and fostering coo peration between the 
government, universities, and the BCI, legal education can successfully equip 
aspiring lawyers with the international perspectives, language skills, and 
cultural sensitivity needed to thrive in an interconnected world. Through 
these ef forts, the legal profession can contribute effectively to global legal 
challenges and promote justice on an international scale. (Para 6.16) 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

64 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

65 
 
XXVI 
TWENTY SIXTH MEETING 
 The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 03:00 PM on 22.08.2022 in Committee 
Room No. 4 , Block -A, Parliament  House Annexe Ext. Building, New Delhi – 
110001.   
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
(iii) Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
(iv) Shri P. Wilson 
(v) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
 
 Lok Sabha 
(vi) Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
(vii) Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
(viii) Smt. Veena Devi 
(ix) Shri Kanumuru Raghu Rama Krishna Raju 
(x) Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
I. DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 
(1) Dr. Niten Chandra, Law Secretary 
(2) Shri Rajveer Singh Verma, Addl. Secretary 
(3) Shri Umashankar Thakur, Director 

66 
 
II. BAR COUNCIL OF INDIA 
 
(1) Shri Manan Kumar Mishra, Sr. Advocate, Chairman 
(2) Shri S. Prabakaran, Sr. Advocate, Vice-Chairman 
(3) Shri Apurba Kumar Sharma, Chairman, Executive Committee 
(4) Shri Ved Prakash Sharma, Co-Chairman, Executive Committee 
(5) Shri Jayant D. Jaibhave, Member 
(6) Shri Srimanto Sen, Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee. He then apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the 
Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs and the Chairman, Bar Council of India 
(BCI) on the subject „ Strengthening Legal Education in view of Emerging 
Challenges before the Legal Profession‟. 
(on arrival of the witnesses) 
3. The Chairman then welcomed the Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs 
and the Chairman, BCI to the meeting of the Committee. He requested them to 
apprise the Committee about the present status of legal education in India and to 
suggest changes required for improving it, including statutory changes, if any. 
4. The Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs apprised the Committee about 
the provisions of the Advocates Act, 1961, which entrust upon the BCI to lay down 
the standards of legal ed ucation and thus, he informed, that the Department does 
not have any direct role to play in determining the standards of legal education in 
the country. However, the Department, from time -to-time makes suggestions and 
recommendations to the BCI for bringing about necessary changes. 
5. Thereafter, the Chairman, BCI made his presentation on the subject. He 
informed the Committee that under the Advocates Act, 1961 a sub -committee 

67 
 
headed by a former Judge of the Supreme Court or a former Chief Justice of India 
is functioning under the aegis of Legal Education Committee which looks after the 
matters related to the legal education in the country. He further apprised the 
Committee that consequent upon the implementation of the New Education Policy, 
LLM and higher l egal education was also handed over t o the BCI for regulating 
them.  
6. The Chairman, BCI then highlighted the problems which are marring the 
higher education in India. He pointed out the dearth of law teachers and 
uncontrolled mushrooming of private insti tutions imparting legal education in the 
country. He also raised the issue of use of unfair means in the examination, lack of 
financial resources at the level of law colleges/universities, quality of law teaching 
etc. He also pointed out the indifferent at titude of State Governments as one of the 
major reasons for decline in the standards of legal education in the country. 
7. He also explained, in detail, the procedure for granting affiliation to any law 
college, wherein, it was informed that the main role in the entire affiliation process 
is played by the State Governments and the University which affiliates the college. 
The BCI only grants recognition based on the affiliation received from the 
concerned university. For overcoming these problems he suggeste d more powers 
has to be vested with BCI. The guidelines/instructions issued from time to time by 
the BCI has to be made mandatory on the Universities.  
8. Thereafter, the Chairman and members asked queries related to the 
presentations made by the Secretary , Department of Legal Affairs and Chairman, 
BCI. The Chairman asked the BCI to come up with the solutions also, and suggest 
comprehensive changes required to overhaul the legal education system in India, 
rather than reforming in a piecemeal manner.  

68 
 
(Witnesses then withdrew) 
9. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10. The meeting adjourned at 04.24 PM.  
 
 
New Delhi                                                                               P. NARAYANAN  
22nd August, 2022                                                                         DIRECTOR 
     
To 
 The Chairman and Members of the  
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel,  
Public Grievances, Law and Justice. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

69 
 
XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING  
 
 The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 2.30 PM on Monday, 17.04.2023 , in 
Committee Room No. - 4, Block – „A‟, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New 
Delhi-110001.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Smt. Vandana Chavan 
(iii) Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
(iv) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
(v) Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
(vi) Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
(vii) Shri P. Wilson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
(viii) Shrimati Veena Devi 
(ix) Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
(x) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanmuru 
(xi) Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
(xii) Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
SECRETARIAT 
i. Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
ii. Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
iii. Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
iv. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
v. Shri Prabhakar Singh, Committee Officer 
 
 

70 
 
WITNESSES 
Law Faculty, University of Delhi 
(i) Prof. (Dr.) Usha Tandon, Dean & Head, Law Faculty 
(ii) Prof. (Dr.) K. Ratnabali, Dean Academic Affairs 
 
National Law University Delhi  
(i) Prof. (Dr.)  G.S. Bajpai, Vice-Chancellor  
(ii) Shri Neeraj Tiwari, Assistant Professor  
 
O.P.Jindal Global University, Sonipat (HR) 
(i) Prof.(Dr.)  C. Raj Kumar, Vice-Chancellor 
(ii) Prof. (Dr.) S.G. Sreejith,  Head& Dean, Jindal Global Law School 
(iii) Prof. (Dr.) Anand Prakash Mishra,  Prof. of practice, Jindal Glo bal Law 
School and Director of Law Admission 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting and 
apprised them of the subject selected by the committee - ' Strengthening Legal 
Education in View of Emerging Challenges before the Legal Pro fession', for 
detailed deliberation.  
 (on the arrival of witnesses) 
 
 3. On arrival of the Vice -Chancellors of National Law University Delhi and 
O.P.Jindal Global University, and Dean, Law Faculty, University of Delhi and 
their team, the Chairman welcomed them to the meeting and summarized them  
Committee's purpose of taking up the subject under deliberation. The Chairman 
observed that legal education is fundamental to the very foundation of the legal and 
judicial systems in the country, and the quality of the legal institutions imparting 
legal education determines the quality of  the bar and bench. Therefore, after due 
deliberations with various stakeholders in the legal education sector, the 
Committee would be placing its recommendations before the government on 
various statutory and other reforms for improving the quality of legal education in 
the country. The witnesses being the critical stakeholders in reforming the legal 
education system in India, were  therefore, asked to apprise the Committee about 

71 
 
the challenges they faced in imparting quality legal education and to give the ir 
suggestions to reform the system.  
 
4. The Vice-Chancellors of O.P. Jindal Global University, in his introductory 
presentation, briefed the Committee regarding the challenges in legal education 
under ten short headings, which included recruiting bright young law graduates to 
academia who can contribute significantly to teaching and research , to make legal 
academia an appealing profession with financial incentives like career 
development opportunities, research infrastructure etc., making legal education 
multidisciplinary by infusing humanities and social sciences into law and 
introducing law as a subject in the 11th grades to inculcate a legal acumen from 
school level, incorporating public interest and social justice elements in law 
curriculum for sensitising the students regarding the importance of building an 
egalitarian society,  the importance of continuing legal education for lawyers and 
judges by incorporating the latest technological advancement like robotics, 
artificial intelligence etc. He also emphasised the importance of addressing the 
mediocrity in law schools, the importance of having National and State Lawyers 
Academy to update the knowledge of Lawyers and Judges to maintain their 
professional competencies, streamlining law entrance examinatio n through 
independent agencies to maintain transparency in admissions, equipping legal 
education to embrace globalisation, establishing a dedicated body for legal 
education and research etc. 
 
5. Thereafter, the Vice -Chancellor of National Law University Delhi gave a 
brief presentation regarding the challenges in legal education. He apprised the 
Committee that the fundamental issue with the present legal education system is 
that it was not created for the contemporary challenges but to practice law and the  
educational approach has stayed the same despite the emerging challenges. He also 
informed the Committee that many colleges in India are not self -sufficient in 
imparting quality legal education du e to lack of resources and infrastructure. He 
further stated that there is a n imminent need for a holistic legal education policy 
which takes care of the interests of all the stakeholders and suggested a mechanism 
to obligate the counterpart organisations like the Judiciary and lawyers to 
contribute positively through practical training sessions in the law colleges. He 
also recommended that the National Law Universities across the country be given 

72 
 
the status of affiliating institutions and include law unive rsities/colleges in the 
policy-making process. He also emphasized redefining the role of the Bar Council 
of India, establishing a 'Think Tank' exclusively for legal education,  and 
incorporating clinical legal education in the curriculum. He also proposed t he 
establishment of a National Academy for Law Teachers and a compulsory six -
month diploma course as a prerequisite for entering into teaching career in place of 
the National Eligibility Test (NET), and inculcation of community lawyering, pro -
bono advocacy and social responsibility into the legal curriculum. He also pointed 
out the importance of framing policy regulations for foreign universities imparting 
legal education in India at par with the legal education goals set for domestic 
universities. He also emphasized that legal education should also impact skills in 
the field of Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) mechanisms. 
6.  Thereafter, the Dean of Law Faculty, University of Delhi , gave her 
presentation. She appreciated the Committee for including the Public University as 
a stakeholder in the deliberations alongside the National Law University and 
Private Law University. She pointed out the disparities prevailing in the entrance 
examinations, admission procedures, fee structure in public, private and na tional 
Universities, grading system and internship opportunities for students in the 
various public , private and national law universities and colleges  etc. She also 
emphasised the importance of having an inclusive education policy and society.  
7. The Cha irman and Members of the Committee sought clarifications on various 
issues, including reservation policy for SC/ST/OBC students in National Law 
Universities, revising curriculum, providing library facilities to students, policies 
for reviving public universities etc. The Committee also sought inputs on including 
regional languages in legal pedagogy, connecting law colleges and Universities to 
NALSA and SALSA, inculcation of constitutional thinking in legal education, 
upgrading the infrastructure, filling the vacancies and improving faculty strength in 
law colleges etc.  
 
8.  The Committee acknowledged the need to frame a National Legal Education 
Policy and constitution of  a Legal Committee in line with the observations and 
suggestions put forth by the witnes ses, review of NAAC accreditation criteria, 
implementing the NEP 2020  policy in the legal education system, improve the 

73 
 
quality of legal education in colleges other than premier legal institutions, 
inculcating passion for academics and research in students etc.   
 
9.  The Committee further sought inputs  on introducing G-Chat or Chat -GPT, 
Artificial intelligence in legal institutions and its benefits, authenticity of clubbed 
degrees to the students like BBA.LL.B  within five years, steps taken to fill the 
legal gaps at par with the technological advancements. 
 
10.   The Chairman also sought clarifications regarding the role of BCI and the 
possibility of bifurcating legal education from the Bar Council of India, the utility 
of the current curriculum in the prac tice of law, implementing the case-study 
method in curriculum and more provisions for moot c ourts. He also sought 
information on introducing new technology like block chain, artificial intelligence 
etc to the curriculum, infrastructure improvement, student-teacher ratio, access and 
affordability of legal education to poor students, curriculum update, inter -college/ 
university student exchange programs etc.  
 
11. The Chairman asked the Vice -Chancellors/ Dean to provide concrete 
suggestions for incorporating into the Committee‟s report and  provide detailed 
information on the queries raised by the Committee in writing. 
 
(witnesses then withdrew) 
 
11. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
12. The meeting adjourned at 4.23 PM. 
 
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN 
17th April 2023                                                                                  DIRECTOR   
 
 
 

74 
 
XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING  
 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice met at 3.00 PM on Wednesday, 31.05.2023, in Committee 
Room No. - 4, Block – „A‟, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi-110001.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
(iii) Shri Sanjay Raut 
(iv) Smt. Darshana Singh 
(v) Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
(vi) Shri P. Wilson 
Lok Sabha 
(vii) Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
(viii) Shri Vinod Chawda 
(ix) Shrimati Veena Devi 
(x) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanmuru 
(xi) Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
SECRETARIAT 
i. Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary 
ii. Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
iii. Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
iv. Shri Abhyuday Singh Shekhawat, OSD to the Vice-President of India 
v. Shri Prabhakar Singh, Committee Officer 
 
WITNESSES 
1. Prof. (Dr.) Ranbir Singh, Founder and former Vice -Chancellor National Law 
University, Delhi and NALSAR University, Hyderabad; and 
2. Prof. (Dr.) Faizan Mustafa, Founder Vice -Chancellor of NLU, Orissa & 
Former Vice-Chancellor NALSAR University, Hyderabad 
 

75 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting and 
apprised them the agenda of the meeting and the insights that had already been 
gathered on the subject from various sources, including the Department of Legal 
Affairs, the Bar Cou ncil of India, and three prominent universities in India. He 
informed the Members that to enhance the Committee's understanding of the 
subject, two distinguished legal experts, Prof. Ranbir Singh and Prof. Faizan 
Mustafa, have been invited as witnesses for the meeting.  
 (On the arrival of witnesses) 
 3. The Chairman welcomed them to the meeting and apprised them that the 
Committee's had taken the subject under deliberation as the field of legal education 
has undergone significant changes to adapt to the demands of globalization trade, 
commerce, indust ries and IT, but despite these advancements, gaps and 
deficiencies still exists within the current legal education system. The Chairman 
then asked Prof. Ranbir Singh and Prof. Faizan Mustafa, to share their views on 
reforming the system and addressing the present challenges and informed them that 
the meeting's proceedings are confidential. 
 
2. Prof. Ranbir Singh informed that approximately 1,800 institutions, with National 
Law schools (Universities) at the top are imparting legal education in India and 
expressed concerns about the overall standards of legal education, citing issues 
such as inadequate faculty, lack of senior teachers, and insufficient infrastructure in 
many colleges. He further mentioned that though establishing law schools in the 
country, has improved legal education, these institutions are still limited in number 
and admissions are highly competitive, posing challenges of diversity, access, 
affordability, equity, and equality. Prof. Singh also discussed the role of the Bar 
Council of India (BCI) in legal education and suggested that the BCI should focus 
on the five-year and three-year law programs and leave LL.M. and Ph.D. programs 
to the Universities. He also highlighted the need for continuing legal education and 
accreditation of degree s. He further, emphasized the importance of producing 
technically sound, professionally competent, and socially relevant lawyers through 
improved curriculum, faculty development programs, outcome -based education, 
research culture, and enhanced employabilit y. He also shared the need to bridge 
the knowledge divide and skill divide in the legal profession, especially in the 
context of technology and access to resources. 
 

76 
 
4. Prof. (Dr.) Ranbir Singh also highlighted the challenges faced by law students in 
finding employment and emphasized the need for support and opportunities for 
young lawyers. He mentioned that the corporate sector provides job opportunities 
and contributes to the economy, making it a viable career path for students. He also 
stressed upon the importance of improving students' writing and research skills and 
reforming the Bar examination. Another concern raised by him was the lack of 
funding and support from state governments to law schools. He advocated for 
treating these institutions as instit utions of eminence and emphasized their 
contribution to the legal field globally.  
 
5. Thereafter, Prof. (Dr.) Faizan Mustafa made a presentation on the subject. He 
mentioned about the importance of disagreements among professors to foster the 
creation of knowledge. He discussed the issue of justice becoming a counter -
cultural value in the legal profession. He also touched upon issues of unethical 
practices, high fees, and the need for competent judges and lawyers. He further 
pointed out the significance of  justice in the legal profession and its impact on 
society. He referred to the two reports he had prepared on legal education for the 
Ministry of Law and Justice, which involved consultations with students, teachers, 
Vice-Chancellors, and Deans. He mentioned that the National Law Universities be 
made 'Institutions of Eminence' and requested to end the disparity in their funding 
in comparison to other premier institutions like IITs and IIMs. He also discussed 
the challenges in attracting good faculty members and the need to improve salaries 
and scales to compete with IITs and IIMs. He suggested that allowing law teachers 
to practice in the court would benefit both the profession and the students. He also 
touched upon the issue of the UGC (University Grants Co mmission) versus BCI 
(Bar Council of India) debate regarding the regulation of legal education. He 
explained the legal basis of the Bar Council of India's authority and the UGC's role 
as a regulator of higher education.  
6. Further, Prof. Mustafa expressed  concern on the current legal curriculum for 
being excessively focused on European jurisprudence, neglecting India's rich 
cultural and legal traditions. He suggested that Indian jurisprudence and ancient 
Indian value systems should be incorporated into the  curriculum. He opined that 
the concept of a uniform curriculum for all national law schools, may not be 
suitable for students intending to practice law in rural or small -town areas. He 

77 
 
proposed to have different types of curriculum, including one for NLUs  and 
another for traditional law colleges, while ensuring the BCI's authority to prescribe 
the LLB curriculum. He further highlighted the need for emphasis on alternative 
dispute resolution (ADR) and clinical legal education for promoting social justice.  
7.  Thereafter the Members expressed their views and congratulated the two 
eminent speakers for their inputs and suggestions. Further, more autonomy in 
curriculum design was suggested for non -National Law Schools. Members also 
raised concerns about young l awyers' lack of court etiquette and the importance of 
incorporating court facet education. Members also welcomed the suggestion of 
elevation of professors to higher judiciary positions and expansion of professors' 
roles beyond the college setting. The Memb ers suggested revamping the 10+2 
curriculum, establishing a uniform entrance examination for legal education, and 
creation of a separate administrative stream for the judiciary, importance of 
infusing technology training for lawyers etc. Members also acknowledged the need 
to establish an independent regulatory body for higher legal education and the 
possibility of reducing the five-year law course to four years. 
8. Further, suggestions were made for the establishment of a National Education 
Council for lega l education and the need for proposed amendments to the 
Advocates Act. Concerns were raised regarding the conflict between the Bar 
Council of India and State and Central Governments, as well as the broader scope 
of professional standards, ethics, disciplin ary mechanisms, and the practical 
aspects of legal education. Additionally, the role of corporate lawyers in the legal 
profession was deliberated upon with some members emphasizing the importance 
of lawyers fighting for the rights of the people. The need f or practical training 
through internships and the decline in lawyers' commitment to working with senior 
lawyers were also addressed.  
9. Members also emphasized the need for practical and technical aspects to be 
incorporated alongside theoretical education in law. It was suggested that students, 
regardless of their level (district court, High Court, or Supreme Court), should be 
exposed to practical proceedings to gain practical knowledge. Furthermore, the 
Members highlighted the importance of showcasing leg al proceedings related to 
women's issues to female law students, as they may communicate better with 
victimized women.  

78 
 
10. Thereafter, the Chairman of the Committee touched upon certain issues in the 
legal education sector, such as the mushrooming of law colleges. It was suggested 
that mapping the requirements of society is necessary before opening new colleges. 
He also expressed concerns regarding the internships programmes and pointed out 
that there is often a disconnect between what is taught in college  and the practical 
aspects of litigation. He also suggested that the recorded video sessions of 
important debates and arguments in the Supreme Court or High Courts can provide 
students with valuable learning material. It was proposed that the powers and 
functions of the University Grants Commission (UGC) and the Bar Council of 
India (BCI) need to be harmonized to regulate the quality of legal education. The 
potential barriers and challenges in implementing reforms in legal education were 
also discussed, con sidering the conflicts and difficulties faced in bringing about 
these reforms. 
11. The Chairman suggested that the Speakers provide concrete points that they 
consider essential for bringing about changes in legal education reforms. He 
specified that these points should be concise and focused, for incorporating them 
into the Committee's report.  
(Witnesses then withdrew) 
11. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
12. The meeting adjourned at 5.27 PM. 
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN 
31.05. 2023                                                                                  DIRECTOR   
 
 
 
 
 

79 
 
RECORD NOTE OF DISCUSSION 
 
 The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 4.00 PM on Thursday, 15.06.2023, in 
Committee Room No. - 4, Block – „A‟, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New 
Delhi-110001.  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
(i) Shri Sushil Kumar Modi - Chairman 
 Rajya Sabha 
(ii) Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
(iii) Shri Sanjay Raut 
(iv) Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
(v) Shri P. Wilson 
Lok Sabha 
(vi) Shrimati Veena Devi 
(vii) Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanmuru 
(viii) Shri Malook Nagar 
(ix) Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
SECRETARIAT 
I. Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
II. Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
III. Shri Abhyuday Singh Shekhawat, OSD to the Vice-President of India 
IV. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
V. Shri Prabhakar Singh, Committee Officer 
 
WITNESSES 
1. Prof. Deepak Kumar Srivastava; Vice -Chairman, University Grants 
Commission and 
2. Dr. Sunita Siwach, Joint Secretary, University Grants Commission (UGC) 
and National Association and Accreditation Council (NAAC) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting  and 
apprised them the agenda of the meeting and the insights that had already been 

80 
 
gathered on the subject from various sources, including the Department of Legal 
Affairs, the Bar Council of India , some prominent universities and legal experts. 
He informed the Members that to enhance the Committee's understanding of the 
subject, representatives of two important regulatory institutions of higher education 
in India, University Grants Commission (UGC) and National Assessment and 
Accreditation Council (NAAC), have been invited as witnesses for the meeting.  
 (On the arrival of witnesses) 
 3.  The Chairman welcomed the representatives of UGC and NAAC  to the 
meeting and apprised them that the Committee wou ld like to know role of UGC in 
enhancing excellence and innovation in the field of legal education and also to hear 
the views of NAAC on the evolving national scenario of legal education in India. 
The Chairman further asked UGC to apprise the Committee if UGC and Bar 
Council of India (BCI) had any overlapping roles with respect to legal education in 
the country and to give suggestions for improving the legal education system in 
India. 
4.  The Vice -Chairman, UGC, then made a presentation and apprised the 
Committee that the role and mandate of UGC is to coordinate and determine 
standards in universities and colleges and the Bar Council of India became a 
regulator of legal education after the Advocates Act, 1961, beside UGC. He further 
apprised that UGC has two  important roles viz. to lay the minimum standards of 
teaching and research across all universities and colleges throughout India and to 
recommend to the Government about the funding of some universities. He further 
informed the Committee that the role of UGC with regard to legal education is 
limited to maintaining minimum standards. He mentioned that as per the 
Advocates Act, 1961, Bar Council of India plays a vital role at undergraduate level 
and in regulating the framework of legal education in India and  UGC plays a 
specific role at post graduate and Ph.D. level. He told the Committee that National 
Education Policy, 2020 does not include law within its framework. The Vice -
Chairman also suggested some steps for reforming the present legal education 
system in the country which include field -oriented legal research, introduction of 
artificial intelligence, promoting clinical legal education and to amend Advocates 
Act so that Bar Council of India can consult a representative body constituted by 

81 
 
UGC to ensure t hat both BCI and UGC can maintain equal partnership in 
regulating legal education. 
5.  Thereafter, Joint Secretary, UGC and NAAC, also gave a presentation and 
informed the Committee that the vision of NAAC is to ensure quality education 
throughout the country and for the same NAAC is performing periodic assessment 
and accreditation of institutions. She further informed that there are 39 qualit ative 
and 80 quantitative matrices on the basis of which accreditation is done. She 
apprised the Committee about the  seven-point scale grading system ranging from 
A++ to D.  
6.  The Chairman and Members of the Committee sought clarifications on 
various issues, including collaboration between the UGC and BCI, accreditations 
of the institutions providing legal education, role of UGC with respect to legal 
education and the jurisdiction, steps to improve standard of law colleges and their 
faculties, grievances of PhD students enrolled in National Law Universities, 
overlapping role of UGC and BCI, funding to the law institutes etc.  
6.  The Vice-Chairman, UGC then replied to queries made by the Chairman and 
Members of the Committee including role of UGC and BCI, grievances of PhD 
students, awareness about law, funding to universities from Central Government, 
list of fake universities. 
(witnesses then withdrew) 
 
7. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
8. The meeting adjourned at 5.28 PM. 
 
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                P. NARAYANAN 
15th June, 2023                                                                                      DIRECTOR   
 
 
 

82 
 
XX 
TWENTIETH MEETING  
          The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 4.00 PM  on Thursday, 27.07.2023, in 
Committee Room No. - 4, Block – „A‟, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New 
Delhi.  
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
i. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi      -        Chairman 
          Rajya Sabha 
ii. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
iii. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
iv. Shri Kanakmedala Ravindra Kumar 
v. Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
vi. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
vii. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
viii. Shri P. Wilson 
Lok Sabha 
ix. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
x. Shrimati Veena Devi 
xi. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
xii. Shri Malook Nagar 
xiii. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
xiv. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
xv. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
xvi. Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
SECRETARIAT 
I. Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary  
II. Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
III. Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
IV. Shri Abhyuday Singh Shekhawat, OSD to the Vice-President of India 
V. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 

83 
 
VI. Shri Prabhakar Singh, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
BAR COUNCIL OF INDIA 
1. Shri Manan Kumar Mishra, Chairman ; 
2. Shri S. Prabakaran, Vice Chairman ; 
3. Shri Apurba Kumar Sharma, Chairman Executive Committee ; 
4. Shri Ved Prakash Sharma, Co-Chairman ; 
5. Shri Jayant D. Jaibhave, Member ; 
6. Prof. (Dr.) R. Venkata Rao, Vice Chancellor of BCI Trust University, Goa ; 
7. Shri Srimanto Sen, Secretary ; 
8. Shri Ashok Kumar Pandey, Joint Secretary ; and 
9. Dr. Nivedita Choudhary, Asstt. Professor of Law, IIULER, Goa. 
  
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee. He then apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the 
Chairman, Bar Council of India (BCI) on the subject „Strengthening Legal 
Education in view of Emerging Challenges before the Legal Profession‟ and  
*                                                                    *                                                       * 
  
(on arrival of the witnesses) 
 3.      The Chairman welcomed Shri Manan Kumar Mishra, Chairman and other 
officials of the Bar Council of India. Thereafter, the Chairman apprised them that 
the last meeting with BCI on the subject of Legal Education was held on 
22.08.2022 and the Committ ee seeks recent views of the Council on that subject 
and *                                                              *                                                       *    
4.      The Chairman, BCI informed the Committee that after implementation of 
New Education Policy not only undergraduate course but the entire legal education 
is under purview of Bar Council of India. Thereafter, Vice -Chancellor of the India 
International Institution for Legal Education and Research, Goa made the 
presentation. H e pointed out some of the difficulties faced by BCI in legal 
education such as hiring of qualified faculties, lack of infrastructure in law  
                             
*pertains to other matters 

84 
 
colleges, substantial growth in number of law colleges, etc. He further informed 
the Committee that BCI has constituted an advisory board consisting of judges, 
jurists, academicians etc. to promote legal education in India. The Chairman, BCI 
also pointed out some of the difficulties faced by them like lack of faculties, use of 
unfair means in L.L.B. exams, scarcity of research in legal education and legal 
profession.  
5.      *                                                         *                                                         * 
6.      The Chairman and Members raised queries and sought clarifications such as 
whether the BCI has ever conducted any survey to find out what are the demands 
of students who are willing to join law colleges, steps taken to addr ess the lack of 
quality among the teaching faculty, incorporation of subjects like Mediation and 
Arbitration in the curriculum, etc. The Chairman suggested that legal education 
should be more practical and pragmatic. *                                                               * 
 7.      The Officials of the Bar Council of India replied to some of the queries. The 
Chairman then thanked all the witnesses and asked them to furnish replies to the 
queries which were not answered during the meeting, in writing.   
 (witnesses then withdrew) 
  
8.      A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
9.      The meeting adjourned at 4.50 PM. 
  
  
 
New Delhi                                                                          P. NARAYANAN 
27th July, 2023                                                                        DIRECTOR  
 
 
                             
*pertains to other matters 
 

85 
 
I 
FIRST MEETING  
          The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 4.00 PM on Friday, 06.10.2023, in 
Committee Room No. - 1, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New 
Delhi.  
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
i. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi      -        Chairman 
          Rajya Sabha 
ii. Shri Kanakmedala Ravindra Kumar 
iii. Shri Sanjay Raut 
iv. Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
v. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
vi. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
vii. Shri P. Wilson 
Lok Sabha 
viii. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
ix. Shrimati Veena Devi 
x. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
xi. Shri Malook Nagar 
xii. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
SECRETARIAT 
I. Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary  
II. Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
III. Smt. Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya, Additional Director 
IV. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
V. Shri Prabhakar Singh, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
1. Smt. Mridula Mishra, Former Judge Patna High Court and Vice -Chancellor 
Chanakya National Law University, Patna 

86 
 
2. Shri M. Sathyanarayanan, Former Judge High Court of Madras 
3. Shri R. Balasubramanian, Senior Advocate 
  
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee. He then apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear 
some legal experts on the subject „Strengthening Legal Education in view of 
Emerging Challenges before the Legal Profession‟. 
  
(on arrival of the witnesses) 
 3.      The Chairman welcomed Hon'ble Justice Smt. Mridula Mishra, Hon'ble 
Justice Shri M. Sathyanarayanan and Senior Advocate Shri R. Balasubramanian. 
Thereafter, the Chairman apprised them that the Committee has already heard the 
views of many legal dignitaries, ex. Vice-Chancellors and Bar Council of India. He 
further apprised them that the Committee would like to hear their views, challenges 
and suggestions on the subject.    
4.      Hon'ble Justice Smt. Mridula Mishra informed the Committee about the 
plight of law colleges situated in rural areas and lack of funding to law colleges. 
She suggested some measures to rectify the process of affiliation to newly opened 
law colleges. She also dis cussed the need for changing of curriculum in these 
colleges. Hon'ble Justice Shri M. Sathyanarayanan coined the problem of lack of 
basic infrastructure in Government Law Colleges and vernacular language 
problem. He also said that proper training of lawyer s and faculties is necessary to 
have a pool of good judges. Senior Advocate Shri R. Balasubramanian made a 
presentation focussing mainly on aims and objectives of legal education, current 
legal framework, factors affecting the legal education and challenge s with legal 
education. He focussed on the point that not only the curriculum but the system of 
teaching and training methodology should be updated to meet the needs of society 
and to face new challenges. He also suggested to establish more State -run legal 
centres of excellence on the lines of AIIMS and IITs alongwith focussing more on 
practical aspects of legal profession.  
6.      The Chairman and Members raised queries and sought clarifications such as 
proper utilization of funds released by the Governme nt, updation of curriculum, 
mushrooming of law colleges without infrastructure and faculty, role of Bar 

87 
 
Council of India in the field of legal education, etc. The Chairman suggested to 
make legal education more practical by increasing the internship progra mme in 
courts for law students 
 7.      The experts replied to some of the queries. The Chairman then thanked all 
the witnesses and asked them to furnish replies to the queries which were not 
answered during the meeting, in writing.   
 (witnesses then withdrew) 
  
8.      A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
9.      The meeting adjourned at 5.10 PM. 
  
  
 
   New Delhi                                                                       P. NARAYANAN 
      6th October, 2023                                                                          DIRECTOR  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

88 
 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING  
 
          The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice met at 1.00 PM on Tuesday, 06.02.2024, in 
Committee Room No.4, Block „A‟, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, 
New Delhi.  
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
i. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi      -        Chairman 
          Rajya Sabha 
ii. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
iii. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
iv. Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
v. Shri Sanjay Raut 
vi. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
vii. Shri K.R.Suresh Reddy 
viii. Shrimati Darshana Singh 
ix. Shri Vivek K.Tankha 
 Lok Sabha 
x. Shri Malook Nagar 
xi. Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
xii. Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
xiii. Shri A.Raja 
xiv. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
xv. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
2. Smt.Indira Chaturvedi Vaidya, Additional Director 

89 
 
3. Shri Abhyuday Singh Shekhawat, OSD to the Vice-President of India 
4. Shri Sunil Tripathi, Under Secretary 
5. Shri Prabhakar Singh, Under Secretary 
 2.          At the outset, the Chairman welcomed all the Members to the meeting of 
the Committee and apprised them about the agenda of the meeting, i.e. 
consideration and adoption of the following draft reports of the Committee: 
i. *                                                        *                                                       * 
ii. 142nd Report on the subject "Strengthening Legal    Education in view of 
emerging challenges before the Legal Profession" ; 
iii. *                                                        *                                                       * 
iv. *                                                        *                                                       * 
3.          The Committee unanimously adopted all the draft Reports a nd decided to 
present those Reports to both Houses of Parliament on 07 th February, 2024.  The 
Committee authorized Shri Vivek K. Tankha and, in his absence, Shri P. Wilson to 
present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Raghu Rama Krishna Raju Kanumuru 
and, in his absence, Shri Malook Nagar to lay the reports in Lok Sabha.  
5.      The meeting adjourned at 2.15 PM. 
  
  
New Delhi                                                                    P. NARAYANAN 
      6th February, 2024                                                               DIRECTOR    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             
*pertains to other matters 