  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
 AFFAIRSAND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2008-09) 
 
 
         FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
 AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the observa tions/recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee on ‘Consumer 
Movement in the Country’ of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)] 
 
 
      
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI  
 
August, 2008 /Sravana, 1930 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 

  
 
  TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD,  
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC 
 DISTRIBUTION (2008-09) 
 
 
         (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee on ‘Consumer 
Movement in the Country’ of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)] 
 
 
      
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24.10.2008 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.10.2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI  
 
August, 2008 /Sravana, 1930 (Saka) 
 

  
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
         PAGE(S) 
     COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE… ………………………………        (iii) 
 
      INTRODUCTION  ……………………………………………………………    (v) 
 
      CHAPTER   I  Report………………………………………………………   1 
  
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been  
                           accepted by the Government………….                            26 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
                           do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s  
                           replies…………………………………………………           48 
  
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
                           replies of the Government have not been accepted  
                           by the Committee…………………………………………    54 
 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
                           final replies of the Government are still awaited……        74 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Second sitting of the Committee held  
             on  27.08.2008……………………………………                        82   
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on  
                the recommendations contained in the Twentieth  
                Report of the Committee……………………………                   84 
 
 
 

  
 
 
MEMBERS OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2008-2009) 
 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav   - Chairman    
  
 
                                                              
MEMBERS 
 
                         Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Govinda Aroon Ahuja  
3. Shri Suresh Angadi 
4. Shri Alakesh Das 
5. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
6. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
7. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
8. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
9. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna  
10. Shri Wangyuh W. Konyak 
11. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
12. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
13. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
14. Shri Munshi Ram 
15. Shri Ghuran Ram 
16. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
17. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
18. Adv. (Smt.) P. Satheedevi 
19. Shri Chandra Bhan Singh  
20. Smt. Meena Singh 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri T.S. Bajwa 
23. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
24. Shri Mangala Kisan 
25. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
26. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
27. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
28. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
29. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu 

  
(iii) 
 
30. Shri Matilal Sarkar 
31. Vacant 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu   -  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Misra    -  Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Veena Sharma   -  Director 
4. Shri B. S. Dahiya    -  Deputy Secretary-I 
5. Shri Jagdish Prasad   -  Deputy Secretary-II 
 
 

  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
1. I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
(2008-2009), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present the Twenty Fifth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha) on ‘Consumer Movement 
in the Country’ of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Departme nt 
of Consumer Affairs). 
 
2. The Twentieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.8.2007. The 
Government furnished their replies indicating action taken on the recommendations  contained 
in the Report on 5.6.2008.  The Report was cons idered and adopted by the Committee at their 
sitting held on 27.08.2008. 
 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on recommendations/ observations 
contained in the Report is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV 
     26 September, 2008                 Chairman, 
     4, Asvina, 1930 (Saka)        Standing Committee on Food, 
  Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 
 

  
 CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Dist ribution deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the 
Committee on ‘Consumer Movement in the Country’ of the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
   
 
1.2 The Twentieth report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 16 th August, 2007. The action taken replies 
of the Government on all the 50 observations/recommendations contained in t he 
report have been received on 5th June, 2008 and categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Serial Nos.  1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 21, 28, 31, 32, 
33, 34, 36, 37 and 45  
 
(Paragraph Nos.   1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 2.10, 2.16, 2.17, 2.18, 2.19, 3.24, 3.26, 
3.27, 3.28, 3.29, 3.32, 4.27, 5.4, 6.3, 7.6, 8.5, 8.7, 8.8 and 10.18). 
 
(Chapter –II Total 22) 
 
(ii) Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 
Serial Nos. 20, 22, 29, 39, 41and 47 
 
(Paragraph Nos.  3.31, 4.21, 4.28, 9.9, 10.14 and 10.20). 
 
(Chapter –III Total 6) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the   
Government have no t been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
 
      Serial Nos.  4, 7, 12, 14, 19, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 35 and 44  
  
 (Paragraph Nos. 1.9, 2.15, 3.23, 3.25, 3.30, 4.22, 4.23, 4.24, 4.25,      
4.26,  8.6 and 10.17). 
 
(Chapter –IV Total 12) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final replies of     
     the Government are still awaited: 
 
     Serial Nos.  5, 30, 38, 40, 42, 43, 46, 48, 49 and 50. 
  

  
    (Paragraph Nos. 2.7, 5.3, 9.8, 10.13, 10.15, 10.16, 10.19, 10.21, 
    10.22 and 10.23). 
 
(Chapter –V Total 10) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations for which only interim replies have been 
received from the Government be furnished to the Committee within three 
months of the presentation of the Report. 
    
1.4 The Committee, in their twentieth report dealt with the subject `Consumer 
Movement in the country’ and found various lacunae in the consumer movement.  
The main observations/recommendations of the Committee were as follows : 
 
(i) Need to reach the level of even the lesser developed 
countries in protecting the interests of the consumers; 
 
(ii) Need to chalk out a detailed strategy relating to consumer 
awareness and consumer protection in consultation with the 
State Governments, NGOs/ VCOs/Local Bodies and all other 
stakeholders; 
 
(iii) Need to have a separate Consumer Affairs Department in 
each State; 
 
(iv) Need to amend Consumer Protection Act, 1986; 
 
(v) Need for higher allocation to the Consumer Protection Unit 
of the Department of Consumer Affairs; 
 
(vi) Need to give wide publicity to the consumer awareness 
campaign through electronic media;  
 
(vii) Need to involve Song & Drama Division and Field Publicity 
Unit of the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting and 
Publicity Units of the State Governm ents to make the people 
aware of their rights; 
 
(viii) Need to find out specific reasons for non -functional district 
Fora and persuade the State Governments to take corrective 
action; 
 
(ix) Need to have All India/State Service to cater to the needs of 
supporting staff  of various consumer fora at national, state 
and district levels; 
 
(x) Need to set up a model district forum funded by the Central 
Government in each State; 
 
(xi) Need to grant Special Fund from Central Consumer Welfare 
Fund to the States;  

  
  
(xii) Need for strict monito ring of the implementation of various 
activities, for which funds have been provided out of 
Consumer Welfare Fund; 
 
(xiii) Need to have an effective monitoring to ensure that only 
credible NGOs/VCOs are provided funds out of Consumer 
Welfare Fund;  
 
(xiv) Need to set up Consumer Clubs in all the States. 
 
  
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
(A) Strategy for creating Consumer Awareness and Consumer 
Protection 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.3, Para No.1.8) 
 
1.6 The Committee in their earlier report had recommended as below:- 
 
“The Committee have dealt in detail the various issues 
related to consumer movement in the report and various 
observations/recommendations have been made.  The 
Committee urge the Department to chalk out detailed 
strategy related to consumer awareness and consumer 
protection in consultation with the State 
Governments/NGOs/VCOs/ local bodies and all other 
stakeholders on the lines suggested by the Committee in the 
report.” 
 
1.7 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under: 
 
“The Department has noted the suggestion of Committee 
and prepared detailed media plan in coordination with all the 
stake holders such as State Govt. Voluntary consumer  
organizations and others . To ensure that the involvement of 
the State Government is very distinctively spelt out, the 
respective State Governments are being advised to send 
detailed proposals for grants.” 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
1.8  The Committee note that the Central Government has prepared 
a detailed media plan in coordination with the State Governments and 
Voluntary Consumer Organizations (VCOs) for creating consumer 
awareness and respective State Governments are being advised to send 
detailed proposals for grants.  The Commi ttee would like to be apprised 
of the details of the media plan proposed by the Government for 
Consumer Awareness and Consumer Protection and the concrete 
action taken thereon.  They also wish to be apprised of the particulars of 
the advice given to the State Governments for their distinct involvement 
in the plan and the response of the State Governments thereto.  

  
 
(B) Need to create separate Department of Consumer Affairs by the 
States 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.4, Para No.1.9) 
1.9 The Committee in their earlier report had recommended as under: 
 
 “The Committee find from the information provided by the 
Department that, only one State viz. West Bengal is having a 
separate Department of Consumer Affairs.  Besides, in 23 
States/UTs, the nomenclature of the Department  includes words 
like “Consumer Affairs”, “Consumer Protection” etc.  The 
Committee are concerned to note that low priority is accorded to 
the subject of Consumer Protection by various State Governments 
and it is virtually a neglected area.  The Committee a re of the view 
that the nature and volume of work involved in consumer protection 
is such that it requires adequate attention and only then justice 
could be done to this matter of much public importance.  The 
Committee feel that the subject also requires c onstant and regular 
monitoring.   And because of its scope being so vast, a full -fledged 
Department headed by an officer of the level of Secretary needs to 
be in place in States for consumer protection.  The Committee also 
desire that for promoting the wel fare of the consumers in the 
States, a separate Budget needs to be earmarked for the 
Consumer Affairs Department.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the matter of separate Department on Consumer 
Affairs/Protection, headed by officer of the rank and pay of 
Secretary and separate budgetary provision, should be taken up in 
the right earnest and at the highest level with the State 
Governments. Some sort of in built incentives be also devised for 
the States/UTs who are doing well in the field of consumer 
awareness and consumer protection.  The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the action taken in the matter.”  
 
1.10 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under: 
 
 “The issue of having a separate Department along with 
separate Budget for Consumer Protection has been taken up time 
and again by this Department with all States/UTs. So far, Kerala & 
West Bengal have established separate Departments for Consumer 
Affairs. The concerns of the Parliamentary Standing Committee in 
this regard as  indicated in the recommendations has again been 
taken up by Secretary (CA) with the States/UTs on 06.11.2007 at 
the level of Chief Secretaries.” 
 

  
 
1.11 The Committee are unhappy to note that the States are not according 
due priority to the matter of crea ting a separate Department of Consumer 
Affairs/Consumer Protection.  The Committee are dismayed to find that 
despite repeated instructions issued by the Central Government, only two 
States namely, Kerala and West Bengal have established separate 
Department of Consumer Affairs. The Committee feel that consequent upon 
the growing awareness amongst consumer, Consumer Protection has 
become a major thrust area.  By having a full fledged Department, the 
States will be able to focus on all aspects related to Consu mer 
Protection/Consumer Awareness which will help the State Governments in 
formulating an effective strategy for consumer protection.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that creation of 
a separate Department of Con sumer Affairs should be accorded top  
priority. The matter of providing incentives to the States which are 
performing well in the field of consumer affairs and consumer protection 
should also be given due consideration.  
 

  
(C) Spreading Consumer Awareness in Rural Areas 
Recommendation  (Sl.No.7, Para No.2.15) 
1.12 The Committee had recommended as below: 
“The Committee note that though the Government has 
started a vigorous consumer awareness campaign through print 
media, adequate publicity has not been given  through electronic 
media. The Committee feel that to make the consumer awareness 
programme broad based and more mass oriented, wide publicity 
should be given through electronic media on the lines of Pulse 
Polio Campaign etc. by roping in well known celebr ities to espouse 
the cause.  The Government should also reach the people through 
Gram Melas, etc.   The services of the NGOs need to be exploited 
through special programmes by making them partners in spreading 
the awareness and enhancing the effectiveness of the consumer 
protection measures.” 
 
1.13 In their action taken replies, the Ministry have stated as under: 
 
“The Multi -media campaign to be organised at the Central 
level will be duly complemented through the above efforts of the 
State Governments in achievi ng a holistic goal. This campaign will 
use print, television and radio.  Joint programmes involving NGO’s 
will also be taken up.  Voluntary consumer organizations are 
already involved in finalizing strategy for awareness campaign and 
enhancing consumer pro tection National  consumer Helpline is a 
example of the same.” 
 

  
 
1.14 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the 
Government as they have not narrated the steps so far taken to spread 
consumer awareness. Moreover, the Committee had recommended t o 
rope in well known celebrities to espouse the cause and also to reach 
the people through Gram Melas, etc. The Ministry in their reply have not 
indicated any steps taken in this direction. The Committee feel that 
people, specially in rural areas, will rel ate more with such programmes 
as compared to print or electronic media. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate that the Consumer awareness campaign should be made more 
broad based and mass oriented so as to educate the people about their 
consumer rights.  
 

  
(D) Need for Multimedia Campaign to make aware the rural people about 
their rights. 
Recommendation (Sl.No.9, Para 2.17) 
 
1.15 The Committee had recommended as follows: 
 
“The Committee further feel that the Department has to think 
of adopting entirely different techniques for consumer awareness in 
rural areas keeping in view the ground reality.   The illiterate and 
innocent rural poor consumers cannot take the advantage of 
sophisticated techniques of consumer helpline or online mechanism 
as introduced by the Department for redressal of consumers’ 
grievances. That foremost condition of using these techniques is a 
minimum level of education and awareness.  There is an urgent 
need to make these people aware of their rights and this can be 
achieved through simple techniques like street drama, musical 
drama, folk dances, nautanki, etc. in regional languages.  Song and 
Drama Division and Field Publicity Units of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting and Publicity Units of the State 
Governments should extensive ly be involved. Besides, as 
recommended in the earlier para of the report, the Committee 
emphasize that adequate outlay for consumer awareness should 
be provided so as to achieve the aforesaid objective.” 
 
1.16 In their action taken replies, the Ministry have stated as under: 
 
“To reach out to Rural areas, the Department has formulated 
the methodology of providing grants to States.. Since Panchayati 
Raj Institutions have access to the remotest areas where 
communication through traditional media has better o utreach, 
through this approach, PRIs would also have ownership over the 
Awareness Campaign.  PRIs Capacity Building is being proposed 
under separate scheme of the Department.   Involvement of State 
Governments will also help create a permanent structure by  
formulating a training programme to teachers regarding consumer 
clubs and also imparting training regarding methodology to 
approach redressal officer for resolution of consumer grievances.  
Involvement of local media and the conventional publicity methods  
such as ‘Nukkad Natak’, folk songs etc. can be best achieved by 
involving State Governments.      For carrying out the campaign in 
rural areas including North Eastern region, Song & Drama Division 
and Field Publicity Units of the Ministry of I&B and Publi city Units of 
the State Governments are also to be involved.  Song & Drama 
Division is a media unit of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting which performs wide -range of activities such as 
Drama, Dance -Drama, Puppetry, folk recitals, magic etc. to 
propagate policies through artists registered with the Division.  The 
successful implementation of programmes is ensured through 
special team of officers deputed to make visit to the places where 
programmes are being held and obtain first hand information o n the 

  
effectiveness of the programmes. Advertisements are being 
released in all the Journals of Publication Division of Ministry of 
Information & Broadcasting including regional languages. 
 
The Multi -media campaign to be organized at the Central 
level will  be duly complemented through the above efforts of the 
State Governments in achieving a holistic goal. The infrastructure 
of other Department having infrastructure all over the country such 
as Department of Railways, Post, Food& Public Distribution etc. wi ll 
also be utilized to deliver the messages all over the Country.” 

  
 
1.17 The Committee observe from the reply that though the Government 
have taken a number of steps to create awareness amongst the consumers 
in rural and backward areas and propose to orga nize multi media 
campaign, yet no target has been fixed to achieve the holistic goal. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the ground work relating to 
implementation of the Multi media campaign should be taken up on priority 
basis and the Government shoul d formulate a time frame for the same to 
ensure successful implementation of the schemes/projects in the rural 
areas.   

  
 
(E) Need to make the District Fora Functional 
Recommendation (Sl.No.12, Para No.3.23) 
1.18 The Committee had recommended as below: 
 
“The Committee note that a three tier quasi judicial redressal 
mechanism has been established at National, State and District 
levels as per the provisions made under the Consumer Protection 
Act, 1986 to resolve the consumer grievances speedily and 
cheaply. W hereas the responsibility of the National Commission 
rests with the Union Government, the responsibility of setting up as 
well as effective functioning of State Commissions and District Fora 
lies with the respective State Governments/Union Territory 
Administrations. The Union Government is further supplementing 
the efforts made by the State Governments by releasing one -time 
grants to District Fora for creating adequate infrastructure. Besides,  
various amendments in the aforesaid Act have been made for the 
smooth functioning of District Fora. In addition, the Department is 
taking proactive action to impress upon the State Governments to 
take desired action for the effective functioning of these Fora. 
Inspite of the best of the efforts made by the Union Gover nment, as 
many as 22 District Fora have been reported as non-functional. The 
Committee further note that non -functional District Fora exist in 
various States viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Nagaland, 
Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Kerala and 
Rajasthan. The various factors responsible for non -functional 
District Fora have been addressed in detail in the subsequent paras 
of the report. Here, the Committee may like to emphasize that the 
Department should find out State specific reasons  for non -
functional District Fora and pursuade the State Governments/Union 
Territory Administrations to take corrective action in this regard.  
Besides, the Committee recommend that the district forum should 
be constituted expeditiously in a newly created District.  The 
Committee may also be kept apprised.” 
 
1.19 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under: 
 
“The Central Government has been regularly taking up the 
matter with the States/UTs even at highest level requesting them to 
expedite corrective measures. Non -Functionality of Consumer Fora 
occurs mostly due to vacancy in posts of President/Members of 
Consumer Fora. The Central Government has been repeatedly 
requesting State Governments to take steps such as taking 
advance action for filling up expected vacancies of President & 
Members and panel of candidates, etc. so that vacancies are filled 
up expeditiously. To ensure that Consumer Fora remain functional, 
States are also requested to club adjacent Consumer Fora 
wherever required. Be sides this, Consumer Protection Act, 1986 

  
has also been amended to provide for the Senior Most Member to 
preside over the Consumer Fora if the President is absent for any 
reasons. However, due to various unforeseen contingencies also, 
unexpected vacancies may arise. The procedure for filling of 
vacancies also takes time and despite best efforts, some Consumer 
Fora remain non-functional. This number fluctuates and varies from 
time to time.               
 
In addition, the performance of all Consumer Fora are also 
analysed regularly State -wise though their Monthly & Quarterly 
periodical reports by this Department and remedial actions are 
suggested accordingly. The matter has also been recently taken up 
by Secretary Consumer Affairs with Chief Secretaries of Sta te 
Government on 06.11.2007 emphasizing the concerns of the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee in this regard.” 
 

  
 
 
1.20 In their original Report, the Committee were concerned to note that 
despite the best efforts made by the Government, as many as 22 Distri ct 
Fora had been reported as non -functional. The Committee had, therefore,  
recommended that State specific reasons for the non -functioning of 
District Fora be found out and State/UTs be pursuaded to take corrective 
action in the matter. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the 
Government which states that the non -functioning of District Fora was 
mainly due to vacancies in the posts of Presidents/Members, as they 
themselves have stated in the action taken reply that the Consumer 
Protection Act,  1986 has been amended to provide for the senior most 
member to preside over the Consumer Fora in the absence of President. 
The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation desire the 
Government to persuade the State Governments to take advance  action to 
avoid procedural delay in filling of expected vacancies of President and 
Members.  

  
(F) Ensuring speedy disposal of cases by setting up of Lok Adalat 
/Circuit Benches 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.14, Para 3.25) 
 
1.21 In the aforesaid para, the Committee had recommended as below: 
 
“While noting the State -wise position of disposal of cases, 
the Committee find that in some of the States, the position is not 
satisfactory. As regards the performance of State Commissions, 
worse is the position in Uttar Prade sh and Mizoram where the 
percentage disposal is only 29.13 and 33.70 per cent, respectively. 
In progressive State of Maharashtra, the percentage disposal of 
cases is just 56.19 per cent. As regards the position of District Fora 
in Bihar, Dadra and Nagar Ha veli, Jammu and Kashmir, Mizoram, 
Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, the percentage disposal of cases is less 
than 80 per cent. The Secretary during the course of oral evidence 
has acknowledged that the time limit of disposal of cases 
prescribed under the Act i.e. within 90 to 150 days is seldom 
adhered to. The Secretary has also informed that in Punjab, a novel 
way of clearing the backlog of cases by holding the Lok Adalats has 
been adopted.  Further, the Committee while examining the 
Demands for Grants (2007 -08) (re fer Para 4.22 of Nineteenth 
Report) had also been informed that an amendment to the 
Consumer Protection Act to have Circuit Benches or Circuit Sharing 
Mechanism by District Fora is being worked out. In the system of 
Circuit Benches or Circuit Sharing, Dist rict Fora may hold their 
sittings at the Tehsil or Block Headquarters in case there are large 
number of cases. The Committee feel that the system of Lok 
Adalats adopted by the Punjab Government needs to be replicated 
in other States where there is bulk pen dency of cases. Besides, 
there is an urgent need to take an early decision on the issue of 
Circuit Benches or Circuit Sharing Mechanism by District Fora for 
speedier disposal of cases pending with respective District Forum. 
The Committee recommend to the D epartment to take the desired 
action in this regard. The Committee also recommend that the 
Department should review the position of pendency of cases on 
quarterly basis and issue necessary instructions to the respective 
State Governments for speedier disposal of cases.” 
 
1.22 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under: 
 
“The National Commission, which has the administrative 
control to oversee the functioning of State Commissions and 
District Fora throughout the country under the provisi ons of Section 
24B of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, have already instructed 
State Commissions to ensure disposal of cases on the pattern of 
Lok Adalat Method.  As regards the issue of holding of Circuit 
Benches by the District Fora, an amendment propo sal is already 

  
under consideration. The Department is already reviewing the 
position of pendency of cases not only on quarterly basis but also 
on monthly basis through Quarterly & Monthly Progress Reports, 
and also taking it up with the respective States f or speedier 
disposal of cases along with suggestions for holding Lok Adalat on 
the last working day of every week to minimize the pendancy of 
cases.  

  
 
1.23 The Committee had found in their original Report that the State -wise 
position of disposal of cases by the District Fora was not satisfactory. The 
Committee feel that the delay in the disposal of cases defeats the very 
purpose of formation of Consumer Fora.   They had emphasized the need 
of replicating the system of Lok Adalats adopted by the Punjab 
Government by all the States where there is bulk pendency of cases.  The 
Committee had also emphasized the need for an early decision on the 
issue of Circuit Benches or Circuit Sharing Mechanism by District Fora for 
speedier disposal of cases.  The Government,  in their action taken notes 
have stated that as regards the issue of holding of Circuit Benches by the 
District Fora, an amendment to the provisions of the Section 24B of the 
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 was under consideration.  The Committee 
recommend that the proposed amendment should be brought before the 
Parliament without further delay. 
  
 

  
 
(G) Ensuring adequate supporting staff for District Fora 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 19, Para No. 3.30) 
 
1.24 The Committee had recommended as below: 
 
“Besides the problem of vacancies, various Consumer Fora 
are also facing the shortage of adequate supporting staff. The 
Committee have been apprised that supporting staff for District 
Fora is normally borrowed from the local Food and Civil Supply 
Department of the State Government. The Committee note that the 
casual approach of the State Governments in this regard has led to 
the ineffective functioning of District Fora. The Committee 
recommend that there should be All India /State service which can 
cater to the need of supporting staff of different levels of Consumer 
Fora at National, State and District Level.” 
 
 
1.25 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under: 
 
“The issue of establishment of State service which can cater 
to the need of supporting st aff of different levels of Consumer Fora 
at State & District level has been taken up with the State 
Governments vide this Department’s D.O. letter No. 5(4)/2007 - 
CPU dated 06.11.2007.” 

  
 
 
1.26 While noting that the supporting staff for District Fora was no rmally 
borrowed from the local Departments, the Committee in their report had 
recommended that there should be an All India/State Service which can 
cater to the need of supporting staff of different levels of Consumer Fora at 
National, State and District L evel. The Government in the action taken 
notes have stated that the issue of establishment of State service has been 
taken up with the State Governments vide a D.O. dated 06.11.2007. 
Apparently, the Government have absolved themselves of the 
responsibility merely by issuing a D.O. letter, that too about 8 months back 
and thereafter not pursuing the matter further. The Committee deplore the 
lackadaisical manner of handling their important recommendation by the 
Government. They feel that without adequate supp orting staff, the District 
Fora will remain ineffective.  The Committee therefore, desire that the issue 
may be taken up at the highest levels with the State Governments so as to 
make the District Fora function effectively.  

  
 
(H) Creation of State Welfare Fund 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 23, Para No. 4.22) 
 
1.27 The Committee had recommended as below: 
 
“The Committee further note that the Department has 
decided to decentralize and transfer the Consumer Awareness and 
Consumer Club Schemes of the State Governments/Union Territory 
Administrations with effect from 1 April, 2004. To supplement the 
efforts made by the States/UTs in this regard, the Government has 
decided to make a one -time contribution of an amount 
proportionate to the number of districts by the Cent re and the State 
Governments in the ratio of 50:50 (Centre:State). In case of special 
category States, the aforesaid ratio is 90:10 (Centre:State). The 
Committee have further been informed that so far 19 States and 
UTs have been sanctioned grants from Cent re Consumer Welfare 
Fund for the purpose. Further, 16 States are yet to apply/receive 
assistance for the State/Local Consumer Welfare Fund. The 
Department has informed that the aforesaid States/UTs could not 
avail the assistance/Central share of seed money  because they 
have not yet credited the State share in permanent non -lapsable, 
non-plan account. The Committee would like the Department to 
pursue further with the aforesaid States so that the Consumer 
Welfare Fund is set up expeditiously to promote the Co nsumer 
Movement throughout the country.” 
 
 
1.28 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under: 
 
“So far 19 States have availed funds to set up their own 
State Consumer Welfare Fund. The remaining    State Govts./UTs 
Administration are being repeatedly reminded to avail of the benefit 
of the Central Share of seed money to set up their own State CWF 
and formulate and notify State CWF guidelines. The delay is due to 
the fact that some States/UTs are yet to allocate in their own 
budget the amo unt to be deposited in CWF as their share and 
credit it to a separate account after which only central share is 
released. In all the meetings of the State Secretaries of the Food 
and Civil Supplies this issue has been discussed and it is hoped 
that the State Govts. /UTs Administrations shall take prompt action 
towards availing the benefit of Central grant of seed money.” 
 
List of the States who have set up their State Consumer Welfare Fund in 
the last one year (4/2007 to 3/2008) : 
 
S.No. Name of States Amount  sanctioned 
1.  Kerala 15,00,000 
2. TamilNadu 50,00,000 
3.  Sikkim  9,00,000 (In three instalments) 

  
 
1.29 The Committee in their earlier Report had noted that 19 States had 
been sanctioned grants from Central Consumer Welfare Fund to create 
State Welfare Fund and out of these 19 States, 16 States were yet to apply 
for the State Consumer Welfare Fund. The Committee had recommended 
that the Department should pursue the matter further with the remaining 
States so that State Consumer Welfare Fund are set  up expeditiously. The 
Committee desire that the remaining State Governments should be 
impressed upon to take prompt action towards availing the benefit of 
Central Grant of seed money, in a time bound manner.   
  

  
(I) Formulation of Guidelines for State Welfare Fund 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 24, Para No. 4.23) 
 
1.30 The Committee had recommended as below: 
  
“The Committee note from the information made available by 
the Department that out of 19 States which have been sanctioned 
grant from Central Consumer Welfare Fund, 11 States/UTs have so 
far not submitted the guidelines for State Consumer Welfare Fund. 
The Committee also note that the organizations receiving grant 
from the Consumer Welfare Fund are required to follow the 
Consumer Welfare Fund Rules, 1992 an d the guidelines for 
sanction of grants from the Consumer Welfare Fund. The 
Committee fail to understand non-submission of status of framing of 
guidelines for State Consumer Welfare Fund by most of the State 
Governments. The Committee are of the view that there is an 
urgent need to have strict monitoring of the implementation of 
various activities for which funding is being granted out of the 
Consumer Welfare Fund. The Committee would like the 
Department to get the information from the aforesaid State 
Governments and submit to the Committee. Further, the States 
which have not so far framed the guidelines should be asked to do 
this expeditiously.” 
 
1.31 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under: 
 
The present status of States that have av ailed seed money 
to set up State CWF and notified guidelines are given at Annexure -
A.  States are being reminded on this regularly.  In the Standing 
Committee set up under State CWF, Jt. Secretary of this 
Department or his nominee is a member.  This Commit tee monitors 
the utilization of funds from State CWF. The Status of financial 
assistance for setting up of State Consumer Welfare Fund of 
Govt./UTs is as under:- 
 
S.No. State (no. of distt.) Amount released 
(Rs).  
 
1 Andhra Pradesh(23)  25,00,000 
2 Chhattisgarh(16)  25,00,000 
3 Goa(2)    4,50,000 
4 Gujarat(25)  22,50,000 
5 Haryana(19)  25,00,000 
6 Karnataka(27)  47,00,000 
7 Maharashtra(35)  46,50,000 
8 Orissa(30)  47,00,000 
9 Punjab(17)  10,00,000 
10 Rajasthan(32)  27,00,000 
11 TamilNadu(29)  50,00,000 
12 Uttar Pradesh (80)  50,00,000 

  
13 Uttaranchal(13)  12,00,000 
14 West Bengal(18)  25,00,000 
15 Sikkim(4)    9,00,000 
16 Mizoram(8)  27,00,000 
17 Arunachal Pradesh(15)  27,00,000 
18 J&k(14)  27,00,000 
19 Tripura(4)    9,00,000 
 TOTAL: Rs. 
 
5,15,00,000 
 

  
 
1.32 The Committee in their original Report had noted that out of 19 
States which had been sanctioned grant from Central Consumer Welfare 
Fund, 11 States/UTs had not submitted the guidelines for State Consumer 
Welfare Fund. The Committee had desired that the States which had not so 
far framed the guidelines should be asked to do so expeditiously as the 
organizations receiving grants from Consumer Welfare Fund were required 
to follow the Consumer Welfare Fund Rules, 1992 and the guidelines. I n 
reply, the Government, while stating that 19 States have availed seed 
money and notified guidelines, have indicated the status of financial 
assistance availed by each of them for setting up of State Consumer 
Welfare Fund. It has also been stated that the  remaining States are being 
reminded regularly. The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation 
and urge upon the Ministry to persuade the other State Governments also 
to notify the guidelines for sanction of grants to have strict monitoring of 
the implementation of various activities for which fund is being granted out 
of Consumer Welfare Fund.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
(J) Blacklisting of defaulting NGOs 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 25, Para No. 4.24) 
 
1.33 In the aforementioned para, the Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants 
(2007-08) had expressed serious concern over non -utilization of 
funds earmarked for the schemes/projects out of Consumer 
Welfare Fund (refer Para 4.54 of Nineteenth Report). The 
Committee had noted that only one -fourth of the amount provided 
under Consumer Welfare Fund was being used by the State 
Governments. The Committee had also expressed serious concern 
over non -submission of Utilization Certificates by various 
NGOs/VCOs. The Committee are of the  firm opinion that an 
effective monitoring is required to ensure that only credible 
NGOs/VCOs are provided funding out of the Consumer Welfare 
Fund. The Committee would like to be apprised of the number of 
NGOs/VCOs who have been provided assistance from t he 
Consumer Welfare Fund so far, along with the number of 
NGOs/VCOs who have been blacklisted. The Committee would like 
to reiterate their earlier recommendation to put the name of the 
blacklisted NGOs on the website of the Department so as to ensure 
that no Government funding is made to these blacklisted NGOs.” 
 
1.34 In their action taken replies, the Ministry have stated as under: 
 
 
“The State Govts. and Distt. Magistrates are being 
repeatedly reminded to take action against the defaulting 
NGOs/VCOs ( Who have not submitted their Utilisation Certificates 
so far) to obtain Utilisation Certificates or effect recovery of the 
CWF grant together with penal interest from them. The State Govts. 
and Distt. Administration have taken action and in quite a few cases 
the defaulting organizations have submitted the Utilisation 
Certificate and other settlement documents. 
  
  As a follow up of the earlier recommendations of the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee the State Govts. have been 
advised to take up appropriate acti on against the defaulting 
organizations. 
 
The number of NGOs who had been provided grant from the 
Consumer Welfare Fund but not submitted Utilisation Certificates 
are at Annexure -B-I.  A list of such NGOs who have not provided 
UC have been posted in the we bsite of this Department.   One 
NGO namely “Society for Emancipating Neo Social Education, 
DCIC-Shivagangai Distt. of Tamil Nadu” has been blacklisted on 
the basis of recommendation of the State Government.” 

  
 
1.35 The Committee are unhappy with the vague reply of the Government 
as they find that no sincere efforts have been made for the recovery of 
outstanding amounts released to the NGOs/VCOs out of the Consumer 
Welfare Fund. The Committee note that there are a number of NGOs who 
have not yet submitted th e Utilization Certificates for the funds released to 
them 10-12 years back which reflects the evasive denial on the part of the 
Government.  The Committee are also dismayed at the fact that till now 
only one NGO has been blacklisted when there are so many defaulters.  
The Committee want to know the reason for delay in the recovery of 
outstanding dues from the defaulting NGOs.  The Committee desire that the 
Government should take up the matter with the State Government at the 
highest level and ensure that ou tstanding amount alongwith interest 
thereon is recovered from the defaulting NGOs by the end of the financial 
year.  The Committee would also like the Government to ensure that none 
of these defaulting NGOs get grants again under any scheme run by the 
Central Government.   
 
 
 

  
(K) Setting up of Consumer clubs in schools/colleges 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 26, Para No. 4.25) 
 
1.36 The Committee had recommended as follows: 
 
“The Committee further note that ‘Consumer Clubs’ is one of 
the schemes operated under Co nsumer Welfare Fund (CWF). 
Under the aforesaid scheme, a consumer club is to be set up in 
middle, higher and higher -secondary school/college affiliated to a 
Government Recognized Board and a grant of  Rs. 10,000 per 
Consumer Club in the schools/colleges is  admissible under this 
scheme. The Committee note that Consumer Clubs could be set up 
only in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Tripura, West Bengal, 
Maharashtra and NCT of Delhi. The Committee note that for 
effective Consumer Movement in the country, children  need to be 
involved and Consumer Clubs are the best way for instilling in 
children the spirit of protection of consumer rights. The Committee 
would, therefore, like the Department to pursue further with the 
remaining States/UTs to ensure that Consumer Clu bs are set up in 
each of the schools/colleges.” 
 
1.37 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under: 
“The list of States  that have availed funds under the scheme 
and  set up consumer clubs are given below.  The detailed list has 
also been posted on the web site.” 
 
S.No. State (no. of distt.) No. of schools 
1 2 3 
1.  Andhra Pradesh(23) 977 
2.  Chhattisgarh(16) 250 
3.  Gujarat(25) 250 
4.  Haryana(19) 135 
5.  Karnataka(27) 650 
6.  Maharashtra(35) 500 
7.  Orissa(30) 500 
8.  Punjab(17) 250 
9.  Rajasthan(32) 1000 
10 TamilNadu(29) 1000 
11. Uttaranchal(13) 100 
12 West Bengal(18) 400 
13 Himachal Pradesh(12) 36 
14 Sikkim(4) 50 
15 Mizoram(8) 100 
16 Arunachal Pradesh(15) 32 
17 Lakshadweep(1) 21 
18 J&k 153 
19 Tripura(4) 27 
20 Puducherry(4) 50 
21 Kerala(14) 100 
              TOTAL: 6581 

  
 
 
1.38 While noting that Consumer Clubs had been set up only in the States 
of Andhra Pradesh, Tripura, West Bengal, Maharashtra & NCT of Delhi, the 
Committee in their earlier report had desired the Department to pursue with 
the remaining States/UTs to set up Consumer Clubs in each of the 
schools/colleges. While appreciating that 21 States have availed funds 
under the scheme to set up Consumer Clubs, the Committee desire that the 
Government should continue its efforts to ensur e that all schools/colleges 
set up consumer clubs which would help the youngsters in getting 
acquainted with the concept of Consumer Awareness.  Reiterating their 
earlier recommendations, the Committee desire that the Government 
should also pursue with suc h States/UTs which do not have a single 
consumer club in any of their schools/colleges, to set up the Consumer 
Clubs without further delay.      

  
(L) Smooth functioning of DCPCs 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 27, Para No. 4.26) 
 
1.39 The Committee had recommended as below: 
 
“The Committee note that Central Consumer Protection 
Councils were set up at Centre and State levels to promote and 
protect the rights of the Consumers. Consumer Protection Act 
mandates the States to establish District Consumer Redressal 
Councils at the District Level to strengthen consumer movement at 
the grass-root level.   The Committee note that the performance of 
Central, State and District Consumer Protection Councils (DCPCs) 
is far from satisfactory.  The Committee feel that these agencie s 
need to be made more accountable, responsible and effective so 
as to ensure justice at the doorsteps of consumers.  The 
Committee note that these Councils have been entrusted with the 
responsibility of raising issues concerning welfare of consumers 
and also give recommendations to this effect.  The Committee note 
with concern that the sittings of Consumer Protection Councils are 
not held regularly.  At times, meetings are not held at all.  The 
Committee feel that there is a need to place a mechanism by wh ich 
sitting of the Council be convened, if 2/3rd Members of the Council 
so desire.  The Committee also feel that though the 
recommendations of the Councils are not binding on the 
Government still, due consideration needs to be given to the 
recommendations of these Councils.  The Committee note that 
District Consumer Protection Councils are headed by District 
Magistrates who are unable to devote much time due to their 
preoccupation in other pressing matters.  As such, District 
Magistrates are not able to do justice to these bodies. The 
Committee desire that Government should find ways and means 
and ensure that officials, who can devote time and energy, head 
these bodies and able to do justice to the work assigned.” 
 
1.40 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under: 
 
“The observations of the Committee have been noted and 
conveyed to the State Governments/UT Administrations for 
remedial action vide this Department’s D.O. letter No. 5(4)/2007 - 
CPU dated 06.11.2007 from Secretary, Consumer Affa irs to Chief 
Secretaries of all States/UTs. 
 
It may be further stated here that as per section 8A of the 
Consumer Protection Act, 1986, the District Consumer Protection 
Council would be chaired by the Collector of the District (by 
whatever name called). Th is provision has been made since the 
Collector being the head of the District Administration is the highest 
official in the District & has the powers to take all necessary steps 
to ensure welfare of consumers.” 
 

  
 
1.41 The Committee note that as per Sectio n 8A of the Consumer 
Protection Act,1986, the District Consumer Protection Councils (DCPCs) 
are chaired by the District Magistrate/Collector as he is the highest official 
in the district and has the powers to take all necessary steps to ensure the 
welfare of consumers. The Committee feel that a provision should be made 
in the Act that in the absence of DM/DC, the next Senior Officer in rank 
should chair the meeting of DCPCs, so that work of DCPCs do not suffer on 
account of non availability of DM or Collector.  

  
(M) Implementation of  recommendations of  Working Group 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 32, Para No. 6.3) 
 
1.42 The Committee had recommended as below: 
 
“The Committee note that a number of Working Groups have 
been set up by the Government to consider ways and means of 
protecting the interests of consumers. Such Working Groups 
include, ‘Food Safety’, ‘Misleading Advertisement’, ‘Drugs, 
Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices/Equipments’, ‘Consumer 
Health and Safety concerning Tobacco & Tobacco Products’, 
‘Counterfeit, Fake, Spurious and Contraband products’. A Working 
Group has also been set up for suggesting improvement in the 
existing Acts relating to the interests of consumers.  The Committee 
understand that Reports of some of the Working Groups have been 
submitted and others are still under the consideration of the 
Government.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
recommendations made by each of the Working Group set up for 
the purpose and the follow up action taken by the Government.  
The Committee would like that the Department should regularly 
follow up the implementation of these recommendations with the 
concerned Ministries.  The Committee would also like to be 
informed of the steps taken by the Government in amending the 
relevant statutes, on th e lines suggested by the Working Group for 
the purpose.” 
 
1.43 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under: 
 
“The Working Group on Food safety; Working Group on 
Drugs, Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices/Equipment; Working 
Group on Cons umer Health & Safety concerning Tobacco & 
Tobacco Products; Working Group on Counterfeit, fake, spurious 
and contraband Products and Working Group to suggest 
Amendment to the Consumer Protection Act have submitted their 
recommendations to the Government, w hich have been forwarded 
to the concerned Ministries/Departments and Agencies concerned 
for taking appropriate action. It may be appreciated that the 
recommendations made by these Working Groups are not binding 
on the Government as these are only advisory in nature. The 
Working Group on Misleading Advertisement has yet to finalize its 
report as it has decided to await the recommendations of the 
Committee, constituted by the Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting to review the Programming of Advertisement co des 
prescribed under the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 
1995 and Rules framed thereunder and the guidelines for 
certification of films prescribed under the Cinematograph Act, 1952. 
The said Committee is still to finalize its recommendations as  per 
information made available by the Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting. The Working Group to suggest further amendments 
to the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 and formulation of new 

  
legislation has also submitted its report to the Government. The 
Working Group has only made recommendations for further 
amendments to the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. As regard new 
legislation, the Working Group observed that other 
Ministries/Departments were already engaged in such exercise in 
bringing new legislations such as Builder Licensing Board Act, 
Public Interest Disclosure (Protection of Informers) Bill, Whistle 
Blowers Protection Act, etc. Hence, the Working Group felt it should 
not duplicate the efforts. As regards product liability and unfair 
terms of contract, the Working Group recommended for appropriate 
amendments in the Consumer Protection Act 1986 itself. The 
recommendations made by the Working Groups with regard to 
further amendments to the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 have 
been taken into consideration  by this Department while formulating 
the draft proposals for fourth Amendment to the Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986 which is being finalized in consultation with the 
Ministry of Law & Justice.” 

  
 
1.44 The Committee in their earlier report had desired to be  informed of 
the steps taken by the Government in amending the relevant statutes on 
the lines suggested by working groups set up by the Government to 
consider ways and means of protecting interests of the Consumers. The 
Government in the action taken notes  have stated that certain 
recommendations suggesting amendments to the Consumer Protection 
Act, 1986 made by the Working Group have been taken into consideration 
while formulating draft proposal for the amendment to the Act which is 
being finalized in cons ultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice.  The 
Committee desire that the Government should bring the amendment Bill 
before the Parliament at the earliest.   
 
 
 

  
(N) Obtaining feedback on working of CGRC 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.35, Para No.8.6) 
 
1.45 The Committee had recommended as below: 
 
“The Committee further note that the working of the Cell is being 
reviewed by the Government from time to time.  In this regard, the 
Committee would like to be informed about the mechanism of 
getting feedback from consu mers to know about the satisfaction 
level of the consumers.” 
 
1.46 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under: 
 
“The CGRC and CCC are trying to resolve the complaints of the 
consumers to their satisfaction with mutual understanding of both 
the parties as CGRC and CCC (CORE Center) have no statutory 
powers. There is no formal mechanism of getting feedback from 
satisfied consumers.” 
 

  
 
 
1.47 The Committee in their earlier Report had recommended that there 
should be a proper mechanism in p lace to obtain feedback from the 
consumers regarding the working of the Consumer Grievance Redressal 
Cell.  The Government in their Action Taken Reply have stated that there is 
no formal mechanism of getting feedback from satisfied consumers. The 
Committee are of the opinion that feedback from the consumer is very 
important as he is the best judge about the services provided by any 
authority. In the absence of proper feedback from consumers, the working 
of the cell cannot be reviewed.  The Committee urge th e Government to 
find some means so that a proper feedback regarding functioning of the 
cell can be obtained from consumers whose grievances have been 
redressed.  The Government should also invite suggestions regarding 
enhancing efficiency of the cell from the affected parties.   
 
 

  
 
(O) Need to bring mandatory municipal services under the ambit of 
Consumer Protection Act 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.44, Para No.10.17) 
 
1.48 The Committee had recommended as below: 
 
“The Committee note that services rendered on 
consideration are included within the purview of the present 
Consumer Protection Act. In the opinion of the Committee, one of 
the major problem areas has been deficiencies on the part of 
Municipalities in providing services which are mandatory in nature.  
These services include health, medical service, garbage disposal, 
drinking water, drainage, etc.  The Committee have been informed 
that one of the Working Groups set up in connection with protection 
of consumer interest had recommended to bring all mandatory 
Municipal services within the ambit of this Act.  However, the 
proposal, after due consideration and consultation, was finally 
deferred as the service providers from State Governments as well 
as many Central Ministries/Departments expressed their inability  to 
provide expected standards due to various resources and capacity 
constraints.  The Committee are pained to note that the 
Government preferred administration and financial constraints over 
the interests of consumers and deferred the proposal, on the 
pretext that this is not the appropriate stage for such a provision.  
The Committee feel that the reasons stated above for deferring the 
proposal are merely delaying tactics on the part of both Central and 
State Governments who are shirking their responsibili ty towards 
citizens and consumers and denying them a right to good living. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the recommendation of 
the Working Group to include all mandatory Municipal services 
within the ambit of this Act be implemented in letter an d spirit so as 
to ensure best services to the consumers.” 
 
 
1.49 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under: 
 
“Due to the fact that majority of the Ministries/Departments, 
States/UTs are not supporting it also because of administrative  & 
financial implications involved, it has been decided to defer the 
proposal to amend the Act to include mandatory services such as 
Municipal services etc. under the definition of ‘service’ in the Act. 
As the responses have been overwhelmingly against inc lusion of 
this proposal, it may not be appropriate to revisit the proposal at 
this stage.” 

  
 
1.50 In their original Report, the Committee had recommended that the 
recommendation of the working group to include all mandatory municipal 
services within the am bit of Consumer Protection Act, 1986 be 
implemented in letter and spirit so as to ensure best services to the 
consumers. The Committee are not convinced with the action taken reply 
of the Ministry which states that as the response from the States/UTs was 
against the inclusion of this proposal, it might not be appropriate to revisit 
the proposal at this stage. As earlier emphasized in their Report, the 
Committee feel that administrative and financial constraints should not be 
preferred over the interests of the consumers.  The Committee, therefore, 
would like to reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that the 
matter may be given a re-thought keeping in view the right of the consumer 
to good living. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard.  
 

  
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.1,  Para No.1.6) 
 
2.1 The Committee note that the consumer movement in India is as old as 
trade and commerce. But there was no orga nized and systematic movement to 
safeguard the interests of the consumers. Prior to Independence, consumers’ 
interests were considered mainly under laws such as the Indian Penal Code, 
Agricultural Production, Grading and Marketing Act, 1937 and Drugs and 
Cosmetic Act, 1940, etc.  Poverty, illiteracy and lack of consciousness to assert 
one’s rights were some of the main reasons for low level of consumer awareness 
in the country.  As such, trade and industry and other service providers easily 
exploited the consumers. Policies were then designed and legislations enacted to 
protect the interests of the consumers.  The consumers were given the right of 
choice, safety, information and redressal mechanism.  A separate Department of 
Consumer Affairs was created in t he Central Government in 1997 to exclusively 
focus on protecting the rights of consumers.  
 
Reply of Government 
 
 2.2 The general observation made by the Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution has been noted. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C  Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.2, Para No. 1.7) 
 
2.3 Setting up of a three -tier quasi -judicial mechanism to address the 
complaints of the c onsumers at National, State and District level was another 
milestone in the history of consumer movement in India. The National 
Commission at the Central level and State Commissions and District fora in 
some of the States/Union Territories are doing commendable work. However, the 
working of State Commissions and District Fora in some of the States is not upto 
the mark.  To supplement the efforts being made by the State Governments for 
strengthening the consumer movement in various parts of the country, gran ts are 
being provided by the Union Government. Inspite of best of the efforts made by 
the Union Government and State Governments, a lot still needs to be done. It 
was acknowledged by the Secretary during the course of oral evidence that as 
compared to deve loping countries,  there is a long way to go before we can 
reach the level of even the lesser -developed countries in protecting the interests 
of consumers. 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
2.4 Under the provisions of Section 24B of the Consumer Protection Act, 
1986, the National Commission is mandated to monitor the functioning of State 
Commissions and District Fora in the country. It regularly calls for returns from 
them and also gives directions where necessary. The National Commission also 
holds Conferences/me etings with Presidents, State Commissions and 
Secretaries in -charge of Consumer Affairs in States/UTs at least once a year. 
Besides, the performance of all Consumer Fora are also analysed regularly 
State-wise though their Monthly and Quarterly periodical r eports by this 
Department and remedial actions are suggested accordingly. However, taking 
into account the functioning of the Consumer Fora, the overall percentage 
disposal of cases as on 31/3/2008 is 88.09% and the same at National 
Commission, State Commi ssions and District Fora is 82.08%, 73.81% and 
90.69% respectively. It can be observed therefrom that the overall percentage of 
cases filed in Consumer Fora is quite good despite all the constraints faced by 
them. However, it may be stated here that the De partment will continue to follow 
up measures which would take the consumer movement forward. In order to 
strengthen the consumer movement and to protect the interests of consumers to 
the level of developed/developing countries all the concerns of the Commi ttee 
has also been taken up with Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs on 6.11.2007 for 
their appropriate action. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 1.8) 
 
2.5 The Committee have dealt in detail the various issues related to consumer 
movement in the report and various observations/recommendations have been 
made.  The Committee urge the Department to chalk out detailed strategy related 
to consumer awareness and consumer protection in consultation with the State 
Governments/NGOs/VCOs/ local bodies and all other stakeholders on the lines 
suggested by the Committee in the report.  
 
Reply of Government 
 
 2.6 The Department  ha s noted the suggestion of Committee  and prepared 
detailed media plan in coordination with all the stake holders such as State Govt, 
Voluntary consumer  organizations and others . To ensure that the involvement 
of the State Government is very distinctively  spelt out, the respective State 
Governments are being advised to send detailed proposals for grants. 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 

  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.8 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No.  2.10) 
 
2.7 The Committee find that the consumer protection unit of the Department of 
Consumer Affairs had been allocated a meagre allocation of Rs.12.8 4 crore 
during the Ninth Plan.  During the Tenth Plan, initially the allocation was made for 
only Rs.15.50 crore.  However, during the last two years of the Tenth Plan i.e. 
the year 2005 -06 and 2006 -07, the allocation for consumer protection was 
enhanced c onsiderably. The Committee further find that a Working Group of 
Consumer Protection has submitted its comprehensive report containing 
recommendations for the Eleventh Plan to the Planning Commission.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the recommendations made 
by the Working Group.  Besides the Committee would like that Planning 
Commission/Ministry of Finance should be persuaded to provide adequate outlay 
during the Eleventh Plan for the consumer protection and awareness 
programmes so  as to bring out sustained countrywide multimedia publicity 
programmes.   
 
Reply of Government 
 
2.8 The Working Group on Consumer Protection, constituted by the Planning 
Commission for the Eleventh Plan, has submitted its report on 31.10.2007.  A 
copy of e xecutive summary, giving details of the recommendations made by the 
Working Group is at Annexure –I.  Based on the recommendations of the 
Working Group the Planning Commission has provided an allocation of Rs. 1083 
cr. for the Eleventh Plan.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 8, Para No.2.16 ) 
 
 
2.9 The Committee feel that the consumer awareness programme shall not 
yield the desi red results, until and unless the focus of targets is villages, tribal 
and inaccessible far flung areas.  The Committee desire that aggressive 
campaigning about consumer protection needs to be stepped up in these 
vulnerable areas.  The literature brought o ut by the Department for example 
‘Upbhokta Jagaran’, needs to be brought out in regional languages.  The video 
and radio Programmes for creating awareness should not only be              
televised /broadcasted by public broadcast but also be shown in cable /private TV 
Channels.  The Committee desire that they may be apprised of the action taken 
by the Government in this regard.  
 

  
 
Reply of Government 
 
 
 2.10 The recommendation of the committee of focusing the campaign will be to 
a greater extent towards vill ages/rural and tribal areas has been noted.  Efforts 
will be made to ensure that the messages of the awareness campaign would 
reach the remotest corner of the country. 
  As per the existing government directions all the advertisements are 
released through Directorate of Advertising & Visual Publicity(DAVP) in the 
empanelled  channels/ broadcasters at approved DAVP rates.  We are advising 
the State Governments/UT administrations that the private local 
channels/broadcasters that are not empanelled with DAVP   may be utilized for 
creating consumer awareness at local level from the funds released to them by 
following proper procedures. DAVP guidelines also provide for coverage of 
newspaper in regional languages. 
  Further the target audiences are both urban and rural consumer from all 
segments of society belonging to all age group. Considering the fact that active 
involvement of State Governments in awareness campaign is crucial in taking 
forward the movement to rural, remote and backward areas, it has been decid ed 
to associate the State/UT Governments in expanding the area of consumer 
awareness, and hence the provisos for grant in -aid/support to States/UTs should 
be a component of the Consumer awareness  scheme. Accordingly Department 
has released Rs.11.71 crores  during 2006 -08 States/UTs  to run  awareness 
campaign at local level in local languages.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G 11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.17) 
 
 
2.11 The Committee further feel that the Department has to think of adopting 
entirely different techniques for consumer awareness in rural areas keeping in 
view the ground reality.   The illiterate and innocent rural poor consumers ca nnot 
take the advantage of sophisticated techniques of consumer helpline or online 
mechanism as introduced by the Department for redressal of consumers’ 
grievances. That foremost condition of using these techniques is a minimum level 
of education and aware ness.  There is an urgent need to make these people 
aware of their rights and this can be achieved through simple techniques like 
street drama, musical drama, folk dances, nautanki, etc. in regional languages.  
Song and Drama Division and Field Publicity U nits of the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting and Publicity Units of the State Governments should 
extensively be involved. Besides, as recommended in the earlier para of the 
report, the Committee emphasize that adequate outlay for consumer awareness  
should be provided so as to achieve the aforesaid objective. 
 
 
 

  
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 2.12 To reach out to Rural areas, the Department has formulated the 
methodology of providing grants to States.. Since Panchayati Raj Institutions 
have access to the re motest areas where communication through traditional 
media has better outreach, through this approach, PRIs would also have 
ownership over the Awareness Campaign.  PRIs Capacity Building is being 
proposed under separate scheme of the Department.   Involvem ent of State 
Governments will also help create a permanent structure by formulating a 
training programme to teachers regarding consumer clubs and also imparting 
training regarding methodology to approach redressal officer for resolution of 
consumer grievances.  Involvement of local media and the conventional publicity 
methods such as ‘Nukkad Natak’, folk songs etc. can be best achieved by 
involving State Governments.      For carrying out the campaign in rural areas 
including North Eastern region, Song & Dr ama Division and Field Publicity Units 
of the Ministry of I&B and Publicity Units of the State Governments are also to be 
involved.  Song & Drama Division is a media unit of the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting which performs wide -range of activiti es such as Drama, 
Dance-Drama, Puppetry, folk recitals, magic etc. to propagate policies through 
artists registered with the Division.  The successful implementation of 
programmes is ensured through special team of officers deputed to make visit to 
the places where programmes are being held and obtain first hand information 
on the effectiveness of the programmes.  Advertisements are being released in 
all the Journals of Publication Division of Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting including regional languages. 
 
  The Multi-media campaign to be organised at the Central level will be duly 
complemented through the above efforts of the State Governments in achieving 
a holistic goal. The infra structure of other Department having infrastructure all 
over the co untry such as Department of Railway, Post, Food and Public 
Distribution etc will also be utilized to deliver the messages all over the Country. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
(Please see Para no.1.17 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.18 ) 
 
 
2.13  With the enactment of the Constitution 73rd Amendment Act, 1992 
elected Panchayati Raj Ins titutions exist in almost every State/UT. The 
Department should take the desired initiatives to involve Panchayati Raj 
Institutions in various programmes related to consumer awareness. Besides, the 

  
publications of the Department specifically ‘Upbhokta Jagaran’ should be brought 
out in regional languages and distributed to the elected representatives of 
Panchayati Raj Institutions.  The Committee further feel that the best forum to 
educate the rural masses about their rights as consumers as well as the 
techniques to redress to their grievances is the meetings of Gram Sabha, which 
are attended by almost every villager.  The Committee note that 24 December 
has been declared as National Consumer Day since the year 2000.  The 
Department in consultation with the Union Ministry of Panchayati Raj should take 
the desired initiatives to have mandatory meetings of Gram Sabhas on this day 
where the villagers could properly be educated about their rights as consumers.   
 
Reply of Government 
 
 2.14 Some of the activities s uch as distribution of user manuals, posters etc. in 
the regional languages can best be undertaken by involving State Governments.  
Further, the involvement of Panchayati Raj institutions for publicity regarding 
consumer awareness shall fulfill the objecti ve of devolution of powers through 
Panchayati Raj institutions.  Since Panchayati Raj Institutions have access to 
remotest areas where communication through traditional medium has better 
outreach, through this approach, PRIs would also have ownership over the 
Awareness Campaign.  PRIs Capacity Building is being proposed under separate 
scheme of the Department.   Involvement of State Governments will also help 
create a permanent structure by formulating a training programme to teachers 
regarding consumer clu bs and also imparting training regarding methodology to 
approach redressal officer for resolution of consumer grievances.  Involvement of 
local media and the conventional publicity methods such as ‘Nukkad Natak’, folk 
songs etc. can be best achieved by inv olving State Governments. Regarding 
mandatory meetings for Gram Sabha on 24 th December(National Consumer 
Day), matter is being perused in consultation with  Union Ministry Pananchyati 
Raj, Publicity material shall also be provided to Gram Panachyat for loc al 
distribution. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.11, Para No. 2.19) 
 
2.15 The Committee note that the Department has institut ed National Awards 
on Consumer Protection to encourage the VCOs , women and youth . The VCOs 
who have done outstanding work are given prize money of Rs. 50,000, Rs. 
40,000 and Rs. 30,000 alongwith certificates of Merit. The Committee would like 
to be appri sed of the number of VCOs, women and youth who have been given 
prize so far. Further, the Department should also inform the Committee about the 
number of VCOs, women and youth from rural areas who have been awarded 
prizes so as to know the impact of this scheme in rural areas. 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
2.16 Under the scheme of Swami Vivekananda National Awards on Consumer 
Protection, so far, 23 VCOs, 15 Youths & 15 Women were given the award, out 
of which 9 VCOs, 5 youths & 3 more women are either from rural areas or have 
their contribution on Consumer Protection in rural areas.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 3.24 ) 
 
2.17 The Committee further note that there are a large number of pending 
cases in the National Commission, State Commissions and District Fora. The 
average percentage of disposal of cases in the case of National Commission has 
been reported to be 81.3 per cent whereas percentage disposal of cases in State 
Commissions and District Fora is 70.16 and 89.59 per cent, respectively.  The 
Committee find from the information provided by the Department that the 
problem of infrastructure is more acute in cas e of District Fora, thus making the 
District Fora non -functional.   However, looking into the overall percentage of 
disposal of cases, the Committee note that District Fora are doing comparatively 
well. The Committee would like the Department to analyze th e aforesaid data of 
disposal of cases carefully and find out the specific reasons for lesser disposal of 
cases in State Commissions. The Committee may also be informed in this 
regard.  
 
Reply of Government 
 
2.18 There are in all 608 District Fora and 35 St ate Commissions out of which 
53 District Fora are stated to be non -functional as on 02.01.2008. This turns out 
to be 8.7% of the total District Fora. As regards, the disposal of cases of State 
Commissions and District Fora, it is to be noted that the figur e given in respect of 
State Commissions and District Fora is the total of the case disposals of all State 
Commissions and District Fora in the entire country, which are having different 
rates of disposal of cases, individually.   
 
  As the rate of disposal  of cases cannot be same in all the State 
Commissions and District Fora, the same is true for total disposal of cases in all 
State Commissions and District Fora separately. The reasons for such variation 
between any two Consumer Fora can be temporarily due  to any of the reasons 
like voluminous growth of cases, staff shortage, lack of working environment, 
efficiency of the President/members in respect of disposal of cases, etc. For 
improving and minimizing the variation in the performance of different Consum er 
Fora, the Central Government has been regularly taking up the matter with the 
States/UTs even at highest level requesting them to expedite corrective 
measures. Besides, the performance of all Consumer Fora are also analysed 

  
regularly State -wise through their Monthly and Quarterly periodical reports and 
remedial actions are suggested accordingly. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No.  3.26 ) 
 
 
2.19 The Committee are concerned to note almost negligible number of cases 
filed in the District Fora in some of the States/UTs. From the data made available 
by the Department, the Committee note that in Daman and Diu, not even a  single 
case was filed in the State Commission and District Fora since inception. 
Besides, in various North -Eastern States and Lakshadweep, the number of 
cases filed are very marginal. The Committee feel that the lack of awareness 
about the rights as a con sumer is the main reason for reporting of almost nil or 
marginal cases in the aforesaid States/UTs. The Committee recommend to 
evolve a strategy to have an aggressive consumer awareness campaign in these 
States in consultation with the respective State Gov ernments/Union Territory 
Administrations.  
 
Reply of Government 
 
 2.20 It is submitted that in smaller States/UTs, because of greater interpersonal 
rapport/interaction between consumers and providers of goods and services, a 
large number of consumer grieva nces may be settled amicably between the 
parties and aggrieved consumers may resort to filing cases in Consumer Fora 
only in extreme cases. This also results in lower number of cases filed in 
Consumer Fora.  However, with regard to filing of cases in State  Commission of 
Daman & Diu, it is stated that UTs of Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu 
share a common State Commission and figures pertaining to filing and disposal 
of cases in State Commissions of these UTs are often shown by NCDRC against 
one of the U Ts. However the figures pertaining to cases filed/disposed etc in 
Daman & Diu as provided by NCDRC on 02.01.2008 is furnished below for ready 
reference: 
 
Name of UT Consumer Fora Cases filed since 
inception 
Cases 
disposed 
Cases 
Pending 
As On 
Daman & Diu  State 
Commission 
25 22 3 31.10.2007 
 
The figures pertaining to District Fora of Daman & Diu are as under: 
 
Name of UT Consumer Fora Cases filed since 
inception 
Cases 
disposed 
Cases 
Pending 
As On 
Daman & Diu  District Fora 120 103 17 31.10.2007 
 

  
The figu res relating to cases filed, disposed & pending in respect of North 
Eastern States and Lakshadweep are as under:- 
 
Name of State Consumer 
Fora 
Cases 
filed since 
inception 
Cases 
disposed of 
since inception 
Cases 
Pending 
%of 
Disposal  
As On 
Arunachal 
Pradesh  
State  
Commission   
45 33 12 73.33 30.09.2007 
District  
Fora   
277 244 33 88.09 30.09.2007 
Assam  State  
Commission   
2122 1100 1022 51.84 31.10.2007 
District  
Fora   
10627 6592 4035 62.03 30.06.2007 
Manipur  State  
Commission   
70 60 10 85.71 30.06.2007 
District  
Fora   
959 937 22 97.71 30.06.2007 
Meghalaya  State  
Commission   
115 109 6 94.78 31.05.2007 
District  
Fora   
322 308 14 95.65 31.03.2007 
Mizoram State  
Commission   
132 115 17 87.12 30.11.2007 
District  
Fora   
2065 2011 54 97.38 31.12.2006 
Nagaland State  
Commission   
94 64 30 68.09 31.12.2006 
District  
Fora   
246 205 41 83.33 30.06.2006 
Tripura State  
Commission   
1045 976 69 93.40 30.11.2007 
District  
Fora   
1894 1689 205 89.18 30.09.2007 
Lakshadweep State  
Commission   
14 13 1 92.86 30.11.2007 
District  
Fora   
53 52 1 98.11 30.11.2007 
  
   
The strategy adopted for Consumer Awareness in these States is as under:-  
 
  The multi -media publicity campaign under “Jago Grahak Jago” theme 
gave adequate attention & focus on the  North-East State and Lakshadweep. The 
observations of the Committee have been noted and even greater thrust shall be 
given to these States in consultation with the respective State Governments/UT 
administrations during the Eleventh Plan. 
 
  The observations of the committee will be kept in mind while devising the 
consumer awareness strategy   for  Dam Diu ,Lakshadweep and North Eastern 
States, An aggressive  campaign specially targeted at these areas undertaken  in 
due consultation  with the respective     State /UTs Administrations . While devising 
the campaign strategy for the entire country, the cultural set up and circumstances 
of these areas will be specifically kept in mind to ensure the awareness campaign 
is effective and takes into account the regio nal and the local issues of these areas 
so as to ensure that consumers in these areas are fully aware about their  right as 
a consumer and also the  grievance redressal  mechanism available to them. 

  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 3.27) 
 
 
2.21 The Committee further note that consumers in remote and far -flung areas, 
consumers have to come to the District Headquart ers for filing of cases. Similarly 
the State Commissions are located in the respective State capitals. The distance 
as well as the lack of connectivity deter the consumers to come to the District 
Headquarters/ State Capitals. In view of the aforesaid scena rio, the Committee 
feel that there is an urgent need to work out some mechanism whereby the 
Consumer Grievance Redressal Mechanism is available at the doorstep of the 
consumers. By and large, holding of Lok Adalats and Circuit Benches at the 
Block Headquar ters may provide solution to this problem. The Department 
should consider the aforesaid difficulties being faced by the consumers in far -
flung /difficult areas and evolve some solution in this regard. The Committee may 
also be kept apprised. 
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
2.22 The observations of the Committee have been noted for consideration. An 
amendment to the Consumer Protection Act to enable District Fora also to hold 
Circuit Benches, among other things, is already under consideration. All 
States/UTs have als o been requested to adopt Lok Adalat method for disposing 
of cases, during weekends by National Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commission (NCDRC). 
 
  The Department has also taken up the matter regarding adoption of Lok 
Adalats in States/UTs where there is bu lk pendency of cases, with Chief 
Secretaries of States/UTs on 06.11.2007.        
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C  Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 3.28) 
 
 
2.23 The Committee have been informed that another reason which has 
impeded the disposal of cases in time as well as non -functional status of some of 
the District Fora is failure to fill the vacancies in the State Commissions and 
District Fora.  From the data provided by the Department, the Committee note 
that District Fora are worst affected by the problem of vacancies. In various 
District Fora, 49 posts of President and 181 posts of Members are lying vacant. 
The Committee also find that various  provisions have been made in the 
Consumer Protection Act through amendments to resolve the problem of 

  
vacancies.  For example, the provision that the senior most Member may preside 
over the Consumer Fora, if the President is absent for any reason and the 
provision of reappointment of President and Members of Consumer Fora are 
some of the amendments made in this regard. In addition, various instructions to 
State Governments to maintain a panel of Presidents and Members to fill 
vacancies arising in the Distr ict Fora are repeatedly being issued by the 
Department. In spite of this, the problem of vacancies persists in State 
Commissions and District Fora.  The Committee therefore, strongly recommend 
that the vacancy position in all the  District Fora across the country should be 
reviewed regularly and all out efforts  be made to fill the vacancies at the earliest.   
 
Reply of Government 
 
2.24 Under the provisions of Section 24B of the Consumer Protection Act, 
1986, National Commission is mandated to monitor the f unctioning of State 
Commissions and District Fora in the country. It regularly calls for returns from 
them and also gives directions where necessary. It also holds 
Conferences/meetings with Presidents of State Commissions and Secretaries in -
charge of Consumer Affairs in States/UTs at least once a year.  
 
As already stated, the Central Government is also regularly taking up the 
issue of vacancy position in Consumer Fora along with other issues, even at the 
highest level, with States/UTs. Besides, the perform ance of the Consumer Fora 
in the State/UTs is also being reviewed through Monthly and Quarterly periodical 
reports and the concerned States/UTs are directed to take remedial action for the 
short falls noticed.  
 
  The recommendation of the Parliamentary St anding Committee in this 
regard has again been taken up by Secretary (CA) with the States/UTs on 
06.11.2007 at the level of Chief Secretaries for appropriate action.   
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para No. 3.29) 
 
 
2.25 In most of the States, salary of a High Court Judge is being provided to 
the President of a State Commission and salary of a District Judge to the 
Presidents of District Fora. In the States where aforesaid provision has not been 
made, the variation in the salary and allowances paid to President and Members 
of State Commissions and District Fora is quite glaring.  The Committee further 
find that in many of the States/UTs, provision has been made to pay the 
remuneration to Members of State Commissions and District Fora on daily basis. 
Further, the honorarium paid to Members of State Commissions as well as 
District Fora is very low in case of some of the State s. For example, in 
Meghalaya, honorarium paid to Members of State Commissions as well as 
District Fora is as low as Rs.75 per day. In Lakshadweep, Rs.150 is provided as 
per day honorarium to Members of State Commissions and Rs.100 to Members 
of District Fora.  On the other hand some of the States are paying very attractive 

  
honorarium/ remuneration to President and Members. For example, in 
Chandigarh, besides the fixed monthly amount of Rs.26,000, allowances and 
perks are also being provided. From the afores aid scenario of disparity in the 
salary and honorarium structure of President and other Members of State 
Commissions and District Fora, the Committee find that perhaps the low salaries 
have dissuaded suitable candidates to take up assignments in State 
Commissions and District Fora. The low salary and honorarium structure has 
failed to attract the best available talent in the field. The Committee further note 
that the Department has been passing resolutions to bring about a uniformity in 
the salary and honor arium being paid to President and Members of different 
State Commissions. However, the State Governments and UT Administrations 
are not implementing the resolutions. The Committee strongly recommend that 
the matter may be taken up with all the State Govern ments and Union Territory 
Administrations at the highest level so that the problem of pending vacancies and 
inadequate remuneration could be resolved.  
 
Reply of Government 
 
2.26 The matter has been recently taken up by the Secretary (Consumer 
Affairs) wit h State Government at the level of Chief Secretary on 06.11.2007 
emphasizing the concerns of the Parliamentary Standing Committee in this 
regard.   In this connection, it may be stated that this Department had circulated 
the Supreme Court judgment in the c ase of State of U.P & Others Vs. Jeet S. 
Bisht & Another [JT -2007(8) SC 59] regarding payment of adequate 
remuneration to the President/Members of Consumer Fora to all the States/UTs.  
The Supreme Court has observed as under   
 
  “103 However, the Central and State Governments are requested to 
consider fixing adequate salaries and allowances for Members of the Consumer 
Fora at all three levels so that they can function effectively and with a free mind.  
They are also requested to fill up vacancies expeditio usly so that the Fora can 
function effectively.”     
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21  Para No.  3.32 ) 
 
 
2.27 The Committee take note of various problems faced by District Fora in the 
implementation of the Consumer Protection Act.  Some of the problems faced by 
these District Fora include non -formation of District Consumer Protection 
Councils at District levels, ignorance of  Members of District Fora about prevailing 
laws relating to complaints, political interference in selection of Members of State 
Commission, District Fora and Consumer Forum, frequent adjournments, 
absence of labs for analysis at District level and failure to release funds by State 
Governments.    The insistence by District Fora on compromise between the 
complainant and defendant, is another factor, which impedes the implementation 
of the Consumer Protection Act leading to delay in delivering justice to the 
consumers.  The Committee are of the view that the problems highlighted by 
various District Fora as given in detail in the preceeding para number 3.22 of the 

  
report are genuine and merit due consideration by the Government.  The 
Committee desire that resul t oriented action be taken by the Centre/State 
Governments in this regard.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken by the Government in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
2.28 The problems and shortcomings observed by the Committee ha ve been 
taken note of. The concerns of the Parliamentary Standing Committee have been 
brought to the notice of all the State Governments/UT Administrations for taking 
appropriate remedial action. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 28, Para No. 4.27 ) 
 
 
2.29 The Committee note that the concept of Citizens’ Charter was introduced 
in the year 1994 to provide a clean, effective and responsive administration at all 
levels with an emphasis on transparency and accountability.  The Government 
introduced Citizens’ Charter in a phased manner in the Ministries/Departments 
where a large public interface is involved. As on date only 91 Centra l Citizens’ 
Charters have been approved and are under implementation by different 
States/UTs. The Committee have also been informed that the Department of 
Consumer Affairs has prepared its own Citizens’ Charter. Besides, BIS and FMC 
have also prepared thei r Citizens’ Charter which is available on the website of 
the Department.The Committee desire that action on fast track basis needs to be 
initiated to cover the remaining agencies/authorities who have not yet formulated 
Citizens’ Charter.  As the Charter in corporates citizens entitlement to public 
services, quality of service, access to information and time bound redressal of 
grievances, etc the Committee desire that wide publicity be given to the Citizens’ 
Charter so that people can take advantage of their entitlements etc. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 2.30 All agencies/authorities under the administrative control of the Department 
have prepared their citizens’ charters. The action is being  initiated for wide 
publicity of these charters. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 31, Para No. 5.4 ) 
 
 
2.31 The Committ ee further note that the Action Plan proposes to evolve a 
National Policy on consumer protection. The Committee recommend that the 
policy should be framed expeditiously so that it can provide necessary direction 
and guidelines to various Ministries of the Union as well as the State 
Governments in setting priorities for consumer awareness and consumer 
protection and also to make them more responsive to the causes of consumers.  
 
Reply of Government 
 
 2.32 The Department has already initiated  necessary actio n  consulting all the 
stake holders before framing  the national policy on consumer protection. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 32,  Para No. 6.3 ) 
  
2.33 The Committee note that a number of Working Groups have been set up 
by the Government to consider ways and means of protecting the interests of 
consumers. Such Working Groups include, ‘Food Safety’, ‘Misleading 
Advertisement’, ‘Drugs, Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices/Equipments’, 
‘Consumer Health and Safety concerning Tobacco & Tobacco Products’, 
‘Counterfeit, Fake, Spurious and Contraband products’. A Working Group has 
also been set up for suggesting improvement in the ex isting Acts relating to the 
interests of consumers.  The Committee understand that Reports of some of the 
Working Groups have been submitted and others are still under the consideration 
of the Government.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
recommendations made by each of the Working Group set up for the purpose 
and the follow up action taken by the Government.  The Committee would like 
that the Department should regularly follow up the implementation of these 
recommendations with the concerned Ministries.  The Committee would also like 
to be informed of the steps taken by the Government in amending the relevant 
statutes, on the lines suggested by the Working Group for the purpose. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
2.34 The Working Group on Food safety; Work ing Group on Drugs, 
Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices/Equipment; Working Group on Consumer 
Health & Safety concerning Tobacco & Tobacco Products; Working Group on 
Counterfeit, fake, spurious and contraband Products and Working Group to 
suggest Amendment to the Consumer Protection Act have submitted their 
recommendations to the Government, which have been forwarded to the 
concerned Ministries/Departments and Agencies concerned for taking 
appropriate action. It may be appreciated that the recommendations ma de by 
these Working Groups are not binding on the Government as these are only 

  
advisory in nature. The Working Group on Misleading Advertisement has yet to 
finalize its report as it has decided to await the recommendations of the 
Committee, constituted by the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting to review 
the Programming of Advertisement codes prescribed under the Cable Television 
Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 and Rules framed thereunder and the 
guidelines for certification of films prescribed under the  Cinematograph Act, 
1952. The said Committee is still to finalize its recommendations as per 
information made available by the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting. The 
Working Group to suggest further amendments to the Consumer Protection Act, 
1986 and formulation of new legislation has also submitted its report to the 
Government. The Working Group has only made recommendations for further 
amendments to the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. As regard new legislation, 
the Working Group observed that other Mi nistries/Departments were already 
engaged in such exercise in bringing new legislations such as Builder Licensing 
Board Act, Public Interest Disclosure (Protection of Informers) Bill, Whistle 
Blowers Protection Act, etc. Hence, the Working Group felt it should not duplicate 
the efforts. As regards product liability and unfair terms of contract, the Working 
Group recommended for appropriate amendments in the Consumer Protection 
Act 1986 itself. The recommendations made by the Working Groups with regard 
to further amendments to the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 have been taken 
into consideration by this Department while formulating the draft proposals for 
fourth Amendment to the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 which is being finalized 
in consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see paragraph no. 1.44 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 33, Para No. 7.6) 
 
2.35 The Committee note that the Consumer Helpline was launched on 15 
March, 2005 on the occasion of World Consumer Rights Day for providing 
guidance, information and advice to consumers for redressal of their grieva nces 
against various services and products. According to the Ministry, the National 
Consumer Helpline advises consumers to deal with problems related to defective 
products, deficiency in services and unfair trade practices etc. The Committee, 
while welcomi ng the introduction of Consumer Helpline for the benefit of 
consumers, desire that the consumers be made aware of this service in a big 
way through electronic and print media. They would like to be informed of the 
steps taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 2.36 All the advertisements under Jago Grahak Jago campaign contain 
information regarding National Consumer Help Line. Apart from this, the Help 
Line details are also being advertised through exclusive advertisements through 
print /electronic media. 

  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.34, Para No. 8.5) 
 
2.37 The Committee note that Consumer Grievance Redressal Cell (CGRC) 
was set up by the Department during 2002 to redress the grievances of 
consumers relating to sale of defective goods, deficient services, overpricing, etc. 
During the five years of its operation the Cell has received 6179 complaints from 
all over the country.  All the complaints are forwarded to Consumer Coordination 
Council for appropriate advice/guidance to the complainant or to the concerned 
manufacturers, companies, etc for redressal of consumers complaints.  The 
Committee observe that the number of compl aints received is too little 
specifically when the Cell operates at the National level and receive complaints 
from all over the country.  The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to 
make the people aware of the working of the aforesaid Cell so that more and 
more consumers get redressal of their complaints through the Cell.  The 
Department should take all the desired action in this regard.   
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 2.38 The Consumer Grievances Redressal Cell (CGRC) was set up in 
February 2002. During the last calendar year, the Cell had received a large 
number of complaints covering the aspects mentioned above from all over the 
country including the North Eastern States. The number of complaints received in 
CGRC since its inception is as under: 
                      _____________________________ 
Year                      No. of complaints 
2002-2003                       742   
2003-2004                       814 
2004-2005                       653 
2005-2006                     3223 
2006-2007                     2256 
______________________________ 
 
  All the complaints received by Consumer Grievances Redressal Cell are 
promptly forwarded to the Consumer Coordination Council for appropriate 
action/guidance/redressal to the complainants or to the concerned 
manufacturers, companies etc. regarding replacement of goods, re -installation of 
telephone/electricity, rectification of wrong bills, possession of allotted flats, 
payment of Bond amounts due on maturity etc. The Cell itself is attending the 
complaints of important nature. To educate the consumers about their rights and 
responsibilities, the Department has been releasing small advertisements in 
National dailies/regional newspapers in local languages as also programmes on 
electronic media like Doordarshan and such other TV Channels. After making the 
efforts, more and more consumers are getting redressal of their complaints 
through the CGRC. Besides, the services of the CORE Center, National 

  
consumer Helpline and VOICE are being utilized by the Government  to m ake 
aware of the people to get redressed of their grievances. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 36, Para No. 8.7) 
 
2.39 The C ommittee also note that the Consumer Grievance Redressal Cell 
also takes suo moto action by attending to complaints appearing in the columns 
of the newspapers.  The Committee while appreciating the aforesaid mechanism 
of redressal of complaints of consumer s would like to be informed about the 
number of complaints attended by the Cell as appeared in the various columns of 
newspapers so as to know the effectiveness of the aforesaid mechanism of 
redressal of consumer grievances.  Besides various grievances rec eived from 
the Cabinet Secretariat and PMO related to consumer matters are also attended 
to.  The Committee would like to be informed about the nature of issues received 
through Cabinet Secretariat and PMO.   
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 
 2.40 The CGRC are also  attending to the complaints appearing in the columns 
of the newspapers. During the year 2006 -07, there were 6 complaints attended 
by the CGRC itself. The CGRC are attending the complaints received through 
the Cabinet Secretariat and PMO related to consume r matters. Besides, the 
CGRC has been receiving the complaints on various subjects like service 
matters, acceptance of innovated projects on electronic systems etc. These 
complaints are forwarded to the concerned Departments/ 
Manufacturers/Companies etc. for taking appropriate action as well as to redress 
the grievance of the complainant.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.37,  Para No. 8.8 ) 
 
 
2.41 The Committee also find that Consumer Grievance Redressal Cell has 
been set up at the National level and is addressing to complaints of consumers 
received from all over the country.  The Committee feel that similar Consumer 
Grievance Redressal Cell need to be set up in various States.  The Committee 
would like that the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations should be 
persuaded to set up such Cells in each of the State/UT. 
 
 

  
Reply of Government 
 
 2.42 The State Governments/Un ion Territory Administrations are persuaded to 
set up the Consumer Grievances Cell in order to redress the complaints of the 
consumers.  
 
  In addition to National Consumer Help Line which has been functioning 
since March 2005,  it is proposed to set up State Consumer Help lines during 11th 
Plan on similar lines as National Consumer Help Line which will extend service in 
the regional language of the State concerned and in Hindi and English.  
Eventually these State Help Lines can be networked with National C onsumer 
Helpline so as to make two way information access possible. These help lines 
will be able to reach out to rural consumers in various States and help in 
redressing their complaints. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.  45, Para No. 10.18) 
 
 
2.43 The Committee have taken note of the upsurge in the prices in housing 
sector consequent upon booming economy.  Taking undue advant age of 
imbalance in demand supply equilibrium, various housing authorities in 
Government and private sectors are inducing consumers.  For instance, recently 
DDA, GDA, Greater Noida and HUDA announced their housing schemes for 
different categories of consum ers.  Surprisingly, the brochure containing 
information about the various schemes of these authorities were priced between 
Rs. 160 to Rs. 1000.  There has been similar experience noticed in the 
admission to professional colleges for courses such as enginee ring, architect, 
medical, pharmacy and other professional courses where not only the prospectus 
are highly priced but also the counseling conducted for these courses are also at 
exorbitant rates and varies from Rs. 1,000 to Rs. 5,000 in some of the cases.  
The Committee do not subscribe to the view of the Government that in the 
current liberalized regime, it is the market forces which should determine the 
price at which a good or a service is made available to a potential consumer.  
The Government have furt her stated that the housing board/promoter of housing 
societies are at liberty in fixing the prices for different categories of consumers.  
Government’s role would limit to ensuring fair competition and in removing 
factors that impede the play of market fo rces.  The Committee are of the view 
that in a welfare State, Government should ensure that all sections of the society 
are treated alike and there is no monopolistic tendency by which a citizen is 
exploited.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the mono polistic tendency on 
the part of housing boards which take undue advantage of shortage of housing 
and exploit the gullible consumers needs to be checked. The Committee desire 
that besides ensuring fair competition, the Government should intervene in the 
matter and not let Housing Boards/Promoters of Housing Societies get away with 
this easily.  An affordable token money not exceeding Rs. 100 can be charged in 
above cases to ensure maximum participation.  The Committee also want that 
the matter regarding pri ce of prospectus and counselling should be taken up at 

  
the highest level with the Department of Higher Education and Department of 
Urban Development.  The Committee should be apprised of the action taken in 
the matter. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
2.44 The observations of the Committee have been taken up with the Ministry 
of Urban Development & the Department of Higher Education of the Govt. of 
India, at the level of Secretary for their appropriate action vide this Department’s 
D.O. letter dated 06.11.2007. 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 

  
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENTS REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.20, Para No.3.31) 
 
 
3.1 The Committee note that most of the District Fora are suffering for want of 
adequate infrastructure and other basic amenities/necessities.  The Committee 
feel that this acts as a deterrent in quick disposal o f cases and thereby causes 
pendency of consumer cases.  In this context, the Committee desire that the 
grants to all District Fora be provided for improving infrastructure facilities at the 
earliest.  It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that  many States do 
not take active interest in consumer related activities.  In order to inculcate the 
feeling of welfare of consumers, the Committee desire that a Model District Fora 
funded by the Central Government needs to be set up in each State.  The 
experience gained from such Model District Fora should be replicated in other 
districts of the State. 
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 3.2 The observations/recommendations of the Committee have been noted for 
consideration. In so far as setting up of Model District Fo ra is concerned, it is felt 
that there appears no need to set up such a Model District Forum out of Central 
Government funds for replication in other States, because under the scheme of 
Integrated Project on Consumer Protection, grants are already being ex tended to 
States/UTs on need based on the basis of norms formulated for a District 
Forum/State Commission so that a minimum level of facilities are provided in 
each Consumer Forum in the Country required for their effective functioning. An 
amount of Rs. 56 .41 crores has been released upto 31.1.2008 to 19 eligible 
States under the scheme. This is in addition to Rs. 61.80 crores released under 
the scheme of One Time Grant of 1995 to cover 458 District Fora & 32 State 
Commissions in all States/UTs & Rs. 10.20 crores released under the scheme of 
One Time Grant of 2004-05 to cover the newly created 53 District Fora & 3 State 
Commissions established after 1995 & spread over 13 States. It is expected that 
after all the grants are fully utilized the Consumer Fora wo uld not suffer for want 
of adequate infrastructure.            
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 

  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22, Para No. 4.21 ) 
 
3.3 The Committee note that the Consumer Welfare Fund was created in 
1991 by amending the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944. The main objective of 
the fund is to provide financial assistance to VCOs/NGOs and State 
Governments for strengthening Consumer Movement i n the country. The 
aforesaid fund was set up by the Department of Revenue in 1992. Subsequently, 
a separate Department of Consumer Affairs was created in the Central 
Government in the year 1997 to act as the nodal Department to exclusively deal 
with the is sues related to consumer welfare and awareness. The Committee 
have been informed that no proposal has been mooted to bring the Consumer 
Welfare Fund under the ambit of the Department of Consumer Affairs, although 
the fund is being operated by the Departmen t of Consumer Affairs.  The 
Committee fail to understand the rationale of placing the Consumer Welfare Fund 
under Department of Revenue when the operational responsibility rests with the 
Department of Consumer Affairs. The Committee are further concerned t o note 
that no initiative in this regard has been taken by the Department of Consumer 
Affairs so far. The Committee feel that the exclusive responsibility of Consumer 
Welfare Fund should be given to the Department of Consumer Affairs. The 
Committee urge th at the desired action in this regard should be taken by the 
Government and the Committee be apprised accordingly. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 3.4 Consumer Welfare Fund was created by amending the Central Excise and 
Salt Act, 1944 where the money which is not re fundable to the 
manufacturers/importers are credited. Since, the Customs and Excise Divisions 
under the Deptt. of Revenue is the source of these funds and receipt of the same 
is a continuous process, the Deptt. of Revenue is the custodian of the fund. 
Moreover re -assessment and appeals and also refunds from CWF to the 
manufacture/importers on the basis of decision on appeals are within the domain 
of the Deptt. of Revenue.  In any case accruals to the CWF are available to this 
Department for usage in accorda nce with the CWF Rules and related guidelines 
(which have recently been comprehensively revised by  the Department) 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 29, Para No. 4.28) 
 
 
3.5 The Committee find that the main objective of the Consumer Welfare Fund 
was to generate consumer awareness and strengthen Consumer Movement 
through various programmes funded out of Consumer Welfare Fund,  pa rticularly 
in rural areas. The Committee would like to be informed about the number of 
schools/colleges in rural areas who have been provided assistance under the 
scheme Consumer Club. The Committee emphasize to monitor the various 
activities/projects funded out of the ‘Consumer Welfare Fund’ separately for rural 
areas so as to know about the fulfillment of the objectives of creating the 
aforesaid Fund. 

  
 
Reply of Government 
 
3.6 A list of schools state wise funded under CWF Scheme is given at 
Annexure-B      Under Consumer Welfare Fund grant has  been sanctioned to 
following organizations for projects mainly catering to  rural consumers.  
 
(1) CONCERT : This is training project for detecting adulteration in common food 
items  covering 8 districts of Tamil Nadu on a pilot basis . Rural women , self help 
groups are given training under this project 
 
(2) Project by Tamil Nadu Govt.: This is a training project on consumer 
awareness and education  mainly  catering to rural women , farmers, self help 
groups and oth er stake holders covering all districts of Tami Nadu. Training of 
Government employees who have consumer interface are also covered under 
the project. 
 
(3) SAVERA : This is an IEC based consumer awareness project being 
implemented in Kishanganj and Kathiar districts of Bihar. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 39 Para No.  9.9) 
 
 
3.7 The Committee note that Hallmarking of Gold Je wellery Scheme was 
launched by BIS in April, 2000 on voluntary basis and 45 hallmarking centres for 
gold jewellery have been recognized by BIS in the country.  The Government 
have now launched a Pilot Project at a cost of Rs. 5.75 crore to give       
incentives/assistance/training to Hallmarking Centres. The Committee have been 
informed that there is a proposal to make gold hallmarking mandatory by 2008. 
The Committee feel that making hallmarking mandatory will further protect 
consumers from being exploited  through sale of gold ornaments of lower 
carratage than what they have paid for. For this, adequate infrastructure in the 
form of Assaying and Hallmarking Centers are required on a large scale. The 
Committee desire that work on the pilot project launched f or providing incentives 
/ assistance / training for setting up additional Hallmarking Centers be expedited 
so that adequate infrastructure for assaying and hallmarking gold jewellery is 
available when the scheme is made mandatory.  
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
3.8 1.  Mandatory Hallmarking 
  
1.1   In a meeting chaired by Secretary, Consumer Affairs on 19 June 
2007, it was decided to introduce mandatory hallmarking of Gold 
jewellery/artefacts in phased manner starting with four metros of 
Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai & K olkatta from 1st January 2008 in the 

  
first phase.  The important measures taken in this regard are 
explained as under : 
 
2. Creation of Countrywide infrastructure for Assaying and 
Hallmarking of Gold   
 
2.1 As on 31 st March, 2008, 91 Assaying & Hallmarking  Centres have 
been recognized by BIS.  13 Assaying and Hallmarking Centres 
have been set up under the Government Scheme (2 Assaying & 
Hallmarking Centres were set up during 2006 -07 and 11 Assaying 
& Hallmarking Centres have come up during 200708 with 
Government Assistance).  Remaining 78 Assaying and Hallmarking 
Centres have been set up in private/public sector without any 
Government assistance. 
  
2.1.1 Further, to enhance the hallmarking capacity in the country, the 
provision for Off-site operations of BIS Recognized A & HM Centres 
have been made in principle, which facilitate the existing centre to 
receive Jewellery for hallmarking at a site away from the main 
centre. In these cases, samples are drawn and hallmarking is done 
at the offsite centre on the basis of results of assaying conducted at 
the main centre. This facility has been availed of by four such 
centers at present. 
 
2.2   Scheme for Setting up of Gold Assaying and Hallmarking Centres in 
India with central assistance     
 
For promoting Hallmarking and help it to spread across the country, a 
scheme of setting up of Assaying and Hallmarking centres for gold 
jewellery in 35 select districts on a pilot basis with central assistance 
was approved by Govt. under the 10 th five year plan in Nov. 2005. 
Under the scheme s elected applicants would be given one time 
financial assistance @ 15% of cost of machinery and equipment 
subject to maximum of Rs. 15 lakhs per centre for all states except 
locations of north -east and special category states namely Jammu 
and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttaranchal for which one time 
financial assistance @ 30% of cost of machinery & equipment 
subject to maximum of Rs. 30 lakhs per centre would be given. 
 
The Scheme is proposed to be continued and further extended to the 
11th Five year Plan. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 

  
Recommendation (Sl. No.  41, Para No.10.14 ) 
 
 
3.9 The Committee note that the Consumer Protection  Act has been enacted 
for providing simple, quick and inexpensive justice to all consumers.  The 
Committee are aware that exemption has been given to “Antyodya Anna Yojana” 
beneficiaries from payment of fee for filing of complaints upto Rs. 1 lakh.  The 
Committee feel that as consumer protection is at a nascent stage and also as the 
fee charges are not enough to deter frivolous litigants, there is no need to levy 
fee for filing of complaints by consumers. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
3.10 Nominal fee have been pro vided for under the Consumer Protection Act, 
1986 for filing complaint in the Consumer Fora primarily to discourage filing of 
frivolous complaints at the initial stage itself. The nominal fee prescribed would 
not be a deterrent to the genuine complainants to seek redressal of their 
grievances through the Consumer Fora. In any case, if the complainant succeeds 
in the case, the Forum is likely to award compensation including the legal costs 
incurred in pursing the matter in the Forum. Hence, it would be appro priate to 
maintain the status quo ante in regard to levy of fee.     
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 47, Para No.10.20 ) 
 
3.11 It has been observed that charges levied for analysis of any sample/test of 
any goods, acts as a deterrent in asserting one’s right under the Consumer 
Protection Act.  The Committee note that this provision has been incorporated in 
the Act to avoid fil ing of frivolous complaints by miscreants.  Yet, instances 
cannot be ruled out where a consumer does not exercise the option of getting a 
product tested on account of prohibitive cost.  The Committee note that in case a 
complainant succeeds in the case, he  is liable to get back the testing fee paid 
besides other cost as decided by the Consumer Forum. However, this 
mechanism of levying fee, deters many genuine consumers from actually getting 
the samples/goods tested on their own.  The Committee desire that i n the event 
of dispute being less than Rs. 50,000 or less, the Government should get test 
undertaken in their own labs and without charging any fee thereon.  For this, the 
Government should set up adequate laboratories where such tests can be 
performed free of cost.  
 
Reply of Government 
 
3.12 The Consumer Fora do not have facilities attached to it where testing of 
goods can be done at negligible cost or free of cost. The tests, if any, conducted 
on the goods purchased by the consumer to substantiate the ch arges/allegations 
made against such goods in the complaint filed in the forum, has, therefore, got 
to be done from other laboratories for which fee for availing their services have to 

  
be paid. In the absence of Government Laboratories set up to perform the se 
tests free of cost, it will not be possible to dispense with the provision requiring 
payment of fee by the complainants for getting the goods tested from outside 
agencies irrespective of compensation claimed.         
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 

  
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNEMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 4, Para No. 1.9) 
 
4.1 The Committee find from the information provided by the Department that, 
only one State viz West Bengal is having a separate Department of Consumer 
Affairs.  Besides, in 23 States/UTs, the nomenclature of the Department includes 
words like “Consumer Affairs”, “Consumer Protection” etc.  The Committee are 
concerned to note that low priority is accorded to the subject of Consumer 
Protection by various State Governments and it is virtually a neglected area.  The 
Committee are of the v iew that the nature and volume of work involved in 
consumer protection is such that it requires adequate attention and only then 
justice could be done to this matter of much public importance.  The Committee 
feel that the subject also requires constant and regular monitoring.   And because 
of its scope being so vast, a full -fledged Department headed by an officer of the 
level of Secretary needs to be in place in States for consumer protection.  The 
Committee also desire that for promoting the welfare of the  consumers in the 
States, a separate Budget needs to be earmarked for the Consumer Affairs 
Department.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the matter of separate 
Department on Consumer Affairs/Protection, headed by officer of the rank and 
pay of Secr etary and separate budgetary provision, should be taken up in the 
right earnest and at the highest level with the State Governments. Some sort of 
in built incentives be also devised for the States/UTs who are doing well in the 
field of consumer awareness a nd consumer protection.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter.  
 
Reply of Government 
 
4.2 The issue of having a separate Department along with separate Budget 
for Consumer Protection has been taken up time and again by this Department 
with all States/UTs. So far, Kerala & West Bengal have established separate 
Departments for Consumer Affairs. The concerns of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee in this regard as indicated in the recommendations has again been 
taken up by Secretary (CA) with the States/UTs on 06.11.2007 at the level of 
Chief Secretaries. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.15 ) 
 
4.3 The Committee note that though the Government has started a vigorous 
consumer awareness campaign through print media, adequate publicity has not 
been given t hrough electronic media. The Committee feel that to make the 
consumer awareness programme broad based and more mass oriented, wide 
publicity should be given through electronic media on the lines of Pulse Polio 
Campaign etc. by roping in well known celebrit ies to espouse the cause.  The 
Government should also reach the people through Gram Melas, etc.   The 
services of the NGOs need to be exploited through special programmes by 
making them partners in spreading the awareness and enhancing the 
effectiveness of the consumer protection measures. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 4.4 The Multi-media campaign to be organised at the Central level will be duly 
complemented through the above efforts of the State Governments in achieving 
a holistic goal. This campaign will use pr int, television and radio.  Joint 
programmes involving NGO’s will also be taken up.  Voluntary consumer 
organizations are already involved in finalizing strategy for awareness campaign 
and enhancing consumer protection National  consumer Helpline is a exam ple of 
the same. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 3.23) 
 
4.5 The Committee note that a three tier quasi judicial redressal mechanism 
has been established at National, State and District levels as per the provisions 
made under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 to resolve the consumer 
grievances speedily and cheaply. Whereas the responsibility of the National 
Commission rests with the Union Government, the responsibility of setting up as 
well as effective functioning of State Commissions and District Fora lies with the 
respective State G overnments/Union Territory Administrations. The Union 
Government is further supplementing the efforts made by the State Governments 
by releasing one-time grants to District Fora for creating adequate infrastructure. 
Besides,  various amendments in the afor esaid Act have been made for the 
smooth functioning of District Fora. In addition, the Department is taking 
proactive action to impress upon the State Governments to take desired action 
for the effective functioning of these Fora. Inspite of the best of th e efforts made 
by the Union Government, as many as 22 District Fora have been reported as 
non-functional. The Committee further note that non -functional District Fora exist 
in various States viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Nagaland, Tamil Nadu, 
Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Kerala and Rajasthan. The various factors 
responsible for non -functional District Fora have been addressed in detail in the 

  
subsequent paras of the report. Here, the Committee may like to emphasize that 
the Department shoul d find out State specific reasons for non -functional District 
Fora and pursuade the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations to 
take corrective action in this regard.  Besides, the Committee recommend that 
the district forum should be constituted expeditiously in a newly created District.  
The Committee may also be kept apprised.  
 
Reply of Government 
 
4.6 The Central Government has been regularly taking up the matter with the 
States/UTs even at highest level requesting them to expedite corrective 
measures. Non-Functionality of Consumer Fora occurs mostly due to vacancy in 
posts of President/Members of Consumer Fora. The Central Government has 
been repeatedly requesting State Governments to take steps such as taking 
advance action for filling up exp ected vacancies of President & Members and 
panel of candidates, etc. so that vacancies are filled up expeditiously. To ensure 
that Consumer Fora remain functional, States are also requested to club 
adjacent Consumer Fora wherever required. Besides this, Co nsumer Protection 
Act, 1986 has also been amended to provide for the Senior Most Member to 
preside over the Consumer Fora if the President is absent for any reasons. 
However, due to various unforeseen contingencies also, unexpected vacancies 
may arise. The procedure for filling of vacancies also takes time and despite best 
efforts, some Consumer Fora remain non -functional. This number fluctuates and 
varies from time to time.               
 
  In addition, the performance of all Consumer Fora are also analyse d 
regularly State -wise though their Monthly & Quarterly periodical reports by this 
Department and remedial actions are suggested accordingly. The matter has 
also been recently taken up by Secretary Consumer Affairs with chief Secretaries 
of State Governmen t on 06.11.2007 emphasizing the concerns of the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee in this regard. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.20 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.14, Para No. 3.25) 
 
4.7 While noting the State -wise position of disposal of cases, the Committee 
find that in some of the States, the position is not satisfactory. As rega rds the 
performance of State Commissions, worse is the position in Uttar Pradesh and 
Mizoram where the percentage disposal is only 29.13 and 33.70 per cent, 
respectively. In progressive State of Maharashtra, the percentage disposal of 
cases is just 56.19 p er cent. As regards the position of District Fora in Bihar, 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Jammu and Kashmir, Mizoram, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, 
the percentage disposal of cases is less than 80 per cent. The Secretary during 
the course of oral evidence has acknowle dged that the time limit of disposal of 
cases prescribed under the Act i.e. within 90 to 150 days is seldom adhered to. 

  
The Secretary has also informed that in Punjab, a novel way of clearing the 
backlog of cases by holding the Lok Adalats has been adopted .  Further, the 
Committee while examining the Demands for Grants (2007 -08) (refer Para 4.22 
of Nineteenth Report) had also been informed that an amendment to the 
Consumer Protection Act to have Circuit Benches or Circuit Sharing Mechanism 
by District Fora is being worked out. In the system of Circuit Benches or Circuit 
Sharing, District Fora may hold their sittings at the Tehsil or Block Headquarters 
in case there are large number of cases. The Committee feel that the system of 
Lok Adalats adopted by the Pu njab Government needs to be replicated in other 
States where there is bulk pendency of cases. Besides, there is an urgent need 
to take an early decision on the issue of Circuit Benches or Circuit Sharing 
Mechanism by District Fora for speedier disposal of cases pending with 
respective District Forum. The Committee recommend to the Department to take 
the desired action in this regard. The Committee also recommend that the 
Department should review the position of pendency of cases on quarterly basis 
and issue  necessary instructions to the respective State Governments for 
speedier disposal of cases. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 4.8 The National Commission, which has the administrative control to oversee 
the functioning of State Commissions and District Fora throughou t the country 
under the provisions of Section 24B of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, have 
already instructed State Commissions to ensure disposal of cases on the pattern 
of Lok Adalat Method.  As regards the issue of holding of Circuit Benches by the 
District Fora, an amendment proposal is already under consideration. The 
Department is already reviewing the position of pendency of cases not only on 
quarterly basis but also on monthly basis through Quarterly & Monthly Progress 
Reports, and also taking it up with the respective States for speedier disposal of 
cases along with suggestions for holding Lok Adalat on the last working day of 
every week to minimize the pendency of cases.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.23 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.19, Para No.3.30) 
 
4.9 Besides the problem of vacancies, various Consumer Fora are also  facing 
the shortage of adequate supporting staff. The Committee have been apprised 
that supporting staff for District Fora is normally borrowed from the local Food 
and Civil Supply Department of the State Government. The Committee note that 
the casual app roach of the State Governments in this regard has led to the 
ineffective functioning of District Fora. The Committee recommend that there 
should be All India /State service which can cater to the need of supporting staff 
of different levels of Consumer Fora at National, State and District Level.    
 
 

  
 
Reply of Government 
 
4.10 The issue of establishment of State service which can cater to the need of 
supporting staff of different levels of Consumer Fora at State & District level has 
been taken up with the State Governments vide this Department’s D.O. letter No. 
5(4)/2007- CPU dated 06.11.2007.   
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.26 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.23, Para No. 4.22 ) 
 
4.11 The Committee further note that the Department has decided to 
decentralize and transfer the Consumer Awareness and Consumer Club 
Schemes of the State G overnments/Union Territory Administrations with effect 
from 1 April, 2004. To supplement the efforts made by the States/UTs in this 
regard, the Government has decided to make a one -time contribution of an 
amount proportionate to the number of districts by the Centre and the State 
Governments in the ratio of 50:50 (Centre:State). In case of special category 
States, the aforesaid ratio is 90:10 (Centre:State). The Committee have further 
been informed that so far 19 States and UTs have been sanctioned grants f rom 
Centre Consumer Welfare Fund for the purpose. Further, 16 States are yet to 
apply/receive assistance for the State/Local Consumer Welfare Fund. The 
Department has informed that the aforesaid States/UTs could not avail the 
assistance/Central share of se ed money because they have not yet credited the 
State share in permanent non-lapsable, non-plan account. The Committee would 
like the Department to pursue further with the aforesaid States so that the 
Consumer Welfare Fund is set up expeditiously to promot e the Consumer 
Movement throughout the country.  
 
Reply of Government 
 
 4.12 So far 19 States have availed funds to set up their own State Consumer 
Welfare Fund. The remaining    State Govts./UTs Administration are being 
repeatedly reminded to avail of the benefit of the Central Share of Seed money to 
set up their own State CWF and formulate and notify State CWF guidelines. The 
delay is due to the fact that some States/UTs are yet to allocate in their own 
budget the amount to be deposited in CWF as their sh are and credit it to a 
separate account after which only Central share is released. In all the meetings 
of the State Secretaries of the Food and Civil Supplies this issue has been 
discussed and it is hoped that the State Govts./UT Administrations shall tak e 
prompt action towards availing the benefit of Central grant of seed money. 
 
 List of the states who have set up their State Consumer Welfare Fund in 
the last one year (4/2007 to 3/2008) : 
 

  
S.No. Name of States Amounts sanctioned 
1.  Kerala 15,00,000 
2. TamilNadu 50,00,000 
3.  Sikkim  9,00,000 (In three 
installments) 
   
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.29 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 24  Para No. 4.23  ) 
 
4.13 The Committee note from the information made available by the 
Department that out of 19 States which have been sanctioned grant from Central 
Consumer Welfare Fund, 11 States/UTs have so far not submitted the guidelines 
for State Consumer Welfare Fund. The Committee also note that the 
organizations receiving grant from the Consumer Welfare Fund are required to 
follow the Consumer Welfare Fund Rules, 1992 and the guidelines for sanction of 
grants from the Consumer Welfare Fund. The Committee fail to understand non -
submission of status of framing of guidelines for State Consumer Welfare Fund 
by most of the State Governments. The Committee are of the view that there is 
an urge nt need to have strict monitoring of the implementation of various 
activities for which funding is being granted out of the Consumer Welfare Fund. 
The Committee would like the Department to get the information from the 
aforesaid State Governments and submi t to the Committee. Further, the States 
which have not so far framed the guidelines should be asked to do this 
expeditiously. 
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 4.14 The present status of States that have availed seed money to set up state 
CWF and notified guidelines  are given at Annexure -A .  States are being 
reminded on this regularly.  In the Standing Committee  set up  under State 
CWF.  Jt. Secretary  of this Department or his nominee  is a member.  This 
committee monitors the utilization of funds from State CWF. 
 
ANNEXURE-A 
 
Status of financial assistance for seting up of State Consumer Welfare Fund of 
Govt./UTs. 
 
S.No. State (No. of distt.) Amount 
released (Rs).  
1 Andhra Pradesh(23)  25,00,000 
2 Chhattisgarh(16)  25,00,000 
3 Goa(2)    4.50,000 
4 Gujarat(25)  22,50,000 

  
5 Haryana(19)  25,00,000 
6 Karnataka(27)  47,00,000 
7 Maharashtra(35)  46,50,000 
8 Orissa(30)  47,00,000 
9 Punjab(17)  10,00,000 
10 Rajasthan(32)  27,00,000 
11 TamilNadu(29)  50,00,000 
12 Uttar Pradesh (80)  50,00,000 
13 Uttaranchal(13)  12,00,000 
14 West Bengal(18)  25,00,000 
15 Sikkim(4)    9,00,000 
16 Mizoram(8)  27,00,000 
17 Arunachal Pradesh(15)  27,00,000 
18 J&k(14)  27,00,000 
19 Tripura(4)    9,00,000 
 TOTAL: Rs. 
 
5,15,50,000 
 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.32 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 25, Para No. 4.24 ) 
 
4.15 The Committee while examining  the Demands for Grants (2007 -08) had 
expressed serious concern over non -utilization of funds earmarked for the 
schemes/ projects out of Consumer Welfare Fund (refer Para 4.54 of Nineteenth 
Report). The Committee had noted that only one -fourth of the amoun t provided 
under Consumer Welfare Fund was being used by the State Governments. The 
Committee had also expressed serious concern over non -submission of 
Utilization Certificates by various NGOs/VCOs. The Committee are of the firm 
opinion that an effective m onitoring is required to ensure that only credible 
NGOs/VCOs are provided funding out of the Consumer Welfare Fund. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the number of NGOs/VCOs who have 
been provided assistance from the Consumer Welfare Fund so far, along with the 
number of NGOs/VCOs who have been blacklisted. The Committee would like to 
reiterate their earlier recommendation to put the name of the blacklisted NGOs 
on the website of the Department so as to ensure that no Government funding is 
made to these blacklisted NGOs. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 4.16 The State Government and Distt Magistrates are being repeatedly 
reminded to take action against the defaulting NGOs/VCOs ( Who have not 
submitted their Utilisation Certificates so far) to obtain Utilisati on Certificates or 

  
effect recovery of the CWF grant together with penal interest from them. The 
State Government and Distt. Administration have taken action and in quite a few 
cases the defaulting organizations have submitted the Utilisation Certificate an d 
other settlement documents. 
  
  As a follow up of the earlier recommendations of the Parliamentary 
Standing Committee the State Govts have been advised to take up appropriate 
action against the defaulting organizations. 
 
 The number of NGOs who had been provided grant from the Consumer 
Welfare Fund but not submitted Utilisation Certificates are at Annexure-B-I.  A list 
of such NGOs who have not provided UC have been posted in the website of this 
Department.   One NGO namely “Society for Emancipating Neo S ocial 
Education, DCIC-Shivagangai Distt of Tamil Nadu” has been black listed on the 
basis of recommendation of the State Government. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 

  
ANNEXURE –B-I 
 
LIST OF ORGANISATIONS WHO HAVE NOT FURNISHED UTILIZATION 
CERTIFICATES IN RESPECT OF GRANT RECEIVED FROM THE CONSUMER 
WELFARE FUND 
 
ANDHRA PRADESH 
Sl.N
o 
NAME OF VCO/NGO Sanction order 
No. and Date 
AMOUNT D.O.R 
 
1* 
Anantpur Consumer Protection 
Council, Department of 
Commerce, Sri Krishnadevaraya 
University, Anantapur, Sri 
Venkateswarapuram -515003 
O-11011/462/94-
CWF 
31/5/95 
22,500/- 22-10-96 
2 Village Integrated Development 
Youth Association, 
Bangaruchennipalli, 
Kothacheruvu-Mandal, 
Ananthpur 
O-11011/130/94-
CWF 
 
36,000/- 20-03-96 
3* Women Association for 
Knowledge  
Earning Unity and Progress, II -
270-2, Society Colony, 
Madanapalle-517325, Chittoor 
Distt.   
O-11011/508/94-
CWF 
15/11/95 
74,970/- 1-03-96 
4* Rural Development Organisation 
(Sri Sai Educational Society,), 
H.No-6-2-69, J.B.Road 
(Jammibanda Road), 
KHAMMAM-507001.  
O-11011/588/94-
CWF 
55,330/- 22-11-95 
5 Guntur Town consumer 
Association, 3/14, Brodipet, 
Guntur    
O-11011/368/94-
CWF 
51,500/- 25-09-96 
 
6* 
 
Mercy Minori ty Education 
Society, D.No.13/580 A, 1 st 
Cross, Ramchandra Nagar, 
Anantpur-515001 
O-1011/106/96-
CWF 
7/6/1996 
31,500/- 30-07-96 
7* SWARE 
Society for Welfare and 
Awakening in Rural 
Environment, Gorantla -515231, 
Anantpur.(Distt.)    
O-11011/115/95-
CWF  
25/9/1996 
58,500/- 19-01-97 
8* C R E D S 
Comprehensive Rural Education 
and Economic Development 
Society, 1488, Jawahar Nagar, 
Vital Nagar,P.O.KARIMNAGAR 
Dist., A.P.-505 214  
O-11011/151/96-
CWF 
29/10./96 
25,000/- 4-4-96 
9 Arunodaya Mahila Mandali, 4 -
600-! 21, Somnath Nagar, 
Anantpur.    
O-11011/346/96-
CWF 
36,000/- 4-12-98 

  
10 Comprehensive Action for Rural 
Development Society, Kishna.    
O-11011/454/97-
CWF 
36,000/- 30.03.98 
11* Santi Mahila Mandali, Chakraya 
Palem, Kollipara Mandalam, 
Guntur Distt. 
O-11011/278/99-
CWF  
24/7/2000 
22,500/- 18-08-2000 
12* PRAGATI 
 Rural Educational Service 
Society, Narlapati Vari Street, 
Kanigiri-523230,  Distt 
Prakasam 
0-
11011/295/2002-
CWF 
17/6/2004 
1,48,500/- 9-3-05 
 
BIHAR 
S.No
. 
Name of Organisation Sanction order 
No. and Date 
Amount Date of 
release 
13 Bihar Gramin Antyodaya Vikas 
Parishad,  12, Ram Krishna Path, 
North S.K.Puri, Patna -800013 
O-
11011/574/94-
CWF 
12/11/1996 
67,500/- 11-3-97 
14 Lok Manglam, Muhalla - Gudri, 
P.O. Laharia Sarai Distt, 
Darbhanga, Bihar -846001.   
1128/97 
O-
11011/1128/97-
CWF 27/8/1999 
22,500/- 11-11-99 
 
DELHI 
S.No
. 
Name of Organisation Sanction order 
No. and Date 
Amount Date of 
release 
15 Rashtra Bal vikas Kendra, C/20/3, 
Sadatpur Extension, 
Delhi-110059   
O-
11011/504/94-
CWF 
1,54,800/- 
 
24-8-95 
 
TAMILNADU 
S.No
. 
Name of Organisation Sanction order 
No. and Date 
Amount Date of 
release 
16 Nehru Social Education Centre, 
Ayakkaranpulam-2, Sethi PO, 
Vedaraniam Taluk, Nagil Quaid E 
Milleth Distt.,Tamilnadu.                     
O-
11011/108/2000
-CWF 
72,000/- 14.9.01 
 

  
 
UTTAR PRADESH 
17 
 
Dr. Ambedkar Anusuchit Jan Jati, 
Vikas Ashram, Nai Bazar, Naini, 
Allahabad.   65/96 
 SO-25/9/96 
O-11011/65/96-
CWF 
25/9/1996 
18,000/- 19-1-97 
18 Adivasi Janjati Mahila Utthan 
Shiksha Samiti, Vinova Nagar, 
Naini,  Allahabad-211 009 
140/95  
SO dt. 29/10/1996 
O-11011/140/95-
CWF 
29/10/1996 
40,000/- 11-3-97 
19 Chandhary Sadhu Singh Sewa 
Samiti, 147 -A Tyula Ram Bagh, 
Allahabad. 
122/95 
SO dt. 29/10/96 
O-11011/122/95-
CWF 
29/10/1996 
40,500/- 2-4-97 
20 Maya Silai Kadhai Prashikshan 
Sansthan, Vill. Gunnour Abdulhai,  
Gunnour(Budau) 
SO dt.18/3/1998   409/97 
O-11011/409/97-
CWF 
6/10/1998 
36,000/- 17-11-98 
21 Vishwa Bhartiya Samajouthan 
Sansthan 178, Munshi Purava, D - 
Block, Indira Nagar, Lucknow    
660/97 
SO dt16/1/1998 
O-11011/660/97-
CWF 
16/1/1998 
36,000/- 30-3-98 
22 Swami Sant Dass Manav Kalyan 
Samiti, Village -Baraicha, Post -
Panchnai, Distt.-Fatehpur 645/96 
SO dt.12/3/1999 
O-11011/645/96 22,500/- 15-03-99 
23 Pushpanjali,E-200, Sector ‘F’. 
 L.D.A. Colony, Kanpur Road,  
Lucknow-226012. 
2nd address 
Vill & P.O. Baraura,  Kanpur  
Road, Lucknow-226012. 
O-11011/607/98-
CWF 
26/4/2000 
22,500/- 
 
 
9-6-2000 
24 Gramodyog Sewa –
Aashram,Village-Medpur, PO -
Kinangar, Distt.-Meerut      
01/20/2003-CWF-II  
SO dt. 20/2/2004 
( 01/20/2003 -
CWF-II ) 
 2,11,500/- 7.4.04 
25 Guru Nanak Vikas Dhara, Jhalkari 
Nagar, Pulia No. 9, Jhansi 
274/2003 
O-
11011/274/2003-
CWF 
7/7/2004 
1,62,000/- 30.8.04 
26 Awadh Sewa Sansthan,Village - 
Pratappur, P.O.Chatrauli, Distt. 
Gonda (U.P.) 
01/548/2003-CWF-II 
SO dt. 27/7/2004 
01/548/2003-
CWF-II 
27/7/2004 
1,75,500/- 21.10.200
4 
 
 KARNATAKA 

  
27 Society for Health, Education & 
Economic Dev., Shed No- 13/3C, 
10th Main Road, 17 th Cross, 
Padarayanapura, Bangalore -560 
026     
O-11011/112/95-
CWF 
7/6/1996 
31,500/- 25-9-96 
28 Social Action For the R ural Dev. 
Orgn. (SARD), L -1, 322/A 5 th 
cross, Mysore.    
O-11011/977/97-
CWF 
16/1/1998 
36,000/- 31-3-98 
29 Yelahanka Vishva Bharati 
Welfare Society and Training 
Institute, Banglore Rural 
Development Planning, SM -3 
Industrial Area, Near GOGO 
Garments, Yelah anka Industrial 
Area,  Bangalore -560064, 
Karnataka   
O-11011/202/99-
CWF 
27/9/2000 
41,400 20-10-
2000 
30 Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Educational 
Society, Veebuthipura, opposite 
keelukote, Antharagange Road, 
Kolar-563101, Karnataka  
O-
11011/1007/97-
CWF 
19/6/2001 
45,000 21.8.01 
31 B.R. Patil Educational Society, R. 
Goundgaon, Tq -Bhalki, District -
Bidar, Karnataka 
O-
11011/23/2002-
CWF 
22/8/2002 
81,000/- 14-11-03 
  
MADHYA PRADESH 
S.No. Name of Organisation Sanction order 
No. and Date 
Amount Date of 
release 
32 Anusuchi Jati & Jan Jati 
Kalyan Sansthan H/O 
Sh Mukesh Agarwal, 
Durga Bhawan, Near 
Agrawal STD/PCO, Kire 
Mohalla, Vidisa, MP  
O-11011/197/97-
CWF 
6/10/1998 
27,000/- 29-10-98 
33 Shri Balabh Shiksha 
Prasar Samit, Tewari 
Bhawan, Tulsi Colony, 
Morena, 
O-
11011/1055/97-
CWF 
1/9/1998 
36,000/- 29.10.98 
34 Helpline Consultancy, 
221, Tansen Nagar, 
Gwalior 
O-
1011/580/2000-
CWF  19/6/2001 
45,000/- 14-09-
2001 
 
MANIPUR 
35   The Rural 
Development 
Association, 
Thangmeiband, 
Yumnam Leikai, Imphal   
O-
11011/270/2003-
CWF 
22/7/2003 
1,53,000/- 
                                                                                        
22.1.04 
36 Goodwill & Threive 
Society, Haochong 
Village, Jameriglong 
01/534/2003-
CWF.II 
5/7/2004 
1,80,000 9-3-
2005 

  
NAGALAND 
 
   ORISSA  
39 Org. for Social Change 
&  
Rural Deve. (OSCARD) 
A/85, Sahidnagar, 
Bhubaneshwar, Orissa. 
O-11011/79/95-
CWF 
7/6/1996 
56,700/- 5-12-96 
40 Mother Teressa Ladies 
Mission Vill & PO 
Chinulei, Dhenkanal 
O-11011/233/97-
CWF 
20/11/97 
27,000/- 31-3-98 
41 Peoples’ Ru ral 
Reconstruction Institute 
For Youth Action P.O. 
Bartana, Balasore Dist.  
O-11011/544/96-
CWF 
11/4/97 
27,000/- 30-5-97 
42 Jagrat Yuva Jyoti Club 
At : Kantamal, P.O. 
Utkela,  
Distt. Kalahandi – 7866 
011, Orissa 
O-11011/865/97-
CWF 
1/2/1999 
40,500/- 16-3-99 
43 Association for Social 
Wel. & Humanitarian 
Approach Adimata 
Colony, Post -
Mancheswar Rly. 
Colony, Bhubaneshwar -
751 017 , Orissa. 
O-11011/463/99-
CWF 
25/7/2000 
27,000 18-9-
2000 
  
UC outstanding for the year 2005-06 
HARYANA 
44 Confederation of Indian 
Industry (CII), (NR), No 
249-Fsec-18, Udyog 
Vihar, Phase IV, 
Gurgaon, Haryana -
122015 
O-
11011/46/2005-
CWF 
7,00,000 6.10.05 
 
TAMILNADU 
45 Citizen and Consumer 
Civic Action Group, 
(CAG), No 8, 4 th Street, 
Ventateshwara Nagar, 
Adyar, Chennai 
01/305/2003-
CWF-II 
4,72,000 6.10.05 
37 Brotherhood 
Multipurpose Society,  
Diphupar, Dimapur, 
Nagaland  
O-
11011/424/2003-
CWF 
21/7/2003 
1,35,000/- 17.03.0
4 
38 ASA Multi purpose 
Coop. Society, Ltd,   
Chumukedima Block-III                           
Dimapur, Nagaland 
O-
11011/289/2003-
CWF 
21/7/2003 
1,44,000/- 9.12.03 

  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.35 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 Recommendation (Sl.No.26, Para No. 4.25) 
 
4.17 The Committee further note that ‘Consumer Clubs’ is one of the schemes 
operated under Consumer Welfare Fund  (CWF). Under the aforesaid scheme, a 
consumer club is to be set up in middle, higher and higher -secondary 
school/college affiliated to a Government Recognized Board and a grant of              
Rs.10,000 per Consumer Club in the schools/colleges is admissi ble under this 
scheme. The Committee note that Consumer Clubs could be set up only in the 
States of Andhra Pradesh, Tripura, West Bengal, Maharashtra and NCT of Delhi. 
The Committee note that for effective Consumer Movement in the country, 
children need to  be involved and Consumer Clubs are the best way for instilling 
in children the spirit of protection of consumer rights. The Committee would, 
therefore, like the Department to pursue further with the remaining States/UTs to 
ensure that Consumer Clubs are set up in each of the schools/colleges. 
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 4.18 The list of  States  that have availed funds under the scheme and  set up 
consumer clubs are given at Annexure -B. The detailed list has also been posted 
on the web site. 
 
 ANNEXURE-B 
 
List showing the number of consumer clubs sanctioned/set up by the State 
Govt./UTs. 
 
S.No. State (No. of distt.) No. of 
schools 
1 Andhra Pradesh(23) 977 
2 Chhattisgarh(16) 250 
3 Gujarat(25) 250 
4 Haryana(19) 135 
5 Karnataka(27) 650 
6 Maharashtra(35) 500 
7 Orissa(30) 500 
8 Punjab(17) 250 
9 Rajasthan(32) 1000 
10 TamilNadu(29) 1000 
11 Uttaranchal(13) 100 
12 West Bengal(18) 400 
13 Himachal Pradesh(12) 36 
14 Sikkim(4) 50 
15 Mizoram(8) 100 
16 Arunachal Pradesh(15) 32 
17 Lakshadweep(1) 21 

  
18 J&k 153 
19 Tripura(4) 27 
20 Puducherry(4) 50 
21 Kerala(14) 100 
 TOTAL 6581 
 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.38 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.27, Para No.4.26) 
 
4.19 The Committee note that Central Consumer Protection Councils were set 
up at Centre and State levels to promote and protect the rights of the 
Consumers. Consumer Protect ion Act mandates the States to establish District 
Consumer Redressal Councils at the District Level to strengthen consumer 
movement at the grass -root level.   The Committee note that the performance of 
Central, State and District Consumer Protection Counci ls (DCPCs) is far from 
satisfactory.  The Committee feel that these agencies need to be made more 
accountable, responsible and effective so as to ensure justice at the doorsteps of 
consumers.  The Committee note that these Councils have been entrusted with  
the responsibility of raising issues concerning welfare of consumers and also 
give recommendations to this effect.  The Committee note with concern that the 
sittings of Consumer Protection Councils are not held regularly.  At times, 
meetings are not held at all.  The Committee feel that there is a need to place a 
mechanism by which sitting of the Council be convened, if 2/3rd Members of the 
Council so desire.  The Committee also feel that though the recommendations of 
the Councils are not binding on the Go vernment still, due consideration needs to 
be given to the recommendations of these Councils.  The Committee note that 
District Consumer Protection Councils are headed by District Magistrates who 
are unable to devote much time due to their preoccupation in  other pressing 
matters.  As such, District Magistrates are not able to do justice to these bodies. 
The Committee desire that Government should find ways and means and ensure 
that officials, who can devote time and energy, head these bodies and able to do 
justice to the work assigned.   
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
4.20 The observations of the Committee have been noted and conveyed to the 
State Governments/UT Administrations for remedial action vide this 
Department’s D.O. letter No. 5(4)/2007 - CPU dated 06.11.200 7 from Secretary, 
Consumer Affairs to Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs. 
 

  
  It may be further stated here that as per section 8A of the Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986, the District Consumer Protection Council would be chaired 
by the Collector of the Distr ict (by whatever name called). This provision has 
been made since the Collector being the head of the District Administration is the 
highest official in the District & has the powers to take all necessary steps to 
ensure welfare of consumers.   
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.41 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.35, Para No.8.6) 
 
4.21 The Committee further note that the working of the Cell is being reviewed 
by the Government from time to time.  In this regard, the Committee would like to 
be informed about the mechanism of getting feedback from consumers to know 
about the satisfaction level of the consumers. 
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 
 4.22 The CGRC and CCC are trying to resolve the complaints of the 
consumers to their satisfaction with mutual understanding of both the parties as 
CGRC and CCC (CORE Center) have no statutory powers. There is  no formal 
mechanism of getting feedback from satisfied consumers. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.47 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 44, Para No.  10.17) 
 
4.23 The Committee note that services rendered on consideration are included 
within the purview of the present Consumer Protection Act. In the opinion of the 
Committee, one of t he major problem areas has been deficiencies on the part of 
Municipalities in providing services which are mandatory in nature.  These 
services include health, medical service, garbage disposal, drinking water, 
drainage, etc.  The Committee have been infor med that one of the Working 
Groups set up in connection with protection of consumer interest had 
recommended to bring all mandatory Municipal services within the ambit of this 
Act.  However, the proposal, after due consideration and consultation, was final ly 
deferred as the service providers from State Governments as well as many 

  
Central Ministries/Departments expressed their inability to provide expected 
standards due to various resources and capacity constraints.  The Committee 
are pained to note that the  Government preferred administration and financial 
constraints over the interests of consumers and deferred the proposal, on the 
pretext that this is not the appropriate stage for such a provision.  The Committee 
feel that the reasons stated above for defe rring the proposal are merely delaying 
tactics on the part of both Central and State Governments who are shirking their 
responsibility towards citizens and consumers and denying them a right to good 
living. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the reco mmendation of the 
Working Group to include all mandatory Municipal services within the ambit of 
this Act be implemented in letter and spirit so as to ensure best services to the 
consumers. 
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
4.24 Due to the fact that majority of the Mi nistries/Departments, States/UTs are 
not supporting it also because of administrative & financial implications involved,  
it has been decided to defer the proposal to amend the Act to include mandatory 
services such as Municipal services etc. under the def inition of ‘service’ in the 
Act. As the responses have been overwhelmingly against inclusion of this 
proposal, it may not be appropriate to revisit the proposal at this stage. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.50 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

  
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.5, Para No. 2.7) 
 
5.1 The Committee note that the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 seeks to 
protect the rights of consumers by rendering quick and inexpensive redressal of 
the grievances of the consumers by establishing `Alternate Justice Deliv ery 
System’. The Committee further note that in a span of two decades since the 
enforcement of the provisions of the aforesaid Act, it has undergone 
amendments thrice and a Working Group has been constituted to propose further 
amendments. The Committee whi le examining Demands for Grants 2007 -08 
have been informed that the draft amendment proposals have been prepared 
based on the recommendations of the Working Group. The Committee would like 
that the amendments should be finalized expeditiously and the draft  legislation 
be introduced in Parliament. Besides, the Committee urge that while bringing the 
amendments, the various observations/suggestions made in the report should 
also be considered. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
5.2 Based on the working Group Report & the  comments received from 
various stake holders, such as State Governments, Central 
Departments/Ministries, National Commission, etc., the proposals for further 
amendments to the Consumer Protection Act are being finalized in consultation 
with the Ministry of Law & Justice. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.30, Para No. 5.3) 
 
5.3 The Committee note that a National Action Plan which proposes to 
educate more than 100 crore of people of various categories on various subject 
matters of consumer interest has been prepared by the Department.  Besides, a 
media Plan has also been prepared in consultation with the DAVP. The State 
Governments have also been asked to evolve their own State Action Plans to 
strengthen the consumer movement in the country.  The Committee emphasize 
on the implementation of the targets fixed under the National Plan. Besides, 
State Governments may also be pursued further for the finalisation of State Plans 
expeditiously.   
 
 

  
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 5.4 The observations of the Committee will be kept in mind while interacting 
with State /UTs. Further the entire media plan is being materialized through an 
empowered Committee headed by Secretary (CA) and a multi media  committee 
having representation from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, 
Voluntary Consumer orgnisations/ professional  agencies will be entrusted with 
the task of carrying a detailed concurrent eval uation of implementation of 
Consumer awareness scheme under National Action Plan. State 
Governments/UTs have been asked to prepare detailed  plan in respect of 
consumer awareness schemes and funding  could be provided from Grant -in-aid 
to States after  examination of such proposals. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.38, Para No. 9.8  ) 
 
5.5 The Committee are concerned to note tha t only few items are covered in 
mandatory certification by BIS.  Further, BIS has published 9540 number of 
product specifications which specify the requirements of specific products taking 
into account the concerns of all stakeholders like consumers, manuf acturers, 
research organizations, regulatory bodies, etc. which are part of the technical 
Committee deciding on such specifications.  The Committee note that factors 
such as Consumer Health, Safety, Security, Environment, Infrastructure, 
Protection of loca l population against spurious foreign made goods and items of 
mass consumption are taken into consideration while deciding whether to include 
a product under mandatory certification or otherwise.  The Committee have 
further been informed that as against 95 40 product certifications, only 110 have 
been covered and 71 more items are proposed to be covered under mandatory 
certification.   The Committee are not satisfied with the pace with which the items 
are classified under mandatory certification.  The Commit tee desire that more 
items should be brought under mandatory certification especially in regard to 
consumer health, safety, security and items of mass consumption.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Government in 
this regard.                  
 
Reply of Government 
 
 5.6 It may be stated here that an Inter Ministerial Task Force has been 
constituted by the Govt. of India under the Chairpersonship of Additional 
Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs in the Ministry of Consum er Affairs, 
Food & Public Distribution to look into the various aspects of mandatory 
certification.  Simultaneously, the BIS Act is also being reviewed with a view to 
overcoming certain existing inadequacies. So as to facilitate bringing more 
products under mandatory certification.   
 
  Further, the list of products under mandatory certification is also being 
reviewed.  Presently, there are 68 products under mandatory BIS certification.  

  
Consultations are being held with other concerned Ministries/Departmen ts 
regarding precedents to be under mandatory certification. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.40, Para No. 10.13 ) 
 
5.7 The Committee find that as the law stands today, a prospective investor 
i.e. applicants for shares, etc. is not covered within the definition of consumer as 
provided for in the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. However, after the 
transactions are over and the shares etc. are allotted in the name of investor, one 
becomes a consumer.  Thereafter such person can move the Consumer Forum 
with regard to any dispute/grievance. It has further been brought to the notice of 
the Committee that this was the recommendation of o ne of the Working Groups 
and a proposal to bring persons such as prospective investor within the definition 
of consumer is under consideration of the Government. The Committee are of 
the view that cases are not rare where a prospective investor has been ch eated 
and there has not been any effective mechanism to redress his grievances.  The 
Committee hope that in the interest of the consumers at large, the Government 
would make efforts to bring such people within the definition of consumer without 
any further loss of time.  
 
Reply of Government 
 
5.8 There is a proposal to amend the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 to 
include prospective investor of shares in the definition of ‘consumer’ to bringing 
them under the purview of the Act. The proposal is being finalize d in consultation 
with the Ministry of Law & Justice. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.42, Para No. 10.15) 
 
5.9 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that in many instances, 
the seller or service provider either refuses or do not issue bills, cash memo, 
receipt etc. to the consumer on purchase.  As a result, no actionable claim can 
be filed under Consumer Protection  Act.  The Committee have been informed 
that the refusal or failure to issue bills/cash memo/receipt etc. is proposed to be 
covered as one of the unfair trade practices under the Consumer Protection Act.  
The Committee desire that the Act be amended to take care of above infirmities. 
 

  
Reply of Government 
 
5.10 There is a proposal to amend the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 to 
include refusal to issue Bill or cash memo as a form of unfair trade practice. The 
proposal is being finalized in consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice.    
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.43, Para No. 10.16  ) 
 
5.11 The Committee find that manufac turers and traders resort to different 
types of schemes to promote sale of their products.  Sometimes there is 
compromise on the quality of the products to compensate the cost of providing 
attractive schemes. The consumers are thus cheated, as they do not get the 
value of the money spent to purchase the product.  The Committee find that at 
present there is no regulating mechanism in this regard. The Committee note that 
the Department propose to amend Section 2(1)(r)(3) of the Consumer Protection 
Act to effectively protect the interests of consumers from such practices of trade 
and industry.  The Committee would like to emphasize to finalize the aforesaid 
proposal expeditiously so as to protect the interests of consumers. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 
5.12 There is a proposal to amend the provision of Section 2(1) (r) (3) of the 
Consumer Protection Act, as observed by the Committee, which among other 
things are being finalized in consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice.  
  
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.46, Para No. 10.19 ) 
 
5.13 In the era of e -transaction, there has been aggressive marketing and sale 
of products and services b y internet, e -mail, telephonically and other means of 
transactions.  In these cases, the consumer does not have any opportunity of 
examining the products or services prior to the purchase.  Fleecing or looting of 
consumers cannot be ruled out in such trans actions.  At times, no opportunity or 
time limit is provided to a consumer within which he may withdraw goods or 
services and get the refund of money already paid.  The Committee feel that 
there is a need to provide an opportunity to a consumer to return t he product or 
seek withdrawal of service and get back the money paid without having to file 
complaint in the Consumer Fora.  The Committee have been informed that 
Government propose to provide a suitable provision in the Consumer Protection 

  
Act, 1986 to ta ckle such kinds of transactions.  The Committee desire that the 
Act be amended to take care of these eventualities.  
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
5.14 There is a proposal to amend the Consumer Protection Act 1986 to 
include a provision allowing consumers to retu rn the goods purchased or 
discontinue the service availed within a fixed time period and get refund of the 
amount paid in consideration thereof, if the consumer is not satisfied with the 
goods purchased or service rendered. The proposal is being finalized in 
consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice.    
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.48, Para No. 10.21) 
 
5.15 The Committee have observed that at times the consumers do not have 
any choice but to accept unilateral one -sided terms of contract while purchasing 
gadgets like Washing Machine, Fax, Telephone instrument, Fridge etc.  These 
unilateral provisions also generally discl aim and deny any responsibility for 
serious defects, deficiencies and delays.  Similarly, certain manufacturers and 
service providers also restrict their liability to a shorter period of time even though 
the durable life of the goods sold or the service pe rformed are designed for a 
much longer time.  The Committee note that all these instances, undoubtedly 
point towards exploitation of consumers and there is hardly any redressal 
mechanism available under Consumer Protection Laws.  The Committee have 
been informed that as per a recent ruling of the Supreme Court, any contract or 
any condition of contract between two parties of unequal bargaining capacities, if 
they are one sided, unilateral or unfair to the weaker party, such contracts or 
conditions of contra cts are unconstitutional, illegal and unenforceable.  The 
Committee have been further informed that there is a proposal to cover all these 
unfair terms of contract as per the law laid down by the Apex Court, in the form of 
unfair trade practices in the def inition itself.  The Committee hope and trust that 
the Government would review the definition of unfair trade practices in the light of 
the above and the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 amended suitably.         
 
Reply of Government 
 
5.16 There is a proposal  to amend the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 to 
include one sided contracts as a form of unfair trade practice within the purview 
of the Act. The proposal is being finalized in consultation with the Ministry of Law 
& Justice. 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 

  
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.49, Para No.10.22 ) 
 
5.17 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that certain 
telemarketing companies, credit  cards, insurance, banks and financial 
institutions, mobile companies etc. share the personal data profile of a consumer 
without one’s knowledge and at times on consideration to other agencies.  As the 
unsolicited telephone calls invade the privacy of an i ndividual, a demand has 
been raised from many quarters to include the disclosure of information given in 
confidence by a consumer as deficiencies in service.  Taking into consideration 
the inconvenience caused to a consumer, the Government is considering a  
proposal to explicitly cover such practices as a form of deficiency in service.  The 
Committee recommend that the Consumer Protection Act be amended in the 
light of above. 
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 5.18 There is a proposal to amend the Consumer Protection A ct, 1986 to 
include Right to Privacy as one of the consumer rights enshrined under the Act. 
The proposal would make disclosure of information, given in confidence by the 
consumer, as a violation of the right of the consumer, which would also amount 
to defi ciency in the service rendered/unfair trade practice adopted by such 
service provider and therefore liable for compensation to the affected party. The 
proposal is being finalized in consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice.    
   
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.50, Para No. 10.23) 
 
5.19 The Committee note that Government propose to set up a Authority on the 
lines of US A’s Consumer Product Safety Commission in order to protect the 
interests of consumers from various problems including the menace of 
counterfeit, fake, spurious and contraband products.  The Committee hope and 
trust that such an independent authority would be set up at the earliest in the 
interest of the consumers. 
 
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
5.20 There is a proposal to set up an authority to be known as National 
Consumer Protection Authority (NCPA). The authority is likely to, inter-alia, deal 
with consumer pro duct safety, fake/spurious goods, etc. The proposal is being 

  
finalized in consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice and other concerned 
Ministries.    
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/14/2007-P&C Dated 05.06.2008] 
      
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI;         DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV 
     26 September, 2008                 Chairman, 
     4, Asvina, 1930 (Saka)        Standing Committee on Food, 
                                                              Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution.

  
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2008-2009) 
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 27TH AUGUST, 2008. 
 
The Committee sat from 1030 hours to 1110 hours in Committee 
Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
PRESENT 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav     -      Chairman 
 
        MEMBERS 
        Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Suresh Angadi 
3. Shri Alakesh Das 
4. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
5. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
6. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
7. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
8. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
9. Shri Munshi Ram 
10. Shri Fransisco Cosme Sardinha 
11. Shri Ghuran Ram 
12. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
13. Shri Chandrabhan Singh  
14. Smt. Meena Singh 
Rajya Sabha 
 
15. Shri T.S.Bajwa 
16. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
17. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
18. Shri Matilal Sarkar 
19. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri    P.K. Misra    - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt.   Veena Sharma  -          Director  
3. Shri    B.S.Dahiya   - Deputy Secretary - I 
4.  Shri    Jagdish Prasad                   -          Deputy Secretary- II 
 
Cont/-…. 
 

  
-2- 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee and apprised them of the agenda of the sitting.   
3.   The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Action Taken 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the 
Committee on ‘Consumer Movement in the Country’ relating to the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Co nsumer 
Affairs) and adopted the same with slight modifications.  
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the aforesaid report 
and present the same to the House in the ensuing session. 
5. The Committee decided to hold the next sitting on 4th September, 2008. 
6. The committee also decided to undertake a study visit to Chandigarh, 
Simla and Manali  in the last week of  September, 2008.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
************ 

  
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations   50 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which have been  
accepted by the Government: 
Serial Nos.  – 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 16, 17,  
18, 21, 28, 31, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37 and 45 
 Total          22 
 Percentage         44 
(iii) Recommendations/ Observations which the  
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the  
replies received from the Government: 
 
Serial Nos. – 20, 22, 29, 39, 41 and 47 
  
 Total          6 
  Percentage         12 
 
(iv) Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which  
replies of the   Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
        Serial Nos.  – 4, 7, 12, 14, 19, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 35  
and 44  
      
 Total         12 
    
Percentage       24 
 
(v) Recommendations in respect of which the final replies  
of  the Government are still awaited: 
 
       Serial Nos.  – 5, 30, 38, 40, 42, 43, 46, 48, 49 and 50. 
 
 Total         10  
    
Percentage       20 
 