164
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION
(2006-07)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
17
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS,
FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER
AFFAIRS)
FORWARD CONTRACTS (REGULATION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2006
lR;eso t;rs
SEVENTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)

157
SEVENTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD,
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC
DISTRIBUTION
(2006-07)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS)
FORWARD CONTRACTS (REGULATION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2006
lR;eso t;rs
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19 December, 2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19 December, 2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)

FCA & PD. No. 17
Price : Rs. 167.00
© 2006 B Y LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Indian Press,
Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
23
25
29
31
32
34
36
37
39
42
44
45
143
146
149
152
155
C
OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .........................................................................
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................................
CHAPTER I Introductory...................................................................................
CHAPTER I I (a) Establishment and Constitution of the Foward
Market Commission............................................................
(b) Management of Commission..........................................
(c) Functions of the Commission.........................................
(d) Grants by Central Government – Accounts & Audit..
(e) Registration of Members and Intermediaries..........
(f) Penalties and Procedures..................................................
(g) Crediting Sums realized by way of Penalties to
Consolidated Fund of India............................................
(h) Investigation...........................................................................
(i) Appeal to Appellate Tribunal.........................................
(j) Exemption from Tax on Wealth and Income.........
(k) Power to make Rules and Regulations......................
A
PPENDIX
The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill,
2006................................................................................................
ANNEXURES
(i) Minutes of the second sitting of the Committee held on
12th September, 2006...............................................................
(ii) Minutes of the fourth sitting of the Committee held on
9th October, 2006.......................................................................
(iii) Minutes of the fifth sitting of the Committee held on
18th October, 2006.....................................................................
(iv) Minutes of the sixth sitting of the Committee held on
31st October, 2006.....................................................................
(v) Minutes of the ninth sitting of the Committee held on
13th December, 2006................................................................
PAGE

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD,
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION
(2006-2007)
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Govinda Aroon Ahuja
3. Shri Alakesh Das
4. Shri Atma Singh Gill
5. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain
6. Shri Baliram Kashyap
7. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
8. Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
9. Shri Parsuram Majhi
10. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
11. Shri Harikewal Prasad
12. Shri Munshi Ram
13. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj
14. Adv. P. Satheedevi
15. Smt. V. Radhika Selvi
16. Shri Chandra Bhan Singh
17. Shri Ramakant Yadav
18. Vacant
19. Vacant
20. Vacant
21. Vacant
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri T.S. Bajwa
23. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
24. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
25. Shri Kanjibhai Patel
26. Shri Rajniti Prasad
27. Shri Nabam Rebia
28. Shri Matilal Sarkar
29. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu
30. Shri Thanga Tamil Selvan
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P.K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.S. Kambo — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri B.S. Dahiya — Under Secretary
5. Shri Jagdish Prasad — Assistant Director

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer
Affairs and Public Distribution (2006-07) having been authorised by the
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Seventeenth
Report on “The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2006”
relating to Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution
(Department of Consumer Affairs).
2. The Forward Contract (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2006; was
introduced in Lok Sabha on 21st March, 2006. Hon’ble Speaker referred
the Bill to the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public
Distribution under Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha on 25th May, 2006 for examination and report
within two months. Thereafter, the Committee invited officials of the
State Governments of Rajasthan, Gujarat and Maharashtra as well as
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI),
National Commodity and Derivatives Exchange Ltd. (NCDEX) and
National Multi-Commodity Exchange (NMCX), Ahmedabad to hear
their views on the subject and sought clarification at its sittings held on
9th and 18th October, 2006. The representatives of the Department of
Consumer Affairs deposed before the Committee on 12th September and
31st October, 2006. The Committee considered and adopted the draft
Report on the Bill at their sitting held on 13th December, 2006.
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Officials of
State Government of (i) Gujarat (ii) Rajasthan and (iii) Maharashtra and
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI),
National Commodity and Derivatives Exchange Ltd. (NCDEX) and
National Multi-Commodity Exchange (MMCX), Ahemdabad for appear-
ing before the Committee and also furnishing their views/suggestions to
the Committee. The Committee also express their thanks to Prof. Kamal
Nayan Kabra for furnishing his valuable suggestions/comments to the
Committee.
(v)

4. The Committee also express their thanks to the representatives
of Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution
(Department of Consumer Affairs) for tendering evidence before the
Committee and for furnishing the detailed information/material desired
in connection with the examination of the Bill.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV,
 N EW D ELHI; Chairman,
15 December, 2006 Standing Committee on Food, Consumer
24 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) Affairs and Public Distribution .
(vi)

REPORT
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
A. BACKGROUND
Futures trading in commodities started in India with the first
contract introduced in cotton in 1875 by the Bombay Cotton Trade
Association Ltd. Subsequently, many regional exchanges like Gujarat
Vyapar Mandali (1900) for oilseeds, Chamber of Commerce at Hapur
(1913) and East India Jute Association Ltd. (1927) for raw jute etc. came
into existence. By 1939, there were more than 300 commodity exchanges
in the country dealing in commodities like turmeric, sugar, gur, pepper,
cotton, oilseeds etc. Trading was conducted through both options and
futures instruments. However, there was no market regulator and hence
there was no uniformity in trading practices. Further, there was no
structured clearing and settlement system. After Independence, the
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 (FCR Act, 1952) was passed to
regulate this market with Forward Markets Commission (FMC) being set
up in 1953 at Mumbai as the regulator. However, in the mid-60s, the
Government imposed a ban on the futures trading of most of the
commodities on the assumption that this led to inflationary conditions.
However, with a view to improving the lot of the Indian farmer and to
reverse the adverse terms of trade that they have been suffering for their
produce, the restrictions on forward trading were lifted in April, 2003.
There are now 24 commodity Exchanges in the country including three
National Multi-Commodity Exchanges,  two at Mumbai and one at
Ahmedabad. These three national Exchanges are state-of-the art,
de-mutualized and corporatized trading platforms from the beginning
with facilities for on-line trading across the country. At present,
103 commodities have been approved for trading out of which
92 commodities are actively traded.

2
B. NEED FOR AMENDMENT
1.2 Since then several changes have taken place in the commodity
futures market. While the commodity futures market has been liberalized
with effect from April, 2003 and modern institutional structures are in
the process of being evolved, the Forward Markets Commission (FMC)
the market Regulator, is broadly functioning in its traditional manner.
Some of the existing provisions of the FCR Act have also become
redundant in view of the rapid expansion of the commodity futures
market. Also, the commodity futures market has been witnessing
exponential growth in the last three years.
C. MAIN OBJECTIVES OF THE PREVIOUS AMENDMENT BILL
1.3 A Bill to amend the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952
(FCR Act) was introduced on the 23rd December, 1998 in the Rajya Sabha
and the same was referred to the Standing Committee on Food, Civil
Supplies and Public Distribution for examination and report. The Bill,
after incorporating the recommendations of the Standing Committee, was
passed on the 15th December 2003 by Rajya Sabha but could not be
passed by the 13th Lok Sabha due to its dissolution. The Bill 1998 mainly
provided for the amendments with regard to :
(1) changes in definition of Specific Delivery Contracts;
(2) enhancement of minimum penalty from Rs. 1000 to Rs. 5000;
(3) registration of brokers;
(4) increase in the period of delivery of goods in case of ready
delivery contracts;
(5) insertion of new definition of ‘future contracts’
(6) removal of prohibition of option in goods and;
(7) increase in maximum number of Members of Forward
Markets Commission (FMC) from 4 to 7.
D. GROWTH OF COMMODITY FUTURE MARKET
1.4 In 2003-04, the total value of commodity futures traded was
Rs. 1.29 lakh crore. In the year 2004-05, the trade value had reached

3
Rs. 5.71 lakh crore with an increase of 342%. During the financial year
2005-06, the total trade value was of Rs. 21.34 lakh crore showing an
increase of 274%.
E. PRESENT POSITION OF REGULATION OF FORWARD MARKET
(TRADING)
1.5 There are three tiers of regulations of forward trading viz.
The Central Government, Forward Markets Commission and the
Recognised Commodity Exchanges/Associations. The Central Govern-
ment broadly determines the policy as to commodities in which futures/
forward trading is to be permitted and the recognition of Exchange/
Association through whom such trading is to be permitted. The Forward
Markets Commission performs the role of approving the Rules and
Regulations of the Exchange subject to which the trading is to be
conducted, accord permission for commencement of trading in different
contracts, monitor market conditions continuously and take remedial
measures whenever the trading tends to go outside the permissible limits.
The Recognised Exchange/Association provide the frame work of Rules
and Regulations for conduct of trading, the place where the trading is
to be conducted, reporting and recording of contracts, execution &
settlement of contracts, forum for exchange of documents and payments,
etc.
F . MAIN OBJECTIVES OF THE AMENDMENT BILL, 2006
1.6. The forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2006,
inter alia , seeks to make the following amendments to the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, to,—
(a) amend the definition of the expression “forward contract” so
as to include therein “commodity derivative” and also insert
new expressions such as “commodity derivative”,
“corporatisation”, “demutualisation” and “intermediary”, etc.,
which have been used in the Bill;
(b) increase the maximum number of members of FMC from four
to nine out of which three to be whole-time members and a
Chairman;
(c) confer power upon the FMC to levy fees;

4
(d) provide for constitution of FMC General Fund to which all
grants, fees and all sums received by the FMC shall be credited
except penalty and apply the funds for meeting the expenses
of the Commission;
(e) confer power upon the Central Government to issue directions
to the FMC on the matter of policy and to supersede the FMC
in certain cases;
(f) make provisions for corporatisation and demutualisation of
recognized associations in accordance with the scheme to be
approved by the FMC;
(g) make provisions for registration of members and intermedi-
aries;
(h) allow trading in options;
(i) make provision for investigation, enforcement and penalty
in case of contravention of the provisions of the FCR Act,
1952;
(j) make provisions of appeals, from the order of the FMC and
adjudicating officer to the Securities Appellate Tribunal for the
purposes of FCR Act, 1952 and from the order of the Securities
Appellate Tribunal under the FCR Act, 1952 to the Supreme
Court;
(k) make provisions for transfer of the duties and functions of
a clearing house to a clearing corporation; and
(l) make provisions for exemption from payment of tax on
wealth, income and profits or gains of FMC.
1.7 Asked as to why the Government have taken a long time in
finalizing the present Bill, the Committee was informed that the
Government had to conduct wide-ranging consultations before finalizing
the fresh amendment Bill. After taking concurrence of the Ministry of
Law and Justice and comments of the various Ministries/Departments,
the proposal to amend the FCR Act was approved by the Cabinet on
29.12.2005. Subsequently the Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on
21.3.06.

5
1.8 The Committee was apprised that following difficulties
being faced by FMC, would be overcome, on the enactment of the present
Bill:—
(i) At present, FMC is an attached office of the Ministry of
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution and it does
not have adequate financial and operational autonomy. The
proposed amendments seek to restructure and strengthen FMC
on the lines of the Securities and Exchange Board of India
(SEBI), the securities market Regulator.
(ii) The FMC does not have adequate powers required for effective
regulation of rapidly growing commodity futures markets.
The Government have delegated most of its powers to FMC
other than the powers for recognition, withdrawal of
recognition and supersession of the Associations. The
proposed amendment seeks to confer upon the FMC all the
delegated and non-delegated powers for effective regulation of
the markets.
(iii) The penal provisions in the present Act are inadequate for
regulating the markets effectively. The proposed amendment
seeks to enhance penal provisions to a minimum of ‘Rupees
Twenty Five thousand, which can be extended up to
Rs. Twenty Five lakhs’ as against the existing provision of
‘Rupees One Thousand only’. Various new provisions are also
proposed to be inserted to provide for penalty to be imposed
after adjudication for contraventions such as failure to furnish
information, return, etc., failure by any person to enter into
agreement with clients, failure to redress clients grievances,
insider trading, adoption of fraudulent and unfair trade
practices, default in case of intermediary and failure to comply
with the directives of FMC.
(iv) FMC at present does not have a statutory power for registration
of members and other intermediaries. The registration of the
intermediaries is essential to ensure their effective monitoring
by the FMC. The Bill provides for statutory provision relating
to registration of members and other intermediaries.

6
(v) The Bill also provides for inserting new provisions relating
to corporatization and demutualization of the existing
commodity Exchanges and for setting up of a Clearing
Corporation.
(vi) The FCR Act, at present, does not provide for an Appellate
Authority. The proposed amendments seek to designate
Securities Appellate Tribunal (SAT) as the Appellate Tribunal
for the purposes of FCR Act. The Amendment Bill provides
for an appeal against the order of FMC and Adjudicating
Officer before SAT and against the order of SAT before the
Supreme Court.
(vii) The present Act prohibits options in goods. The proposed
amendment seeks to introduce options in goods and
commodity derivatives. This will provide farmers and other
stakeholders with a better risk management tool.
1.9 In this regard, the Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs
further clarified:—
“Our objective is to ensure that the futures market functions
in a very transparent, objective and efficient manner and it performs
the two basic functions of price discovery and risk management.
To ensure that this is achieved more efficiently we have now
introduced a new Bill which really seeks to restructure and empower
the FMC something on the lines of SEBI. We are proposing to amend
the existing provisions and taking out those which are redundant
or modifying them. We are also proposing certain new provisions
on the lines of Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992.
The Standing Committee, when it had looked at the last Bill, had
made certain recommendations. It has recommended that the
Forward Markets Commission should be restructured on very
professional lines; the Exchanges should be professionalised by
way of demutualisation, and the Enforcement Wing of the
Commission should be given more powers so that it can investigate
and go straight to the courts without having to depend on the police
force for investigation. We have incorporated all these recommen-
dations of the Committee in our new Bill also.”
1.10 Asked whether any survey has been conducted in the country
regarding difficulties being faced by the farmers and cultivators relating

7
to forward contract, the Committee was informed that futures trading
helps the farmers through price discovery and risk management. All
Committees set up by the Government such as Khusro Committee and
Kabra Committee have recommended resumption of forward trading for
the benefit of farmers. However, specific steps need to be initiated to
enable farmers to benefit from the development of the futures market.
1.11 It has been stated that the draft Amendment Bill, 2006 was
posted on the website of FMC for comments from the public as well as
all concerned institutions and entities. When asked about the response
from the general public in respect of the amendment Bill and whether
the views/comments from all the State Governments/ UT Administration
were obtained, the Ministry informed the Committee that no comments
were received from the general public or State Governments.
1.12 The National Commodity Derivatives Exchanges Limited
(NCDEX) in their memorandum submitted to the Committee favoured
the passage of Bill and stated that Forward Contracts market gives
advance signals of prices of commodities in future. Farmers can use this
signal for hedging their price risks and also to decide which crop
economically suits them. Forward Markets Commission and the national
level exchanges have taken steps to disseminate price information to the
farmers and other participants. Knowledge of price prevailing in the
market in any commodity is biggest enabler for the farmers to negotiate
price for his produce. Even though direct participation of farmers in the
futures trading is at initial stages, farmers are benefited with the
knowledge of prevailing spot and also by the prevailing future price of
such commodity prices before they move their commodities for sale. With
the establishment of technology driven and institution promoted national
level commodity exchanges, the process of price discovery of commodities
has become transparent.
1.13 Typically farmers face two major risks at point of sowing;
these are the volumetric risks (weather covered by insurance companies
through crop  and weather insurance and going ahead, weather
derivatives offered by commodity exchanges can be used for similar
cover), and price risk, (which exchanges like NCDEX already provide).
At  the point of sowing a farmer can sell forward a part of his expected
production and lock into a firm price. If the FCR Act is amended and
options are permitted, then the farmers can buy through a local bank

8
branch an option which will give him an assured price for the harvest
period but also allow him to benefit from higher prices if the spot prices
at the time of harvesting are better than the strike price in the option.
Reserve Bank of India does not today allow bank branches play this role
of aggregator for pooling farmers’ requirements and hedging on their
behalf on commodity exchanges. RBI needs to allow bank branches to
immediately play this role (this has already been suggested by the RBI)
in its report on Warehouse Receipts and Commodity Futures in April,
2005.
1.14 The State Government of Gujarat stated that besides this
Commodity Futures market addresses the issues relating to smoothening
price fluctuations, vulnerability of farmers to such price fluctuations on
how to cope up with the prices of crop crash tomorrow. A farmer can
sell his commodity at a price which is fixed today, which eliminates his
risk from price fluctuations. A farmer would thus be able to lock in his
future price and not be exposed to fluctuations in prices. Such a market
also facilities in sending the right signals to farmers as to whether in
the future a commodity would be in demand. If a shortage of a particular
commodity is expected the future prices will go up today, and it will carry
signals back to the farmer making sowing decisions today. This would
help farmers in the long run to optimize cropping patterns.
1.15 In regard to dissemination of price information to the farmers,
the Committee was informed that with the initiative of FMC, the National
Exchanges are widely disseminating price information through: (a) their
own websites, (b) print media, (c) T.V. Channels, and (d) Radio. Under
the Pilot Project to build price dissemination network, the Exchanges have
set up electronic price ticker boards in most of the Agricultural Mandis
in the State of Gujarat. The Government has written to various State
Governments to support dissemination of spot and futures prices in the
agricultural markets in their respective States. The futures prices are also
being disseminated through the kiosks set up by private institutions such
as ITC e-Chaupals.
1.16 Asked about the steps taken by the Government to create
awareness and extensive training to farmers and their cooperatives on
futures trading and related issues like agriculture price risk management
to enable him to increase participation in the future markets, the
Committee was informed that FMC in association with the national and

9
regional Exchanges have organised a large number of awareness
programmes for the benefit of farmers, Cooperatives and other
stakeholders like Food-Processors. During 2005-06, 42 awareness
programmes were conducted by FMC. During 2006-07, so far
20 awareness programmes have been conducted. During the current
financial year, FMC is in correspondence with organizations such as
NABARD, MP State Warehousing Corporation and NIAM, Jaipur for
conducting awareness programmes exclusively for farmers. FMC is also
organizing a programme through Institute of Rural Management, Anand,
on 29th and 30th September, 2006 for the benefit of agri-marketing
cooperative societies and Federations with the objective of creating
awareness among them regarding participation in the commodity
markets. FMC is in correspondence with various Agricultural
Universities/Colleges and is offering them all support, financial as well
as faculty, to introduce the subject of “Futures Markets and their
relevance for farmers” to their students who will in turn carry the
message to rural India. FMC is of the view that Agricultural Universities
may provide a good interface between the commodity futures markets
and farmers.
1.17 When enquired as to how the FMC helps the farmers when
there is a sharp decline in prices of the peak marketing season, the
Ministry stated that FMC helps the farmers by regulating the commodity
futures market efficiently. Commodity futures market integrates prices
during peak and lean periods subject to normal cost of carry i.e.
warehouse charges, interest etc. The futures contracts having maturity
during lean period reflect the likely demand and supply conditions at
that time. Futures prices of these lean season contracts are normally
higher than the prices of contracts maturing during pea marketing
season. If the difference between the spot prices and futures prices of
lean period contracts are higher than the cost of carry, market participants
buy the goods from the spot market and sell equivalent quantity in lean
season futures contracts. This results in creating demand for the
commodity during the peak marketing season, thereby preventing sharp
decline in the prices. FMC monitors the relationship between spot prices
and futures prices to ensure that the difference is not disproportionately
large in comparison to cost of carry. The farmers can hold back their
stock for sale in future date on the basis of the prices discovered on the
platform of the Exchanges. This can avoid distress sales by the farmers

10
during peak harvest season at low prices. The futures trading, therefore,
lead to price stabilization avoiding glut at the time of harvest season and
shortage during the lean season.
1.18 Commenting upon the benefit likely to be accrued if the FMC
is restructured and strengthened on the line of SEBI, the Committee was
informed that the restructuring and strengthening of FMC will enable
it to regulate the commodity futures markets more effectively and enable
the futures markets to perform the two economic functions i.e. price
discovery and price risk management in a more efficient manner.
Efficient price discovery and price risk management will benefit the
farmers as well as consumers. The quality of regulation in any market
is a contributing factor to the overall objectives of ensuring an efficient
market, reducing information asymmetry, promoting confidence among
all the stakeholders in the market and protecting the participants from
manipulative practices. Regulatory oversight attempts to ensure that
market prices are not distorted by manipulative practices. Restructuring
and strengthening of FMC on the lines of SEBI would enable it to perform
its functions of regulating the market in a more pro-active and efficient
manner so as to ensure that these benefits of futures markets reach the
farmers, consumers and all other stakeholders.
1.19 To a specific query of the Committee as to why the benefits
have not trickled down to farmers especially small and marginal farmers,
it was informed that the reasons for their exclusion under the existing
dispensation are stated to be ignorance, lack of awareness and large size
of standardized contracts offered by the Exchanges. It was urged that
there is a urgent need to launch massive awareness campaigns to create
awareness among various stakeholders like farmers, stockists, importers,
exporters about the useful role played by these markets and how they
can derive benefits from these markets. The prices prevailing at the
Exchanges need to be disseminated at the Mandis, APMCs etc. and other
such destinations frequented by farmers to help the farmer community
take informed decisions. This would improve the bargaining power of
the farmer and reduce the role of the middle man. Banks and Cooperative
Societies should be encouraged to play the role of aggregators on behalf
of the small and marginal farmers. Many of the banks and Cooperative
Societies have rural reach, which cannot be matched by any other
institutions. Involvement of these institutional investors would deepen
the market and also attract others who would have better capacity to take

11
risk and thereby enabling the producers to get a better price from the
institutional investors.
1.20 In reply to a question regarding benefits to small and marginal
farmers, the representatives of the Ministry deposed:—
“Small and marginal farmers cannot approach Forward Market
Commission as they will not have any stake in the market.”
1.21 As far as awareness was concerned, the Committee was
apprised that during the year 2005-2006, 42 awareness programmes were
organised. During the year 2006-2007, 24 awareness programmes have
been organized so far. FMC is launching awareness programmes
exclusively for farmers through National Institute of Agricultural
Marketing, Jaipur and NABARD. The awareness programmes conducted
so far have been found to be very useful to the stakeholders. This activity
is being expanded to cover much wider parts of the country and much
larger cross sections of the society. Through awareness campaigns, small
and marginal farmers could be made aware of the price discovery role
being played by the futures market. The futures prices and the signals
emanating from the market could be used by them in deciding the
cropping pattern and while bargaining for better price at the time of sale
of the produce.
1.22 The subject “stock exchanges and futures markets” is
under the Union List in Schedule VII of the Constitution of India,
whereas the “Trade and Commerce” and “Agriculture” are the
subjects within the jurisdiction of States. Therefore, the regulators of
commodities Exchanges do not have jurisdiction over spot Markets even
in non-Agricultural Commodities. Asked whether the regulator of
Commodities markets should have a mandate to regulate the spot
markets in Commodities and the steps taken to resolve the issue, the
Committee was informed that it is true that absence of regulatory
jurisdiction over spot  market in commodities constitutes a handicap
faced by the FMC. The objective and functioning of futures and spot
market are completely different. However, some of the national
commodity Exchanges are taking initiatives to set up national level
electronic Exchanges for spot transactions for agricultural commodities.
Ideally, there should be convergence of spot and futures markets under
a uniform regulatory framework for the optimization of the benefits of
these reforms.

12
1.23 The Committee pointed out that there are variations all over
the country like weather variations, production variations, crop variations
and other variations and enquired as to how the spot market and future
market will come under the same regulatory framework. The Secretary,
Department of Consumer Affairs stated during evidence:—
“Right now in India as per the Constitution, the futures market
comes under Government of India within the competence of
Parliament and the spot market comes under competence of the
State Government. That is why in every State the agriculture spot
market is regulated by the APMC Act. Therefore, you have totally
two set of markets. The spot market in agricultural commodities
is actually regulated by each State Government. There are
7500 mandis across the country. As you rightly said, there is also
no uniform grading. Wheat may be traded in five mandis but you
cannot compare the prices because they may be of different grades.
Sugar may be transacted in ten mandis but you cannot compare
the prices. That is creating problem for the futures market because
the contract in the futures market has to be very specific. I as a
buyer or a seller am offering something in the market. So, the buyer
must be sure that after, let us say, two-three months if the delivery
is taken, it is of the same grade, same quantity, in the same
condition. That is the underlying fundamental principle of the
futures market.”
1.24 Asked whether any provision in this regard have been made
in the Bill, he stated:—
“It is not there. This is the flaw of the market. So, we have to, there
is no other alternative, introduce standards and grading of all the
commodities which are being traded. That is why this answer was
given. There is another aspect also. Let us say I have entered into
a contract to sell and the person who finally settles that contract
is a tenth buyer, because these are transacted. When he settles, the
settlement is always at the spot price on the day of the contractor
settling. So, which is the spot price? I have entered into a contract
for wheat. So, is it of the same grade and the same price? So, each
exchange now has a formula for determining the spot price of the
commodity at which contracts are settled. It is not an ideal thing
because it is something which is derived. So, if you want to have

13
a healthy market, you must have a convergence of the spot and the
futures market.”
1.25 The Committee invited suggestions/comments from expert
and individuals on the FC(R) Bill, 2006. In response Prof. Kamal Nayan
Kabra — Former Prof. of Indian Institute of Economics and Public
Administration, New Delhi and Chairman of Forward Market Review
Committee, 1994 has furnished the following suggestions/comments for
consideration of the Committee:—
(i) A major step towards unlimited space for speculative financial
transactions has been put on the anvil. As a result easy and
quick money-multiplying opportunities for both the Indian
and foreign investors, including those holding huge stocks of
black wealth, would take a quantum jump. In addition to the
commodity futures in 103 commodities permitted since 2003,
a law is being proposed to be tabled in Lok Sabha for
permitting commodity derivatives (price index based
contracts) and options (not the contracts for sale and purchase
of the permitted commodity but an option to do so on the basis
of an upfront payment of premium to the counter party).
(ii) The entirely negative consequences of these huge markets,
involving the essential goods whose retail spot prices are sent
northwards in sympathy with their futures prices are sent
soaring up by the speculators, particularly when the time to
close the deals approaches, have alarmed even the traders and
their organisations. They have gone to the extent of going
beyond submitting memoranda and have taken to the streets.
A very noteworthy aspect of the policy towards futures trading
is that no stakeholders in actual merchandising and no actual
producers of farm goods have pleaded for starting futures in
these commodities. On the contrary, there has been vocal
opposition to the starting of futures trade in these
commodities. Even among the large number of persons and
firms who have started buying and selling futures contracts,
there is little evidence that there are actual trading interests,
as against some large stockists and hoarders who have taken
to these contracts as a price risk management instrument. In
fact, it remains to be demonstrated that there is a serious risk
of unanticipatable price movements.

14
(iii) The Indian commodity markets have been experiencing
continuous price increases over the last few decades and there
is a fairly well established and known seasonal pattern of the
direction of price movements and the unknown of the
situation is basically the extent of price rise. Moreover, there
are some well-known conditions for the suitability of any
commodity for being a fit case for permitting and legally
regulating futures contracts, especially the transferable specific
delivery contracts. Many expert committees appointed by the
Government of India to go in to the question of futures and
forward markets have detailed these conditions. There are
hardly any essential goods of mass consumption that satisfy
these conditions of suitability for futures trading. But it is
equally true that in India there is a sizeable and resourceful
speculative community that took to forward and futures
trading long time ago, both of over the counter variety and that
through commodity exchanges. The Government has to step
in order to regulate these essentially speculative trades, though
some big consumers of things like cotton and jute also found
it expedient to participate in these contracts. But the
Government had from time to time banned these trades,
essentially for macro economic reasons, for price stability and
to prevent a hidden kind of gambling and impulsive
speculation.
(iv) Most analysis of the recent sharp increases in the prices of
essential commodities have linked the inflationary pressures
to the speculative spree in these commodities in the futures
markets. In many of these commodities the hoarders have
taken future positions at high prices to prosper by their
hoarding operations. This is corroborated by the fact that as
the time for settlement comes the prices in the futures market
increase quite sharply. Another indicator of the non-real flows
of commodities related speculative trading is that the actual
annual supply of most of the traded goods, such as pulses,
sugar, wheat, etc., is a small proportion of the total volume
of transactions concerning these commodities in the futures
markets. These markets have shown that the closing prices this
year have increased to a high level over the last year’s level.

15
It is well known that the ready or spot market prices tend to
be influenced, at least directionally, by the trend in the futures
prices. Another feature of the on-line trading and the complex
nature of dealing in the futures markets is that a whole range
of speculators with no interest in actual physical trade in the
commodity in question, either as producers, traders, large scale
consumers/processors or exporters have started taking posi-
tion in these complicated markets owing to the lure of easy
money by squaring the deals by paying/receiving differences.
These people have little understanding either of the actual
merchandising, current demand/supply trends or future
trends, in the domestic or international markets. It has been
the position of the traders organisations that as a result of the
availability of futures trading opportunities many are easily
lured in to this casino-kind of markets and have either
incurred huge losses or have gone bankrupt. A main point is
that such a large number of people are attracted in to this
gambling, staking a lot of money which in the ultimate
analysis is entirely unproductive and turns out to be zero sum
game.
(v) None of the above questions seem to have been examined by
the Government and a decision has been taken to expand the
scope and range of futures markets in view of the strong
criticisms and widespread disenchantment with the expansion
of these speculative activities, especially without showing any
positive and worthwhile contribution made by the massive
growth of turnover in the future markets (their turnover is
expected to leave behind the turnover in the stock markets
shortly).
(vi) It is indeed shocking that a decision to intensify and expand
the futures markets by way of derivatives and options and the
entry of foreign operators, read speculators, banks and fund
managers, has been taken. Since these entities put in an
enormous amount of liquidity in the market. The futures in
derivatives and options would become a game in which the
major players, mostly the foreign funds and other financial
institutions would pay the game of expecting each others
moves and counter moves and create a great deal of volatility

16
in the market. Their global game plans of putting in funds
and withdrawing them would add fires to the turmoil in these
markets. The farmers, already exposed to the vicissitudes of
input prices and quality, along with the usual gamble in
monsoon, would be exposed to yet another source of
uncertainty and trouble over which and against which they
would hardly have any defence. To assume that the farmers,
even the big farmers, can become players in these highly
complicated financial markets whose deals are denominated
in terms of some specified real commodities but otherwise but
have little connection with actual merchandising, and where
the futures markets show a great of intra-day and over time
price volatility would amount to taking leave of common
sense. Do Indian farmers, with their small land holdings and
poverty have the means, capability, expertise and information
to participate in these markets where even the margin money
required for entering a standard transaction of minimum size
would be many times their total financial strength?
(vii) Thus with ever growing size of the commodity futures
transactions the situation is already bad enough for the proper
and productive use of our financial resources. One sees
increasing disappearance of any traces of social gains along
with the urge to make individual/personal gains in the hyper
active futures markets. The classical rationale of ‘free markets’
to fulfill some social role with the pursuit of individual urges
(that is a social dual of the activities undertaken for personal
gains) simply vanishes in thin air with the opening up of
derivatives and options trading in which the real commodities
are simply accounting or reference units.
(viii) A look at some of the claims made by the protagonists of
futures trade would expose the shallow ground on which they
stand. They claim that the farmers can get protection against
adverse price movements as these markets are claimed to be
excellent instruments for price risk management. Even if such
an outcome were possible, as mentioned above, the Indian
farming community is simply not in a position to take
participate in these markets as by their very nature and

17
organisational set up and modus operandi , these markets
exclude participation by the overwhelming majority of our
farmers. Then, do Indian farmers, in the midst of prevailing
economic trends, with an uninterrupted inflation, (of up to
5 per cent being considered acceptable and helpful for growth),
need such an instrument? For one thing, in India, the
government has been operating a minimum support price
policy for most of the agricultural commodities like wheat, rice
and other cereals backed by public procurement in consider-
able quantities. For many other commodities, the Commission
on Agricultural Costs and Prices, suggests a minimum support
price that is announced prior to every sowing season. Thus
both price discovery and price support are available by means
of state policies, though with varying degrees of effectiveness.
But the backing of these price announcement by procurement
not only helps the farmers able to sell their produce to the
public agencies but also impacts the overall market. It would
be rare, like it was a few years ago, when the actual market
prices fall below the procurement prices owing to inadequate
purchasing power in the economy in the hands of the poor
masses, though in some cases rigging of the market by the
better organised group of traders is not ruled out.
(ix) In fact, in India, for last so many decades, prices of essential
farm goods have always moved up with varying speed and
a dip in the wholesale price index is a rare event..... The cost
of farm operations have been moving up and the farmers have
complaints about inadequate price increases compared to the
rise in the cost of production as well as the cost of living. For
the other commodities like sugar cane, they have the support
of public policy that seeks to guarantee a minimum support
price. The unrealistic claim that the farmers can take
advantage of the futures markets by hedging their risk of
adverse price movements in the Exchanges controlled by the
speculators-traders is no more than a flight of fancy. Without
making any reference and evaluation of the outcome of this
wild spree of financialisation of the commodity markets over
the past three years any move to enlarge these markets by
adding new contracts (derivatives and options) even more

18
unlikely to be related to the real commodity markets is nothing
but a move to offer more and growing business opportunities
to the foreign financial interests and institutions.
1.26 The Committee would now deal with various provisions of the
Bill which need comments, in the next Chapter.
1.27 The Committee note that the futures trading in India
started in the year 1875. There was no regulator and hence, there
was no uniformity in trading practices. After independence, the
Forward Contract (Regulation) Act, 1952 was passed to regulate this
market and the FMC was set up in 1953 as the regulator. A Bill
to amend Forward Contracts (Regulation) act, 1952 was introduced
in Rajya Sabha on 23rd December, 1998 and the same was referred
to the Standing Committee on Food, Civil Supplies and Public
Distribution for examination and report. The Bill, after incorporating
the recommendations of the Standing Committee was passed by
Rajya Sabha on 15th December, 2003 but could not be passed by
Lok Sabha due to its dissolution. The present Bill was introduced
in Lok Sabha on 21.03.2006 and the same has been referred to the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and
Public Distribution for examination and report. The Committee note
that the Government had wide-ranging consultations for finalizing
the amendment Bill. Keeping in view the importance of commodity
market, forward and future market in the country, the Committee
recommend the passage of the Forward Contracts (Regulation)
Amendment Bill, 2006 subject to their observation/recommendation
which are contained in the subsequent paras/chapters.
1.28 The Committee note that the Forward Contract
(Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2006 inter alia  proposes to strengthen
and restructure FMC, amend definition of expression “Forward
Contract”, to include therein “commodity derivatives”; allow trading
in options and make provision for constitution of appellate tribunal.
The Committee note that Government had imposed a ban on future
trading of most of the commodities on the assumption that this lead
to inflationary conditions. However, it has been claimed that with
a view to improve the lot of Indian farmers and to reverse the adverse
terms of trade that they had been suffering for their produce, the
restriction on forward trading was lifted in April, 2003. Forward and

19
future trading, it is said, enable sellers and buyers to reduce
uncertainty and consequent risk through price discovery mechanism
ahead of actual production. The Committee’s review of commodity
trading in agriculture sector during the last three years has revealed
that the intended benefit of commodity market has not been realized
by farmers’ community, for whom the ban in forward trading was
lifted. This trading has not produced any positive results except
introducing an additional element of instability and marginalisation
of the impact of the real factors. The small and marginal farmers,
who constitute more than eighty percent of farmers’ community, have
been further marginalized. The Committee is of a view that an
enlargement of these markets by introducing new contracts like
options and derivatives that have direct bearing on the actual
supplies would multiply the speculative prone character of these
markets without any limit. No positive economic purpose is going
to be served by these options and derivative contracts but would
be a misallocation of our scarce resources. The Committee
per se  is in favour of protecting the interest of farmers as well as
the interest of end consumer. The Committee would like the
Government to balance the interests of both the producer and the
end consumer.
1.29 The Committee have been informed that there are
conditions precedent to which a commodity is selected for future
contracts. One of the conditions is that a commodity for such future
contracts, needs to be free of Government interference in its
marketing. As the market for foodgrains in the country is subject
to manifold public policy regulations and control, the futures certainly
interfere and at times nullify the intent of public policy. On the
other hand, the Government’s controls distort the functioning of the
contract market. Further, the condition for large quantity of contract
is not satisfied by many of the agricultural commodities. With chronic
and growing shortages of foodgrains, pulses, edible oils and sugar
subjecting them to the speculative play of the futures derivatives
and options, is certainly a negative influence as shown by the
unjustified rise in prices of these commodities whose futures
trade turn out to be many times the actual volume of the trade.
Such trading in futures etc. are certainly distorting the functioning
of the real physical and ready markets. The negative influences

20
of trading would multiply manifold as a result of derivative
and option trade in these commodities as they are based on no
physical delivery or actual spot price but on the index number of
the futures.
1.30 The Committee feel that with the policy of fixing a support
price and backing it by procurement, the foodgrains and other cereals
do not need the uncertain, ineffective and even counter productive
risk management by means of the future contracts. It is hardly
possible for the small farmers to participate in these futures market.
They have simply to suffer the consequences of the unbridled
speculation. Given the known seasonality of price behavior of the
farm produce and long term trend of rising prices, it is futile to
think that the farmers stand in need of a market based instrument
for protecting them against the risk of adverse price movement. The
Committee strongly feel that to permit derivatives and options in
the name of the farmers and small traders, is nothing but a ploy
for protecting the speculative financial interests. The expansion of
these contracts to include options and derivatives would simply
intensify and magnify these direct negative effects.
1.31 The Committee has been informed that in forward and
future contracts, of commodity an individual farmer generally do no
participate as their produce is very small. The major benefits are
realized by traders and other market participants who have
knowledge, skill and capacity to withstand the vagaries of risk. Even
otherwise there has been lack of awareness and dissemination of
information about the benefit of commodity markets. Further, large
size of standardized contract offered by exchanges also dissuade the
farmers to go in for future/forward trading. Taking into consideration,
the above factors and also the lack of infrastructure of warehousing
facilities and their networking, grading and other quality parameters,
accreditation of warehouses and cold storage etc., the Committee
feel that the stage has not come, where the Indian farmers can be
exposed to the risk of commodity derivative and options in goods.
Further, as the benefit of upsurge in commodity market especially
for agriculture sector has been cornered by middleman and traders
at the cost of Indian farmers and consumers alike, the Committee
recommend that agricultural commodity especially foodgrains
including coarsegrains, pulses, and sugar need not be permitted to

21
be traded in the commodity markets including forward/future
contract derivatives and options. The Committee would like to
emphasize that non-agricultural commodities be allowed to trade in
commodity markets as before.
1.32 In the meanwhile, the Committee feel that there is a
urgent need to launch massive awareness campaign to create
awareness about the benefits which can be accrued from commodity
markets. Similarly, the other stakeholders like stockists, importers/
exporters warehouse entrepreneurs need to be educated. The
consumers self-help groups and the institutions of village Panchayat
can also be used to create awareness. The services of print and
electronic media need to be pressed into service for spreading
awareness. At the same time, the Committee would like to
emphasize that action needs to be taken to network/link APMC with
rural market, haatts, Panchayats and commodity exchanges to
upgrade the infrastructure including accredited warehouses, chain of
cold storages. Quality, control and grading of agricultural produce
need to be undertaken on priority basis so that these can be aligned
with the commodity markets.
1.33 The Committee note that the stock exchanges and future
markets is a subject assigned under the Union List, in Schedule VII
of the Constitution of India, whereas the ‘Trade and Commerce’
and “Agriculture” are the subjects within the jurisdiction of States.
As such the regulators of commodities exchanges does not have
jurisdiction over spot markets, which is regulated by APMC Act.
It falls under the ambit of concerned State Government. The
Committee feel that the spot market and future market needs to
be placed under the same regulator’s framework. In this regard, the
Committee are in agreement with the views of Secretary, Department
of Consumer Affairs that for a healthy market, convergence of spot
and future market is a must. The Committee concur with the views
of Secretary and recommend that Government should find out ways
and means to put spot and commodity market under one regulatory
framework. At the same time, the Committee would like to
recommend that in order to bring in better coordination and synergy
between spot trading and future market this subject need to be
placed under Union or Concurrent List by amending the Constitution
of India, suitably. This is subject to the condition that a mature

22
and vibrant market with adequate infrastructure is in place and
awareness spread amongst all concerned about the benefit of
commodity market.
1.34 The Committee note that there is enabling provision in
the Bill which provide foreign institutional investors and foreign
intermediary who can participate in the commodity market. Taking
into consideration, the interest of farmers and small investor the
committee feel that hedge funds, banks, PF should not be allowed
to participate in these markets. At the same time, the Committee
also recommend that all the players, direct and those operating
through others like brokers must disclose their interest in actual,
physical merchandising. Except for a small number, who have a
reasonable control over liquidity, no pure speculator with massive
resources should be allowed to enter these markets.
1.35 The Committee note that presently there is a minimum
limit prescribed for size of the transactions by the Commodity
Exchanges resulting in the exclusion of direct participation of the
large number of small producers in the futures market. The
Committee are of the considered view that the direct participation
of small producers can make the futures market truly participative.
They, therefore, desire that the Government should explore ways
and means to ensure that the exchanges do not fix a minimum limit
on the transactions size. This should be taken care of while framing
rules/regulations in this regard.

23
CHAPTER II
(A) CLAUSE 4 — ESTABLISHMENT & CONSTITUTION OF THE
FORWARD MARKETS COMMISSION
2.1 The Clause 4 proposes to amend Section 3 of the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 which prescribes the procedure for
Establishment and constitution of the Forward Markets Commission as
under:—
1. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish a Commission to be called the Forward
Markets Commission for the purpose of exercising such
functions and discharging such duties as may be assigned to
the Commission by or under this Act.
2. The Commission shall consist of not less than two, but not
exceeding four, members appointed by the Central Govern-
ment one of them being nominated by the Central Government
to be the Chairman thereof; and the Chairman and the other
member or members shall be either whole-time as the Central
Government may direct:
Provided that the members to be so appointed shall be persons
of ability, integrity and standing who have shown capacity in
dealing with problems relating to commerce or commodity
markets, or in administration or who have special knowledge
or practical experience in any matter which renders them
suitable for appointment on the commission.
3. No person shall be qualified for appointment as, or for
continuing to be, a member of the Commission if he has,
directly or indirectly, any such financial or other interest as
is likely to effect prejudicially his functions as a member of
the commission, and every member shall, whenever required
23

24
by the Central Government so do, furnish to it such
information as it may require for the purpose of securing
compliance with the provisions of this sub-section.
4. No member of the Commission shall hold office for a period
of more than three years from the date of his appointment,
and a member relinquishing his office on the expiry of his
term shall be eligible for re-appointment.
5. The other terms and conditions of service of members of the
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
2.2 The Government has proposed to delete sub sections (2),  (3),
(4) and (5) of Section 3 of the Principal Act and has proposed to substitute
the following sub-section:—
“(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name
aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal with
power subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire hold and
dispose of property, both moveable and immovable, and to contract,
and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.”
2.3 The Committee finds that sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and
(5) of the Principal Act deal with the establishment and constitution
of the Forward Markets Commission, laying down general
qualifications for appointment to the post of the Members, their term
of office and other terms and conditions of service of Members of
the Commission. It is noticed that while sub-section (2) has been
revised and adequately provided for in the new bill as Clause 3A(1)
and (5) but other sub-clauses have not been adequately provided
for in the new Bill. The Committee feel the provisions of sub-
sections (3) and (4) should also be incorporated in the new Bill
especially sub-section (4) which prescribe term of office of the
Members of the Commission. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that Clause 4 should be suitably amended in the light of above
observation.

25
(B) CLAUSE 5 – MANAGEMENT OF COMMISSION
2.4 Section 3 of the Forward Contract (Regulation) Act, 1952 deals
with the establishment and constitution of the Forward Market
Commission. They have proposed to insert new Sections 3A, 3B, 3C, 3D,
3E, 3F, 3G and 3H through the FC(R) Amendment Bill, 2006. It is proposed
that after section 3 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be
inserted, namely:—
“3A (1) The Commission shall consist of the following members,
namely:—
(a) a Chairman;
(b) two members from amongst the officials of the
Ministries or Departments of the Central Government
dealing with Consumer Affairs, Commodity Derivatives,
Food and Public Distribution, Agriculture or Finance;
(c) one member from amongst the officials of the Reserve
Bank;
(d) five other members of whom at least three shall be the
whole-time members.
(2) The general superintendence, direction and management of
the affairs of the Commission shall vest in a board of
members, which may exercise all powers and do all acts
and things which may be exercised or done by the
Commission.
(3) Save as otherwise determined, by regulations, the Chairman
shall have powers of general superintendence and direction
of the affairs of the Commission and may also exercise all
powers and do all the acts and things which may be exercised
or done by the Commission.
(4) The Chairman and members referred to in clauses (a) and (d)
of sub-section (1) shall be appointed by the Central
Government and the members referred to in clauses (b) and
(c) of that sub-section shall be nominated by the Central
Government and the Reserve Bank, respectively.
25

26
(5) The Chairman and other members referred to in clauses (a)
and (d) of sub-section (1) shall be persons of ability, integrity
and standing who have shown capacity in dealing with
problems relating to commodity markets or who have special
knowledge or experience of commerce or economics or law or
finance or in administration or have practical experience in
any matter which renders them suitable for appointment on
the Commission.
2.5 Prof. Kamal Nayan Kabra in his memorandum submitted to
the Committee has stated that regulation is a highly technical activity,
especially in the case of commodity futures, as it is a highly complex
activity covering both real and financial sectors. The Chairman of the
Commission must invariably be a financial, technical expert, with
professional qualifications in the working of financial sector/markets,
and must have a proven track record of at least ten years in high
managerial regulatory position in the financial sector as also in the
commodity markets. It is not a job meant for generalists, not even for
the run of the mill bankers.
2.6 The State Government of Rajasthan while welcoming the
amendment Bill suggested that there is a need to ensure that the
membership should consist of those who have direct and relevant
experience in trading of futures or in running of Commodity Exchanges.
Representation of farmers and consumer groups in the associations and
in FMC, needs to be also ensured.
2.7 In Clause 5, the Government has also proposed to insert a new
Clause 3C which provides that the Central Government shall remove a
member from office if he—
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated as insolvent;
(b) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent
court;
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the option of the
Central Government, involves a moral turpitude;
(d) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his
position as to render his continuation in office detrimental to
the public interest;

27
Provided that no member shall be removed under this clause
unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard
in the matter.
2.8 Clause 5 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 3 of the
principle Act by inserting Sections 3A to 3H in the Principle Act.
The Committee has examined sub-clause 3A(1) of the Bill which
provides the composition of FMC. As per the provisions, the FMC
would consist of a Chairman, two members from amongst officials
of certain Ministries, one Member from RBI and 5 other Members
of whom 3 shall be whole time member. The Committee note that,
as Regulation, is a highly technical activity especially in the case
of commodity futures the Chairman of the Commission needs to
be a financial and technical expert with professional qualifications
in the working of financial sector/commodity markets. He should
have a proven track record of at least 10 years in high managerial
regulatory position in the financial sector/commodity market. The
Committee also feel that the officials from Central Ministries need
not be part of the FMC. Rather persons of ability, integrity and
standing who have shown capacity in dealing with problems relating
to commodity market or who has special knowledge or experience
of commerce or agriculture or law or finance and having practical
experience in any matter should be considered for appointment on
the Commission. As such sub-Clause (b) of Clause 3A be deleted.
The Committee also desire that five Members to be nominated on
the FMC as per sub-Clause (d) of Section 3A, a Member from farming
community may also be associated. The Committee also desire that
subject ‘knowledge in administration’ need not be a qualification
for appointment to the post of Chairman and Members of the FMC
as prescribed under sub-Section (5) of Clause 3A. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the word ‘administration’ appearing in sub-
Clause (5) of Clause 3A be deleted. The Committee also recommend
that the retirement age of Chairman and Members of FMC should
also be prescribed which should not be more than 60 years.
2.9 The Government of Rajasthan in their submission on
the bill to the Committee has suggested that there is a need to
ensure that the membership of the commission should consist of
those who  have direct and relevant experience in trading of futures
or in running of commodity exchanges, representation of farmers and
consumer groups in FMC needs to be ensured. The Committee are
in agreement with the above suggestion of the Government of

28
Rajasthan and desire that sub-section (3)(d) should be suitably
amended by providing for representation of farmers and consumer
groups in FMC.
2.10 The Committee further note that Central Government has
been empowered to appoint Chairman and other Members of
Commission vide sub-clause 4 of Clause 3A. The Committee are
of the view that in order to impart transparency in the system, there
is a need to provide for constitution of a Selection Committee which
will recommend names for the post of Chairman and Members of
the Commission. The Committee further desire that a broad based
Selection Commission with  Member of Planning Commission
incharge of Agriculture Sector be made Chairman of this Selection
Body and Secretary, Incharge of Central Government Department
dealing with Commodity Market be nominated as Member of this
Body. Beside these, some more Members may also be associated
with this Selection Body. The Committee further desire that similar
procedure be made applicable for Appellate Tribunal also.
2.11 The Committee find that Clause 5 Section 3C provides
for grounds on which Members can be removed from the Office of
the Commission. The Committee desire that in order to impart
transparency in the working of Forward Market Commission, there
is a need to include two additional grounds which will validate the
removal of Member from Office namely (i) Has acquired such
financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his/her
functions as Member. (ii) Has been guilty of proved misbehaviour.
The Committee further desire that this provision may also be made
applicable to the Appellate Tribunal. The clause be amended
suitably.
2.12 The Committee further desire that in the event of any
vacancy in the Commission, the Central Government should within
one month from the date of occurrence of vacancy or removal of
Member of Forward Market Commission/Tribunal and six months
before the superannuation or tenure of Membership of Forward
Market Commission/Tribunal, make a reference to Selection
Committee for filling up of vacancy. This will ensure that for the
reasons of vacancy in the composition of the Commission/Appellate
Tribunal the work is not held up. The Committee further desire
that Selection Committee needs to finalize and made selection within
three months from the date on which a reference is made.

29
(C) CLAUSE 6 — FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION
2.13 Clause 6 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 4 of the
FC(R) Act, 1952 which elaborate the functions of the Commission as
follows:—
(a) to advise the Central Government in respect of the recognition
of, or the withdrawal of recognition from, any association or
in respect of any other matter arising out of the administration
of this Act;
(b) to keep forward markets under observation and to take such
action in relation to them as it may consider necessary, in
exercise of the powers assigned to it by or under this Act;
(c) to collect and whenever the Commission thinks it necessary
publish information regarding the trading conditions in
respect of goods to which any of the provisions of this
Act is made applicable, including information regarding
supply, demand and prices, and to submit to the Central
Government periodical reports on the operation of this Act
and on the working of forward markets relating to such
goods;
(d) to make recommendations generally with a view to improving
the organisation and working of forward markets;
(e) to undertake the inspection of the accounts and other
documents of any recognized association or registered
association or any member of such association whenever it
considers it necessary; and
(f) to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers
as may be assigned to the Commission by or under this Act,
or as may be prescribed.
29

30
2.14 The Government has proposed to substitute section (f) vide
section 4 (c) as under:—
(a) to regulate the business of association, clearing houses,
warehouses and intermediaries;
(b) to levy fees;
(c) to conduct research for the purpose of development and
regulation of commodity derivatives market;
(d) to call from or furnishing of information from agencies;
(e) to protect the interests of market participants;
(f) to promote and regulate self-regulatory organizations;
(g) to prohibit fraudulent and unfair trade practices relating to
commodity derivatives market;
(h) to promote investors’ education and training of intermediaries;
(i) to prohibit insider trading;
(j) to advice the Central Government in respect of forward
contracts or option in goods or option in commodity derivative;
and
(k) to perform such other duties and such other powers as may
be assigned to the Commission.
2.15 Clause 6 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 4(f) of
the Principle Act prescribing the functions of the Commission. In
sub-clause (a), it is proposed to regulate the functioning of members
of the associations, clearing houses, warehouses and intermediaries.
The Committee feel that since a comprehensive act is proposed to
be enacted regarding warehousing to regulate the business of
warehouses, there should not be any conflicting regulation of the
warehouses under this Section in contravention of the Warehousing
Act. The Committee feel that this should be re-examined and if
necessary, word “warehouses” should be deleted.

31
(D) CLAUSE 9 — GRANTS BY CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
2.16 Clause 9 of the Bill proposes to insert a new Chapter IIA after
Chapter II of the Principal Act. Sub-clause 4F(4) of Chapter IIA of the
Bill prescribes as under:—
“(4) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India or any other person appointed by him
in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be
forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Govern-
ment shall cause the same to be laid before each House of
Parliament.”
2.17 Clause 9 proposes to insert Chapter IIA in the Principle
Act regarding Grants by the Central Government. Under this
Chapter, sub-sections 4(d), 4(e), and 4(f) are proposed to be inserted
in the Principal Act. Under sub-clause 4(f), there is a provision that
a certified account of the commission together with C & AG Audit
Report thereon has to be forwarded annually to the Central
Government and the Government shall cause the same to be laid
before each House of Parliament. The Committee note that no period
has been prescribed for laying such reports before each House of
Parliament. The Committee feel that the report should be laid before
each House of Parliament within 3 months of its receipt by the
Central Government. The Committee, therefore, desire that this
clause should be suitably amended. The Committee note that there
is no provision in the Act regarding preparation of Annual Report
of the Commission. The Committee desire that the Commission
should prepare an Annual Report every year and the Central
Government should lay it before each House of Parliament. This
should be suitably provided for in the Act.
31

32
(E) CLAUSE 21 — REGISTRATION OF MEMBERS AND
INTERMEDIARIES
2.18 Section 14A of the Forward Contract (Regulation) Act, 1952
deals with procedure regarding certificate of registration to be obtained
by all associations. The Government have proposed to delete Chapter IIIA
(Section 14A) from the Principal Act and have suggested to substitute
a new Chapter IIIA (Section 14A) namely, “Registration of Members and
Intermediaries”. As per sub-section (3) of Section 14A, no foreign
participant or foreign intermediary associated with the commodity
derivatives market, as the Commission may, by notification in this behalf,
specify, shall deal in forward contract or option in goods or option in
commodity derivative except under and in accordance with the conditions
of a certificate of registration obtained from the Commission in
accordance with the regulations made under this Act.
Provided that a foreign participant or foreign intermediary dealing
in forward contract or option in goods or option in commodity derivative
immediately before the commencement of this Act, for which no
certificate of registration was required prior to such commencement, may
continue to deal in forward contract or option in goods until such time
as rules may be made by the Central Government for such dealings or
in case no such rules have been made until permitted as such by the
Commission by notification.
2.19 The Committee find that Government had imposed a ban
on future trading in most of the commodities, in mid-60s, to contain
inflationary conditions. This ban was lifted in April, 2003 and the
Forward Contracts in Commodities permitted. The Committee feel
that the present Indian Commodity Market is still is nascent stage
and needs protection. The Committee per se is not averse to
competition thrown by foreign participants and foreign intermedi-
aries. The Committee, however desire that an orderly, mature and
vibrant commodity market needs to be in place before the challenges
and competition from foreign participants is met. Still there has been
32

33
lack of awareness amongst market participants including farmers.
Further there is dearth of dissemination of market information
by APMCs/State Agri. Market Boards and National/Regional
Exchanges. As forward Contract has been permitted very recently,
the Committee feel that the time is yet not ripe, to allow foreign
participant/foreign intermediary in Commodity Market and especially
when this intention of the legislation has not been clearly spelt out
in Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill. Further, there has
not been adequate debate within Parliament and out side about the
desirability or otherwise of foreign participants or foreign
intermediaries in the Commodity Markets. Taking a holistic view
of the matter, the Committee is of the firm opinion that in the
interest of Commodity Market, it will neither be desirable nor
appropriate to allow foreign participants or foreign intermediaries in
the Commodity Market. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
foreign participant or foreign intermediary need not be allowed to
participate in the Commodity Market. Clause 21 of the Bill be thus
suitably amended.

34
(F) CLAUSE 25 AND 26 — PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE
2.20 Sub-Section (i) and (ii) of Section 20(e) states that any person
who enters into any forward contract or any option in goods in
contravention of any of the provisions contained in sub-section (1) or sub-
section (3A) or sub-section (4) of section 15, section 17 or section 19, shall,
on conviction, be punishable–
(i) for a first offence, with imprisonment which may extent to one
year, or with a fine of not less than one thousand rupees, or
with both;
(ii) for a second or subsequent offence under clause (d) or under
clause (e) [other than an offence in respect of a contravention
of the provisions of sub-section (4) of section 15], with
imprisonment which may extend to one year and also with
fine: provided that in the absence of special and adequate
reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the judgement of
the court, the imprisonment shall be not less than one month
and the fine shall be not less than one thousand rupees.]
2.21 The Government has proposed the following amendments in
Section 20(e) (i) and (ii) of the principal Act;—
(A) in clause (i), for the words “one thousand rupees”, the words
“twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to
twenty-five lakh rupees” shall be substituted;
(B) in clause (ii),—
(i) for the words, brackets and letter “under clause (d)”, the
words, brackets and letters “under clause (d) or under
clause (da)” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words “one thousand rupees”, the words “twenty-
five thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
34

35
2.22 Similarly in section 21(h) (i) and (ii) of the principal Act the
Government has proposed as under,—
After the words “shall, on conviction, be punishable—” occurring
below clause (h), in clauses (i) and (ii), for the words “one thousand
rupees”, the words “twenty-five thousand rupees but which may
extend to twenty-five lakh rupees” shall be substituted.
2.23 In t heir background note the Ministry has stated that the
existing penalty provisions in the FCR Act are inadequate. In order to
make the penalty provisions more effective and deterrent, the existing
monetary limit of the penalty is proposed to be enhanced to a minimum
of “rupees twenty five thousand” as against the existing provision of
“rupees one thousand only”. New provisions are proposed to be inserted
to provide for penalty, to be imposed after adjudication, of up to “rupees
twenty five lakhs” covering contraventions such as failure to furnish
information, return etc.; failure by any person to enter into an agreement
with clients; failure to redress clients’ grievances; insider trading;
fraudulent and unfair trade practices; default in case of an intermediary;
and failure to comply with directives of the FMC.
2.24 Clause 25 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 20 of the
Principle Act which provides for punishment on conviction. Under
Clauses 1(i) and 2(i) of sub-clause (e), amount of fine is proposed
to be increased from Rs. 1,000/- at present to Rs. 25,000/- which
may extend upto Rs. 25 lakhs. The Committee feel that the amount
of fine should be in proportion to the gain earned by the offender
or Rs. 25 lakhs whichever is more and this clause should be amended
suitably.

36
(G) CLAUSE 27 — CREDITING SUMS REALISED BY WAY OF
PENALTIES TO CONSOLIDATED FUND OF INDIA
2.25 Clause 27 – this Clause proposes to substitute section 21A of
the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to power of Court
to order forfeiture of property. Section 21A of the Principal Act States as
under:—
“Any court trying an offence punishable under section 20 or section
21 may, if it thinks fit and in addition to any sentence which it
may impose for such offence, direct that any money, goods or other
property in respect of which the offence has been committed, shall
be forfeited to the Central Government.
Explanation – For the purposes of this section, property in respect
of which an offence has been committed, shall include deposits in
a bank where the said property is converted into such deposits.”
2.26 The Government has now proposed to insert new Sections 21A,
21B, 21C, 21D, 21E, 21F, 21G, 21H, 21I, 21J, 21K, in place of Section 21A
of the Principal Act. Section 21K states that all sums realized by way
of penalties under this Act shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund
of India.
2.27 Under proposed Section 21 K, all sums realized by way
of penalty under this Act are to be credited to the Consolidated
Fund of India. Since under Section 4 E, there is a provision to
constitute a fund to be called “The Forward Markets Commission
General Fund”, the Committee feel that the sums realized by way
of penalty under this Act should also be credited to such a fund
to enable the Commission to perform its duties mentioned under
Section 4E (2) of the Bill. The Committee, therefore desire that this
matter should be re-examined and this clause be amended suitably.
36

37
(H) CLAUSE 30 — INVESTIGATION
2.28 The Government have proposed that after Section 22B of the
Principal Act, Section 22C(1) shall be inserted as under:—
“Where the Commission has reasonable grounds to believe
that—
(a) the transactions in forward contracts or option in goods or
option in commodity derivative are being dealt with in a
manner detrimental to the commodity market or person
associated with the commodity market; or
(b) any intermediary or any person associated with the commodi-
ties market has violated any of the provisions of this Act or
the rules or regulations made or directions issued by the
Commission thereunder,
It may, at any time by order in writing, direct any person
(hereinafter in this section referred to as the Investigating
Authority) specified in the order to investigate the affairs of
such intermediary or person associated with the commodities
market and to report thereon the Commission.
2.29 During evidence, the Committee enquired whether any
qualification has been prescribed for the investigating authority, the
representative of the Department of Consumer Affairs stated that the
intention in the amendment bill is to have an investigating agency. In
practice, what will happen is that the Commission or a Senior Officer
will decide that any officer of the Commission will be the investigating
agency. There will be an adjudicating officer which is also provided for
before it comes to the Commission for final decision. But we will have
an option, if he so desires that for example, if it is a very complicated
financial fraud that has taken place, we will ask a firm of auditors or
any other person who we think fit to do this investigation.
37

38
2.30 When suggested that the situation will differ from State to
State, hence there should be a prescribed qualification for that competent
or investigating agency, the representative deposed:—
“We will certainly take this into view when we frame the rules.”
2.31 In clause 30 the Government has proposed to insert a new
Section 22-C where it has been provided in sub-Clause (b) that the
investigating authority shall report to the Commission about his
finding relating to violation of any provision of the Act. The
Committee are concerned to note that no qualification has been
prescribed for the investigating authority. During evidence the
representative of the Ministry admitted that they will certainly take
this into view when they frame the Rules. The Committee hope
that this aspect will be taken care of at the time of framing the
Rules.

39
(I) CLAUSE 33 — APPEAL TO APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
2.32 The Government has proposed that after Chapter V of the
Principal Act, a new Chapter VA may be inserted as under:—
Chapter VA
24B. (1) Save as provided in sub-section (2), any persons
aggrieved on or after the commencement of the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2006, or by an
order of the Commission made, or the rules or regulations
made thereunder or by an order made by an adjudicating
officer under this Act may prefer an appeal to the
Appellate Tribunal having jurisdiction in the matter.
(2) The Central Government shall specify, by notification,
the matters and places in relating to which the Appellate
Tribunal may exercise jurisdiction.
(3) No appeal shall lie to the Appellate Tribunal from an
order made by the Commission or an adjudicated officer
with the consent of the parties.
(4) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be filed within
a period of forty-five days from the date on which a copy
of the order made by the Chairman of the Commission
is received by and it shall be in such form and be
accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed;
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an
appeal after the expiry of the said period if it is satisfied
that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that
period.
2.33 The Government has proposed vide Clause 3 — of the Bill that
the Appellate Tribunal shall be established on the line of sub-section (l)
of section 15K of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992
for adjudicating offences relating to forward trading and future trading
asked about the reasons for not having a separate Appellate Tribunal
39

40
for the Forward Markets Commission, the Secretary, Department of
Consumer Affairs stated during evidence:—
“When we were first considering the original draft of the Bill, at
that juncture, we thought that we must have a separate Appellate
Tribunal for the Forward Markets Commission that will be the body
to whom persons aggrieved by the decision of Forward Markets
Commission can appeal. Thereafter, in consultation with various
Departments, a suggestion came from the Ministry of Finance that
there is already a Securities Appellate Tribunal which is also based
in Mumbai, and this may be used by the Futures Markets also, as
an Appellate Tribunal. The Department of Consumer Affairs were
kind enough to accept this suggestion. That is why Appellate
Tribunal has been defined which is the same Appellate Tribunal
as in the Securities Market.”
2.34 The State Government of Gujarat has suggested that for speedy
disposal of cases, pending with Appellate Tribunal, time limit for
disposal of cases needs to be fixed. Asked whether any provision has
been made in the Bill for disposal of cases in a prescribed time
limit, the Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs stated during
evidence:—
“It has to be consistent with the Act. So, we can take the Law
Ministry’s opinion. But basically we are also interested that it
should be responsive and there should be quick disposal. It can
be an administrative decision also that cases should be settled
within three months”.
2.35 Clause 33 of the Bill propose to insert Chapter VA in the
Principal Act providing for appeal to Appellate Tribunal, procedure
to be followed and other related matters thereto. The Committee
note that this is a new addition to 1952 Act whereby procedure for
appeal to Appellate Tribunal has been laid down. Section 24B(i)
provide that any person aggrieved by an order of the Commission
or an Adjudicating Officer under this Act may prefer an appeal to
the Appellate Tribunal having jurisdiction in the matter. However,
no further details have been given about Appellate Tribunal in this
clause. The Committee further note that in Clause 3 term “Appellate
Tribunal” has been defined as “the Securities Appellate Tribunal
established under sub-section (i) of Section 15K of the Securities

41
and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992”. Thus, it appears from the
above provision that an Appellate Tribunal constituted under the
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 is proposed to be
authorized to deal with the appeals arising out of the matters dealt
with by the Forward Markets Commission. The Committee feel that
considering the rate of growth of forward markets during the last
two years, it would be difficult for the Appellate Tribunal under
the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 to deal with
the matters of forward trading in Commodity Market. The
Committee feel that there should be a separate Appellate Tribunal
for dealing with the cases arising out of the orders made by the
Commission or by an Adjudicating Officer of the Forward Markets
Commission under the Forward Contract (Regulation) Act, 1952. The
Committee also desire that all the cases pending with the Appellate
Tribunal should be decided at the earliest as far as possible. The
Committee concur with the views of Secretary, Department of
Consumer Affairs that the cases should be settled within three
months and recommend that suitable provision be incorporated in
the Bill itself in this regard.

42
(J) CLAUSE 35 — EXEMPTION FROM TAX ON
WEALTH AND INCOME
2.36 Section 27 of the Forward Contract (Regulation) Act, 1952 deals
with power to exempt and states that the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, exempt, subject to such conditions
and in such circumstances and in such areas as may be specified in the
notification, any contract or class of contracts from the operation of all
or any of the provisions of this Act.
2.37 The Government has proposed that after Section 27 A of the
Principal Act, Section 27B shall be inserted:—
“27 B. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Wealth–tax Act,
1957, the Income-tax Act, 1961, or any other enactment for the time
being in force relating to tax on wealth, income, profits or gains,
the Commission shall not be liable to pay wealth-tax, income-tax
or any other tax in respect of their wealth, income, profits or gains
derived.”
2.38 When asked as to why the FMC has been exempted from
payment of Tax on Wealth, Income and prepaid and others, the
Committee was informed that with the passing of the FC(R) Amendment
Bill, 2006, FMC would acquire the status of a body corporate with greater
financial and functional autonomy like SEBI. Under Section 25 of SEBI
Act, 1992, SEBI enjoys this privilege. Exemption from taxes would avoid
undesirable drain on its meager resources raised by way  of fees and
charges etc. This would make FMC self-sufficient and would not be a
burden on the Exchequer. As proposed in the Bill, all sums that may
be realised by FMC by way of penalties shall however, be credited to
the Consolidated Fund of India.
2.39 During evidence, the Secretary, Department of Consumer
Affairs stated that this clause has been inserted in the Bill with a view
to make FMC self-sufficient so that it may not depend on the
Government assistance.
42

43
2.40 Clause 35 of the Bill provides for grant of exemption to
the Commission from Wealth tax and Income tax or any other tax
in respect of income, profits or gains etc. The reasons for exemption
is to make FMC self-sufficient so that it may not depend on
Government assistance. The Committee note that this is a new
insertion in the Act. Since the last 2 years, the growth of the Forward
Market has been 375%. The present values of the transactions in
the Forward Commodity Market is around 22 lakh crores rupees.
In view of this amount, the Committee feel that there is no need
to grant any Wealth Tax and Income Tax concessions to the
Commission. It is more so when Ministry of Finance is trying to
widen its tax-net and is bringing more and more people under its
coverage. Moreover, the Commission is purely a commercial
organization and is not devoted to any social, philanthropic or
research work. The Committee, therefore, desire that this Clause
should be deleted from the Bill.

44
(K) CLAUSE 37 — POWER TO MAKE RULES AND
REGULATIONS
2.41 The Government have proposed vide clause 37 of the Bill that
after section 28A of the principal Act, the following sections shall be
inserted, namely:—
“28A. (1) The Commission may, with the previous approval of the
Central Government, by notification, make regulations consistent
with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the
purposes of this Act”.
2.42 Clause 37 seeks to insert new section 28A relating to power
to make regulations after sections 28A. The Committee feel this
should read as Section 28 and not 28A. This should be amended
suitably.
2.43 Section 28A(1) state that the Commission with the
previous approval of the Central Government may make regulations
consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out
the purposes of this Act. The Committee note that power to make
regulations under the Principle Act vest with the Commission.
However, this clause proposes to make it compulsory for the
commission to seek previous approval of the Central Government
for making regulations. The Committee feel that this pre-condition
would delay the process of finalizing regulations and as a result,
the Commission would loose the required operational flexibility. The
Committee also note that this sub-section has been inserted here
on the lines of similar provisions which existed in Securities and
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992. However, this provision has since
been deleted from that Act. The Committee, therefore, desire that
the words “with the previous approval of the Central Government”
should be deleted and this clause should be amended accordingly.
 N
EW D ELHI;
15 December, 2006
24 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)
DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV,
Chairman,
Standing Committee on Food, Consumer
Affairs and Public Distribution.
44

45
APPENDIX
As Introduced in Lok Sabha
21 MARCH 2006
Bill No. 29 of 2006
THE FORWARD CONTRACTS (REGULATION) AMENDMENT
BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint; and different dates may be appointed for
different provisions of this Act.
CHAPTER II
A
MENDMENTS TO THE FORWARD C ONTRACTS
(REGULATION) ACT, 1952
2. In the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act,
1952 (hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the
principal Act), in the long title, for the words “the
prohibition of options in goods”, the words “and
74 of 1952
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Amendment
of long title.
45

46
to promote the development of, and to regulate, the
commodity derivatives market” shall be substi-
tuted.
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,—
(i) for clause ( a), the following clauses
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(a) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Secu-
rities Appellate Tribunal established under sub-
section ( I) of section 15K of the Securities and
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992;
(aa) “association” means any body of in-
dividuals, whether incorporated or not, constituted
for the purposes of regulating and controlling the
business of the sale or purchase of any goods and
commodity derivative;
(ab) “Chairman” means the Chairman of
the Commission refund to in clause ( a) of sub-
section ( I) of section 3A;’;
(ii) after clause ( b), the following clauses
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ba) “commodity derivative” means—
(i) a contract for delivery of goods,
which is not a ready delivery contract; or
(ii) a contract for differences which
derives its value from prices or indices of prices of
such underlying goods or activities, services,
rights, interest and events, as may be notified in
consultation with the Commission by the Central
Government, but does not include securities;
(bb) “corporatisation” means the succession
of recognised association, being a body of individu-
als or a society registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860, by another association,
Amendment
of section 2.
15 of 1992.
21 of 1860.

47
being a company incorporated for the purpose of
assisting, regulating or controlling the business of
buying, selling or dealing in goods or commodity
derivatives carried on by such individuals or
society;
(bc) “demutualisation” means the segrega-
tion of ownership and management from the
trading rights of the members of recognised
association in accordance with a scheme approved
by the Commission;’;
(iii) in clause (c), after the words “delivery
contract”, the words “and includes contract for
commodity derivative” shall be inserted;
(iv) after clause ( c), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:—
‘(ca) “Fund” means the Forward Markets
Commission General Fund constituted under sub-
section (I) of section 4E;’;
(v) after clause ( e), the following clauses shall
be inserted, namely:—
‘(ea) “intermediary” means a member of the
association, and includes a collateral manager, a
clearing house, or such other person who is
associated with the commodity derivatives market
and is specified as such by the Central Government
for the purposes of this Act;
(eb) “member” means a whole-time or part-time
member of the Commission and includes the
Chairman;’;
(vi) after clause ( f), the following clauses shall
be inserted, namely:—
‘(fa)“notification” means a notification
published in the Official Gazette and the expres-
sion “notify” shall be construed accordingly;

48
(fb) “option in commodity derivative”
means an agreement, by whatever name called for
trading in a commodity derivative and includes a
teji, a mandi, a tejimandi, a gali, a put, a call or a
put and call in commodity derivative’; ( vii) in clause
(i),—
(A) for the words “eleven days”, the words
“thirty days” shall be substituted;
(B) in the Explanation, in the clause ( i),
after the words and figures “Act, 1970”, the
words, figures and brackets “or under section 3
of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980” shall be
inserted;
(viii ) in clause ( j), for the words and figures
“the Central Government under section 6 in respect
of goods or classes of goods”, the words and figure
“the commission under section 6 in respect of
forward contract or classes of forward contracts”
shall be substituted;
(ix) for clause (jj), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:—
‘(jj) “regulations” means the regulations
made by the Commission under this Act,’;
(x) after clause ( k), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ka) “scheme” means a scheme for
corporatisation or demutualisation of a recognised
association which may provide for—
(A) the issue of shares for a lawful
consideration and provision for trading rights in
lieu of membership cards of members of a
recognised association;
(B) the restrictions on voting rights;
40 of 1980.

49
(C) the transfer of property, business,
assets, rights, liabilities, recognitions, contracts of
the recognised association, legal proceedings by, or
against, the recognised association, whether in the
name of the recognised association or any trustee
or otherwise and any permission given to, or by, the
recognised association;
(D) the transfer of employees of a recognised
association to another recognised association;
(E) any other matter required for the
purpose of, or in connection with, the corporatisation
or demutualisation, as the case may be, of the
recognised association;’;
(xi) in clause ( m), for the words “forward
contract which provides for”, the words “forward
contract which provides for, and is performed by.”
shall be substituted.
4. In section 3 of the principal Act, for the sub-
sections ( 2),  ( 3), ( 4) and ( 5), the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) The Commission shall be a body
corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power subject
to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and
dispose of property, both movable and immovable,
and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue
or be sued;”.
5. After section 3 of the principal Act, the
following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“3A. ( I) The Commission shall consist of
the following members, namely:—
(a) a Chairman;
(b) two members from amongst the offi-
cials of the Ministries or Departments of the Central
Amendment
of section 3
Insertion of
new section
3A, 3B, 3C,
3D, 3E, 3F, 3G
and 3H.
Management
of Commis-
sion.

50
Government dealing with Consumer Affairs, Com-
modity Derivatives, Food and Public Distribution,
Agriculture or Finance;
(c) one member from amongst the
officials of the Reserve Bank;
(d) five other members of whom at
least three shall be the whole-time members;
(2) The general superintendence, direction and
management of the affairs of the Commission shall
vest in a board of members, which may exercise all
powers and do all acts and things which may be
exercised or done by the Commission.
(3) Save as otherwise determined, by regula-
tions, the Chairman shall have powers of general
superintendence and direction of the affairs of the
Commission and may also exercise all powers and
do all acts and things which may be exercised or
done by the Commission.
(4) The Chairman and members referred to in
clauses ( a) and ( d) of sub-section ( I) shall be
appointed by the Central Government and the
members referred to in clauses ( b) and ( c) of that
sub-section shall be nominated by the Central
Government and the Reserve Bank, respectively.
(5) The Chairman and other members referred
to in clauses ( a) and ( d) of sub-section ( I) shall be
persons of ability, integrity and standing who have
shown capacity in dealing with problems relating
to commodity markets or who have special
knowledge or experience of commerce or economics
or law or finance or in administration or have
practical experience in any matter which renders
them suitable for appointment on the Commission:
Provide that every person appointed as Chair-
man and every other person appointed as member

51
of the Commission and holding office as such
immediately before the commencement of the
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act,
2006, shall, notwithstanding any order for their
appointment made under sub-section ( 2) of section
3 as it stood before the commencement of the
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act,
2006, shall hold office till the Chairman or other
member has been appointed in accordance with
this section after such commencement and no
person shall be entitled to claim any compensation
for the premature termination of the term of his
office or of any contract of service.
3B. (I) The term of office and other conditions
of service of the Chairman and the members
referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (I)  of section
3A shall be such as may be prescribed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (I), the Central Government shall have
the right to terminate the services of the Chairman
or a member appointed under clause ( d) of sub-
section ( I) of section 3A, at any time before the
expiry of the period prescribed under sub-section,
(I), by giving him notice of not less than three
months in writing or three months’ salary and
allowances in lieu thereof, and the Chairman or a
member, as the case may be, shall also have the
right to relinquish his office, at any time before the
expiry of the period prescribed under sub-section
(I), by giving to the Central Government notice of
not less than three months in writing.
3C. The Central Government shall remove a
member from office if he—
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated as
insolvent;
(b) is of unsound mind and stands so declared
by competent court;
Term of office
and conditions
of service of
Chairman and
member of
Commission
Removal of
member from
office.

52
(c) has been convicted of an offence
which, in the opinion of the Central Government,
involves a moral turpitude;
(d) has, in the opinion of the Central
Government, so abused his position as to render his
continuation in office detrimental to the public
interest:
Provided that no member shall be removed
under this clause unless he has been given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the
matter.
3D. ( I) The Commission shall meet at such
times and places, and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business
at its meetings including quorum at such meetings
as may be provided by regulations.
(2) The Chairman or, if for any reason, he is
unable to attend the meeting of the Commission,
any other member chosen by the members present
from amongst themselves at the meeting shall
preside at the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any
meeting of the Commission shall be decided by a
majority of votes of the members of the Commis-
sion present and voting, and in the event of an
equality of votes, the Chairman or in his absence
the member presiding, shall have a second or
casting vote.
3E. No act or proceeding of the Commission
shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the
constitution of, the Commission; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a
person acting as a member of the Commission;
or
Meetings of
Commission.
Vacancies, etc.
not to
invalidate
proceedings of
Commission.

53
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the
Commission not affecting the merits of the case.
3F. Any member, who is a director of a
company and who as such director has any direct
or indirect pecuniary interest in any matter coming
up for consideration at a meeting of the Commis-
sion, shall, as soon as possible after relevant
circumstances have come to his knowledge, dis-
close the nature of his interest at such meeting and
such disclosure shall be recorded in the proceedings
of the Commission, and the member shall not take
any part in any deliberation or decision of the
Commission with respect to that matter.
3G. The Chairman and the whole-time mem-
bers shall not, for a period of two years from the
date on which they cease to hold office as such,
except with the previous approval of the Central
Government, accept any employment with any
person dealing with the commodities derivatives or
with any intermediary.
3H. (I) The Commission may appoint such
officers and other employees as it considers
necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions
under this Act.
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the
officers and employees of the Commission ap-
pointed under sub-section ( I) shall be such as may
be determined by regulations:
Provided that every officer and other employee
holding any office under the Commission, before
the commencement of the Forward Contracts
(Regulation) Amendment Act, 2006, shall continue
to hold his office as such after such commencement
for the same tenure and upon the same terms and
conditions of service as respects remuneration,
leave, provident fund, retirement and other terminal
Member not
to participate
in meetings in
certain cases.
Bar on future
employment
of members.
Officers and
emplyees of
Commission.

54
benefits as he would have held such office if the
said Act had not come into force and shall continue
to do as an officer or other employee of the
Commission until the regulations are made under
this sub-section or the expiry of one year from the
date of such commencement or till the date on
which such officer or other employee opts not to be
the officer or other employee of the Commission,
whichever is earlier;”.
6. In section 4 of the principal Act,—
(a) for clause (a), the following clauses shall
be substituted, namely:—
(a) to advise the Central Government
in respect of matters arising out of the administra-
tion of this Act;
(aa) to grant or withdraw recognition of
any association;”;
(b) in clause ( e), for the words “registered
association or any member of such association”, the
words “any member of such association or any
intermediary” shall be substituted;
(c) for clause (f), the following clauses shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(f) to regulate the business of the
associations;
(g) to regulate the functioning of mem-
bers of the associations, clearing houses, ware-
houses and intermediaries;
(h) to levy fees for carrying out the
purposes of this Act;
(i) to conduct research for the purpose
of development and regulation of commodity
derivatives market;
Amendment
of section 4.
Fund.

55
(j) to call from or furnishing to any such
agencies, as may be specified by the Commission,
such information as may be considered necessary
by it for the efficient discharge of its functions;
(k) to protect the interests of the market
participants in commodity derivatives markets;
(l) to promote and regulate self-regulatory
organisations;
(m) to prohibit fraudulent and unfair trade
practices relating to commodity derivatives market;
(n) to promote investors education and
training of intermediaries;
(o) to prohibit insider trading in commod-
ity
(p) to advise the Central Government as to
the goods in respect of which forward contract or
option in goods or option in commodity derivative
may be notified;
(q) to perform such other duties and
exercise such other powers as may be assigned to
the Commission by or under this Act, or as may
be prescribed.”.
7. In section 4A of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 3), for the words and
figures “the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898”, the
words and figures “the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973” shall be substituted;
(b) for the word and figures “section 482”,
the word and figures “section 346” shall be
substituted.
8. After section 4A of the principal Act, the
following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“4B. Save as otherwise provided in
section 4, if after making or causing to be made an
5 of 1898.
2 of 1974.
Amendment
of section
4A.
Insertion of
new sections
4B and 4C.
Power to

56
enquiry, the Commission is satisfied that it is
necessary, in the interest of trade and orderly
development of commodity derivatives market, it
may issue directions to any intermediary or
association.
4C. If the Commission finds, after causing
an inquiry to be made, that any person has violated,
or is likely to violate any provisions of this Act or
any rules or regulations made thereunder, the
Commission may pass an order requiring such
person to cease and desist from committing or
causing such violations.”.
9. After Chapter II of the principal Act, the
following Chapter shall be inserted, namely:—
CHAPTER II A
F
INANCE, A CCOUNTS AND A UDIT
4D. The Central Government may, after
due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, make to the Commission grants
of such sums of money as that Government may
think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this
Act.
4E. (1) There shall be constituted a fund to be
called the Forward Markets Commission General
Fund and there shall be credited thereto—
(i) all grants and fees received by the
Commission under this Act;
(ii) all sums received by the Commission
from such other sources as may be decided upon
by the Central Government.
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting—
(i) The salaries, allowances and other
remuneration of the members, officers and other
employees of the Commission;
issue direc-
tions by
Commission.
Cease and
desist pro-
ceedings.
Insertion of
new Chap-
ter IIA.
Grants by
Central
Govern-
ment.
Fund.

57
(ii) the expenses of the Commission in the
discharge of its functions under section 4;
(iii) the expenses on objects and for pur-
poses authorised by this Act:
Provided that the sums authorised to be paid
and applied from and out of the Consolidated Fund
of India and appropriated by law made by
Parliament for the services and purposes of the
Commission shall continue to be paid and applied
for such services and purposes of the Commission
till the Fund is constituted under this section.
4F. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an
annual statement of accounts in such form and
manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government in consultation with the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall
be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India at such intervals as may be specified by
him and any expenditure incurred in connection
with such audit shall be payable by the Commis-
sion to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India and any other person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the
Commission shall have the same rights and
privileges and authority in connection with such
audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General
generally has in connection with the audit of the
Government accounts, and in particular, shall have
the right to demand the production of books,
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents
and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the
Commission.
Accounts
and audit.

58
(4) The accounts of the Commission as certi-
fied by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India or any other person appointed by him in this
behalf together with the audit report thereon shall
be forwarded annually to the Central Government
and that Government shall cause the same to be
laid before each House of Parliament.”.
10. In section 5 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1).—
(i) for the words “forward contracts”, the
words “forward contracts or option in goods or
option in commodity derivative” shall be substi-
tuted;
(ii) for the words “Central Government”,
the word “Commission” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 2), for the words “forward
contracts”, the words “forward contracts or option
in goods or option in commodity derivative” shall
be substituted,
(c) the following proviso shall be inserted at
the end, namely:—
“Provided that the applications made to the
Central Government, on or before the commence-
ment of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amend-
ment Act, 2006 and pending with the Central
Government on such date, shall be transferred to
the Commission and thereafter the Commission
shall dispose of such applications in accordance
with the provisions of this Act.”.
11. In section 6 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) for the words “Central Government”.,
the word “Commission” shall be substituted;
Amendment
of section 5.
Amendment
of section 6.

59
(ii) for the words “the goods or classes of
goods with respect to which forward contracts may
be entered”, the words “the goods or classes of
goods or commodity derivative or classes of
commodity derivatives with respect to which
forward contracts or options may be entered” shall
be substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 2),—
(i) for the words “Central Govern-
ment”, at both the places where they occur, the
word “Commission” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause ( b), for the words “of not
more than three persons”, the words “such number
of persons as the Commission may, having regard
to the interest of trade in commodities and
commodities derivatives, specify,” shall be substi-
tuted;
(c) in sub-section ( 3), for the words “Central
Government”, the word “Commission” shall be
substituted;
 (d) after sub-section ( 4), the following proviso
shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the recognition granted by
the Central Government, before the commencement
of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment
Act, 2006, shall be deemed to have been granted by
the Commission in accordance with the provisions
of this Act.”.
12. For section 7 of the principal Act, the
following sections shall be substituted, namely:—
7. (1) If the Commission is of opinion that
any recognition granted to an association under the
provisions of this Act should, in the interest of the
trade or in the public interest, be withdrawn, the
Substitution
of new
sections for
section 7.
Withdrawal
of recogni-
tion.

60
Commission may, after giving a reasonable oppor-
tunity to the association to be heard in the matter,
withdraw, by notification, the recognition granted
to the said association:
Provided that no such withdrawal shall affect
the validity of any contract entered into or made
before the date of the notification, and the
Commission may make such provision as it deems
fit in the notification of withdrawal or in any
subsequent notification similarly published for the
due performance of any contract outstanding on
that date.
(2) Where the recognised association has not
been corporatised or demutualised or it fails to
submit the scheme referred to in sub-section ( 1) of
section 7B within the specified time therefor or the
scheme has been rejected by the Commission under
sub-section (5) of section 7B, the recognition granted
to such association under section 6, shall, notwith-
standing anything contained contrary to any other
provision of this Act, stand withdrawn and the
Commission shall publish, by notification, such
withdrawal of recognition:
Provided that no such withdrawal shall affect
the validity of any contract entered into or made
before the date of the notification, and the
Commission may, after consultation with associa-
tion, make such provisions as it deems fit, in the
order rejecting the scheme published in the Official
Gazette under sub-section ( 5) of section 7B.
7A. On and from the appointed date, all
recognised associations (if not corporatised and
demutualised before the appointed date) shall be
corporatised and demutualised in accordance with
the provisions contained in section 7B:
Provided that different appointed dates may be
appointed for different recognised associations:
Corporatisa-
tion and
demutuali-
sation of
associations.

61
Provided further that the Commission may, if
it is satisfied that any recognised association was
prevented by sufficient cause from being
corporatised and demutualised on or after the
appointed date, extend the appointed date specified
in respect of that recognised association and such
recognised association may continue as such before
such appointed date.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,
“appointed date” means the date which the
Commission may, by notification, appoint.
7B. (1) All recognised associations referred to in
section 7A shall, within such time as may be
specified by the Commission, submit a scheme for
corporatisation and demutualisation for its ap-
proval.
Provided that the Commission may, by notifi-
cation, specify name of the recognised association,
which had already been corporatised and
demutualised, and such association shall not
be required to submit the scheme under this
section.
(2) On receipt of the scheme referred to in
 sub-section (1), the Commission may, after making
such enquiry as may be necessary in this
behalf and obtaining such further information, if
any, as it may require and if it is satisfied that it
would be in the interest of the trade in goods or
commodity derivatives and also in the public
interest, approve the scheme with or without
modification.
(3) No scheme under sub-section ( 2) shall be
approved by the Commission if the issue of shares
for a lawful consideration or provision of trading
rights in lieu of membership card of the members
Procedure
for corpora-
tisation and
demutuali-
sation

62
of a recognised association or payment of dividends
to members have been proposed out of any reserves
or assets of that association.
(4) Where the scheme is approved under sub-
section ( 2), the scheme so approved shall be
published immediately by—
(a) the Commission in the Official
Gazette;
(b) the recognised association in such two
daily newspapers circulating in India, as may be
specified by the Commission,
and upon such publication, notwithstanding
anything contained contrary to any other provision
of this Act or in any other law for the time being
in force or any agreement, award, judgement, decree
or other instrument for the time being in force, the
scheme shall have effect and be binding on all
persons and authorities including all members,
creditors, depositors and employees of the recognised
association and on all persons having any contract
right, power, obligation or liability with, against,
over, to, or in connection with, the recognised
association or its members.
(5) Where the Commission is satisfied that it
would not be in the interest of the trade in
goods or commodity derivatives and also in the
public interest to approve the scheme under
sub-section ( 2), it may, by an order, reject the
scheme and such order of rejection shall be
published by it in the Official Gazette:
Provided that the Commission shall give a
reasonable opportunity of being heard to all the
persons concerned and the recognised association
concerned before passing an order rejecting the
scheme.

63
(6) The Commission may, while approving the
scheme under sub-section ( 2), by an order in
writing, restrict—
(a) the voting rights of the shareholders
who are also members of the recognised associa-
tion;
(b) the right of shareholders or a member
of the recognised association to appoint the
representatives on the governing board of the
association;
(c) the maximum number of representa-
tives of the members of the recognised association
to be appointed on the governing board of the
association, which shall not exceed one-fourth of
the total strength of the governing board.
(7) The order made under sub-section ( 6) shall
be published in the Official Gazette and on the
publication thereof, the order shall, notwithstand-
ing anything to the contrary contained in the
Companies Act, 1956, or in any other law for the
time being in force, have full effect.
(8) Every recognised association, in respect of
which the scheme for corporatisation or
demutualisation has been approved under
sub-section ( 2) shall, either by fresh issue of
equity shares to the public or in any other
manner as may be specified by the regulations
made by the Commission, ensure that at least
fifty-one per cent, of its equity share capital is
held, within twelve months from the date of
publication of the order under sub-section ( 7), by
the public other than shareholders having trading
rights:
1 of 1956.

64
Provided that the Commission may, on
sufficient cause being shown to it and in the
public interest, extend the said period by another
twelve months.’.
13. In section 8 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the words “Central Government”
wherever they occur, the words “Central Govern-
ment or Commission” shall be substituted;
(b) for the word “inquiry”, where it occurs,
the words “an inquiry or inspection” shall be
substituted;
(c) in sub-section ( 2), in clause ( c), for the
words “direct the Commission”, the words ”direct
any agency or any of its officers” shall be
substituted.
14. In section 9A of the principal Act, in sub-
section (2),—
(a) for the words “Central Government”
wherever they occur, the words “Central Govern-
ment or Commission” shall be substituted;
(b) for the words “that Government”, the
words “that Government or Commission”, shall be
substituted.
15. For section 10 of the principal Act, the
following sections shall be substituted, namely:—
“10. ( 1) Whenever the Commission con-
siders it expedient so to do, it may, by order in
writing, direct any recognised association to make
any rules or to amend any rules made by the
recognised association with such period as it may
specify in this behalf.
(2) If any recognised association, against
whom an order is issued by the Commission under
sub-section (1), fails or neglects to comply with such
Amendment
of section 8.
Amendment
of section
9A.
Substitution
of new
sections for
section 10
Power of
Commission
to direct
rules to be
made or to
make rules.
30

65
order within the specified period, the Commission
may make the rules or amend the rules made by
the recognised association, as the case may be,
either in the form specified in the order or with such
modification thereof as the Commission may think
fit.
(3) Where, in pursuance of sub-section ( 2), any
rules have been made or amended, the rules so
made or amended shall be published in the
Gazette of India, and shall, thereupon, have effect
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained
in the Companies Act, 1956 or any other law for
the time being in force, as if they had been made
or amended by the recognised association con-
cerned.
10A. ( 1) A recognised association may, with
the prior approval of the Commission, transfer the
duties and functions of a clearing house to a
clearing corporation, being a company incorporated
under the Companies Act, 1956, for the purpose
of—
(a) the periodical settlement of contracts and
differences thereunder;
(b) the delivery of, and payment for, goods;
(c) any other matter incidental to, or connected
with, such transfer.
(2) Every clearing corporation shall, for the
purpose of transfer of the duties and functions of
a clearing house to a clearing corporation referred
to in sub-section (I), make bye-laws and submit the
same to the Commission for its approval.
(3) The Commission may, on being satisfied
that it is in the interest of the trade and also in the
public interest to transfer the duties and functions
of a clearing house to a clearing corporation, grant
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.
Clearing
corporation.

66
approval to the bye-laws submitted to it under sub-
section (2) and approve transfer of the duties and
functions of clearing house to a clearing corporation
referred to in sub-section ( I).
(4) The provisions of sections 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 12A, 12B and 13 shall, as far as may be,
apply to a clearing corporation referred to in sub-
section (I) as they apply in relation to a recognised
association.”.
16. In section 11 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( I),—
(i) for the words “Central Government”,
the word “Commission” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words “forward contracts”, the
words “forward contracts or option in goods or
option in commodity derivative” shall be substi-
tuted;
(b) in sub-section ( 2), after the word “goods”,
wherever it occurs, the words “or forward contracts
or option in goods or option in commodity
derivative” shall be inserted;
(c) in sub-section ( 3), in clause ( aa), for the
brackets, figure and letter “( 3A)”, the brackets and
figure “( 4)” shall be substituted;
(d) in sub-section ( 4) and then proviso, for the
words “Central Government” at both the places
where they occur, the word “Commission” shall be
substituted.
17. For sections 12 and 12A of the principal
Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“12. ( I) The Commission may, either on a
request in writing received by it in this behalf from
the governing body of a recognised association, or
if in its opinion it is expedient so to do, make bye-
Amendment
of section 11.
Substitution
of new
sections for
sections 12
and 12A.
Power of
Commission
to make or
amend bye-
laws of
recognised
association.

67
laws for all or any of the matter specified in section
11 or amend any bye-laws made by such associa-
tion under that section.
(2) Where, in pursuance of this section,
any bye-laws have been made or amended, the bye-
laws so made or amended shall be published in the
Gazette of India and shall thereupon have effect as
if they had been made or amended by the
recognised association.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained
in this section, where the governing body of a
recognised association objects to any bye-laws
made or amended under this section by the
Commission on its own motion, it may, within
six months of the publication thereof under
sub-section ( 2), apply to the Commission for a
revision thereof, and the Commission may, after
giving a reasonable opportunity to the governing
body of the association to be heard in the matter,
revise the bye-laws so made or amended, and
where any bye-laws so made or amended are
revised as a result of any action taken under this
sub-section the bye-laws so revised shall be
published and shall become effective as provided
in sub-section ( 2).
(4) The making or amendment or revision of
any bye-laws under this section shall in all cases
be subject to such conditions in regard to the
previous publication as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Commission may, in the
interest of the trade or in the public interest, by
order in writing, dispense with the condition of
previous publication.
12A. Any amendment of a bye-law made
under section 11 other than an amendment made
in pursuance of clause ( a) or clause ( aa) of sub-
Application of
amendment of
bye-laws to
existing
forward

68
section (3) of that section or under section 12 shall
also apply to all forward contracts or option in
goods or option in commodity derivative entered
into before the date of its approval by the
Commission or before the date of its publication in
the Gazette of India, as the case be, and remaining
to be performed on or after the said date.”.
18. In section 12B of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( I),—
(i) for the words “forward contract”, the
words “forward contract or option in goods or
option in commodity-derivative” shall be substi-
tuted;
(ii) the words “of any goods or class of
goods” shall be omitted;
(iii) after the words “any such contract”, the
words “or option in goods or option in commodity
derivatives” shall be inserted;
(b) in sub-section ( 3), for the words “forward
contract” at both the places where they occur, the
words “forward contract or option in goods or
option in commodity derivative” shall be substi-
tuted.
19. For section 13 of the principal Act,
the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“13. (I) Without prejudice to any other powers
vested in the Commission under this Act, where the
Commission is of the opinion that the governing
body of any recognised association should be
superseded, then, notwithstanding anything
contained in this Act or in any other law for the
time being in force the, Commission may, after
giving a reasonable opportunity to the governing
body of the recognised association concerned to
contracts of
option in
goods or
option in
commodity
derivative.
Amendment
of section
12B.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 13.
Power of
Commission
to supersede
governing
body of
recognised
association.

69
show cause why it should not be superseded, by
notification, declare the governing body, and where
more persons than one are appointed may appoint
one of such persons to be the chairman and another
of such person to be the vice-chairman.
(2) On the publication of a notification, under
sub-section ( I), the following consequences shall
ensure, namely:—
(a) the members of the governing body
which has been superseded shall, as from the date
of the notification of supersession, cease to hold
office as such members;
(b) the person or persons appointed under
sub-section ( I) may exercise and perform all the
powers and duties of the governing body which has
been superseded;
(c) all such property of the recognised
association as the person or persons appointed
under sub-section ( I) may, by order in writing,
specify in this behalf as being necessary for the
purpose of enabling him or them to carry out the
purposes of this Act, shall vest in such person or
persons.
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in any law or the rules or bye-laws of the
association whose governing body is superseded
under sub-section ( I), the person or persons
appointed under that sub-section shall hold office
for such period as may be specified in the
notification published under that sub-section, and
the Commission may, from time to time, by like
notification, vary such period.
(4) On the determination of the period of office
of any person or persons appointed under this
section, the recognised association shall forthwith

70
reconstitute a governing body in accordance with
its rules:
Provided that until a governing body is so
reconstituted, the person or persons appointed
under sub-section ( I), shall notwithstanding any-
thing contained in sub-section ( I), continue to
exercise and perform their powers and duties.
(5) On the reconstitution of a governing body
under sub-section ( 4), all the property of the
recongnised association which had vested in, or
was in the possession of, the person or persons
appointed under sub-section (I) shall vest or revest,
as the case may be, in the governing body so
reconstituted.”.
20. In section 14 of the principal Act, for the
words “Central Government” at both the places
they occur, the word “Commission” shall be
substituted.
21. For Chapter IIIA of the principal Act,
the following Chapter shall be substituted,
namely:—
“CHAPTER IIIA
REGISTRATION OF MEMBERS AND INTERMEDIARIES
14A. (I) On and from the commencement of the
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act,
2006, no person intending to act as a member or
intermediary shall deal in forward contract or
option in goods or option in commodity derivative
except under and in accordance with the conditions
of a certificate of registration granted by the
Commission in accordance with the regulations
made under this Act.
(2) A person, who in his capacity as a member
or intermediary intends to deal in forward contract
or option in goods or option in commodity
derivative shall make an application for a certificate
Amendment
of section 14.
Substitution
of new
Chapter for
Chapter
IIIA.
Registration
of members
and interme-
diaries.

71
of registration to the Commission in such form
along with such fee and containing such particulars
as may be provided by regulations:
Provided that a person who was acting as a
member or intermediary, before the commencement
of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment
Act, 2006, may continue to do so for a period of six
months from the date of such commencement if he
has made an application for registration within the
said period of six months, till the disposal of such
application, whichever is later:
Provided further that the Commission may, by
regulations, specify different fees for a class or
classes of members or intermediaries on the basis
of turnover of the business of such members or
intermediaries.
(3) No foreign participant or foreign interme-
diary associated with the commodity derivatives
market, as the Commission may, by notification in
this behalf, specify, shall deal in forward contract
or option in goods or option in commodity
derivative except under and in accordance with the
conditions of a certificate of registration obtained
from the Commission in accordance with the
regulations made under this Act:
Provided that a foreign participant or foreign
intermediary dealing in forward contract or option
in goods or option in commodity derivative
immediately before the commencement of this Act,
for which no certificate of registration was required
prior to such commencement, may continue to deal
in forward contract or option in goods until such
time as rules may be made by the Central
Government for such dealings or in case no such
rules have been made until permitted as such by
the Commission by notification.

72
(4) On receipt of an application under
sub-section (2), the Commission may, after making
such inquiry as it considers necessary in this
behalf, by order in writing, grant a certificate of
registration on such terms and conditions as may
by specified by regulations or refuse to grant such
certificate:
Provided that, before refusing to grant such
certificate, the person making the application shall
be given an opportunity of being heard in the
matter.
14B. The Commission may, by order, suspend
or cancel the certificate of registration in such
manner as may be provided by regulations:
Provided that no order under this section shall
be made unless the person concerned has
been given an opportunity of being heard in the
matter.”.
22. For sections 15, 16 and 17 of the principal
Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(15). (I) Subject to the provisions contained in
sections 17 and 18, every forward contract, entered
into otherwise than between members of a
recognised association or through or with any such
member, shall be illegal.
(2) Any forward contract entered into in
pursuance of sub-section ( I) which is in contraven-
tion of any of the bye-laws specified in this behalf
under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 11 shall
be void—
(a) as respects the rights of any member of
the recognised association who has entered into
contract in contravention of any such bye-law, and
also.
Suggestion
on cancella-
tion of
registration.

73
(b) as respects the rights of any other
person who has knowingly participated in the
transaction entailing such contravention.
(3) Nothing in sub-section ( 2) shall affect the
right of any person other than a member of the
recognised association to enforce any such contract
or to recover any sum under or in respect of such
contract:
Provided that such person had no knowledge
that such transaction was in contravention of any
of the bye-laws specified under clause ( a) of sub-
section (3) of section 11.
(4) Any forward contract entered into in
pursuance of sub-section ( I) which at the date of
the contract is in contravention of any of the bye-
laws specified in this behalf under clause ( aa) of
sub-section  ( 3) of section 11 shall be illegal.
(5) No member of a recognised association
shall enter into any contract on his own account
with any person other than a member of the
recognised association, unless he has secured the
consent or authority of such person and discloses
in the note, memorandum or agreement of sale
or purchase that he has bought on sold the
forward contract, as the case may be, on his own
account:
Provided that where the member has
secured the consent or authority of such person
otherwise than in writing he shall secure a written
confirmation by such person of such consent or
authority within three days from the date of such
contract:
Provided further that in respect of any out-
standing contract entered into by a member with
a person other than a member of the recognised
association, no consent or authority of such person

74
shall be necessary for closing out in accordance
with the bye-laws, the outstanding contract, if the
member discloses in the note, memorandum or
agreement of sale or purchase in respect of such
closing out that he had bought or sold the goods,
forward contract or option in goods or option in
commodity derivative as the case may be on his
own account.
16. Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force or in any
custom, usage or practice of the trade or the terms
of any contract or the bye-laws of any association
concerned relatating to any contract,—
(a) every forward contract entered into on
or before the date of commencement of the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2006, and
remaining to be performed after the said date and
which is not in conformity with the provisions of
section 15, shall be deemed to be closed out at such
rate as the Commission may fix in this behalf and
different rates may be fixed for different classes of
such contracts;
(b) all differences arising out of any
contract so deemed to be closed out shall be payable
on the basis of the rate fixed under clause ( a)
and the seller shall not be bound to give and the
buyer shall not be bound to take delivery of the
goods.
17. (1) The Central Government may, by
notification, declare that no person shall, save with
the permission of the Central Government, deal in
any forward contract or option in goods or option
in commodity derivative specified in the notifica-
tion, except to the extent and in the manner, if any,
as may be specified in the notification.
Consequen-
ces of
section 15.
Power to
prohibit
forward
contract or
options in
goods or
option in
commodity
derivative.

75
(2) All forward contracts or options in goods
or options in commodity derivative in contravention
of the provisions of sub-section (I) entered into after
the date of publication of the notification there-
under shall be illegal.
(3) Where a notification has been issued under
sub-section (I), the provisions of section 16 shall, in
the absence of anything to the contrary in the
notification, apply to all forward contracts and
options in goods for the sale or purchase of any
goods specified in the notification (entered into on
or before the date of the notification) and remaining
to be performed after the said date.”.
23. In section 18 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( I),—
(i) for the words “non-transferable specific
delivery contracts”, the words and brackets “spe-
cific delivery contracts (both transferable and non-
transferable)” shall be substituted;
(ii) in the proviso, for the words “non-transfer-
able specific delivery contracts”, the words and
brackets “specific delivery contracts (both transfer-
able and non-transferable)” shall be substituted;
(b) sub-section ( 2) shall be omitted;
(c) in sub-section ( 3), for the words “non-
transferable specific delivery contracts” at both the
places where they occur, the words and brackets
“specific delivery contracts (both transferable and
non-transferable)” shall be substituted;
24. For section 19 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“19. ( I) Any option in goods or option in
commodity derivative which has been entered into
on or after the commencement of the Forward
Amendment
of section 18.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 19.
Option in
goods or
option in
comoodity
derivate

76
Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2006,
otherwise than between members of a recognised
association or through or with any such member
shall be illegal.
(2) The provisions of sub-sections ( 2), (3), (4)
and (5) of section 15 shall apply to options in goods
or option in commodity derivative as they apply in
relation to a forward contract.”.
25. In section 20 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause ( a), in sub-clause ( iii), for the
words “forward contract”, the words “forward
contract or option in goods or option in commodity
derivative” shall be substituted;
(ii) clause ( b) shall be omitted;
(iii) in clause ( c), for the words “forward
contract”, the words “forward contract or option in
goods or option in commodity derivative” shall be
substituted;
(iv) after clause ( d), the following clauses
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(da) fails to make or accept delivery of
goods covered by non-transferable specific delivery
contracts or by transferable specific contracts where
rights and obligations have not been transferred, as
the case may be; or”;
(v) for clause ( e) the following clause shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(e) enters into any forward contract or
option in goods or option in commodity derivative
in contravention of any of the provisions contained
in sub-section ( I) or sub-section ( 4) or sub-section
(5) of section 15 or section 17 or section 19,”;
(vi) after the words “shall, on conviction, be
punishable–” occurring below clause ( e),—
illegal in
certain
circumsta-
nces.
Amendment
of section 20.

77
(A) in clause ( i), for the words “one
thousand rupees”, the words “twenty-five thousand
rupees but which may extend to twenty-five lakh
rupees” shall be substituted;
(B) in clause ( ii),—
(I) for the words, brackets and letter
“under clause  ( d)”, the words, brackets and letters
“under clause ( d) or under clause  ( da)” shall be
substituted;
(II) for the words “one thousand rupees”,
the words “twenty-five thousand rupees” shall be
substituted.
26. In section 21 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clauses ( a) to ( f) for the words
“forward contracts”, where ever they occur the
words “forward contract or option in goods or
option in commodity derivative” shall be substi-
tuted;
(ii) in clause ( g), for the words and figures
“in respect of goods to which the provisions of
section 15 have been made applicable”, the words
“in respect of goods or option in goods or option
in commodity derivative“ shall be substituted;
(iii) for clause (h), the following clause shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(h) manipulates or attempts to ma-
nipulate prices in respect of forward contracts or
option in goods or option in commodity deriva-
tive;”;
(iv) after the words “shall, on conviction, be
punishable—” occurring below clause ( h), in
clauses ( i) and ( ii), for the words “one thousand
rupees”, the words “twenty-five thousand rupees
Amendment
of section 21.

78
but which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees”
shall be substituted.
27. For section 21A of the principal Act, the
following sections shall be substituted, namely:—
“21A. If any person, who is required
under this Act or any rules or regulations made
thereunder,—
(a) to furnish any document, return or report
to the Commission, fails to furnish the same,
he shall be liable to a penalty of twenty
thousand rupees for each day during which such
failure continues or five lakh rupees, whichever is
less:
(b) to file any return or furnish any informa-
tion, books or other documents within the time
specified therefor in the regulations, fails to file or
furnish the same within the time specified therefor
in the regulations, he shall be liable to pay a penalty
not exceeding five thousand rupees for each day
during which such failure continues or five lakh
rupees, whichever is less;
(c) to maintain books of account or records,
fails to maintain the same, he shall be liable to a
penalty of ten thousand rupees for each day during
which such failure continues or five lakh rupees,
whichever is less;
(d) being a person or who was incharge of, and
was responsible to, an association for the conduct
of the business of the association, obstructs any
officer of the Commission or any other person
authorised by it to conduct inspection or to
discharge any other function assigned by the
Commission, such person as well as the association
shall be liable to pay a fine of rupees one lakh for
every occasion of such obstruction.
Substitution
of new
sections for
section 21A.
Penalty for
failure to
furnish
information,
return, etc.

79
21B. If any person, who is registered as a
member or an intermediary and is required under
this Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder
to enter into an agreement with his client, fails to
enter into such agreement, he shall be liable to a
penalty of twenty thousand rupees for each such
failure during which such failure continues or five
lakh rupees, whichever is less.
21C. If any person, who is registered as a
member or an intermediary, after having been
called upon by the Commission in writing to
redress the grievances of clients, fails to redress
such grievances within the time specified by the
Commission, he shall be liable to a penalty not
exceeding two thousand rupees for each day during
which such failure continues or five lakh rupees,
whichever is less.
21D. If any insider who,—
(i) either on his own behalf or on behalf
of any other person, deals in forward contract or
option in goods or option in commodity derivative
on any association on the basis of any unpublished
price sensitive information; or
(ii) communicates any unpublished price
sensitive information to any person, with or without
his request for such information except as required
in the ordinary course of business or under any law;
or
(iii) counsels, or procures for any other
person to deal in any forward contract or option in
goods or option in commodity derivative on the
basis of unpublished price sensitive information,
shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five lakh
rupees or three times the amount of profits made
out of insider trading, whichever is higher.
21E. If any person indulges in fraudulent
and unfair trade practices relating to forward
Penalty for
failure by
any person
to enter
into an
agreement
with
clients.
Penalty for
failure to
redress
clients’
grievances.
Penalty for
insider
trading.
Penalty for
fraudulent

80
contract or option in goods or option in commodity
derivative, he shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-
five lakh rupees or three times the amount of
profits made out of such practices, whichever is
higher.
21F. If any person, who is registered as an
intermediary under this Act or any regulations
made thereunder,—
(a) fails to issue contract notes in the form
and manner specified by the association of which
such intermediary is a member, he shall be liable
to a penalty not exceeding five times the amount
for which the contract note was required to be
issued by that intermediary;
(b) fails to deliver any goods or fails to
make payment of the amount due to the client or
in the manner or within the period specified in the
regulations, he shall be liable to a penalty not
exceeding five thousand rupees for each day during
which such failure continues;
(c) charges an amount of brokerage which
is in excess of the brokerage specified by the
association, he shall be liable to a penalty of five
thousand rupees or five times the amount of
brokerage charged in excess of the specified
brokerage, whichever is higher.
21G. Any person, who fails to comply with
the directives issued by the Commission under
section 4B, shall be liable to pay a penalty not
exceeding two lakh rupees for each day during
which such failure continues which may extend to
five lakh rupees.
21H. ( I) Without prejudice to any award of
penalty by the adjudicating officer under this Act,
if any person contravenes or attempts to contravene
Penalty for
failure to
comply with
directives of
Commission
Conse-
quences of
failure to
pay penalty.
and unfair
trade
practices.
Penalty for
default in
case of an
inter-
mediary.

81
or abets the contravention any of the provisions of
this Act or of any rules or regulations made
thereunder, he shall be punishable with imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to three years,
or with fine, or with both.
(2) If any person fails to pay the penalty
imposed by the adjudicating officer or fails to
comply with any of his directions or orders, he
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than one month but
which may extend to three years or with fine or with
both.
21.I. (I) For the purposes of adjudging under
sections 21A to 21G, the Commission shall
appoint any of its officers not below the rank of
a Division Chief to be an adjudicating officer for
holding an inquiry in the prescribed manner after
giving any person concerned a reasonable oppor-
tunity of being heard for the purpose of imposing
any penalty.
(2) While holding an inquiry, the adjudicating
officer shall have power to summon and enforce
the attendance of any person acquainted with the
facts and circumstances of the case to give
evidence or to produce any document which, in the
opinion of the adjudicating officer, may be useful
for or relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry
and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the
person has failed to comply with the provision of
any of the sections specified in sub-section ( I), he
may impose such penalty as he thinks fit in
accordance with the provisions of any of those
sections.
21J.While adjudging the quantum of penalty
under section 21-I, the adjudicating officer
Power to
adjudicate.
Factors to be
taken into

82
shall have due regard to the following factors,
namely:—
(a) the amount of disproportionate gain or
unfair advantage, wherever quantifiable, made as
a result of the default;
(b) the amount of loss caused to a client or
group of clients as a result of the default;
(c) the repetitive nature of the default.
21K. All sums realised by way of penalties
under this Act shall be credited to the Consolidated
Fund of India.
21L. Any court trying an offence punishable
under this Act, may, if it thinks fit and in addition
to any sentence which it may impose for such
offence, direct that any money, goods or other
property in respect of which the offence has been
committed, shall be forfeited to the Central Govern-
ment.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,
property in respect of which an offence has been
committed, shall include deposits in a bank where
the said property is converted into such deposits.”.
28. In section 22A of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) after the words “forward contracts
or options in goods” at both the places where they
occur, the words “or option in commodity deriva-
tive” shall be inserted;
(ii) after the words “forward contract
or options in goods”, the words “or option in
commodity derivative” shall be inserted;
(b) for sub-section ( 2), the following sub-
sections shall be substituted, namely:—
Crediting
sums
realised by
way of
penalties to
Consolidated
Fund of India.
Power of court
to order
forfeiture of
property.
Amendment
of section 22A.
account by
adjudicating
officer.

83
“(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, shall, so far as may be, apply to
search or seizure made under sub-section (1) as they
apply to any search or seizure made under the
authority of a warrant issued under section 94 of
the said Code.
(3) The Commission may, notwithstand-
ing anything contained in this Act, file cases in
respect of offences committed under this Act,
directly to the courts having jurisdiction in respect
of such offences.”.
29. In section 22B of the principal Act, in sub-
section (1), after the words “or option in goods”, the
words “or option in commodity derivative” shall be
inserted.
30. After section 22B of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“22C. (1) Where the Commission has reason-
able grounds to believe that—
(a) the transactions in forward contracts or
option in goods or option in commodity derivative
are being dealt with in a manner detrimental to the
commodity market or person associated with the
commodity market; or
(b) any intermediary or any person associ-
ated with the commodities market has violated any
of the provisions of this Act or the rules or
regulations made or directions issued by the
Commission thereunder,
it may, at any time by order in writing, direct any
person (hereafter in this section referred to as the
Investigating Authority) specified in the order to
investigate the affairs of such intermediary or
person associated with the commodities market
and to report thereon to the Commission.
Amendment
of section
22B.
Insertion of
new section
22C.
Investigation.
2 of 1974.

84
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of
sections 235 to 241 of the Companies Act, 1956, it
shall be the duty of every manager, managing
director, officer and other employee of the company
and every intermediary referred to in section 14A,
every person associated with the commodities
market to preserve and to produce to the Investi-
gating Authority or any person authorised, by him
in this behalf, all the books, registers, other
documents and record of, or relating to, the
company or, as the case may be, of or relating to,
the intermediary or such person, which are in their
custody or power.
(3) The Investigating Authority may require
any intermediary or any person associated with
commodities market in any manner to furnish such
information to, or produce such books, or registers,
or other documents, or record before him or any
person authorised by him in this behalf as he may
consider necessary if the furnishing of such
information or the production of such books,
or registers, or other documents, or record is
relevant or necessary for the purposes of its
investigation.
(4) The Investigating Authority may keep in its
custody any books, registers, other documents and
record produced under sub-section ( 2) or sub-
section (3) for six months and thereafter shall return
the same to any intermediary or any person
associated with commodities market by whom or
on whose behalf the books, registers, other docu-
ments and record are produced:
Provided that the Investigating Authority may
call for any books, register, other document and
record if they are needed again:
Provided further that if the person on whose
behalf the books, registers, other documents and
1 of 1956.

85
record are produced requires certified copies of the
books, registers, other documents and record
produced before the Investigating Authority, it shall
give certified copies of such books, registers, other
documents and record to such person or on whose
behalf the books, registers, other documents and
record were produced.
(5) Any person, directed to make an investiga-
tion under sub-section ( 1), may examine on oath,
any manager, managing director, officer and other
employee of any intermediary or any person
associated with commodities market in any
manner, in relation to the affairs of his business
and may administer an oath accordingly and for
that purpose may require any of those persons to
appear before him personally.
(6) If any person fails without reasonable
cause or refuses—
(a) to produce to the Investigating Author-
ity or any person authorised by it in this behalf any
book, register, other document and record which is
his duty under sub-section ( 2) sub-section ( 3) to
produce; or
(b) to furnish any information which is his
duty under sub-section ( 3) to furnish; or
(c) to appear before the Investigating
Authority personally when required to do so under
sub-section (5) or to answer any question which is
put to him by the Investigating Authority in
pursuance of that sub-section; or
(d) to sign the notes of any examination
referred to in sub-section ( 7),
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine,
which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both,

86
and also with a further fine which may extend to
twenty thousand rupees for every day after the first
during which the failure or refusal continues.
(7) Notes of any examination under sub-
section (5) shall be taken down in writing and shall
be read over to, or by, and signed by, the person
examined, and may thereafter be used in evidence
against him.
(8) Where in the course of investigation, the
Investigating Authority has reasonable ground to
believe that the books, registers, other documents
and record of, or relating to, any intermediary or
any person associated with commodities market in
any manner, may be destroyed, mutilated, altered,
falsified or secreted, the Investigating Authority
may make an application to the Judicial Magistrate
of the first class having jurisdiction for an order for
the seizure of such books, registers, other docu-
ments and record.
(9) After considering the application and hear-
ing the Investigating Authority, if necessary, the
Magistrate may, by order, authorise the Investigat-
ing Authority—
(a) to enter, with such assistance, as may
be required, the place or places where such books,
registers, other documents and record are kept;
(b) to search that place or those places in
the manner specified in the order; and
(c) to seize books, registers, other docu-
ments and record, as it considers necessary for the
purposes of the investigation.
(10) The Investigating Authority shall keep
in its custody the books, registers, other
documents and record seized under this section for
such period not later than the conclusion of the

87
investigation as it considers necessary and there-
after shall return the same to the company or the
other body corporate, or, as the case may be, to
the managing director or the manager or any
other person, from whose custody or power they
were seized and inform the Magistrate of such
return:
Provided that the Investigating Authority
may, before returning such books, registers,
other documents and record as aforesaid,
place identification marks on them or any part
thereof.
(11) Save as otherwise provided in this section,
every search or seizure made under this section
shall be carried out in accordance with the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
relating to searches or seizures made under that
Code.”.
31. In section 23 of the principal Act, after
clause ( d), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(e) an offence falling under section
21H.”.
32. In Chapter V of the principal Act, after
section 24 the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“24A. No civil court shall have jurisdiction
to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of any
matter which an adjudicating officer appointed
under this Act or the Appellate Tribunal is
empowerd by or under this Act to determine and
no injunction shall be granted by any court or other
authority in respect of any action taken or to be
taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or
under this Act.”.
2 of 1974.
Amendment
of section 23.
Insertion of
new section
24A.
Civil court
not to have
jurisdiction.

88
33. After Chapter V of the principal Act, the
following Chapter shall be inserted, namely:—
CHAPTER VA
JURISDICTION, AND A UTHORITY OF A PPELLATE T RIBUNAL
24B. (1) Save as provided in sub-section (2), any
person aggrieved on or after the commencement of
the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment
Act, 2006, or by an order of the Commission
made, or the rules or regulations made thereunder
or by an order made by an adjudicating officer
under this Act may prefer an appeal to the
Appellate Tribunal having jurisdiction in the
matter.
(2) The Central Government shall specify, by
notification, the matters and places in relation
to which the Appellate Tribunal may exercise
jurisdiction.
(3) No appeal shall lie to the Appellate
Tribunal from an order made by the Commission
or an adjudicating officer with the consent of the
parties.
(4) Every appeal under sub-section ( 1) shall be
filed within a period of forty-five days from the date
on which a copy of the order made by the Chairman
of the Commission is received by and it shall be
in such form and be accompanied by such fee as
may be prescribed:
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may
entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said
period if it is satisfied that there was sufficient
cause for not filing it within that period.
(5) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section
(1), the Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the
parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard,
pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming,
modifying or setting aside the order appealed
against.
Appeal to
Appellate
Tribunal.
Insertion of
new
Chapter VA.

89
(6) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy
of every order made by it to the parties to the appeal
and to the concerned authority whose order has
been appealed against.
(7) The appeal filed before the Appellate
Tribunal under sub-section ( 1) shall be dealt with
by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour
shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally
within six months from the date of receipt of the
appeal.
24C. The appellant may either appear in person
or authorise one or more chartered accountants or
company secretaries or cost accountants or legal
practitioners or any of its officers to present his or
its case before the Appellate Tribunal.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this
section,—
(a) “Chartered accountant” means a
chartered accountant as defined in clause ( b) of
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Chartered
Accountants Act, 1949 and who has obtained a
certificate of practice under sub-section ( 1) of
section 6 of that Act;
(b) “Company secretary” means a com-
pany secretary as defined in clause ( c) of sub-
section (1) of section 2 of the Company Secretariat
Act, 1980 and who has obtained a certificate of
practice under sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of that
Act;
(c) “cost accountant” means a cost
accountant as defined in clause (b) of sub-section(1)
of section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants
Act, 1959 and who has obtained a certificate of
practice under sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of that
Act;
Right to legal
representa-
tives.
38 of 1949.
56 of 1980.
23 of 1959.

90
(d) “legal practitioner” means an advocate,
vakil or an attorney of any High Court, and
includes pleader in practice.
24D. The provisions of the Limitation Act,
1963 shall; as far as may be, apply to an appeal
made to the Appellate Tribunal.
24E. Any person aggrieved by any decision
or order of the Appellate Tribunal may file an
appeal to the Supreme Court within sixty days from
the date of communication of the decision or order
of the Appellate Tribunal to him on any question
of law arising out of such order:
Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is
satisfied that the applicant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the
said period, allow it to be filed within a further
period not exceeding sixty days.”.
34. After section 26 of the principal Act, the
following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“26A. ( I) Without prejudice to the foregoing
provisions of this Act, the Commission shall, in
exercise of its powers or performance of its
functions under this Act, be bound by such
directions on questions of policy as the Central
Government may give in writing to it from time to
time:
Provided that the Commission shall, as far as
practicable, be given an opportunity to express its
views before any direction is given under this sub-
section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government,
whether a question is one of policy or not, shall be
final.
36 of 1963.
Limitation.
Appeal to
Supreme
Court.
Insertion of
new sections
26A, 26B,
26C,  26D,
26E and 26F.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.

91
26B. ( I) If at any time the Central Govern-
ment is of the opinion—
(a) that on account of grave emergency, the
Commission is unable to discharge the functions
and perform the duties imposed on it by or under
the provisions of this Act; or
(b) that the Commission has persistently
made wilful default in complying with any
direction issued by the Central Government under
this Act or in the discharge of the functions and
perform the duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of this Act and as a result of such default
the financial position of the Commission or the
administration of the Commission has deteriorated;
or
(c) that circumstances exist which render it
necessary in the public interest so to do,
the Central Government may, by notification,
supersede the Commission for such period, not
exceeding six months, as may be specified in the
notification.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification
under sub-section ( I) superseding the Commis-
sion,—
(a) all the members shall, as from the date
of supersession, vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties
which may, by or under the provisions of this Act,
be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the
Commission shall, until the Commission is recon-
stituted under sub-section ( 3), be exercised and
discharged by such person or persons as the Central
Government may direct; and
(c) all property owned or controlled by the
Commission shall, until the Commission is recon-
stituted, vest in the Central Government.
Power of
Central
Government
to supersede
Commission.

92
(3) On the expiration of the period of superses-
sion specified in the notification issued under sub-
section (I), the Central Government may reconstitute
the Commission by fresh appointment and in such
case any person or persons who vacated their
offices under clause (a) of sub-section (2), shall not
be deemed disqualified for such appointment:
Provided that the Central Government may, at
any time before the expiration of the period of
supersession, take action under this sub-section.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a
notification issued under sub-section ( 1) and a
full report of any action taken under this section
and the circumstances leading to such action to
be laid before each House of Parliament at the
earliest.
26C.  ( 1) The Commission shall furnish to the
Central Government at such time and in such form
and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central
Government may direct, such returns and state-
ments and such particulars in regard to any
proposed or existing programme for the promotion
and development of the commodities market, as the
Central Government may, from time to time,
require.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-
section ( 1), the Commission shall, within ninety
days, after the end financial year, submit to the
Central Government a report in such form, as may
be prescribed, giving a true and full account of its
activities, policy and programmes during the
previous financial year.
(3) A copy of the report received under
sub-section ( 2) shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is received, before each House of
Parliament.
Return and
reports.

93
26D. The Commission may, by general or
special order in writing, delegate to any member or
officer of the Commission or any other person
subject to such conditions, if any, as may be
specified in the order, such of its powers and
functions under this Act (except the powers under
section 28) as it may deem necessary.
26E. No order passed by the Commission or
the Adjudicating Officer under this Act shall
be appealable except as provided in section 24B
and no civil court shall have jurisdiction in
respect of any matter which the Commission or
the Adjudicating Officer is empowered by, or
under, this Act to pass any order and no injuction
shall be granted by any court or other authority
in respect of any action taken or to be taken
in pursuance of any order passed by the
Commission or the Adjudicating Officer by, or
under, this Act.
26F. All members, officers and other
employees of the Commission shall be deemed,
when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of
any of the provisions of this Act, to be public
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the
Indian Penal Code.”.
35. After section 27A of the principal Act,
the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“27B. Notwithstanding anything contained
in the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, the Income-tax Act,
1961, or any other enactment for the time being in
force relating to tax on wealth, income, profits or
gains, the Commission shall not be liable to
pay wealth-tax, income-tax or any other tax in
respect of their wealth, income, profits or gains
derived.”.
Deligation.
Bar of
jurisdiction.
Member,
officers and
employees
of
Commission
to be public
servants.
Insertion of
new section
27B.
Exemption
from tax on
wealth and
income.
45 of 1860.
27 of 1957.
43 of 1961.

94
36. In section 28 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (2),—
(i) clause (cc) shall be omitted;
(ii) for clause ( g), the following clauses
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(g) the duties and powers which may be
performed or exercised by the Commission under
clause (q) of section 4;
(h) the form and manner in which the
annual statement of accounts shall be maintained
under sub-section ( 1) of section 4F;
(i) the rules for dealing by foreign partici-
pant or foreign intermediary under the proviso to
sub-section (3) of section 14A;
(j) the manner in which an inquiry shall
be held under sub-section ( 1) of section 21-I;
(k) the form in which an appeal may be
filed before the Appellate Tribunal under sub-
section (4) of section 24B and the fees payable in
respect of such appeal;
(l) the form and the manner in which
returns and report to be made to the Central
Government under section 26C;
(m) any other matter which is to be, or may
be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is
to be, or may be, made by rules.”.
37. After section 28A of the principal Act, the
following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“28A. ( 1) The Commission may, with the
previous approval of the Central Government, by
notification, make regulations consistent with this
Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the
purposes of this Act.
Amendment
of section 28.
Insertion of
new sec-
tions 28A
and 28B.
Power to
make
regulations.

95
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, such regula-
tions may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) the time and places of meetings
of the Commission and the procedure to be
followed at such meetings under section 3D
including quorum necessary for the transaction of
business;
(b) the terms and other conditions of
service of officers and employees of the Commis-
sion under sub-section ( 2) of section 3H;
(c) the manner in which the fresh issue of
equity shares shall be made to the public under
sub-section (8) of section 7B;
(d) the conditions of certificate of registra-
tion to act as a member or intermediary to deal with
forward contract or option in goods or option in
commodity derivative under sub-section ( 1) of
section 14A;
(f) the fee for a class or class of member
or intermediary under the second proviso to sub-
section (2) of section 14A;
(g) the terms and conditions subject to
which registration may be under sub-section ( 4) of
section 14A;
(h) the manner in which the certificate of
registration may be suspended or cancelled under
section 14B;
(i) any other matter relating to trading,
clearing, settlement, and delivery of goods, forward
contract, option in goods or option in commodity
derivative.
(3) Every regulation made under this Act shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before

96
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for
a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the regulation or both
Houses agree that the regulation should not be
made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as
the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without preju-
dice to the validity of anything previously done
under that regulation.
28B. The provisions of this Act shall be in
addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions
of any other law for the time being in force.”.
CHAPTER III
A
MENDMENT TO THE S ECURITIES AND E XCHANGE B OARD
OF I NDIA A CT, 1992
38. In section 15U of the Securities and
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992, in sub-section
(2), for the words “under this Act”, the words
“under this Act or any other law for the time being
in force” shall be substituted.
Application
of other
laws not
barred.
Amendment
of section
15U of Act
15 of 1992.

97
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 (FCR Act, 1952) was
enacted with a view to regulate certain matters relating to Forward
Contracts, the prohibition of options in goods and for matters connected
herewith.
2. A Bill amending the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952
was introduced on the 23rd December, 1998 in Rajya Sabha and the same
was referred to the Standing Committee on Food, Civil Supplies and
Public Distribution for examination and report. The Bill, after incorpo-
rating the recommendations of the Standing Committee on Food, Civil
Supplies and Public Distribution, was passed on the 15th December, 2003
by Rajya Sabha but could not be passed by the 13th Lok Sabha due to
its dissolution.
3. Since then several changes have taken place in the commodity
futures market. While the commodity futures market has been liberalised
with effect from April, 2003 and modern institutional structures are in
the process of being evolved, the Forward Markets Commission (FMC)
is broadly functioning in its traditional manner. Many of the existing
provisions of the FCR Act, 1952 have also become redundant in view
of the rapid expansion of the commodity futures market. This has
necessitated changes in the organisational structure and institutional
capacity of the FMC. There is also a growing demand for allowing trading
in options and new generation of commodity derivatives so as to provide
wider option for risk management.
4. In order to regulate commodity derivatives market
effectively, there is a need to restructure and strengthen the FMC and also
confer upon it more statutory powers. The Central Government has,
therefore, decided to restructure and strengthen FMC broadly on the lines
of the Securities and Exchange Board of India and make necessary
amendments in the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 for the said
purpose.
97

98
5. The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2006,
inter alia,  seeks to make the following amendments to the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, to,—
(a) amend the definition of the expression “forward contract” so
as to include therein “commodity derivative” and also insert
new expressions such as “commodity derivative”,
“corporatisation”, “demutualisation” and “intermediary”, etc.,
which have been used in the Bill;
(b) increase the maximum number of members of FMC from four
to nine out of which three to be whole-time members and a
Chairman;
(c) confer power upon the FMC to levy fees;
(d) provide for constitution of FMC General Fund to which all
grants, fees and all sums received by the FMC shall be credited
except penalty and apply the funds for meeting the expenses
of the Commission;
(e) confer power upon the Central Government to issue directions
to the FMC on the matter of policy and to supersede the FMC
in certain cases;
(f) make provisions for corporatisation and demutualisation of
recognised associations in accordance with the scheme to be
approved by the FMC;
(g) make provisions for registration of members and intermedi-
aries;
(h) allow trading in options;
(i) make provision for investigation, enforcement and penalty
in case of contravention of the provisions of the FCR Act
1952;
(j) make provision of appeals, from the order of the FMC and
adjudicating officer to the Securities Appellate Tribunal for the
purposes of FCR Act, 1952 and from the order of the Securities
Appellate Tribunal under the FCR Act, 1952 to the Supreme
Court;

99
(k) make provision for transfer of the duties and functions of a
clearing house to a clearing corporation; and
(l) make provisions for exemption from payment of tax on
wealth, income and profits or gains of FMC.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
 N EW D ELHI;
The 24th February, 2006. SHARAD PAWAR
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
________
[Copy of letter No. 17(1)/2005-IT/436, dated the 24th February, 2006
from Shri Sharad Pawar, Minister of Agriculture and Consumer Affairs,
Food and Public Distribution to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the
proposed Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, recommends
to the House for the introduction and consideration of the Bill under
article 117(1) and (3) of the Constitution.

100
Notes on clauses
Clause 3.— This clause seeks to amend section 2 of the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to definitions.
This clause seeks to amend definitions of “associations”, “forward
contracts” “ready delivery contracts”, and “specific delivery contracts”.
It, inter alia, further seeks to define the expressions “Appellate
Tribunal” “Chairman”, “commodity derivative”, “corporatisation”,
“demutualisation”, “Fund”, “intermediary”, “member”, “notification”,
“option in commodity derivative”, “regulation” and “scheme” used in
the Bill.
Clause 4.— This clause seeks to amend section 3 of the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to establishment of the Forward
Markets Commission. It is proposed to substitute sub-section ( 2), (3), (4)
and ( 5) with a new sub-section ( 2) so as to confer upon the Forward
Markets Commission the status of a body corporate.
Clause 5.— Clause 5 of the Bill proposes to insert new sections 3A,
3B, 3C, 3D, 3E, 3F, 3G and 3H in the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act,
1952. The new section 3A contains provisions relating to management
of the Forward Markets Commission. The new section 3B contains
provisions for the term of office and conditions of service of Chairman
and members of the Commission. The new section 3C contains provisions
for removal of members from office. The new section 3D contains
provisions for meetings of the Commission. The new section 3E contains
provisions for vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the
Commission. The new section 3F contains provisions for member not to
participate in meetings in certain cases. The new section 3G contains
provisions for bar on future employment of whole-time members and
Chairman. The new section 3H contains provisions for appointment of
officers and employees of the Commission.
Clause 6.—This clause seeks to amend section 4 of the
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to functions of the
Commission.
Under the existing provisions contained in clause (a) of section 4
of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 the Forward Markets
Commission is required to advise the Central Government in respect of
recognition or withdrawal of recognition from any association or in
respect of any other matter arising out of the administration of the said
Act.

101
It is proposed to amend clause (q) of section 4 of the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 to confer power upon the Forward
Markets Commission to also grant or withdraw recognition from any
association.
It is further proposed to amend clause (e) of the said section to
remove the reference of registered association or any member of such
association as the concept of registered association is proposed to be done
away with in the Bill.
It is also proposed to amend clause (f) of the said section 4 of the
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, to confer power upon the
Forward Markets Commission (a) to regulate the business of association,
clearing houses, warehouses and intermediaries; (b) to levy fees; (c) to
conduct research for the purpose of development and regulation of
commodity derivatives market; (d) to call from or furnishing of
information from agencies; (e) to protect the interests of market
participants; (f) to promote and regulate self-regulatory organisations;
(g) to prohibit fraudulent and unfair trade practices relating to
commodity derivatives market; (h) to promote investors’ education
and training of intermediaries; (i) to prohibit insider trading; (j) to
advice the Central Government in respect of forward contracts or
option in goods or option in commodity derivative; and (k) to perform
such other duties and such other powers as may be assigned to the
Commission.
Clause 7.— This clause seeks to amend sub-section ( 3) of section
4A of the Act Sub-section ( 3) of section 4A makes reference to the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, which has been repealed and
re-enacted as the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. It is proposed to
amend the said sub-section so as to give reference to the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 instead of, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.
Clause 8.— This clause seeks to insert new sections 4B in the
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to power to issue
directions by the Commission and 4C relating to cease and desist
proceedings.
The new section 4B proposes to confer power upon the Forward
Markets Commission to issue directions to any intermediary or
association in the interest of trade and orderly development of commodity
derivatives market by the Commission.
The new section 4C proposes to confer power upon the Forward
Markets Commission to pass an order requiring any person to cease and

102
desist from committing or causing any violation of the Forward Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1952 or rules or regulations made thereunder, if such
person has committed any such violation.
Clause 9.— This clause proposes to insert a new Chapter IIA in the
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to Finance, Accounts
and Audit.
The proposed new section 4D contains provisions for grants by the
Central Government to the Forward Markets Commission. Such grants
will be made after due appropriation made by Parliament by law. The
new section 4E contains provisions for constitution of a Fund, to be called
the Forward Markets Commission General Fund which all grants, fees
and charges etc., received by the Forward Markets Commission shall be
credited and also the provisions for application of the Fund. The new
section 4F contains provisions for maintenance of proper accounts and
other relevant records and annual statement of accounts by the Forward
Markets Commission and for audit of accounts by the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.
Clause 10.— This clause seeks to amend section 5 of the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to application for recognition
of associations.
Under the existing provisions contained in the said section 5, trading
in forward contracts by the association is allowed if such association is
recognised.
Since option in goods or option in commodity derivative are being
permitted, it is proposed to extend the scope of trading in options by such
associations.
Under the existing provisions, the applications for recognition of
associations is required to be made to the Central Government. The
proposed amendment further seeks to provide that such applications
shall, after the commencement of the proposed amendments, be made
to the Forward Markets Commission.
A transitory provision is also proposed to be made for transfer of
such applications with the Central Government to the Commission.
Clause 11.— This clause seeks to amend section 6 of the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to grant of recognition to
association.
Under the existing provisions, recognition to the association is
granted by the Central Government. It is, inter alia, proposed to confer
power upon the Forward Markets Commission to grant recognition to

103
the association. A validation provision is also proposed to be made for
recognitions already granted to associations by the Central Government
before commencement of this Act.
Clause 12.— This clause seeks to substitute section 7, by new
sections 7, 7A and 7B, in the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act,
1952 relating to withdrawal of recognition, corporatisation and
demutualisation of associations and the procedure for corporatisation
and demutualisation.
Under the existing provisions, the Central Government has been
conferred power to withdraw recognition of an association. The new
section 7 seeks to confer power upon the Forward Markets Commission
instead of the Central Government to withdraw recognition granted to
an association. The new section 7A contains provisions for corporatisation
and demutualisation of associations wherein trading of commodities and
commodity derivative is conducted or may be carried out. The new
section 7B relates to procedure for the corporatisation and demutualisation
of the associations.
Clause 13.— This clause seeks to amend section 8 of the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to power of the Central
Government to call for periodical returns or direct inquiries to be made.
It is, inter alia, proposed to confer the said power upon the Forward
Markets Commission.
Clause 14.— This clause seeks to amend sub-section ( 2) of
section 9A of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952. The said sub-
section (2) gives powers to the Central Government to approve rules made
by the recognised association. It is proposed to confer the said power
upon the Forward Markets Commission.
Clause 15.— This clause seeks to substitute section 10 of the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 by new sections 10 and 10A relating to
power of Commission to direct rules to be made or to make rules and
relating to clearing corporation.
The existing provisions contained in section 10 confer power upon
the Central Government to direct rules to be made by an association or
to amend rules made by it. It is proposed to confer the said power upon
the Forward Markets Commission. It is a further proposed to insert a
new section 10A for transfer the duties and functions of a clearing house
to a clearing corporation. Every clearing corporation is required to make
bye-laws for the purpose of transfer of said duties and functions and
submit the same to the Forward Markets Commission for its approval.

104
Clause 16.— This clause seeks to amend section 11 of the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to power of recognised
associations to make bye-laws.
Under the existing provisions, the recognised associations can make
bye-laws for the regulation and control of forward contracts subject to
the previous approval of the Central Government.
It is proposed to confer the said powers upon the Forward Markets
Commission and also to extend the scope of the said section to option
in goods or option in commodity derivative.
Clause 17.— This clause seeks to substitute section 12 and 12A of
the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 by new sections relating
to power of the Commission to make or amend bye-laws of recognised
association and application of amendment of bye-laws to existing
forward contracts.
The existing provisions contained in section 12 confer powers upon
the Central Government to make or amend bye-laws of recognised
associations.
It is proposed to confer the said power upon the Forward Markets
Commission.
The existing provisions contained in section 12A provide for
application of amendment of bye-laws to the existing forward contracts.
It is further proposed to extend the scope of the said section to the
option in goods or option in commodity derivative also.
Clause 18.— This clause seeks to amend section 12B of the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to power of the Commission
to suspend the member of a recognised association or to prohibit him
from trading.
It is proposed to extend the scope of the said section to include
trading in option in goods or option in commodity derivative to enable
the Commission to suspend members of associations who are trading
in option in goods or option in commodity derivative in addition to
forward contracts.
Clause 19.— This clause seeks to substitute section 13 of the
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to power of the
Central Government to supersede governing body of recognised
association.

105
It is proposed to confer the said power upon the Forward Markets
Commission.
Clause 20.— This clause seeks to amend section 14 of the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to power to suspend business
of recognised associations.
It is proposed to confer the said power upon the Forward Markets
Commission.
Clause 21.— This clause proposes to substitute Chapter IIIA by a
new Chapter in Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to
registration of members.
It is proposed to require the members and intermediaries to register
with the Forward Markets Commission. The proposed new section 14B
confers power upon the Forward Markets Commission to suspend or
cancel the certificate of registration.
Clause 22.— This clause, inter alia, seeks to substitute section 15 of
the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 which provides the
circumstances in which the forward contracts are illegal or void. It is
proposed to substitute said section 15 by a new section so as to do away
with the requirement of issuing the notifications in respect of forward
contract.
It is proposed to make forward contract illegal or void unless
organised under the aegis of recognised association except under
section 17 (power of the Central Government to prohibit forward contracts
or options in goods or option in commodity derivative) and section 18
(special provisions in respect of certain kinds of forward contracts).
This clause also proposes to substitute sections 16 and 17 of the
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to the consequences
of contravention of section 15 and relating to power to prohibit forward
contracts or option in goods or option in commodity derivative.
In view of the amendment in section 15 vide clause 22, the marginal
heading of section 16 would require amendment and the power under
section 16 is proposed to be conferred upon the Forward Markets
Commission.
Under the existing provision contained in section 17, forward
contracts in certain cases can be prohibited.
It is proposed to extend the scope of the said section 17 to the option
in goods or option in commodity derivative and also make certain other
minor amendments.

106
Clause 23.— This clause seeks to amend section 18 of the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating special provisions in respect of
certain kinds of forward contracts (non-transferable specific delivery
contracts and specific delivery contracts).
Under the existing provisions contained in section 18 non-
transferable specific delivery contracts could be entered into in any area
other than recognised associations.
It is proposed to amend the said section 18 of the Forward Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1952, so as to bring specific delivery contracts both
(transferable and non-transferable) also within the scope of section 18.
The existing provisions contained in sub-section ( 2) of the said
section 18 confer power upon the Central Government to grant exemption
to forward contracts relating to transferable specific delivery contract.
It is proposed to extend the scope of the sub-section ( 1) of the said
section 18 to all transferable specific delivery contracts. Therefore,
sub-section (2) of section 18 is proposed to be omitted. The omission of
sub-section ( 2) is of consequential in nature.
Clause 24.— This clause seeks to substitute a new section for
section 19 of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to
option in goods or option in commodity derivative illegal or void in
certain circumstances.
Under the existing provisions contained in section 19, trading in
options in goods is prohibited.
It is proposed to substitute the said section 19 so as to allow trading
in option in goods or option in commodity derivative.
Clause 25.— This clause seeks to amend section 20 of the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to penalties. Clause 24 of the
Bill proposes to substitute section 19 of the Forward Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1952, so as to allow trading in option in goods or option
in commodity derivative. It is, therefore, proposed to extend the scope
of the said section 20 to options in goods or option in commodity
derivative also in addition to forward contracts.
It is further proposed to extend the scope of the said section 20 in
cases of failure to make or accept delivery of goods under non-
transferable specific delivery contracts or transferable specific delivery
contracts of goods by inserting new clause (da) in the said section. Under
the existing provisions, the monetary penalty for contravention of
provisions of Chapter IV (forward contracts and option in goods) and

107
option in commodity derivative is “one thousand rupees”. It is also
proposed to enhance the said monetary penalty to “twenty-five thousand
rupees”.
Clause 26.— This clause seeks to amend section 21 of the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to penalty for owning or
keeping place used for entering into forward contracts in goods.
Under the existing provisions, penalty is provided in relation to
entering into forward contracts in goods.
It is proposed to include in clauses ( a) to (f) of the said section the
options in goods or option in commodity derivative in addition to forward
contracts. It is further proposed to enhance monetary penalty from “one
thousand rupees” specified in the aforesaid section 21 to “twenty-five
thousand rupees”.
Clause 27.— This clause proposes to substitute section 21A of the
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to power of Court to
order forfeiture of property by the new sections 21A, 21B, 21C, 21D, 21E,
21F, 21G, 21H, 21-I, 21J and 21K.
The new section 21A contains provisions for penalty relating to
failure to furnish information, return, etc. The new section 21B contains
provisions for penalty relating to failure by any person to enter into an
agreement with clients. The new section 21C contains provisions relating
to penalty for failure to redress clients’ grievances. The new section 21D
contains previsions relating to penalty for insider trading. The new
section 21E contains provisions relating to penalty for fraudulent
and unfair trade practices. The new section 21F contains provisions
relating to penalty for default in case of an intermediary. The new
section 21G contains provisions relating to penalty for failure to comply
with directives of the Commission. The new section 21H contains
provisions relating to consequences of failure to pay penalty. The new
section 21-I contains provisions relating to power to adjudicate. The new
section 21J contains provisions relating to factors to be taken into account
by adjudicating officer. The new section 21K contains provisions relating
to crediting sums realised by way of penalties to Consolidated Fund of
India. The new section 21L contains provisions relating to power of court
to order forfeiture of property. The contraventions for which the penalty
is leviable (except under new section 21G) are broadly on the lines of
the provisions contained in the Securities and Exchange Board of India
Act, 1992, but the quantum of monetary penalty is different in the said
new sections from the monetary penalties specified under the securities
and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992.

108
Clause 28.— This clause seeks to amend section 22A of the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to power to search and seize
books of account or other documents in the case of forward contracts
or option in goods entered into in contravention of provisions of the Act.
It is proposed to extend the scope of the said section to option in
commodity derivative also. Sub-section  (2) of section 22A gives reference
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, which has been repealed and
re-enacted as the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
It is proposed to amend the said sub-section to give a reference of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, instead of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898.
Clause 29.— This clause seeks to amend section 22B relating
presumption to be drawn in certain cases. It is proposed to extend the
scope of this section to option in commodity derivative also.
Clause 30.— This clause seeks to insert a new section 22C in the
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to investigation.
It is proposed to confer power upon the Forward Markets
Commission to direct the Investigating Authority to investigate the affairs
of intermediary or person associated with the commodity derivative
market and to submit the report to the Forward Markets Commission.
Clause 31.— This clause seeks to insert new clause (e) in section 23
of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, which specifies certain
offences to be cognizable, Clause 27 of the Bill proposes to insert a new
section 21H relating to consequences of failure to pay penalty.
It is proposed to insert reference of section 21H so as to make the
offence specified in the proposed new section 21H (consequences of
failure to pay penalty) cognizable.
Clause 32.— This clause seeks to insert new section 24A in the
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 relating to bar of jurisdiction
of Civil Courts.
It is proposed to bar the jurisdiction of the civil courts relating to
any matter in respect of which the Adjudicating Officer or the Forward
Markets Commission has the jurisdiction under the Act.
Clause 33.— This clause proposes to insert a new Chapter VA in
the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to jurisdiction,
authority and procedure of Appellate Tribunal.
The new 24B contains provisions relating to appeal to the Appellate
Tribunal. It is further provided that the Central Government shall, specify

109
by notification, the matters and places in relation to which the Appellate
Tribunal may exercise jurisdiction.
The new 24C contains provisions for right to legal representation.
The new section 24D contains provisions for limitation. The new section
24E contains provisions for appeal to the Supreme Court.
Clause 34.— This clause seeks to insert new sections 26A, 26B,  26C,
26D, and 26E, in the Act. The new section 26A contains provisions
relating to power of the Central Government to issue directions. The new
section 26B contains provisions relating to power of the Central
Government to supersede the Forward Markets Commission. The new
section 26C contains provisions relating to returns and reports to be
furnished by the Forward Markets Commission. The new section 26D
contains provisions relating to delegation of powers by the Commission.
The new section 26E contains provisions relating to bar of jurisdiction.
The new section 26F contains provisions relating to members, officers
and employees of the Commission to be public servants.
Clause 35.— This clause proposes to insert new section 27B in the
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, relating to exemption from tax
on wealth, income, profits or gains of the Forward Markets Commission.
Clause 36.— This clause seeks to amend section 28 in the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, which confers power upon the Central
Government to make rules in respect of certain matters.
Clause 37.— This clause seeks to insert new section 28A and 28B
in the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, proposing to confer
power upon the Forward Markets Commission to make regulations. The
regulations to be made by the Forward Markets Commission shall be
laid before both Houses of Parliament.
It is further proposed to insert a new section 28B so as to provide
that the provisions of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, shall
be in addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of any other
law for the time being in force.
Clause 38.— This clause seeks to amend section 15U of the Securities
and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992. It is proposed to widen the scope
of the said section to the matters arising out of the Forward Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1952 also.
The proposed amendment is consequential in nature.

110
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to provide that the Forward Markets
Commission shall be a body corporate with powers to acquire, hold and
dispose of property, both movable and immovable and to contract, etc.
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 3A for the appointment
of the Chairman and eight other members. The proposed section 3B
provides for the conditions of service of the Chairman and members of
the Commission to be prescribed by rules made under the Act. The
proposed section 3H provides for appointment of officers and other
employees of the Commission and to provide for their conditions of
service to be determined by regulations. Accordingly, the structure and
infrastructure facility of the Commission will have to be suitably
augmented and strengthened.
2. Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Chapter IIA to the
Act relating to Finance, Accounts and Audit. The proposed new section
4D provides for grants to the Commission by the Central Government
by due appropriation made by Parliament. The new section 4E provides
for a Fund to be called the Forward Markets Commission General Fund
to which all grants, fees and all sums received by the Commission from
such sources shall be credited as may be decided by the Central
Government.
3. The expenditure involved in the operational expenses of the
Forward Markets Commission including rent for additional premises,
salary, etc. shall be Rupees twenty-five crore for the year 2006-07, for
acquiring and furnishing of new premises and part of the operational
expenses shall be Rupees sixty-five crore for the year 2007-08, for
operational expenses and furnishing of new premises to the extent not
met by revenue shall be Rupees twenty-five crore for the year
2008-09 and operational expenses to the extent not met by revenue for
the year 2009-10 shall be Rupees five crore. Thus, an amount of 120 crores
of rupees will be required as interest free loan as detailed above subject
to the moratorium period of five years and repayment period of ten years
of the expiry of moratorium period.
4. The Bill will not involve any other recurring or non-recurring
expenditure.
110

111
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 36 of the Bill seeks to amend section 28 of the Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952. This clause empowers the Central
Government to make rules, by notification, to carry out the provisions
of the proposed legislation. The matters in respect of which such rules
may be made are specified therein. These matters relate, inter alia, to
provide for ( i) the additional duties and powers that may be performed
or exercised by the Commission under clause ( q) section 4; ( ii) the form
and manner in which the annual statement of accounts of the
Commission shall be maintained under section 4(F); ( iii) the rules for
dealing by foreign participant or foreign intermediary under the
proviso to sub-section (3) of section 14A; (iv) the manner of inquiry under
clause ( a) of section 21-I; ( v) the form in which an appeal may be
filed before the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (4) of section 24B
and the fees payable in respect of such appeal; ( vi) the form and the
manner in which returns and report to be made to the Central
Government under section 26C; ( vii) any other matter which is to be, or
may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to be, or may be,
made by rules.
2. Clause 37 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 28A in the
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952. This clause empowers the
Commission to make regulations, by notification, to carry out the
purposes of the proposed legislation. The matters in respect of which such
rules may be made are specified therein. These matters relate, inter alia,
to provide for ( i) the times and places of meetings of the Commission
and the procedure to be followed at such meetings under section 3D
including quorum necessary for the transaction of business; ( ii) the terms
and other conditions of service of officers and employees of the
Commission-under sub-section (2) of section 3H; ( iii) the manner in
which the fresh issue of equity shares shall be made to the public, under
sub-section (8) of section 7B; ( iv) the form in which and the terms and
conditions subject to which applications for certificates of registration
may be made under sub-section (2) of section 14A and the levy of fees
in support of such application; ( v) the terms and conditions subject to
111

112
which registration may be granted under sub-section (4) of section 14A;
(vi) the manner in which the certificate of registration may be granted,
suspended or cancelled under section 14B; (vii) any other matter relating
to conduct of commodity derivatives including trading, clearing,
settlement and delivery of goods, forward contracts, option in goods or
option in commodity derivative.
3. The rules made by the Central Government and the regulations
made by the Forward Markets Commission shall be laid, as soon as may
be after they are made, before each House of Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be
made are generally matters of procedure and administrative detail and
it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation
of legislative power involved is of a normal character.

113
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE F ORWARD C ONTRACTS (R EGULATION) A CT, 1952
(74 OF 1952)
An Act to provide for the regulation of certain
matters relating to forward contracts, the prohibi-
tion of options in goods and for matters connected
therewith.
* ****
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a) “association” means any body of
individuals, whether incorporated or not,
constituted for the purpose of regulating and
controlling the business of the sale or purchase of
any goods;
* ****
(c) “forward contract” means a contract
for the delivery of goods and which is not a ready
delivery contract;
* ****
(i) “ready delivery contract” means a
contract which provides for the delivery of goods
and the payment of a price therefor, either
immediately or within such period not exceeding
eleven days after the date of the contract and subject
to such conditions as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in
respect of any goods, the period under such contract
not being capable of extension by the mutual
consent of the parties thereto or otherwise:
Definitions.
113

114
Provided that where any such contract is
performed either wholly or in part,—
(1) by tendering of the documents of title
to the goods covered by the contract by any party
thereto (not being a commission agent or a bank)
who has acquired ownership of the said documents
by purchase, exchange or otherwise, to any other
person (including a commission agent but not
including a bank); or
(2) by the realisation of any sum of money
being the difference between the contract rate and
the settlement rate or clearing rate or the rate of any
offsetting contract; or
(3) by any other means whatsoever, and as
a result of which the actual tendering of the goods
covered by the contract or the payment of the
full-price therefor is dispensed with, then, such
contract shall not be deemed to be a ready delivery
contract.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this
clause,—
(i) “bank” includes any banking com-
pany as defined in the Banking Regulation Act,
1949, a co-operative bank as defined in the Reserve
Bank of India, 1934, the State Bank of India and
any of its subsidiaries and any corresponding new
bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertak-
ings) Act, 1970;
(ii) “Commission agent” means a person
who, in the ordinary course of business, makes
contract for the sale or purchase of goods for others
for a remuneration (whether known as commission
or otherwise) which is determined in the contract
itself or determinable from the terms of the contract,
in either case only with reference to the quantity of
10 of 1949.
2 of 1934.
5 of 1970.

115
goods or to the price therefor as stipulated in the
contract;
(j) “recognised association” means an associa-
tion to which recognition for the time being has
been granted by the Central Government under
section 6 in respect of goods or classes of goods
specified in such recognition;
(jj) “registered association” means an associa-
tion to which for the time being a certificate of
registration has been granted by the Commission
under section 14B;
* ****
(m) “specific delivery contract” means a for-
ward contract which provides for the actual
delivery of specific qualities or types of goods
during it specified future period at a price fixed
thereby or to be fixed in the manner thereby agreed
and in which the names of both the buyer and the
seller are mentioned;
* ****
CHAPTER II
F
ORWARD M ARKETS C OMMISSION
3. (1) ****
(2) The Commission shall consist of not less
than two, but not exceeding four, members
appointed by the Central Government one of them
being nominated by the Central Government to be
the Chairman thereof; and the Chairman and
the other member or members shall either
whole-time or part-time as the Central Government
may direct:
Provided that the members to be so appointed
shall be persons of ability, integrity and standing
Establish-
ment and
constitution
of the
Forward
Markets
Commis-
sion.

116
who have shown capacity in dealing with problems
relating to commerce or commodity markets, or in
administration or who have special knowledge or
practical experience in any matter which renders
them suitable for appointment on the Commission.
(3) No person shall be qualified for appoint-
ment as, or for continuing to be, a member of the
Commission if he has, directly or indirectly, any
such financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions as a member of the
Commission, and every member shall, whenever
required by the Central Government so to do,
furnish to it such information as it may require for
the purpose of securing compliance with the
provisions of this sub-section.
(4) No member of the Commission shall hold
office for a period of more than three years from
the date of his appointment, and a member
relinquishing his office on the expiry of his term
shall be eligible for re-appointment.
(5) The other terms and conditions of service
of members of the Commission shall be such as
may be prescribed.
4. The functions of the Commission shall
be—
(a) to advise the Central Government in respect
of the recognition of, or the withdrawal of
recognition from any association or in respect of
any other matter arising out of the administration
of this Act;
* ****
(e) to undertake the inspection of the accounts
and other documents of any recognised association
or registered association or any member of such
association whenever it considers it necessary; and
Functions of
the
Commission

117
(f) to perform such other duties and exercise
such other powers as may be assigned to the
Commission by or under this Act, or as may be
prescribed.
4A. ( I) * ****
(3) The Commission shall be deemed to be a
civil court and when any offence described in
sections 175, 178, 179, 180 or section 228 of the
Indian Penal Code is committed in the view or
presence of the Commission, the Commission may,
after recording the facts constituting the offence and
the statement of the accused as provided for in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, forward the case
to a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try the same
and the Magistrate to whom any such case is
forwarded shall proceed to hear the complaint
against the accused as if the case had been
forwarded to him under section 482 of the said
Code.
* ****
CHAPTER III
R
ECOGNISED ASSOCIATIONS
5. ( 1) Any association concerned with the
regulation and control of forward contracts which
is desirous of being recognised for the purposes of
this Act may make an application in the prescribed
manner to the Central Government.
(2) Every application made under sub-section
(1) shall contain such particulars as may be
prescribed and shall be accompanied by a copy of
the bye-laws for the regulation and control of
forward contracts and also a copy of the rules
relating in general to the constitution of the
association, and, in particular to—
(a) the governing body of such association,
its constitution and powers of management and
Powers
of the
Commission.
45 of 1860.
5 of 1898.
Application
for
recognition of
associations.

118
the manner in which its business is to be
transacted;
(b) the powers and duties of the office-
bearers of the association;
(c) the admission into the association of
various classes of members, the qualifications of
members, and the exclusion, suspension, expulsion
and re-admission of members therefrom or therein
to;
(d) the procedure for registration of part-
nerships as members of the association and the
nomination and appointment of authorised repre-
sentatives and clerks.
6. (1) If the Central Government, after making
such enquiry as may be necessary in this behalf
and after obtaining such further information, if
any, as it may require, is satisfied that it would be
in the interest of the trade and also in the public
interest to grant recognition to the association which
has made an application under section 5, it may
grant recognition in such form and subject to such
conditions as may be prescribed or specified, and
shall specify in such recognition the goods or
classes of goods with respect to which forward
contracts may be entered into between members of
such association or through or with any such
member.
(2) Before granting recognition under sub-
section (1), the Central Government may, by order,
direct,—
(a) that there shall be no limitation on the
number of members of the association or that there
shall be such limitation on the number of members
as may be specified;
(b) that the association shall provide for
the appointment by the Central Government of a
Grant of
recognition to
association.

119
person, whether a member of the association or not
as representative on, and of not more than three
persons representing interests not directly
represented through membership of the association
as member or members of the governing body of
such association and may require the association
to incorporate in its rules any such direction and
the conditions, if any, accompanying it.
(3) No rules of a recognised association shall
be amended except with the approval of the Central
Government.
(4) Every grant of recognition under this
section shall be published in the Gazette of India
and also in the Gazette of the State in which the
principal office of the recognised association is
situate, and such recognition shall have effect as
from the date of its publication in the Gazette of
India.
7. If the Central Government is of opinion that
any recognition granted to an association under the
provisions of this Act should, in the interest of the
trade or in the public interest, be withdrawn, the
Central Government may, after giving a reasonable
opportunity to the association to be heard in the
matter, withdraw, by notification in the Official
Gazette, the recognition granted to the said associa-
tion.
Provided that no such withdrawal shall effect
the validity of any contract entered into or made
before the date of the notification, and the Central
Government may make such provision as it deems
fit in the notification of withdrawal or in any
subsequent notification similarly published for the
due performance of any contract outstanding on
that date.
Withdrawal
of recognition.

120
8. (1)  Every recognised association and ev-
ery member thereof shall furnish to the Central
Government such periodical returns relating to its
affairs, or the affairs of its members, or his affairs,
as the case may be, as may be prescribed.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions con-
tained in sub-section (1), where the Central Govern-
ment considers it expedient so to do, it may, by
order in writing,—
(a) call upon a recognised association to or
a member thereof furnish in writing such informa-
tion or explanation relating to its affairs or the
affairs of any of its members or his affairs, as the
case may be as the Central Government may
require, or
(b) appoint one or more persons to make
an enquiry in relation to the affairs of such
association or the affairs of any of its members and
submit a report of the result of such inquiry to the
Central Government within such time as may be
specified in the order or, in the alternative, direct
the inquiry to be made, and the report to be
submitted, by the governing body of such associa-
tion acting jointly with one or more representative
of the Central Government; and
(c) direct the Commission to inspect the
accounts and other documents of any recognised
association or of any of its members and submit
its report thereon to the Central Government.
(3) Where an inquiry in relation to the affairs
of a recognised association or the affairs of any of
its members has been undertaken under sub-
section (2)—
(a) every director, manager, secretary or
other officer of such association;
Power of
Central
Government
to call for
periodical
returns or
direct
inquiries
to be made.

121
(b) every member of such association;
(c) if the member of the association is a
firm, every partner, manager, secretary or other
officer of the firm, and
(d) every other person or body of persons
who has had dealings in the course of business
with any of the persons mentioned in clauses ( a),
(b) and (c),
shall be bound to produce before the authority
making the inquiry, all such books, accounts,
correspondence and other documents in his custody
or power relating to, or having a bearing on the
subject matter of, such inquiry and also to furnish
the authority with any such statement or informa-
tion relating thereto as may be required of him,
within such time as may be specified.
(4) Every recognised association and every
member thereof shall maintain such books of
accounts and other documents as the Commission
may specify and the books of account and other
documents so specified shall be prescribed for a
period not exceeding three years as the Commission
may specify and shall be subject to inspection at
all reasonable times by the Commission.
* ****
9A. (1) ****
(2) No rules of a recognised association made
or amended in relation to any matter referred to in
clauses (a) to (g) of sub-section (1) shall have effect
until they have been approved by the Central
Government and published by that Government in
the Official Gazette and, in approving the rules so
made or amended, the Central Government may
make such modifications therein as it thinks fit,
and or such publication, the rules as approved by
Power of
recognised
association to
make rules
respecting
admission of
a firm or a
Hindu undi-
vided family,
grouping of
members,
restricting,
voting rights,
etc. in special
cases.

122
the Central Government shall be deemed to have
been validly made, notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in the Companies Act, 1956.
* ****
10. ( 1) Whenever the Central Government
considers it expendient so to do, it may, by order
in writing, direct any recognised association to
make any rules or to amend any rules made by the
recognised association within such period as it may
specify in this behalf.
(2) If any recognised association, against whom
an order is issued by the Central Government under
sub-section (1), fails or neglects to comply with such
order within the specified period, the Central
Government may make the rules or amend the rules
made by the recognised association, as the case may
be, either in the form specified in the order or with
such modification thereof as the Central Govern-
ment may think fit.
(3) Where, in pursuance of sub-section ( 2), any
rules have been made or amended, the rule so made
or amended shall be published in the Gazette of
India, and shall, thereupon, have effect notwith-
standing anything to the contrary contained in the
Companies Act, 1956, or any other law for the time
being in force, as if they had been made or
amended by the recognised association concerned.
11. (1) Any recognised association may, subject
to the previous approval of the Central Government,
make bye-laws for the regulation and control of
forward contracts.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the
generally of the foregoing power, such bye-laws
may provide for—
(a) the opening and closing of markets and
the regulation of the hours of trade;
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.
Power of
recognised
association to
make bye-
laws.
Power of
Central
Government
to direct rules
to be made or
to make rules.

123
(b) a clearing-house for the periodical
settlement of contracts and differences thereunder,
the delivery of, and payment for, goods, the passing
on of delivery orders and for the regulation and
maintenance of such clearing house;
(c) the number and classes of contracts in
respect of which settlements shall be made or
differences paid through the clearing house;
(d) fixing, altering or postponing days for
settlement;
(e) determining and declaring market rates;
including opening, closing highest and lowest rates
for goods;
(f) the terms, conditions and incidents of
contracts including the prescription of margin
requirements, if any and conditions relating thereto,
and the forms of contract in writing;
(g) regulating the entering into, making,
performances, rescissions and termination of con-
tracts, including contracts between members or
between a commission agent and his constituent,
or between a broker and his constituent, or between
a member of the recognised association and a
person who is not a member, and the consequences
of default or insolvency on the part of a seller or
buyer or intermediary, the consequences of a breach
or omission by a seller or buyer and the responsi-
bility of commission agents and brokers who are
not parties to such contracts;
(h) the admission and prohibition of spe-
cific classes or types of goods or of dealings in
goods by a member of the recognised association;
(i) the method and procedure for the
settlement of claims or disputes including the
settlement thereof by arbitration;

124
(j) the levy and recovery of fees, fines and
penalties;
(k) the regulation of the course of business
between parties to contracts in any capacity;
(l) the fixing of a scale of brokerage and
other charges;
(m) the making, comparing, setting and
closing of bargains;
(n) the regulation of fluctuations in rates
and prices;
(o) the emergencies in trade which
may arise and the exercise of powers in such
emergencies including the power to fix maximum
prices;
(p) the regulation of dealings by members
for their own account;
(q) the limitations on the volume of trade
done by any individual member;
(r) the obligation of members to supply
such information or explanation and to produce
such books relating to their business as the
governing body may require.
(3) The bye-laws made under this section
may—
(a) specify the bye-laws the contravention
of any of which shall make a contract entered into
otherwise than in accordance with the bye-laws
void under sub-section ( 2) of section 15;
(aa) specify the bye-laws the contravention
of any of which shall make a forward contract
entered otherwise than in accordance with the
bye-laws illegal under sub-section ( 3A) of section
15;

125
(b) provide that the contravention of any bye-
laws shall—
(i) render the member concerned liable to
fine; or
(ii) render the member concerned liable to
expulsion or suspension from the recognised
association or to any penalty of a like nature not
involving the payment of money.
(4) Any bye-laws made under this section shall
be subject to such conditions in regard to previous
publication as may be prescribed, and when
approved by the Central Government, shall be
published in the Gazette of India.
Provided that the Central Government may, in
the interest of the trade or in the public interest, by
order in writing, dispense with the condition of
previous publication in any case.
12. (1) The Central Government may, either on
a request in writing received by it in this behalf
from the governing body of a recognised associa-
tion, or if in its opinion it is expendient so to do,
make bye-laws for all or any of the matters
specified in section 11 or amend any bye-laws
made by such association under that section.
(2) Where, in pursuance of this section, any
bye-laws have been made or amended, the bye-laws
so made or amended shall be published in the
Gazette of India and shall thereupon have effect as
if they had been made or amended by the
recognised association.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in
this section where the governing body of a
recognised association objects to any bye-law made
or amended under this section by the Central
Government on its own motion, it may, within six
Power of
Central
Government
to make or
amend bye-
laws of
recognised
association.

126
months of the publication thereof under sub-section
(2), apply to the Central Government for a revision
thereof, and the Central Government may, after
giving a reasonable opportunity to the governing
body of the association to be heard in the matter,
revise the bye-laws so made or amended, and where
any bye-laws so made or amended are revised as
a result of any action taken under this sub-section,
the bye-laws so revised shall be published and
shall become effective as provided in sub-section
(2).
(4) The making or the amendment or revision
of any bye-laws under this section shall in all cases
be subject to such conditions in regard to previous
publication as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Central Government may, in
the interest of the trade or in the public interest, by
order in writing, dispense with the condition of
previous publication.
12A. Any amendment of a bye-law under
section 11 other than an amendment made in
pursuance of clause (a) or clause (aa) of sub-section
(3) of that section or under section 12 shall also
apply to all forward contracts entered into before
the date of its approval by the Central Government
or before the date of its publication in the Gazette
of India, as the case may be, and remaining to be
performed on or after the said date.
12B. ( I) If, the interest of trade or in the
public interest, the Commission considers it neces-
sary to suspend a member from his membership
of any recognised association or to prohibit such
members from entering into any forward contract
for the sale or purchase in his own name or through
another member of a recognised association of any
goods or class of goods, then, notwithstanding
anything contained in any law for time being in
Application of
amendment of
bye-laws to
existing
forward
contracts.
Power of
Commission
to suspend
member of
recognised
association or
to prohibit
him from
trading.

127
force or in the rules or bye-laws of a recognised
association, the Commission may, after giving an
opportunity to the member concerned of being
heard, by order, suspend his membership of any
association or prohibit him from entering into any
such contract.
* ****
(3) No order made under sub-section ( I) in
respect of any member of a recognised association
shall affect the validity of any forward contract
entered into or made by, with or through such
member on or before the date of such order and
remaining to be performed on or after the said date;
but the Commission may make such provision as
it deems fit in such order or in any subsequent
order for the closing out of any such forward
contract.
13. ( I) Without prejudice to any other powers
vested in the Central Government under this Act,
where the Central Government is of opinion that the
governing body of any recognised association
should be superseded, then, notwithstanding any-
thing contained in this Act or in any other law for
the time being in force, the Central Government
may,  after giving a reasonable opportunity to the
governing body of the recognised association
concerned to show cause why it should not be
superseded, by notification in the Official Gazette,
declare the governing body of such association to
be superseded for such period not exceeding six
months as may be specified in the notification, and
may appoint any person or persons to exercise and
perform all the powers and duties of the governing
body, and where more persons than one are
appointed may appoint one of such persons to be
the Chairman and another of such person to be the
Vice-Chairman.
Power of
Central
Government
to supersede
governing
body of
recognised
association.

128
(2) On the publication of a notification in the
Official Gazette under sub-section ( I), the following
consequences shall ensue, namely:—
(a) the members of the governing body
which has been superseded shall, as from the date
of the notification of supersession, cease to hold
office as such members;
(b) the person or persons appointed under
sub-section ( I) may exercise and perform all the
powers and duties of the governing body which has
been susperseded;
(c) all such property of the recognised
association as the person or persons appointed
under sub-section ( I) may, by order in writing,
specify in this behalf as being necessary for the
purpose of enabling him or them to carry out the
purposes of this Act, shall vest in such person or
persons.
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in any law or the rules or bye-laws of the
association whose governing body is superseded
under sub-section ( I), the person or persons
appointed under that sub-section shall hold office
for such period as may be specified in the
notification published under that sub-section, and
the Central Government may, from time to time by
like notification, vary such period.
(4) On the determination of the period of office
of any person or persons appointed under this
section the recognised association shall forthwith
reconstitute a governing body in accordance with
its rules;
Provided that until a governing body is so
reconstituted, the person or persons appointed
under sub-section ( I) shall, notwithstanding any-
thing contained in sub-section ( I) continue to
exercise and perform their powers and duties.

129
(5) On the reconstitution of a governing body
under sub-section ( 4), all the property of the
recongnised association which had vested in, or
was in the possession of, the person or persons
appointed under sub-section (I) shall vest or revest,
as the case may be, in the governing body so
reconstituted.
14. If in the interest of the trade or in the public
interest the Central Government considers it expe-
dient so to do, it may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, direct a recognised association to suspend
such of its business for such period not exceeding
seven days and subject to such conditions as may
be specified in the notification, and may if, in the
opinion of the Central Government, the interest of
the trade or the public interest so requires by like
notification extended the said period from time to
time:
Provided that where the period of suspension
is likely to exceed one month, no notification
extending the suspension beyond such period shall
be issued, unless the governing body of the
recognised association has been given an opportu-
nity of being heard in the matter.
CHAPTER III A
R
EGISTERED ASSOCIATIONS
14A. ( I) No association concerned with the
regulation and control of business relating to
forward contracts shall, after the commencement of
the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment
Act, 1960 (hereinafter referred to as such com-
mencement), carry on such business except under,
and in accordance with, the conditions of a
certificate of registration granted under this Act by
the Commission.
Power to
suspend
business of
recognised
associations.
Certificate of
registration to
be obtained
by all
associations.
62 of 1960.

130
(2) Every association referred to in sub-section
(I) which is in existence at such commencement,
before the expiry of six months from such
commencement, and every association referred to
in sub-section ( I) which is not in existence at
such commencement, before commencing such
business, shall make an application for a
certificate of registration to the Commission in such
form and containing such particulars as may be
prescribed.
Provided that the Commission may in its
discretion extend from time to time the period of
six months aforesaid up to one year in the
aggregate.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be
deemed—
(a) to prohibit an association in existence
at such commencement from carrying on its
business until the disposal of the application made
by it under sub-section ( 2); or
(b) to require a recognised association in
existence at such commencement to make an
application under sub-section ( 2); and every such
association shall, as soon as may be after such
commencement, be granted free of cost by the
Commission a certificate of registration.
14B. On receipt of an application under
section 14A, the Commission, after making such
enquiry as it considers necessary in this behalf may
by order in writing grant a certificate of registration
or refuse to grant it:
Provided that before refusing to grant such
certificate, the association shall be given an
opportunity of being heard in the matter.
Grant or
refusal of
certificate of
registration.

131
14C. The provisions of sections 8 and 12B shall
apply in relation to a registered associations as they
apply in relation to a recognised association with
the substitution of—
(i) references to the registered association,
for references to the recognised association; and
(ii) the words “two years”, for the words
“three years” in sub-section ( 2) of section 12B.
CHAPTER IV
F
ORWARD CONTRACTS AND OPTIONS IN GOODS
15. ( I) The Central Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette, declare this
section to apply to such goods or class of goods and
in such areas as may be specified in the notifica-
tion, and thereupon, subject to the provisions
contained in section 18, every forward contract for
the sale or purchase of any goods specified in the
notification which is entered into in the area
specified therein otherwise than between members
of a recognised association or through or with any
such member shall be illegal.
(2) Any forward contract in goods entered into
in pursuance of sub-section ( I) which is in
contravention of any of the bye-laws specified in
this behalf under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 3) of
section 11 shall be void—
(i) as respects the rights of any member of
the recognised association who has entered into
contract in contravention of any such bye-law and
also,
(ii) as respects the rights of any other
person who has knowingly participated in the
transanction entailing such contravention.
(3) Nothing in sub-section ( 2) shall effect the
right of any person other than a member of the
recognised association to enforce any such contract
Forward
contracts in
notified
goods illegal
or void in
certain
circumstances.
Application of
sections 8 and
12B to
registered
associations.

132
or to recover any sum under or in respect of such
contract:
Provided that such person had no knowledge
that such transaction was in contravention of any
of the bye-laws specified under clause ( a) of sub-
section (3) of section 11.
(3A) Any forward contract in goods entered
into in pursuance of sub-section ( I) which at the
date of the contract is in contravention of any of
the bye-laws specified in this behalf under clause
(aa) of sub-section (3) of section 11 shall be illegal.
(4) No member of a recognised association
shall, in respect of any goods specified in the
notification under sub-section ( I), enter into any
contract on his own account with any person other
than a member of the recognised association unless
he has secured the consent or authority of such
person and discloses in the note, memorandum or
agreement of sale or purchase that he has bought
or sole the goods, as the case may be, on his own
account:
Provided that where the member has secured
the consent or authority of such person otherwise
than in writing he shall secure a written confirma-
tion by such person of such consent or authority
within three days from the date of such contact:
Provided further that in respect of any out-
standing contract entered into by a member with
a person other than a member of the recognised
association, no consent or authority of such person
shall be necessary for closing out in accordance
with the bye-laws the outstanding contact, if the
member discloses in the note, memorandum or
agreement of sale or purchase in respect of such
closing out that he has bought or sold the goods,
as the case may be, on his own account.

133
16. Where a notification has been issued under
section 15, then notwithstanding anything con-
tained in any other law for the time being in force
or in any custom, usage or practice of the trade or
the terms of any contract or the bye-laws of any
association concerned relating to any contract—
(a) every forward contract for the sale or
purchase of any goods specified in the notification,
entered into on or before the date of the notification
and remaining to be performed after the said date
and which is not in conformity with the provisions
of section 15, shall be deemed to be closed out at
such rate as the Central Government may fix in this
behalf, and different rates may be fixed for
different classes of such contracts:
(b) all differences arising out of any
contract so deemed to be closed out shall be payable
on the basis of the rate fixed under clause ( a) and
the seller shall not be bound to give and the buyer
shall not be bound to take delivery of the goods.
17. ( I) The Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, declare that no
person shall, save with the permission of the
Central Government, enter into any forward con-
tract for the sale or purchase of any goods or class
of goods specified in the notification and to which
provisions of section 15 have not been made
applicable, except to the extent and in the manner,
if any, as may be specified in the notification.
(2) All forward contracts in contravention of
the provisions of sub-section ( I) entered into after
the date of publication of the notification thereun-
der shall be illegal.
(3) Where a notification has been issued under
sub-section (I), the provisions of section 16 shall, in
the absence of anything to the contrary in the
Consequences
of notification
under section
15.
Power to
prohibit
forward
contracts in
certain cases.

134
notification, apply to all forward contracts for the
sale or purchase of any goods specified in the
notification entered into on or before the date of
notification and remaining to be performed after
the said date as they apply to all forward contracts
for the sale or purchase or any goods specified in
the notification under section 15.
18. ( I) Nothing contained in Chapter III or
Chapter IV shall apply to non-transferable specific
delivery contracts for the sale or purchase of any
goods;
Provided that no person shall organise or assist
in organising or be a member of any association
in any area to which the provisions of section 15
have been made applicable (other than a recognised
association) which provides facilities for the perfor-
mance of any non-transferable specific delivery
contract by any party thereto without having to
make or to receive actual delivery to or from the
other party to the contract or to or from any other
party named in the contract.
(2) Where in respect of any area the provisions
of section 15 have been made applicable in relation
to forward contracts for the sale or purchase of any
goods or class of goods, the Central Government
may, by a like notification, declare that in the
said area or any part thereof as may be specified
in the notification all or any of the provisions of
Chapter III or Chapter IV shall not apply to
transferable specific delivery contracts for the sale
or purchase of the said goods or class of goods
either generally, or to any class of such contracts
in particular.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section ( I), if the Central Government is of
opinion that in the interest of the trade or in the
Special
provisions
respecting
certain kinds
of forward
contracts.

135
public interest it is expedient to regulate and control
non-transferable specific delivery contracts in any
area, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
declare that all or any of the provisions of Chapter
III and IV shall apply to such classes or classes of
non-transferable specific delivery contracts in such
area and in respect of such goods or class of goods
as may be specified in the notification, and may
also specify the manner in which and the extent to
which all or any of the said provisions shall so
apply.
19. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
this Act or in any other law for the time being in
force, all options in goods entered into after the date
on which this section comes into force shall be
illegal.
(2) Any option in goods which has been
entered into before the date on which this section
comes into force and which remains to be
performed, whether wholly or in part, after the said
date shall, to that extent become void.
CHAPTER V
P
ENALTIES AND PROCEDURES
20. Any person who—
(a) ( i) in any return, statement or other
document required by or under this Act, makes a
statement which is false in any material particular,
knowing it to be false, or wilfully omits to make
a material statement; or
(ii) without reasonable excuse (the burden of
proving which shall be on him) fails to furnish any
return, statement or other document or any infor-
mation or to answer any question or to comply with
any requisition made under this Act or any rules
made thereunder; or
Prohibition
of options
in goods.
Penalties.

136
(iii) enters into any forward contract during the
period of suspension of business of a recognised
association in pursuance of a notification under
section 14; or
(b) is a member of any association, other than
a recognised association, to which a certificate of
registration has not been granted under this Act; or
(c) publisher’s or circulates infromation relat-
ing to the rate at which any forward contract has
been entered into in contravention of any of the bye-
laws of a recognised organisation; or
(d) organises or assists in organising, or is a
member of, any association in contravention of the
provisions contained in the proviso to sub-
section (1) of Section 18; or
(e) enters into any forward contract or any
option in goods in contravention of any of the
provisions contained in sub-section (l) or sub-
section (3A) or sub-section (4) of section 15, section
17 or section 19;
shall, on conviction be punishable—
(i) for a first offence, with imprisonment
which may extend to one year, or with a fine or not
less one thousand rupees, or with both;
(ii) for a second or subsequent offence under
clause (d), or under clause (e) [other than an offence
in respect of a contravention of the provisions of
sub-section (4) of section 15] with imprisonment
which may extent to one year and also with fine;
provided that in the absence of special and
adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned
in the judgement of the Court, the imprisonment
shall be not less than one month and the fine shall
not be less than one thousand rupees.
21. Any person who—
(a) owns or keeps a place other than of a
recognised association which is used for the
purpose of entering into a making or performing,
whether wholly or in part, any forward contracts
Penalty for
owning or
keeping place
used for
entering
into forward
contracts in
goods.

137
in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act
and knowingly permits such place to be used for
such purposes; or
(b) without the permission of the Central
Government, organises, or assists in organizing, or
becomes a member of any association, other than
a recognised association, for the purpose of
assisting in entering into or making or performing,
whether wholly or in part, any forward contracts
in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act,
or
(c) manages, controls or assists in keeping any
place other than that of a recognised association,
which is used for the purpose of entering into or
making or performing, whether wholly or in part,
any forward contracts in contravention of any of the
provisions of this Act or at which such contracts
are recorded or adjusted, or rights or liabilities
arising out of such forward contracts are adjusted,
regulated or enforced in any manner whatsoever, or
(d) not being a member of a recognised
association, wilfully represents to, or induces, any
person to believe that he is a member of a
recognised association or that forward contracts can
be entered into or made or performed, whether
wholly or in part, under this Act through him; or
(e) not being a member of a recognised
association or his agent authorised as such under
the rules or bye-laws or such association, canvasses,
advertises or touts in any manner, either for himself
or on behalf of any other person, for any business
connected with forward contracts in contravention
of any of the provisions of this Act, or
(f) joints, gathers, or assists in gethering at any
place, other than the place of business specified in
the bye-laws of a recognised association, any

138
person or persons for making bids or offers or for
entering into or making or performing, whether
wholly or in part, any forward contracts in
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act,
or
(g) makes, publishes or circulates any state-
ment or information which is false and which he
either knows or believes to be false, affecting or
tending to affect the course of business in foward
contracts in respect of goods to which the provi-
sions of section 15 have been made applicable, or
(h) manipulates or attempts to manipulate
prices in respect of forward contracts for the sale
or purchase of any goods specified in any
notification under section 15, in any area specified
in that notification,
shall on conviction be punishable—
(i) for a first offence, with imprisonment
which may extend to two years, or with a fine of
not less than one thousand rupees, or with both;
(ii) for a second or subsequent offence, with
imprisonment which may extend to two years and
also with fine: provided that in the absence of
special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be
mentioned in the judgement of the Court, the
imprisonment shall not be less than one month and
the fine shall not be less than one thousand rupees.
21A. Any court trying an offence punishable
under section 20 or section 21 may, if it thinks fit
and in addition to any sentence which it may
impose for such offence, direct that any money,
goods or other property in respect of which the
offence has been committed, shall be forfeited to the
Central Government.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section
property in respect of which an offence has been
Power of
Court to
order
forfeiture of
property.

139
committed, shall include deposits in a bank where
the said property is converted into such deposits.
* ****
22A. (1) Any presidency Magistrate or a
Magistrate of the first class may, by warrant,
authorise any police officer not below the rank of
sub-inspector to enter upon and search any place
where books of account or other documents relating
to forward contracts or options in goods entered
into in contravention of the provisions of this Act,
may be reasonably suspected to be and such police
officer may seize any such books or documents, if
in his opinion, it relates to any such forward
contractor option in goods.
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898, shall, so far as may be, apply to
any search or seizure made under sub-section (1)
as they apply to any search or seizure made under
the authority of a warrant issued under section 98
of the said code.
22B. (1) Where any books of acco unt or
other documents are seized from any place and
there are entries therein making reference to
quantity, quotations, rates, months of delivery,
receipt or payment of differences or sale or
purchase of goods or option in goods, such books
of account or other documents shall be admitted in
evidence without witnesses having to appear to
prove the same; and such entries shall be prima facie
evidence of the matters, transactions and accounts
purported to be therein recorded.
(2) In any trial for an offence punishable
under section 21, it shall be presumed, until the
contrary is proved that the place in which the books
of account of other documents referred to in sub-
section (1) were seized, was used, and that the
Power to
search and
seize books
of account
or other
documents.
Presumptions
to be drawn
in certain
cases.
5 of 1898.

140
persons found therein were present, for the purpose
of committing the said offence.
23. Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, the following
offences shall be deemed to be cognizable within
the meaning of that Code, namely:—
* ****
28. (1) ****
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for—
* ****
(cc)the manner in which the applications for
certificates of registration may be made under
section 14A and the levy of fees in respect of such
applications;
* ****
(g) any other matter which is to be or may be
prescribed.
* ****
________
E
XTRACT FROM THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD
OF I NDIA A CT, 1992
(15 of 1992)
*             *             *             *             *
15U. (1) *            *            *            *
(2) The securities Appellate Tribunal shall
have, for the purposes of discharging their func-
tions under this Act, the same powers as are vested
in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure,
Certain
offences to be
cognizable.
5 of 1898.
Power to
make rules.
Procedure
and powers of
the Securities
Appellate
Tribunal.
5 of 1908.

141
1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance
of any person and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of
documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination
of witnesses or documents;
(e) reviewing its decisions;
(f) dismissing an application for defaults or
deciding it ex parte ;
(g) setting aside any order of dismissal of any
application for default or any order passed by it ex
parte;
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed.
*             *             *             *             *

142
LOK SABHA
_________
A
BILL
further to amend the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952.
________
(Shri Sharad Pawar, Minister of Agriculture and Consumer Affairs,
Food and Public Distribution)
142

143
ANNEXURE-I
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION
HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 12TH SEPTEMBER, 2006
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1340 hrs. in Committee Room
‘E’ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi
PRESENT
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Alakesh Dass
13. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain
14. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
15. Shri Parsuram Majhi
16. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
17. Shri Harikewal Prasad
18. Shri Munshi Ram
19. Smt. V. Radhika Selvi
10. Shri Chandra Bhan Singh
Rajya Sabha
11. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
12. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
13. Shri Kanjibhai Patel
14. Shri Rajniti Prasad
15. Shri Matilal Sarkar
16. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu
17. Shri Nabam Rebia
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P.K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.S. Kambo — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri B.S. Dahiya — Under Secretary
5. Shri Jagdish Prasad — Assistant Director
143

144
Representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and
Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)
1. Smt. Alka Sirohi — AS
2. Shri Vivek Mehrotra — AS & FA
3. Shri S. Sundereshan — Chairman, FMC
4. Shri Paul Joseph — Sr. Economic Advisor
5. Shri G.S. Negi — Director
6. Shri D.S. Kolankar — Director, FMC
7. Shri Rajiv Aggarwal — Director, FMC
At the outset Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of
Department of Consumer Affairs to the sitting of the Committee.
Thereafter, the representatives of the Department of Consumer Affairs
made a power-point presentation regarding the salient features of the Bill
to the Committee. The following points emerged during the deliberations
of the Committee:—
(i) Reasons for delay in bringing the Amendment Bill to
Parliament.
(ii) Need to make the futures market transparent, objective and
to run it in an efficient manner.
(iii) Steps taken for creating awareness amongst farmers about the
benefits of Commodity Futures Markets through Electronic
Media.
(iv) Empirical survey to ascertain the problems being faced by the
farmers.
(v) Need to put a limit on price fluctuation in essential and
sensitive commodities.
(vi) Amplification of the powers of Chairman and Board of
Members under Clause 5 of the Bill.

145
(vii) Restrictions on voting right of shareholders of Stock
Exchanges, Commodity Exchanges by amending Clause 6,
Sub Clause (2).
(viii) Need to have an efficient and transparent price discovery
mechanism to curb the artificial scarcity of essential commodi-
ties.
The representatives replied to the queries raised by the Members.
The Committee also desired that they be apprised of draft rules
framed under the proposed Bill as and when they are framed.
The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before
them and sharing their views with the Committee.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

146
ANNEXURE-II
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION
HELD ON MONDAY, THE 9TH OCTOBER, 2006
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1620 hrs. in Committee Room
‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi
PRESENT
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Alakesh Dass
13. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain
14. Shri Harikewal Prasad
15. Shri Munshi Ram
16. Adv. P. Satheedevi
17. Shri Chandra Bhan Singh
18. Shri Ramakant Yadav
Rajya Sabha
19. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
10. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
11. Shri Kanjibhai Patel
12. Shri Rajniti Prasad
13. Shri Matilal Sarkar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.S. Kambo — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri B.S. Dahiya — Under Secretary
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad — Assistant Director
146

147
Representatives of Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry (FICCI)
Ms. Seema Bathla — Group Leader
Representatives of National Commodity and
Derivatives Exchange Ltd. (NCDEX)
1. Shri P.H. Ravikumar — Managing Director
2. Shri Ravinder Sachdev — Head, Legal
3. Shri R. Raghunathan — Vice President, Relationship
4. Shri Achintya Karati — Head, Govt. & Institutional
Relationship
Representatives of National Multi Commodity
Exchange (NMCX), Ahemdabad
1. Shri Kailash R. Gupta — Managing Director
2. Shri D.C. Anjaria — Consultant of NMCE
3. Ms. Rajeshwari Sharma — Secretarial Advisor of NMCE
At the outset Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of
FICCI, NCDEX and NMCE to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter,
the Committee sought their views on The Forward Contracts (Regulation)
Amendment Bill, 2006. The following points emerged during the
deliberations of the Committee:—
(i) Need to appoint a Government nominee on the Board of
Directors of Exchanges and inclusion of representatives of
State Government, Reserve Bank of India, Securities and
Exchange Board of India in the governing body making it
broad based.
(ii) Major weaknesses and shortcomings in the existing Forward
Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 1952.

148
(iii) Need to include indices to cover the aspect of Risk
Management for farmers and stakeholders.
(iv) Lack of awareness amongst the small and marginal farmers
in remote areas about dissemination of price information.
(v) Need to include ‘indices’ in the definition of commodities.
(vi) Fear of middlemen and traders taking advantage and rise of
speculation in the market on introduction of amendment bill.
The representatives replied to the queries raised by the Members.
The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before
them and sharing their views with the Committee.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

149
ANNEXURE-III
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 18TH OCTOBER, 2006
The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in Committee Room
‘D’ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi
PRESENT
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain
13. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
14. Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
15. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
16. Shri Harikewal Prasad
17. Shri Munshi Ram
18. Adv. P. Satheedevi
19. Shri Chandra Bhan Singh
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri T.S. Bajwa
11. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
12. Shri Kanjibhai Patel
13. Shri Rajniti Prasad
14. Shri Nabam Rebia
15. Shri Matilal Sarkar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.S. Kambo — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya — Under Secretary
4. Shri Jagdish Prasad — Assistant Director
149

150
Representatives of State Government of Rajasthan
Ms. Meenakshi Hooja — Principal Secretary,
Department of Food, Civil
Supplies & Consumer Affairs
Representatives of State Government of Gujarat
Dr. S.K. Nanda — Principal Secretary,
Department of Food, Civil
Supplies & Consumer Affairs
Representatives of State Government of Maharashtra
1. Shri K.P. Bakshi — Secretary, Department of Food &
Civil Supplies
2. Shri S.Y. Kursange — Executive Secretary (Consumer
Protection), Food
At the outset Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of
State Governments of Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Gujarat to the sitting
of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee sought their views on “The
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2006”. The following
points emerged during the deliberations of the Committee:—
(i) Need to introduce the concept of “National Spot Market” and
harmonization with Future Market.
(ii) The FMC, Quality Council of India, NGOs and Consumer
Departments Co-operatives, FIIs to play proactive role for
creating awareness amongst farmers about the advantages of
commodity future trading to them.
(iii) The doubts of the farmers as to how the transaction of
wholesale prices and retail market prices effect the regular
trading needs to be resolved.
(iv) Need for strengthening the infrastructure of FMC and
empowering them.

151
(v) Need for amendment to harmonize spot market and future
market.
(vi) Need to regulate price surges in essential commodities.
(vii) Fixation of time limit for disposal of cases by Appellate
Tribunal.
(viii) A provision in the Bill be made so that there is no speculation
in agricultural commodities in the event of flood, drought,
cyclone, natural calamities and disaster in any part of the
country.
(ix) Participation of Mutual funds, FII and banks in Commodity
Future Market.
(x) All APMCs, Rural Market Haats and Panchayats to be linked
with a network to help the State Government to improve the
functioning of Commodity Future Market Exchanges.
(xi) Need to have capable efficient and professionals in FMC.
(xii) Need for investment by Banks in warehousing.
(xiii) The Central and State Governments should consult each other
before issuing directions in regard to the Act.
The representatives replied to the queries raised by the Members.
The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before
them and sharing their views with the Committee.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

152
ANNEXURE-IV
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION
HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 31ST OCTOBER, 2006
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room
‘B’ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Alakesh Dass
13. Shri Atma Singh Gill
14. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain
15. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
16. Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
17. Shri Harikewal Prasad
18. Shri Munshi Ram
19. Adv. P. Satheedevi
10. Smt. V. Radhika Selvi
11. Shri Chandra Bhan Singh
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri T.S. Bajwa
13. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
14. Shri Kanjibhai Patel
15. Shri Nabam Rebia
16. Shri Matilal Sarkar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.S. Kambo — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad — Assistant Director
152

153
Representatives of Department of Consumer Affairs
1. Shri L. Mansingh — Secretary, Deptt. of Consumer
Affairs
2. Smt. Alka Sirohi — Additional Secretary, Deptt. of
Consumer Affairs
3. Shri A.N. Bokshi — Chief Controller of Accounts,
Deptt. of Consumer Affairs
4. Shri Paul Joseph — Senior Economic Adviser, Deptt.
of Consumer Affairs
5. Shri S. Sundareshan — Chairman, Forward Markets
Commission
At the outset Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution
(Department of Consumer Affairs) to the sitting of the Committee.
Thereafter, the Committee took their evidence on “The Forward Contracts
(Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2006”. The following points were
discussed at length during the deliberations of the Committee:—
(i) Defining of “Appellate Tribunal”, “Commodity Derivatives”,
Corporatisation & Demutualisation.
(ii) Special provision to protect the interests of farmers.
(iii) Scope of trading in options.
(iv) Reasons for exempting FMC from the income-tax and wealth-
tax etc.
(v) Precautions to ensure that market is regulated effectively.
(vi) Scheme for demutualisation to stop the inside trading.
(vii) Need to make provision in the Bill to bring hoarders under
the purview of the FC(R) Act.
(viii) Reasons for convergence of “Spot” and “Future” markets
under uniform regulatory framework.

154
(ix) Need to have specific provision on the nature and qualification
of investigating agency under section 22 (c).
(x) Government nominee on the Board of FMC.
(xi) Harmonious functioning of the regulator consistent with
Government policies.
(xii) Need to create more warehousing facilities for small and
marginal farmers.
The representatives replied to the queries raised by the Members.
The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before
them and sharing their views with the Committee.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

155
ANNEXURE-V
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION
(2006-07) HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 13TH DECEMBER, 2006
The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room
‘D’ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain
13. Shri Harikewal Prasad
14. Shri Alakesh Das
15. Adv. P. Satheedevi
16. Shri Chandra Bhan Singh
Rajya Sabha
17. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
18. Shri Kanjibhai Patel
19. Shri Rajniti Prasad
10. Shri Matilal Sarkar
11. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.S. Kambo — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya — Under Secretary
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad — Assistant Director
155

156
2. At the outset Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up Draft Report on
“The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2006” for
consideration. The Committee adopted the same with some minor
modifications/amendments.
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Report
after making consequential changes arising out of factual verification of
the Report by the concerned Department and present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament during the current Session of the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.