 
 
10   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2005-06) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
 
 
TENTH   REPORT 
O N 
 
 
(i) The Standards of W eights and Measur es (Amendment) Bill,  
2005; and 
 
(ii) The Stan dards of Weight s and Measures (Enforcement) 
Amendment Bill, 2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 December, 2005/ Agrahayna 1927 (Saka)  
 1

   
 
10 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2005-06) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
 
 
TENTH   REPORT 
O N 
 
 
(i) The Standards of W eights and Measur es (Amendment) Bill,  
2005; and 
 
(ii) The Stan dards of Weight s and Measures (Enforcement) 
Amendment Bill, 2005 
 
 
   Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.12.2005 
   Laid on Rajya Sabha on 23.12.2005 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 December, 2005/ Agrahayna 1927 (Saka) 
 2

 3
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
(i) Composition of the Committee 
 
(ii) Introduction 
 
(iii) Report 
 
 
Chapter – I: Introductory 
 
Chapter – II: “The Standards of Weights And Measures 
(Amendment) Bill, 2005” 
 
Chapter – III: “The Standards of We ights and Measures 
(Enforcement) Amendment Bill, 2005” 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
(i) Statement showi ng the parallel offences in Standards 
of Weights and Measures Acts of 1976 and 1985 
 
(ii) Minutes of the sittings  of the Committee. 
  

 4
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2005-06 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Govinda Aroon Ahuja 
4. Shri Suresh Angadi 
5. Shri Ranen Barman 
6. Shri Alakesh Dass 
7.       Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar 
8.       Shri Atma Singh Gill 
9.       Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
10.       Shri Jaiprakash 
11.       Shri Baliram Kashyap 
12.       Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
13.  Shri Parsuram Majhi 
14.       Shri Zora Singh Mann 
15.       Shri Harish Nagpal 
16.       Shri Kondapalli Paidithalli Naidu 
17.       Shri Harikewal Prasad 
18.       Smt. Daggubati Purandeswari 
19.  Shri Ajit Kumar Singh 
20.  Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
21.  Shri Ramakant Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
23. Shri T.S. Bajwa 
24. Shri Palden Tsering Gyamtso 
25. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
26        Smt. Bimba Raikar 
27        Shri  Nabam Rebia 
28.       Shri Thanga Tamil Selvan 
29. Shri Vikram Verma 
30.      Shri Vijay Singh Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph   - Secretary 
2. Dr. (Smt.) Paramjit Kaur Sandhu - Additional Secretary 
3. Shri P.K. Bhandari   - Joint Secretary 
4 Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
5 Shri B.S, Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
6. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director 

 5
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, The Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution (2005-06) having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Tenth Report on (i) the Standards of Weights and 
Measures (Amendment) Bill, 2005; (ii) the Standards of Weights and 
Measures (Enforcement) Amendment Bill, 2005 relating to Ministry 
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs). 
 
2. The Standards of Weights and Measures (Amendment) Bill, 
2005; and the Standards of Weights and Measures (Enforcement) 
Amendment Bill, 2005 were introduced in Rajya Sabha on 10
th 
March, 2005.  Hon’ble Speaker  referred these Bills to the Standing 
Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution under 
Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha on 24
th March, 2005 for examination and report. The 
Committee invited Memoranda on the Bills from the public in general 
and experts/professionals/organizations/associations interested in 
particular for which the text of the Bills was hosted at the website of 
Lok Sabha 
http://www.parliamentofindia.nic.in on internet.  The 
Committee also invite views/suggestions of the State 
Governments/UTs and the Controllers of Legal Metrology, 
Department of the State Governments/UTs and the Bar Council of 
India and Bar Councils of the States.  Thereafter, the Committee 
invited officials of the State Governments and 
organizations/associations/institution/ professionals to hear their 
views on the subject and sought clarification at its sittings held on 
14
th, 27th June, 11 th July, 12 th September & 19 th October, 2005.  The 
representatives of the Department of Consumer Affairs deposed 
before the Committee on 10 th May and 27 th September, 2005. The 
Committee have examined both the Bills simultaneously and 
prepared a comprehensive Report. The Committee considered and 
adopted the draft Report on the Bills at their sitting held on 21
st 
December,  2005. 
 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to Shri T. 
Singarvel-Ex. Controller of Legal Metrology, Maharashtra, Shri K. 
Venkatesvarulu-Ex. Enforcement Officer, Dr. S.V. Gupta, Former 
Director, Weights and Measures, Government of India and the 
representatives of (i) Legal Megrology (W & M), District Inspector 
and Inspectors Association, Hyderabad (ii) Consumer Coordination 
Council, Delhi (iii) Eastern Regional Legal Metrology Licensees 
Association, Kolkata (iv) Scales Weights and Measures Merchants 
Association, Mumbai (v) All India Legal Metrology Officers 
Association, Kolkata (vi) Grahak Panchayat, Latur  (vii) Reliance 
Industries Limited  Mumbai and (viii)  Confederation of Indian 
Industry  (CII) and the Officials of State Governments of (i) 
Karnataka (ii) Orissa (iii) Punjab (iv) Maharashtra (v) Jammu & 

 6
Kashmir (vi) Andhra Pradesh (vii) Arunachal Pradesh (viii) Bihar  (ix) 
Rajasthan (x) Government of NCT, Delhi and (xi) Indian Institute of 
Legal Metrology, Ranchi for tendering evidence before the 
Committee and also for furnishing their views/suggestions to the 
Committee.   
 
 
4. The Committee also express their thanks to the 
representatives of Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs), Ministry of Law and 
Justice (Legislative Deptt.) for tendering evidence before the 
Committee and for furnishing the Committee their detailed 
information/material desired in connection with the examination of 
the Bills. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been pointed in bold 
letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi 
December 21,    2005  DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV 
           Agrahayana 30, 1927 (Saka)    Chairman,  
     Standing Committee on 
Food, 
      Consumer Affairs and  
Public Distribution   
    
 
 
 

 7
   
 
CHAPTER –I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 The Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976 was 
enacted to establish standards of weights and measures, to 
regulate inter-state trade or commerce in weights, measures and  
other goods which are so ld or distributed by  weight, measure or 
number and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  The Standards of Weig hts and  Measures (Enforcement) 
Act, 1985 was enacted   to provide for enforcement by the State 
Governments of the Standards of Weights and Measures 
established by or under the  Standards of Weights & Measures Act, 
1976 and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
1.2 According to the Ministry of Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution (D epartment of Consumer Affairs), there has 
been technological advancement in Legal Metrology in measuring 
instruments, necessitating  a revi ew of the Acts to make them 
simple, eliminate  obsolete regulations  ensure  accountability, bring 
transparency and to empower consumers for protecting their rights.   
The two proposed amendment Bills viz., (i) the Standards of 
Weights and Measures (Amendm ent) Bill, 2005 and (ii) the 
Standards of Weights and Measur es (Enforcement) Amendment 
Bill, 2005 to amend the existing Acts viz., (i) the Standards of 
Weights and Measures Act, 1976 (ii)  the Standards of Weights and 
Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985 were introduced in Rajya Sabha 
on 10.3.2005.  Hon’ble Speaker referred the above said two Bills to 
the Committee on Food, Consumer A ffairs and Public Distribution 
for examination and report. 

 8
1.3 The Standards of Weights and Measures (Amendment) Bill, 
2005 seeks to provide for:- 
(a) Keeping weighing ma chines and measuring 
instruments by prescribed retail dealer for the purpose 
of use by consumer to check the quantity of products; 
 
(b) Appointing special verifi cation agents for verification 
of sophisticated weighing machines or measuring 
instruments; 
 
(c) Using specific type of we ight or measure, which are 
user friendly, in public transaction; 
 
(d) Nominating a Director by a company who shall be 
responsible for complying with the provision of the 
enactment; 
 
(e) Multiple sealing of wei ght on measure with a view to 
prevent fraudulent practices; 
 
(f) Permitting manufactures to inscribe the non-metric 
units in addition to metric units on certain measuring 
instruments for information of consumers and for the 
smooth transition from non-metric to metric units; 
 
(g) Providing statutory ba cking for establishment of 
Regional  Reference Standards Laboratories; 
 
(h) Enhancing the amount of fine for violation of 
provisions relating to regulation of pre-packed 
commodities; 
 
(i) Simplifying the procedure of verification and stamping 
of weight and measure in relation to inter-state trade; 
 
(j) Empowering the Centra l Government to conduct 
survey or collect statistics in respect of 
implementation of standards of weights, measures 
and numeration; and 
 
(k) Revising fee for various services provided under the 
enactment to make such fee commensurate with the 
services rendered. 
 

 9
1.4 The Standards of Weights and Measures (Enforcement) 
Amendment Bill, 2005 seeks to provide for:- 
(a) Prescribing the qualificat ions for appointment of 
Additional, Joint, Deputy and Assistant Controllers of 
Legal Metrology and Inspectors under the Act for 
providing quality and professional service, beneficial 
to consumers and industries; 
 
(b) Providing for issue of guidelines by the Central 
Government for uniform implementation of the 
provision of the enactment; 
 
(c) Doing away with the requirement of registration of 
users of weight or measure with  the Departments; 
 
(d) Validating the licence for the whole of the country, for 
manufacture and repair of weight or measure issued 
to a manufactures by a State Government and 
enabling the Central Governm ent also to issue such 
all India licence, for convenience; 
 
(e) Revising penalties for various offences under the 
enactment to make the provisions more deterrent; 
and 
 
(f) Empowering the Central Gove rnment to prescribe fee, 
to be levied by the State Governments, for the 
purpose of uniformity of fee. 
 
1.5 The Secretariat made availa ble the above said amendment 
on the web-site of Lok Sabha http.//www.parliamentofindia.nic.in on 
Internet  and also telecas on te levision for general public and 
invited the comments/suggestions on t he said Bills from the public 
at  large.  The Committee re ceived a large number of 
representations/memoranda from experts/NGOs/State 
Governments containing their suggestions/opposition to the 
proposed amendments. 
 

 10
1.6 The Committee took evidence of  the representatives of the 
Department of Consumer Affairs (Nodal Department) and Ministry 
of Law and Justice, various NGOs, experts and State Governments 
on  10th May, 14th  and 27th June, 11th July, 12th and 27 September 
and 19th October, 2005. 
1.7 The Committee’s views on th e basis of examination of 
written replies received from t he Department of Consumer Affairs 
and the evidence of NGOs, exper ts and State Governments are 
given in the following paragraph:- 
1.8 The Committee note that a large number of  amendments 
have been proposed in these two Bi lls.  Out of the total of 160 
Sections in both the Acts, 87 Sections are proposed to be 
amended.  Further 21 Sections are to be  omitted and 13 new 
Sections are to be inserted as shown in the Tables given below:- 
Table -I 
 Existing Amended 
Standards Act: 85 45 
Enforcement Act: 75 42 
        Total 160 87 
Table -II 
 Omitted Added 
Standards Act: 17 
(6, 7,  8, 9, 10, 11, 23, 40, 41, 
42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 53, 62 and 
63) 
10 
(27A, 46A, 46B, 46C, 
46D, 46E, 46F, 46G, 
63A and 86) 
 
Enforcement Act: 4 
( 12, 16, 17, 18 ) 
3 
 
(31A, 39A, 74A) 
            Total 21 13 
   

 11
 
1.9 The Committee’s  exami nation   has revealed that  Section 3 
of the Standards Act and Section 4 of the Enforcement Act override 
all the provisions pertaining to we ights and measures in other Acts 
and this position needs to be ma intained throughout.  But the 
amendments proposed do not maintain  this position as explained 
below. 
(i) Section 2 (b) defining “Commodities in Packaged 
form” in the Standards Act  1976 should have been omitted 
and definition of “Pre Packed Commodity” given in clause 13 
of the Standards of Weights and Measures Enforcement Bill, 
2005 adding an Explanatio n to section 31A should have 
been inserted, instead. 
 
(ii) Though clause 21 of the Standards of Weights and 
Measures (Amendment) Bill 2005 has proposed two 
Amendments, it has not amende d Section 52 for dropping 
the following words to bring it in line with Section 3 of the 
Standards Act: 
 
“Expect where any weight or measure is made or 
manufactured, with the pe rmission of the Central 
Government exclusively for export, every person who makes  
or manufactures any weight or measures which does not 
conform to the standards of wei ght or measures established 
by or under this Act, shall  where such offense is not 
punishable under any other Law relating to Weights and 
Measures for the time being in force, be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two thousand 
rupees, or with both, and, fo r the second or subsequent 
offence with imprisonment for a term which may extended to 
three years and also with fine.” 
 
(iii) Section 75 of the Standards  Act and the section 66 of 
the Enforcement Act have ousted the jurisdiction of Chapter 
XIII of IPC dealing with weights and measures.  But both the 
Standards Act and the  Enforcement Act have said nothing 
about Section 153 of the Code of  Criminal Procedure.  It 
should have specifically stated w hether it is ousted or not to 
bring it in line wit h Section 3 of the Standards Act and 
Section 4 of the Enforcement Act. 

 12
1.10 Yet other instances of discrepancies which came to the 
notice of the Committee are given below: 
 
(i) Clause 38 of the Standards  of Weights and Measures 
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 proposing to amend Sub-Section 3 
of Section 73 of the Standards of Weights and Measures Act 
1976 omits the following words “ if in custody, shall be 
discharged forthwith.”  Unfortunately clause 37 of the 
Standards of Weights and Measures (Enforcement) 
Amendment Bill, 2005 proposing to  amend Section 65 of the 
Standards of Weights and Meas ures (Enforcement) Act 
1985 has not omitted the following words “ if in custody, shall 
be discharged forthwith.” 
  
 (ii) Clause 36 of Standards  of Weights and Measures 
(Enforcement) Amendment Bill 2005 provides for the prosecution of 
a Director nominated by instead of  the all the Directors of the 
company under Section 62 and clause  39 of Standards of Weights 
and Measures Amendment Bill 2005 al so provides for prosecution 
of such Director nominated by the Company in Section 74.  
However Sub-Section (3) (4) and (5 ) provided under Section 74 of 
the Standards of Weights and Measures Act 1976, could have been 
inserted in Section 62  of the Standards of Weights and Measures  
(Enforcement) Act, 1985 also. 
 
 
(iii) Officers of Legal Metrology of  the Government of India and 
the Governments of the States respectively have powers of search 
conferred by Section 29 (I) (a) of  the Standards Act and Section 27 
(I) of the Enforcement Act. For misu se of powers of search by the 
officers of Legal Metrology, penal provisions respectively have 
been made in the paralle l Sections 71 (I) (b) of the Standards Act 
and 58 (I) (b) of the Enforcement Ac t.  These two sub-sections give 
rise to the false impression of possession of powers of search of 
`persons’ by these officers.  Ac tually these officers have only 
powers of entry and search of `premi ses’ as defined in Section 2  
(r) of  the Standards Act, which definition has been made applicable 
to Enforcement Act by virtue of Section 3 (o) of that Act.  They are 
not conferred the powers of search of `persons.: Section 71 (I) (b) 
of the Standards Act penalizes vexatious search of `Persons’ by the 
authorized officers  and such penalty  under Section 58 (I) (b) of the 
Enforcement Act for vexatious search of `Persons’ by the Inspector 
or any  other person of Legal Metr ology  exercising powers under 
this Act.    
 

 13
When an officer of Legal Metrology searches a house, 
conveyance, or place for any incrim inating documents kept therein, 
the officer can be easily dodged by the accused person if, he 
removes such documents from the `premises’ being searched and 
carries it on his person, as it happens with hawkers carrying their 
wares on head loads, when checki ng squad comes  to seize their 
ware.  If the officer persists in searching the person of the accused 
in the `premises’ keeping such incriminating documents, on  his 
person, that officer is liable for t he penalty laid down Section 71 (I) 
of the Standards Act or Section 58 (I) of the Enforcement Act, as 
the  case may be. The point being m ade here is  that clause (b) in 
these Sections, gives a misleading impression of existence of the 
power of search of person, which is not true.  Power of search, 
conferred is thus, ambiguous and inadequate. It affects effective 
implementation  of these Acts   and the Amendments should get rid 
of these ambiguity. 
(iv) Director, Legal Metrology an d his subordinates have only 
powers of inspection of records and registers under Section 29 of 
the Standards Act. They are not empowered to summon the 
registers and records to their offices or elsewhere for  inspection. 
Rather they have to go to the premises of the licensed  
Manufactures, Dealers and Repairers, if they wanted to inspect the 
registers and records. But, on the ot her hand all the Inspectors  of 
Legal Metrology in the States ar e conferred powers under Section 
28 of the Enforcement Act to su mmon the registers and records for 
inspection to their offices.  Amendments should set right this 
discrepancy.    
  
1.11  The Committee have noticed that both these Acts viz.       (i) 
The Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976 and (ii) The 
Standards of Weights  and Measur ement (Enforcement) Act, 1985 
contain 21 pairs of  parallel  Sections in respect of substantive as 
well as  procedural offences as shown in Annexure.    O n  b e i n g  
enquired whether both these Acts can be merged into one, the 
Secretary, Department of Cons umer Affairs during evidence  was            
candid         in           admitting        that           “it        is        entirely  

 14
possible and desirable t hat we should have one  Act rather than 
having this hugely complicated things”.  There are  discrepancies in 
the mode of trial for the parallel offences and the discrepancies are 
also noticed in the classification of offences as compoundable and 
non compoundable as can be seen in the table given below:- 
Table III 
Enforcement Act Standards Act Sr. 
No. Provisi
on 
 Penal 
Provisi
on 
Classification 
Provision Penal 
Provision 
Classification 
1 10 40 Summary 32 55 Regular 
2 21 (a) 44(a) Regular 22 52 Summary 
3. 22 45 Summary 41 (3) (4)  62 Regular 
4 39(2) 39 (2) Summary 34 57 Regular 
 
Table IV 
Enforcement Act Standards Act Sr. 
No. 
Definition Penal 
Classification 
Definition Penal 
Classification 
1 21 (a) 44(a) Compoundable 22 52 Non-
Compoundable 
2 38 (1)(2) 38 (1) (2) Non-
Compoundable 
21 50 Compoundable 
 

 15
 
1.12 The Committee has  noticed over- lapping of similar offences 
in the same act with different punishments in each instance.  
Further, the Committee also found that in some cases penalty has 
been prescribed in the same Section and in other case the penalty 
has been prescribed in different section as may be seen form the 
Table below.  Section 21 (a) of th e Enforcement Act 1985 prohibits 
the manufacture of Weights and M easures not conforming to the 
Standards laid down.  Section 36  of the same act prohibits the 
manufacture of non standard Weight s and Measures. Penalty for 
section 21 (a) is given in Secti on 44  and that for Section 36 is 
given in the same section. 
Table –V 
Enforcement Act, 1985 
Provision Penal 
Provision 
Penalty 
21(a) 
 
 
 
36 
44(a) 
 
 
 
36 
Ist  Offence Imprisonment upto 1 year  upto two thousands or  
both* 
Iind  and subsequent Offence- Imprisonment upto 3 years and 
also fine, 
Ist Offence – Imprisonment not less than three months and  upto 
1 year. 
Iind and subsequent offence-Imprisonment not less than six 
months and  upto 3 years and also fine. 
 
(* Penalty proposed in the Amendments) 
      

 16
 
1.13  Similar instances have also come to the notice of 
Committee, under The Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 
1976. For instance  Section 33 (d),  deals with indication in non-
standards units on packages and Se ction 39 (a) (b) (c) (ii) and 
(iii) prohibits packaging of co mmodities in non-Standard units. 
Penalty for Section 33(d) is give n in Section 56 and that for the 
latter is given in Section 63 as can be seen in Table given 
below:.   
     Table –VI 
                                                                   Standards Act, 1976 
Definition Penal Penalty 
33 (d) & (e) 
 
 
 
39 (i) (a) (b) 
(c) 
(ii) and (iii) 
56 
 
 
 
63 (I) 
 
 
 
 
63 (2) 
Ist Offence – Fine upto 5000/- * 
IInd  and subsequent Offence- Imprisonment upto 3 years or with 
fine or with both. 
 
Ist Offence – Fine upto 5000/- * 
IInd   Offence- Fine upto 10,000/- and for subsequent offence 
imprisonments upto 5 years or fine upto Rs. 50,000 or both. 
 
 
Ist Offence – Imprisonment upto 2 years or fine upto Rs. 20,000/- 
or with both. 
IInd  and subsequent Offence- Imprisonment upto 5 years and 
also with fine. 
 
(* Penalty proposed in the Amendments) 

 17
1.14 The Committee has noticed that there are 
discrepancies also in the power  of the officers’ of Legal 
Metrology to compound an offenc e or other-wise  as can be 
seen in the following paragraph:- 
 Section 73 of the Standards Act, 1976 
enumerates offences punishable under the following 
twelve sections as Compoundable Offences: 50, 55, 
56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 63, 64,  65, 66 and 67. Director, 
Legal Metrology or Officers authorized by him are 
empowered to compound these offences.  Out of the 
12 compoundable Sections, Section 60 provide for 
penalty of imprisonment even for the first offence.   
 
 
1.15 The Committee has come across anomalies in the 
provisions of appeal as illustrated below:- 
 In the  Standards Act, there is a provision for 
appeals to the Director, Legal Metrology against the 
orders of his subordinate and to Central Government 
against the orders of the Director in respect of orders 
passed under Section 30 (f orfeiture of Weight & 
Measures or false packages seized and orders 
passed under Section 36 regarding approval of 
models).  It has been further noted that in the 
Enforcement Act, Section 69  provides for appeal to 
Controller of Legal Metrology against the order 
passed under Chapter V to X of Enforcement Act and 
to State Government against the order passed under 
Chapter V to X by the Controller, Legal Metrology.  
Non-compoundable offences ar e sent for trial to the 
courts and there is no question of offenders of non- 
compoundable offences coming to the Controller or 
the State Government in appeal.  However, the 
offenders of compoundable offences may come up 
before Controller in appeal against the orders for 
compounding  passed by his subordinate or they may 
come up to the Government in appeal against the 
orders passed by Controller.   All the Compoundable 
offences in the Enforcem ent Act and penalty thereto 
fall under Chapter XI & XII.  However, these two 
Chapters do not fall in the ambit of appeal in Section 
69.  Only Chapter V to X falls in the ambit of Section 
69.   

 18
 
1.16 The Committee find that the Standards of Weights 
and Measures Amendment Bills have been introduced to 
give effect to the advancements in the international 
practices and technological innovations made in the 
field of Legal Metrology.  It also attempts to weed out 
obsolete provisions, ensure enforcement and bring 
about transparency to the consumers in protecting their 
rights.  The Committee find th at out of 160 Sections in 
both the Acts, the Government have proposed 
amendments in 87 Sections.  Further as many as 21 
Sections have been omitted and another 13 added in 
both the Acts.  The Committee ar e of the view that such 
a large number of amendments in these Bills is nothing 
short of revision of these two Acts. The Committee are 
sad to note that the amendments proposed are highly 
confusing and at times some  of them contradict each 
other.  Even after a large number of  proposed 
amendments,  there is a lack of clarity, leading to 
confusion. The Committee also find that the 
amendments contemplated do not clearly reflect the 
concern of the various State Governments and are not 
in consonance with the federal structure of our 
Constitution.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Government should have a relook at both the Bills in the 
light of the observations of  the Committee contained in 
this Report. 
 

 19
1.17 The Committee note that  both the Standards  of 
Weights and Measures Act 1976 and the Standards of 
Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act 1985 mostly 
follow a pattern of defini ng the offences under some 
chapters and lay down spec ific penalties for those 
offences in other Chapters. There are 21 pairs of parallel 
offences, each pair consisting of one Section from the 
Standards Acts and one Section from the Enforcement 
Act. Certain offences under the Act are compounded.    
Discrepancies in classifying the pair of offences as 
compoundable   and non-compoundable have been 
noticed.  Further overlapping of definition of parallel 
offences in the same Act with different punishments in 
each pair have also been observed. Certain offences 
specified in these Acts can be tried under summary 
procedure by the courts while others are to be decided 
by the regular trials. The incompatibility and 
incoherency in structuring the various amendments, 
have turned these Acts even more complex and 
incomprehensible, thus defeating the very purpose, for 
which the amendments have been  proposed.  In the 
opinion of the Committee the inconsistency and lack of 
harmony in these Acts even after proposed 
amendments, does not augur well and not conducive for 

 20
effective implementation of the Acts. Such 
discrepancies and inconsistencies could be 
harmonized, only if both the Acts are consolidated into 
once piece of Legislation. In this context, the Committee 
concurs with the views of Secretary (Department of 
Consumer Affairs), who during evidence before the 
Committee was candid enough to admit that these Acts 
can be consolidated, and recommend that the 
Government should amalgamate both the Acts into a 
single piece of legislation.  

 21
 
1.18  The Committee note that the Standards of 
Weights and Measures Act,  1976 and Standards of 
Weights and Measures (Enf orcement) Act, 1985 are 
basically regulatory in nature and therefore neither the 
Officers of Legal Metrology of the Central Government 
nor those of the State Governments have been 
conferred the powers of arrest under these Acts.  
However, the provision pertaining to the compounding 
of offence in the Standards Act vide Section 73(3) and 
the Enforcement Act vide Section 65(3), which have 
identical wording "and the offender, if in custody, shall 
be discharged forthwith" have got a clause which gives 
rise to doubts about the existen ce of powers of arrest.  
The Committee find that this anomaly has been rectified 
in clause 38 of the proposed amendments to Section 
73(3) of the Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 
1976 but this anomaly still persists in the Standards of 
Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act [Section 
65(3)].  The Committee, theref ore, desire that the words 
which give rise to doubt may also be deleted in the 
Standards of Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act, 
1985 on the lines being done in the Standards of 
Weights and Measures Act, 1976. 

 22
 
1.19 The Committee find th at Section 3 of the 
Standards of Weights and Measures, Act 1976 and  
Section 4 of the Standards of Weights and Measures 
(Enforcement) Act, 1985, override all the provisions 
pertaining to weights and me asures in other Acts and 
this position is required to be maintained throughout.  
The Committee, however, note that this  has not been 
done at all.  The Committee desire that this anamoly 
should also be rectified. 

 23
 
1.20 The Committee are concerned to note the 
existence of an anomaly in the matter of preferring an 
appeal by the accused violating the provision of the 
Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976 and 
Standard of Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act, 
1985.  Surprisingly, even after the proposed  
amendments  the anomaly persists.  The Committee are 
of the view that the provis ion of appeal thus becomes 
infructuous.  Similarly, the powers to arrest and search 
are nebulous and vague.  Further, powers to summon 
registers/records and inspections thereof is 
contradictory as the same is available to the Inspectors 
in the States while the same power is not available with 
the Director and his subordinates.   The Committee do 
not appreciate the ambiguity a nd lack of clarity  which  
hamper the implementation of the Acts and thus defeat 
the purpose for which the amendments have been 
suggested in the  Acts.  The  Committee, view these with 
seriousness and desire that while amalgamating these 
Acts into a single piece of legislation, the anomalies, the 
discrepancies and deficiencies pointed out be rectified, 
so as to protect the interest of the consumers.    

 24
1.21 The Committee note that  at present the 
Standards Act 1976 provide for different types of 
Standards viz. Internationa l Standard [Section 2(l)], 
National Standard, Referen ce Standard [Section 2(t)], 
Secondary Standard [Section 2(x)], Working Standard 
[2(ze)] and also Commercial Standard.  The Committee 
feel that a large number of standards lead to confusion 
in the minds of ordinary ci tizen.  These standards  may 
only be useful for the purpose of hierarchy in different 
Standards and a layman may not be able to understand 
the technicalities attached to such standards.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government 
should explore the possibility of reducing the numbers 
of such standards to a barest minimum so that it does 
not create confusion in the mind of a common man.  The 
Committee also desire that the arrangements of various 
clauses and the language used  in both the Acts too 
complex and is not easily understandable.  The 
Committee desire that while recasting the Acts as 
proposed in this Report, the Government should attempt 
to make the language of the Acts as simple  as possible.  
 
   
    

 25
CHAPTER – II 
THE STANDARDS OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005 
 
Section 2 (O) Definition of “Manufacturer” 
 
2.1  The Government have pr oposed that for clause (o) 
the following clause shall be substituted namely:- 
 
(o) “manufacturer”; in relation to any- 
 
(a) weight or measure, means a per son who, or a firm or a Hindu 
undivided family, which:- 
 
(i) makes or manufactures such weight or measure, 
 
(ii)  makes or manufactures one or more parts, and acquires the 
other parts, of such weight or measure and, after assembling 
those parts, claims the end produc ts to be a weight or measure 
manufactured by himself of itself, as the case may be,  
 
(iii) does not make or manufacture  any part of such weight or 
measure but assembles parts ther eof made or manufactured by 
others and claims the end product to be a weight or measure 
manufactured by himself or itself, as the case may be, 
 
(iv) puts, or causes to be put, his or its own mark on any 
complete weight or measure made or manufactured by any 
other person and claims such pr oducts to be a weight or 
measure made or manufactured by hi mself or itself, as the case 
may be. 
 
Explanation:-Where any manufacturer despatches any 
weight or measure or any part thereof to any branch office 
maintained by him or it, such branch office shall not be deemed 
to be a manufacturer even though the parts so despatched to it 
are assembled at such branch office; 
 
(b)  commodity in packaged form, means a person who, 
or a firm or a Hindu undivided fam ily which, produces, makes or 
manufacturers such commodity and includes a person who, or a 
firm or a Hindu undivided family which, puts or causes to put, 
any mark on any packaged commodity, not produced, made or 
manufactured by him or it, and the mark claims the commodity 
in the package to be commodity produced, made or 
manufactured by such person, firm or Hindu undivided family, 
as the case may be; 

 26
 
(c) in clause (y), in the expl anation, for the word “branding” 
the words “branding affixing pre-stressed paper seal” shall 
be substituted. 
 
2.2  The Government of Andhra Pradesh has suggested that in 
clause 2 (o)(b) of the Bill, an ex planation may be added to cover the 
individuals or firms or HUF who do not claim the end product but sell 
the end product.  For this, individuals or firms or HUF who sell/possess 
for sale any product assembled in a packaged form, shall be treated as 
manufacturer for the reasons that presently some Manufacturers who 
do not Manufacture any part of packaged commodity but assemble all 
the parts Manufactured by other people and give a shape of packing 
by enclosing for the above Manufactur er to claim himself/herself/itself 
as the Manufacturer and in fact taking advantage of this they are 
releasing the product without claiming as Manufacturer. 
2.3  When asked as to how the new Definition as proposed by 
Andhra Pradesh Government will  help the consumers, the 
representatives of the State Government stated during evidence: 
“At present, some of the people collect the various parts of 
the machines, weighing or meas uring instruments and they 
are selling the product.  They  are not claiming.  The 
definition calls onl y the person who claims, whether he 
manufactures or assembles or  sells.  If he claims, he will 
become a manufacturer but if he does not, he never falls 
under the present defi nition.  Another thing is about the 
packaged commodities. I would like  to give an example.  As 
far as, edible oil is concerned,  Palmolein is imported from 
Malaysia.  Here in India, they  are packing it.  They are not 
claiming that they are manufacturer, not even importer.  
Simply, they are telling that they are packing it.  They are not 
manufacturer.  For that r eason, we request the hon. 
Committee, in discussion with the Law Department and also 
with the Industry, a comprehensive definition may be 
incorporated so that we can have a better enforcement. 
 
2.4  The Department of Consumer  Affairs reacted on the above 
proposal that provisions have been ma de in the Rules to cover the 
responsibility. 
 

 27
2.5  It was  pointed out that pr esently some manufactures  do not 
manufacture any part of the packaged commodity but assemble all the 
parts manufactured by other people and give a shape of packing  to 
the end product. It has been suggested that an “explanat ion” may be 
added to cover the individuals or firms on HUF who do not claim the 
end product but sell the end product should be treated as 
manufacturer.  In this context, t he Committee asked the view of the 
Government. The Ministry in their reply stated that the existing 
definition is comprehensive enough and take care of individuals or 
firms on HUF.  The responsibility for ensuring compliance shall rest 
with those who sell th e product unless the name and address of the 
manufacturer is clearly declared. 
   
2.6  On the suggestion that in the definition of manufacturers 
{Section 2 (O) }  “Company” should also  be included,  since “firm’ and 
“person” have already been covered,  the Ministry stated that the 
definition of `manufacturer’ provi ded under Section 2(o) is very wide 
and encompasses all situations includ ing where the trade mark is put 
or cause to be put on end product not manufactured. So the individuals 
or firms or HUF or the company ow es responsibility for any deficiency 
thereof. 
 

 28
 
2.7 The Committee note that the Government have 
proposed modification in the definition of 
“manufacturer” to cover such cases of Weight & 
Measures which one does not make or manufacture but 
is sold and claims the end product to be his. It however 
does not cover manufactur ers who do not manufacture 
any part of packaged commodity but assemble all parts 
manufactured by other people and give a shape of 
packing and sell the end product  in the market without 
claiming themselves to be ma nufacturer.  In that way 
they are not held responsible for any short filling, 
measurement or other defects.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that for better enforcement of 
law, an “explanation” may be  added in the Section 2(o) 
to cover the individuals or  firms or HUF who do not 
claim the end product but sell the end product. 

 29
Section 19 - Power of Central Government to prescribe 
physical characteristics, etc., of weights and measures 
 
2.8  It has been provided  in Section 19(1) of the Parent Act that 
the Central Government shall, in re lation to any weight or measure, 
prescribe the physical characteristi cs, configuration,  constructional 
details, materials, equipment, performance, tolerances, methods or 
procedures of tests in accordance with the recommendations made by 
the International Organisation of Legal Metrology: 
 
 2.9 To ensure uniformity in the implementation of the Act, The 
Ministry has proposed that in Sect ion 19 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (1) after the word “toleranc es” at both the places where it 
occurs, the words “period of re-verification shall be inserted. 
 
2.10  The State Government of  Karnataka while objecting 
to the amendment in the Section stated that the powers of re-
verification of the weights and measures has been prescribed under 
the Karnataka Standards  of Weights and Measures (Enforcement) 
Rules, 1988 which are framed by t he State Government. There is no 
necessity of prescribing the peri od of re-verification under the 
Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976.  The Central 
Government proposed this amendment to take away the powers of the 
State Government to frame the rules.   It is against the spirit of the 
Constitution.  The Cons titution has given the power to the state 
Government to frame the rules in su ch a way that they are suitable to 
the conditions of the State and also keeping in view the uniformity of 
the rules throughout the country. 
 
2.11 The Government of Jammu and Kashmir stated that such 
amendment is not in the interest of  the State Governments but aimed 
to withdraw the powers of  State Governments due to the fact that after 
careful consideration taking into account all types of environmental 

 30
conditions of wear and tear, technical experts have prescribed period 
of re-verification of weights and measures as onc e in twelve months in 
the present law.   
2.12 During evidence, the Commi ttee asked as to how the 
proposed amendment empower s the Central Government to withdraw 
the powers of the State Government, the representatives of the Jammu 
and Kashmir Government stated: 
 
“That power was lying with the State Governments under 
Section 72 which authorized the State Governments to make 
rules as far as period of re-verification is concerned, in 
consultation with the Central Government.  We are only 
saying that when the States are already making rules 
regarding period of re-verificat ion in consultation with the 
Central Government, what is th e necessity of bringing it to 
the Central Act where no agency is  involved in determining 
the period of re-verification?” 
 
2.13 The Eastern Regional Leg al Metrology Licencees 
Association objected the insertion of words “Period of re-verification”, 
because the climatic condition and economic condition of different 
States are different; where more rainfall occurs the weights and 
weighing instruments are damaged ear ly.  So, this period of re-
verification should be prescribed by the State Government instead of 
Central Government, as the State Government understands its local 
condition.  When asked as to what should be the “Period of re-
verification”, the witnesses state duri ng evidence that for the sake of 
consumer’s interest it should be done within 12 months.     
 
2.14 In this regard, Shri K. Venkatswarulu, Ex. Enforcement 
Officer has submitted during evidence:- 
 
 "My submission in this regard is that already use of 
weights and measures is different  in all the States.  Even in 
the States, it is different in district to district because the 
trade practices are different.  In a State like Andhra Pradesh, 
there are tribal areas, plai n areas, and urban centres like 
Hyderabad, Visakhapatanam, etc. where trade practices are 
different.  Even the State Govern ment is finding difficulty in 
applying the enforcement provisions of the law to various 
areas in the same manner with effect from the same date. 
“The law must also take into co nsideration the welfare of the 
farmers who are being cheated in  the market yards.  There 
are many products like cotton, wheat, rice, etc. The weighing 

 31
practices are different even withi n the State.  So, unless it is 
consolidated within the State,  it cannot be implemented by 
the Central Government because there must be a harmony.  
There must be feed back from the ground level.  So, that is 
not possible, if the power is vested with the Central 
Government.  Therefore, whatever use of weights and 
measures would be in a partic ular trade or particular area 
the power must be vested with the State Governments but 
not with the Central Government.”   
 
 2.15 The Government of West Bengal is of the opinion that 
insertion of the word “Period of re-verification” in sub-section (1) of 
Section 19 is uncalled for because of the existing provisions in Section 
24(2) of Standards of Weights & Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985 
read with Section 72. 
 
2.16 The Ministry of Food, Consume Affairs and Public 
Distribution (Department of Consum er Affairs) in their comments 
furnished to the Committee  stated that  re-verification of a weight or 
measure is done to ensure that the same retain its accuracy during its 
use. This re-verific ation period depends on va rious factors like the 
quality of production, system, cu stom and usage, etc. Mainly 
depending on the manufacturing process, the re-verification period 
may vary for different weighing or measuring instruments. This period 
could be 5 years as in the case of  Water Meters. Even in the existing 
rules, the re-verification period is not one year. For weighing machines 
it is one  year, for wei ghts, capacity measures, length measures it is 2 
years, for vertical storage tank it is 5 years.  A technical Committee 
constituted by the Department re commends on the re-verification 
period for different instruments and rules are modified accordingly. In 
other countries, the re-v erification period is not  uniform as claimed. 
They vary. For uniformity Model En forcement Rules are circulated to 
states in this regard but many States have not  adopted them in the 
past due to various reasons and this  has resulted in non-uniformity in 
implementation. The experience in the past also indicated that States 
were making amendments in the Rules without consultation with 

 32
Central Govt.  So it is necessary to  prescribe the re-verification period 
of different weight or measure through Central Rules for uniformity. 
2.17 The Committee drew the attention of the Government that a 
number of organizations and State Go vernments have objected to the 
proposed amendment to Section 19 on the plea that the amended 
clause amount to withdrawal/encr oachment upon the powers of the 
State Government and asked the reaction of the Ministry in this regard.  
The Ministry in their reply furnish ed to the Committee stated that since 
the Enforcement Act, 1985  had been enacted by the Parliament, it is 
but appropriate that the enforcement rules framed there under are also 
framed by the Central  Government, so as to have uniformity of 
implementation throughout  the country. At present the Enforcement 
Rules are passed by the State legislatures, which is not conducive for 
achieving uniformity. 
2.18 The Committee pointed out that most of 
States/Organizations have suggested t hat the period of re-verification 
of Weight or  Measure  should be decided by the State keeping in view 
the different environmental conditi ons and geographical nature of the 
States. The period of re-verification cannot be uniform across States. It 
may differ from State to State and a sked the views of the Government. 
The Ministry stated that the re-verification period is a technical 
requirement depending on the capab ility of the manufacturers, 
technique and system adopted.  So that  uniformity is required to be 
ensured in respect of re-verification period  all throughout the country.  

 33
2.19 The Committee note that to ensure uniformity in 
the implementation of the law, the Government have 
proposed that ‘period of re-v erification’ of the weights 
and measures would be prescribed by the Central 
Government.  A number of  State Governments have 
objected to this amendment st ating that it was against 
the Federal structure of our Constitution and that it was 
likely to affect the revenue of the State Governments.  
The Committee feel that the Central Government should 
avoid to prescribe the period of reverification as at 
present  the powers to make Rules lies with the State 
Governments under Section 72( 2)(m) of Standard of 
Weights & Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985.  Further 
the Government, while making amendments have not 
kept in mind that climatic  conditions and economic 
conditions of the different  States differ where trade 
Practices are also different .  The Committee are not 
convinced with the argument put-forth by the 
Government that the Model Enforcement Rules were 
circulated to States but ma ny States have not adopted 
them due to various reasons and this has resulted in 
non-uniformity in implementation.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Central Government 
should not encroach upon the Rule making powers of 

 34
the State Governments/UTs a nd ensure that the period 
of re-verification of Weight s is prescribed by respective 
State Governments keeping in view the technical 
requirements as well as othe r factors like climatic 
conditions and usage etc.  The Committee desire that all 
State Governments should make their own rules within a 
period of two years failing which the Central 
Government, may lay down the model rules for the 
States to follow. 

 35
 
Section 23 - Prohibition with regard to inscriptions, etc. 
 
2.20 Section 23 of the SWM Act, 1976 provides that no weight, 
measure or other goods shall bear t hereon any inscription or indication 
of weight, measure or number exc ept in accordance with the standard 
unit of such weight, measure or numeration established by or under 
this Act: 
 
Provided that in relation to any weight, measure or other goods 
which are manufactured for scientific investigation or research or for 
export, inscription or indication thereon of any weight, measure or 
number may also be made in accordance with any other system of 
weight, measure or numeration if such inscription of indication is 
demanded by the person by whom su ch scientific investigation or 
research is to be made or  by the person to whom the export is to be 
made. 
 
2.21 The Government have proposed to “omit” this Section from 
the Principal Act. 
 
2.22 The All India Legal Metrology Officers' Association, Kolkata 
and the Government of Jammu and Kashmir through their comments 
furnished to the Committee stated that  India being a member of OIML 
should not use non-metric units in the name of ignorance of people.  
Such amendments if accepted will take  the country to 48 years back 
and shall reduce the image of the country in the world.  This 
amendment is only aimed to sati sfy the interest of certain 
manufacturers and has been suggested for ulterior motive and hence 
should not be accepted.  Needless to mention that without proper 
amendment ad-interim, a notificat ion has already been issued to 
inscribe non-metric unit, which is ultra virus. 

 36
 
2.23 The All India Legal Metrology Officers' Association, Kolkata  
in their post-evidence reply stated that  as India is o ne of the members 
of OIML and CGPM (Industrial Forums),  so allowing use of non-metric 
unit in addition to metric units even for a limited period, will be against 
the treaty/agreement with t hose bodies.  Moreover, it is a convenient 
system and has been adopted by majority of people of this country.  It 
is not in the interest of consumer at la rge, rather it is in the interest of 
certain manufacturer. 
2.24 In this regard, the Governm ent of Maharashtra have stated 
that use of non-metric units on weight or measure will be against the 
objective of OIML.  Though, it is  accepted that use of certain non-
standard unit is necessary during the per iod of transition, provision for 
permitting such period should have been fixed in the said Section. 
2.25 The Indian Institute of Legal Metrology, Ranchi is not 
convinced with the amendment.  In their view present provision of legal 
metrology, prohibits the use of non-me tric units.  Aim and Objective of 
weight and measure organization are to introduce metric system in the 
country in order to work uniform at  par with international practice.  
Metric system has been adopted in the country since 1958.  Now in the 
proposed amendment (after 48 years) suggesting to allow inscription of 
non-metric units to manufacturers may not be in the interest of the 
country.  India, being a member of OIML, BIPM and other international 
organisations, should not use non-metric units in the name of 
ignorance of some people.  Again,  our country cannot go 48 years 
back and reduce the image of the nation in the world. 
2.26 State Government of Orissa, Rajasthan, Punjab and U.T. of 
Chandigarh have also expressed similar views in the matter. 
2.27 In response to the aforesaid comments/views, the Ministry of 
Food, Consumer Affairs and Publ ic Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) reacted that people are still non conversant with 
metric units especially while dea ling with length or body temperature 

 37
measurements. For exam ple, height of a person is still measured in 
feet and inches, area of a room is measured in square feet, body 
temperature is measured in d egree Fahrenheit instead of degree 
Centigrade. So people use tape measures with feet, clinical 
thermometer with degree Fahrenheit etc. As per the existing provisions 
of the Act, inscription of such non-metric units, even in addition to 
metric units, on any measuring inst ruments is an offence and cases 
are booked by enforcement agency. So the sale of such instruments is 
done illegally without verification.  Hence the need to amend the Act for 
permitting the indication of non metric units selectively in the area of 
length and temperature for certain per iod of time in addition to the 
official metric units. Delhi High C ourt has in a Writ petition directed 
permitting the inscription of degree Fahrenheit scale on clinical 
thermometer in addition to Centigrade scale. 
2.28 When asked about the efforts made by the Government to 
educate the public and manufactures about the use and popularization 
of metric system, since the adopti on of metric system in 1956, the 
Committee was informed that deta iled programme for educating the 
public on metric unit and conversion from non-metric units were taken 
up by the Central and State Govern ment departments during the late 
50s and in 60s.  Because of such effort, complete metrication has been 
adopted in monetization, mass measurements, volume measurements, 
in manufacturing sectors, in engin eering industries, in technical 
education, etc.  However conversion is still not complete in land 
measurement due to the fact that t he land records of many years are 
being maintained in non-metric local units.   So all related activities are 
being done in non metric units lik e building construction, building 
material like bricks etc.  Another  area where the conversion is not 
complete is body temperature measurement where still degree 
Fahrenheit is used commonly though all temperature measurements in 
industries are done in metric uni ts and scientific and weather 
measurement is also done in metric units    

 38
 
2.29 The Committee find that Government propose to 
delete Section 23 of th e Standards of Weights & 
Measures Act, 1976.  By virtue of deletion of this Section 
the use of non-metric units along with metric units will 
be permissible.  A large num ber of State Governments 
have opposed the ‘omission’ of Section 23 on the plea 
that it will be against the agreement of the country with 
Organisation of International Legal Metrology and 
General Conference on Wei ghts & Measures and would 
take our country 50 years b ack.  It has been further 
stated that it may lead to cheating of consumers also.  
The Committee do not share the contention of the 
Government that the people are still conversant with 
some non-metric units only and the same could be 
permitted in addition to standard units for some more 
time.  The Committee are of the opinion that the 
Standard scales were introduced way back in 1956.  It 
was expected of the Government to undertake an 
extensive campaigning to educate and disseminate the 
information about the use of metric/standard units 
thoughout the country which they failed to do so.  
Permitting the use of non-metr ic units along with metric 
units may not only lead to confusion but also cheat 
consumers in one way or the other.  The Committee are 
also of the view that the use of non-metric units will be 
against the spirit and recommendation of Organisation 
of International Legal Metrology and General 
Conference on Weights & M easures.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that Government should not 
delete this Section as proposed in the amendment Bill. 
 

 39
 
Section 36 - Approval of models 
 
2.30 The Government have proposed  that in section 36 of the 
principal Act:- 
 
(a) in sub-section (1) clauses (a) and (e) shall be omitted 
 
(b) in sub-section (7) after the words “in respect of that 
model”  the words “subject to such terms and 
conditions, including  
the period of its validity, as  may be prescribed” shall be 
inserted. 
 
(c) Sub-section (8) shall be omitted. 
 
2.31 The Committee noted that delet ion of sub-section (8) would 
mean that the approved models need not be published in Official 
Gazette.  A number of State Gove rnments have adversely commented 
upon on this amendment. 
2.32 The State Government of Jammu and Kashmir and the All 
India Legal Metrology Officers' Associ ation, Kolkata ar e of the opinion 
that such amendments will create harassment among the 
manufacturers unnecessarily.  The weights and measures which are in 
use since last 20 to 30 years as per the specifications of the metric 
systems throughout the country; there is no need for model approval.  
If a new item comes, it should r equire model approval and such model 
approval of the new item should be widely publicized for the knowledge 
of the general public.  As such there should no t be any reluctance in 
publishing such model approval certificates in the official gazette which 
is highly essential for the interest of the public. 

 40
When asked as to how amendments in Section 36 will create 
harassments amongst the manufacturers , the representatives of the 
Jammu and Kashmir Government repl ied that by deletion of sub-
section, a manufacturer has to appr oach the Central Government for 
model approval again. 
2.33 The All India Legal Metrology Officers' Association, Kolkata, 
that the models of weights and measures is --- us e since last 50 years 
do not require approval of their model s as they are time tested and 
their efficiency have been ascertained several times.  Models of new 
weights and measures can be c hecked and approved to reflect the 
advancement and technological innovat ions and the certificate of 
approval should contain all the relevant information as required under 
the Acts and Rules.  Every Indian ci tizen has the right as to know 
details of a new model s of weights and measur es country in the 
market.  For a particular W&M one ti me model approval is in the 
interest of consumers as well as manufacture and it should be 
published in the official gazette as well.” 
2.34 The Government of Bihar have partially agreed to the 
 amendments proposed by the Government.  In their view the re-
approval of existing models will cause uncertainty always in a useless 
exercise.  Besides the Gazette publication is proper for general 
awareness confirmation and transparency. 
2.35 During evidence the representat ives of the Eastern Regional 
Legal Metrology Licensees Association further clarified that the power 
of approval of models should be dec entralized.  Every State has its 
own laboratory and controller.  So, t he controller acts as the Assistant 
Director of the Legal Metrology. This controller has its own laboratory, 
lab inspector, assistant controller and deputy controller and so on and 
so forth. They are totally equipp ed and the equipment is supplied by 
the Central Government itself. So , when the Controller of State is 
looking after even so many licence and other activities in a State, then 
why not he has power to give the model approval. 

 41
 
2.36 The Ministry in their repl y stated that model Approval 
certificate are normally useful only for the three stake holders; namely, 
user, manufacturer and the enforcement  agency. Copies of the Model 
approval certificates can be sent to these stake holders immediately on 
its approval by the Government. At present, after approval, it takes 4-6 
months before it gets printed in the gazette and that too at a great cost 
which no body is bearing. To expedite  its receipt, it is proposed to be 
put on the Website of the Department on the same day of the approval 
of the certificate. 
2.37 As per the provisions of t he proposed Bill, the details of 
models are not required to be made officially known. In this context, 
the Committee asked  the difficulties in publishing the certificates of 
approval of models in Official Gaze tte for the information of general 
public and manner in which the Go vernment propose to inform the 
masses about the details of Models approved by them, the Ministry 
stated that there is no  proposal to decline the details of models 
officially. The proposal is to do-away with the notification of the 
certificate in Gazette. Instead it is proposed to be notified on the 
internet and copies made available to stake holders who are mainly the   
enforcement authorities, manufacturers. This procedure will be cost 
effective, and reduce the time for notification by almost 2 months. 
  

 42
 
2.38      The Committee note that as per Section 
 36(8) of the Standards of Weights and Measures 
Act, 1976, every certificate of  approval of a model 
shall be published in the Official Gazette and shall 
also be published in such other manner as the 
Central Government may think fit.  Now the 
Government have proposed to omit the said sub-
section from the parent Act and have  proposed 
that  the certificate of a pproval of models would 
be placed on the website of  the Department.  The 
Government have also stated that the Gazette 
Notification is normally available only to limited 
people due to its low circ ulation.  The Committee 
are not convinced with the plea of the 
Government.  The Committee feel that Gazette 
Notification is an auth entic official document 
unlike information posted on website.  The 
Committee do not approve the proposal of the 
Government and recommend  that the present 
practice of publishing such information on 
Gazette may continue.  However, if the 
Government so desire, they may make available 
the approved certificate, on the website, as well. 

 43
 
NEW PROVISION 
In part IV of the principal Act after chapter V as omitted 
by section 15 the following Chapter shall be inserted 
namely:- 
 
 
VERIFICATION AND STAMPING OF WEIGHTS AND 
MEASURES BY SPECIAL VERIFICATION AGENTS 
   
2.39   A new Chapter has been inserted  to provide for creation of 
Special Verification Agents (SVA).  The SVA will  take up periodical 
verification of sophisticated weighing or measuring instruments like 
flow metres, energy metres etc. which are at present not verified by 
State enforcement authorities due to lack of infrastructure, 
expertise etc Special Speical Ve rification Agents  will augment the 
facilities already existing with Stat es  by making use of testing 
facilities in the non-Governmental  Sector in the country. The 
concept of Special Veri fication Agents is not acceptable to any one 
who have furnished their comments to the Committee.   The 
Ministry have also proposed c onsequential changes in the Act vide 
clause 46-B to 46-G 
2.40 The Government of Mahar ashtra have furnished their 
views/comments as follows:- 
“Section 46 A(d) Specified weighing and measuring 
instrument has been defined under this clause. This definition 
is very vague and there is every possibility that type of 
weighing or measuring instru ment can be changed at the 
sweet will of the Central Adviso ry Board, which in turn will 
defeat the basic purpose enumerated in the preamble for Act. 
The objectives and reasons  given for the Amendment 
prescribes that Special Verification Agents are to be 
appointed for the purpose of Verification of “Sophisticated 
weighing machines or weig hing instruments”. The Term 
“Sophisticated Weighing Mach ine” or Sophisticated 
Measuring Instruments” did find any  place in the act or in the 
Rules. As per Section 19 of the act, weight and measure 
prescribed under the Standards  of Weights and Measures 

 44
(General) Rules, 1987 can only fa ll within the ambit of this 
Act. As such, Special Verifica tion Agency has to undertake 
verification and stamping of  weighing or measuring 
instruments prescribed under these Rules. It is, therefore, felt 
necessary that type of weig hing or measuring instrument 
proposed to be verified and stam ped by Special Verification 
Agency should be clearly mentio ned and there shall be clear-
cut demarcation of type of weighing or measuring instruments 
to be verified by Special Verification Agency and that of other 
weights or measures. 
Moreover, proposed amendment is without Constitutional 
basis. Verification and stampi ng is basically subject under 
State Act. By the proposed ame ndment, Centre has entered 
directly into field of verification i.e. enforcement.  It is 
proposed to entrust verificati on and stamping of specified 
weighing or measuring instru ments to Special Verification 
Agents. These agents will verify and stamp/seal such 
instruments like State enforce ment agency. Provisions in 
respect of Special Verificati on Agents are laid down under 
this Act and rules made thereun der. This means enforcement 
by Central Government and enforcement by Central 
Government  mean duel enforcement control.’ 
 
2.41 The Karnataka Government in their Comments furnished to 
the Committee stated that the proposal of omission of  chapter V of 
Part IV and the introduction of a new chapter (Chapter VI) shows 
that the Central Government is trying to takeaway the work of 
verification of some important weights, measures weighing & 
measuring instruments from t he department of the State and 
entrusting the same to  special verification agents. This is not 
acceptable for the reasons stated below:- 
 
(a) If the verification of the weights and measures 
used in any transaction are entrusted to the special 
verification agents, then the department cannot 
enforce the provisions of the Act on the user of the 
weights and measures. This will lead to cheating of the 
consumers. As there will not be any enforcement from 
the department a lot of weights and measures will 
remain unverified and unstamped. The private agent 
will do the verification of the weights and measures 
which are brought to them vo luntarily by the users. 
They cannot compel the us ers to get the weights and 
measures verified by them. There is every possibility 
that the private agents may not maintain the required 
accuricies in the weight s and measures which may 
lead to short or excess weighment. 

 45
 
(b) If the verification is entrusted to the  special 
agents then the state governm ent will lose substantial 
amount of revenue in the form of verification and 
stamping fees and the legal Metrology department will 
lose its importance. The idea of having special 
verification agent will neither be in the interest of the 
consumer nor in the interest of the Government. 
 
(c) The amendments are ai med at centralising the 
powers with the Director of Legal Metrology, 
Government of India and finally handing over the 
public  welfare organisation to the business groups. 
 
(d) Since there is proposal to introduce the word “ 
prescribed” under the standar ds Act after the words 
weights and measures in Section 24(3) of the 1985 Act 
which means the Director at his will can prescribe any 
type of weight or measure which should be verified by 
the special verification agents thereby under- mining 
the effect of the Legal Metrology department. 
 
 
2.42 Eastern Regional Lega l Metrology Licensees 
Association has inter-alia stated that the appointment of SVA 
will cause a good amount of lo ss of revenue to the state 
exchequer. The SVA will not be able to reach to the extreme 
of remote corner  of the st ate where the existing small 
repairers are working throughout the rural India. Besides 
there will not have any check an d balance for the misuse of 
the function of SVA, but work done by the state authority is 
subject to check and counter check by Senior Officers and 
outside wings like vigilance, CBI etc. 
2.43 The Government of Jammu and Kashmir has 
submitted their views as follows.  
 
 “When there is existing infrastructure in all the 
states for enforcement of weights and measures law, 
there is no necessity for introducing a special 
verification agency for the purpose.  Moreover the 
type of weights and measures to be verified by the 
special agencies has not been clearly mentioned in 

 46
the amendment. Rather the authority has tried to 
centralize the power on him alone to prescribe the 
weights and measures to be verified by the special 
agency. Such an idea of c entralizing the power is 
dangerous in a democratic country like India. These 
special agencies will collect  more charges from the 
traders for verification which will ultimately affect the 
consumer. 
 
 Rather it is sugges ted that the available 
infrastructures in the St ate should be strengthened in 
order to add new items und er verifications and 
stamping. Such amendment s are also against the 
recommendations of OIML and perhaps nowhere in 
the world these type of concept and existence.” 
2.44 The Indian Institute of Legal  Metrology, Ranchi in their 
comments stated that when their ex isting intra-structure in all 
the state for enforcement of weights and measures law (legal 
metrology), there is no necessary for introducing a special 
verification agency for the above purpose. The purpose of 
consumer protection in public in terest may be fulfilled with 
the help of state enforcement rather then centralizing the 
power. 
2.45 In response to the aforesaid comments the 
Department of Consumers Affairs submitted as under:- 
 
“The Weights and Measures Act require verification of 
all weighing or measur ing instruments. The 
infrastructure created in the State is meant only for 
verification of basic instruments like weight or 
measure like weights, capacity measures, length 
measure. Even in their verification, they lack 
credibility. With the str engthening of our country’s 
economy, trade and industry has started using new 
sophisticated measuring inst ruments. It is necessary 
to regulate them in the interest of consumers. There is 
neither infra-structure avai lable for this purpose with 
states nor any possibility of creating such facility with 
them in the near future due to inadequacy of funds, 
etc.   
 

 47
The Special Verification Agent system proposed 
would take care of this wit hout the involvement of any 
Govt finance and at the same  time provide third party 
verification of instruments like energy meter, water 
meter, telephone meters, Pe troleum flow meters, 
glucometer, etc simult aneously.  The proposed 
legislation has enough safe  guards to ensure proper 
supervision and control of the SVA so created.  
 
The operation of such system is prevalent in many 
other countries providing protection to consumers. 
OIML has also recommended the creation of such 
system. 
 
2.46 The Committee have noted  that affixing seal, stamping and 
verification of Weights and Meas ures instruments is a sacred 
sovereign functions of a State like minting of coins and printing of 
currency notes. Such functions should not be parted with by any one 
and especially a private agency.  In this regard the Committee 
wanted views of Government. 
2.47 The Committee was informed t hat the verification carried out 
under the Weights and Measures Acts is a third party certification. 
So it can be done by any authorized agents. 
2.48 When pointed out verification and stamping is basically 
subject under state Act. By the proposed amendment, the Central 
Government has entered directly the filed of verification i.e. 
Enforcement. Thus there will be enf orcement both by Central and 
State Governments. The Ministry responded that  the Enforcement 
of Weights and Measures is now  under the Concurrent List. 
However there is no proposal under consideration for the Central 
Government to take enforcement. 
2.49 To a query as to whom SVA will be accountable and who will 
exercise control and monitor SVA, the Ministry stated that the details 
of regulation of SVA shall be prescribed under Rules.  
2.50 It has been noted that Special Agents will work for profit and 
will not visit for flung areas to ve rify the Weights and Measures 
Instruments brought to them by user s voluntarily. This will lead to 

 48
cheating of consumers as a good number of Weights and Measures 
instruments would remain unv erified and unstamped. The 
Committee asked about the reac tion of the Government and 
corrective steps taken in the matter, the Ministry stated that 
responsibility of getting the instrument verified rests with the user.  
So they will get the weighing or measuring instrument verified from 
the authorized agency. 
2.51 Asked as to how Government  will ensure that the private 
agents maintain the required accuraci es verifying  in the Weights 
and  Measures instrument s, the Ministry stated that the working of 
SVA will be monitored under the provisions of the Rules. 
2.52 There is a hierarchy of  standards namely National, 
Reference, Secondary and Workings Standards.   With the coming 
up of SVA, this chain will be br oken at working Standards level. 
Further no mechanism exists in t he Bill to check the Standards of 
SVA. In this context the Committee desired the reaction of the 
Government.  The Committee was informed that under the National 
Accreditation Board of Laboratories (NABL) scheme, many 
laboratories are accredited for carrying out third party calibration and 
these accredited laboratories are to maintain standards traceable to 
National Standards.  So this facilit y is proposed to be utilized for 
SVA. 
2.53 It has been proposed that SVA will undertake verification 
and stamping of Weight s and Measures instruments of only the 
“Sophisticated Instruments. Ask ed whether such sophisticated 
instruments defined any where in t he Act, the Ministry replied that 
the “sophisticated instruments” has not been defined as yet. These 
are instruments where higher degrees of tec hnical knowledge is 
required for their proper verification. As per the proposal the powers 
to prescribe instruments to be taken up for verification by SVAs shall 
rest with the Central Government. 

 49
2.54 The Committee note that a new Chapter has been 
proposed to be inserted in the Standards of Weights and 
Measures Act, 1976 to provide for creation of Special 
Verification Agency (SVA) for the verification of 
specified Weights and Measur es Instruments by Central 
Government.  The Committee note that almost all the 
State Governments have objected to the introduction of 
concept of SVA on the grounds  that: (i) Verification is 
the sovereign function of th e State and should not be 
outsourced; (ii) The SVA will  not visit the far-flung areas 
to verify the Weights and Measures Instrument and may 
work for profit only in ur ban areas; (iii) Only those 
instruments will be verified and stamped which will be 
brought before SVA for verification. (iv) The existing 
infrastructure available in the States will go waste.   The 
Committee have reasons to believe that the Special 
Verification Agency may not be able to maintain the 
required accuracy in mainta ining the verification of 
Weights and Measures.  There is also likelihood of loss 
of revenue to State Government in the aftermath of 
introduction of SVA.  Further, the details of specified 
instrument to be verified have not been defined in the 
Act.  The appointment of service agents on sub-contract 
basis to undertake verification can not also be ruled out. 

 50
In addition there is no agency  to oversee the work of 
special verification agencies.  The Committee, therefore, 
feel that the concept of Sp ecial Verification Agency for 
verification of Weights and Measures Instruments need 
not be introduced at all and whole Chapter VI should be 
dropped. The Committee desire that instead Union 
Government should upgrade and strengthen the 
existing facilities of stampi ng and verification available 
with the State Governments. 
 
 
 

 51
2.55 If the State Government has not been able to 
provide the necessary infrastructure for implementation 
of Standards of Weights & Measures Act, 1976, the 
Committee fail to understa nd how the Department 
expects the private agency to arrange the required 
infrastructure immediately on passage of the Bill.  The 
Committee feel that the trust of the Department on 
private agency is totally misplaced and not based on 
any facts.  Secondly, while  the staff of the State 
Governments will be rendered useless, the Central 
Government will be creating another cadre of Inspectors 
to verify the work of SVAs under clause 46-G of the 
Weights & Measures (Amendment) Bill, 2005. 
 
 
 

 52
CHAPTER III 
 
The Standards of Weights and Measures (Enforcement) 
Amendment Bill, 2005 
 
Section – 5  Appointment of Controllers, Inspectors and 
other officers and staff 
 
3.1 According to Section 5 of the Standards of Weights 
and 
Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985 the State Government 
may, by notification, appoint a Controller of Legal Metrology 
for the State and as many A dditional, Joint, Deputy or 
Assistant Controllers, Inspectors, and other officers and staff 
as may be necessary for exercising the powers, and 
efficiently discharging the dutie s, conferred or imposed on 
them by or under this Act or the Standards Act. 
 
3.2 The Government hav e proposed the following 
amendments Section 5:- 
 
“(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely:- 
(1A) The Central Government may, by notification, 
prescribe the qualifications  for being appointed as 
the Additional, Joint, Deputy and Assistant 
Controllers and the Inspectors under sub-section 
(1)” 
 
(b) in sub-section (4), the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
 
Provided that the Controller shall exercise his 
powers and discharge the duties of his office subject 
to such general or special directions, as the Director 
may, from time to time, give and such directions 
shall be binding on the Controller”. 
 
3.3 In their comments furnis hed to the Committee, the 
Government of Karnataka stated as under:- 
“So far as the post of Controller of Legal Metrology is 
concerned, it is filled up eit her by an IAS Officer or a KAS 
(Senior Scale Officer) with sufficient experience and 
seniority.  They have the re quired administrative, legal 

 53
experience in dealing wit h the subject matter of the Act.  So 
far as other than the Controller,  other staff, including KAS 
are concerned, they are State Government Servants.  They 
are covered by Article 309 of the Constitution read with entry 
41 of the list-2 (State list) of seventh schedule to the 
constitution.  It would be difficult for any State Government to 
make compromise with regard to the power of State 
Legislature, as State Legislat ure has exclusive power to 
make law on the subject.  Even  the Parliament may not like 
to usurp the power of the St ate Legislature in making the 
proposed amendments to Section 5 and 72 in this regard.  
The question would be debatable,  whether by an enactment 
the constitutional scheme could be altered in view of the 
decisions of the Supreme Court in A/R 1967 se 944 (1979) 3 
sec 165, A/R 1957 Se 628(633), A/R 1960 Se 1, A/R 1977 
Se 1825, so far as subordinat e legislation is concerned.  
Actually Rule 20 of the present  Rules of the Standards of 
Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Rules 1988 are under 
challenge and they are being disputed an account of 
Supreme Court decision in A/R 1976 Se 1031 and A/R 1989 
Se 1982.  Keeping the above l egal position in view, the 
following suggestion is made:- 
 
(a) The State Government has already prescribed 
qualification for the Inspector under Rule 20 of the Karnataka 
Standards of Weights & Meas ures (Enforcement) Rues 
1988.The qualification for the post of Additional Controller, 
Deputy Controller and Assist ant Controller including 
Inspector will be incorporated in the C & R Rules of the 
Department.  Hence there is no necessity of incorporating 
this sub-section under the se ction 5 of the Standards of 
Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act 1985. 
 
(b) This amendment has been prescribed with the 
intention to usurp the powers of the State Government to 
make the rules by the centra l government. The subject of 
weights & measures is incorpor ated in the concurrent list of 
the constitution whereby both the Central and the State 
Government are empowered to make the rules. The Central 
Government has already enacted the Karnataka  
Standards of Weights & Measures  (Enforcement)  Act 1985 
and the S.G. has framed t he Karnataka Karnataka 
Standards of Weights & Measur es (Enforcement)  Rules 
1988 by simply adopting the draft rules circulated by the 
central Government. This was done to have uniformity in the 
enforcement of the Act and Rules throughout the country. 
 

 54
(c) Further there is a provis ions under the Section 72(1) 
of the enforcement Act 1985 that  the State Government has 
to consult the Central Government before making any rules 
to carryout the provisions of th e said Act. This provision is 
also made to have uniformity in the enforcement of the 
weights & measures Act and the Rules throughout the 
Country. 
 
(d) With the above condition of consulting the Central 
Government, the powers of framing the rules may be 
continued with the State Government instead of taking those 
powers by the Central Government. This is against to the 
principles of the de-centra lisation of the powers as 
envisaged by the Central Government. 
 
(e) In some circumstances the State Government have to 
make little changes in the enfor cement rules to make them 
suitable to the local conditions of the state like provisions 
relating to the period of verification of a particular type of 
weighing or measuring instru ments which are extensively 
used in any region of the state.  For this purpose the rules 
making powers should remain with the state governments 
rather than the central government. Hence the proposed 
amendment is not acceptable. 
 
3.4       This provision is not required to be incorporated in 
the Act for the following reasons: 
 
 The Controller of Legal Me trology is appointed under 
Section 5(1) of the Standards of Weights & Measures 
(Enforcement) Act 1985 to enforce the provisions of the said 
Act. The Controllers appointed in the states are usually of 
the rank of IAS, I PS or State Administrative services. They 
have the required knowledge an d experience to carryout the 
duties confirmed on them by  the Act. There is no 
requirement of any directions from the director The Director 
may issue clarifications whenever they are sought by the 
state controllers.” 
 
3.5 The Government of Ori ssa, however, desired that 
Section 5(4) may not be inserted.   Since the Controller are 
appointed by the State Governm ent and they are under the 
administrative control of the St ate Government, the specific 
duties of the Controller under the Director is not feasible.  

 55
Besides, the Controllers of the State Government are at par 
with or above the Directors in the Ministry. 
3.6 In this regard, the Go vernment of West Bengal 
forwarded their comments as under:- 
“1) The new sub section 1( a) may be inserted in 
section 5 provided following words are incorporated 
“in consultation with the state govt.”  This is necessary 
in view of the fact that  enforcement officials are 
appointed by the respective state govt. 
 
2) The new proviso to s ub-section 4 of section 5 
 Would put the State Contro ller subjected to general 
or special direction of t he Director of Legal Metrology, 
Govt of India.  State Cont rollers being the State level 
officers are under the State Service Rules and 
Regulations.  Putting him under the direction of the 
Director of Legal Metrology, Govt. of India would 
mean placing him under t he two heads, will create 
administrative and legal pr oblems which is bound to 
have effect on the adminis tration of Weights and 
Measures law in the State.   It is therefore proposed 
that such amendment shoul d be scrapped.  Fact 
remains that Central guidel ines coming from the 
Director of Legal Metrology, Govt. of India is being 
respected always.  Pro posed amendment would 
unsettle the settle thing i.e. time honoured co-
operation and co-ordination between Central and 
State in respect of admin stration of Weights and 
Measures.” 
 
3.7 According to Shri K. V enketeshwarulu the proviso (b) 
in sub section 5 proposed to be included is impracticable, 
unenforceable, as the Controll er is appoint ee of State 
Government and he takes directions only from State 
Government but not from the Director Weights and 
Measures as proposed in the law.  When the order of the 
day is to decentralise the pow ers, the amendment proposed 
concentrates power and authority in a person far away from 
the people, overriding the democratically elected 

 56
Government of the State.  Inst ead the directions if any may 
be issued to the State Government, which in turn direct the 
Enforcing Officials including Cont roller of Legal Metrology to 
enforce the law in letter and spirit. 
3.8 The Government of Kerala have the objection if 
Section (1A) is inserted in Sect ion 5 due to the reasons that 
the Controller is appointed by  the State Government and 
bound to follow the directions of that Government.  
According to the amendment, the Controller has to follow the 
directions of Director.  Such dual control will create crisis in 
the administration and enforcement. 
 3.9 The Government of Jammu and Kashmir and All India 
Legal Metrology Officers’ Association, Kolkata are of the 
view that almost in all the States, the weights and measures 
organisation is headed by the officers in the cadre of 
Commissioner/Secretary/Additional Secretary/Joint 
Secretaries, who are above the rank of Director Legal 
Metrology.  Such modification may cause insubordination in 
exercising the powers.  There is already provision that all the 
rules required to be made by the State Government should 
be done in consultation with th e Central Government.  So, 
the question of non-uniformity in the rules does not arise if 
the Central Government renders similar consultancy to all 
the States.  It is ridiculous to make a law that the State 
authorities shall exercise pow ers under the superintendence 
of the central authority.  Ra ther both the authorities should 
exercise powers as per the provisions of the law. 

 57
3.10 Asked as to how the modification will cause 
insubordination in exercising the powers, the AILMOA, 
Kolkata informed the Committee t hat definitely the Controller 
will have no alternative and discretion but shall have to act 
as per the wishes of the Direc tor of Legal Metrology of the 
Central Government.  Most of the Controllers are very senior 
officials (Finance commissioner – in J & K, I.G. Rank police 
officer in Andhra Pradesh, etc.) than the Director working 
under him will be an act of insubordination. 
3.11 The Arunachal Pradesh Gove rnment stated that after 
the word “Inspectors”, the words “and other officers and 
staff” may be inserted.  In fac t, in some State, the concerned 
officials verifying the working standards sets in respective 
Secondary Standard Laboratory are designated as Technical 
Assistant, Scientific Asstt. and as so. A new provision 
specifying equal structural pattern  in respect of 
organization set-up including spec ification of duty uniform, 
status of officers etc. and ot her enforcement activities may 
be included. 
3.12 In view of the Government of Maharashtra provision 
regarding “making compliance of directions of Director 
binding on Controller of Legal Me trology and such directions 
shall be binding on Controller”, th is provision is in excess of 
the powers.  It ultimately, becomes mandatory on Controller 
to comply with the directions of the Director of Legal 
Metrology; further mentioning  of such a binding is 
duplication.  Hence, such duplication shall be omitted. 
3.13 Asked as to how there will be excess of powers on 
the post of Director if the orders passed by him are binding 
and mandatory on Controller of Legal  Metrology, the 
Government of Maharashtra in this post evidence replies 
that  all powers in respect of  both the Acts are vested with 

 58
Director of Legal Metrology.  This is centralization of powers. 
In fact Central Government can be a nodal authority and can 
issue overall guidance.  Pe rsonnel in Legal Metrology 
Organization functions under direct supervision and control 
of the controller. It is, therefor e, essential that policy matters 
relating to Standardization of  weights and measures and 
regularization of Packaged Commodities Rules shall be dealt 
with by Director of Legal Me trology and the remaining 
functions needs to be dealt with by the controller of Legal 
Metrology of the State.   
3.14 The Union Territory Administration of Chandigarh 
have furnished the following comments to the Committee:- 
“While the qualifications of Inspectors are already 
prescribed under the St andards of Weights & 
Measures (Enforcement) Ru les that of any other 
officers have not been prescribed. 
 
Now with this amendment q ualifications of Joint 
Controller, Deputy Controller, Assistant Controller and 
Inspectors are proposed to be prescribed by the 
Central Government by notification but the 
qualification of t he Controller who is supposed to 
Control whole of the Stat e has not been proposed to 
be prescribed. 
It may be noted that with the Advancement in 
International trade practi ces and development of 
Technology in the field of Legal Metrology, the job of 
all the enforcement offici al/officers demands highly 
technical qualified persons  so as to understand the 
working of the sophisticat ed weighing and measuring 
instruments/systems.  Under  these circumstances for 
proper protection of Consum er interest.  The person 
appointed as Controller should  be able to understand 
the Technology of the weighing/measuring systems 
being used so that he could guide his Juniors 
properly, who are supposed to work under his 
superintendance and direction and control as per Sec. 
5(4) of the Principal Act. 
 
Keeping in view the above requirements, the 
qualification of the Cont roller should also be 

 59
prescribed by the Central Government alongwith the 
qualifications of other enforcement officers/official.” 
 
3.15 The Government of Goa stated that State 
Government has prescribed the qualification of Controller, 
Assistant Controller, published  vide Official Gazette dated 
16th May, 1991, Sl. No. 7, and for Inspector, vide Official 
Gazette dated 26 th August, 1983, Serial No. 21.  The 
qualification of Inspector is also incorporated under Rule 20 
of Standards of Weights and Measures (Enforcement) 
Rules, 1987.  The qualific ation of the Controller and 
Assistant Controller can be inco rporated in the State Rule. 
However, this amendment is agreeable provided it protects 
the existing Additional, Joint, Deputy and Assistant 
Controller, regarding the service matter and promotion etc. 
  At present the Controller is furnishing all information 
as per the directions of the Dir ector, whenever it is required 
by him.  The Controller is appointed under Section 5(1) of 
the Standards of Weights and M easures (Enforcement) Act, 
1985 I to enforce the provisions of the said Act.  This 
appointed Controller have experi ence and knowledge in the 
overall working of the Department of Legal Metrology. 
Therefore, it is not agreeable to incorporate this provision. 
3.16 The amendment in Section 5 is acceptable to the 
Government of Gujarat provided compulsory basic training 
course of IILM, Ranchi must be passed successfully. 
3.17 The Government of Raja sthan suggested that Section 
5 (4) should remain as it is and the proposed provision is 
inappropriate.  The work of the Controller, legal Metrology is 
done as per the direction of the State Government.  The 
Controller acts according to the economic condition, 
manpower, maintenance of laboratories and the purchase of 
new equipments, et c and budget situati on of the State 

 60
Government. At present it has been provided in the proviso 
of 5 (4) that the Controller shal l work as per guideline of the 
Director which would be binding on them.  It is also likely to 
increase the problems of the controller. 
  
3.18 While responding to the above suggestions of the 
individual and State Governments, the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs stated that it will lead to non-uniformity in the 
qualification of persons working in enforcement activities as 
it exists today. Moreover sk ill levels of the employees 
required to be raised. 
 
3.19 The subject of Weights and Measures is highly 
technical in nature. Normally long experience and expertise 
is required to ensure proper implementation of the provisions 
of the laws. Under section 28(7)  of the existing Standards of 
Weights and Measures Act 1976  all enforcement authorities 
are functioning under the superintendence and guidance of 
Director Legal Metrology. The la ck of similar provision under 
the Enforcement Act has lead to  impediments in the growth 
of industries and trade in the country due to non-uniformity in 
implementation. Even the provisions of the Acts and Rules 
are interpreted in different li nes leading to strangulation of 
the industries. So for economic development in a transparent 
manner it is absolutely necessary to ensure functioning 
under the guidelines of a single technical authority. 
3.20 In the absence of such  binding, the enforcement 
authorities do not comply with the guidelines issued and 
trade and industry is put to great difficulties and they have to 
run State to State to solve their problems.  

 61
3.21 It has been stated that t he Central Government may 
prescribe qualification for A dditional Controller, Joint 
Controllers, Assistant Controllers and Inspector and not 
appoint them.  Asked as to what prevented the Central 
Government to prescribe qu alification for the post of 
Controller, which is most needed as Controller need to 
possess technical qua lification and only than can guide and 
supervise the work and supervise the work of his 
subordinates, the Ministry stated that the post of controller is 
of administrative in nature and ar e filled in most of the State 
from Revenue Service. It may be desirable to have scientific 
qualification for the post of Controller also. 
3.22 It has brought to the not ice of the Committee that 
there may be insubordination a nd the amount to excising 
excising excessive power etc.  and is also be against the 
Principal of decentralization if the present amendment in 
Section 5 is allowed to be passed.  In this context the 
Committee enquired       as to  why the Central Government 
issue directions to  State Government functionary which is 
against federal principle of Consti tution, the Ministry stated   
the weights and measures laws and their implementation is 
highly technical and hence it is necessary to issue guidelines 
from the Central Government for uniform and proper 
implementation. 

 62
3.23  The Committee note that  a new section (IA) is 
proposed to be inserted in Section 5 of Weights & 
Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985 according to which 
the Central Government has been authorised to 
prescribe qualifications for the posts of Additional, 
Joint, Deputy and Assistant Controllers and the 
Inspectors.  
  A proviso is also proposed to be added to sub-
section 4 whereby the orders of the Director shall be 
binding on the Controller of the State Legal Metrology 
Department.  
   The aforesaid amendments are not acceptable to 
the State Government due to various reasons.  The 
Committee note that at present recruitment to the posts 
mentioned in Clause (IA) is  made by respective State 
Governments and as such the qualifications for these 
posts are also laid down by them.  A number of State 
Governments have informed the Committee that 
appointment of these officers is covered by Article 309 
of the Constitution read with Entry 41 of List 2 of 
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.  As such, it would 
amount to compromising the powers of State 
Legislature which no State Government would like to do.   
 
Similarly, the Controller who is appointed by the 
State Government is bound to follow the direction of 
that Government.  The Committee feel that such 
amendments may cause insubordination in exercising 
the powers by various officers in the field of Legal 
Metrology.  The Committee ar e aware of the fact that 
most of the Controllers are very senior officials from IAS 
& IPS and have the better knowledge and 

 63
experience of the working of  the State Department of 
Legal Metrology.  As such, asking them to follow the 
direction of a Director of  the Union Government which 
may not have any knowledge about the ground realities 
in various States would be totally unjustified.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the proposed 
amendment to Section 5 of the Act should be dropped 
and status-quo should be maintained. 
 
 
 
 

 64
 
Section 24- Verification and stamping of weights or 
measures.- 
 
 
3.24 This Section provides t hat every weight or measure 
referred to in sub-section (1) shall be re-verified at such 
periodical intervals as may be prescribed except the weight 
or measure which is used exclusively for domestic purposes. 
3.25 The Government have propos e that in section 24 of 
the principal Act,- 
(a) in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
“ provided that the verifi cation  of the weight or 
measure as prescribed under the Standards Act, shall 
be made by the special ve rification agents under the 
Act. 
(b) in sub-section (2)  for the words “ as may be 
prescribed, the following shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
    “ as prescribed under the Standards Act: 
 
Provided that re-verificat ion, of such weight or 
measure verified by the special verification agents 
under the standards Act, may be made by the agents 
at such periodical interval s as prescribed under that 
Act.” 
 
(c) in sub-section (3) for the proviso, the following 
provisos shall be substituted, namely:- 
 
“provided that in respect of the weight or measure, as 
may be prescribed, the Inspector shall take steps for 
the verification of such weight or measure at the place 
of its location provided further that the verification of 
such weight or measure, as prescribed under the 
Standards Act, shall be made by the special 
verification agents under the Act:. 
 
(d) sub-section (4), (5) and (6) shall be omitted. 
 

 65
3.26 In this regard the Gove rnment of Karnataka has 
furnished their comments/views as under:- 
“The Inspectors and the other officers of the 
department of Legal Metr ology are authorised 
under the Act to undertake the verification of 
the weights & measures used in any 
transaction, industrial production or protection. 
 
Penal provision has been incorporated under 
the Act for the use of un-verified weight or 
measure. This provision is made to ensure 
correct weighment and measurement in the 
transactions and to prevent any mal-practices 
or cheating. This prov ision has to be enforced 
by the departmental officers. If the verification 
of the weights and measures used in any 
transaction are entrusted to the special 
verification agents, then the department cannot 
enforce the provisions of the Act on users of 
the weights and measures. This will lead to 
cheating of the consumers. As there will not be 
any enforcement from the department a lot of 
weights and measures will remain unverified 
and unstamped. The privat e agent will do the 
verification of the weig hts and measures which 
are brought to them voluntarily by the users. 
They cannot compel the users to get the 
weights and measures verified by them. There 
are possibilities that the private agents may not 
maintain the required accuracies in the weights 
and measures which may lead to short or 
excess weighment. 
 
3.27 If the verification is entrus ted to a special agent then 
the state government will loose substantial amount of 
revenue in the form of verification and stamping fees and the 
legal Metrology department will loose the importance. The 
idea of having special verifica tion agent will neither be in the 
interest of the consumer nor in the interest of the 
Government.  The amendments are aimed at centralising the 
powers with the Director of Legal Metrology, Government of 
India and finally handing over the public  welfare 

 66
organisation to the business groups.  Hence this proposal is 
not acceptable.” 
3.28 The All India Legal Metr ology Officers Association, 
Kolkata has submitted their view as under: 
 
Section 24(2) & 24(3) :-  “Since implementation 
of the provisions of s pecial agencies is highly 
derogative as explained in  the Section 46(a) to 
46(i), there is no need for amendment to this 
section.  Total objection against the 
introduction of Special Verification Agency.  
Modernisation and specialization of the State 
present setup can easily replace the very 
concept of Special Verification Agency. 
 
Section 24(1) and 25(2):  It contradicts: 
Exploiting and denigrating the status of State 
Government Machinery by Special Verification 
Agency is favoured in the proposed 
amendment.  Perhaps this is the first of its kind 
in Law making process of  the Country that a 
non-statutory body like Special Verification 
Agency is given a statutory status.”  
 
3.29 The Government Madhya Pradesh stated that in 
Section 24(I) some exemptions  should be made in special 
circumstances where the item is  used for internal processes 
in industrial production. 
 
3.30 As per the Memorandum of Grahak Panchyat, Latur, 
“Section 24(1) Proviso added in the amendment bill 2005 be 
deleted as the special verifica tion agents would be a type of 
private contractor of weight an d measure.  He would work in 
area where he will get maximum benefit and profit.  He 
would not work where profit is less or minimum and such 
work would have to be taken by department of Legal 
Metrology officials.   
 

 67
3.31 The Government of Kerala have objection if the new 
system of verification is done by SVA due to the following 
reasons:- 
“The introduction of special verification agents for 
verification and stamping of weights and measures 
will result in idling of the multi crores invested 
infrastructure and system of the States.  The existing 
system of verification and stamping by Government 
Departments will be more reliable than the proposed 
special verification agen cy which will be a private 
agency.  It is also against the principle of 
decentralisation.  If at all a special verification agency 
is introduced, the following suggestions may be 
considered:- 
All weights and measures  now being verified 
and stamped by the State Government shall be 
excluded from the purview of Special Verification 
Agency.” 
 
3.32 The Consumer Coordi nation Council stated that 
Special Verification Agencies (SVA’s) are required to work in 
special areas to be notified by the Government and they are 
required to have necessary infrastructure.  The functioning of 
SVA’s may induce an element of  competition with the State 
Enforcement Agencies and may result in up-gradation of 
their infrastructure, training, transparency efficiency in output 
etc.  For uniform regulation & implementation, it is desirable 
that Special Verification Agents are appointed by the Central 
Government. Detailed procedures  for regulating the Special 
Verification Agency have to be worked out in the Rules. 
3.33 The Government of West Bengal wants that the 
amendment of Section 24 of the Act should be scrapped 
because of the fact that we  have objection against the 
introduction of special verifi cation Agents under a licencing 
system.  Such objections hav e been noted in our comments 
upon the proposed amendment of Standards of Weights and 
Measures Act, 1976. 

 68
3.34 The Government of J harkhand in their Memorandum 
furnished to the Committee ha s stated that the proposed 
Amendment Bill is not worth to be considered in the interest 
of the State and the public bec ause the present amendment 
proposes to entrust some of the works related to the 
verification, stamping and inspec tion of weighing machines 
by Enforcement   Officers of the State while some of the said 
works are to be entrusted to s pecial agencies. There is a 
proposal to collect verification and stamping fees by 
enforcement officers of state and special agencies. It  has 
also been provided that special agencies  will deposit 7% 
(seven per cent) of the total revenue thus collected in the 
State’s Exchequer. At present, enforcement officers of the 
State Government are collect ing Rs. 3,00,00,000.00 (Rs. 
three crores) as verification and stamping fees and 
approximately one and half core is being spent as 
establishment expenses of enfor cement officers. If special 
agencies are assigned to verify and stamping weight and 
measures and to collect fees  for the same then State 
Government will receive only  21 lakh of rupees while 
establishment cost will   be Rupees one and half crore. 
Though Enforcement Officers ap pointed and trained and are 
subject to code   of conduct m eant for Government officials, 
special agencies are not subject to   any condition  and no 
qualifications have been fixed for them , consequently the 
accuracy and validity fo the work disposed of by them is 
always under doubt. Hence, pr oposed amendment is not in 
the public interest. 
  

 69
3.35 The Government of Rajast han is of view the proviso 
to section 24 (a) should be dele ted due to the reasons that 
Special Verification Agency should not be given power of 
verification, rather they should be assigned the work of 
maintenance  and repairing only.   The verified equipments 
should bear the seal of State Government only. Even under 
the existing arrangements, the repairers do the job of 
repairing as per the laid down norms and standards and 
send the same to the author ized officer of the State 
Government for verification.  He nce, there is no justification 
in handing over the verification work to any private agency. 
3.36 The Government of Punj ab stated that amending the 
power of the inspection of t he Inspector, as well as, the 
Assistant Controller, Deputy Co ntroller, even the Controller 
of the State is bound to give a free hand to the ‘Special 
Verification Agent’, which is likely to lead to malpractice.  In 
this case, transparency and accountability in verification of 
weights and measures by the ‘Special Verification Agent’, 
will be questionable, thus compromising the consumers 
interest.  In addition, the Inspector, Assistant Controller, 
Deputy Controller or even Cont roller of the State will be 
handicapped even to look into the specific local complaints 
against instrument verified by the ‘Special Verification 
Agent’, even though one may not conduct re-verification  of 
weight and measure.   
3.37 The Department of Consum er Affairs in their reply 
stated as under:- 
“As the policy proposed is to entrust the 
verification of those spec ified weighing or measuring 
instrument to SVA where th e infra-structure is not 
available with the existing enforcement machinery, it 
is not desirable to permit the enforcement agencies to  

 70
again check those instruments in the name of 
inspection. On the one ha nd they do not have any 
infra structure for the che cking of such instruments 
and at the same time, it will put the industries to the 
same situation from where they are being salvaged. 
 
The Weights and Measures Act require 
verification of all weighing or measuring instruments. 
The infra-structure created in  the State is meant only 
for verification of basic instruments like weight or 
measure like weights, capacity measures, length 
measure. Even in their verification, they lack 
credibility. With the str engthening of our country’s 
economy, trade and industry has started using new 
sophisticated measuring inst ruments. It is necessary 
to regulate them in the interest of consumers. There is 
neither infra-structure avai lable for this purpose with 
states nor any possibility of creating such facility with 
them in the near future due to inadequacy of funds, 
etc”.   
 
The Special Verification Agent system 
proposed would take care of this without the 
involvement of any Govt finance and at the same time 
provide third party verification of instruments like 
energy meter, water meter, telephone meters, 
Petroleum flow meters, glucometer, etc.  The 
proposed legislation has enough safe guards to 
ensure proper supervision an d control of the SVA so 
created. The operation of such  system is prevalent in 
many other countries providing protection to 
consumers. The weights and measures to be verified 
by the SVA shall be pre scribed under Rules made 
under the provisions of the Standards Act.”                
        
3.38 On being suggested that States /UTs should 
be assisted in creation of infrastructure, instead of 
usurping their powers to enfor ce the rules of Weights 
and Measures Laws, the Ministry stated that the 
States were advised to create infra-structure for 
verification of weights and measures.  But no such 
facility is seen in the field. The main reason appears 
to be low priority given for weights and measures 
subject.  

 71
3.39 The Committee note th at in Section 24 a 
proviso is to be inserted making it mandatory to 
verify or reverify the Weights & Measure by 
Special Verification Agent in  periodical intervals 
as prescribed under the Act. The Committee 
further note that proviso to Sub-Section 3 of 
Section 24, a new proviso is to be substituted 
stating that the Central Government shall specify 
the weight or measures whic h shall be verified by 
the Inspector or by Special Verification agents.  
Hence, leading to ambiguity in the powers of 
Inspector and Special Ve rification agents.  The 
State Government have objected to this Clause on 
the ground that if the verification of the Weights & 
Measures are entrusted to Special Verification 
agents, than the Department cannot enforce the 
provisions of the Act on users of weight an 
measures.  It has  also been  suggested by the 
State Government that Special Verification agents 
should not be given power to verify rather they 
should be given the work of maintenance and 
repair only.  The Committee are not convinced 
with the plea of the Government that they have 
proposed the amendment to ensure proper 
supervision and control of the SVA. The 
Committee feel that there is no need to adopt the 
concept of Special Verification Agency as has 
already been explained in the earlier Chapter. 
Accordingly, the Committee desire that 
amendments proposed in Sections 24 and 25 of 
the principal act should be dropped.  
 

 72
 
3.40 The Department of Consumer Affairs have 
stated that there is neither infrastructure available 
in the States nor there is any possibility of 
creating such facilities with them in the near 
future due to inadequacy of funds.  The 
Committee do not concur with the views of the 
Government and desire that the Government 
should strengthen the infrastructure available 
with the States and the proposed amendments 
should be dropped. 
  

 73
  
 
27. Power to inspect.-  
3.41   Section 27 (1) provides that an Inspector may, within 
the local limits of his jurisdic tion, inspect land test, at all 
reasonable times, any weight or measure which- 
(i) is in the possession, cu stody or control of any 
person, or  
(ii) is in or on any premises,  
in such circumstances as to indicate that such 
weight or measure is being, or is intended or likely to 
be, used in any transaction or for industrial production 
or for protection, and may also verify whether such 
weight or measure is in conformity with the standards 
established by or under the Standards Act. 
 
(2) For the purpose of ascertaining the 
correctness of any weight or measure used in any 
transaction, an Inspector may also test the weight or 
measure of the article sold or delivered to any person 
in the course of such transaction. 
 
The Government have proposed that in section 
27 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (1) the following 
proviso shall be inserted namely:- 
 
“Provided that in the case of weight or measure 
verified and stamped by the special verification 
agents under the Standards Act, the Inspector may 
inspect only genuineness of such stamping” 
 
3.42 The Government of Karnat aka in their Memorandum 
stated as under:- 
“In the proposed amendment the Inspector of 
Legal Metrology is restrained from inspecting the 
weights and measures verified by the special 
verification agents. For the purpose of determining the 
accuracy of the  weight or measures the Inspectors 
should be given powers to test the weights & 
measures where as in the proposed amendment the  

 74
 
Inspector is given power to inspect only the geuniness 
of the stamping. This pr oposed amendment will go 
against to the interest of the consumers. Even if there 
are errors in the weights and measures, the Inspector 
cannot take action against verification agent or  the 
users of such weight or measure. 
 
If Such an amendment is made the department 
will become a  helpless spectator to the malpractice’s, 
resorted to by the trading community. Hence this 
amendment is not acceptable”. 
 
3.43 The Government of Andhra Pradesh vide their 
Memorandum stated that this clause does not allow the 
Inspector of the Legal Metrology Department to check the 
accuracy of the weight, measure, in the presence of a 
Consumer. This acts as the biggest impediment to the 
consumer protection. Therefore, there must be a provision to 
check the accuracy of the weight  or measure in the 
presence of a Consumer. 
 
To substantiate the above point the deliveries in a 
Petrol Pump can be taken as an example. When the 
consumer has any doubt about  the deliveries he can 
demand checking of petrol pumps with the Calibrated Can 
available with the dealer. But, in  practice the consumer is 
unable to assert his right as the dealer does not allow the 
consumer to avail this facility. Only the Inspector of Legal 
Metrology comes to the rescue of the consumer in such 
cases by checking the deliveries in the presence of 
consumers. Consumers will be le ft high and dry if this power 
is taken away.  
3.44 The Government of Punj ab stated that amending the 
power of the inspection of the Inspector, as well as the 
Assistant Controller, Deputy Co ntroller, even the Controller 

 75
of the State is bound give a free hand to the ` Special 
Verification Agent’, which is like ly to lead to malpractice. In 
this case, transparency and accountability in verification of 
weights and measures by the `Special Verification Agent’ will 
be questionable, thus compromising the consumes interest. 
In addition, the Inspector, Assistant Controller, Deputy 
Controller or  even Contro ller of the State will be 
handicapped even  to took into the specific local complaints 
against instrument verified by  the `Special Verification 
Agent’, even though one may not conduct revivification of 
weight and measure. The random checking of the work done 
by the `Special Verification Ag ent’ is essential and it is, 
therefore, strongly reco mmended to drop the said 
amendment in Section 27 in the interest  of the Consumer 
protection. 
3.45 When enquired as to why the verification done by 
SVA will not be checked by the inspectors  and other officers 
of the Weights and Measures  Department, the AILMOA 
stated that in the name of  duplicacy  the State Machinery 
has been restricted to check the correctness of the weights 
and measures verified by S VA. The verification and 
inspection are different jobs and for transparency, statutory 
inspection after verification is  a must. 
   
3.46 The Government of West B engal is of the view that 
amendment of Section 27 is not desirable and should 
scrapped. 

 76
3.47 The Amendment in Secti on 27 is not acceptable to 
the Government of Kerala due to the following reasons:- 
 
“ In amendment clause 12 by the insertion of 
the proviso to subsection 1 of section 27, the purpose 
of sub-section 2 of secti on 27 is defeated. Hence the 
word `only’ coming after the word ‘inspect’ in the 
provision may be omitted.  Otherwise, it weakens the 
State Enforcement which will adversely affect the 
protection of Consumers”.  
 
3.48 The Government of Gujara t is not in favour of the 
amendment in Section 27. In their view only by checking,  
genuiness of the stamping done by SVA, the Meteorological 
accuracy of sophisticated inst ruments cannot be checked. 
Hence inspection is necessary which is also essential for 
consumer protection.  
3.49 The Ministry in their reply state as under : 
“As the policy proposed is to entrust the 
verification of those spec ified weighing or measuring 
instrument to SVA where th e infra-structure is not 
available with the existing enforcement machinery, it 
is not desirable to permit the enforcement agencies to 
again check those instruments in the name of 
inspection. On the one ha nd they do not have any 
infra structure for the che cking of such instruments 
and at the same time, it will put the industries to the 
same situation from where they are being salvaged. 
 
There is no change proposed to the existing 
enforcement department of  the States. Only 
verification of certain prescribed measuring 
instruments are proposed to  be regulated through the 
Special Verification Agents (SVA). The supervisions 
of the SVA are proposed to be done through certain 
technical agencies who could be any where in the 
country and competent to undertake testing of the 
such instruments. The ins pection of such measuring 
instruments by the exis ting state enforcement 

 77
Agencies has been limited to checking the 
genuineness of the seal ap plied to detect any 
fraudulent practices as they  do not have any infra-
structure for checking other meteorological qualities of 
the measuring instrument”. 
 
3.50 When pointed out that the verification done by Special 
Verification Agency (SVA) will not be checked by the 
Inspector and other senior offi cer due to the fact that the 
Inspector can only inspect t he genuineness of stamping and 
enquired the authority who will keep watch on the verification 
work done by the SVA, the Ministry  in its reply stated that it 
has been proposed so.  
 
3.51 When asked about the action the Government can 
take against the unscrupulous acti vities of SVA, the Ministry 
stated that  to Monitor the activities of SVA, suitable 
provisions have been made in the Standards of Weights and 
Measures (Amendment) Bill 2005 at clause 46G. 

 78
3.52 The Committee note that a proviso has been 
added in Section 27 of the Principal Act wherein the 
Inspector of the Weights & Measures of the State 
Government have been authorised to check the 
genuineness of the stamping of Weights & Measures 
verified and stamped by Special Verification Agent.  The 
proposed amendment is not acceptable to any of the 
State Governments or other interested groups.  In  their 
view the amendment will lead to nexus between the 
traders and SVA and the ultimate sufferer will be the 
consumer as it will prevent checking of any Weights & 
Measures stamped by SVA.  SVA will get free hand 
which is likely to result in malpractices.  In the opinion 
of the Committee the responsibility to protect the 
interest of the consumers is that of the State 
Government and the amendment will weaken the State 
Enforcement machinery which will adversely affect the 
protection of consumers.  The Committee are not 
convinced with the arguments of the Ministry that they 
have made this provision as the State Enforcement 
machinery do not have the adequate infrastructure or 
other facilities to check the instruments.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that proviso added in 
Section 27(1) may be deleted. 

 79
Section  72     Power to make rules:-  
3.53  This Section of the parent  Act provides that the State 
Government may, by notificatio n and after consultation with 
the Central Government, make  rules to carry out the 
provisions of this Act. 
3.54 The Government have proposed that In section 72 of 
the principal Act,- 
(a) in sub-section (1) for the words “The State 
Government may, by notification and after 
consultation with the Central Government the 
words, “The Central Government may, by 
notification” shall be substituted. 
 
(b) In sub-section (2),- 
(i )  for clause (a), t he following clauses shall be 
substituted namely:- 
(a)  the qualification for being appointed as the 
Additional, Joint Deputy and Assistant Controller and 
the Inspector under section 5; 
(aa) the clause of goods, services, undertakings or 
users, in relation to whic h no transaction, dealing or 
contract or industrial produc tion or use for protection 
shall be made or had or undertaken except by such 
weight, measure or number or in respect of which no 
transaction, dealing or contract shall be made except 
by such weighing or m easuring instrument as 
required under sub-section (1 ) or sub-section (1A) of 
section 10; 
(ii)  sub-clause (i) of claus e (b) clauses (d), (e) and 
(f) shall be omitted. 
(iii) in clause (j) after the words “ the controller, the 
words “or any officer authorised by him” shall be 
inserted. 
(iv) clause (m) shall be omitted; 
(v) for clause (n) and (o) the following clauses shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
 
“(n) the weight or measure for the verification of which 
steps to be taken by the Inspector under sub-section 
(3) of section 24. 
 
(o) the form in which and the details with which a 
certificate of verification of  any weight or measure as 
required under sub-section (2) (3) and (4) of section 
25 shall be granted.” 

 80
 
(vi) clause ( r ) shall be omitted. 
(vii) after caluse (t) the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
“(tt) the form and the manner in which notice by a 
company may  be given to the director or the 
concerned Controller or the authorised officer under 
sub-section (2) of section 62. 
(ttt) the amount of money to  be paid for credit to the 
State Government under sub-section (1) of section 65 
 
(c) in sub-section (3) for the words the State 
Government may the words the Central 
Government may shall be substituted. 
 
(d) For sub-section (5) the following sub-section shall 
be substituted namely: 
 
(5)  Every rule made by the Central Government 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of  Parliament, while it is 
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately followi ng the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in t he rule or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not  be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in  such modification form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however 
that any such modificati on or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under the rule or annulment shall be 
    
 3.55  Similar powers are proposed to be conferred on 
Central Government under Sections 10,15,19 etc. of the 
Enforcement Act, 1985. 

 81
3.56 The Government of Karnataka in their 
views/Comments furnished to the Committee has stated as 
under:- 
“This amendment is being proposed to take away the 
powers of the State Government by the Central 
Government. This amendment is not acceptable for 
the reasons stated in para 2.  
 
3.57 The Eastern Regional Legal Metrology Licensees 
Association, Kolkata stated that it is against the principle of 
decentralization. Power to make rules, thus should remain in 
the hands  of the Stat e Government.  We object it ethically.  
Though directly it does not affect them. 
3.58 The Government of Goa has furnished the following 
comments/suggestions to the Committee:- 
“72(1) & 72 (1)(a)  The State Government 
should be empowered to make the  Rules after 
consultation with the Central Government, 
hence this proposed amend is not agreeable”. 
 
3.59 Amendment of Section 72 is also opposed by the 
Government of West Bengal on the ground that it takes 
away the rule making power of the State Government 
conferred upon it under the Act, it is reiterated that State, 
since it implements the law on weights and measures. It is 
better placed to asses the situation directly calling for any 
change necessary to achieve the purposes of the Act. Hence 
rule making power under the Act should be with the State 
Government. 

 82
3.60 The Department of Consum er Affairs reacted that the 
enforcement activities in the States are guided by the 
enforcement Rules. With every State enacting an 
enforcement rules, variations has resulted which has led to 
impediments to the growth of  industries and trade. Non 
uniformity in enforcement laws creates havoc, confusion, 
lack of transparency and leading to high handedness. 
 3.61     When asked as to why the Central Government 
wants to exercise the power of State Governments in the 
name of uniformity, the Minist ry stated that even under the 
present law, the model enforce ment rules are prepared by 
the Central Government and circulated to states for 
adoption. However many State Governments are not  able to 
adopt the Rules timely or has changed the Rules during 
adoption in some States. This has resulted in lack of 
transparency and non-uniformity  putting the trade and 
industry to problems. 

 83
 
3.62  The Government have proposed that 
in Section 72 of the Principal Act in sub-section 
(1) for the words ‘State Governments may’ be 
substituted by the words ‘the Central Government 
may’.  This amendment is not acceptable to the 
State Governments and ot her interested groups 
because through this amendment the Central 
Government intends to take away the rule making 
powers of the State Governments.  In their view, it 
is against the principle of decentralisation. The 
Committee cannot accept the arguments put forth 
by the Ministry that the enforcement activities in 
the States are guided by the enforcement rules 
and non-uniformity in enforcement law creates 
havoc, confusion, lack of transparency and 
leading to high-handedness. The Committee is of 
the opinion that the power to make rules should 
remain in the hands of State Government and, 
therefore, recommend that the rule making 
powers should remain with the State 
Governments and the proposed amendment 
suggested in the section may be deleted. 
 
 
NEW DELHI        DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV, 
  December, 2005.                               Chairman, 
Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution. 

Annexure –I 
(Vide Para No. 1.11 of Chapter –I)  
 
 
 
 (Statement showing the Parallel offences in Standards of Weights and Measures Acts of 1976 &1985) 
 
Sr. 
No 
Section Definition/Description of offence Penalty 
  Sec. 
Punishment Compoundable/ Summary 
            Non 
Compoundable 
Regular 
                         Remarks 
1.  Section
21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E 38(1) 
 
 
 
 
E 38(2) 
Use of Weights and measures or numerals 
other than the Standard Weights, Measure 
and Numeral is an offence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Use of  non Standard Weight or Measure  
to sell commodity. 
 
 
 
Use of  non Standard Weight or Measure  
to render service 
 
50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38(1) 
 
 
 
 
38(2) 
First offence, Imprisonm ent 
upto 6 m onths, the fi ne 
upto Rs. 5000/- or both. 
Second an d su bsequent 
Imprisonment upto 2 years 
and unspecified fine. 
 
 
 
Not less then Rs.500/- upto 
Rs.5000/- 
 
 
 
S.S. Not less than 3 
months upto 1 years or with 
fine 
Compoundable 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Compoundable 
 
 
 
 
Compoundable 
 
 
Summary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary 
 
 
 
 
Summary 
Use of n on Stand ard W/M and  
Numeral for all pur poses is    
.transaction, producti on to this 
section, is an offence. 
     When the first offence is 
punishable b y imprisonemnt, 
compounding by officers  of  Le gal 
Metrology is anomaly. 
 
Use of n on Stand ard W/M and  
Numeral onl y for trans actions, 
according t o this section is an 
offence. 
 
 
 84

2 
 
Section 
22 
 
 
 
E 36 
 
 
 
 
 
E 21(a) 
Manufacture of W eights a nd Meas ures 
which do not conform to the Standards of 
Weights and Measures under the Act. 
 
 
Manufacture s ale and h ire of weights a nd 
measures which do not co nform to the  
Standard of Weights a nd Measures ar e 
offence 
 
 
No pers on will manufactur e W /M unless  
they co nform to Stan dards estab lished.  
Manufacturing W /M which ostensi bly 
conform to Standard establ ished but not  
acutally conforming to the Standards 
52 
 
 
 
 
36 
 
 
 
 
 
44(a) 
Upto one Year    &      fine   
upto  Rs 25, 000/- or both  
S.S. upto 3  years and 
unspecified fine 
 
Not le ss th an 3 mo nths 
upto 1 year 
SS: Not less than 6 months 
upto 1 year and unspecified 
fine 
 
Upto 1  year or fine  upt o 
Rs.2000/-or both 
SS: upto 3  years and  
unspecified fine 
Non-
Compoundable 
 
 
 
Non-
Compoundable 
 
 
 
 
Compoundable 
 
Summary 
 
 
 
 
Summary 
 
 
 
 
 
Regular 
1) Only manufacture is offence 
2) Clause when such offence is not  
punishable und er an y la w 
relating to W & M –Section 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1) Manufacture, sale a nd hire of 
W/M not conformin g to  
Standards are offences 
2) Power of compounding offen ces 
punishable only by imprisonment 
by officers of Leg al Metrology is 
anomalous. 
3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 
23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E 21(b) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inscriptions not in c onformity w ith the 
Standards est ablished b y t his Act on  
weights a nd measures (L ike me asuring 
tape sh owing metre an d yar d) is a n 
offence. 
 
 
 
Manufacturing W /M with ind ication 
thereon, any W/M with any this units other 
than, specified by the Standards Act, is an  
offence 
 
 
53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44(b) 
Upto 1  year or fine  upt o 
Rs.2000/- or both 
S.S. upto 3  years and 
unspecified fine 
 
 
 
 
Upto 1 year or fine upto Rs. 
2,000/- or both 
S.S. upto 3  years and 
unspecified fine  
 
Non 
Compoundable 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Compoundable 
 
 
Summary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regular 
Clause when such offenc e is not  
punishable under an y la w re lating to 
W & Measures hits Section 3 
2)  W hen the first offe nce is 
punishable b y imprisonment, 
compounding by officers  of  Le gal 
Metrology is anomaly 
 85

4.  Section
24(3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 
26(4) 
 
 
E 14(4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No Refere nce Standard shall be de emed 
to be a Reference Standard unless verified 
and authenticated as laid down in Rules 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No Seco ndary Stan dard or W orking 
Standard sh all be  use d fo r verificati on 
unless they are duly verified and stamped  
 
A Secon dary or W orking Standard n ot 
verified and stamped shall not be deemed 
to be  a S econdary or W orking St andard 
and s hall n ot be us ed for  v erification of  
weights and measures 
 
 
67 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63 
 
 
 
59 
Fine upto Rs.2000/- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fine upto Rs.2000/- 
 
 
 
Fine upto Rs.2000/- 
 
 
 
Compoundable 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Compoundable 
 
 
 
Compoundable 
 
Regular 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regular 
 
 
 
Regular 
Standards of W eights & Measure 
(General) Rules 1987 R ule 8 (3) lays 
down periodical Verific ation of 
Secondary  
Standard Bal ance one year.  On the 
contrary, Sta ndard of W eights and  
Measures (Enforceme nt) Rul es 200 0 
Amended under Rule 6(3) l ays down 
24 months  for (Poeriodical 
verification) of  Second ary Standard 
Balance. 
 
 
 
 
5.  Section
29 
 
 
 
 
E 30 
 
 
 
E 31 
Obstruction of Director Le gal Metrology or 
persons authorized by him to enter searc h 
and seize from any ‘Premises’ any W/M or 
Packaged Commodity is an Offence 
 
Obstruction of Controll er or perso n 
authorized by him to enter and search for 
W/M documents or things is an offence 
 
Obstruction of an  Insp ector L egal 
Metrology to seize W /M d ocuments and 
goods sold and delivered is an offence 
 
54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
Upto 2 year 
S.S. upto 5 years 
 
 
 
 
Upto 2 year 
SS u pto 5 years an d a lso 
fine upto Rs.1000/- 
 
 Upto 2 year 
SS u pto 5 years an d a lso 
fine upto Rs.10000/- 
 
 
 
 
Non 
Compoundable 
 
 
 
 
Non 
Compoundable 
 
 
Non 
Compoundable 
Regular 
 
 
 
 
 
Regular 
 
 
 
Regular 
 
Definition of ‘Premises’ in Standar d 
Act in Secti on 2( o) Exp lanation 
includes a vehicle,  vessel or other  
mobile service 
 86

6.  Section
29(1)(2) 
 
E 29 
Obstruction of Director Legal Metrology to 
enter Premises and search is an offence 
 
Obstruction of Inspector to e nter premises 
and search 
54 
 
 
49 
Upto 2 years 
S.S. upto 5 years 
 
Upto 2 years 
S.S. upto 5 years 
Non 
Compoundable 
 
Non 
Compoundable 
Regular 
 
 
Regular 
 
7.  Section
32 
 
 
E 13 
In respect of certain cl ass of goo ds use o f 
only weights or on ly me asures or only 
numbers, as laid down by General Rules 
 
Use of e xclusively weight or exclusively or 
measures or  exc lusively of numb er in  
respect of cert ain cl ass of g oods as lai d 
down in Enforcement Rules. 
55 
 
 
 
40 
Fine upto Rs. 5000/- 
S.S. upto 1  year a nd 
unspecified fine.  
 
Fine upto Rs. 2000/- 
S.S. upto 1 year with fine or 
with both.  
Compoundable 
 
 
 
Compoundable 
Regular 
 
 
 
Summary 
1) General Ru les have not s o for 
down class es of go ods to  use  
exclusively W/M or Number 
2) Enforcement Rules 9 & 11  with 
Schedule IV l ay down classes of 
goods to use exclusively W/M of 
Numbers & Exceptions thereto 
3) Rule 12 r/ w Fifth Schedule P CR 
gives details o f such go ods and 
exceptions.  But these schedules 
have discrepancies. 
 87

8.  Section
33(d) 
33(e) 
 
 
 
 
Section 
39 (ii) 
(iii) 
 
 
E 11 
In the course o f inter State tra de on goods 
sold services rendered indicating quantity, 
price list, adv ertisement, ne t contents on 
cartons, weights and measur es other tha n 
the Stand ard of W eights a nd Meas ures 
established is an offence. 
 
In the co urse of inter Sta te trade on 
commodities in pa ckaged fo rm i ndicating 
net contents in W/M or Numbers other than 
those prescribed, is an offence. 
 
In trade within the State goods sol d an d 
services rendered indicating quantity, price 
list, advertisement, net conte nts in carton s 
W/M other than the St andards established, 
is an offence 
 
56 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63 
 
 
 
 
41 
Fine upto Rs. 5000/- 
S.S. upto 1  year a nd 
unspecified fine P.7(24) 
 
 
 
 
Fine upto Rs.5000/- 
SS upto 5 y4ars or with fine 
Rs.50000/- or with both 
 
Fine upto Rs.2000/- 
S.S. upto 1 year or with fine 
or with both.  
Compoundable 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Compoundable 
 
 
 
 
Compoundable 
Summary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary 
 
 
 
 
Summary 
1) Packaged c ommodities b oth for  
inter State and within th e S tate 
should d isclose net co ntents not  
merely according to Stan dard o f 
W/M or Numbers esta blished, 
but b y q uantities spec ifically laid 
down 
2) Offence in res pect of packa ged 
commodities provides for heavier 
punishment c ompared t o o ther 
commodities in inter State trade 
1)  There is o mission of ‘numeration’ 
in Section 41(e) 
9.  Section
34 
 
 
 
E 39(2) 
Selling/rendering s ervice by less quantity 
then c ontracted, b uying and r eceiving 
service b y exc ess qua ntity th en 
contracted/paid for, is an offence 
 
Selling/rendering s ervice by less quantity 
then c ontracted, b uying and r eceiving 
service excess quantit y then 
contracted/paid for, as an offence 
57 
 
 
 
 
39(2) 
Fine upto Rs.25000/- 
S.S. upto 5 years and also 
fine unspecified  
 
 
Fine upto Rs. 50,000/- 
SS upto 5 year or with fine 
or with both  
Compoundable 
 
 
 
 
Compoundable 
Regular 
 
 
 
 
Summary 
 
10  Section
35 (1)  
(a) (b) 
 
 
E 23 (i) 
 
 
Non-maintenance of Registers and record 
prescribed for manufactures, Dealers and 
Repairers in an offence. 
 
 
Non-maintenance of Registers and records 
prescribed and non-production of them 
before Inspector Legal Metrology when 
58 
 
 
 
 
 
56(2) 
 
Fine u p to Rs.  50 00/-   
S.S. upto 6 months or with 
fine or with both  
 
 
Fine upto  Rs. 10,00 0/- SS 
upto 1  year and also 
unspecified fine.  
Compoundable 
 
 
 
 
Non-
Compoundable 
 
Summary 
 
 
 
 
Regular 
 
 
 
 88

 
 
 
E 46 
asked to produce the registers and recodes 
is an offence.  
 
Whoever required to maintain registers and 
records, fail to maintain them or having 
maintained them refuse or  omits to 
produce them whom required by the 
Inspector, to do so. 
 
 
 
 
 
46 
 
 
 
Fine upto Rs.  2000/- SS  
upto 1 year or  w ith fine or 
with both. 
 
 
 
 
 
Compoundable  
 
 
 
Regular 
 
11  Section
36 (3) 
 
 
 
Section 
38 (4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E 73 (2) 
 
 
Whoever manufactures  W/ M without 
approval of Model, commits and offence. 
 
 
 
Whoever manufactures W/M even after the 
revocation  of  Approval  of  Model,  
Commits  and office. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Whoever manufacture Weights and 
Measures  without Approval of Model or 
manufactures weights and Measures even 
after revocation of Approval  of Model, 
commits an offence. 
59 
 
 
 
 
(60 (1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
73 (2) 
 
Upto Rs. 20,000/- S.S upto 
5 years and also 
unspecified fine.       (P. 8 
27)  
 
Upto 2 years and fine S.S 
upto 3 years and 
unspecified  fine upto 
20,000/- 
(P. 8 (28) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Upto 2 years and fine S,S 
upto 5 years and 
unspecified fine. 
 
Compoundable 
 
 
 
 
Compoundable 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Compoundable 
 
Regular 
 
 
 
 
Summary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  By compounding an offence 
punishable by imprisonment u/s 60(i) 
Standard Act and 73 (2) of 
Enforcement Act by officers of Legal 
Metrology is anomaly. 
 
2.  Section (73(2) wrongly mentions 
omitted.  Section 39, 40 and 41 of 
Standards Act  which deals with 
Packaged Commodities. Whereas the 
appropriate sections are 36,37 and 
38 of Standards Act which deal with 
Approval of Models. 
 
 89

12  Section
36 (10) & 
S 36 (II) 
 
 
 
E 73(2) 
Whoever manufactures  W/  M using 
material other than that for which the 
Approval of Model was given, commits an 
offence. 
 
 
Whoever manufactures  W/ M using 
material other than that for which the 
Approval of Model was given, commits an 
office. 
60 (2) 
 
 
 
 
 
73 (2) 
Upto 5 years and also fine 
upto 20,000/- 
 
 
 
 
Upto 5 years and also 
unspecified fine. 
 
 
 
 
 
Compoundable 
 
 
 
 
 
Compoundable 
Summary 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary 
Compounding an offence punishable 
by imprisonment by officers of Legal 
Metrology is anomaly. 
 90

 
13  Section
38 
 
 
 
 
E 73(2) 
Manufactures of W/M not bearing the 
number by which the Approval of Model 
was given, commits an offence. 
 
 
 
Manufactures W/ M without every W/ M 
produced bearing the number by which 
Approval of Model was issued an offence. 
61 
 
 
 
 
 
73(2) 
Upto Rs. 5000/- S upto 5 
years or with fine or with 
both. 
 
 
 
Fine upto Rs. 5,000/- S.S. 
upto 5 years and also 
unspecified fine 
 
Non-
Compoundable 
 
 
 
 
Non-
Compoundable 
Summary 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary 
 
14  Section
39 
 
 
 
E 33 
In the course of Inter-State trade in 
commodities in packaged form, violating 
the provisions of this section and PCR are 
punishable. 
 
In the course of trade within the State in 
Prepackaged Commodities violating the 
provisions of 39 of Standards Act and 
packaged Commodities Rules are 
punishable. 
 
63 
 
 
 
 
 
51(i) 
Fine upto Rs.5,000/- S. 
upto Rs. 10,000/ Third with 
5 years or fine upto Rs. 
5,000 or with both  
 
Fine upto Rs. 5000/- 
S.10,000  and Third  with 5 
years or fine upto Rs. 
5,000/- or with both.  
Compoundable 
 
 
 
 
 
Compoundable 
Summary 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary 
1. Commod ity in packaged 
form is defined in Standards 
Act Section. 
 
2. Pr-packed Commodity  in 
Section 32(2) explanation of 
Enforcement Act, is defined 
in PCR Rule (2(I). 
 
3. Section 51 (2) provide for 
punishment of short delivery 
of the net contents in 
Packaged Commodities in 
trade within the State. 
 
4. For short delivery of net 
quantity in  inter-state trae, 
wecton 34 -/2 section 57(I) 
has to be used. 
 
15  41(3)
43 
 
 
 
41 (4)   
44 (1) (2) 
 
 
 
W/ M the First Category cannot be sold or 
used in any State unless it is stamped in 
the transferor State by Interstate Special 
Stamp. 
 
W/ M of the Second Category cannot be 
sold or used in any State, unless it is 
verified and stamped after its reinstallation 
in transferee State. 
 
62 
 
 
 
 
62 
 
 
 
 
Fine upto Rs. 10,000/- SS 
upto 7 years and 
unspecified fine. 
 
 
Fine upto rs. 10,000/- 
S.S. upto 7 years and also 
unspecified fine. 
 
 
Non-
Compoundable 
 
 
 
 
Non-
Compoundable 
 
 
Regular 
 
 
 
 
Regular 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 91

E 22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E 24 
First category Weights and Measures (New 
goods) for sale and use within the State 
and Second category Weights and 
Measures received from other State should 
be verified and stamped by the local 
officers of Legal Metrology. 
 
A manufacturer of First Category (New 
goods) a dealer or user, of Second 
Category (New Goods) has to get these 
News Goods verified and stamped and a 
user of any these Weights and Measures 
has to get them revivified periodically. 
Failure to do so, is an offence.  
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47 
Six months imprisonment 
and fine upto Rs. 2000/- 
S.S. upt 1 year or with fine 
or with both P. 6(22) 
 
 
 
Fine upto Rs. 10,000/- S.S. 
One year or unspecified 
fine or   with both  
Compoundable 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Compoundable 
Summary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regular 
When the first offence itself is 
punishable by imprisonment, 
compounding it by Legal Metrology 
Officers is anomaly. 
16  46
(Omitted
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56 (2) 
Manufactures and Dealers who send 
W?M whether of First Category or 
Second Category, have to submit 
periodical Returns to the Director L.M 
and to the Controllers of both State 
Concerned. 
 
 
Submitting false Returns is an offence. 
70 (2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56 (2) 
Fine upto Rs. 2,000/- 
S.S. upto 1 year and 
unspecified fine or both  
 
 
 
 
 
Fine upto Rs. 10,000/- 
SS upto 1 year and also 
unspecified fine.  
Non-
Compoundable 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-
Compoundable  
Regular 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regular 
Section 56 of Enforcement Act 
does not say anything about 
failure to submit Returns and so 
the Manufactures, Dealers and 
Repairers just don’t submit any 
Returns. 
17  Section
69 
 
 
E 55 
 
 
Impersonation of Director or authorized  
person is an offence 
 
Impersonation of Controller, Additional 
Controller or Inspector Legal 
Metrology. 
69 
 
 
 
55 
Upto 3 years. 
 
 
 
Up to 3 years 
Non-
Compoundable  
 
 
Non 
Compoundable 
Regular 
 
 
 
Regular 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18  Section
70(I) 
Giving false information to the 
Director Legal Metrology or to the 
70(I) 
 
Upto y6 months or fine 
up to 15,000/- or both    
Non Compoundable 
 
Regular 
 
 
 92

 
 
 
E 56 (I) 
 
Officer authoritised by him, knowing it 
to be false. 
 
 
Giving information to Controller 
knowing it to be false.   
 
 
 
56(I) 
 
 
 
 
Upto 6 months for fine to 
Rs. 10,000/- or both P 7 
(32) 
 
 
 
Non Compoundable 
 
 
 
Regular 
 
19  Section
71 (I) 
 
 
 
E 58 
 
 
Vexatious search and seizure of 
Weights and Measures. 
 
 
Vexatious search and Seizure of 
Weights and Meausres. 
71(I) 
 
 
 
 
58 
Upto 1 year or fine up to 
Rs. 10,000/- or both. 
 
 
Upto 1 year or fine up to 
Rs. 10,000/- both  
Non Compoundable 
 
 
 
Non Compoundable 
Regular 
 
 
 
 
Regular 
 
20  71 (2)
(Omitted) 
 
 
 
 
 
57 (1) 
E  
Willful verification of First Category 
Weights and Measures by transferee 
State Inspector Legal Metrology and 
obliteration of inter State stamp 
except in accordance with Proviso 1 
to Section 42 
 
Willful verification of Weights and 
Measures the against provisions 
Enforcement Act and Enforcement 
Rules. 
72 (2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
57(I) 
 
 
 
 
 
Upto 1 year or fine up to 
Rs. 2,000/- both for 
every such offence.    P 
9 (37) 
 
 
 
Upto 1 year or fine up to 
Rs. 10,000/- or  both  
Non Compoundable 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regular 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regular 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21  Section
80 
 
 
 
 
9(2) 
No Weights and Measures and N 
other than the Standards Weights and 
Measures or Number be mentioned in 
Enforcement Notification, Order, 
contracted and other instrument. 
 
No Weights and Measures and N 
other than the Standards Weights/ 
67 
 
 
 
 
 
39(2) 
Fine up to Rs. 2,000/- 
 
 
 
 
 
Fine upto Rs. 10,000/- 
SS up to 1 year and with 
Compoundable 
 
 
 
 
 
Compoundable 
Regular 
 
 
 
 
 
Regular 
 
 93

Measures or Number be mentioned in 
agreement for commerce, production 
and protection. 
unspecified fine or both  
 94

 95
ANNEXURE -II 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PU BLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON 
TUESDAY, THE 10TH MAY, 2005. 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Commi ttee Room ‘B’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Alakesh Dass 
4.       Shri Atma Singh Gill 
5.        Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
6.        Shri Santosh Bagrodia  
7  .      Shri T.S. Bajwa 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director  
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF  CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
1. Shri L. Mansingh, Secretary  
2. Smt. Satwant Reddy, A dditional Secretary   
 
 
 

 96
 
At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman we lcomed the representatives of 
Department of Consumer Affairs to t he sitting of the Committee held to 
have briefing by them on the two bills viz. (i) The Standards of Weights 
and Measures (Enforcement) Amendm ent Bill, 2005; and (ii) The 
Standards of Weights and Measur es (Amendment) Bill, 2005 as  
introduced in Rajya Sabha on 10 th March, 2005.  
The Chairman then informed the representatives that the Hon’ble Speaker 
has referred the above said bills to the Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribut ion for examination and Report.  He 
also stated  that in the first instance, the Committee have decided to invite 
the views/suggestions of public in general and experts/professionals, 
organisations/associations through El ectronic and Print Media  for which 
the Bills have been posted at the website of Lok Sabha on Internet. 
The Committee then sought  clarif ications from the Secretary, 
Department of Consumer Affairs on both the bills . The representatives 
replied to the queries raised by the Members. 
The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for tendering their 
valuable views before the Committee.  
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  

 97
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON 
TUESDAY, THE 14TH JUNE, 2005. 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to  1300 hrs. in Committee Room No. 
62, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Suresh Angadi 
4. Shri Ranen Barman 
5. Shri Alakesh Dass 
6. Shri Tukaram Gadakh 
7. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
8.        Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
9. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
10. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
11.      Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
12.      Smt. Daggubati Purandareswari 
13. Shri Ajit Kumar Singh 
14. Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
15. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
       
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.      Shri T.S. Bajwa 
17. Shri Narayan Singh Kesri 
18. Shri Lalitbhai Mehta 
19. Smt. Bimba Raikar 
20.      Shri  Nabam Rebia 
21. Shri Vikram Verma 
22. Shri Vijay Singh Yadav 
 

 98
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. (Smt.) Paramjit K aur Sandhu - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director  
 
(A) Representatives of All India Legal Metrology Officers’ Association, 
Kolkata 
 
1. Shri S.N. Choudhary - President 
2. Shri K.C. Moharana  - General Secretary 
3. Shri Rabindra Nath  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.P. Choudhary - Coordinator 
4. Shri B. Samaddar  - Treasurer   
 
(B) Representatives of Grahak Panchayat, Latur District, Latur 
  
1. Adv. Avinash Dabad Gaonkar  
2.    Shri Vishnu R. Bhutada  
3. Shri Ravidev Gupta  
4. Shri Rajendra Singha  
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welc omed the representatives of All India 
Legal Metrology Officers’ Association, Kolkata and Grahak Panchayat, Latur 
District, Latur to the sitting of the Commi ttee and invited their attention to the 
provisions contained in Dir ection 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.  The 
representatives of both the organisa tions then briefed the Committee by 
expressing their views on the (i) t he Standards of Weights and Measures 
(Enforcement) Amendment Bill, 2005; and (ii) the Standards  of Weights and 
Measures (Amendment) Bill, 2005 and re plied to the queries raised by the 
Members of the Committee.   
3. The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee and tendering their valuable views. 
 
4. A verbatim record of proc eedings has been kept for record. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
  

 99
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON 
MONDAY, THE 27TH JUNE, 2005. 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. and from1530 hrs. to 1730 
hrs.  in Committee Room  `D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Suresh Angadi 
4. Shri Ranen Barman 
5. Shri Alakesh Dass 
6. Shri Tukaram Gadakh 
7. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
8. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
9. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
10. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
11.      Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
12. Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Santosh Bagordia 
14. Shri Narayan Singh Kesri 
15. Shri Lalitbhai Mehta 
16       Shri  Nabam Rebia 
17       Shri Thanga Tamil Selvan 
18. Shri Vikram Verma 
19.      Shri Vijay Singh Yadav 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director  

 100
  
(i) Representatives of Eastern Regi onal Legal Meteorology Licensees 
Association, Kolkata.  
 
1. Shri B. Das  -   Convener 
2. Shri G. Halder 
3. Shri Shuprio Ghose 
 
(ii) Representatives of Consumer Coordination Council, Delhi. 
 
1. Dr. Sriram Khanna,  - Member, Governing Council 
2. Shri S. Krishnan,   - Dir ector and  Executive Secretary 
 
(iii) Representatives of Scales, Weights and Measures Merchants 
Association, Mumbai. 
 
1. Shri Suresh Ji Shah  - Hony. Secretary 
2. Shri Jayesh H. Shelet 
 
(iv)  Representatives of Indian Inst itute of Legal Metrology, Ranchi 
 
1. Shri N.C. Biswas    - Director 
2. Shri Rajeshwar Kumar 
 
(v)  Representatives of State Government of Andhra Pradesh 
 
1. Shri G.V. Ranganathan Swamy,  - Deputy Controller 
 
(vi) Representatives of State Government of Jammu and Kashmir 
 
1. Shri Manoj Prabhakar  - Assistant Controller 
 
 
2. At  the  outset,  Hon’ble  Chairman   welcomed   the  representatives   of 
(i) Eastern Regional Legal Meteorology Li censees Association, Kolkata, (ii) 
Consumer Coordination Council, Delhi a nd  (iii) Scales, Weights and Measures 
Merchants Association, Mumbai to the sitting of the Committee and drew their 
attention to the provisions contained in  Direction 58 of the Directions by the 
Speaker.  The Committee then proceeded to take evidence on the amendment 
Bills viz.  (i) the Standards of Weights and Measures (E nforcement) Amendment 

 101
Bill, 2005; and (ii) the Standards of We ights and Measures (Amendment) Bill, 
2005. The representatives then briefed the Committee and expressed their views 
on the various clauses of the Bills and other matter s relating thereto. The 
representatives replied to the queries raised by the Members of the Committee. 
3. The following points were discu ssed by the Committee at length:- 
(i) Period of re-verification of Weights and Measures; 
 
(ii) Use of non-metric Standards of  Weights and Measures for limited 
period; 
 
(iii) Issue of licence, penalties and exorbitant fee for sa le and repair of 
Weights and Measures Instruments etc. throughout the country; 
 
(iv) Introduction of new system of verification and re-verification of 
Weights and Measures equipments by Special Verification Agents. 
  
(v) Nomination of Nodal Officer fo r the offences committed by a 
company. 
 
(vi) Penalty for misuse of  Weights and Measures Laws. 
 
(vii) Qualifications for appointment to the post of  Additional Controller, 
Joint Controller, Deputy Controller and Assistant Controller etc. 
 
(viii) Vesting of Rule Making Powers with States. 
 
(ix) Streamlining the procedure for approval of Models and publication 
of details of approved Model in the Official Gazette. 
 
(x) Compounding of offences. 
      
 
4.    The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee and tendering evidence before them. 
The Committee then adjourned for lunch to meet again at 1530 hrs. 
 
 
 

 102
5.   The Committee resumed  their discu ssion  on the Bills and took evidence of 
the officials of the (i) I ndian Institute of Legal Metrology, Ranchi and  State 
Governments  of (i) Andhra Pradesh a nd (ii)  Jammu and Kashmir.  The 
Committee sought certain clarifications on   the various clauses of the Bills 
and other matter relating thereto. The St ate Governments officials responded 
to the queries raised by the Members.  
6. The following points emerged during discussion:- 
(i) Need for a comprehensive definition of packaged goods. 
 
(ii) Collection of fees by Special Verification A gent for verification and 
stamping of Weights and Measures ;  clarity about sophisticated 
Weighing and Measuring Instruments.   
 
(iii) Penalty for short measurement. 
 
(iv) Need to check the accuracy of Weights and Measures instruments 
in the presence of consumer. 
 
(v) Approval of Models and period of re-verific ation of Weights and 
Measures. 
 
(vi) Need to strengthen the Weight s and Measures infrastructure 
already available with State Governments. 
 
(vii) Use of non-metric units for limited period. 
 
(viii) Legal entity to RRSLs and esta blishment of Reference Standards 
laboratories in the State. 
 
(ix) Enhancement in penalties for non-approval of pre-packaged 
commodities. 
 
(x) Compounding of offences and penalties for various offences 
committed under the 1976 and 1985 Acts. 
 
(xi) Publication of model approval in  the Official Gazette to make it 
transparent. 
 
(xii) Appointment of nodal  officer fo r  the  offences committed by the 
company.    
 

 103
7. The Committee also asked the witnesses to furnish the written 
 replies on few points to the Secretariat at the earliest. 
8. The Chairman then thanked the officials for appearing before the 
Committee and tendering their valuable views.  
 A verbatim record of the pr oceedings has been kept on record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

 104
  
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON 
MONDAY, THE 11TH JULY,  2005. 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to  1300 hrs. and from 1415 hrs. to 
1715 hrs.  in Committee Room  `E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Suresh Angadi 
4. Shri Ranen Barman 
5. Shri Alakesh Dass 
11. Shri Tukaram Gadakh 
12. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
13. Shri Jai Prakesh  
14. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
15. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
11. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
12  Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
13. Shri Ajit Kumar Singh 
14. Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
15. Shri Santosh Bagordia 
16.       Shri T.S. Bajwa 
17.       Shri Lalitbhai Mehta 
18.       Smt. Bimba Raikar 
19       Shri  Nabam Rebia 
20. Shri Vikram Verma 
21.      Shri Vijay Singh Yadav 

 105
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director  
  
(i) Ex- Government officials  
 
4. Shri T. Singaravel   - (Ex.-Controller) Legal Metrology, 
 Maharashtra 
2. Shri K. Venkarteswarlu  - Ex-Enforcement Officer  
 
(ii) Representatives of Legal Metrol ogy (W&M) Districts Inspector and 
Inspectors Association, Hyderabad (Andhra Pradesh) 
 
1. Shri Ch. Laxma Goud - President 
  
 2. Shri P.S.R.N.T Swamy  - District Inspector of Legal Metrology, 
Department 
 
(iii) Representatives of St ate Government of Bihar 
 
1.      Shri K.D. Sinha   - Agriculture Production 
 Commissioner.  
2.      Shri R.P. Singh  - Director Agriculture-cum–Controller,  
Legal Metrology 
3. Shri J.P. Narayan  - Deputy Controller, Legal 
Metrology 
4. Shri Rabinder Nath  - Assistant Controller, Legal 
Metrology 
 
(iv) Representatives of Stat e Government of Punjab 
 
1. Dr. B.C. Gupta, IAS  - Principal Secretary to Government 
of Punjab, Department of Food, Civil 
Supplies and Consumer Affairs 
2       Shri J.S. S andhu, IAS  - Director FCS&CA 
3.       Dr. Ranjit  Po wer  - Controller Legal Metrology 

 106
 
(v) Representatives of State Government of Karnataka 
 
1. Shri Koushik Mukherjee, IAS - Principal Secretary to 
Government of Karnataka, Food, 
Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs 
Department. 
2. Shri Mohmad Jahangir - Head Quarter Assistant and Deputy  
Controller, Department of Legal 
Metrology. 
  
(vi) Representatives of State Government of Maharashtra 
 
1. Shri A. Ramakrishanan - Principal Secretary to 
Government of Maharashtra, 
Food and Civil Supplies and 
Consumer Affairs Department. 
2. Dr. Maadhava Saanapa - Controller Legal Metrology, 
 3. Shri Narendradatta Janardan - Assistant Controller Legal 
  P a t i l      M e t r o l o g y      
 4. Shri Balasaheb Kisan Zavare - Assistant Controller Legal  
      M e t r o l o g y .  
 
(vii) Representatives of Stat e  Government of Orissa 
 
1. Shri R.K. Sharma, IAS  - Commissioner-cum-Secretary to 
  Government of Orissa. 
2. Shri B.K. Nayak  - Controller, Legal Metrology 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Shri T. Singaravel -(Ex.-
Controller) Legal Metrology and Shri K. Ve nkarteswarlu -Ex-Enforcement Officer 
and the representatives of Legal Metr ology (W&M) Districts Inspector and 
Inspectors Association, Hyderabad to the sitting of the Committee and invited 
their attention to the provisions contained in Direction 58 of the Directions by the 
Speaker.  The Committee then proceeded to  take their evidence on the (i) the 
Standards of Weights and Measures (E nforcement) Amendment Bill, 2005; and 
(ii) the Standards of Weights and M easures (Amendment) Bill, 2005. The 
representatives then briefed the Commi ttee and expressed their views on the 

 107
various clauses of the Bills and other  matters relating thereto. The 
representatives replied to the queries raised by the Members of the Committee. 
3. The following points were discu ssed by the Committee at length:- 
(a) Difficulties being faced by the tr aders, commercial organizations and 
consumer due to variance in the Standards. 
 
(b) Integration of   Standards of Weights and Measures Act 1976    and 
Standards of Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act 1985 into 
one act. 
 
(c) Difficulties faced by the State Governments in enforcing  the   
provisions of the Weights and Measures laws. 
 
(d) Specifying the periodicity of re -verification of Weights      
and Measurers Instruments.  
 
(e) Streamlining the procedure for ap pointment of Controller of Legal 
Metrology. 
 
(f) Fee structure in rural and urban areas. 
 
(g) Appeal against the decision and orders of the Controllers. 
 
(h) Penalty for  counter feiting   of seals, sale or delivery of 
 commodities   of Non-Standards Weights and Measures. 
 
(i) Sharing of fees collected by the Special Verification Agents. 
 
(j) Use of  Non-Standard units for some more time. 
 
(k) Transparency in the water, electr ical and petrol pump meters etc. 
 
(l) Definition of pr e-packed commodities. 
 
4.  The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee and tendering evidence before them. 
The Committee then adjourned for Lunch to meet against at 1415 hrs. 

 108
5.      The Committee resumed  their discussion  on the Bills and took evidence of 
the officials of the State Governments of    (i)  Bihar (ii) Punjab (iii)  Karnataka  
(iv) Maharashtra and (v) Orissa.  The Commi ttee sought certain cl arifications on  
the various clauses of the Bills and ot her matter relating thereto. The State 
Government officials responded to t he queries raised by the Members. The 
Committee asked them to furnish their wr itten replies on certain points to the 
Secretariat. 
 6.        The following po ints emerged during the discussion: - 
(a) Rule making powers be vest wit h the Central Government but the 
implementation  remain with the State Governments. 
 
(b) Absence of clarity on the functions, scope and areas under 
jurisdiction w.r.t verification of Weights and Measures by Special 
Verification Agencies. 
 
(c) Approval of Models – misuse or fraudulent use of Weights and 
 Measures. 
 
(d) Penalty for manufacture of N on-Standards  Weights and Measures 
 instruments exclusively for export. 
 
(e) Sharing of fees collected by Special Verification Agents between  
Central Government and State Governments. 
 
(f) Qualification for appoi ntment of Controller, Inspectors and other  
Officers. 
 
(g)   Periodicity of re-verification of Weights and Measures instruments. 
 
(h) Stamping and verification of  Weights and Measures meant for  
Inter- State transaction. 
 
(i) Objection with regard to delegation of powers to Director of Legal  
Metrology. 
 
(j) Provision with regard to sale and distribution of Commodities in 
packaged form within the State. 
  

 109
 
7.        The Committee also asked the witness to furnish the written replies on few 
points to the Secretariat at the earliest. 
8. The Chairman then thanked the o fficials for appearing before the 
Committee and tendering their valuable views. 
 A verbatim record of the pr oceedings has been kept on record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 110
 
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PU BLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON 
MONDAY, THE 12TH SEPTEMBER, 2005. 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Commi ttee Room ‘E’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Alakesh Dass 
4. Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar 
5. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
6. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann 
8.  Shri Harikewal Prasad 
9.  Smt. Daggubati Purandeswari 
10.  Shri Ajit Kumar Singh 
11.  Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
12.  Shri Ramakant Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
14. Shri T.S. Bajwa 
15. Shri Palden Tsering Gyamtso 
16. Smt. Bimba Raikar 
17. Shri  Nabam Rebia 
18. Shri Vijay Singh Yadav 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director  
 

 111
 
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF RELIANCE INDUSTRIES LIMITED ( Petroleum Business ) 
 
1. Shri P. Raghavendran  -  Pr esident (Refinery Business)  
2. Smt. Vikram Patel  -  Retail Marketing 
3. Shri Vivek Srivastava  -  Head (Retail Engineering) 
4. Shri Surinder Kumar Sharma  - Device Manager (Fuel System) 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF CONFEDERATION OF INDIAN INDUSTRY (C.I.I.) 
 
1. Shri Dev Bajpai   - Head Legal & Company  
Secretary, Marico Ltd., Mumbai 
2. Shri Surinder Kumar  - General Manager Legal &  
Company Secy, Glaxo Smith 
Kline Bleachem Ltd. 
3. Ms. Indrani Kar   - Senior Director- CII 
4. Shri D.S. Chadha   - Technical Advisor-CII 
 
2. At the outset Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the first sitting 
of the Committee.  He apprised the Members about the work done by the 
Committee during last year.  Thereafte r, the Committee took up Memorandum 
No. I regarding selection of Subjects fo r detailed examination during 2005-06.  
After some deliberations, the Committee dec ided to continue with examination of 
the following subjects for detailed examination during 2005-06:- 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  
(A) Department of Food and Public Distribution. 
(i)  Targeted Public Dist ribution System– A Review. 
(ii)    Food Subsidy and its utilization. 
(iii)    Storage and Warehousing  

 112
 
(B) Department of Consumer Affairs 
  
(i) BIS– Standardization, Qua lity Control, Certification 
and their Regulation. 
(ii) Essential Commodities – Availability and Monitoring 
of Prices. 
 
3. The Committee then took evidence of  the representatives of the Reliance 
Industries Limited (Petroleum Busine ss) on (i) The Standard of Weights & 
Measures Amendment Bill, 2005 and (ii) The Standards of Weights & Measures 
(Enforcement) Amendment Bill,  2005.  The Committee drew the attention of the 
representatives towards Direction 58 of  the Directions by the Speaker.  The 
representatives then expl ained the latest automatio n technology (Audit Trail 
Mechanism) in the petroleum retailing in dustry with the help of Power Point 
presentation.  The represent atives also responded to the queries raised by the 
Members of the Committee.   The following points were discussed by the 
Committee at length:- 
 
(i) How to ensure correct deliv ery of petroleum products to 
consumers at Retail Outlets; 
(ii) Need to encourage use of new  technology specifically ‘ self-
regulation’ which benefits consumers and brings more 
transparency; 
(iii) Need to use ‘Proving Cans’ in measuring the petroleum 
products; 
(iv) Repairer licenc e for manufacturers by Central Government 
to be valid throughout the country; 
(v) Need to use modern technology to detect adulteration in 
petrol/diesel outlets; and 
-4- 
(vi) Need to introduce electronic locking system at Petrol Pumps 
to prevent adulteration and short measuring at petroleum 
outlets. 
 

 113
4. The Hon’ble Chairman than thanked the representatives of 
Reliance Industries Limted for appearing before the Committee and 
tendering evidence before them. 
(The representatives of Reliance Industries Limited then 
withdrew). 
5. The Committee than resumed their discussion with the 
representatives of Conf ederation of Indian Industr y (C.I.I.) regarding (i)  
the Standard of Weights & Measures Amendment Bill, 2005 and (ii) the 
Standards of Weights & Measures (E nforcement) Amendment Bill, 2005.  
Hon’ble Chairman invited the attention of the r epresentatives towards 
Direction 58 of the Direction by t he Speaker and asked them to explain 
their viewpoints with regard to  proposed Amendments in the above-
mentioned Bills.  The witnesses res ponded to the queries raised by the 
Members.  The following points emerged out of the discussion:- 
(i) Need to disclose the name and address of manufacturer, 
Maximum Retail Price (M.R.P. ) and ingredients on the label 
of packed commodities; 
 
(ii) The word ‘Central Govern ment’ may be inserted along with 
the words ‘State Government ’ wherever appearing in the 
Acts. 
 
(iii) Sharing of fees collected by  the Special Verification Agent 
(SVA)towards the verification/reverification of Standard of 
Weights & Measures instruments;  
 
(iv) Compounding of offences; and 
 
(v) Need to integrate both the Acts into a single piece of 
legislation. 
 

 114
6. The Chairman then thanked the representatives for appearing 
before the Committee and explaining their views. 
The verbatim  record of the proceedings has been kept on record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

 115
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PU BLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON 
TUESDAY, THE 27TH SEPTEMBER, 2005. 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Commi ttee Room ‘C’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
3.       Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
4.       Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar 
5.       Shri Atma Singh Gill 
6.       Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
7.       Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
7. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
8. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
9.  Smt. Daggubati Purandeswari 
10.  Shri Ajit Kumar Singh 
11.  Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
13. Shri T.S. Bajwa 
14. Shri Palden Tsering Gyamtso 
15. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
16. Shri  Nabam Rebia 
17. Shri Vikram Verma 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director  
 
 
 

 116
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
 
  
1.  Shri L. Mansingh                          -           Secretary  
2. 
Smt. Alka Sirohi                       -           Additional Secretary    
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE 
(LEGISLATIVE DEPRTMENT) 
 
1. Shri S.R. Dhaleta - Joint Secretary and  
   Legislative Counsel 
 
2. Shri N.K. Ambastha - Deputy Legislative Counsel 
 
 
2. At the outset Hon’ble Chairman we lcomed the representatives of the 
Department of Consumer Affairs and Ministry of Law & Justice (Legislative 
Department) to the sitting of the Commi ttee and drew their attention towards 
Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.  The Committee then took the 
evidence of the representatives  w.r.t.  (i) The Standa rds of Weights & Measures 
(Amendment) Bill, 2005; and (ii) The Standards of  Weights & Measures 
(Enforcement) Amendment Bill, 2005. The following important points were 
discussed by the Committee at length:- 
(i) Overlapping of jurisdiction w.r.t. ‘Packed Commodities’ especially food and 
drugs which are covered under separate laws; 
 
(ii) Need for declaration of quantit y, origin, complete address of 
manufacturer/packer on  packaged commodities; 
(iii) Exemptions to the commodities  meant for import/ export from the 
requirement of Standards of  Weights and Measures. 
 
(iv) Sharing of fees colle cted by Special Verification Agent  to be part of 
relevant Rules and not incorporated in  the Act; 

 117
(v) Prescribing    qualification fo r Inspection Officers under Section 46 G; 
(vi) Harmonising the penal provisi ons of the Standards of Weights & 
Measures (Enforcement) Act with the Indian Penal Code; 
(vii) Need to eliminate disc repancies in the mode of tr ial for parallel offences 
and discrepances in classification of  offences as “compoundable” and 
“non-compoundable”; 
(viii) Need to omit the “explanation” clause from Section 62 so as to bring 
clarity in the provisions; 
(ix) Amalgamation of both these Acts into a single piece of legislation. 
3. The Chairman then thanked the repr esentatives for tendering evidence  
before the Committee. 
           The verbatim  record of the proceedings has been kept on record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 118
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PU BLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON 
THURSDAY, THE 19TH OCTOBER, 2005. 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room ‘53’ 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
8. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
9. Shri Ranen Barman 
10. Shri Alakesh Dass 
11. Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar 
12. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
13. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
14. Shri Ajit Kumar Singh 
9. Shri Zora Singh Mann 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
11. Shri Palden Tsering Gyamtso 
12. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
13. Smt. Bimba Raikar 
14. Shri  Nabam Rebia 
15. Shri Vikram Verma 
16. Shri Vijay Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Bhandari   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
5. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director  
 

 119
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE GOVERNMENT OF RAJASTHAN 
1. Shri Ashok Sampatram - Principal Secretary to  
Government,Industrial 
Department 
2. Shri K.N. Gupta  - Commissioner, 
      Industries 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE GOVERNMENT OF NCT, DELHI 
 
1. Shri K.S. Mehra  - Principal Secretary-cum- 
      C o m m i s s i o n e r ,  
      Food & Supplies Deptt. 
2. Shri M. Ravikanth  - Controller, Legal Metrology 
 
 
2. At the outset Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of 
the Government of Rajasthan & Government of NCT, Delhi to the sitting of 
the Committee and drew their attention to the provisions contained in 
Direction 58 of the Directions by  the Speaker. The Committee then 
proceeded to take evidence on the am endment Bills viz. (i) the Standards 
of Weights & Measures (Enforcement ) Amendment Bill, 2005; and (ii) the 
Standards of Weights & Measures  (Amendment) Bill, 2005.  The 
representatives then briefed the Committee and expressed their views on 
the various clauses of the Bills and other matters relating thereto.  The 
representatives replied to the quer ies raised by the Members of the 
Committee. 

 120
3. The following points were discussed by the Committee at length:- 
(i) Need to retain Section 23 in the Act, 1976 so as to 
promote the use standard and metric units instead of 
allowing the non-metric units for a limited period; 
(ii) Need to strengthen the Re gional Reference Standard 
Laboratories (RRSLs)  and insertion of the words 
‘such other places’   in the Act being  financial 
burden to the States; 
(iii) The collection of fees for verification of secondary  by 
RRSLs and the addition of the words ‘payment of 
such fees and’ to Section 26(1); 
(iv) The management and cont rol of Regional Reference 
Standard Laboratories. 
(v) The deletion of Section 36 (8) of 1976 Act. 
(vi)  The words ‘sale price’ under Section 19(iv) may be 
substituted by ‘retail sale price’; 
(vii) Deletion of Sections 16,  17 & 18 of the Standards of 
Weights & Measures Act, 1985. 
(viii) The power of issue of manufacturing licences. 
(ix) The introduction of the Special Verification Agency.  
(x) The power of superintendenc e and control over the 
functionaries.  
(xi) Maintenance of Transparency in the functioning of 
Weights & Measures Department under the Scheme 
‘Shudh Ke Liye Yudh’; 

 121
(xi) The prescription of the  minimum fine in the Act for 
violation of various provisions of the Act. 
(xii) Need to increase the str ength of Inspectors of Legal 
Metrology Department of Delhi; and 
(xiii) The applicability of the provisions of Indian Penal 
Code in cases of the offence committed under 
Weights & Measures Act. 
4. The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee and tendering evidence before them. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
       
 
 

 122
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING  COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PU BLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, THE 21TH DECEMBER, 2005. 
 
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room ‘139’ 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
Present 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
15. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
16. Shri Suresh Angadi 
17. Shri Alakesh Dass 
18. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
19. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
20. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
21. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
22. Smt. Daggubati Purandaswari 
23. Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
17. Shri Vijay Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director  
 
 
 
 
 
       

 123
2. At the outset Hon’ble Chairm an  welcomed the Members to the 
sitting  of the Committee.  Thereafter, the Committee took up the Draft 
Report on (i) the Standards of Weights & Measures (Amendment)  Bill, 
2005; and (ii) the Standards of Weights & Measures (Enforcement) 
Amendment  Bill, 2005 for consideration.  The Committee adopted the 
Report with minor  amendment/modification.  
3. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to make 
consequential changes arising out of the factual verification of the Report 
by the Department of Consumer Affairs and finalise the report and 
thereafter present/lay the same to the House in the current Session of the 
Parliament. 
4.  XXX   XXX    XXX 
5. XXX   XXX    XXX  
  The Committee then adjourned. 
       
 
 
 
   
 