 
 
 
 
      STANDING  COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD,CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
    (2008-2009) 
 
     FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY  OF   CONSUMER   AFFAIRS, 
FOOD    AND   PUBLIC   DISTIRBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
{Action Taken by  the Government on the  recommendations/observations, 
contained    in    the  Twenty third   Report  of  the Committee on  Demands 
for   Grants   (2008 - 2009)   of     the    Ministry    of     Consumer     Affairs, 
Food and  Public Distribution (Department  of Food and Public Distribution)} 
 
 
 
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SBHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DLEHI 
December, 2008/    Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) 
26 

 
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2008-2009) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY  OF   CONSUMER   AFFAIRS, 
FOOD    AND   PUBLIC   DISTIRBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on  the recommendations/observations, 
contained    in    the  Twenty third Report  of  the Committee on  Demands 
for   Grants   (2008 - 2009)   of    the    Ministry   of    Consumer     Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution)} 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.12.2008 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.12.2008 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SBHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DLEHI 
December, 2008/  Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) 
 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 
   
 
   
 
CHAPTER  I Report.  ………….. 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
Recommendations/ Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government.  
 
…………. 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
Recommendations/ Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies. 
 
…………. 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Recommendations / Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the committee. 
 
 
…………. 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited.  
 
…………. 
 
 
  
APPENDICES 
 
 
I  Minutes of the Twelfth sitting of the Committee held on                    
8 December, 2008. 
…………. 
 
II Analysis of  the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty -third Report of the 
Committee. 
 
…………. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
…………. 
                                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER   
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION  (2008-2009). 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav     -   Chairman      
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Govinda Aroon Ahuja 
3. Shri Suresh Angadi 
4. Shri Alakesh Das 
5. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
6. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
7. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
8. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
9. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna  
10. Shri Wangyuh W. Konyak 
11. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
12. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
13. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
14. Shri Munshi Ram 
15. Shri Ghuran Ram 
16. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
17. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
18. Adv. (Smt.) P. Satheedevi 
19. Shri Chandrabhan Singh # 
20. Smt.Meena Singh * 
21. Vacant 
  
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri T.S Bajwa** 
23. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
24. Shri Mangala Kisan 
25. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik   
26. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
27. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
28. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
29. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu  
30. Shri Matilal Sarkar 
31. Vacant  
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Shri A.K. Singh     -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt.  Veena Sharma    -  Director 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya     -  Deputy Secretary-I 
4. Shri Jagdish Prasad    -  Deputy Secretary-II 
5. Shri Rakesh Bhardwaj    -  Executive Officer 
________________________________________________________________ 
* Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent to her resignation from Lok Sabha 
w.e.f. 11.11.2008 
** Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent to his retirement from Rajya 
Sabha w.e.f. 25.11.2008 
# Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent to his disqualification from         
Lok Sabha w.e.f. 5.12.2008 on Ground of Defection. 
 
(ii)

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer 
Affairs and Public Distributio n (2008-2009) having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Twenty -sixth 
Report on  action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty third Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2008 -2009) of the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution). 
  
2. The Twenty -third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in   
Rajya Sabha on 16 April, 2008. The Government  furnished replies 
indicating action taken on all the recommendations contained in the 
Report on 12 August, 2008. The Report was considered and adopted by 
the Committee at their sitting held on 8 December, 2008.  
 
3. An     analysis    of    the    action   t aken   by   the   Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix-II. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI       DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV 
-- December, 2008           Chairman 
-- Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)     Standing Committee on Food,  
                                                          Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on  the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty third Report (14 th Lok Sabha) 
on “Demands for Grants (2008 -2009)” pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
 
1.2 The Twenty-Third Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid 
in the Rajya Sabha on 16 th April, 2008.  It contained 31 recommendations. Action Taken 
Notes in respect of all the 31 recommendations contained in the Report have been 
received and categorized as follows: - 
 
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 
Serial Nos. – 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 25, 
26, 28 and 29 
  
(Paragraph Nos.  – 3.16, 3.17, 3.18, 3.19, 4.26, 4.72, 4.73, 4.74, 4.75, 5.7, 
5.11, 5.24, 5.25, 5.32, 5.46, 6.8, 6.14, 6.26, 7.26, 7.28 and 7.29) 
 
(Chapter –II Total 21) 
 
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies received from the Government: 
 
Serial Nos.  – 5, 6, 14 and 24 
 
(Paragraph Nos.  – 4.24, 4.25, 4.76 and 6.25) 
 
(Chapter –III, Total 4) 
 
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
Serial Nos.  – 27, 30 and 31 
 
(Paragraph Nos.  – 7.27, 8.13 and 8.14) 
 
(Chapter –IV Total 3) 
 
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which the final replies of the Government are 
still awaited: 
 
Serial Nos.  – 8, 9 and 20 
 
(Paragraph Nos.  – 4.27, 4.28 and 5.39) 
 
(Chapter –V, Total    3) 

1.3 In their Twenty -third Report the C ommittee had recommended for 
corrective action to ensure that the position of under spending is not repeated 
year after year; spreading of expenditure evenly over all the four quarters of the 
year; procurement of wheat from non -traditional States; fixing o f stock limit for 
purchase of wheat by private traders; drawing of long term plans to arrest the 
increase in prices of wheat & pulses; review of BPL list for elimination of bogus & 
ineligible ration cards; issue of roaming ration cards to migrants within S tate; 
regular visits by area officers to review & monitor the working of PDS; 
establishment of Village Grain Banks to benefit the intended beneficiaries; 
liquidity of outstanding dues of FCI; reassessment of requirement of storage 
space and maximum utiliza tion of owned capacity by proper scientific 
management; effective remedial measures to bring down transit and storage 
losses; abolition of proxy labour in FCI; early disposal of pending vigilance cases; 
implementation of Tata Consultancy Services recommend ations to stop the 
increase in establishment cost of CWC; simplication of procedures involved for 
advancing loans to Sugar Mills from Sugar Development Fund (SDF); disbursal 
of maximum amount of SDF for the development of Sugar Mills; taking action to 
promote and popularize the use of non -traditional secondary sources of edible 
oils; strengthening of enforcement machinery against the adulterators of edible 
oils; and enhancing of analysis of samples of edible oils to keep a check on the 
widespread adulteration in edible oils.   Some of these recommendations have 
been accepted by the Government, while some of the recommendations the 
Committee do not want to pursue in view of the action taken replies received 

from the Government.  In some cases the Government h as submitted only the 
interim replies to the recommendations. 
 
1.4 The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the 
recommendations for which only interim replies have been received from the 
Government be furnished to the Committee within thre e months of the 
presentation of the Report. 
 
1.5  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations, which need reiteration or merit comments.   
 
 
A. Huge underspending under non- plan funds 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 3 Para 3.18) 
  
1.6 The Committee had recommended as below: - 
 
“The Committee note that there is huge underspending under 
different schemes, both plan and non -plan during the years     
2006-07 and 2007 -08 especially in the programmes related to 
loans for cane development, reimbursement of internal transport 
and freight charges to sugar factories on export shipment of 
sugar, loans to sugar mills for bagasse based cogeneration power 
projects and loans for production of anhydrous alcohol/ethanol.  
Similarly, the position/situation is quite dismal during the year 
2007-08 as physical achievement in the first three quarters have 
been reported to be ‘NIL’ in case of following seven plan schemes 
viz. (i) Construction of Godowns by FCI/State Governments, etc. 
(ii) Integrated Information System in Foodgrains Management 
(IISFM), (iii) Computerization of PDS Operations, (iv)  
Strengthening of PDS and Capacity Building, (v) NSI, Kanpur (vi) 
Consultancies, Training and Research and (vii) Village Grain 
Bank.  Further, the physical achievement during the fourth quarter 
also under the two schemes viz. Computerisation of PDS and NSI 
Kanpur is again ‘NIL’.  The reasons put forth by the Department 
for the under spending which include non -completion of certain 
procedural formali ties, non -furnishing of relevant papers in time 
etc. are not acceptable to the Committee.  Moreover, NIL 
expenditure under such very important schemes of the 
Department is a matter of serious concern.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Department should take 
the corrective actions to ensure that the position of underspending 
is not repeated year after year.” 
 
 

1.7 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under:- 
 
“The Committee has rightly observed that there had been un der 
spending of non -plan funds during 2006 -2007 and 2007 -08 in the 
Programme/Schemes relating to loans for cane development, 
reimbursement of internal transport and freight charges to sugar 
factories on export shipment of sugar, loans to sugar mills for 
bagasse based cogeneration power projects and loans for production 
anhydrous alcohol/ethanol. The recommendations of the Committee 
have been noted for taking correcting actions. In this regard all the 
Grant Controlling Authorities were requested vide letter No I -
34/3/2007-08 Budget dated 26 th May, 2008 to take necessary steps 
to utilize the funds fully.” 

 
1.8 While noting that there was huge underspending of funds under 
different schemes, both Plan and Non-Plan during the years 2006, 2007 and 
2007-08, the Co mmittee in their earlier report had recommended that the 
Government should take all corrective actions to ensure that the position 
of underspending is not repeated year after year.  The Committee are not 
convinced with the action taken reply, furnished by the Ministry stating that 
the recommendations of the Committee have been noted for taking 
corrective action.  The Committee feel that the concern of the Committee 
has not been taken seriously by the Government as they have not 
mentioned about any steps tak en so far to ensure that the position of 
underspending is not repeated.  As expenditure on some of very important 
schemes remained nil during earlier years, the Committee desire that 
specific steps should be taken to address the problem of underspending.  
The State/UT Governments should also be persuaded to review the 
position scheme-wise and take action to ensure timely expenditure under 
each scheme.  
 
 
  

B Non-receipt of utilisation certificates  
   
Recommendation (S. No. 4, Para No. 3.19) 
 
1.9  The Committee had recommended as below: - 
 
“The Committee also note that an amount of Rs.26.28 crore was 
released to States/UTs from 1989 to 2001 for purchase of vans and 
construction of godowns but utilization certificates have not been 
furnished by the States/UT s till date.  Similarly, an amount of  Rs. 
21.75 crore was released to 9 States under the Scheme 
construction of godown from 1992 -93 to 1998 -99 but utilization 
certificates have not yet been received  from these States.  The 
reasons furnished by the Depart ment viz.  the funds released by 
the Department proved to be inadequate, some States purchased 
higher/lesser capacity vans which was not permitted in pattern 
approved  under the scheme, etc. are  not acceptable to the 
Committee.  The Committee also note th at the Department has 
assured the Committee to take up the matter at higher levels and 
funds for other schemes to these States will be released only after 
the receipt of the utilization certificate of earlier releases.  The 
Committee are of the view that n on-release of funds for other 
schemes till receipt of utilization certificates of earlier releases is 
not a solution of the problem as it would hamper the progress of the 
other schemes.  The Committee feel that mere assurance on the 
part of the Department is not going to serve any purpose and 
therefore, strongly recommend that the matter may be immediately 
taken at the highest levels for an early settlement of the issue as lot 
of public money has remained unaccounted   for during the last 
almost 20 years.  The action taken in this regard should be 
communicated to the Committee at the earliest.” 
 
 
1.10 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under:- 
 
“The matter has been taken at the level of State Food Secretaries.  
It is being further followed up at higher levels.” 
 
 

1.11 The Committee had noted that a substantial amount was released to 
States/UTs under different schemes, but the utilization certificates had not 
been received from the States.  They had, therefore, recommended that the 
matter may be immediately taken up at the higher level for an early 
settlement of the issue.  The Ministry, in their action taken reply has merely 
stated that the matter has been taken up at the level of State Food 
Secretaries and is being further followed up at higher levels.  The 
Committee are anguished to note that the matter is not being given due 
attention it requires, as apparently the Department has not made any 
earnest attempt for the settlement of huge amount of public money that has 
remained unaccount ed for more than twenty years.  The Committee, 
therefore, urge upon the Ministry to make concerted efforts for a time 
bound settlement of the issue by taking up the matter at higher level. 
 
 
 

C. Diversion of PDS foodgrains 
 
 
  Recommendation (S. No. 10, Para No. 4.72) 
 
1.12 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
 
“The Committee find that diversion of foodgrains meant for the 
poorest of the poor is the biggest menace in the functioning of 
Public Distribution System.   The studies conducted by Programme 
Evaluation Organisation (PEO) and ORG Marg to evaluate the 
Targeted Public Distribution System in the country have revealed 
diversion of foodgrains in most of the States. The worst position in 
this regard is in the North Eastern States where diversion upto 10 0 
per cent in case of wheat and upto 97.7 per cent in case of rice has 
been reported.   The Committee take a very serious view of the 
diversion and is of the opinion that the very purpose of PDS would 
be defeated if the PDS foodgrains do not reach the inten ded 
beneficiaries and are instead diverted to the open market.   The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should 
evolve a foolproof mechanism within a fixed time frame to check 
the diversion of foodgrains.   Although the management and 
operation of PDS is the joint responsibility of Central and State 
Governments concerned but Central Government is responsible for 
procurement and allocation of foodgrains to the State Governments 
which in turn distribute foodgrains through their agencies within 
their respective States.   The Committee, therefore, emphasise that 
the issue of diversion of foodgrains should be tackled with utmost 
seriousness and recommend that to check the diversion of 
foodgrains, a joint special audit by officials of FCI and State 
Governments should be conducted in the event of off -take being 
abnormally high. 
 
The committee feel that diversion of foodgrains from Fair 
Price Shops to the open market is a matter of serious concern 
which urgently needs to be looked into. The Committee not e that 
one of the major reasons for diversion of foodgrains from fair price 
shops is the low commission being provided to the fair price shop 
owners inducing them to indulge in malpractices.    The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the matter regarding incr ease of commission 
of fair price shop owners should be taken up with the State 
Governments, as a reasonable increase in their commission would 
make the Fair price shops economically more viable and could help 
in curbing the diversion of PDS foodgrains to the open market.  
 
The Committee also note that to check diversion of PDS 
foodgrains, technological interventions such as tracking of 

movement of vehicles carrying TPDS foodgrains through Global 
Positioning System (GPS) devices, issuance of Bar Coded 
Coupons with rations cards for delivery of TPDS foodgrains to 
genuine ration card holders, capturing of biometric features of card 
holders while issuing ration cards to avoid issuance of bogus or 
fake ration cards and introduction of smart cards for similar 
purposes are being tried in different States.   The Committee feel 
that all these measures and also other monitoring mechanism in 
place like formation of vigilance Committees, involvement of 
Panchayati Raj Institutions and self -help groups in the activities of 
public distribution system should be implemented in the right 
earnest to achieve the desired results.” 
 
 
1.13 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated that the 
following measures have been taken: 
 
“(1) Evaluation of TPDS : 
 
To strengthen the TPDS, Government. got it evaluated 
through PEO of the Planning Commission and ORG MARG, New 
Delhi. Their reports received in 2005 pointed out certain 
shortcomings such as diversion/leakages of foodgrains, inclusion 
and exclusion errors in identification of  targeted beneficiaries and 
non-viability of operation of Fair Price Shops. 
 
(2) 9-Point Action Plan : 
 
Based upon PEO and ORG MARG evaluation reports, a 9 -
Point Action Plan was prepared in 2006. It is being implemented by 
the State and UT Governments. The Nine Points Action Plan for 
strengthening the TPDS is as under:- 
                                                                         
1.         Continuous review of the BPL and AAY lists to eliminate 
bogus ration cards and to ensure coverage of only eligible BPL and 
Antyodaya families. 
  
2.         Ensuring leakage-free and diversion-free distribution of PDS 
commodities, regular inspection by different levels of functionaries, 
strict action against guilty persons/agencies. 
  
3.         Involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions in PDS 
operations – PRI representatives on Advisory Committees, running 
of fair price shops by Panchayats and effective representation of 
Panchayati Raj representatives on Vigilance Committees. 
  

4.         Ensuring transparency  in working of PDS, display of BPL 
and AAY lists by fair price shops, observance of notified timings by 
fair price shops. 
  
5.         Use of Information Technology, Computerization of TPDS 
operations, display of fair price shop -wise and district wise 
allocation of PDS commodities on web-sites for public scrutiny. 
  
6.         Carryout door-step delivery of PDS commodities to fair price 
shops. 
  
7.         Ensuring timely availability of and issuance of foodgrains by 
fair price shops. 
  
8.         Creating awareness among public about PDS operations, 
training Vigilance Committees of intricacies of PDS Operations. 
  
9.         Making fair price shops financially viable entities -allowing 
them to sell non PDS items etc. 
 
 
The Department of Food and Public Distr ibution is 
continuously reviewing progress of implementation of the 9 -Point 
Action Plan.  Secretary, Government of India has been taking it up 
with Chief Secretaries of States and UT Governments, and Minister 
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distributi on has written to 
Chief Ministers drawing their personal attention for taking strict 
action to eliminate diversion and leakages under the TPDS.State 
and UT Governments have reported reduction in diversions and 
leakages of foodgrains under TPDS through measures like – 
 
(a) Elimination of bogus ration cards, 
 
(b) Introduction of coupons/bar coded coupons in some 
States, 
 
(c) Allocation of Fair Price Shops to Women’s Self Help 
Groups, and 
 
(d) Door delivery of foodgrains upto Fair Price Shops. 
  
(3) Concurrent Evaluation: 
 
Concurrent evaluation of TPDS functioning has been taken 
up in 26 States and UTs. The National Council of Applied Economic 
Research and Indian Institute of Public Administration have been 
assigned this study in 12 and 14 States and UTs, respectively. The 

reports of NCAER for 12 States have been received. Compared to 
the earlier findings of PEO and ORG Marg, these reports have 
revealed improvement in functioning of TPDS in some of these 
States. 
 
(4) TPDS Operations made transparent and amenable to RTI Act  
provisions: 
 
With a view to make functioning of the TPDS amenable to 
public scrutiny, a model Citizens’ Charter was issued by the Central 
Government in 1997 and again in 2006 for adoption by the State 
Governments/UT Administrations. A revised Citizens’ Charte r has 
been issued in July, 2007 for adoption and implementation by 
State/UT Governments for facilitating use by Citizens of provisions 
of Right to information (RTI) Act, 2005 in relation to functioning of 
the TPDS. 
 
(5) Rationalization of APL allocations:  
 
Since the allocations of wheat and rice to States and UTs for 
the APL category made during earlier years of their surplus stocks 
in the Central Pool were very high and the actual offtake was very 
low, these allocations have been rationalized for wheat an d rice 
from June, 2006 and April, 2007, respectively. This has been done 
by linking the allocations with the offtake of previous three years 
(2003-04 to 2005 -06) so as to make them realistic, in line with the 
actual offtake and manageable within the stocks  available in the 
Central Pool. 
 
(6)  Road-map for reforming TPDS : 
 
The Department has directed the State Governments to 
pursue road-map for reforming the TPDS– 
 
(a) Monitoring of implementation of 9 Point Action Plan: 
 
Since implementation of 9 Point Action Plan by State and UT 
Governments has shown improvement in the functioning of TPDS 
in many of States and UTs., the Department will continue its 
monitoring for better implementation through periodic reviews. 
 
(b)     Issuance of revised orders for liftin g of foodgrains by State 
and UT Governments from FCI depots and validity period for this 
purpose: 
 
While allocating foodgrains to States and UT Governments, 
presently a period of 2 months is allowed for lifting from FCI depots. 

This is to enable the State and UT Governments to lift foodgrains 
during the month preceding the allocation month so that 
subsequent internal allocations and distribution may be organised 
within States and UTs in the first half of the allocation month. To 
streamline this process, rev ised orders have been issued by the 
Department in February, 2008, so that State and UT Governments. 
may lift foodgrains by 15 th of every allocation month, ensure their 
proper distribution during that month and chances for diversion are 
minimized. 
 
(c) Monthly certification by Village Panchayats/Vigilance 
Committees/Urban Local Bodies/Self Help Groups for delivery of 
foodgrains to FPS and distribution to ration card holders : 
 
In order to ensure increased transparency in functioning of 
FPSs, the State and UT  Governments have been directed in 
March, 2008 to introduce monthly certification by Village 
Panchayats/Vigilance Committees/Urban Local Bodies/Self Help 
Groups for delivery of foodgrains to FPS and their distribution to 
ration card holders. Such a certifi cation of actual delivery of 
foodgrains to Fair Price Shops in time and their distribution to ration 
card holders is also expected to streamline functioning of Vigilance 
Committees at Fair Price Shop level. 
 
(d) Distribution of wheat flour/fortified wheat flour under TPDS: 
 
To facilitate distribution of wheat flour/fortified wheat flour 
under TPDS instead of wheat in convergence with other 
Government. programmes/schemes for nutritional improvement of 
targeted beneficiaries, the Department has issued revised  policy 
guidelines on this subject in January, 2008.  
 
(e) Publicity-cum-Awareness Campaign:   
 
For greater public scrutiny of TPDS functioning through the 
provisions of the RTI Act, 2005, a publicity -cum-awareness 
campaign on TPDS is being taken up as a part of the plan scheme 
on strengthening of TPDS. Revised guidelines for taking up the 
campaign have been issued and proposals invited from State 
Government for sanction. In addition, the Department is also taking 
up such a campaign at its level. 
 
(f) Training Programmes: 
 
As a part of a Plan Scheme on strengthening of TPDS, the 
Department will support training programmes to be taken up by 

State and UT Governments for TPDS functionaries and members 
of Vigilance Committees, etc. during the11th Plan period. 
 
(g) Integrated Information System for Foodgrain Management 
(IISFM):    
 
A project named Integrated Information System for 
Foodgrains Management has been implemented in the Food 
Corporation of India. While coverage of FCI offices and depots has 
been completed un der this project, depots/godowns of State 
Governments. in Decentralised Procurement States are to be 
covered, during the current year. 
 
(h) Computerization of TPDS operations:   
 
Digitization of PDS operations at National/State/District and 
Block levels al l over the country has been taken up under a Plan 
Scheme on Computerization of TPDS during the 11 th Plan Period.    
For this the NISG has been appointed as consultant, it is  studying  
processes and systems of TPDS functioning in four pilot States 
namely A ssam, Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh and Delhi  to 
prepare a detailed report for further work under the project. 
 
  (i) Introduction of new technologies in functioning of TPDS: 
 
Piloting of Global Positioning System (GPS) for tracking 
movement of vehicles ca rrying TPDS commodities has been taken 
up in Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu and Delhi”. 
 
 

1.14 The Committee had in their earlier report found that diversion of 
foodgrains meant for the poorest of the poor was the biggest menace in the 
functioning of Public Distribution System.  While taking a very serious view 
of the diversion of PDS foodgrains, the Committee had observed that the 
very purpose of PDS would be defeated if the PDS foodgrains did not reach 
the intended beneficiaries and were instead diverted to th e open market.  
The Committee, therefore, had recommended that to tackle the issue of 
diversion of foodgrains, a Joint Special Audit by the officials of the FCI and 
State Governments be conducted in the event of offtake being abnormally 
high.  The Committee had also recommended that the matter of increase in 
commission of fair price shops should be taken up with the State 
Governments to make the fair price shops economically more viable.  From 
the action taken reply furnished by the Ministry, the Committee find that the 
Government has taken various steps to check diversion of PDS foodgrains. 
However, the reply is silent on the issue of conducting a Joint Special 
Audit by the officials of FCI and State Governments in case of offtake being 
abnormally high and the increase in the commission of fair price shop 
owners. The Committee reiterate that the Government should take steps for 
conducting a Joint Special Audit by the officials of the FCI and concerned 
State Governments.  They should also take up the matter w ith the 
concerned State Governments to increase the commission of fair price 
shop owners. 
 
 

 
 
D. Liquidation of outstanding dues of FCI. 
 
 
  Recommendation (S. No. 15, Para No. 5.7) 
 
1.15 The Committee had recommended as below: - 
 
“The Committee note with concern that a large amount is still 
outstanding against the Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry 
of Human Resource Development on account of foodgrains 
provided to them for various welfare schemes on payment basis.  
Although the balance outstanding principal amount has decreased 
yet the interest on the principal amount has considerably increased 
over the years.  The outstanding dues which were Rs.19,898.64 
crore in 2006 -07 from these Ministries, has increased to 
Rs.21,902.80 crore as on 31 st March, 2 007, including the interest 
accrued on the principal amount. Since the interest accrued is also 
loaded on the food subsidy bill, the Committee feel that inability to 
liquidate the outstanding dues  of FCI over the years indicate 
financial indiscipline.  Th e Committee view this with grave concern 
and desire that the Department should take up the matter at the 
highest level with the concerned Ministry so that the outstanding 
dues are liquidated at the earliest and the burden on Food Subsidy 
is reduced.  The C ommittee also desire that a time limit should be 
fixed within which the Central Ministries should be required to make 
payments”. 
 
 
1.16 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under:- 
  
“The issue of liquidation of outstanding dues of the  FCI pending 
against the Ministry of Rural Development has been taken up at the 
highest level.  The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs(CCEA), 
in its meeting held on 8.11.2007, considered the Note dated 
29.10.07 submitted by this Department and approved the proposals 
of this Department to direct the Ministry of Rural 
Development(MoRD)/Ministry of Finance(MoF) to settle the balance 
outstanding dues of FCI as on 31.08.07 amounting to Rs.19,000 
crore for foodgrains supplied for various welfare schemes of the  
MoRD by cash payments to FCI during 2007 -08/2008-09 and 
directed the MOF to make adequate budgetary provision in the 
budget of MoRD for supply of foodgrains by FCI for the various 
welfare programmes from 2007 -08 onwards and also directed that 
the foodgrains would be supplied by FCI for the various schemes of 
MoRD on pre -payment basis.  This matter has subsequently been 

regularly taken up with the Ministry of Rural Development and 
Ministry of Finance for early implementation of these decisions of 
the CCEA. Similarly, the issue of making payment to the FCI for 
supply of foodgrains to the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development Ministry for their Mid Day Meal(MDM) programme 
has also been taken up with that Ministry regularly”.   
 
 

1.17 The Committee, in their earlier report, had noted with concern that a 
 substantial amount was outstanding against the Ministries of Rural 
Development and Human Resource Development on account of foodgrains 
provided to them for various welfare schemes on payment basis.  While 
expressing grave concern over the matter, the Committee had desired that 
the matter be taken up at the highest level of the concerned Ministry.  The 
Committee had also desired that a time limit should be fixed, within which, 
the Central Ministries be required to ma ke payments.  The Committee are 
not convinced with the action taken reply of the Ministry which states that 
the matter has been taken up with the concerned Ministries regularly and is 
silent on the issue of fixing a time limit for making payments. The 
Committee feel that the matter has not been dealt with the seriousness it 
requires as for early liquidation of the outstanding dues, more earnest 
attempts are required to be made. The inability to liquidate the outstanding 
dues over the years indicate financial indiscipline and lack of efforts on the 
part of FCI. While reiterating their recommendation, the Committee desire 
that the Ministry should take up the matter with more seriousness and a 
time limit should be fixed for the Ministries to make payments to the FCI.   
  
 
 
 
 
 

E Need to identify/acquire suitable land for construction of  godowns 
in Lakshdweep etc.  
 
  Recommendation (S. No. 18, Para No. 5.25) 
  
1.18 The Committee had recommended as below: - 
“The Committee Note that the Planning Commission has al located an 
amount of Rs.20.40 crore for the financial year   2007-08 for construction 
of godowns, but the entire fund could not be utilized due to non -
acquisition of land for construction of godowns by the FCI.   The 
Committee feel that there is lack of coor dination between the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution and States/UTs which 
resulted in non -acquisition of land for construction of godowns in the 
States.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution sho uld take up the matter urgently with 
States/UTs at highest level for identifying and providing suitable land for 
construction of godowns and ensure that the funds earmarked for the 
purpose do not remain unutilized.   The Committee also recommend that 
the pr oposal sent by UT of Lakshadweep for construction of godowns 
may be considered on priority basis and efforts should be made to 
resolve the problem of storage capacity there”. 
 
1.19 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under:- 
 
“The Gov ernment has decided that FCI would construct a storage 
godown at Lakshdweep during the XI th Five Year Plan under the Plan 
Scheme for construction of storage godowns.  The FCI has already 
taken up the matter with the Lakshdweep Administration for 
identification/acquisition of suitable land for construction of storage 
godowns.  Construction of godowns will be taken up immediately after 
suitable land is handed over to the FCI by the UT Administration. 
 
As regards land availability at other places, the matter h as been 
taken up with the concerned State Governments to identify suitable 
land for acquisition”.  
 
 

1.20 The Committee while viewing with concern that the funds earmarked 
for construction of godowns could not be fully utilised during the financial 
year 2007-08 due to non-acquisition of land for construction of godowns by 
FCI had asked the Department to take up the matter urgently with State 
Governments/UTs at the highest level for identifying and providing suitable 
land for construction of godowns.  In th e action taken reply furnished by 
the Department it has been stated that FCI has already taken up the matter 
with UT Administration of Lakshadweep and other State Governments to 
identify suitable land for acquisition.  
 
The Committee while appreciating the  efforts being made by the 
Department in the matter still feel that the matter needs to be dealt with 
more vigorously and desire that the matter may be expedited and accorded 
top most priority.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken in this regard.  
 
 

F Storage and transit losses.  
 
  Recommendation (S. No. 19, Para No. 5.32) 
 
1.21  The Committee had recommended as below:- 
 
“The Committee note that as a result of various measures taken by 
the Ministry, storage and transit losses have been reduced to a 
considerable extent but still they are quiet high.  The Committee 
feel that the issue of storage losses requires regular monitoring on 
the part of the Government as well by the technical staff posted in 
the field.  In the opinion of the Committee, the steps taken by FCI to 
prevent storage losses are not adequate.  Regular inspections and 
constant monitoring are required to ensure that losses do not 
increase further. The Committee desire that vigorous efforts should 
be made to minimize the losse s so that funds earmarked for the 
poorest of the poor reach the actual beneficiaries.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the concrete measures taken in this 
regard. 
 
The Committee are further constrained to note that 3320 
cases were initiated up t o 2007 where 18042 officials were held 
responsible for transit and storage losses.  A penalty of Rs.2.24 
crore was imposed on such officials.  From the above facts, the 
Committee concluded that the FCI is not serious about the storage 
and transit losses which occur due to human error.  The Committee 
desire that the FCI should improve its monitoring over field staff so 
that their losses are minimized.  Also they desire that FCI should 
also analyze the reasons for such a huge transit and storage losses 
and devise effective remedial measures to bring down such losses 
due to human negligence". 
1.22 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under:- 
“The recommendation of Committee has been noted. 
It is submitted that storage and transit loss cases are 
vigorously pursued.  Apart from recovery, (already indicated in the 
recommendation) penalties like dismissal, reduction in rank, 
recovery from pay, withholding promotion and withholding 
increments are also imposed on delinquents. 
 
In order to improve the m onitoring and reduction of losses, 
depots/rail heads which have been showing chronic transit and 
storage losses have been identified. Intensified checking is 
conducted in respect of these depots.  Field offices are advised to 
supervise/check every specials /rakes by a committee of officers 
both at loading and unloading points”. 

1.23 The Committee, while expressing the view that the issue of storage 
losses required regular monitoring on the part of the Government as well 
as by the technical staff posted in the fi eld had, in their earlier report, 
desired that vigorous efforts should be made to minimize such losses. The 
Committee had also desired that FCI should analyze the reasons for a huge 
transit and storage losses and devise effective remedial measures to bring  
down such losses caused due to human negligence. The Government in 
their action taken reply have stated that intensified checking is conducted 
in respect of depots/rail heads showing chronic transit and storage losses.  
However, they are silent on the iss ue of analyzing the reasons for transit 
and storage losses. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry 
should detect and analyze the reasons for such huge transit and storage 
losses and take suitable remedial steps so that these losses are reduced to 
minimum, if not eliminated altogether.  
 
 

G. Corruption cases in FCI. 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 21, Para No. 5.46) 
 
1.24 The Committee had recommended as below: - 
 
“The Committee are pained to note that despite various punitive and 
preventive measures, a  large number of corruption cases have been 
detected against the FCI officials during 2007.  The Committee are of 
the view that the corruption in FCI may be rampant on account of lack 
of institutional mechanism for vigilance available at the zonal and 
regional offices of FCI.  This fact has also been admitted by Secretary, 
Department of Food and Public Distribution during the course of 
evidence.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that FCI should 
strengthen its vigilance mechanism in coordination with the States/UTs 
so as to detect corrupt practices by FCI officers and take stringent 
punitive action against them, if found guilty.  The Committee feel that 
efforts should be made for early disposal of pending cases as delay in 
disposal of vigilance cases would  encourage corrupt practices and 
undermine the authority of law” 
1.25 Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under: - 
“Recommendations of the Committee are accepted.   
 
FCI is having adequate institutional set up from Headquarters 
level to f ield offices (i.e. District Office) level to check corruption. The 
functioning of vigilance mechanism is monitored through information 
received / called for from RO/ZO level, regularly.  Inspections/reviews 
are regularly conducted by CVO or by nominated se nior officers of 
CVO. Strengthening of vigilance mechanism is a continuous  process 
with strict implementation of the directions and guidelines of CVC and 
administrative ministry. 
 
The disposal of pending cases has accelerated in the last three 
years as shown below:-  
 
Period 
 
 
Opening Balance 
at the beginning 
of the year                                
Number  of 
cases added 
during the year                      
Total 
number of 
cases  
Number 
of cases 
finalised             
Closing 
Balance 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
2005 1219 2877 4096 1951 2145 
2006 2145 2940 5085 3081 2004 
2007 2004 2594 4598 3216 1382 
 
From the column No.6 it could be clear that pendency has been 
considerably reduced”. 
 
 

1.26 The Committee, in their earlier report, had noted that inspite of 
vigorous punitive and preventive measures taken by FCI, a large number of 
cases had been detected against FCI officials during the year 2007. The 
Committee had desired for an early disposal of all the pending cases. From 
the action taken reply furnished by the Government,  it is found that though  
consequent upon the regular inspections/reviews conducted by officers of 
CVO, the number of corruption cases have come down considerably during 
the year 2007, a lot of cases are still  pending finalization. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that besides strengthening the vigilance mechanism,  
sincere efforts be made for an early disposal of all the pending cases in a 
time bound manner.  
 
 

H. Establishment cost of CWC. 
 
  Recommendation (S. No. 23, Para No. 6.14) 
 
1.27 The Committee had recommended as below: - 
  
““TThhee  CCoommmmiitttteeee  rreeggrreettss  ttoo  nnoottee  tthhaatt  eexxppeennddiittuurree  oonn  eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  
ccoosstt  ooff  CCWWCC  iiss  ccoonnssttaannttllyy  iinnccrreeaassiinngg  ddeessppiittee  vvaarriioouuss  rreemmeeddiiaall  
mmeeaassuurreess  bbeeiinngg  aaddoopptteedd  bbyy  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  TThhee  eexxppeennddiittuurree  oonn  
EEssttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt  hhaass  rriisseenn  ffrroomm  RRss..  118888..4400  ccrroorree  dduurriinngg  tthhee  yyeeaarr  
22000044--0055  ttoo  RRss..  224400..6699  ccrroorree  dduurriinngg  tthhee  yyeeaarr  22000077--0088..  AAlltthhoouugghh  aa  
ssttuuddyy  wwaass  ccoonndduucctteedd  tthhrroouugghh  TTaattaa  CCoonnssuullttaannccyy  SSeerrvviicceess  ((TTCCSS))  ttoo  
ssuuggggeesstt  mmeeaassuurreess  ttoo  ccuurrttaaiill  tthhee  eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt  ooff  CCWWCC  yyeett  tthhee  
CCWWCC  ddiidd  nnoott  ggiivvee  dduuee  wweeiigghhttaaggee  ttoo  tthheeiirr  rreeccoommmmeennddaattiioonn  wwiitthh  tthhee  
rreessuulltt  tthheerree  iiss  nnoo  ccuurrttaaiillmmeenntt  iinn  tthhee  eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt  ooff  CCWWCC..  TThhee  
CCoommmmiitttteeee  ccaannnnoott  aacccceepptt  tthhee  pplleeaa  ooff  tthhee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  tthhaatt  tthhee  mmaaiinn  
rreeaassoonnss  ffoorr  iinnccrreeaassee  iinn  tthhee  eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt  wwaass  dduuee  ttoo  iinnccrreeaassee  
iinn  ssttaaffff  aanndd  ppaayy  rreevviissiioonn  ooff  tthheeiirr  eemmppllooyyeeeess  iinn  vviieeww  ooff  tthhee  ffaacctt  tthhaatt  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  rreedduucceedd  iittss  mmaannppoowweerr  bbyy  iinnttrroodduucciinngg  tthhee  VVRRSS..  TThhee  
CCoommmmiitttteeee  ddeessiirree  tthhaatt  aallll  rreeccoommmmeennddaattiioonnss  ooff  TTCCSS  sshhoouulldd  bbee  
iimmpplleemmeenntteedd  iinn  lleetttteerr  aanndd  ssppiirriitt  ssoo  tthhaatt  tthheerree  iiss  nnoo  iinnccrreeaassee  iinn  tthhee  
eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt  ooff  CCWWCC  iinn  tthhee  ccoommiinngg  yyeeaarrss””..    
 
1.28 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under:- 
  
““TThhee  rreeccoommmmeennddaattiioonnss  ooff  tthhee  TTaattaa  CCoonnssuullttaannccyy  SSeerrvviicceess  oonn  
MMaannppoowweerr  PPllaannnniinngg  wweerree  ppllaacceedd  bbeeffoorree  tthhee  BBooaarrdd  ooff  DDiirreeccttoorrss  aanndd  
tthhee  rreeccoommmmeennddaattiioonnss  aacccceepptteedd  hhaavvee  ggeenneerraallllyy  bbeeeenn  iimmpplleemmeenntteedd  
bbyy  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
The Corporation has given due consideration to the 
recommendations of the Tata Consultancy Services to curtail its 
establishment cost.  There was no fresh recruitment after 1998 and 
the Manpower has been reduc ed from 8954 during March 1998 to 
6059 as on March 2008.  
TThhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  iinnttrroodduucceedd  VVoolluunnttaarryy  RReettiirreemmeenntt  SScchheemmeess  
dduurriinngg  tthhee  yyeeaarrss  11999944,,  11999988,,  22000022  aanndd  22000055  iinn  oorrddeerr  ttoo  rreedduuccee  iittss  
MMaannppoowweerr,,  iinn  wwhhiicchh  mmoorree  tthhaann  22440000  eemmppllooyyeeeess  oopptteedd  ffoorr  VVoolluunnttaarryy  
RReettiirreemmeenntt..  
IInn  oorrddeerr  ttoo  pphhaassee  oouutt  EEnnggiinneeeerriinngg  ccaaddrree  aass  ppeerr  TTCCSS  RReeppoorrtt,,  
tthhee  CCoonnssttrruuccttiioonn  CCeellllss  hhaavvee  bbeeeenn  rreedduucceedd  ffrroomm  1177  ttoo  33  aanndd  
VVoolluunnttaarryy  RReettiirreemmeenntt  SScchheemmee  ffoorr  tthhee  eennttiirree  EEnnggiinneeeerriinngg  CCaaddrree  
iinncclluuddiinngg  GGrr..  ‘‘AA’’  OOffffiicceerrss  wwaass  iinnttrroodduucceedd..  

DDuurriinngg  tthhee  yyeeaarr  22000055--0066  tthhee  eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt  hhaass  
iinnccrreeaasseedd  dduuee  ttoo  tthhee  rreeaassoonn  tthhaatt  CCWWCC  hhaadd  ttoo  ccrreeaattee  pprroovviissiioonn  ooff  
mmoorree  tthhaann  99  ccrroorreess  ttoowwaarrddss  PPoosstt  RReettiirreemmeenntt  MMeeddiiccaall  SScchheemmee  aass  
ppeerr  RReevviisseedd  AAccccoouunnttiinngg  SSttaannddaarrddss  iissssuueedd  bbyy  tthhee  IInnssttiittuuttee  ooff  
CChhaarrtteerreedd  AAccccoouunnttaannttss  ooff  IInnddiiaa  ffoorr  tthhee  ffiirrsstt  ttiimmee..  TThhee  pprroovviissiioonn  wwaass  
ccrreeaatteedd  bbaasseedd  oonn  tthhee  aaccttuuaarriiaall  VVaalluuaattiioonn..  TThhiiss  pprroovviissiioonn  iiss  aaddddeedd  iinn  
tthhee  eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt..  SSiimmiillaarr  pprroovviissiioonn  aammoouunnttiinngg  ttoo  RRss..  88..6688  
ccrroorreess  wwaass  mmaaddee  iinn  tthhee  yyeeaarr  22000066--0077  aanndd  aallssoo  aaddddeedd  ttoo  tthhee  
eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt..  IIff  tthhee  eeffffoorrtt  ooff  tthhiiss  pprroovviissiioonn  iiss  sseeppaarraatteedd,,  tthheerree  
iiss  nnoo  iinnccrreeaassee  iinn  tthhee  eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt  dduurriinngg  tthhee  yyeeaarr  22000055--0066  
aanndd  22000066--0077..  
TThhee  eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt  ffoorr  tthhee  yyeeaarr  22000077--0088  iiss  hhiigghh  dduuee  ttoo  
DDAA  mmeerrggeerr  ww..ee..ff..  11sstt  JJaannuuaarryy,,  22000077  ffoorr  tthhee  eemmppllooyyeeeess  iinn  IIDDAA  
PPaatttteerrnn  ooff  PPaayy  SSccaallee  aass  ppeerr  DDPPEE  OOrrddeerr  NNoo..  22((77))//  22000055  DDPPEE  ((WWCC))  
GGLL--IIIIII  ddaatteedd  2266tthh  FFeebb..  22000088  aanndd  aallssoo  aannttiicciippaatteedd  PPaayy  RReevviissiioonn  ccoosstt  
pprroojjeecctteedd  @@  2200%%  oonn  tthhee  eexxiissttiinngg  bbaassiicc  ppaayy  iinn  rreessppeecctt  ooff  bbootthh  IIDDAA  
aanndd  CCDDAA  ppaatttteerrnn  ppaayy  ssccaallee  eemmppllooyyeeeess..  
TThhee  eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt  wwiitthh  rreeffeerreennccee  ttoo  tthhee  ttoottaall  
eexxppeennddiittuurree  hhaass  rreedduucceedd  dduurriinngg  tthhee  ppeerriioodd  22000044--0055  ttoo  22000066--0077  
rreefflleecctteedd  aass  ffuurrnniisshheedd  bbeellooww::    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 The Storage Capacity of the Corporation has significantly gone up 
during the years. This has also contributed marginally to increase in 
the establishment cost".  
 
YYeeaarr  IInnccoommee  
((RRss..  IInn  
CCrroorree))  
EExxppeennddiittuurree  
((RRss..  IInn  CCrroorree))  
EEssttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  
CCoosstt  ((RRss..  IInn  
CCrroorree))  
%%  ooff  
EEssttaabblliisshhmmee
nntt  ccoosstt  ttoo  
ttoottaall  
eexxppeennddiittuurree  
22000044--0055  552222..8877  446622..4455  118888..4400  4400..3377%%  
22000055--0066    661199..5500  551122..5555  119977..2255  3388..4488%%  
22000066--0077    668866..4444  555522..6644  119966..0066  3355..4488%%  

1.29 In their original Report the Committee had regretted to note that the 
Establishment Cost of Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC) was 
constantly increasing and desired that the recommendations of Tata 
Consultancy Services (TCS) which had suggested measures to curt ail the 
establishment cost of CWC be implemented in letter and spirit so that there 
was no increase in the Establishment Cost in the coming years. The action 
taken reply furnished by the Government reveal that though the percentage 
of Establishment Cost to the total expenditure of CWC was decreasing over 
the years, the Establishment Cost was on the increase. The Committee are 
of the view that if the establishment cost is not reduced, it may be difficult 
for the organisation to be financially viable and to s ustain itself.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the 
recommendations of the TCS be implemented in toto.  The Government 
should also find ways and means to contain the Establishment Cost of its 
organisations to the barest minimum level. 

I Liquidation of cane price arrears. 
 
  Recommendation (S. No. 27, Para No. 7.27) 
 
1.30 The Committee had recommended as below: - 
 
“The Committee are constrained to note that as on date, a total of 
Rs.3260.66 crores which includes Rs.1638 .17 crore for 2007 -08 
sugar season, Rs.1383.36 crore for 2006 -07 sugar season and 
Rs.239.13 crores for sugar season 2005 -06 and earlier seasons 
are outstanding as cane price arrears. The Committee are pained 
to note that although payment of sugarcane is re quired to be made 
within 14 days of the supply of sugarcane by the farmers, it is, 
however, rarely done. The cane price arrears pertaining to sugar 
seasons 2005-06 and earlier are still outstanding and yet no action 
has been taken against the sugar mills f or recovery of cane price 
arrears along with interest @ 15%, as per the provisions of the 
Sugarcane (Control) Order,1966. As regards State -wise position, 
the maximum arrears are outstanding in the States of Uttar 
Pradesh and Maharashtra the main sugarcane producing States. 
The Committee feel that non payment of cane price arrears to the 
farmers in time can be a deterrent and might force the farmers to 
stop cultivation of sugarcane and instead go in for production of 
some other crops. The Committee, therefor e, recommend that to 
protect the interests of the sugarcane farmers and motivate them to 
continue to cultivate sugarcane, the aids/grants given to the sugar 
mills should be kept in abeyance till they liquidate the cane price 
arrears with interest and stric t action should be taken against the 
sugar mills for not paying cane price arrears”.  
 
 
1.31 The Ministry in their action taken replies have furnished the position of 
cane prices arrears, as on 29.02.2008 as follows: 
 
2007-08 sugar season:  
 
Against the total cane price payable of Rs.14,420.47 crore, a 
sum of Rs.9,967.89 crore has been paid leaving a balance payable 
of Rs.4,452.58 crore (30.88% of the total payable). 
 
2006-07 sugar season: 
 
The cane price arrears have been brought down from Rs.1, 
383.36 crore as on 31.12.2007 to Rs.662.88 crore.  
 
2005-06 and earlier sugar seasons: 
 

The cane price arrears for the sugar season 2005 -06 and 
earlier are Rs.234.75 crore which are mainly on account of litigation 
pending before the Hon’ble Courts or because of clos ure of sugar 
mills. 
 
The responsibility of ensuring timely payment of cane price 
dues to the sugarcane growers lies with the respective State 
Governments who have been delegated powers under the 
Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966 and have the necessary field 
organizations. 
 
As regards the recommendation of the Standing Committee 
that to protect the interests of the sugarcane farmers and motivate 
them to continue to cultivate sugarcane, the aids/grants given to the 
sugar mills should be kept in abeyance till th ey liquidate the cane 
price arrears with interest, the Central Government, in its earlier 
reply, had indicated that it agrees, in principle, with the views of the 
Committee, but there are practical difficulties in implementing this 
recommendation.  Usually , the cane price arrears build up in the 
years of low sugar prices as it happened in 2002 -03 and 2006 -07 
sugar seasons and again happening in 2007-08 sugar season.  The 
Government takes appropriate steps to help the sugar factories and 
sugarcane growers in such situation.  The Central Government has 
recently taken various steps to help the sugar industry in  
liquidating the outstanding cane price arrears of 2006 -07 and 2007-
08 sugar seasons as given as under:- 
 
(i) A buffer stock of 20 lakh tonnes for one year was created for 
the period 01.05.2007 to 30.04.2008. This has since been 
dismantled after the expiry of the buffer stock period and the sugar 
mills have been allowed to sell their allocated buffer stock quantity 
in the open market with effect from 01.5.200 8 before the close of 
the current sugar season 2007-08. 
 
(ii) A buffer stock of 30 lakh tonnes was created for the period 
01.08.2007 to 31.07.2008. The two buffer stocks involve annual 
subsidy of about Rs.880 crore from the Sugar Development Fund 
(SDF) and addi tional bank credit of about Rs.978 crore, and are 
aimed to enhance liquidity of sugar mills affected by decline in 
prices of sugar and stock value, for clearing cane price arrears as 
first priority. 
 
(iii) Export assistance to defray expenditure on internal 
transport, marketing and handling charges and ocean freight @ 
Rs.1,350/- per tonne for sugar factories in coastal States and 
Rs.1,450/- per tonne for those in non coastal States subject to 
actual by road/rail for exports to the neighboring countries, has 

been provided for one year from 19.04.2007 to 18.04.2008. The 
facility has been recently extended up to 30.09.2008 and is likely to 
involve an amount of up to Rs.700 crore as assistance from SDF, 
and is aimed for clearing cane price arrears as first priority. 
  
(iv) The requirement of Release Orders for exports has been 
dispensed with from 31.07.2007. 
 
(v) The NABARD package of 2005 for restructuring of term 
loans of co-operative sugar factories has been expanded to include 
cooperative sugar factories not included earlier to avail the benefits, 
convert outstanding loans on account of harvesting and transport 
charges appearing in the factories’ accounts as on 01.04.2007 up 
to maximum five year term loans without interest subvention and 
enhancing budgetary support from Rs.5 60 crore to Rs.600 crore to 
provide maximum 3% per annum interest subsidy for restructured 
term loans carrying an interest cap of 10% per annum.  
 
(vi) A loan scheme of about Rs.3800 crore to extend financial 
assistance to sugar undertakings has been formulated  and 
implemented to provide additional liquidity support to the extent of 
notional excise duty on production of sugar in 2006-07 and 2007-08 
sugar seasons exclusively earmarked for cane arrears/dues of 
2006-07 and 2007-08 sugar seasons respectively relatab le to SMP 
fixed by the Central Government. The total interest subvention 
estimated at about Rs.1355 crore is to be borne from the Central 
Government budget (5% out of the maximum 12% p.a. interest 
subvention and balance up to 7% p.a. from the SDF). As per 
information received from National Bank of Agricultural and Rural 
Development (NABARD) and other scheduled commercial banks, a 
sum of about Rs.2482 crores has been sanctioned by them to 
concerned sugar factories.  Further, the proposals amounting to 
Rs.464 crores are under process with the banks. 
 
(vii) To promote Ethanol Blending with petrol (EBP), the following 
have been decided:- 
 
(a) 5% ethanol blending made mandatory from October, 2007 
with 10% blending being made optional from           
October, 2007 and mandat ory from October, 2008 except 
in Jammu and Kashmir, North -Eastern States and Island 
territories. 
 
(b) Uniform Purchase Price of Rs.21.50 per litre ex -factory for 
ethanol supplied by sugar factories for next three years.  
 
 

(c) Permitting sugar factories to produce  ethanol from 
sugarcane juice directly to give flexibility to sugar factories. 
 
(d) Reduction in customs duty from 7.5% to 5% for denatured 
alcohol and from 10% to 5% on molasses when EBP 
programme at 5% level is fully operationalized. 
 
The steps taken by the Central Government would definitely 
help the sugar mills in liquidating their outstanding cane price dues 
payable to farmers supplying sugarcane.  
As the assistance to the mills under the listed schemes is 
primarily intended for liquidating cane dues, if a ny, if the suggestion 
of the Committee is imposed on sugar factories, it will not be 
possible for the Government to pay buffer subsidy and extend other 
assistance to sugar mills having cane price arrears due to which 
sugarcane growers may suffer.  The impl ementation of the 
recommendation of the Committee will render the primary objective 
of listed schemes viz., enhancing the liquidity of the sugar industry 
in order to enable them liquidate cane dues infructuous.  Adequate 
safeguards have been provided in th e SDF Rules and the other 
schemes. Therefore, the recommendation of the Standing 
Committee cannot be accepted due to practical difficulties in 
implementing this recommendation”.    
 
  

1.32 The Committee had in their earlier report expressed concern that 
although payment of sugarcane was required to be made within 14 days of 
the supply of sugarcane by the farmers, the sugarcane arrears for sugar 
seasons 2005 -2006, 2006 -2007 and 2007 -2008 were still outstanding. The 
Committee, therefore, had recommended that to protect the interests of the 
sugarcane farmers and motivate them to continue sugarcane cultivation, 
the grants- in- aid given to the sugarcane mills be kept in abeyance till they 
liquidate the cane price arrears with interest. In their action taken reply, t he 
Ministry has stated that they have taken a number of steps, which would 
definitely help the sugar mills in liquidating their outstanding cane price 
dues payable to farmers.  The Committee are not inclined to accept the 
further reply of the Ministry stat ing that if the suggestion of the Committee 
is imposed on sugar mills, it will not be possible for the Government to pay 
buffer subsidy and extend other assistance to sugar mills having cane 
prices arrears, due to which sugarcane growers may suffer.                      
The Committee are of the view that if the outstanding arrears of sugarcane 
mills are not paid within a fixed time period, they may suffer and opt for  
other commercial crops. While reiterating their earlier recommendation, the 
Committee desir e that all the incentives/grant - in- aid to sugar mills be 
contingent upon the liquidation of the cane arrears in future.  
 
 
 
 

J Need to increase the production and productivity of edible 
oils/oilseeds crops 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 30, Para No. 8.13) 
 
1.33 The Committee had recommended as below: - 
 
“The Committee note with concern that despite the various 
measures undertaken by the Government to increase the 
production of oilseeds in the country which include enhanced 
incentives to farmers through fixation of Minimum Support Price 
(MSP), implementation of “Integrated scheme of oilseeds, Pulses, 
Oil Palm and Maize” (ISOPOM), the production of oilseeds has not 
increased.  Although there was an increased production of edible 
oils in the Country from 72.47 lakh tonnes in 2004-05 to 83.16 lakh 
tonnes during 2005-06, the production during 2006-07 decreased to 
73.70 lakh tonnes i.e. a decline of 9.46 lakh tonnes when compared 
to the previous year. The Committee note that the edible oils 
produced in the country barel y meets about 55 -60 per cent of the 
total edible oil requirements in the country. Due to increasing 
population and consequently the demand of edible oils, the country 
has to import about 40 -45 lakh tonnes of edible oils every year to 
meet its total require ments.  The dependency on imports with 
regard to edible oils has been around 35 to 40 per cent during the 
last few years.  The Secretary of the Department during the course 
of oral evidence also acknowledged that the country may not be 
self-sufficient in e dible oils in the next five years as new varieties 
and very high yielding varieties have not really come out on a large 
scale and a real technology breakthrough is required in this regard.  
Considering the overall scenario with regard to oil seeds and edib le 
oils in the country, the Committee feel that efforts being made by 
the Department in the field of developing improved high yielding 
verities of oilseeds need to be geared up. The Integrated Scheme 
of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize (ISOPOM) should be 
extended to other States also to encourage the farmers to go in for 
the production of oilseeds.  The Committee feel that to bridge the 
gap between demand and supply of edible oils, the increase in 
production and productivity is imperative. The Committee , 
therefore, recommend that there is a need to review and restructure 
the centrally sponsored scheme ISOPOM, as neither the production 
nor the productivity of oilseeds have shown a rising trend over the 
last few years.   The Committee also recommends that other ways 
and means should also be explored to increase the production and 
productivity of oilseed crops.  Further, to reduce the dependency on 
imported edible oils, result oriented action should be taken to 
promote and popularize the use of non -traditional secondary 
sources of edible oils”. 

 
1.34 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under:-  
 
“The subject matter primarily relates to production and productivity 
and Minimum Support Price (MSP) of edible oils, which lies within 
the purview of Ministry of Agriculture. The matter has been taken 
up with that Ministry.  The Ministry of Agriculture has stated as 
follows:- 
 
Oilseeds are mainly grown on marginal and sub -marginal 
lands under rain fed conditions with low input uses.  Less than 25%  
of the area under oilseeds are irrigated, exposing most oilseeds 
production to weather related yield risks.  Consequently, oilseeds 
production in India is characterized by fluctuating production and 
low yield. 
 
Some of the major factors/reasons impeding t he productivity 
and production of oilseeds in the country are: -  
 
(i) Non-Availability of hybrids in mustard, groundnut, 
sesamum, soybean, niger and pest and diseases 
resistance varieties. 
 
(ii) Low monetary returns from cultivation of oilseeds due to 
low production potential in comparison to crops like rice, 
wheat and sugarcane. 
 
(iii) High risks in oilseeds cultivation due to vagaries of nature 
and susceptibility to a number of insects/pests and 
diseases. 
 
(iv) Use of poor quality of seeds by the farmers. 
 
(v) Un-assured market  of remunerative prices resulting in 
realization of low prices of oilseeds during the harvesting 
period. 
With a view to enhancing the productivity and production of 
oilseeds in the country and also to make the implementation of the 
integrated scheme of Oil seeds, Pulses, Oil palm and Maize 
(ISOPOM) more effective, ISOPOM has recently been modified as 
a part of National Food Security Mission with regard to norms and 
pattern of assistance, inclusion of new components and additional 
implementing agencies during 11th Plan Period.   
 
Further, keeping in view the fact that there is a constraint in 
area expansion under oilseeds, the thrust during the 11 th Plan will 
be given towards yield improvement in oilseeds besides promoting 

the cultivation of oil palm, a crop w ith a potential of producing 3 - 
3.5 MT of palm oil per ha. for augmenting the indigenous availability 
of edible oils in the country.  The States especially North -Eastern 
States which are not covered under ISOPOM can also promote 
oilseeds cultivation as a new initiative under Macro Management 
mode of Agriculture.  Further, the revised scheme of Macro 
Management of Agriculture will be helpful in encouraging the 
oilseeds production programme in the States, which are not 
covered under ISOPOM during 11th Plan”. 
 
 

1.35 The Committee while noting that the production of oilseeds in the country 
had not increased over the years, had recommended that there was a need to 
review and restructure the centrally sponsored scheme ISOPOM.  The Committee 
had also recommended that other ways and means be explored to increase the 
production and productivity of oilseeds crops and result -oriented action be taken 
to promote and popularize the use of non -traditional secondary sources of edible 
oils.  The Ministry in their action taken re ply has stated that with a view to 
enhancing the productivity and production of oilseeds in the country ISOPOM has 
recently been modified as a part of National Food Security Mission and during the 
11th Plan the thrust will be towards yield improvement in o ilseeds besides 
promoting the cultivation of oil palm.  The Committee are not convinced with the 
reply of the Ministry and feel that the bottlenecks mentioned by them in the way of 
less production and productivity of oil seeds viz. non -availability of hybr ids in 
mustard, groundnut, soyabean etc; pest and diseases resistance varieties; use of 
poor quality seeds by farmers, low monetary returns due to low production 
potential and unassured market of remunerative prices can surely be taken care of 
by the Government by strengthening its R&D projects and by fixing a reasonable 
minimum support price of different oil seeds, to make them a viable proposition 
for the farmers.  While reiterating their earlier recommendation, the Committee 
desire that besides effective ly monitoring the ISOPOM, the Government should 
take concrete steps to promote and popularize the use of non traditional sources 
of edible oils to bridge the gap between demand and production of edible oils.  
 
 
 

K Need to enhance inspections by the offici als of Directorate of 
Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils and Fats(DVVO&F) 
 
  Recommendation (S. No. 31, Para No. 8.14) 
 
1.36 The Committee had recommended as below: - 
 
“The Committee are constrained to note that the number of 
inspections carried out by the officials of DVVO&F as well as the 
number of samples being drawn and analysed  are on the decline.  
For instance, the number of inspection carried out in 2006 -07 were 
900 which declined to 610 during 2007-08.  Similarly, the number of 
samples analysed which were 3207 i n 2006 -07 declined to 2501 
during 2007 -08. The Committee are of the opinion that in a vast 
country like India where the main cooking medium are edible oils 
and where adulteration in edible oils is so rampant, the number of 
inspections being carried out and  samples drawn and analysed are 
very low.  The Committee are unhappy to note that not a single 
inspection has been carried out by the field officers of DVVO&F of 
the Institutes funded for conducting R and D projects under the plan 
schemes of the DVVO&F. Th e Committee have been apprised that 
the prime reason  for decline in the number of inspections by 
officials of DVVO&F is shortage of manpower.  The Committee 
therefore recommend that to keep a check on the widespread 
adulteration in edible oils and in order  to protect the health of the 
citizens of the country, the number of inspections to be carried out 
as well as drawing and analysis of samples of edible oils from all 
around the country need to be enhanced.  The Committee also 
desire that the Department sho uld strengthen its enforcement 
machinery and take strongest possible action against the 
adulterators of edible oils, who are playing with the health and life 
of the people of the country. 
 
1.37  The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under: - 
 
“The subject matter primarily relates to adulteration of edible oils, 
which lies within the purview of Ministry of Health, Directorate 
General of Health Services, (PFA).  The matter has been taken up 
with that Ministry.  The response of the Ministry  of Health is as 
follows: - 
The implementation of the Prevention of Food Adulteration 
(PFA) Act, 1954 and Rules framed thereunder are vested with the 
Food (Health) Authorities of the States/UTs. The enforcement 
staff/machinery of the concerned State/U.T. d raw the samples of  
commonly used food commodity suspected to be 
adulterated/misbranded. As such the total number of food samples 
drawn/examined during the year 2001 were 93,335 and 11,008 

samples were found to be adulterated, whereas in 2005, the total 
number of food samples drawn/examined were 90,285 and 
samples found to be adulterated were 8,645 (information for the 
year 2005 was not received from the State of Rajasthan).  Similarly 
the number of samples of edible oil, fats and vanaspati examined 
during t he year 2001 was 15918 which declined to 13970 during 
the year 2005 and the number of samples found adulterated also 
declined from 1790 in 2001 to 1090 in 2005. 
 
The concern of the Committee to draw large number of 
samples of edible oils is being sent to a ll Food (Health) Authorities 
of the States/UTs for compliance. 
 
As regards action taken against adulterated samples of 
edible oils and fats, the concerned State/UTs Government take 
necessary action under the provisions of the Prevention of Food 
Adulteration (PFA) Act, 1954 and Rules framed thereunder”. 
 
 

1.38 While expressing their unhappiness to note that not a single 
inspection had been carried out by the Field Officers of DVVO & F of the 
Institutes funded for conducting R&D projects under the Plan Schemes, the 
Committee had recommended that to keep a check on the widespread 
adulteration in edible oils and in order to protect the health of the citizens 
of the country the number of inspections carried out as well as drawing 
and analyzing the samples of edi ble oils from all around the country be 
enhanced.  The Committee had also recommended for strengthening of the 
enforcement machinery and to take strongest possible action against 
adulterators of edible oils.  The Ministry in their action taken reply have 
given the data of the number of food samples drawn/ examined which 
indicates that in the year 2005, the total number of food samples 
drawn/examined were 90,285 and samples found to be adulterated were 
8,645. Similarly out of the 13,970 number of samples of edible oils, fats and 
vanaspati examined during 2005, 1,090 number of samples were found 
adulterated, which was a decline from 1,790 in the year 2001.  The Ministry 
have stated that the concern of the Committee to draw large number of 
samples of edible oil s was being sent to all food authorities of the States/ 
Union Territories for compliance. The Ministry has also stated that action 
against adulterated samples of edible oils was taken by the concerned 
State Governments / Union Territories Administration. T he Committee 
would like to reiterate their earlier recommendation for enhancing the 
drawing and analyzing of samples of edible oils and strengthening of the 
enforcement machinery. 
 

 
Chapter II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation  (S.No.1- 3 Para No. 3.16 to 3.18) 
 
 
    The Committee note that the total allocation of the Department at 
Budget Estimates (BE) stage during 2008 -09 is Rs.34111 crores out of which 
Rs.34016 crore are for non-plan schemes and Rs.95 crore for the plan schemes.  
The enhancement in non -plan outlay over the allocations made during the 
previous year i.e. 2007 -08 was to the tune of Rs.7609.80 crore and the 
enhancement, when compared to the year 2006 -07, is Rs.9516.00 crore.  The 
Committee note that there was heavy reduction of plan funds of the Department 
at Revised Estimates stage during 2006 -07 as well as 2007 -08 which is evident 
from the fact that the allocations under plan head during 2006 -07 was reduced 
from Rs.95.80 crore at BE stag e to Rs.70.00 crore at RE stage and the actual 
expenditure during the year was Rs.65.63 crore i.e. just 68.50 per cent of the 
allocations at BE stage.  Again during 2007-08 there was a cut of Rs.25 crore i.e. 
compared to BE of Rs.85 crore, the RE is Rs.60 crore.  The Committee feel that 
the heavy reductions of funds at RE stage show a lack of proper perspective 
planning on the part of the Department due to which the Department is not able 
to make realistic projections, which leads to heavy cuts in the alloc ations at RE 
stage.  The Committee is not willing to accept the plea of the Department that 
being the first year of the 11 th Five Year Plan, the evaluation of some important 
schemes could not be done and also the approval of EFC/SFC procedure was 
required for implementation of the schemes.  The committee therefore strongly 
recommended that the Department should make advance and better planning to 
fix realistic targets to avoid heavy reduction of plan funds at RE stage and the 
allocations earmarked for the different schemes are fully utilized during the year. 
 
   The Committee are unhappy to note the uneven utilization of funds, both 
under plan and non-plan heads during the year 2007-08.  For instance, the actual 
expenditure under plan head during the first q uarter was NIL and during the 
second quarter, it was almost negligible at 0.03 per cent which however rose to 
33.03 per cent in the fourth quarter.  The Committee are also perturbed to note 
the decline in percentage utilization of funds during 2007 -08 as c ompared to 
2006-07.  It was 68.50 per cent during 2006 -07 which declined to 56.54 per cent 
during 2007-08.  The Committee are not convinced with the plea that the shortfall 
in expenditure was due to non clearance of the scheme viz. (i) Construction of 
Godowns; (ii) Integrated Information System for Food grain Management (IISFM) 
and (iii) Village Grain Bank Scheme by the Planning commission, which took a 
long time.  The Committee in its earlier reports had been emphasizing on the 
need to utilize/spread the e xpenditure evenly throughout the year.  The 
Committee feel that its recommendations in this regard are not being taken 

seriously.  The Committee also note with concern that even the financial rules of 
the Government, which clearly stipulate spreading of ex penditure evenly over all 
the four quarters and bar the rushing of expenditure especially in the last fourth 
quarter, have been ignored/not adhered to by the Department.  The Committee, 
therefore, while deploring the tendency of making major part of the ex penditure 
during the last two quarters, strongly recommend that the Government should 
ensure spreading of expenditure evenly over all the four quarters of the year so 
that the situation of rush of expenditure in the last few months of the financial 
year is avoided. 
 
 The Committee note that there is huge underspending under different 
schemes, both plan and non -plan during the years 2006 -07 and 2007 -08 
especially in the programmes related to loans for cane development, 
reimbursement of internal transport and  freight charges to sugar factories on 
export shipment of sugar, loans to sugar mills for bagasse based cogeneration 
power projects and loans for production of anhydrous alcohol/ethanol.  Similarly, 
the position/situation is quite dismal during the year 20 07-08 as physical 
achievement in the first three quarters have been reported to be ‘NIL’ in case of 
following seven plan schemes viz. (i) Construction of Godowns by FCI/State 
Governments, etc. (ii) Integrated Information System in Foodgrains Management 
(IISFM), (iii) Computerization of PDS Operations, (iv)  Strengthening of PDS and 
Capacity Building, (v) NSI, Kanpur (vi) Consultancies, Training and Research 
and (vii) Village Grain Bank.  Further, the physical achievement during the fourth 
quarter also under  the two schemes viz. Computerisation of PDS and NSI 
Kanpur is again ‘NIL’.  The reasons put forth by the Department for the under 
spending which include non -completion of certain procedural formalities, non -
furnishing of relevant papers in time etc. are n ot acceptable to the Committee.  
Moreover, NIL expenditure under such very important schemes of the 
Department is a matter of serious concern.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Department should take the corrective actions to ensure that 
the position of underspending is not repeated year after year. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
PLAN 
 
The recommendation that this Department should make advance and 
better planning to fix realistic targets and ensure spreading of expenditure evenly 
over all the four quarters of the year has been noted for strict compliance.  It will 
also be ensured that the position of under spending will not be repeated.  The 
recommendation is also being circulated to all the Joint Secretaries for 
compliance. 
 
 
It is, howeve r, mentioned that as per Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Expenditure (Plan Finance II Division) vide their O.M. No.1(3) PF.II/2001 dated 

29.5.2007, comprehensive, in -depth and independent evaluations of Plan 
Schemes is necessary before continuation of t he Schemes from 10 th to 11th Five 
Year Plan.  Ministry of Finance conveyed their approval on 20.6.07 for exemption 
of Village Grain Bank Scheme which was less than 3 years old in the Department 
of Food and Public Distribution. Evaluation of rest of the sch emes was done in 
2007-08.  In the case of Construction of Godown Scheme, Planning Commission 
furnished their comments on 28.1.2008 though the EFC Memo was circulated on 
14.9.2007.  A statement showing the date of EFC meeting and approval of 
sanctioning authority is given as under:- 
 
Status of EFC/SFC Memos. 
 
S.No. Name of the Plan 
Scheme 
11th Plan outlay at 
current prices 
(tentative)(Rs. In 
crore) 
Date of 
EFC 
meeting 
Approval of 
sanctioning 
Authority 
1. Construction of 
Godowns by 
FCI/State 
Governments 
149 11-2-08* 24-3-2008 
(FM) 
2. Integrated 
Information System 
for Foodgrains 
Management 
(IISFM) 
28 28-9-07 12-11-07 
(MOCAFandPD) 
3. Computerisation of 
PDS Operations  
376 - - 
4. Strengthening of 
PDS- Capacity 
building. 
31.50 28-12-07 Jan. 2008 
(MOCAFandPD) 
5.  NSI, Kanpur 7.50 - 3-12-07 
(Secy(FandPD) 
6. Consultancies, 
Training and 
Research 
9.50 23-10-07 31-10-07 
(MOCAFandPD) 
7. Setting up of 
Warehousing 
Development and 
Regulatory Authority  
5.50 - 17-1-08 
(MOCAFandPD) 
8. Village Grain Bank 87 12-11-07 7-1-08 
(FM) 
 Total 694   
 
* Though EFC Memo was circulated for comments on 14 -9-2007, 
comments from Planning Commission were received on 28.1.2008. 
 

The Planning Commission had conveyed the tentative total plan outlay for the 
11th Five Year Plan vide note d ated 7.9.2007 and confirmed final scheme -wise plan 
allocation for the 11th Plan vide O.M. dated 31.1.08.  
  
 
NON PLAN 
            
The Committee has rightly observed that there had been increase in Non -
Plan BE 2008 -09 by Rs. 7609.80 crore over BE in 2007 -08 and by Rs. 9516.00 
crore over BE 2006 -07. The provision of Rs. 34016.00 crore made under Non -
Plan for the year 2008 -09 is mainly on account of the increase in food subsidy 
payable to FCI and State Governments on decentralized procurement of 
foodgrains, subsidy for maintenance of buffer stock of sugar, reimbursement of 
internal transport and freight charges to sugar factories on export shipment of 
sugar etc. The increase in food subsidy inevitable in view of increase in Minimum 
Support Price, (MSP), bonus a nd rail and road transport etc. cannot be fully met 
with the provision made under the Non -Plan for the purpose. Additional 
provisioning will be necessitated through supplementaries is due course. 
 
 The Committee has rightly observed that there had been und er spending 
of non -plan funds during 2006 -2007 and 2007 -08 in the Programme/Schemes 
relating to loans for cane development, reimbursement of internal transport and 
freight charges to sugar factories on export shipment of sugar, loans to sugar 
mills for bag asse based cogeneration power projects and loans for production 
anhydrous alcohol/ethanol. The recommendations of the Committee have been 
noted for taking correcting actions. In this regard all the Grant Controlling 
Authorities were requested vide letter N o I-34/3/2007-08 Budget dated 26 th May, 
2008 to take necessary steps to utilize the funds fully. 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No. 4-01/08 - Plan dated the    26/5/2008 
OM. No1-34/3/2007-08/Budget  dated the 26/5/2008 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S. No.4 Para No.3.19) 
 
The Committee also note that an amount of Rs.26.28 crore was released 
to States/UTs from 1989  to 2001 for purchase of vans and construction of 
godowns but utilization certificates have not been furnished by the States/UTs till 
date.  Similarly, an amount of  Rs. 21.75 crore was released to 9 States under 
the Scheme construction of godown from 1992 -93 to 1998 -99 but utilization 

certificates have not yet been received  from these States.  The reasons 
furnished by the Department viz.  the funds released by the Department proved 
to be inadequate, some States purchased higher/lesser capacity vans which was 
not permitted in pattern approved  under the scheme, etc. are  not acceptable to 
the Committee.  The Committee also note that the Department has assured the 
Committee to take up the matter at higher levels and funds for other schemes to 
these States wi ll be released only after the receipt of the utilization certificate of 
earlier releases.  The Committee are of the view that non -release of funds for 
other schemes till receipt of utilization certificates of earlier releases is not a 
solution of the probl em as it would hamper the progress of the other schemes.  
The Committee feel that mere assurance on the part of the Department is not 
going to serve any purpose and therefore, strongly recommend that the matter 
may be immediately taken at the highest level s for an early settlement of the 
issue as lot of public money has remained unaccounted   for during the last 
almost 20 years.  The action taken in this regard should be communicated to the 
Committee at the earliest. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The matter ha s been taken at the level of State Food Secretaries.  It is 
being further followed up at higher levels. 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No.9(2)2008-PD-I/III dated the    8/7/2008 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 7 Para No.4.26) 
 
 
The Committee find that there has been a spurt in prices of foodgrains in 
the recent past. The Finance Minister in his speech on Bud get (2008 -09) has 
expressed concern over rising price of food articles and highlighted that the 
prices of wheat and rice have increased in the world market by 88 per cent and 
15 percent, respectively during the period April, 2007 to January,2008 and as 
such there is a pressure on domestic prices especially on the prices of various 
food articles. Significant price rise was also recorded in pulses and edible oils. 
The low domestic production coupled with high demands, hoarding of large 
quantities of foodgrain s by private traders who create artificial scarcity in the 
market are the reasons for increase in the prices of wheat, pulses, edible oils, 
etc. The measures taken by the Government to arrest the price rise include 

augmenting of domestic supplies of wheat and pulses through imports  at 
reduced rates of duty, ban on exports of these items, imposing of stock limits on 
wheat, pulses, edible oils and even on rice. The Committee feel that the 
Government is fully aware of the inflationary trends prevailing in the  Country but 
the steps taken by it to bring down the prices of the essential commodities, 
especially food articles are not proving to be effective. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should in consultation with the other 
Ministries/Departments, draw a long term plan to meet the situation before it 
goes out of hand to unbearable proportions. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Prices of rice and wheat are monitored regularly  in Department of Food 
and Public Distribution. Further regular meetings  of the CCP and COS are held 
to review prices of essential commodities including wheat and rice. With the 
increased procurement of wheat in the Central Pool in the  current RMS 2008-09, 
prices of wheat  has shown a softening trend. With the procurement of sufficient 
quantity of rice in the Current KMS 2007 -08 to meet the requirement of TPDS 
and Welfare Schemes and other steps taken to increase availability of rice in the 
country, it is expected that prices will be contained at the manageable level.  
 
Department of Food and Public Distribution has introduced a Scheme for 
Distribution of Subsidized Imported Oils through State Government/UTs for  
increased availability and softening of prices of edible oils in the domestic 
markets. The Scheme would be restricte d to imported edible oils. The subsidies 
from Government of India will be restricted to a total one million tonnes of edible 
oil under this Scheme @ Rs. 15 per kg. during the financial year 2008 -09. 
However, initially 3 lakh tonnes of oil will be allocated  amongst the States. The 
Scheme will initially be implemented for 3 months and can be extended after a 
review of its impact on domestic availability and prices of edible oils.  The edible 
oil will be allocated by Department of Food and Public Distribution to the 
States/UTs for distribution of subsidized imported oil to BPL families or part of 
APL families as well, depending upon the availability and the distribution logistics 
subject to maximum of 1 kg. edible oil per ration card/family per month. The other 
steps taken to reduce the prices of edible oils are cut in custom duties, imposing 
of stock limit on edible oils and oil seeds(other than imported oils), exemption 
from 4% SAD of Crude and refined edible grade vegetable oils, condition no. 18 
made non -applicable to import  soyabean oil, no mandatory compulsion 
regarding usages of indigenous oils including expeller mustard oil in the 
manufacture of vanaspati and export of major edible oils banned.  
 
The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has launched  two major 
schemes i.e. National Food Security Mission (NFSM) and Rashtriya  Krishi Vikas 
Yojana (RKVY) during Eleventh Plan for enhancing the production  and 

productivity of foodgrains and for development of agriculture and allied sectors in 
the country. 
  
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  
( Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
 OM. No.  156(7)/2008 PY.I dated  4th June,2008 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 10 Para No.4.72) 
 
The Committee find that diversion of foodgrains meant for the poorest of 
the poor is the biggest menace in the functioning of Public Distribution System.   
The studies conducted by Programme Evaluation Organisation (PEO) and ORG 
Marg to evaluate the Targeted Public Distribution System in the country have 
revealed diversion of foodgrains in most of the States. The worst position in this 
regard is in the North Eastern States where diversion upto 100 per cent in case 
of wheat and upto 97.7 per cent in case of rice has been reported.   The 
Committee take a very serious view of the diversion and is of the opinion that the 
very purpose of PDS would be defeated if the PDS foodgrains do not reach the 
intended beneficiaries and are instead diverted to the open market.   The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government s hould evolve a 
foolproof mechanism within a fixed time frame to check the diversion of 
foodgrains.  Although the management and operation of PDS is the joint 
responsibility of Central and State Governments concerned but Central 
Government is responsible fo r procurement and allocation of foodgrains to the 
State Governments which in turn distribute foodgrains through their agencies 
within their respective States.   The Committee, therefore, emphasise that the 
issue of diversion of foodgrains should be tackled with utmost seriousness and 
recommend that to check the diversion of foodgrains, a joint special audit by 
officials of FCI and State Governments should be conducted in the event of off -
take being abnormally high. 
 
The Committee feel that diversion of foodg rains from Fair Price Shops to 
the open market is a matter of serious concern which urgently needs to be 
looked into. The Committee note that one of the major reasons for diversion of 
foodgrains from fair price shops is the low commission being provided to  the fair 
price shop owners inducing them to indulge in malpractices.    The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the matter regarding increase of commission of fair price 
shop owners should be taken up with the State Governments, as a reasonable 
increase in their commission would make the Fair price shops economically more 
viable and could help in curbing the diversion of PDS foodgrains to the open 
market.  
 
The Committee also note that to check diversion of PDS foodgrains, 
technological interventions such as tracking of movement of vehicles carrying 
TPDS foodgrains through Global Positioning System (GPS) devices, issuance of 

Bar Coded Coupons with rations cards for delivery of TPDS foodgrains to 
genuine ration card holders, capturing of biometric features of c ard holders while 
issuing ration cards to avoid issuance of bogus or fake ration cards and 
introduction of smart cards for similar purposes are being tried in different 
States.  The Committee feel that all these measures and also other monitoring 
mechanism in place like formation of vigilance Committees, involvement of 
Panchayati Raj Institutions and self -help groups in the activities of public 
distribution system should be implemented in the right earnest to achieve the 
desired results. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
    
For this, the following measures have been taken: 
 
(1) Evaluation of TPDS : 
 
To strengthen the TPDS, Government. got it evaluated through PEO of 
the Planning Commission and ORG MARG, New Delhi. Their reports received in 
2005 pointed out certain shortcomings such as diversion/leakages of foodgrains, 
inclusion and exclusion errors in identification of targeted beneficiaries and non -
viability of operation of Fair Price Shops. 
 
(2) 9-Point Action Plan : 
 
Based upon PEO and ORG MARG evaluation reports , a 9 -Point Action 
Plan was prepared in 2006. It is being implemented by the State and UT 
Governments. The Nine Points Action Plan for strengthening the TPDS is as 
under:- 
                                                                         
1.         Continuous review of the BPL and AAY lists to eliminate bogus ration 
cards and to ensure coverage of only eligible BPL and Antyodaya families. 
  
2.         Ensuring leakage -free and diversion -free distribution of PDS 
commodities, regular inspection by diff erent levels of functionaries, strict action 
against guilty persons/agencies. 
  
3.         Involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions in PDS operations – PRI 
representatives on Advisory Committees, running of fair price shops by 
Panchayats and effective re presentation of Panchayati Raj representatives on 
Vigilance Committees. 
  
4.         Ensuring transparency in working of PDS, display of BPL and AAY lists 
by fair price shops, observance of notified timings by fair price shops. 
  

5.         Use of Informat ion Technology, Computerization of TPDS operations, 
display of fair price shop-wise and district wise allocation of PDS commodities on 
web-sites for public scrutiny. 
  
6.         Carryout door-step delivery of PDS commodities to fair price shops. 
  
7.         Ensuring timely availability of and issuance of foodgrains by fair price 
shops. 
  
8.         Creating awareness among public about PDS operations, training 
Vigilance Committees of intricacies of PDS Operations. 
  
9.         Making fair price shops financially viable entities-allowing them to sell non 
PDS items etc. 
 
The Department of Food and Public Distribution is continuously reviewing 
progress of implementation of the 9-Point Action Plan.  Secretary, Government of 
India has been taking it up with Chi ef Secretaries of States and UT 
Governments, and Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
has written to Chief Ministers drawing their personal attention for taking strict 
action to eliminate diversion and leakages under the TPDS.State an d UT 
Governments have reported reduction in diversions and leakages of foodgrains 
under TPDS through measures like – 
 
(a) Elimination of bogus ration cards, 
 
(b) Introduction of coupons/bar coded coupons in some States, 
 
(c) Allocation of Fair Price Shops to Women’s Self Help Groups, and 
 
(d) Door delivery of foodgrains upto Fair Price Shops. 
  
(3) Concurrent Evaluation: 
 
Concurrent evaluation of TPDS functioning has been taken up in 26 
States and UTs. The National Council of Applied Economic Research and I ndian 
Institute of Public Administration have been assigned this study in 12 and 14 
States and UTs, respectively. The reports of NCAER for 12 States have been 
received. Compared to the earlier findings of PEO and ORG Marg, these reports 
have revealed improvement in functioning of TPDS in some of these States. 
 
(4) TPDS Operations made transparent and amenable to RTI Act  provisions: 
 
With a view to make functioning of the TPDS amenable to public scrutiny, 
a model Citizens’ Charter was issued by the Central Government in 1997 and 
again in 2006 for adoption by the State Governments/UT Administrations. A 
revised Citizens’ Charter has been issued in July, 2007 for adoption and 

implementation by State/UT Governments for facilitating use by Citizens of 
provisions of Right to information (RTI) Act, 2005 in relation to functioning of the 
TPDS. 
 
(5) Rationalization of APL allocations :  
 
Since the allocations of wheat and rice to States and UTs for the APL 
category made during earlier years of their surplus stocks in the Central Pool 
were very high and the actual offtake was very low, these allocations have been 
rationalized for wheat and rice from June, 2006 and April, 2007, respectively. 
This has been done by linking the allocations with the offtake of previous three  
years (2003-04 to 2005 -06) so as to make them realistic, in line with the actual 
offtake and manageable within the stocks available in the Central Pool. 
 
(6)  Road-map for reforming TPDS : 
 
The Department has directed the State Governments to pursue road -map 
for reforming the TPDS– 
 
(a) Monitoring of implementation of 9 Point Action Plan: 
 
Since implementation of 9 Point Action Plan by State and UT 
Governments has shown improvement in the functioning of TPDS in many 
of States and UTs., the Department will continue its monitoring for better 
implementation through periodic reviews. 
 
(b)     Issuance of revised orders for lifting of foodgrains by State and UT 
Governments from FCI depots and validity period for this purpose: 
 
While allocating foodgrains to Stat es and UT Governments, 
presently a period of 2 months is allowed for lifting from FCI depots. This 
is to enable the State and UT Governments to lift foodgrains during the 
month preceding the allocation month so that subsequent internal 
allocations and distribution may be organized within States and UTs in the 
first half of the allocation month. To streamline this process, revised orders 
have been issued by the Department in February, 2008, so that State and 
UT Governments. may lift foodgrains by 15 th of eve ry allocation month, 
ensure their proper distribution during that month and chances for 
diversion are minimized. 
 
(c) Monthly certification by Village Panchayats/Vigilance 
Committees/Urban Local Bodies/Self Help Groups for delivery of 
foodgrains to FPS and distribution to ration card holders : 
 
In order to ensure increased transparency in functioning of FPSs, 
the State and UT Governments have been directed in March, 2008 to 
introduce monthly certification by Village Panchayats/Vigilance 

Committees/Urban Loc al Bodies/Self Help Groups for delivery of 
foodgrains to FPS and their distribution to ration card holders. Such a 
certification of actual delivery of foodgrains to Fair Price Shops in time and 
their distribution to ration card holders is also expected to streamline 
functioning of Vigilance Committees at Fair Price Shop level. 
 
(d) Distribution of wheat flour/fortified wheat flour under TPDS: 
 
To facilitate distribution of wheat flour/fortified wheat flour under 
TPDS instead of wheat in convergence with oth er Government. 
programmes/schemes for nutritional improvement of targeted 
beneficiaries, the Department has issued revised policy guidelines on this 
subject in January, 2008.  
 
(e) Publicity-cum-Awareness Campaign: -  
 
For greater public scrutiny of TPDS f unctioning through the 
provisions of the RTI Act, 2005, a publicity -cum-awareness campaign on 
TPDS is being taken up as a part of the plan scheme on strengthening of 
TPDS. Revised guidelines for taking up the campaign have been issued 
and proposals invited from State Government for sanction. In addition, the 
Department is also taking up such a campaign at its level. 
 
(f) Training Programmes: 
 
As a part of a Plan Scheme on strengthening of TPDS, the 
Department will support training programmes to be taken up by State and 
UT Governments for TPDS functionaries and members of Vigilance 
Committees, etc. during the11th Plan period. 
 
(g) Integrated Information System for Foodgrain Management (IISFM)    
 
A project named Integrated Information System for Foodgrains 
Management has been implemented in the Food Corporation of India. 
While coverage of FCI offices and depots has been completed under this 
project, depots/godowns of State Governments. in Decentralised 
Procurement States are to be covered, during the current year. 
 
(h) Computerization of TPDS operations : -  
 
Digitization of PDS operations at National/State/District and Block 
levels all over the country has been taken up under a Plan Scheme on 
Computerization of TPDS during the 11 th Plan Period.    For this the  NISG 
has been appointed as consultant, it is  studying  processes and systems 
of TPDS functioning in four pilot States namely Assam, Chhattisgarh, 
Andhra Pradesh and Delhi  to prepare a detailed report for further work 
under the project. 

 
  (i) Introduction of new technologies in functioning of TPDS 
 
Piloting of Global Positioning System (GPS) for tracking movement 
of vehicles carrying TPDS commodities has been taken up in 
Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu and Delhi. 
 
. 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No. 9(2) 2008-PD-I/III dated the   8/7/2008 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 11 Para No.4.73) 
 
The Committee note that t he PDS (Control) Order, 2001 stipulates that 
elimination of bogus ration cards as well as bogus units in the ration cards shall 
be a continuous exercise by the State Governments to check diversion of 
essential commodities. The Committee further note that s ince July 2006, 
subsequent to the reviews undertaken by States/UTs, 67.41 lakh bogus and 
ineligible ration cards have been eliminated by 11 States, highest being 24.87 
lakh in Madhya Pradesh followed by Delhi at 14.62 lakh. The Committee feel that 
the problem of proper identification of BPL persons and inclusion and exclusion 
errors arising out of lack of proper coordination between the concerned 
Departments is a matter of serious concern before the Government. The 
Committee therefore, strongly recommend that all States/UTs be strictly asked to 
review the BPL list immediately for elimination of bogus and ineligible ration 
cards. Proper identification of the BPL persons would help in ensuring that the 
food subsidy meant for the poorest of the poor actually re aches the targeted 
beneficiaries. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
All the State/UT Governments have been requested to send a detailed report on (i) 
number of bogus/ghost ration cards del eted w.e.f. July, 2006 (month -wise), (ii) action 
taken against the families who were found possessing bogus/ghost ration cards and also 
action taken against   the officials who issued such bogus/ghost ration cards.   After 
submission of the last reply to t he Standing Committee on 20 th August 2007, five 
State/UT Governments have reported deletion of 29,55,868 number of ration cards.  
Replies received from 10 State and UT Governments regarding action taken in the 

deletion of bogus ration cards and action take n thereon with effect from          
July, 2006 are given as under: - 
(As compiled on 30.06.08) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Number of bogus 
ration cards 
deducted/ 
deleted/ 
cancelled  
Number of 
staff members 
who had 
issued such 
bogus ration 
cards   
Details o f 
action taken 
against the 
staff 
responsible  
Number of 
persons/ 
families 
found 
possessing 
bogus ration 
cards 
Details of 
action taken 
against such 
persons/ 
families 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
1 Goa -------------------------------  NIL Reported ----------------------------- 
2   Himachal               
Pradesh 
There are no bogus/ghost ration cards of BPL/AAY in the State as cards under 
the scheme are issued to the beneficiaries as per the identification list supplied 
by the Rural/Urban Department. 
3 Kerala 103 Genuine cards are 
issued and later the 
card holders migrate 
to some other places 
due to various 
reasons without 
canceling the cards.  
Such cards are 
detected and 
cancelled. 
Staff is not 
responsible for 
issue since 
genuine cards are 
issued.  They 
detect invalid 
cards on 
verification and 
cancelled. 
41 In valid cards 
found 
registered in 
ARDs- 
Authorization 
suspended.  
Single member 
cards have 
been deleted 
due to expiry of 
card holder. 
4 Maharashtra 29,45,000 
approx. 
The distribution of foodgrains has be en stopped against these 
ration cards holders. 
5 Mizoram 889 No action has been taken against the defaulting officials/families 
during the period in question. 
6 Tripura -------------------------------- NIL Reported ------------------------ 
7 A and N 
Islands  
 
----------------------    NIL Reported ---------------------------- 
8 Chandigarh 6935 BPL 
2519 AAY 
These cards have been weeded out/deleted as they were 
found to have either attained the status of APL or found to 
have shifted from Chandigarh.  In t hese circumstances, no 
penal action has been taken against any person/official. 
9 D and N 
Haveli 
-------------------------------- NIL Reported---------------------------- 
10 Pondicherry 422 NA- As the door to door enumeration was 
done by engaging the ser vices of various 
Governments Departments’ officials, the 
responsibility may not be fixed in this 
regard at this juncture. 
422 Cards were 
cancelled 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No. 9(2)2008-PD-I/III dated the   8/7/2008 

Recommendation (S. No. 12 Para No.4.74) 
 
The Committee note that 19 States/UTs are presently selling non -PDS 
items such as exercise books, iodised salts, pulses, tea, etc., through Fair Price 
Shops (FPSs).  The Committee also note that the Department has also taken up 
with the Ministry of Railways and Department of Posts to explore the possibility of 
selling railway tickets and postal stationery, etc. through FPSs.   The Committee 
desire that all the State/UTs may b e persuaded to sell non -PDS items through 
FPSs so that the people in rural areas, especially those living in far flung, 
backward and remote areas can get the items of their daily use from FPSs.   As 
per the Committee, this would also help in making FPSs eco nomically viable and 
in a way help in curbing diversion of food grains from Fair Prices Shops.   The 
Committee further note that Gujarat have implemented a scheme (Roaming 
Ration Card) with a view to issue roaming ration cards to those families who 
migrate to a new destination within their State.  The Department has also advised 
other States and UTs to follow the said scheme in their respective States/UTs 
also.  The Committee desire that the Department should pursue the matter 
further with the State Governme nts and intimate to the Committee about the 
follow up action taken by them in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The State/UT Governments of Haryana, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, 
Kerala and Andhra Pradesh have reported that they have a provision to cove r 
migrant labour for the issue of ration cards under TPDS. The Government of 
Arunachal Pradesh has reported that the Deputy Commissioners or District Food 
and Civil Supplies Officers, in the districts are the competent authorities for 
issuing of special pe rmit or temporary group ration card for such purpose.  The 
UT of Chandigarh has reported that the UT is very small and as such if 
beneficiaries want to get their address changed, they can approach the centrally 
located office of the department and the same  is recorded in their card and 
database updated accordingly.  In the UT of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, it 
has been reported that roaming population does not exist but BPL and AAY 
cards are transferred to places where card holders  migrate within the UT of  
Andaman and Nicobar. The other State/UT Governments have again been 
reminded on 24.06.08 to issue ration card to migrant labourers. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No. 9(2)2008-PD-I/III dated the   8/7/2008 

Recommendation (S. No. 13 Para No.4.75) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry has appointed Area Officers for different 
States/UTs to coordinate with the State Governments/UTs for regular and effective 
monitoring of Public Dist ribution System. The guidelines for the Area Officers Scheme 
provide that the Area Officers would visit their allocated States/UTs at least once in a 
quarter and conduct review of performance of the TPDS.  The Committee’s examination 
reveal that not a sing le visit has been made during the last five years in the States of 
Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Delhi, Goa, Gujarat, Punjab, Haryana whereas only one and 
at the most two visits have been made during the five years in some States like 
Rajasthan, etc. Moreover,  during 2007 -08, not a single visit to any of the States/UTs 
has been undertaken. The Ministry have stated that due to exigencies of work and 
vacancies in the Department, the Area Officers were unable to undertake such visits. 
The Committee are dismayed that not even a single visit was made by the Area Officers 
during the last five years in some of the States. The Committee deplore the casual 
approach of the Ministry in this regard and express their displeasure on the aforesaid 
situation and recommend that regular visits should be undertaken by the Area Officers 
to review and monitor the working of PDS in a given State. The Committee desire that 
follow up action taken in this regard may be reported to them within three months of the 
presentation of this Report to Parliament. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
In pursuance of the Standing Committee recommendations, the Department has 
taken action and officers have started visits to the States  to inspect functioning of 
TPDS in those States. So far officers of the ran k of Directors and Deputy Secretaries 
have visited the States of Delhi, West Bengal, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, and Bihar. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No. 9(2)2008-PD-I/III dated the   8/7/2008 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 15 Para No.5.7) 
 
The Committee note with concern that a large amount is still outstanding 
against the Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of Human Resource 
Development on account of foodgrains p rovided to them for various welfare 
schemes on payment basis.  Although the balance outstanding principal amount 
has decreased yet the interest on the principal amount has considerably 
increased over the years.  The outstanding dues which were Rs.19,898.64  crore 
in 2006-07 from these Ministries, has increased to Rs.21,902.80 crore as on 31 st 
March, 2007, including the interest accrued on the principal amount. Since the 
interest accrued is also loaded on the food subsidy bill, the Committee feel that 

inability to liquidate the outstanding dues  of FCI over the years indicate financial 
indiscipline.  The Committee view this with grave concern and desire that the 
Department should take up the matter at the highest level with the concerned 
Ministry so that the outstanding dues are liquidated at the earliest and the burden 
on Food Subsidy is reduced.  The Committee also desire that a time limit should 
be fixed within which the Central Ministries should be required to make 
payments. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 The issue of liquidation of outstanding dues of the FCI pending against the 
Ministry of Rural Development has been taken up at the highest level.  The 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs(CCEA), in its meeting held on 
8.11.2007, considered the Note dated 29.1 0.07 submitted by this Department 
and approved the proposals of this Department to direct the Ministry of Rural 
Development(MoRD)/Ministry of Finance(MoF) to settle the balance outstanding 
dues of FCI as on 31.08.07 amounting to Rs.19,000 crore for foodgrains supplied 
for various welfare schemes of the MoRD by cash payments to FCI during 2007 -
08/2008-09 and directed the MOF to make adequate budgetary provision in the 
budget of MoRD for supply of foodgrains by FCI for the various welfare 
programmes from 2007 -08 onwards and also directed that the foodgrains would 
be supplied by FCI for the various schemes of MoRD on pre -payment basis.  
This matter has subsequently been regularly taken up with the Ministry of Rural 
Development and Ministry of Finance for early implementation of these decisions 
of the CCEA. Similarly, the issue of making payment to the FCI for supply of 
foodgrains to the Ministry of Human Resource Development Ministry for their Mid 
Day Meal(MDM) programme has also been taken up with that Ministry regularly.   
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.197(1)/2008 FC A/Cs dated  30.04.2008. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.17 of Chapter – I of the Report)

Recommendation  (S. No. 16 Para No.5.11) 
 
 
The Committee are concerned to note the steep rise in the Establishment 
Cost of FCI during 2007 -08 as compared to previous year 2006 -07.  The 
Establishment Cost of FCI during the year 2007 -08 was Rs.1759.18 crore which 
was 28.42% more than establishment cost of FCI of Rs.1369.86 crore during the 
year 2006 -07.  According to the Ministry, the steep rise in Establishment Cost 
was mainly due to additional outgo for the 50% merger of DA along with arrears 
payment.  In the opinion  of the Committee, the Establishment Cost of the 
Corporation is still very high during the year 2007 -08 even after taking into 
account the DA and arrears payment.  The Committee feel that there is still 
scope to further reduce the Establishment Cost.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that ways and means should be devised to reduce the 
Establishment Cost so that substantial amount of food subsidy, which is basically 
meant for the poor section of the society, percolates down to rightful beneficiaries 
only. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is stated that the higher figure of Rs.1723.13 crore for the year 2006 -
2007 RE was mainly due to provision made for payment of higher Dearness Pay, 
higher HRA, higher LTC based on merger of 50% DA for the staff drawing 
salaries on IDA pattern of pay scales, payment of interim relief, enhanced 
amount of PLI due to amendment in Payment of Bonus Act etc, which did not 
materialise during the year (2006 -07). The actual expenditure for 2006 -2007 
(provisional) came down sharply from Rs.1723.13 crore to Rs.1369.86 crore.   
 
Rs.1759.18 crore in RE 2007 -08 included provision for payment on 
account of merger of 50% DA with Basic Pay of the employees on IDA pattern of 
pay scales and higher payment of PLI due to amendment in Payment of Bonu s 
Act etc, which again did not materialise during the year .  The actual expenditure 
for the year 2007 -08 will correspondingly reduce as happened in the previous 
year. 
 
However, the Corporation has been making all possible efforts for 
reducing the establishment cost as is evident from the steps taken in the past, as 
under: - 
 
(a) The filling up of direct recruitment vacancies has been restricted to 1/3 rd of 
the total of direct recruitment vacancies accrued in the year or 1% of 
sanctioned posts whichever is lower, in the light of DOPT instructions vide 
OM No.2/8/2001-PIC  dated 16/05/2001. 
 
(b) In 2004, a special Voluntary Retirement Scheme was introduced under 
which 8777 posts were abolished. 
 

(c) In 2006, 2449 vacant posts were abolished which had remained unfilled 
for a period of more than one year. 
 
(d) Continuous efforts are being made to seek exemption from the State 
Governments/UTs from their respective Shops and Establishments Acts in 
favour of FCI establishments so as to pay OTA to its employees at single 
rates instead of twice the normal wages as defined in the said acts. 
 
(e) The economy instructions issued vide Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Expenditure OM No.7 (2)/E -Coord/2005 dated 23 rd November 2005 is 
being followed in the Corporation. 
  
It may be seen from the  above that the Corporation has taken all possible 
measures to reduce its establishment cost to the maximum extent.  The 
establishment cost constitutes mainly payment of pay and allowances to the 
employees and retirement benefits to the retiring employees.   
 
It is also to be noted that the manpower of the Corporation will get further 
reduced by 9219 posts up to year 2010 by way of normal retirements.  The 
Corporation will continue to following the restrictions imposed in filling up of direct 
recruitment po sts vide DOPT OM dated 16/05/2001 referred to above, with a 
view to reduce the establishment cost and the economy instructions issued vide 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure OM dated 23 rd November 2005 
will be strictly complied with.  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No. 8-1/2008-FC-II Vol.II  dated the 4th JUNE, 2008 

Recommendation (S. No. 17 Para No.5.24) 
 
The Committee note that although the Bureau of Industrial Costs  and 
Prices (BICP) had suggested a norm of 75% capacity utilization of FCI godowns, 
the actual capacity utilistion as on 31 st January, 2008 was only 40%.   The 
Committee are deeply distressed by such a low utilization by FCI of its storage 
capacity, it has been observed that during 2007 -08, utilization of Covered/Hired 
capacity was 51% whereas the utilization of Covered/Owned capacity was only 
38%.  Also, capacity utilization of CAP/Hired was 98% whereas utilization of 
CAP/Owned was merely 05%.   In the opini on of the Committee, this is a very 
highly disturbing state of affairs because the capacity utilization of hired capacity 
is much more than the capacity utilization of FCI owned godowns.   The 
Committee feel that since large amount of money is being spent o n hiring 
godowns,  it clearly reflects lack of planning and improper management on the 
part of FCI. 
          The Committee, therefore, desire that FCI should reassess their 
requirement of storage space and dehire the hired godowns on priority basis and 
put their owned capacity to maximum utilization by proper scientific 
management.  This will enable FCI to save huge amount of funds required for 
hiring storage space on exorbitant rates from the market. 
Reply of the Government 
          CAP storage capacity is temporarily hired as per the requirement for a 
limited period   till the liquidation of stocks and all possible efforts are made to 
release the hired capacities as soon as the stocks are liquidated. As on 
31.1.2008. CAP capacity was hired only in Rajast han and Chhatisgarh Region 
where CAP capacity utilization was almostly 100% during Jan.2008 to 
March.2008, as per table given below:- 
(Figures in lakh MTs) 
CAP CAPACITY 
Owned Hired 
State Capacity Stock Utilization Capacity Stock Utilization 
31.1.2008 
Rajasthan  1.58 0.05 3% 0.05 0.01 20% 
Chhatisgarh 0.41 0.41 100% 2.44 2.44 100% 
29.2.2008 
Rajasthan  1.58 0.16 10% 0.02 0.02 100% 
Chhatisgarh 0.19 0.19 100% 1.13 1.13 100% 
31.3.2008 
Rajasthan  1.58 0.12 5% 0.02 0.02 100% 
Chhatisgarh 0.02 0.02 100% 0.25 0.25 100% 

So far dehiring of CAP capacity is concerned, the hired CAP capacity 2.49 
lakh MT in January,2008   has been reduced to 0.27 lakh MT.  As on 31.3.2008 
FCI was having only 0.27 lakh MT. hired CAP capacity with 100% utilization, 
which was expect ed to be dehired as soon the stocks were  liquidated.  On the 
other hand in the case of owned CAP capacities, with the changing pattern of 
procurement, their capacity utilization goes down. 
As regards Covered hired capacity, out of 87.13 lakh MT 69.06 lakh  MT is 
on seven year guarantee basis as on 31.3.2008  and  can not be dehired till the 
expiry of the agreement period and balance hired capacity to the tune of 18.07 
lakh MT capacity has been taken at the needy places where FCI’s capacity is not 
available.  As such the utilization of hired capacity is higher as compared to 
owned capacity.  
Utilization of godowns capacity depends upon the trend of procurement 
and off-take of foodgrains.   During the RMS 2007 -08 the wheat procured in the 
Central Pool was 111. 28 lakh MT out of which FCI procured 15.40 lakh MT 
whereas during the current RMS 2008 -09 the wheat procurement has crossed 
level of 211 lakh MT in the Central pool as on 20-05-2008, out of which FCI alone 
has procured 45.60 lakh MT upto 28.5.2008.   
It is  hoped that the %age of utilization of the owned/covered and CAP 
capacity will be improved and the utilization may   be beyond 75%.   However, 
instructions to the field offices are being issued to maximize the utilization of 
godowns capacity. 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No.8-1/2008-FC-II Vol.II  dated the 4th JUNE, 2008 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 18 Para No.5.25) 
 
The Committee Note that the Planning Commission has allocated an 
amount of Rs.20.40 crore for the financial year   2007-08 for construction of 
godowns, but the entire fund could not be utilized due to non -acquisition of land 
for construction of godowns by the FCI.   The Committee feel that there is lack of 
coordination between the Department of Food and Public Distribution and 
States/UTs which resulted in non -acquisition of land for construction of godowns 
in the States.   The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution should take up the m atter urgently with States/UTs 
at highest level for identifying and providing suitable land for construction of 
godowns and ensure that the funds earmarked for the purpose do not remain 
unutilised.  The Committee also recommend that the proposal sent by UT  of 

Lakshadweep for construction of godowns may be considered on priority basis 
and efforts should be made to resolve the problem of storage capacity there. 
Reply of the Government 
            The Government has decided that FCI would construct a storage godown 
at Lakshadweep during the XI th Five Year Plan under the Plan Scheme for 
construction of storage godowns.  The FCI has already taken up the matter with 
the Lakshadweep Administration for identification/acquisition of suitable land for 
construction of storage godowns.  Construction of godowns will be taken up 
immediately after suitable land is handed over to the FCI by the UT 
Administration. 
         As regards land availability at other places, the matter has been taken up 
with the concerned State Governments to identify suitable land for acquisition. 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No.8-1/2008-FC-II Vol.II  dated the   4th June, 2008 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.20 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 19 Para No.5.32) 
 
 
The Committee note that as a result of various measures taken by the 
Ministry, storage and transit losses have been reduced to a considerable extent 
but still they are quiet hi gh.  The Committee feel that the issue of storage losses 
requires regular monitoring on the part of the Government as well by the 
technical staff posted in the field.  In the opinion of the Committee, the steps 
taken by FCI to prevent storage losses are no t adequate.  Regular inspections 
and constant monitoring are required to ensure that losses do not increase 
further. The Committee desire that vigorous efforts should be made to minimize 
the losses so that funds earmarked for the poorest of the poor reach the actual 
beneficiaries.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the concrete 
measures taken in this regard. 
 
The Committee are further constrained to note that 3320 cases were 
initiated up to 2007 where 18042 officials were held responsible for trans it and 
storage losses.  A penalty of Rs.2.24 crore was imposed on such officials.  From 
the above facts, the Committee concluded that the FCI is not serious about the 
storage and transit losses which occur due to human error.  The Committee 
desire that the  FCI should improve its monitoring over field staff so that their 
losses are minimized.  Also they desire that FCI should also analyze the reasons 

for such a huge transit and storage losses and devise effective remedial 
measures to bring down such losses due to human negligence. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of Committee has been noted. 
 
It is submitted that storage and transit loss cases are vigorously pursued.  
Apart from recovery, (already indicated in the recommendation) penalties like 
dismissal, reduction in rank, recovery from pay, withholding promotion and 
withholding increments are also imposed on delinquents. 
 
In order to improve the monitoring and reduction of losses,  depots / rail 
heads which have been showing chronic transit and st orage losses have been 
identified. Intensified checking is conducted in respect of these depots.  Field 
offices are advised to supervise/check every specials/rakes by a committee of 
officers both at loading and unloading points. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No.8-1/2008-FC-II Vol.II  dated the  4th JUNE, 2008 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.23 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 21 Para No 5.46) 
 
The Committee are pained to note that despite various punitive and 
preventive measures, a large number of corruption cases have been detected 
against the FCI officials during 2007.  The Committee are of the view that the 
corruption in FCI may be rampant on account of lack of institutional mechanism 
for vigilance available at the zonal and regional offices of FCI.  This fact has also 
been admitted by Secretary, Department of Food and Public Distribution during 
the course of evidence.  The Committee, theref ore, recommend that FCI should 
strengthen its vigilance mechanism in coordination with the States/UTs so as to 
detect corrupt practices by FCI officers and take stringent punitive action against 
them, if found guilty.  The Committee feel that efforts shoul d be made for early 
disposal of pending cases as delay in disposal of vigilance cases would 
encourage corrupt practices and undermine the authority of law. 
 

Reply of the Government 
Recommendations of the Committee are accepted.   
 
FCI is having adequate institutional set up from Headquarters level to field 
offices (i.e. District Office) level to check corruption. The functioning of vigilance 
mechanism is monitored through information received / called for from RO/ZO 
level, regularly.  Inspections/reviews ar e regularly conducted by CVO or by 
nominated senior officers of CVO. Strengthening of vigilance mechanism is a 
continuous process with strict implementation of the directions and guidelines of 
CVC and administrative ministry. 
 
 The disposal of pending case s has accelerated in the last three years as 
shown below:-  
 
Period 
 
 
Opening 
Balance at the 
beginning of the 
year  
Number of 
cases added 
during the 
year  
Total 
number of 
cases  
Number of 
cases 
finalized  
Closing 
Balance 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
2005 1219 2877 4096 1951 2145 
2006 2145 2940 5085 3081 2004 
2007 2004 2594 4598 3216 1382 
 
 From the column No.6 it could be clear that pendency has been 
considerably reduced. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No.8-1/2008-FC-II Vol.II  dated the   4th June, 2008 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.26 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 22 Para No.6.8) 
  
The Committee are perturbed to note that outstanding dues of CWC 
during the last three years, 2004 -05 to 2006-07 has been consistently increasing 
from Rs. 118.87 crores to Rs. 154.94 crore. Outstanding liabilities also rose from 
Rs. 119.08 crore   ttoo  RRss..  114466..1166  ccrroorree  dduurriinngg  tthhee  ssaammee  ppeerriioodd..  AAccccoorrddiinngg  ttoo  tthhee  
MMiinniissttrryy,,  tthhee  mmaaiinn  rreeaassoonnss  ffoorr  iinnccrreeaassee  iinn  tthhee  oouuttssttaannddiinngg  dduueess  ooff  CCWWCC  aarree  ((ii))  
iinnccrreeaassee  iinn  ttuurrnnoovveerr  ooff  CCWWCC;;  ((iiii))  ddeedduuccttiioonn  mmaaddee  aanndd  ppeennddiinngg  rreegguullaarriizzaattiioonn  ooff  
ssttoorraaggee  aanndd  ttrraannssiitt  lloosssseess  bbyy  FFCCII;;  aanndd  ((iiiiii))  ccrreeddiitt  ffaacciilliittiieess  eexxtteennddeedd  ttoo  aattttrraacctt  tthhee  

ccuussttoommeerrss..  IItt  iiss  ssuurrpprriissiinngg  tthhaatt  eevveerryy  yyeeaarr  aa  hhuuggee  aammoouunntt  iiss  ddeeccllaarreedd  aass  bbaadd  
ddeebbttss  aanndd  wwrriitttteenn  ooffff  ffoorr  tthhee  llaasstt  tthhrreeee  yyeeaarrss..  IInn  tthhee  ooppiinniioonn  ooff  tthhee  CCoommmmiitttteeee,,  
tthheerree  iiss  aa  ccaassuuaall  aapppprrooaacchh  iinn  tthhee  CCWWCC  oovveerr  tthheeiirr  mmoouunnttiinngg  dduueess  aanndd  lliiaabbiilliittiieess..  
TThhee  CCoommmmiitttteeee,,  tthheerreeffoorree,,  rreeccoommmmeennddss  tthhee  CCWWCC  sshhoouulldd  mmaakkee  ccoonncceerrtteedd  eeffffoorrttss  
ffoorr  lliiqquuiiddaattiioonn  ooff  oouuttssttaannddiinngg  dduueess  ffuullllyy  tthhee  eeaarrlliieesstt  iinn  oorrddeerr  ttoo  eennhhaannccee  iittss  
pprrooffiittaabbiilliittyy..  TThhee  CCoommmmiitttteeee  wwoouulldd  aallssoo  lliikkee  ttoo  bbee  aapppprriisseedd  aabboouutt  tthhee  rreeaassoonnss  ffoorr  
aa  hhuuggee  jjuummpp  iinn  tthhee  aammoouunntt  ooff  bbaadd  ddeebbttss  wwrriitttteenn  ooffff  aanndd  wwoouulldd  lliikkee  tthhee  MMiinniissttrryy  ttoo  
kkeeeepp  aa  cclloossee  wwaattcchh  oonn  iitt..    
  
Reply of the Government 
  
As per the recommendation of the Committee, efforts to reduce the 
outstanding dues shall be made by close follow up with the depositors. The 
amount of outstanding dues has gone high due to  increase in turnover. 
Regarding Committee's observations on jump in the amount of bad debts written 
off, it is stated that the Bad Debts written off has gone upto Rs. 17.18 lakh during 
2005-06 from Rs. 4.33 lakhs during 2004 -05. This is because during 200 5-06, 
the dues relating to godown rent in respect of Maharashtra Government on 
whose behalf, CWC was handling Public Distribution of their stocks which were 
long pending and under dispute, have been ultimately written off. However, the 
bad debts have come down to a negligible amount of Rs. 0.94 lakhs during 2006-
07. 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No. 1-1/2008-SG dated the  28/4/2008 
  
Recommendation  (S. No. 23 Para No. 6.14) 
  
TThhee  CCoommmmiitttteeee  rreeggrreettss  ttoo  nnoottee  tthhaatt  eexxppeennddiittuurree  oonn  eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt  ooff  
CCWWCC  iiss  ccoonnssttaannttllyy  iinnccrreeaassiinngg  ddeessppiittee  vvaarriioouuss  rreemmeeddiiaall  mmeeaassuurreess  bbeeiinngg  aaddoopptteedd  
bbyy  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  TThhee  eexxppeennddiittuurree  oonn  EEssttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt  hhaass  rriisseenn  ffrroomm  RRss..  
118888..4400  ccrroorree  dduurriinngg  tthhee  yyeeaarr  22000044--0055  ttoo  RRss..  224400..6699  ccrroorree  dduurriinngg  tthhee  yyeeaarr  22000077--
0088..  AAlltthhoouugghh  aa  ssttuuddyy  wwaass  ccoonndduucctteedd  tthhrroouugghh  TTaattaa  CCoonnssuullttaannccyy  SSeerrvviicceess  ((TTCCSS))  ttoo  
ssuuggggeesstt  mmeeaassuurreess  ttoo  ccuurrttaaiill  tthhee  eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt  ooff  CCWWCC  yyeett  tthhee  CCWWCC  ddiidd  ggiivvee  
dduuee  wweeiigghhttaaggee  ttoo  tthheeiirr  rreeccoommmmeennddaattiioonn  wwiitthh  tthhee  rreessuulltt  tthheerree  iiss  nnoo  ccuurrttaaiillmmeenntt  iinn  
tthhee  eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt  ooff  CCWWCC..  TThhee  CCoommmmiitttteeee  ccaannnnoott  aacccceepptt  tthhee  pplleeaa  ooff  tthhee  
GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  tthhaatt  tthhee  mmaaiinn  rreeaassoonnss  ffoorr  iinnccrreeaassee  iinn  tthhee  eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt  wwaass  
dduuee  ttoo  iinnccrreeaassee  iinn  ssttaaffff  aanndd  ppaayy  rreevviissiioonn  ooff  tthheeiirr  eemmppllooyyeeeess  iinn  vviieeww  ooff  tthhee  ffaacctt  
tthhaatt  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  rreedduucceedd  iittss  mmaannppoowweerr  bbyy  iinnttrroodduucciinngg  tthhee  VVRRSS..  TThhee  CCoommmmiitttteeee  
ddeessiirree  tthhaatt  aallll  rreeccoommmmeennddaattiioonnss  ooff  TTCCSS  sshhoouulldd  bbee  iimmpplleemmeenntteedd  iinn  lleetttteerr  aanndd  
ssppiirriitt  ssoo  tthhaatt  tthheerree  iiss  nnoo  iinnccrreeaassee  iinn  tthhee  eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt  ooff  CCWWCC  iinn  tthhee  ccoommiinngg  
yyeeaarrss..    

Reply of the Government 
  
  TThhee  rreeccoommmmeennddaattiioonnss  ooff  tthhee  TTaattaa  CCoonnssuullttaannccyy  SSeerrvviicceess  oonn  MMaannppoowweerr  
PPllaannnniinngg  wweerree  ppllaacceedd  bbeeffoorree  tthhee  BBooaarrdd  ooff  DDiirreeccttoorrss  aanndd  tthhee  rreeccoommmmeennddaattiioonnss  
aacccceepptteedd  hhaavvee  ggeenneerraallllyy  bbeeeenn  iimmpplleemmeenntteedd  bbyy  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
The Corporation has given due consideration  to the recommendations of 
the Tata Consultancy Services to curtail its establishment cost.  There was no 
fresh recruitment after 1998 and the Manpower has been reduced from 8954 
during March 1998 to 6059 as on March 2008.  
TThhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  iinnttrroodduucceedd  VVoolluunnttaarryy  RReettiirreemmeenntt  SScchheemmeess  dduurriinngg  tthhee  
yyeeaarrss  11999944,,  11999988,,  22000022  aanndd  22000055  iinn  oorrddeerr  ttoo  rreedduuccee  iittss  MMaannppoowweerr,,  iinn  wwhhiicchh  
mmoorree  tthhaann  22440000  eemmppllooyyeeeess  oopptteedd  ffoorr  VVoolluunnttaarryy  RReettiirreemmeenntt..  
IInn  oorrddeerr  ttoo  pphhaassee  oouutt  EEnnggiinneeeerriinngg  ccaaddrree  aass  ppeerr  TTCCSS  RReeppoorrtt,,  tthhee  
CCoonnssttrruuccttiioonn  CCeellllss  hhaavvee  bbeeeenn  rreedduucceedd  ffrroomm  1177  ttoo  33  aanndd  VVoolluunnttaarryy  RReettiirreemmeenntt  
SScchheemmee  ffoorr  tthhee  eennttiirree  EEnnggiinneeeerriinngg  CCaaddrree  iinncclluuddiinngg  GGrr..  ‘‘AA’’  OOffffiicceerrss  wwaass  
iinnttrroodduucceedd..  
DDuurriinngg  tthhee  yyeeaarr  22000055--0066  tthhee  eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt  hhaass  iinnccrreeaasseedd  dduuee  ttoo  tthhee  
rreeaassoonn  tthhaatt  CCWWCC  hhaadd  ttoo  ccrreeaattee  pprroovviissiioonn  ooff  mmoorree  tthhaann  99  ccrroorreess  ttoowwaarrddss  PPoosstt  
RReettiirreemmeenntt  MMeeddiiccaall  SScchheemmee  aass  ppeerr  RReevviisseedd  AAccccoouunnttiinngg  SSttaannddaarrddss  iissssuueedd  bbyy  tthhee  
IInnssttiittuuttee  ooff  CChhaarrtteerreedd  AAccccoouunnttaannttss  ooff  IInnddiiaa  ffoorr  tthhee  ffiirrsstt  ttiimmee..  TThhee  pprroovviissiioonn  wwaass  
ccrreeaatteedd  bbaasseedd  oonn  tthhee  aaccttuuaarriiaall  VVaalluuaattiioonn..  TThhiiss  pprroovviissiioonn  iiss  aaddddeedd  iinn  tthhee  
eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt..  SSiimmiillaarr  pprroovviissiioonn  aammoouunnttiinngg  ttoo  RRss..  88..6688  ccrroorreess  wwaass  mmaaddee  iinn  
tthhee  yyeeaarr  22000066--0077  aanndd  aallssoo  aaddddeedd  ttoo  tthhee  eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt..  IIff  tthhee  eeffffoorrtt  ooff  tthhiiss  
pprroovviissiioonn  iiss  sseeppaarraatteedd,,  tthheerree  iiss  nnoo  iinnccrreeaassee  iinn  tthhee  eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt  dduurriinngg  tthhee  
yyeeaarr  22000055--0066  aanndd  22000066--0077..  
TThhee  eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt  ffoorr  tthhee  yyeeaarr  22000077--0088  iiss  hhiigghh  dduuee  ttoo  DDAA  mmeerrggeerr  
ww..ee..ff..  11sstt  JJaannuuaarryy,,  22000077  ffoorr  tthhee  eemmppllooyyeeeess  iinn  IIDDAA  PPaatttteerrnn  ooff  PPaayy  SSccaallee  aass  ppeerr  
DDPPEE  OOrrddeerr  NNoo..  22((77))//  22000055  DDPPEE  ((WWCC))  GGLL--IIIIII  ddaatteedd  2266tthh  FFeebb..  22000088  aanndd  aallssoo  
aannttiicciippaatteedd  PPaayy  RReevviissiioonn  ccoosstt  pprroojjeecctteedd  @@  2200%%  oonn  tthhee  eexxiissttiinngg  bbaassiicc  ppaayy  iinn  
rreessppeecctt  ooff  bbootthh  IIDDAA  aanndd  CCDDAA  ppaatttteerrnn  ppaayy  ssccaallee  eemmppllooyyeeeess..  
TThhee  eessttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  ccoosstt  wwiitthh  rreeffeerreennccee  ttoo  tthhee  ttoottaall  eexxppeennddiittuurree  hhaass  
rreedduucceedd  dduurriinngg  tthhee  ppeerriioodd  22000044--0055  ttoo  22000066--0077  rreefflleecctteedd  aass  ffuurrnniisshheedd  bbeellooww::    
YYeeaarr  IInnccoommee  
((RRss..  IInn  
CCrroorree))  
EExxppeennddiittuurree  
((RRss..  IInn  CCrroorree))  
EEssttaabblliisshhmmeenntt  
CCoosstt  ((RRss..  IInn  
CCrroorree))  
%%  ooff  
EEssttaabblliisshhmmee
nntt  ccoosstt  ttoo  
ttoottaall  
eexxppeennddiittuurree  
22000044--0055  552222..8877  446622..4455  118888..4400  4400..3377%%  
22000055--0066    661199..5500  551122..5555  119977..2255  3388..4488%%  
22000066--0077    668866..4444  555522..6644  119966..0066  3355..4488%%  

 
           The Storage Capacity of the Corporation has significantly gone up during 
the years. This has also contributed marginally to increase in the establishment 
cost.  
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No. 1-1/2008-SG dated the   28/4/2008 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.29 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 25 Para No. 6.26) 
  
TThhee  CCoommmmiitttteeee  nnoottee  tthhaatt  uupp  ttoo  2288tthh  FFeebbrruuaarryy,,  22000088  ttoottaall  ssttoorraaggee  ccaappaacciittyy  
aavvaaiillaabbllee  wwiitthh  PPuunnjjaabb  wwaass  5511..5555  llaakkhh  MMTTss  ((oowwnneedd  ––  2244..1177  llaakkhh  MMTTss  aanndd  hhiirreedd  ––  
2266..9922  llaakkhh  MMTTss  PPlliinntthh  ––  00..8888  llaakkhh  MMTTss,,  wwhhiicchh  iinn  ppeerrcceennttaaggee    ttoonnnnee  iiss  4455..5522,,  
5511..8811  aanndd  11..6655  rreessppeeccttiivveellyy))  bbuutt  ooccccuuppaannccyy  lleevveell  wwaass  oonnllyy  4400..3322  llaakkhh  MMTTss  ((7788%%  
ooccccuuppaannccyy))..    SSiimmiillaarr  iiss  tthhee  ssiittuuaattiioonn  iinn  tthhee  SSttaattee  ooff  AAnnddhhrraa  PPrraaddeesshh..    TThhee  
CCoommmmiitttteeee  aarree  ccoonnssttrraaiinneedd  ttoo  nnoottee  tthhaatt  aalltthhoouugghh  tthhee  hhiirreedd  ccaappaacciittyy  iiss  bbeeiinngg  
uuttiilliizzeedd  ttoo  tthhee  mmaaxxiimmuumm  bbuutt  ssuurrpprriissiinnggllyy  nnoott  tthhee  oowwnneedd  oonnee..    TThhee  CCoommmmiitttteeee  
eexxpprreessss  tthheeiirr  ddeeeepp  aanngguuiisshh  oovveerr  uunnddeerr--uuttiilliizzaattiioonn  ooff  oowwnneedd  ccaappaacciittyy  aanndd  tthhee  iinn  
ffrruuccttuuoouuss  eexxppeennddiittuurree  bbeeiinngg  iinnccuurrrreedd  oonn  hhiirriinngg  tthhee  ssttoorraaggee  ccaappaacciittyy..    TThhee  
CCoommmmiitttteeee,,  tthheerreeffoorree,,  ssttrroonnggllyy  rreeccoommmmeenndd  tthhaatt  dduuee  ccaarree  sshhoouulldd  bbee  ttaakkeenn  bbyy  
CCWWCC  bbyy  uuttiilliizziinngg  tthheeiirr  oowwnn  ccaappaacciittyy  ttoo  tthhee  mmaaxxiimmuumm  ffiirrsstt  bbeeffoorree  hhiirriinngg  aannyy  
ssttoorraaggee  ccaappaacciittyy  ffrroomm  oouuttssiiddee  iinn  oorrddeerr  ttoo  ssaavvee  pprreecciioouuss  ffuunnddss  ssppeenntt  oonn  hhiirriinngg  
ssppaaccee..  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As on 1 st April, 08, the capacity of Punjab Region is 7,13,759 MT which 
comprises 6,44,659 MT owned and 69,100 MT of hired capacity.  The occupancy 
of owned capacity is 52% and occupancy of hired capacity is 53%. 
IInn  AAnnddhhrraa  PPrraaddeesshh  RReeggiioonn,,  tthhee  ttoottaall  ccaappaacciittyy  iiss  1133,,1100,,334411  MMTT  wwhhiicchh  
ccoommpprriisseess  1111,,7700,,224422  MMTT  oowwnneedd  aanndd  11,,4400,,009999  MMTT  hhiirreedd..  TThhee  ooccccuuppaannccyy  ooff  
oowwnneedd  ccaappaacciittyy  iiss  5588%%  aanndd  hhiirreedd  ccaappaacciittyy  iiss  9900%%..    TThhee  ccaappaacciittyy  hhaass  bbeeeenn  hhiirreedd    
iinn  ppllaacceess  wwhheerree  CCWWCC  ddooeess  nnoott  hhaavvee  tthheeiirr  oowwnn  ggooddoowwnnss  aanndd  tthheessee  hhiirreedd  
ggooddoowwnnss  hhaavvee  mmaaxxiimmuumm  uuttiilliizzaattiioonn  dduuee  ttoo  wwhhiicchh,,  tthhee  ooccccuuppaannccyy  ooff  hhiirreedd  
ggooddoowwnnss  iiss  mmoorree  tthhaann  tthhaatt  ooff  oowwnneedd  ccaappaacciittyy..  
TThhee  ttoottaall  ccaappaacciittyy  ooff  CCWWCC  aass  oonn  11sstt  AApprriill,,  0088  iiss  9977,,5522,,442200  MMTT  wwhhiicchh  
ccoommpprriisseess  6677,,1177,,007799  MMTT  oowwnneedd  aanndd  3300,,3355,,334411  MMTT  ooff  hhiirreedd  ccaappaacciittyy..    TThhee  hhiirreedd  

ccaappaacciittyy  iinncclluuddeess  1133,,7788,,776600  MMTT  ooppeenn  aarreeaa  oowwnneedd//hhiirreedd  aanndd  44,,2299,,116600  MMTT  ttaakkeenn  
oonn  mmaannaaggeemmeenntt  bbaassiiss  ffoorr  wwhhiicchh  nnoo  rreenntt  iiss  bbeeiinngg  ppaaiidd..    TThhee  ttoottaall  ooccccuuppaannccyy  ooff  tthhee  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  iiss  7744%%..    OOuutt  ooff  wwhhiicchh  uuttiilliizzaattiioonn  ooff  oowwnneedd  ccaappaacciittyy  iiss  7744%%  aanndd  ooff  
hhiirreedd  ooccccuuppaannccyy  iiss  7766%%..  
FFrroomm  tthhee  aabboovvee,,  iitt  ccaann  bbee  sseeeenn  tthhaatt  tthhee  hhiirreedd  ccaappaacciittyy  ooff  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
iiss  oonnllyy  3311%%  ooff  tthhee  ttoottaall  ccaappaacciittyy  aanndd  uuttiilliizzaattiioonn  ooff  hhiirreedd  ccaappaacciittyy  iiss  mmoorree  tthhaann  tthhee  
uuttiilliizzaattiioonn  ooff  oowwnneedd  ccaappaacciittyy    ssiinnccee  aa  lloott  ooff  hhiirreedd  WWaarreehhoouusseess  iiss  oonn  mmaannaaggeemmeenntt  
bbaassiiss  ffoorr  wwhhiicchh  CCWWCC  iiss  nnoott  ppaayyiinngg  aannyy  rreenntt  aanndd  tthheeiirr  ooccccuuppaannccyy  iiss  110000%%,,  dduuee  ttoo  
wwhhiicchh  ooccccuuppaannccyy  ooff  hhiirreedd  uunniittss  hhaavvee  iinnccrreeaasseedd..    TThhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  pprreeffeerrss  ttoo  
uuttiilliizzee  iittss  oowwnn  ggooddoowwnnss  ttoo  tthhee  mmaaxxiimmuumm  ffiirrsstt  aanndd  hhiirreess  tthhee  ssttoorraaggee  ccaappaacciittyy  oonnllyy  
wwhheenn  eeiitthheerr  oowwnneedd  ssttoorraaggee  ccaappaacciittyy  iiss  ffuullll  oorr  oowwnneedd  ssttoorraaggee  ccaappaacciittyy  iiss  nnoott  
aavvaaiillaabbllee  aanndd  tthheerree  iiss  ddeemmaanndd  ooff  ssppaaccee  ffrroomm  tthhee  ddeeppoossiittoorrss..      
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No. 1-1/2008-SG dated the   28/4/2008 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 26 Para No.7.26) 
 
The Committee note that the Sugar Development Fund (SDF) was created 
in 1982 for financing the activities of sugar industries for their developmen t. A 
cess of Rs.14 per quintal upto 31.12.2007 and @ Rs.15.00 per quintal w.e.f. 
01.01.2008 and @ Rs.24.00 per quintal w.e.f. 01.3.2008 is being collected as 
excise duty on all sugar produced by any sugar factory in India under the Sugar 
Cess Act, 1982. Th e Committee also note that during the period 1982 -83 to 
2007-08 (upto 30.11.2007) an amount of Rs.4685 crore were collected as cess, 
out of which Rs.4006 crore has been transferred to the Sugar Development Fund 
and Rs. 3754 core have been disbursed for the  development of the sugar 
industry upto 31 st November, 2007.  The Committee are constrained to note that 
there is huge underspending under various schemes for the development of the 
sugar industry during the years 2006 -07 and 2007 -08 which is evident from the 
fact that during 2006 -07 out of Rs.300 crore, the Department could utilise only 
Rs.195.57 crore. Similarly,  during 2007 -08, the Department could utilise 
Rs.190.62 crore out of the total allocation of Rs.330 crore. The Committee also 
find that the amoun t allocated at BE Stage was enhanced at RE Stage even 
when the actual expenditure was far less than the allocated amount. The 
Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Government which states that 
huge underspending have been due to receipt of less er and incomplete 
applications as required under the rules, non -execution of timely Tripartite 
Agreement (TPA), non completion of certain procedural formalities etc. The 
Committee view this very seriously and feel that the very purpose of SDF would 
be defe ated if the funds allocated/sanctioned for the various schemes are not 
fully utilised /disbursed.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that maximum 
amount of SDF should be disbursed for the development of sugar industries and 
also desire that procedures in volved for advancing loans to various sugar mills 

from the Sugar Development Fund be simplified to remove the procedural 
bottlenecks so that more and more sugar mills could avail of the benefits of loans 
from SDF. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Total spending during the year 2007-2008 upto 31.3.2008 was as under:  
 
S. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme Budget 2007-08 
(Rs. in crore) 
Actual Exp. 
(Rs. in crore) 
1 Loans for modernization/ 
rehabilitation of   sugar mills: 
125.00 125.00 
2 Cane Development 25.00 5.06 
3 Bagasse based co-generation 150.00 150.00 
4 Loan for production of ethanol   30.00 8.36 
 Total  330.00 288.42 
 
From the above, it would be seen that in case of 
modernisation/rehabilitation and bagasse based cogeneration schemes 100% of 
the allotted amount for t he year 2007-08 was utilised within the financial year i.e. 
Department was able to achieve the set targets.   
 
Disbursement of loan from Sugar Development Fund for all the schemes 
is dependent on completion of necessary documentation, furnishing of securit y 
etc. in time.   In case of Cane Development a number of loans were sanctioned  
but  the same  could not be disbursed due to the fact that the factories failed  to 
furnish  requisite bank guarantee or State Government Guarantee as security as 
per SDF Rules.  In case of ethanol scheme, due to lack of adequate demand and 
an assured market for ethanol, factories were not forthcoming with proposals for 
grant of loan for production of ethanol.  The Government policy was also, till 
recently, not clear with regar d to a mandatory blending programme. Therefore, 
the number of applications received in the department for such loans were much 
below expectations.  
 
However, In order to minimize the procedural delays in disbursement of 
sanctioned loans to the minimum and as advised  by  the Standing Committee,  
the Government have since reviewed some of the existing guidelines and taken 
following decisions:- 
 
(a) Sugar factories are now allowed to furnish a charge on the assets in 
addition to the earlier requirement of bank gu arantee only for loans for 
sugarcane development and for ethanol projects; 
 
(b) The nature of security to be furnished by the sugar factories, which 
was being earlier decided at the time of disbursement of SDF loans are 
now being  decided at the time of sanction of the loan itself;  
 

(c) A bench -mark has been fixed and industry informed for the Fixed 
Assets Coverage Ratio (FACR) to decide  the nature of security; 
 
(d) Payments are now being made through Electronic Clearance Service 
(ECS) so that the sugar factory recei ves payment within a day or two 
instead of receiving payment through our monitoring agencies viz., 
IFCI and NCDC.  
 
The Committee’s recommendation to the Ministry to continue the pro -
active initiatives to simplify the procedures for disbursement of SDF loa n has 
been accepted and all possible steps are being taken in this regard.  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No. 3-2/2008-SDF dated the   5/5/2008 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 28 Para 7.28) 
 
The Committee are perturbed to note the continuous decline in the 
number of claims being settled on account of reimbursement of internal transport 
and freight charges and also on Ocean freight and handling and marketing 
charges.  For instance, the nu mber of claims settled on account of internal 
transport which were 418 during 2003 -04 declined to just 38 during 2006 -07 and 
in 2007 -08 a mere 15 claims have been settled on this account upto 31 st 
December,2007.  Similar is the position with regard to numb er of claims settled 
on account of ocean freight and handling and marketing charges.  270 claims 
were settled during 2005 -06 which came down to 94 during 2006 -07 and to just 
44 during 2007 -08 upto 31 st December,2007.   Total expenditure on both these 
accounts during 2005 -06 was just Rs. 37.44 crore against the Budget allocation 
of Rs. 90 crore and during 2006 -07 it was Rs. 20.96 crore out of the budget 
allocations of Rs. 50 crore.  The reasons for settlement of less number of claims 
given is that a large nu mber of claims received were found to be deficient and 
incomplete is not acceptable to the Committee.  The Committee view this matter 
with great anxiety and recommend  that concerted efforts should be made for 
maximum utilisation/disbursal of funds under th ese heads so that huge amounts 
are not blocked under these heads resulting in their surrender.  The Committee 
also recommend that the cumbersome procedural formalities which are gone into 
for clearance/settlement of claims should be made easier and entrepr eneur 
friendly, so that more and more claims are settled expeditiously. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The scheme announced in 2002 by the Central Government for providing 
export assistance to sugar mills was applicable for the exports made between 
21st June,2002 and 18 th August 2004.  The claims referred to by the Committee 
are with regard to this scheme.   Efforts are being made to settle more and more 

claims still pending disposal under this scheme to avoid surrender of funds.  The 
sugar mills are being regul arly advised to submit complete claims so as to settle 
the same.   Most of the claims were settled in the first year of the scheme i.e. 
2003-04 for internal transport and freight charges and 2005 -06 for ocean freight 
and handling and marketing charges.  Th e rest of the cases could be settled in 
the subsequent years as and when the relevant documents and information were 
furnished by the mills.  Therefore, the claims settled in subsequent years have 
been less.   
 
There has been no scheme till April 2007 for export assistance since 
expiry of the earlier scheme on 18th August 2004. 
 
The Central Government announced a new export assistance scheme for 
exports of sugar made on or after 19 th April 2007 and upto 18 th April 2008.  The 
SDF Rules have been amended by i nsertion of a new Rule 20A vide notification 
dated 7.11.2007. The scheme has since been extended for exports made upto 
30th September 2008.  The procedure this time has been made as simple as 
possible requiring minimum number of documents.  As a result in just about 3 -4 
months (the claims were submitted from December 2007 onwards), altogether 
124 claims have  been settled and an amount of Rs.69.92 crore has been 
disbursed to the sugar factories on account of the above during the financial year 
2007-08.   Bes ides, another 86 cases under the earlier scheme involving an 
amount of Rs. 10.40 crore has been disbursed to the sugar factories during the 
2007-08 financial year. 
 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 (Department of Food and Public Distribution  
O.M. No. 6-1/2008- SPF dated 9.5.2008) 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 29 Para No. 7.29) 
 
The Committee are constrained to note that the percentage of recovery of 
funds from the financial assistance provided to the sugar mills from Sugar 
Development Fund  has been quite low over the years. It was just 14 to 18 
percent during the years 2003 -04 to 2005 -06 which increased to 31 percent 
during 2006-07. The Committee also note that the provisional figure for recovery 
during 2007-08 was only 47 per cent.  The Committee feel that the recovery of 
loans given as assistance to the sugar mills from SDF is still not upto the mark 
and desire that the Department should make concerted efforts to make the 
recovery to a higher level say about 50 -60 per cent of the lo ans so provided. 
They desire that action taken in this regard may be communicated to them at the 
earliest.  
 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
Secretary (F&PD) has already taken up the matter with the Ministry of 
Finance for the recovery of outstanding SDF dues fr om the Normal Central 
Assistance to the State Governments of Maharashtra, Punjab and U.P. where 
the State Governments had guaranteed the repayment of the SDF loan.  The 
Ministry of Finance has already issued instructions to adjust SDF dues with  the 
Normal Central Assistance to the State Governments of Maharashtra, Punjab 
and U.P.   
 
Secretary (F&PD) has written D.O letters to all concerned Chief 
Secretaries of the State Governments for arranging payment of default where the 
repayments of loans were guaranteed by the State Government.  
 
            Letters have been written to the defaulter Sugar Units advising them to 
liquidate  
overdues to avoid legal complications.  In some cases, legal notices have been 
also issued.  
 
            Special  Meetings were  held with major defaulters including  U.P. State 
Sugar Corporation for liquidation of default.  
 
            SDF dues are being recovered from the  claims of differential levy price of 
levy sugar, reimbursement of expenditure on export  of sugar and buffer stock 
maintained  
 by the sugar units. 
 
            IFCI and NCDC, who are the nominated agencies to recover SDF dues, 
have been impressed upon to put in extra efforts for collection of defaults. The 
payments of fees to these two agencies have also been li nked to the actual 
recoveries of SDF dues made by them.  
 
The above steps taken over the last two years have shown fruitful results, as from 
2005-06 onwards the percentage increase in default over previous year has decelerated 
and percentage wise recovery of SDF dues with reference to total default has accelerated.  
It is expected that with the steps taken by the Government, this trend will continue which 
will bring down the default further in future.  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No. 3-2/2008-SDF dated the 5/5/2008 
 

 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSEVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (S.N. 5 Para No.4.24) 
 
 
From the  data of procurement of wheat, the Committee note that the 
procurement is mainly from Haryana and Punjab. Out of 111.2 lakh tonnes of 
wheat procured during 2007 -08, the quantity of wheat purchased from Punjab 
and Haryana is 67.81 lakh tonnes and 33.50 lakh  tonnes, respectively which 
amounts to 91.04 per cent of the total wheat procurement  in the country. In case 
of rice, the maximum procurement  is from Punjab, Chhatisgarh, Orissa, Haryana 
and Uttar Pradesh. The Committee note that to increase the procurem ent of 
wheat during RMS 2008 -09, certain steps have been taken by the Government 
which include fixing of MSP of wheat at Rs. 1000 per quintal, ban on export of 
wheat on private account as well as from the central pool, permitting of import of 
wheat on priv ate account at zero duty etc. The Committee further note that to 
increase the procurement of wheat from non -traditional States and to encourage 
procurement operations in these  States a number of steps have been taken 
which include enhancement of commission  to societies/sub agents to 2.5 per 
cent, directions to the concerned Departments of State Governments to closely 
monitor the mandi arrivals and also to procure at least the requisite quantity of 
wheat which may be sufficient to meet its requirement of whe at for TPDS from 
within the State. NAFED has been authorized in some States to procure wheat 
on behalf of FCI. The Committee note that despite a number of initiatives taken 
by the Department, the procurement of wheat by the Government agencies  is 
not upto  the mark. The Committee therefore recommend that result oriented 
initiatives be taken by the Department to increase the procurement of wheat from 
non-traditional States. The Committee also feel that the problem of procurement 
of wheat for the Central pool  will continue unless and until there is a marked 
improvement in the production of wheat in the country. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Department should,  in consultation with other 
concerned Ministries/Departments, chalk out a comprehensive pla n for 
increasing the production of wheat in the country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per the 3 rdAdvance Estimates of Department of Agriculture and  
Cooperation, production of wheat crop 2007 -08 (to be marketed in RMS 2008 -
09) is estimated at 767.84 lakh tonnes against the final  estimates of wheat 

production of 758.07 lakh tonnes of crop 2006 -07 (marketed in RMS 2007 -08).  
The Government has significantly increased minimum support price of both 
paddy and wheat in recent  years to encourage  farmers to gro w  more  wheat 
and rice. Moreover, to increase production of wheat, rice and coarse cereals, 
Centrally Sponsored Integrated Cereals Development Programme (ICDP) is in 
operation from October, 2000. The Government has also initiated two schemes 
for increasing foodgrains production and improving the agricultural growth in the 
country. These are (i) National Food Security Mission (NFSM) and (ii) Rashtriya 
Krishi Vikash Yojana (RKVY). 
 
Due to various initiatives taken by the Department as well as the increase 
in MSP for wheat crop 2007 -08 (to be marketed in RMS 2008 -09)  180.12 lakh 
tonnes of wheat has been procured in RMS 2008 -09 ( as on 8.5.08) against 
111.3 lakh tonnes procured in the entire RMS 2007 -08. Further, procurement in  
Uttar Pradesh is  13.37 lakh to nnes (as on 8.5.2008) during current RMS against 
0.53 lakh tonnes procured in the corresponding period last year.  In the last few 
years, no wheat was ever procured in Gujarat.  However, procurement this year 
is 1.73 lakh tonnes (as on 8.5.2008).  Similarl y, in Madhya Pradesh, the 
procurement this year is 12.58 lakh tonnes (as on 8.5.08) as against 3688 tonnes 
in the corresponding period last year.   Procurement in Rajasthan is 7.03 lakh 
tonnes of wheat during the current RMS (as on 8.5.2008) as against 1.5 6 tonnes 
in the corresponding period last year.  
  
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 (Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No.156(7)/2008 PY.I   dated 16th  May,2008) 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 6 Para No.4.25) 
 
             The Committee find that a large number of multinational 
companies/private traders have entered into the market in a big way and are 
purchasing huge quantity of wheat over and above the Minimum Support Price 
(MSP) fixed by the Government. They procure w heat in excess of their 
requirement which leads to profiteering, hoarding and black marketing of wheat. 
The Committee apprehend that the wheat procured by private traders/MNCs is 
offloaded to roller flourmills and other manufacturers of wheat products at a much 
higher price. The Committee note that in order to monitor purchases of wheat by 
private traders, a notification has been issued on 11.2.2008 which stipulates that 
any company which purchases wheat beyond 10,000 tonnes during RMS 2008 -
09 shall furnish  a return of the same to the State Government., and if it 
purchases over 25,000 tonnes of wheat it will furnish a return to the Central 
Government. However, the main concern of the Committee is about the purchase 
of unlimited stocks of wheat and that too for unlimited period by the MNCs/private 
traders. Owing to unlimited purchase of wheat by these companies, even the 

Government is not able to procure the quantity of wheat required to maintain its  
buffer stock and has to resort to imports to meet the minimu m buffer norms and 
also to meet the requirements of Public Distribution System (PDS) and other 
Welfare Schemes in the Country. In the opinion of the Committee these private 
traders create artificial scarcity by hoarding large quantities of wheat and jack u p 
the prices of wheat in the market. The Secretary, Department of Food and Public 
Distribution during the course of oral evidence has submitted that it is very 
difficult to come to a national average in terms of any stock limit so that States 
have been authorized to put whatever stock limit they think was appropriate. The 
Committee also note that Eleven States/UTs have decided not to implement the  
stock limit order, while five States are reported to be considering the issue of 
stock limit order and the rema ining States have already issued stock limit orders. 
The Committee are of the view that mere filling of returns by private companies 
making purchase of over 25000 tonnes of wheat cannot stop the MNCs/private 
traders from purchasing unlimited stocks. The Co mmittee also note that the 
notification issued by the Government makes provision for disclosure only. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government should work out 
some maximum stock limit for purchase of wheat by private traders so as t o curb 
the tendency of hoarding by the unscrupulous private traders for making profits 
and also to protect the interest of the consumer at large. The Committee desire 
that action taken in this regard may be communicated to them at the earliest.  
 
 
Reply of the Government. 
 
The Government notified the removal of “Removal of (Licensing 
requirements, Stock limits and Movement Restrictions) on specified Foodstuffs 
Order, 2002” on 15.2.2002 to facilitate movement and trade and to ensure 
remunerative prices to farmers. 
 
The situation was reviewed in the context of rise in prices of essential 
commodities, including wheat and wheat product, in the mid 2006 and various 
options including imposition of stock limits for wheat were considered. A Central 
Order No.1373 (E)  dated 29.8.2006 was issued for keeping in abeyance some 
provisions of the above mentioned Order dated 15.2.2002 with respect to wheat 
and pulses for a period of 6 months. It has since been periodically extended and 
is currently valid upto 31.8.2008. This Order revived the powers delegated to 
State / UT Governments to fix stock limits, as considered appropriate by them, in 
respect of wheat (and Pulses).  
 
Regarding specifying a maximum stock limit for purchase of wheat by 
Private Traders by Central Governme nt, it is felt that a uniform stock limit is not 
feasible for the entire Country since production/availability of wheat and its 
demand/requirement differ from State to State depending upon various factors 
such as food habits of the local people and location of wheat based industries. 
 

The Wheat (Stock Declaration by Companies or Firms or Individuals) 
Order, 2008 is an additional measure intended to keep a watch on bulk 
purchases by and availability of stock of wheat with Private Traders and to check 
evasion of taxes on such purchases.  
 
Adequate powers are already available to State/UT Governments to take 
appropriate action against those found indulging in hoarding and black -marketing 
of essential commodities, including wheat, under the provisions of `Essent ial 
Commodities Act, 1955’ and  `Prevention of Black Marketing and Maintenance of 
Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980’. The Department of Consumer 
Affairs, in pursuance of para 5.37 in the 24 th Report of the Standing Committee 
on Demands for Grants  (2008-09 – Department of Consumer Affairs), has also 
sought views of State/UT Governments regarding any lacunae in the Essential 
Commodities Act and the ‘Prevention of Black Marketing and Maintenance of 
Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980’ and sug gestions regarding 
changes, if any, required to make them more effective in curbing hoarding and 
black-marketing of Essential Commodities. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
( Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
OM. No.  2(LS)/2007 PY.III  dated  24th July,2008 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 14 Para No.4.76) 
 
 
The Committee note that the main objective of Village Grain Bank Scheme 
is to provide safeguard against starvation during the period of natural calamity or 
during the lean season.  The Committee also note that scheme though launched 
during 1996-97 could not take off because the concept of this scheme was not 
clear to the intended beneficiaries. Thus, the scheme could not take off in the 
right earnest.  The Committee further note that during the 10 th five year plan 
period only 7188 village grain banks could be established out of 14495 village 
grain banks sanctioned for the entire plan period.  The Committee further note 
that revised guidelines for implementation of the scheme during 11 th Five Year 
Plan have been issued in January 2008 and the Food Secretary in a meeting 
with the Food Secretaries of all the States has clarified all the conceptual issues 
relating to the scheme.  In view of the above, the Committee recommends that all 
the State Governments should be persuaded to establish more and more Village 
Grain Banks in their States in order to give benefit to the intended beneficiaries 
under the scheme.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken 
in this regard. 
 
 
 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
 
As per the recommendations of the Standing Committee, all efforts are 
being made by this Department to establish more Village Grain Banks.  
Accordingly special  request has been made on 13 -5-2008 to all States/UTs 
Governments to send their fresh proposals for setting up of Village Grain Banks  
to provide safeguard against starvation to BPL and AAY families in chronically 
food scarce areas.  During 2007 -08, 2598 additional Village Grain Banks have 
been sanctioned in 9 States .  More Village Grain Banks are likely to be 
sanctioned during current year. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No. 9(2)2008-PD-I/III dated the   8/7/2008 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 24 Para No.6.25) 
  
TThhee  CCoommmmiitttteeee  aarree  ccoonnssttrraaiinneedd  ttoo  nnoottee  tthhaatt  CCWWCC  hhaass  nnoo  pprrooppoossaall  ffoorr  
ccoonnssttrruuccttiioonn  ooff  ggooddoowwnnss  iinn  NNEE  SSttaattee//JJaannddKK..  TThhee  MMiinniissttrryy  hhaass  aallssoo  iinnffoorrmmeedd  tthhaatt  
tthheeyy  aarree  iinn  ccoonnssttaanntt  ttoouucchh  wwiitthh  MMeegghhaallaayyaa  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ffoorr  ddeevveellooppiinngg  ccoolldd  
ssttoorraaggee  ffaacciilliittyy..  TThhee  CCoommmmiitttteeee  ffeeeellss  tthhaatt  iinnaaddeeqquuaaccyy  ooff  ssttoorraaggee  ccaappaacciittyy  iinn  NNEE  
SSttaattee  aanndd  JJaannddKK  ppoosseess  aa  sseerriioouuss  tthhrreeaatt  ttoo  eeffffiicciieenntt  aanndd  ssmmooootthh  rruunnnniinngg  ooff  PPuubblliicc  
DDiissttrriibbuuttiioonn  SSyysstteemm,,  eessppeecciiaallllyy  dduurriinngg  rraaiinnyy  sseeaassoonn..  AAccccoorrddiinngg  ttoo  tthhee  CCoommmmiitttteeee,,  
NNoorrtthh--EEaasstteerrnn  SSttaatteess  aarree  tthhee  mmoosstt  ddiissaaddvvaannttaaggeedd  SSttaatteess  iinn  tteerrmmss  ooff  llaacckk  ooff  
iinnffrraassttrruuccttuurree,,  ccoommmmuunniiccaattiioonn  aanndd  rraaiill//rrooaadd  nneettwwoorrkk..  SSttoorraaggee  ooff  aaddeeqquuaattee  
ffooooddggrraaiinnss  iiss  aa  ccoonnttiinnuuoouuss  pprroobblleemm  wwhhiicchh  nneeeeddss  ttoo  bbee  ttaacckklleedd  iinn  aallll  sseerriioouussnneessss..  
IInn  tthhee  ooppiinniioonn  ooff  tthhee  CCoommmmiitttteeee,,  eexxiisstteennccee  ooff  ssuuffffiicciieenntt  ssttoorraaggee  ccaappaacciittyy  iinn  tthheessee  
SSttaatteess  iiss  aa  pprree--rreeqquuiissiittee  ffoorr  tthhee  ppeeooppllee  ooff  tthheessee  SSttaatteess  ttoo  rreeaapp  tthhee  bbeenneeffiittss  ooff  
PPuubblliicc  DDiissttrriibbuuttiioonn  SSyysstteemm..  TThhee  CCoommmmiitttteeee,,  tthheerreeffoorree,,  ssttrroonnggllyy  rreeccoommmmeennddss  tthhaatt  
tthhee  MMiinniissttrryy  sshhoouulldd  ggiivvee  hhiigghheesstt  pprriioorriittyy  ttoo  tthhee  ttaasskk  ooff  ccoonnssttrruuccttiioonn  ooff  ggooddoowwnnss  iinn  
NNEE  RReeggiioonn//JJ&&KK..    
Reply of the Government 
 
TThhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  hhaass  ssiixx  wwaarreehhoouusseess  iinn  AAssssaamm  SSttaattee  hhaavviinngg  ccaappaacciittyy  ooff  
6644,,220000  MMTT,,  oonnee  wwaarreehhoouussee  iinn  DDiimmaappuurr  ((NNaaggaallaanndd))  hhaavviinngg  1133,,000000  MMTT  ccaappaacciittyy  
aanndd  ttwwoo  WWaarreehhoouusseess  aatt  AAggaarrttaallaa  ((TTrriippuurraa))  hhaavviinngg  ccaappaacciittyy  ooff  2244,,000000  MMTT..  TThhuuss,,  
tthhee  ttoottaall  ccaappaacciittyy  aavvaaiillaabbllee  iinn  NNoorrtthh  EEaasstt  RReeggiioonn  iiss  11,,0011,,220000  MMTT..    HHoowweevveerr,,  tthhee  
uuttiilliizzaattiioonn  lleevveell  iiss  oonnllyy  6699%%..  TThhee  vvaaccaanntt  ccaappaacciittyy  mmaayy  bbee  uuttiilliizzeedd  ffoorr  ssttoorraaggee  ooff  
ffooooddggrraaiinnss..  IInn  JJaammmmuu  aanndd  KKaasshhmmiirr,,  CCWWCC  iiss    nnoott  ooppeerraattiinngg  aannyy  WWaarreehhoouussee  aatt  
pprreesseenntt..  
  

TThhee  CCWWCC  iiss  wwiilllliinngg  ttoo  ccoonnssiiddeerr  rreeqquueesstt  ffoorr  ccoonnssttrruuccttiioonn  ooff    wwaarreehhoouusseess  iinn  
NN..EE..  RReeggiioonn//JJaannddKK  pprroovviiddeedd  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt..  llaanndd  iiss  mmaaddee  aavvaaiillaabbllee  ttoo  CCWWCC  aanndd  
aassssuurraannccee  iiss  ggiivveenn  bbyy  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt//ootthheerr  aaggeenncciieess  ffoorr  ffuullll  uuttiilliizzaattiioonn  ooff  tthhee  ssaammee..    
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No. 1-1/2008-SG dated the   28/4/2008 

CHAPTER IV 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation  (S. No. 27 Para No.7.27) 
 
The Committee are constrained to note that as on date, a total of 
Rs.3260.66 crores which includes Rs.1638.17 crore for 2007 -08 sugar season, 
Rs.1383.36 crore for 2006 -07 sugar season and Rs.239.13 crores for sugar 
season 2005-06 and earlier seasons are outstanding as cane price arrears. The 
Committee are pained to note that although payment of sugarcane is required to 
be made within 14 days of the supply of sugarcane by the farmers, it is, however, 
rarely done. The cane  price arrears pertaining to sugar seasons 2005 -06 and 
earlier are still outstanding and yet no action has been taken against the sugar 
mills for recovery of cane price arrears along with interest @ 15%, as per the 
provisions of the Sugarcane (Control) Ord er,1966. As regards State -wise 
position, the maximum arrears are outstanding in the States of Uttar Pradesh and 
Maharashtra the main sugarcane producing States. The Committee feel that non 
payment of cane price arrears to the farmers in time can be a deter rent and 
might force the farmers to stop cultivation of sugarcane and instead go in for 
production of some other crops. The Committee, therefore, recommend that to 
protect the interests of the sugarcane farmers and motivate them to continue to 
cultivate su garcane, the aids/grants given to the sugar mills should be kept in 
abeyance till they liquidate the cane price arrears with interest and strict action 
should be taken against the sugar mills for not paying cane price arrears.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The position of cane prices arrears, as on 29.02.2008, is as follows: 
 
2007-08 sugar season:  
 
Against the total cane price payable of Rs.14,420.47 crore, a sum of 
Rs.9,967.89 crore has been paid leaving a balance payable of Rs.4,452.58 crore 
(30.88% of the total payable). 
 
2006-07 sugar season: 
 
The cane price arrears have been brought down from Rs.1, 383.36 crore 
as on 31.12.2007 to Rs.662.88 crore.  
 

2005-06 and earlier sugar seasons: 
 
The cane price arrears for the sugar season 2005 -06 and earlier are 
Rs.234.75 crore which are mainly on account of litigation pending before the 
Hon’ble Courts or because of closure of sugar mills. 
 
The responsibility of ensuring timely payment of cane price dues to the 
sugarcane growers lies with the respective State Governm ents who have been 
delegated powers under the Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966 and have the 
necessary field organizations. 
 
As regards the recommendation of the Standing Committee that to protect 
the interests of the sugarcane farmers and motivate them to c ontinue to cultivate 
sugarcane, the aids/grants given to the sugar mills should be kept in abeyance till 
they liquidate the cane price arrears with interest, the Central Government, in its 
earlier reply, had indicated that it agrees, in principle, with the  views of the 
Committee, but there are practical difficulties in implementing this 
recommendation.  Usually, the cane price arrears build up in the years of low 
sugar prices as it happened in 2002 -03 and 2006 -07 sugar seasons and again 
happening in 2007 -08 sugar season.  The Government takes appropriate steps 
to help the sugar factories and sugarcane growers in such situation.  The Central 
Government has recently taken various steps to help the sugar industry in  
liquidating the outstanding cane price arrea rs of 2006 -07 and 2007 -08 sugar 
seasons as given as under:- 
 
(i) A buffer stock of 20 lakh tonnes for one year was created for the 
period 01.05.2007 to 30.04.2008. This has since been dismantled 
after the expiry of the buffer stock period and the sugar mills h ave 
been allowed to sell their allocated buffer stock quantity in the open 
market with effect from 01.5.2008 before the close of the current 
sugar season 2007-08. 
 
(ii) A buffer stock of 30 lakh tonnes was created for the period 
01.08.2007 to 31.07.2008. The tw o buffer stocks involve annual 
subsidy of about Rs.880 crore from the Sugar Development Fund 
(SDF) and additional bank credit of about Rs.978 crore, and are 
aimed to enhance liquidity of sugar mills affected by decline in 
prices of sugar and stock value, f or clearing cane price arrears as 
first priority. 
 
(iii) Export assistance to defray expenditure on internal transport, 
marketing and handling charges and ocean freight @ Rs.1,350/ - 
per tonne for sugar factories in coastal States and Rs.1,450/ - per 
tonne for tho se in non coastal States subject to actual by road/rail 
for exports to the neighboring countries, has been provided for one 
year from 19.04.2007 to 18.04.2008. The facility has been recently 
extended up to 30.09.2008 and is likely to involve an amount of u p 

to Rs.700 crore as assistance from SDF, and is aimed for clearing 
cane price arrears as first priority. 
 
(iv) The requirement of Release Orders for exports has been dispensed 
with from 31.07.2007. 
 
(v) The NABARD package of 2005 for restructuring of term loans of co-
operative sugar factories has been expanded to include 
cooperative sugar factories not included earlier to avail the benefits, 
convert outstanding loans on account of harvesting and transport 
charges appearing in the factories’ accounts as on 01.04.200 7 up 
to maximum five year term loans without interest subvention and 
enhancing budgetary support from Rs.560 crore to Rs.600 crore to 
provide maximum 3% per annum interest subsidy for restructured 
term loans carrying an interest cap of 10% per annum.  
 
(vi) A l oan scheme of about Rs.3800 crore to extend financial 
assistance to sugar undertakings has been formulated and 
implemented to provide additional liquidity support to the extent of 
notional excise duty on production of sugar in 2006-07 and 2007-08 
sugar sea sons exclusively earmarked for cane arrears/dues of 
2006-07 and 2007-08 sugar seasons respectively relatable to SMP 
fixed by the Central Government. The total interest subvention 
estimated at about Rs.1355 crore is to be borne from the Central 
Government b udget (5% out of the maximum 12% p.a. interest 
subvention and balance up to 7% p.a. from the SDF). As per 
information received from National Bank of Agricultural and Rural 
Development (NABARD) and other scheduled commercial banks, a 
sum of about Rs.2482 cr ores has been sanctioned by them to 
concerned sugar factories.  Further, the proposals amounting to 
Rs.464 crores are under process with the banks. 
 
(vii) To promote Ethanol Blending with petrol (EBP), the following have 
been decided:- 
 
a. 5% ethanol blending made mandatory from October, 2007 with 
10% blending being made optional from October, 2007 and mandatory 
from October, 2008 except in Jammu and Kashmir, North -Eastern States 
and Island territories. 
 
b. Uniform Purchase Price of Rs.21.50 per litre ex -factory for et hanol 
supplied by sugar factories for next three years.  
 
c. Permitting sugar factories to produce ethanol from sugarcane juice 
directly to give flexibility to sugar factories. 
 

d. Reduction in customs duty from 7.5% to 5% for denatured alcohol 
and from 10% to 5 % on molasses when EBP programme at 5% level is 
fully operationalised. 
 
            The steps taken by the Central Government would definitely help the 
sugar mills in liquidating their outstanding cane price dues payable to farmers 
supplying sugarcane.  
As the assistance to the mills under the listed schemes is primarily 
intended for liquidating cane dues, if any, if the suggestion of the Committee is 
imposed on sugar factories, it will not be possible for the Government to pay 
buffer subsidy and extend oth er assistance to sugar mills having cane price 
arrears due to which sugarcane growers may suffer.  The implementation of the 
recommendation of the Committee will render the primary objective of listed 
schemes viz., enhancing the liquidity of the sugar indu stry in order to enable 
them liquidate cane dues infructuous.  Adequate safeguards have been provided 
in the SDF Rules and the other schemes.   Therefore, the recommendation of the 
Standing Committee cannot be accepted due to practical difficulties in 
implementing this recommendation.    
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No. 7-1/2008 Stat.II dated the 18/6/2008 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.32 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation  (S. No.30 Para 8.13) 
 
The Committee note with concern that despite the various measures 
undertaken by the Government to increase the production of oilseeds in the 
country which include enhanced incentives to farmers through fixat ion of 
Minimum Support Price (MSP), implementation of “Integrated scheme of 
oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize” (ISOPOM), the production of oilseeds has 
not increased.  Although there was an increased production of edible oils in the 
Country from 72.47 lakh tonnes in 2004-05 to 83.16 lakh tonnes during 2005 -06, 
the production during 2006 -07 decreased to 73.70 lakh tonnes i.e. a decline of 
9.46 lakh tonnes when compared to the previous year. The Committee note that 
the edible oils produced in the country b arely meets about 55 -60 per cent of the 
total edible oil requirements in the country. Due to increasing population and 
consequently the demand of edible oils, the country has to import about 40 -45 
lakh tonnes of edible oils every year to meet its total req uirements.  The 
dependency on imports with regard to edible oils has been around 35 to 40 per 
cent during the last few years.  The Secretary of the Department during the 
course of oral evidence also acknowledged that the country may not be self -

sufficient in edible oils in the next five years as new varieties and  very high 
yielding varieties have not really come out on a large scale and a real technology 
breakthrough is required in this regard.  Considering the overall scenario with 
regard to oil seeds and edible oils in the country, the Committee feel that efforts 
being made by the Department in the field of developing improved high yielding 
verities of oilseeds need to be geared up. The Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, 
Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize (ISOPOM) sho uld be extended to other States also 
to encourage the farmers to go in for the production of oilseeds.  The Committee 
feel that to bridge the gap between demand and supply of edible oils, the 
increase in production and productivity is imperative. The Commi ttee, therefore, 
recommend that there is a need to review and restructure the centrally sponsored 
scheme ISOPOM, as neither the production nor the productivity of oilseeds have 
shown a rising trend over the last few years.   The Committee also recommends 
that other ways and means should also be explored to increase the production 
and productivity of oilseed crops.  Further, to reduce the dependency on 
imported edible oils, result oriented action should be taken to promote and 
popularize the use of non-traditional secondary sources of edible oils. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The subject matter primarily relates to production and productivity and 
Minimum Support Price (MSP) of edible oils, which lies within the purview of 
Ministry of Agriculture. The matter has  been taken up with that Ministry.  The 
Ministry of Agriculture has stated as follows:- 
 
Oilseeds are mainly grown on marginal and sub -marginal lands under rain 
fed conditions with low input uses.  Less than 25% of the area under oilseeds are 
irrigated, ex posing most oilseeds production to weather related yield risks.  
Consequently, oilseeds production in India is characterized by fluctuating 
production and low yield. 
 
Some of the major factors/reasons impeding the productivity and 
production of oilseeds in the country are: -  
 
(vi) Non-Availability of hybrids in mustard, groundnut, sesamum, 
soybean, niger and pest and diseases resistance varieties. 
(vii) Low monetary returns from cultivation of oilseeds due to low 
production potential in comparison to crops like rice,  wheat and 
sugarcane. 
(viii) High risks in oilseeds cultivation due to vagaries of nature and 
susceptibility to a number of insects/pests and diseases. 
(ix) Use of poor quality of seeds by the farmers. 
(x) Un-assured market of remunerative prices resulting in 
realization of low prices of oilseeds during the harvesting period. 
 

With a view to enhancing the productivity and production of oilseeds in the 
country and also to make the implementation of the integrated scheme of 
Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil palm and Maize (ISOPOM) more effective, ISOPOM has 
recently been modified as a part of National Food Security Mission with regard to 
norms and pattern of assistance, inclusion of new components and additional 
implementing agencies during 11th Plan Period.   
 
 
 Further, keeping in view  the fact that there is a constraint in area 
expansion under oilseeds, the thrust during the 11 th Plan will be given towards 
yield improvement in oilseeds besides promoting the cultivation of oil palm, a 
crop with a potential of producing 3 - 3.5 MT of pal m oil per ha. for augmenting 
the indigenous availability of  edible oils in the country.  The States especially 
North-Eastern States which are not covered under ISOPOM can also promote 
oilseeds cultivation as a new initiative under Macro Management mode of 
Agriculture.  Further, the revised scheme of Macro Management of Agriculture 
will be helpful in encouraging the oilseeds production programme in the States, 
which are not covered under ISOPOM during 11th Plan. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No. 6/4/2008-EXP.dated the   6/5/2008 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.35 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation  (S. No.31 Para 8.14) 
 
  
The Committee are constrained t o note that the number of inspections 
carried out by the officials of DVVO&F as well as the number of samples being 
drawn and analysed  are on the decline.  For instance, the number of inspection 
carried out in 2006-07 were 900 which declined to 610 during 2007-08.  Similarly, 
the number of samples analysed which were 3207 in 2006 -07 declined to 2501 
during 2007-08. The Committee are of the opinion that in a vast country like India 
where the main cooking medium are edible oils and where adulteration in edib le 
oils is so rampant, the number of inspections being carried out and samples 
drawn and analysed are very low.  The Committee are unhappy to note that not a 
single inspection has been carried out by the field officers of DVVO&F of the 
Institutes funded for conducting R and D projects under the plan schemes of the 
DVVO&F. The Committee have been apprised that the prime reason  for decline 
in the number of inspections by officials of DVVO&F is shortage of manpower.  
The Committee therefore recommend that to k eep a check on the widespread 
adulteration in edible oils and in order to protect the health of the citizens of the 
country, the number of inspections to be carried out as well as drawing and 

analysis of samples of edible oils from all around the country n eed to be 
enhanced.  The Committee also desire that the Department should strengthen its 
enforcement machinery and take strongest possible action against the 
adulterators of edible oils, who are playing with the health and life of the people 
of the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
             The subject matter primarily relates to adulteration of edible oils, which 
lies within the purview of Ministry of Health, Directorate General of Health 
Services, (PFA).  The matter has been taken up with that Ministry.  The response 
of the Ministry of Health is as follows: - 
 
The implementation of the Prevention of Food Adulteration (PFA) Act, 
1954 and Rules framed thereunder are vested with the Food (Health) Authorities 
of the States/U.Ts. The enforcement staff/mach inery of the concerned State/U.T. 
draw the samples of  commonly used food commodity suspected to be 
adulterated/misbranded. As such the total number of food samples 
drawn/examined during the year 2001 were 93,335 and 11,008 samples were 
found to be adultera ted, whereas in 2005, the total number of food samples 
drawn/examined were 90,285 and samples found to be adulterated were 8,645 
(information for the year 2005 was not received from the State of Rajasthan).  
Similarly the number of samples of edible oil, fats and vanaspati examined during 
the year 2001 was 15918 which declined to 13970 during the year 2005 and the 
number of samples found adulterated also declined from 1790 in 2001 to 1090 in 
2005. 
 
The concern of the Committee to draw large number of sample s of edible 
oils is being sent to all Food (Health) Authorities of the States/U.Ts for 
compliance. 
 
As regards action taken against adulterated samples of edible oils and 
fats, the concerned State/UTs Government take necessary action under the 
provisions o f the Prevention of Food Adulteration (PFA) Act, 1954 and Rules 
framed thereunder. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No. 6/4/2008-EXP.dated the 6/5/2008 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.38 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 8 Para No.4.27) 
            The Committee while examining De mands for Grants for 2007 -08 
(refer para 3.75 of the 18 th Report) had recommended to the Government to 
devise a modified APL Scheme covering at least 20 per cent of the poor persons 
who are just above the poverty line i.e.  just above BPL.   The Committee had 
desired for expeditious working out of the modalities of the modified scheme for 
placing the same before  cabinet. The Committee have been informed that the 
matter is still under consideration in the Government whereas Planning 
Commission has appreciat ed the proposal of the Committee. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate its earlier recommendation and strongly desire that the  
modalities of the modified scheme for  providing food security to the category of 
persons who are technically above  the poverty line  but are actually poor and 
suffer from food insecurity and  are deprived of the special benefits of the Public 
Distribution System be worked out expeditiously and placed before the Cabinet.    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Government of India allocat es foodgrains to States and UTs under 
Targeted Public Distribution System  based on 1993 -94 poverty estimates of 
Planning Commission  and March, 2000 population estimates of  Registrar 
General of India.  While the Government of India allocates foodgrains  @ 35 kg. 
per family per month for accepted number of  BPL and AAY families, allocations 
for APL families are also being made depending upon their availability in the 
Central Pool.   
 
As against 6.52 crores BPL and AAY families  accepted by the 
Government of India for allocations, the State Governments have issued 10.28 
crore BPL and AAY ration cards.  These ration cards are thus 57 % more then 
the number of BPL and AAY families  accepted for allocations.   Some of the  
State  Governments are also distributi ng the  APL allocations to these additional 
BPL ration card holder families at BPL issue prices.   
 
 However, the subject is being further examined in the Department. 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No. 9(2)2008-PD-I/III dated the   8/7/2008 

Recommendation (S. No. 9 Para No.4.28) 
  
            The Committee in their earlier Report on Demands for Grants (2007 -08) 
(refer Para 3.76  of the 18th Report)  had recommended for evolving a strategy  to 
provide 2 kg. of pulses and 1 kg. of edible oils at subsidized rates  to each family  
through PDS to address the problem of malnutrition, especially among women 
and children.  The  Committee  have been informed  that after detailed 
examination and also in consultation with other Ministries, it has not been found 
feasible to implement the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee as it 
would put an additional subsidy burden of about Rs. 1200 crore on the 
exchequer.  It has also been stated that  it would not be possible to implement  
the aforesaid  recommendation until visible improvement in performance   of 
TPDS takes place.  The Secretary, Department of Food and Public Distribution, 
however, during  the course of oral evidence, acknowledged  th at there was an 
urgent need to address the problem of malnutrition, especially in  the women and 
children and informed that a scheme to offer subsidized edible oils  to the State 
Governments/UTs for distribution to ration card holders at the rate of maximu m 1 
kg. per family per month was under  consideration.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommended that apart from finalizing  the scheme of providing  edible 
oils at the rate of 1 kg. per family per month, the Government should also work 
out the modalities of providing  2 kg. of pulses at subsidized rates to each family 
through PDS, expeditiously.  The  action taken in the matter may be 
communicated to the Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Based on consultation with State Governments, in April, 2008 , the 
Department of Consumer Affairs, which is concerned with the subject of pulses, 
is formulating a scheme for distribution of imported pulses such as yellow peas, 
Arhar, Moong and Urad.  Their import has been planned through Central Public 
Sector Undert akings namely PEC, MMTC, STC and NAFED depending upon 
response of State Governments to participate in the scheme. 
  
           Regarding supply of one kg. of  edible oil at subsidized rates to 
each BPL family through TPDS, it is informed that this Departme nt has finalized  
a scheme for distribution of subsidized imported oil to States/UTs.  The main 
features of this scheme are as follows:- 
 
         Scope of the scheme would be restricted to imported edible oils only.  The 
subsidy would be limited to Rs.15 per kg of imported oil and shall be given to the 
PSUs directly by the Government of India. Under this, it is proposed to import 
one million tonnes of edible oils through Central PSUs viz. PEC, MMTC, STC 
and NAFED, who will deliver the edible oils to State Governments.  The State 
Governments in turn would distribute to BPL families @ 1 liter per month through 
TPDS or other network.   
 
 

Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution 
OM. No. 9(2)2008-PD-I/III dated the   8/7/2008 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 20 Para No.5.39) 
 
The Committee is happy to note that  the recommendations of the 
Committee for eliminating the evil of proxy labour has been fully implemented in 
20 States and partially in 2 States.  Thoug h labourers are resisting payment 
through cheques on the plea that they are illiterate and cannot handle the bank 
account independently.  Yet FCI has succeeded in convincing them and assured 
that they will also render co -operation to acquaint them with the  handling of bank 
account.  Efforts are being made to implement their recommendation in the State 
of Chhatisgarh, Jharkand and Assam.  The committee, therefore, desire that FCI 
should gear up their efforts in implementing the suggestions of the Committee t o 
regulate the attendance system in FCI in rest of the States also, so that system 
of proxy labour is abolished through out the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The matter relating to implementation of recommendations of the 
Parliamentary Standing Commit tee is being placed before the Executive 
Committee of FCI in its ensuing meeting fixed on 13 th May, 2008, so that a time 
bound action plan can be formulated to implement the above recommendations.   
 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food Public Distribution) 
O.M. No. H-11013/2/2008-FC-3 dated  9th  May, 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI       DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV 
-- December, 2008           Chairman 
-- Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)     Standing Committee on Food,  
                                                          Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
 

APPENDIX – I 
 Minutes of the Twelfth sitting of the Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution held on Monday, the                   
8th December, 2008. 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs. in Committee      
Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
3. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
4. Shri Fransisco Cosme sardinha 
5. Shri  Munshi Ram 
6. Shri W. Wangyuh. Konyak 
 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
7. Shri  Shantaram Laxman Naik 
8. Shri  Rajniti Prasad 
9. Shri  Mangala Kisan  
10. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
 
    SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
 2. Shri B. S. Dahiya  - Deputy Secretary-I 
 3. Shri Jagdish Prasad  - Deputy Secretary-II 
 
At the outset Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft report on 
Action Taken by the Governm ent on recommendations contained in the Twenty -
third Report  (14 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer 
Affairs and Public Distribution on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Dep artment of Food and Public 
Distribution) and adopted the same with minor amendment.  
 

2. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the aforesaid report and 
present the same to both the Houses of Parliament in the current Session of 
Parliament.  
3. Thereafter, the Committee took evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) on the subject ‘Price rise of Essential Commodities - Causes         
and Effects with special e mphasis on import of wheat and Enforcement of 
Prevention of Black Marketing and Maintenance of supply of Essential 
Commodities  Act, 1980’. 
4.  A  verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept for records.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

APPENDIX – II 
 
(Vide introduction in the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON                
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY THIRD       
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS              
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
Total Number of Recommendations            31 
 
(i) Recommendations/ Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos.  – 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21,  
    22, 23, 25, 26, 28 and 29 
 
Total                21 
 
Percentage              67 
 
(ii) Recommendations/ Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 
Recommendation No.  – 5, 6, 14 and 24 
 
Total                  4 
 
Percentage              13 
 
 
(iii) Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 
Recommendation Nos.  – 27, 30 and 31 
  
Total                 3 
 
Percentage              10 
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/ observations in respect of which the final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
Recommendation Nos.  – 8, 9 and 20 
 
Total                    3 
 
Percentage              10 