         
 16  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION 
(2006-2007) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Committee on Demands for 
Grants  (2006-2007) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)} 
    SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 NEW DELHI 
 
                               November, 2006  /, Agrahayana1928 (Saka) 

SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2006-2007) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the  Thirteenth Report of the Committee  on Demands for 
Grants  (2006-2007) of the Ministry of  Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of  Consumer Affairs)}  
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  6.12.2006 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on    6.12.2006 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2006 / Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 
 

CONTENTS 
 
          PAGES 
 
Composition of the Commit
INTRODUCTION 
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………… 1- 
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been  
 accepted by the Government………………….. 
 
Chapter III  
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
 the Government’s replies…………………….. 
 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 replies of the Government have not been accepted  
 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   
 the final replies of the Government are still  awaited  ………. 
APPENDICES 
 
(I) Minutes of the Eighth Committee held on 17.11 2006. 
(ii) Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in t he Thirteenth Report of the  
tee 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations which the  
by the Committee ……………………………………. 
 
 sitting of the 
Committee.

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2006-07 
  
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Govinda Aroon Ahuja 
3. Shri Alakesh Das 
4.        Shri  Atma Singh Gill 
5.        Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
7.       Shri  Baliram Kashyap 
8.       Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
9.       Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak 
9.  Shri Parsuram Majhi 
10.      Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
11.      Shri Harikewal Prasad  
12.       Shri Munshi Ram 
13.       Shri Daroga  Prasad Saroj 
14.  Adv. P. Satheedevi 
15.  Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
16.  Shri Ramakant Yadav 
17.  Smt. V. Radhika Selvi 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 

 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. 
23. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
24.       Shri  Shantaram Laxman Naik 
25.       Shri Thanga Tamil Selvan 
26. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
7.       Shri Rajniti Prasad  
 
  
hu 
 
 
Kaur Sandhu - Additional Secretary 
- Joint Secretary 
 - Deputy Secretary 
 - Under Secretary 
 - Assistant Director 
 
 
Shri T.S. Bajwa 
2
28. Shri Nabam Rebia 
29. Shri Matilal Sarkar
30. Shri Ram Narayan Sa
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
1. Dr. (Smt.) Paramjit 
2. Shri P.K. Bhandari   
3. Shri R.S. Kambo  
4. Shri B.S. Dahiya  
5. Shri Jagdish Prasad  

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Commi ttee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
Pu (2006-2007) having been authorised by the Committee to 
lf, present this Sixteenth Report on Action Taken 
dations/observations contained in the 13 th  
ok Sabha ) on “Demands for Grants (2006-
)”  Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
ffairs). 
s presented to Lok Sa bha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
 May, 2006.  The Government have fu rnished their replies indicating Action 
mmendations contained in the Report on    18 th August, 2006.  
The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
17th November, 2006.  
 
3. An analysis of the acti on taken by the Government on 
Recommendations/observ in the Report is given in Appendix- II.   
New Delhi      DE VENDRA PRASAD YADAV 
20   November, 2006
 
and blic Distribution 
submit the Report on their beha
by the Government on the recommen
Report of the Committee (14 th   L
2007  of the Ministry of
(Department of Consumer A
 
2. The 13 th Report wa
22nd
Taken on the reco
ations contained 
 
 
       C h a i r m a n  
29 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)  Standing Committee on Food, Consumer 
 Affairs and Public Distribution 

      
         CH
REPORT 
 
.2 The Report was presented to Lok S abha and laid on t he Table of Rajya 
ommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government : 
(Paragraph Nos. – 2.5, 3.15, 3.16, 3.21, 4.9, 4.10, 4.11 and 6.7) 
      (Chapter –II , Total   8  ) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not 
e 
Serial Nos.3, 7, 13 
(Paragraph Nos- 3.14, 3.25 and 5.4) 
      
      (Chapter –III , Total  3  ) 
 
 
APTER -I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on  Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution deals with the Acti on Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report (14 th  Lo k 
Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2006-2007 )” pertaining to the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs). 
1
Sabha on 22nd May, 2006. It contained 15 recommendations/observations. Action 
Taken Notes in respect of all the 15 obs ervations/recommendations contained in 
the Report have been received and these have been categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Rec
 
Serial Nos.- 1, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 12, 15  
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from th
Government 
 

 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
 
Serial Nos.  2, 9. 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which the interim 
 (Chapter – V, Total 2) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations for which only interim replies have been 
received from the Government be furnished to the Committee 
expeditiously. 
1.4 The Committee strongly phasize 
be given to the implementati on of Observations/Recommendations 
accepted by
Government to imp
reason, the matter should be reporte d to the Committee in time with 
reasons for non-implementation. 
1.5 The Comm ken by the Government on 
some of the r
 
 
 
(Paragraph Nos. –3.7 and 3.40) 
 
      (Chapter – IV, Total 2)   
 
replies of the Government have been received. 
   Serial No. 8, 14 
   (Paragraph No. – 3.33 and 5.5) 
 
 em that utmost importance should 
 the Government. In case where it is not possible for the 
lement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any 
ittee will now deal with acti on ta
ecommendations. 

A. Consumer Awareness 
Recommendation (Serial No.2  Paragraph 3.7) 
 
1.6 The Committe
spread awareness pro root level, the people living in remote and 
backward areas are still deprived of thei r rights as a consumer due to inadequate 
ublicity.  The Committe had, therefore, recommended that the Department of Consumer 
Affairs should make all out efforts to edu cate the people of remote and backward areas 
about their consumer r e Fairs and Village Fairs.   
 1.7 The Government in their Action Taken Re plies have stated that publicity material 
such as posters
to State Governments for distribution by the district administration through Panchayats to 
take across the messages at the grass root level.  Additionally, to ensure active and 
effective par
backward areas, a sc  assistance to the 
States/UTs to carry out activities such as display and dissemination of relevant publicity 
ataks in local language s, associating folk 
rtists  drive home evelopment of audio cassettes of 
lk songs and their distribution amongst rural masses; organizing exhibitions in the local 
irs on specific issues identified by State Government as being relevant to particular area 
etc.  Besides this, in the Media Plan for 2006-07 to create ltural 
ctivities through Song & Drama Division of the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting 
in rural remote areas have also been incor porated and action is be ing taken to organize 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
e noted that although the Mini stry had taken a number of steps to 
gramme at grass 
p
ights through Village Haats, Cattl
 
, folders CDs containing consumer related information have been provided 
ticipation of State Governments in creating cons umer awareness in rural and 
heme has been prepared  to provide financial
material during local festivals, organizing n
a to  messages on consumer rights; d
fo
fa
 consumer awareness, cu
a
programmes in village Haats and fairs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1.8  efforts of the 
consumers living in rural and backward areas is still very less. The 
educate the consumers personally. Th e Committee further note that a 
scheme has been prepared for providing financial assistance to the 
States / UTs to carry out activities for spread of consumer awareness 
in far-flung, rural and backward areas. The Committee would like to 
be apprised at the earliest possibl e time of the financial assistance 
given to each State / UT thereunder and the actual utilization thereof 
for spreading consumer awareness in rural and backward areas of the 
country.  
 
The Committee while acknowledging the
Ministry regarding publicity of co nsumer awareness still feel that 
enough has not been done in this matter and a lot more is required to 
be done.  The Committee are of the view that the  awareness of 
Committee feel that illiterate and se mi-literate consumers should be 
the main targets of publicity. The awareness programmes should be 
prepared keeping this section of co nsumers in mind so that they can 
derive maximum benefit from the var ious provisions of the Act.  The 
Committee feel that for this the ai d of local print and audio visual 
media should also be sought.  Also the local NGOs and VCOs be 
involved in the awareness programme s at the grass root level to  
 
 

 
 
 
 
B. Infrast
 
 
1.9 The Co
to the States/UTs, for strengthening the in frastructure of Cons umer Fora not much 
improvement i
that the Central Government should prevail upon each State Government to (a) provide 
need based fin
Head and separate Budget for Consumer A ffairs in each State/UT, for promoting the 
interest of cons
 
1.10 The Go
Consumer Affairs has been taking up the matte r regarding providing financial assistance 
to the States/
States/UTs at the highest level from time to time. The Recommendations of the Standing 
Committee ha
13.6.2006 from Secretary, Consumer Affairs a ddressed to the Chief Secretaries 
requesting them
especially in respect of provision of adequate infrastructure, supporting staff, 
accommodatio
facilitate quicker disposal of cases mee ting the time norm. All State/UT Governments 
were requested
have a separate Department, separate Head & separate Budget for Consumer Affairs in 
each State/UT,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ructure of Consumer Fora  
Recommendation (Serial No.4, Paragraph 3.15) 
mmittee took note of the fact that  inspite of one time financial assistance 
s seen in terms of disposal of cases. The Committee had, therefore, desired 
ancial assistance for Consumer Fora (b) separate Department, separate 
umers.  
vernment in their Action Taken Replies have stated that the Department of 
UTs for strengthening the infr astructure of Consumer Fora with the 
ve also been circulated to a ll the States/UTs vide D.O. letter dated 
 to ensure that concrete acti on is taken urgently by the State Government 
n and requisite financial support to the Consumer Fora of the State so as to 
 to: (a) provide need based financial assistance for Consumer Fora and (b) 
 for promoting the interests of consumers.  
 

 
1.11 The Committee note that though the Ministry has 
circulated the recommendations of the Committee to all State 
viding adequate infrastructure but the 
 The Committee 
based financial assistance for Consumer Fora and having a 
Governments for pr o
implementation thereof is still very dismal. 
feel that in absence of adequate infrastructure, the Consumer 
Fora will not be able to do justice to the job they have been 
entrusted with.  The Committ ee desire that for this the 
Government should follow up with each State Government by 
seeking periodical reports on the matter of providing need 
separate department and budget for consumer affairs in each 
State. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the 
response of the State Governme nts to the communication of 
the Central Government.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
C.  Dispos
 
Reco
 
 
1.12 The Co
by the President,
through Lok Adala
Ministry should pr
Adalats so that th
inexpensive justice
 
1.13 The M
Consumer Affairs
(NCDRC) have b
Adalats” by Cons
meetings held wit
States had alread
recommendations  ha ve also been circulated to all the 
States/UTs vide D  from Secretary, Consumer Affairs 
addressed to the Chief Secretaries requesti ng them to consider adoption of Alternate 
Dispute Redressal (ADR) methods including the Lok Adalats so that the burden of 
the Consumer Fora is lessened and inexpens ive justice is delivered to the consumers 
expeditiously. As per latest informati on made available by NCDRC, so far 9 
States/UTs namely, Bihar, Chandigarh, Chha ttisgarh, Haryana, Maharashtra, Orissa, 
Punjab, Rajasthan & Tripura have successfu lly settled pending consumer grievances 
through the Lok Adalat method, disposi ng off a total of 152 cases in State 
Commissions and 3422 cases in District Fora. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
al of Consumer Grievances through Lok Adalats 
mmendation (Serial No. 6,  Paragraph No. 3.21) 
mmittee while regretting to note that despite the instructions issued 
 National Commission to adjudicate the consumers grievances 
ts, only five States started Lok Adalats, had recommended  that the 
evail upon the remaining States / UTs to  adopt the concept of Lok 
e burden on the Consum er Courts / For a is lessened and the 
 is delivered to the consumers expeditiously.   
inistry in their Action Taken No tes stated that the Department of 
 as well as National C onsumer Disputes Redressal Commission 
een repeatedly taking up the matter regarding holding of “Lok 
umer Fora in the States/UTs through le tters as well as during all 
h State Governments/Pr esidents, State Commissions, etc. Several 
y starte d holding Lok Adalats in response to the same. The 
of the Standing Committee
.O. Letter dated 13.6.2006
 

 
try has been 
repeatedly taking up the matter with the State Governments / 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.14 The Committee note that the Minis
State Commissions for adopting the mechanism of Lok Adalats 
etc and only nine States have done so. The Committee 
emphasize the need for expedi tious delivery of inexpensive 
justice to the consumers. The Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire that th e remaining States / UTs be 
persuaded to adopt the system of disposal of grievances 
through Lok Adalats.  
 
 

 
 
D. Defaulting NGOs / VCOs  
Reco
 
1.15      Taking strong
in respect of Rs.47,17
Welfare Fund, the Com
recover the while am
should be taken at the
the whereabouts of the
whom the Utilization 
release of funds shoul
the Department. Also
Vigilance Commission
 
 1.16 The Governme
utilization certificates 
with the concerned sta ised by the committee, advice of CVC has 
been sought in the m ng organizations has been posted on the 
ebsite of the Department.  No fresh propos al of any defaulting NGO is considered by 
e Department till the necessary utilization certificates are submitted.  
 
mmendation (Serial No.9,  Paragraph No. 3.40) 
 objection to the fact of non-submission of Utilization Certificates 
,300 released to 85 NGOs/VCOs 4-5 years back from Consumer 
mittee had recommended that concerted efforts should be made to 
ount released to th eses NGOs/VCOs at the earliest. The matter 
 highest level in persua ding the State Government/UTs to trace out 
 NGOs/VCOs.  The Committee also desired that  such NGOs from 
Certificate are not rece ived within the 12 months from the date of 
d be blacklisted and their names may be displayed on the website of 
, the matter be got examined in consultation with the Central 
 (CVC) to ensure accountability of such NGOs/VCOs.  
 
nt in their Action Taken Re plies have stated th at efforts to obtain 
from defaulting organizations are on.  We have taken up the matter 
te governments.  As adv
atter.  A list of defa ulti
w
th
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1.17 The Committee feel that the matter  of non-receipt of utilization 
ce NGOs / VCOs 
e verified 
rtificates in respect of Rs. 47,17,300/- released to 85 
4-5 years back is a serious one. The Committee feel that the matter 
should be given utmost priority as  it involves Government money.  
The Committee wants that all out efforts should be made to trace such 
NGOs/ VCOs and if need be the guilty be fined or punished so that no 
one dares to siphon off Government money in future.  The Committee 
also desire that in future the ante cedents of NGOs/VCOs b
before disbursing funds. They would al so like to be apprised of the 
action taken in the matter on the basis of advice given by CVC.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 E. Evaluating impact of future trading  
 
 
 
 
1.18 The Committee had been apprised that a study on impact of trading in 
commo
Committee had recommended that it be apprised of the action taken in the matter.  
 
 
1.19 
instructed the National Multi Commodity Exchanges – NCDEX, MCX and 
NMCE
the country. The process of  assigning consultancies to  evaluate the impact of 
futures
the other commodities in the rural parts of  India has been initiated by FMC. In 
this con
Mumbai, IRMA, Anand and ISI Delhi are underway. 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.15,  Paragraph No. 6.7) 
dities like wheat, sugar, pulses etc. is going to be conducted by FMC. The 
The Government in their reply have stated that  FMC has already 
 to set up/install terminals, at Sub-Di strict/Block levels, in various parts of 
 trading in certain major commodities like wheat, sugar, pulses, cereals and 
nection, discussions with reputed institutes such as IIM, Ahmedabad, IIT, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1.20 The Committee note t  tha Government propose to 
engage reputed institutions for assessing / evaluating the 
impact of future trading in certain major commodities like 
of the evaluation made by thes e institutions and the follow-up 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wheat, sugar, pulses, cereals and other commodities in rural 
parts of the country. The Committee would like to be apprised 
action taken by the Government thereon.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIO
THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No.1, Paragraph   2.5) 
2.1 The Committee are happy to note that th e Department of Consumer Affairs has 
been able to reach the
the Ministry have utilized Rs. 88.36 crore which reflect a better planning of the utilization 
of the Funds allocated t the Ministry would 
streamline the efforts and achieve the 100% uti lization of funds in the coming years. At 
e same time, the Committee express its dissatisfaction over the tendency of utilization 
f funds at the fag end of the financial year  and the reasons given by the Ministry for the 
me are not acceptable to the Committee. In the opinion of the Committee, the Ministry 
ould make advance exercise to clear the proposals submitted by the implementing 
gencies and finalize the modalities of the scheme/ programmes so that the approval does 
ot get delayed. The Committee strongly feel that  there is an urgent  need to curb the 
ndency of implementing agencies to clear huge bills for reimbursement towards the fag 
nd of the financial year where the clearance of bills without proper scrutiny cannot be 
led out. The Committee hope and trust that th e Ministry would make sincere efforts to 
void the release of funds in th e last week of the financial year and plan to utilize the 
nds equally in any quarter of the year.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department of Consumer Affairs is grateful to the Hon’ble Committee for 
eir encouraging words regarding the overall  funds utilization. Plan budget provision in 
spect of the Department of Consumer Af fairs was increased from Rs. 18.25 crore in 
004-05 to Rs. 107.94 crore in BE 2005-06 which was subsequently revised to Rs. 90 
rore in RE 2005-06.   As agains t a provision of Rs. 90.00 crore funds to the extent of    
s. 88.36 crore have been utilized by 31.03.2006. The major portion of the expenditure is 
n account of Advertisement and Publicity, through DAVP on the basis of authorization 
r which the utilization of  funds’ certificate is to be obtained from DAVP. The 
xpenditure against funds author ized is booked in the last qu arter of the financial year 
ough the expenditure is spread over the entire year.  
Since the plan allocation of the Department was raised to Rs. 107.94 crore in BE 
005-06, which is more than the original 10 th Five Year Plan outla y of the Department, 
rocedural requirements, such as the approva ls of the competent au thorities, had to be 
lfilled due to the enhanced allocation. This was a time consuming process delaying the 
plementation of schemes. 
 
CHAPTER II 
NS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
 
 
 level of utilization of funds up to  98.8%. Out of Rs. 90.00 crore, 
 to the Department. The Committee hope tha
th
o
sa
sh
a
n
te
e
ru
a
fu
 2.2 
th
re
2
c
R
o
fo
e
th
 
 2.3 
2
p
fu
im

 2.4 The observations of the Standing Committee have been noted for strict 
compliance in future. In order to ensure ven distribution of Plan expenditure, the 
progress of expenditure is be ing monitored at the level of Secretary (CA) on a monthly 
asis. 
(Ministry of Consumer A istribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM 6) 
 
ffairs has been taking up the matter regarding 
providing financial assi stance to the States/UTs for stre ngthening the infrastructure of 
Consumer Fora with the Sta el from time to time. The 
Recommendations of the Sta nding Comm tee have also been circulated to all the 
 Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
that according to the Planning Commission, only 5% to 8% 
ases could be resolved by Consumer Courts/Fora within 90 days which in the opinion of 
the Committee is indicative of poor monitori ng mechanism on the part of the Ministry. 
e
b
 
ffairs, Food and Public D
 No. G-11027/3/2006-P&C  dated 18th August, 200
Recommendation (Serial No.4, Paragraph 3.15) 
 
2.5 The Committee are perturbed to note that inspite of one time fi nancial assistance 
to the States/UTs, for strengthening the in frastructure of Cons umer Fora not much 
improvement is seen in terms of disposal of cases. Taking into consideration that it is the 
responsibility of a given State/UT to pr ovide the Consumer Fora with requisite 
infrastructure, manpower and funds, for their efficient functioning, the Central 
Government should prevail upon each State Government to (a) provide need based 
financial assistance for Consumer Fora (b) separate Department, separate Head and 
separate Budget for Consumer Affairs in each  State/UT, for promoting the interest of 
consumers. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the 
Government in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 The Department of Consumer A
tes/UTs at th e highest lev
it
States/UTs vide D.O. letter dated 13.6.2006 from  Secretary, Consumer Affairs addressed 
to the Chief Secretaries requesting them to en sure that concrete action is taken urgently 
by the State Government especial ly in respect of provision of adequate infrastructure, 
supporting staff, accommodation and requisite financial support to the Consumer Fora of 
the State so as to facilitate quicker disposal  of cases meeting the time norm. All State/UT 
Governments were requested to: (a) provi de need based financial assistance for 
Consumer Fora and (b) have a separate Department, separate Head & separate Budget for 
Consumer Affairs in each State/UT, for promoting the interests of consumers.  
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and
OM No. G-11027/3/2006-P&C  dated 18th August, 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.5,  Paragraph 3.16) 
2.7 The Committee note 
c

The plea of the Government that many Distri ct Fora remain non functional as they are 
within the purview of the State Government  is not convincing to the Committee. The 
Committee is of the view that the Central Government is equally responsible for ensuring 
that the funds released by them are properl y utilized for the purpos e for which they are 
sanctioned and should monitor the working overnments. The 
Commi  sincere efforts for 
strengthening ict and State levels so that the District 
Fora and Stat in Consumer 
ourts/Consumer Fora are disposed off within the prescribed period.    
 
Reply of the Government 
epartment, many St ates/UTs could not utilize fully the one 
me grant released to them and requested for further extension of time for utilizing the 
grant and sending Utilization C  have been granted extension 
f time up to 30.9.2006 for the same. It has been made clear to them that the States/UTs 
dly being 
dvised to ensure that all the District Fora as well as State Commission remain functional 
all the time an
 
(M  
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM ) 
 
 through concerned State G
ttee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should make
the institutional mechanism at Dist r
e Commission are functiona l and the cases filed 
C
 
2.8 The Central Government has from time to time been taking up the matter with the 
States/UTs even at highest level regarding ut ilization of grants released to them, also 
suggesting the ways to ensure that the Cons umer Fora remain functional. Though it is the 
responsibility of the St ates/UTs to provide infrastructure to th e Consumer Fora, the 
Government had released a sum of Rs. 61.80 crores during 1995-99 to supplement the 
efforts of States/UTs for strengthening infr astructure of the Consumer Fora. A further 
sum of Rs. 10.20 crores was rel eased in 2004-05 to the newly created fora subsequent to 
the earlier grant only to those States who had by then utilized the earlier grant. In spite of 
repeated reminders by the D
ti
ertificate. Accordingly they
o
who fail to utilize the funds  released during 1995-99 by 30 .9.2006 shall not be eligible 
for further grants under ‘Integrated Project  on Consumer Protection’ which is under 
finalization in the Department. Under this scheme, the benc hmark for infrastructure in 
State Commissions and District Fora is being finalized, based on which financial 
assistance would be extended to States/UTs to meet the gaps in infrastructure in the 
Consumer Fora to make them fully functi onal.  A project for computerization and 
networking of all consumer courts ha s also been taken up through the National 
Informatics Centre.  The total cost of the project is Rs. 48.64 cror es.  The project on 
completion will ensure transparency, simplify procedure as well as facilitate quicker 
disposal of cases and a closer monitoring.  It may, therefore, be appreciated that the 
Central Government has been all along ma king sincere efforts to strengthen the 
infrastructure of the Consumer Fora in the Country. States are also repeate
a
d cases filed are disposed off within the prescribed period. 
inistry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution
 No. G-11027/3/2006-P&C  dated 18th August, 2006

Recommendation (Serial No.6, Paragraph 3.21) 
2.9  The Committee are happy to note that  holding of “Lok Adalats” by Consumer 
Fora has given consumers another Forum to seek redressal of their grievances. The 
Consumer Protection Act does not mandate the Consumer Fora to organize “Lok 
Adalats”. However, to reduce pendency in C onsumer Courts, an out of Court settlement 
through Lok Adalats, is a powerful medium  to resolve Consumers grievances. The 
Committee, however, regret to note that despite the instructions issued by the President of 
National Commission to adjudicate the cons umer grievances through Lok Adalat, only 
ve States namely, Punjab, Haryana, Chandigarh, Karanataka and Maharashtra have 
started the Lok Adalats. In th e he concept of Lok Adalat is a 
ery convenient option for the consumers to se ek redressal of their grievances, which is 
 
2.11  The Com Act for misuse 
f BIS Standards are far from satisfact ory.  During 2003-04 (134), 2004-05 (133), 2005-
06 (47) cases have been filed.  In the opini on of the Committee, there is a slackness on 
the part of the enforcement machinery of the BIS.  In this context, the Committee desire 
that the enforcement department of BIS should be activated and adequate number of 
fi
 opinion of the Committee, t
v
evident from the number of cases settled by the State Commission and District Fora 
through Lok Adalats during 2005-06. The Comm ittee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should prevail upon the remaining St ates/UTs to adopt the concept of Lok 
Adalats so that the burden on the Consumer Courts/Fora is lessened and the inexpensive 
justice is delivered to the consumers expeditiously. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 2.10 The Department of Consumer Affairs as well as National Consumer Disputes 
Redressal Commission (NCDRC) have been repeatedly ta king up the matter regarding 
holding of “Lok Adalats” by Consumer Fora in the States/UTs through letters as well as 
during all meetings held with State Govern ments/Presidents, State Commissions, etc. 
Several States had already started holding Lok Adalats in response to the same. The 
recommendations of the Standing Committee have also been circulated to all the 
States/UTs vide D.O. Letter dated 13.6.2006 from Secretary, Consumer Affairs addressed 
to the Chief Secretaries requesting them to consider adoption of Alternate Dispute 
Redressal (ADR) methods including the Lok Adalats so that the burden of the Consumer 
Fora is lessened and inexpensive justice is delivered to the consumers expeditiously. As 
per latest information made available by NC DRC, so far 9 States/UTs namely, Bihar, 
Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan & Tripura 
have successfully settled pending consumer grievances through the Lok Adalat method, 
disposing off a total of 152 cases in State Commissions and 3422 cases in District Fora. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. G-11027/3/2006-P&C  dated 18
th August, 2006)
 
Recommendation (Serial No.10, Paragraph 4.9) 
  
mittee note that the prosecution cases filed under the BIS 
o

officers appointed ct surprise visits/ 
raids so as to prevent the misuse of ISI mar k.  There is also a need to step up market 
Name of the agency 
in the regions and branch offices of BIS to condu
surveillance, visits to exhibitions, interac tion with industry and trade associations, 
feedback from BIS licensees and other sources.  This will go a long way in protecting the 
interest of consumers. 
  
Reply of the Government 
  
 2.12 During 2005-06 out of the 241 raids carri ed out, prosecution cases against 128 
offenders have already been filed in various courts in the country as per the information 
available on 15 June 2006.  Continuous follow up is maintained with RO/BOs for 
expediting collection of evidence and early filing of remaining cases by them. 
  
 2.13 To strengthen enforcement activity, two outside agencies have been engaged for 
providing intelligence and assisting in carrying out raids ag ainst the offending parties for 
an initial period of one year for the following locations in the country: 
  
                                                           Location 
 
. M/s Knight Watch Security Ltd, New Delhi              NCR & Chennai 
 2.16 A regu ional Offices 
through video conferencing  gather information of any 
misuse through with industries 
nd trade associations and othe r sources for initiating needed action as per the provisions 
of Enforcement M  held by all the 
Branches as per targets fixed and the activ ity is adequately covered and relevant 
1
 
2. M/s Tact India Pvt Ltd,                                              Mumbai, Kolkata, Bangalore, 
    New Delhi                                                                  Hyderabad, Ahmedabad & Jaipur 
  
 2.14 The target for the year 2006-07 has also been stepped up to 350 enforcement raids 
as against the target of 250 raids fixed for 2005-06.The concerned Branch Offices have 
already been directed to c onduct immediate raids after info rmation is provided by the 
above agencies.  An officer of  the rank of Joint Director ha s been posted in Enforcement 
Department for coordination and constant follow up with Regional/Branch Offices of 
BIS. 
  
 2.15 Wide publicity is given through prin t and electronic media about the raids 
conducted for awareness of the public at large where public is requested for providing 
information of misuse of BIS Standard Mark as and when they notice the same. 
  
lar review of status of pending cases is taken up with all Reg
. ROs/BOs are regularly advised to
 market surveys, visiting exhi bitions, through inter action 
a
anual. Consumer awaren ess programmes are also
pamphlets/booklets are also distributed.   
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. G-11027/3/2006-P&C  dated 18th August, 2006) 

 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Paragraph 4.10) 
  
2.17  The Committee note that Hallmarking Sc heme was formally launched by BIS in 
April 2000 on voluntar y basis.  During 2001-02, BIS conducted survey in 8 major cities 
mely, Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Hydera bad, Jaipur, Bangalo re, Ahmedabad and 
Kolkata to find out the actual ity of gold jewellery.  It was 
found that 88% samples failed against the purity declared with shortage of purity as wide 
 the urban 
ties only but it should cover the semi-urban and rural areas where the chances of 
ubject to cheating 
 unscrupulous traders/ jewelers. 
es in 2006:  
pur, 
otal financial outlay of Rs.5.75 crores. Under the scheme selected applicants would 
 given one time financial assistance @ 15% of cost of machinery & equipment subject 
i
n private 
ctor. However, 35 centres will be set up with the financial incentive from the Central 
em in case the consumers file complaints in the 
onsumer fora on the basis of the test reports. 
(Ministry of Distribution 
OM No. G-11027/3/2006-P&C  dated 18  August, 2006) 
na
 position with re gard to pur
as 36%.  The Committee further note that no survey has b een conducted in semi-urban 
and rural areas to ascertain the purity of gol d.  The Committee have been informed that 
the Ministry has planned to c onduct surveys in anot her 16 major cities of the country.  
The Committee are of the opini on that the surveys should not be centralized to
ci
cheating by jewelers are more.  For this, the facility of Assaying and Hallmarking centres 
may be provided in the remote and backwa rd areas so that the consumers may get 
facilities of testing the quality of gold purch ased by them and are not s
by
Reply of the Government 
  
 2.18 A survey on purity of gold is being conducted in following 16 citi
 
‘Pune, Vadodara, Thiruvananthapuram, Ma durai, Bhubaneswar, Ranchi, Kan
Ludhiana, Indore, Meerut, Jaipur, Jodhpur, Chandigarh, Jammu, Gurgaon & Delhi.’ 
  
 2.19 Under BIS Hallmarking Scheme, 37 Gold  Assaying & Hallmarking Centres have 
been recognized. All the centres except one  by MMTC Ltd. have come up in the private 
sector. In order to encourage the entreprene urs, a scheme of setting up of Assaying and 
Hallmarking centres for gold jewellery  in 35 se lect districts on a pilo t basis with central 
assistance approved by Govt. is being implemented by BIS during 2005-06 and 2006-07 
with t
be
to max mum of Rs. 15 lakhs per centre.  
  
2.20 As indicated above, 37 centres have al ready come up in 16 di stricts i
se
Govt. as mentioned above under the  Scheme  of setting up of Assaying and Hallmarking 
centres for gold jewellery on pilot basis. Scope of the scheme will be reviewed at the end 
of pilot phase 2005-2007.   
 
 2.21 It is also relevant to mention that al l BIS-recognised assaying centres have been 
mandated to test jewellery items brought by i ndividual consumers and to appear in court 
to authenticate the test reports issued by th
c
 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
th

   
1) 
   
 2.25 Hallmarked Jewellery s  different licensee jewelers of 
IS and got tested to check conformance as per marked fineness. The centres have also 
.  
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
th
ontrol on the price of such commodities.  The 
Committee have been informed  that ma  farmers now in States like Punjab and 
ous traders/middlemen.  As such, the advantage of operating 
tures/forward markets benefits have been  reaped by  middlemen/traders instead of 
g out of adverse price fluctuations through 
hedging to those who are willing   to assume  it in the hope of ma king some profit in 
future.  In th rers   would 
attempt   to cover their risks by charging a higher price to the  consumers or paying a 
lower price to t osed that they 
Recommendation  (Serial No.12, Paragraph 4.1
2.22  The Committee also desire that quality hall marked jewellery may also be sample 
test checked to ensure that these 37 centres  are working within the parameters of the 
licenses issued to them and the people can take their certification on face value. 
  
Reply of the Government 
  
 2.23 The 37 Assaying and Hallmarking centres  have been recognized by BIS as per 
laid down criteria for recognition.  
  
 2.24 To ensure that the recognized centres are working within the parameters of 
recognition granted to them and the results are genuine, regular surveillance audits of the 
recognized centres are carried out to mon itor implementation of the criteria by the 
centres.  
  
amples are also dr awn from
B
been directed to test the jewellery brought by common consumer and issue test reports
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
OM No. G-11027/3/2006-P&C  dated 18  August, 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.15,  Paragraph No. 6.7) 
 
2.26  The  Committee note that recently there wa s a sudden rise in the prices of wheat, 
rice, sugar, pulses and edible oils in the ma rket but the farmers  are neither getting the 
benefit of such price rise and  nor futures trading  benefited them. The Committee are of 
the view that there is no Government  c
ny
Haryana are holding back their products due to   which there  was less arrival of  
foodgranis in the Mandi.  The Committee are of  the opinion that  futures/forward trading 
has not assisted the farmers in releasing rem unerative  price of agri cultural  produce.  In 
fact, the speculative  tendency  of a Commodity Market, has h it the  consumers  most  to 
the advantage  to unscrupul
fu
farmers.  A futures market should serve the  purpose  of stabilization of prices in  
commodities   which are  susceptible to season to season   and year to year variations 
based on supply and demand.  Futures trading enables the various trading interests to 
shift the risk involved  in such activities  arisin
e absence of such hedging fac ilities, traders and manufactu
he producers.  During evidence, the Chairman, FMC dep

were going to study the impact of trading in  certain major  commodities like wheat, 
sugar, pulses and a f rural parts of  
India.  The  Committee, therefore, recommends that  the Government should conduct the 
rs to  set 
/install terminals, at Sub-Di strict/Block levels, in variou s part of the country.  The 
Committee would like to be ap he matter.  
Reply of the Government 
g  ticker boa rds at Talukas and APMCs (mandis) has  
ready been initiated  in Gujarat in association with ‘national level’ Exchanges,   
f middlemen.  Some  of these  centers are Gandhi Nagar, Palanpur, Himatnagar, 
hanera, Visanagar, Unjah, Sarkahej, Sayajipura, Baroda, Deesa, Dhokla, Bavla, Sanand, 
.28 FMC has already instructed the National Multi Commodity Exchanges – 
NCDEX, MC ck levels, in 
various parts of the coun ultancies to evaluate the 
impact of future  pulses, cereals 
nd the other commodities in the rural parts of India has been initiated by FMC. In this 
connection, disc , IIT, Mumbai, 
MA, Anand and ISI Delhi are underway. 
ew other  commodities, which have impact in the 
study on the impact of futures/forward trad ing in certain major commodities like wheat, 
sugar, pulses  in various parts of the country.  At the same time, the Committee desire 
that FMC should instruct Commodity Excha nges like NCDEX, MCX and othe
up
prised of the action taken in t
 
 
 2.27 A  pilot project for installin
al
Government of Gujarat and  Forward Markets Commission.    The proj ect  is aimed at  
disseminating prices traded  at the ‘nationa l level’ Exchanges which would improve the 
bargaining  power of the farmers   who sell their produce at   the APMCs and to  reduce 
the role o
D
Harij, Patan, Mehsana and Sidhpur.   It is al so proposed to replicate the project in other 
States.   
 
2
X and NMCE to set up/install term inals, at Sub-District/Blo
try. The process of  assigning cons
s trading in certain major commodities like wheat, sugar,
a
ussions with reputed institutes such as IIM, Ahmedabad
IR
 
 2.29 As regards the observation of the Comm ittee that commodities futures trading has 
benefitted neither the farmer nor the consumer, it is submitted that media and other 
reports have indicated that ri se in wheat prices had benefi tted the farmers for the first 
time.  No farmers’ body has opposed the commodities futures trading.  So far, mainly 
traders associations have been criticizing futu res trading for being responsible for rise in 
prices of some commodities.  The commoditie s futures market is subject to regulatory 
frame work consisting of the bye-laws of the exchanges, guidelines laid down by FMC as 
the market regulator and Department of Consumer Affairs which implements the 
provisions of FCRA, 1952.  If any specific allegation of market manipulation is made, the 
exchange or the FMC shall take prompt action as per the provisions of the said Act.  It 
would also help in the proposed amendments to  the said Act, to make its provisions up-
dated and relevant to present day require ments and to make FMC as an autonomous 
regulator in line with SEBI is passed expeditiously.  
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. G-11027/3/2006-P&C  dated 18
th August, 2006) 
 

 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.3,  Paragraph 3.14) 
 
3.1 The Committee note with concern that the funds allocation in 2005-06 for 
strengthening the Consumer Courts/Fora could not be ut ilized by the Department of 
er Affairs due to non approval of th e scheme namely, “Integrated Project on 
he Scheme ‘Integrated Project on C onsumer Protection’, inter-alia, envisages 
xtending financial assistance to States/UTs in order to meet the gap in the minimum 
tates/UTs to meet the gaps in infrastructure 
ereby ensuring that the funds are utilized properly.     
ffairs may take up the matter with 
e Ministry of Urban Development at highest level for early clearance of drawings of the 
building by M  the financial 
year itself and the work of ompleted. The Committee 
suggest that wh nalty clause be 
Consum
Consumer Protection” by the Ministry of  Finance. The Planning Commission has 
allocated Rs. 37.40 crore for 2006-07. The Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should take up the matter at the highest level to expedite the approval of the scheme by 
the Ministry of Finance and ensure that th e entire fund is meaningfully utilized for 
strengthening the State Commission and District Fora.  
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 T
e
infrastructural facilities required by the Consumer Fora so as to make them fully 
functional. The Planning Comm ission has provided Rs. 46.00 crores for the Scheme in 
the BE 2006-07 (i.e. Rs. 37.40 crores for Stat es, Rs. 4.00 crores for UTs and Rs. 4.60 
crores for North-Eastern States).  The Ministry of Finance has since approved the Scheme 
in June, 2006, subject to certain conditions. The benchmark for infrastructural 
requirements for District Forum & State Co mmission has been finalized based on which 
financial assistance would be extended to S
th
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. G-11027/3/2006-P&C  dated 18th August, 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.7,  Paragraph 3.25) 
3.3  The Committee are surprised to note that out of Rs. 11 crore allocated for 
construction of NCDRC building called “U pbhokta Nyaya Bhavan”, Rs. 6 crore was 
earmarked in   2005-06 but the construction wo rk could not be star ted by CPWD due to 
delay in getting clearance from MCD. The Comm ittee have been informed that the office 
space available is too inadequate for smooth functioning of the NCDRC. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Department of Consumer A
th
CD so that the f unds allocated for the purpose is  utilized in
the construction of the building is c
ile entering into any agreement with CPWD, a specific pe

inserted in it for non-performance of the contract  by either clause so that the project can 
be completed in a time bound manne
 
The Department of Consumer Affairs has been taking up the matter regarding 
early construction n Development at 
e highest level from time to time. It ma y be added here that after getting the 
em to intimate action taken in 
compliance of the recommendations of the Standing Committee, at the earliest.    This 
Department would also continu nistry of  Urban Development 
atter. 
posal for merger of NTH-BIS (iv) 
on filling the  the Planning 
Commission. s reflects the 
poor planning o or General has 
een appointed  organizational 
problem of the NT  utilize the entire 
funds within the plan period. 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. G-11027/3/2006-P&C  dated 18th August, 2006)
r. 
 
Reply of the Government 
3.4 
of building for NCDRC with  the Ministry of Urba
th
recommendations of the Standing Committee, the matter was  again taken up with the 
Ministry of Urban Development at Secr etary level on 13.06.2006 for early clearance for 
construction drawings of the building so that  the funds allocated for the purpose for the 
current financial year is utilized in this fina ncial year itself and th e work of construction 
of the building can be completed as per schedule. Inviting attention to concern of the 
Parliamentary  Standing  Committee, the  Ministry of Urban Development has also taken 
up the matter on 26.6.2006 with Municipal Corpor ation of Delhi for early clearance of 
construction drawings of the building  re questing th
e to follow  up with the Mi
in the m
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. G-11027/3/2006-P&C  dated 18th August, 2006) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No 13.   Paragraph-5.4) 
 
3.5  The Committee note that the Planni ng Commission had allocated Rs.25 Crore to 
National Test House for entire Tenth Five Year Plan (2006-07) but the Ministry could 
utilize only Rs.14.27 Crore up to 15 th March, 2006.  The reasons for less utilization  of 
funds are stated to be (i) Delay in procur ement of machinery a nd equipment (ii) Non-
tilization of funds by CPWD (iii) Non-approval of prou
N  post of Director General, NTH (v) Reduction in allocation by
 The Commi f entire fundttee feel that the non-  utilization o
n the part of the Department.  Now that a regular Direct
in the National Test House, the Committee hope that theb
H will be resolved and the Mi nistry will be able to
Reply of the Government 
 
 3.6 An amount of Rs.16.26 Crore has been uti lized by NTH during the last four years 
of the Tenth Five Year  Plan, i.e. up to 31 st March, 2006.  Hence, th e balance amount of 
Rs.8.74 Crore was projected in the Budget proposal for the concluding year (2006-07) of 
the Tenth Plan Period against which the B udget allocation receiv ed during 2006-07 was 
Rs.6.50 Crore.  The allocation of  Rs.6.50 Crore is expected to  be fully utilized by NTH 
during 2006-07. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE G  BEEN ACCEDPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE 
ough Village 
Fair/Village H e Committee, 
therefore, recom  make all out 
efforts to educa onsumer rights 
through these Villa e to 
be apprised of the action in the matter. 
folk artists to  drive home messages on  consumer rights; 
development of audio cassettes ibution amongst rural masses; 
organizing exhibitions in the local fairs on specific issues identified by State Government 
inistry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
 
OVERNMENT HAVE NOT
Recommendation (Serial No.2  Paragraph 3.7) 
 
4.1 The Committee note that the Consumer awareness varies from state to state 
depending upon the level of literacy and soci al awareness of the people.  Although the 
Ministry has taken a number of steps to spread awareness programme at grass root level 
through publicity material such as posters, ma gazines, compact discs (CD) at District 
Level, the people living in remote and backwa rd areas are still deprived of their rights 
due to inadequate publicity.  The Committee are of the view that traditionally Village 
Fairs, Cattle Fairs and Village Haats are organized by the people at a fixed interval where 
a large number of people gather.  The Committee desire that the Ministry in coordination 
with the State Government/UT Administration may participate in su ch Haats and have 
interaction with the local people about their consumer rights.  The Secretary, Department 
of Consumer A
ffairs has also accepted during evidence that the publicity thr
aat was in the nalize it.  Thir media plan and they will operatio
mend that the Department of Consum er Affairs should
te the people of remote and backward area s about their c
ge Haats, Cattle Fairs and Village Fairs.  The Committee would lik
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 4.2 Publicity material such as posters, folders CDs containing consumer related 
information have been provided to State Governments for distribution by the district 
administration through Panchayats to take acro ss the messages at the grass root level.  
Additionally, to ensure active and effectiv e participation of St ate Governments in 
creating consumer awareness in rural and back ward areas, a scheme has been prepared to 
provide financial assistance to the States/UTs to carry out activities such as display and 
dissemination of relevant publicity material dur ing local festivals, organizing nataks in 
local languages, associating 
 of folk songs and their distr
as being relevant to particular area etc.  Besides this, in the Media Plan for 2006-07 to 
create consumer awareness, cultural activities through Song & Drama Division of the 
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting in  rural remote areas have also been 
incorporated and action is being taken to organize programmes in village Haats and fairs. 
 
(M
OM No. G-11027/3/2006-P&C  dated 18th August, 2006) 

 
 
 
4.3      The Committee note with on Certificates in respect of 
Rs.47,17,300 released to 85 NGOs/VCOs releas ed 4-5 years back from Consumer 
Welfare Fund have  performance and 
onitoring over the scheme by the Department of Consumer Affairs.  While viewing the 
ncerned state governments.  As advised by the 
committee, advice of CVC has been sought in the matter.  A list of defaulting 
organizations has been posted tment.  No fresh proposal of 
any defaulting NGO is considered by the Department till the necessary utilization 
c
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.9,  Paragraph No. 3.40) 
concern the Utilizati
 not yet been received which reflects the poor
m
situation with great concern, the Committee strongly recommend that concerted efforts 
should be made to recover the while amount  released to theses  NGOs/VCOs at the 
earliest and appropriate legal action should be taken against them.  For this, the matter 
should be taken at the highest level in persua ding the State Government/UTs to trace out 
the whereabouts of the NGOs/VCOs.  The Committee also desire that the Ministry should 
blacklist such NGOs from whom the Utilization Certificate are not received within the 12 
months from the date of re lease of funds and their names may be displayed on the 
website of the Department so that they may not get any grant under the schemes being 
implemented by the other Ministry/Department.  The matter should be got examined in 
consultation with the Central Vigilance Comm ission (CVC) as to how the accountability 
of such NGOs/VCOs can be ensured. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 4.4 Efforts to obtain utilization certificate s from defaulting organizations are on.  We 
have taken up the matter with the co
on the website of the Depar
certifi ates are submitted.  
 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. G-11027/3/2006-P&C  dated 18th August, 2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
up or So ciety, it must be kept in mind that it has 
dequate infrastructure, experience and financ ial capacity to run the business.  Also, the 
Government may strengthen its r the functioning of the Super 
azar so that it does not re-lapse to losses.  It should be ensured that there is due financial 
  The Supreme Court of India on 5.5.2006 di rected the Committee constituted by it 
to issue an advertisement in two National dailies for inviti ng bids to start Super Bazar 
afresh. The Co
 
1. The financia  regard to the 
investm nt involved and the existing liabilities. 
 
2. The expertise of the bidder in conducting such business, and whether it is in the 
position  employ professional Managers to run the business on sound business lines. 
 
3. The bidder shall also di sclose how much and when they shall be making their 
investm nt so as to give a clear picture to the Committee as to the approximate time that 
may be taken to discharge the existing liabilit ies of the Super Bazar and enabling it to 
start afresh. 
 
4. They shall also disclose their source of funding. 
 
REPLIES TO THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.8,  Paragraph No. 3.33 ) 
 
5.1  The committee note that consequent upon the Special Leave Petition (SLP) filed 
by the Super Bazar Dalit Karamchari Sangh, Hon'ble Supreme court has constituted a 
Committee consisting of (i) Central Registra r, Cooperative Societies (ii) Economic 
Adviser, department of Consumer Affairs; and (iii) Official Liquidator, Cooperative 
Stores, Super Bazar, Delhi to explore the possi bilities for revival of  Super Bazar.  The 
Committee constituted by the Supreme Cour t has recommended for revival of Super 
Bazar. The Committee are of the view that unless and until the guidelines framed by the 
Official Committee are strongly adhered to, the proposal of revival of Super Bazar would 
be futile exercise.  The Committee, therefor e, recommends that before handing over the 
management of Super Bazar to a Gro
a
 monitoring mechanism ove
B
accountability on the part of the future management and employees of the Super Bazar.  
They should be given a time frame during which the program must be made self-
sustaining failing which it should be closed down. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
urt also fixed  criteria for evaluating the bids as follows: 
l capacity of the bidder to run the Super Bazar having
e
 to
e

5. The intending bidders must deposit by way of earnest money a demand draft from a 
Nationalized Bank for a sum of Rs. 5 C e advertisements are issued and 
bids re eived, the Committee shall evaluate them having regard inter-alia to the 
guidelines l
 
 5.2 The bids received in re sponse to the above advertis ement were evaluated by the 
ommittee and evaluation report has been submitted to the Supreme Court on 04.07.2006 
for further direct t is 03.08.2006.  
he matter is sub judice before the Supreme Court.  The entire process has been as per 
ir
are let out in that locality. In these 
circumstances we can now proceed to consider the bids made by the two 
contending parties and ues involved in terms of this 
Court’s order dated 26 th July, 2006. Let these matters come up on 5 th 
Recommendation (Serial No.14,  Paragraph-5.5) 
ier R&D Institution under the ambit of 
epartment of Consumer Affairs.  It is i nvolved in all respect of technology, connected 
lobalization of Indian economy and take proactive action/step s in protecting the interest 
of NTH.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome. 
 
 
rores.  After th
c
aid down by the Supreme Court. 
C
ions. The next date of hearing fixed by the Supreme Cour
T
the d ections of the Supreme Court.  Any steps to be taken by the Government will be 
dependent on interim, if any, and final orders of the court in this matter.  
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. G-11027/3/2006-P&C  dated 18th August, 2006 
 
 
5.3  The Ministry vide OM No. G- 20011/1/2006-CPD (Part File) dated 13.11.2006 
have informed the Committee that Hon’bl e Supreme Court has made the following 
order:-   
“An affidavit has been filed on behalf  of the N.D.M.C. and the parties 
before us have considered the affidavit from which it appears that the N.D.M.C. is 
willing to let out the entire premises of  the Super Bazar located in Connaught 
Circus on the basis of payment of rent at market rate. They have also indicated the 
approximate rate at which such premises 
 also consider the legal iss
December, 2006 when we shall make an effort to dispose of the matters 
finally.” 
 
 
5.4 The Committee find that NTH is a prem
D
with industry, commerce, trade and standardiz ation.  In the opinion of the Committee, 
NTH  should gear up their machineries, in the wake of challenges thrown upon by 
g
of Indian entrepreneurs.  At the same time, the Committee recommend that the 
Government should evaluate the working of NTH to see as to how far it has been able to 
achieve the aims and objectives for which it was set up.  There is also a need to undertake 
Serial Audit 
 
 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
 5.5 In order to play an active role in meeting the requirements of the engineering 
dustries in the wake of globalization, NTH are taking steps in creating laboratories of 
There is a proposal to have a study of NTH to redefine its role in the present 
national persp nclude  – (i) 
Comparative studies with o oad to examine how they 
function and ho led to make it 
more relevant to present and future requirem nts; (ii) Conducting a perception survey of 
e existing brand image of NTH as a testin g organization and its test reports; (iii) 
ing and its relationshi ps with Government, industry and other bodies ;                      
(v) Evaluating
(vi) Su
Trainin                          
(vii) P                
(viii)  P
 
AV, 
20    NOVEMBER, 2006
in
Centre of Excellence in various  regions of NTH.  Some impo rtant areas of operation are: 
Chemical Paint & Hi-Polymer, Packaged Drinki ng Water, Tea, Petrol/Diesel, Electrical 
Energy Meter, Batteries, FRLSH (Flame Re tardant Low Smoke Halogen) Cable, High 
Voltage Testing, Automobile Tyre, Failure An alysis of Engineering Materials, Cement, 
Water Meter, Wood & Wood Products. 
 
 5.6 
ective. The proposed study of NTH by IIM, Kolkata would i
ther similar bodies in India and abr
w the NTH structure and functioning s hould be remode
e
th
Suggesting measures required for building in transparency and reli ability of the test 
report; (iv) Preparation of road-map for changes in the organizational structure, 
function
 long term human resource needs and determining extent of outsourcing; 
ggesting training and human resource  development needs of NTH and suggesting 
g Institutions in India and abroad, where training could be arranged;   
reparation of road ma p for making it self-sufficient over a specifi ed period;  
rescribing productivity norms for NTH personnel.  
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM No. G-11027/3/2006-P&C  dated 18th August, 2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       NEW DELHI;     DEVENDRA PRASAD YAD
                      Chairman, 
    29  Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)       Standing Committee on Food, 
      Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
 
 
 

 
MINUTES OF THE EIGH ANIDING COMMITTEE  TH SITTING OF THE ST
       ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2006-  
        2007) HELD ON FRIDAY, 17th NOVEMBER, 2006. 
 
The Committee sat from 1530 hours to 1600 hours in Committee 
Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
Present 
  
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav     -      Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Shri W.Wangyuh Konyak 
3. Shri  Munshi Ram 
4.    Adv. P. Satheedevi 
5.    Smt. V. Radhika Selvi 
6.    Shri Chandra Bhan Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
7.     
8.      Shri S hanta
9.      S
10.      Shri Rajniti Prasad 
11.     Shri Matilal Sarkar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri  T.S. Bajwa 
ram Laxman Naik 
hri Kanjibhai Patel 
 
 
1. Shri    P.K.Bhandari   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri    R.S. Kambo                         -          Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri     B.S. Dahiya    -          Under Secretary 
4.        Shri    Jagdish Prasad                   -          Assistant Director 
 
 
Cont/-….. 
 
 

 
-2- 
 
2.  itting At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairm an welcomed the Members to the s
of the Comm raft Report on ittee. The Committee then took up for cons ideration D
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations  
contained in the 13 th Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer 
Affairs ts (2006-07)” pertaining to  and Public Distribution on “Dem ands for Gran
the Department of Consumer Affairs and  adopted the same with some minor 
modifications/ amendments. 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to  finalise the Draft Report in the 
light of consequential changes and present the same to Parliament on their 
behalf in the ensuing Winter Session of Parliament. 
4. ers desired that the Committee may visit 
some of the places to have in depth st udy of the subjects selected by the 
ommittee for detailed examination after t he Winter Session of Parliament. After 
some discussion , the Committee decided to  undertake an on-the-spot study visit 
 Goa nd Mumbai from 23rd to 30th December, 2006.  
During deliberations, the Memb
C
to , Cochin, Lakshadeep a
 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
A NDIX III 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
ndations/observations which have  
1,12,15. 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government 
 
Recommendation  Nos.3, 7 and 13. 
      
 T o t a l         3     
  
Percentage       20 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
Recommendation Nos. 2 and 9 
 
  
 
PPE
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT    ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN TH E THIRTEENTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFA IRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations   15 
 
(ii) Recomme
    been accepted by the Government : 
 
Recommendation Nos.1,4,5,6,10,1
 
 T o t a l           8  
 Percentage         54 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not 
 
  
 

T o t a l          2   
Percentage         13 
 
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect of which the replies of 
      2  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the Government are still awaited 
 
  Recommendation No. 8 and 14 
T o t a l     
Percentage         13 
 