 
3 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION 
(2004-2005) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the  Twenty-Seventh Report of the Committee (Thirteenth Lok 
Sabha) on “Sick Sugar Industry and Sugar Development Fund”.}  
 
 
 
 THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2004  /Agrahayan, 1926 (Saka) 

 
 THIRD REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations /observations 
contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report of the Committee (Thirteenth Lok 
Sabha) on “Sick Sugar Industry and Sugar Development Fund”} 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   10 December, 2004 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on     10 December, 2004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2004  /Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          P A G E  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………… 
 
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
 accepted by the Government………………….. 
 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
 the Government’s replies…………………….. 
 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
 replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee ……………………………………. 
 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
 which final replies of the Government are  
still awaited……………………………………………… 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the Sixth sitting  of the Committee held on 
 22nd November, 2004…….. 
 
II Analysis  of the Action  Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report of 
the Committee………

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2004-05 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Suresh Angadi 
4. Shri Ranen Barman 
5. Shri Alakesh Dass 
6. Shri Tukaram Gadakh 
7. Shri Govinda 
8. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
9. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
10. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
11. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
12. Shri Zora Singh Mann 
13. Shri K.P. Naidu 
14. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
15. Smt. Daggubati Purandareswari 
16. Shri Ajit Kumar Singh 
17. Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
18. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
19. Shri Harish Nagpal 
20. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri T.S. Bajwa 
23. Shri Palden Tsering Gyamtso  
24. Shri Narayan Singh Kesri 
25 Shri Lalitbhai Mehta 
26. Smt. Bimba Raikar 
27. Shri  Nabam Rebia  
28. Shri Thanga Tamil Selvan 
29 Shri Vikram Verma 
30 Shri Vijay Singh Yadav 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. (Smt.) Paramjit K aur Sandhu - Joint Secretary 
2 Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
3 Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director 
4. Shri R.K.Bhatnagar   - Committee Officer 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I,  the Chairman of the Standing Co mmittee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution (2004-2005) having been authorised by the Committee to 
submit the Report on their behalf, present this Third Report on Action Taken by 
the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty 
Seventh Report of the Committee (Thirteenth  Lok Sabha ) on “Sick Sugar 
Industry and Sugar Development Fund” of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
 
2. The Twenty Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 23 rd December, 2003.  The Government have furnished their 
replies indicating Action Taken on the re commendations contained in the Report 
on 7 th October, 2003. The Draft Report was considered and adopted by the 
Committee at their sitting held on 22nd November, 2004. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by  the Government on Recommendations 
contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.   
 
 
New Delhi      DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV 
22 November, 2004       C h a i r m a n  
1 Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)  Standing Committee on Food, Consumer 
 Affairs and Public Distribution 

CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Commi ttee on Food, Consum er Affairs and 
Public Distribution deals with the Ac tion Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations /Observations contai ned in the Twenty-seventh Report 
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on  “Sick Sugar  Industry and Sugar Development Fund” 
pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer  Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
1.2 The Report was presented to Lok S abha and laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on  23rd December, 2003. It contains 13 recommendations/ observations. 
1.3 Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 13 observations/recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received and categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations  which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
Recommendations Nos.3, 4,5,7 and 13 
       
(Chapter –II, Total 5) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observati ons which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Recommendations Nos. 8 and 10 
 
      (Chapter – III, Total 2) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendations  Nos. 1, 2,  6, 11 and 12 
   
    (Chapter – IV, Total 5) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are still awaited. 
Recommendation No. 9 
   
   (Chapter – V Total 1) 

 
1.4 The Committee desire that the fi nal replies in respect of the  
Observations/Recommendations for which only interim replies have been 
received from the Government shoul d be furnished  to the Committee 
expeditiously. 
 
1.5 The Committee strongly emphasize th at utmost importance should 
be given to the implementati on of Observations/Recommendations 
accepted by the Government.  In cases where it is not possible for the 
Government to implement the recommenda tions in letter and spirit for any 
reason, the matter should be reporte d to the Committee in time with 
reasons for non-implementation. 
 
1.6 The Committee will now deal with acti on taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations. 
 
 A. Loan for Cane Development Programme 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
1.7 The Committee had observed that t hough there is provision of loan for 
cane development out of S ugar Development Fund (SDF ), yet the loans taken 
out of SDF was not passed on to sugarcane farmers resulting in inadequate 
availability of sugarcane in the area of  sugar mills.  The Committee had  
recommend that the cane dev elopment programme should be accorded priority 
and necessary measures should be taken to ensure that the loans  availed of by 
the sugar mills are actually passed on to Cane growers.        
1.8 The Department of Food and Public Distribution in their Action Taken reply 
have inter-alia stated  that the Government has written to all the sugar producing 
State Governments highlighting the need to accord priority to cane development 
programmes and to utilize SDF loan through the sugarcane farmers in respect of 
components of such programmes implem enting  through the farmers.  The 
Government had earlier also written to the State Governments requesting them 
to urge the sugar mills situated in their St ates to avail of the SDF loans for cane 
development.    

  
1.9 In their further action taken replie s, the Department has  stated that in 
response to our letter No. 1-10/2004-SDF dated 23.6.2004, Government of 
Nagaland has informed that as there is no sugar mill in Nagaland, therefore, 
recommendations may not apply to that Stat e.  The Government  of Punjab has 
circulated our letter, referred to above, to all the sugar mills of  the State as also 
to the Secretary, Department of Agriculture.  
 
1.10 The Committee note with concer n the casual approach adopted by 
the Government in treating the reco mmendation of this Committee.  The 
Committee had specifically recommended  for according priority for Cane 
Development Programme.  However, the Government have merely 
forwarded the recommendation of the Committee to State Governments 
without any follow-up action.  The Gover nment had been so casual that it 
has forwarded the recommendation of  the Committee to Government of 
Nagaland,  where neither sugarcane is grown nor there is any Sugar Mill.  
This callousness approach of the Government shows how serious the 
Government is, in treating the reco mmendation of the Committee.  The 
Committee   reiterate  their   earlie r recommendation and desire that pro-
active and result oriented action needs to  be taken by the Government,  so 
that the Cane Development Programme could be undertaken on a large 
scale and both the production and productivity of cane improved.  In this 
context, the Committee would like to r ecommend that it should be ensured 
that the loans to the farmers for cane development under SDF be easily 
made available to them. At the same ti me, the Committee would also like to 
recommend that there is need to review short term loans made available 
under the Scheme for the farmers. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the Action Taken by the Government in this regard with in a 
period of 3 months.   

 
B. Uneconomic Capacity of Sugar Mills  
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
1.11 The Committee had noted that ther e were 165 sugar mills operating with 
less than 2000 TCD capacity and another 223 sugar mills having capacity 
between 2000-2500.  TCD,  whereas capacity of 3500 TCD and more is 
considered to be viable.  Taking into  consideration the uneconomic scale of 
sugar mills capacity, the Committee had recommended that a comprehensive 
programme for expansion/upgradation of technology of the sugar mills of 
uneconomic size be drawn up.  
1.12 In their action taken reply the Go vernment has stated that Government 
has written to the sugar pr oducing States as also t he apex bodies of the sugar 
industry to initiate action on the Committee’s recommendation and prepare 
comprehensive programmes for expansi on of capacity/upgradi ng of technology 
in cases where the existing capacities of  the sugar factories are affecting their 
performance and they are unable to maintain economic viability.  
1.13 In their further action taken  repl y Indian  Sugar Mills Association has 
informed that they have forwarded the above recommendations to the member 
sugar factories for taking action as recommend by the Committee. 
 
1.14        Taking into considerat ion  the uneconomic scale of sugar mill 
capacity, the Committee had recommended that a comprehensive 
programme for expansion/upgradation of sugar mills be taken up at the 
earliest.  The Committee are concerned to note that  the Government have 
merely  forwarded the recommendation of the Committee  to sugar 
producing States and also apex bodies of s ugar industry to initiate action.  
The Committee are deeply concerned to note that no follow-up action has 
been taken up by the Government.  The Committee do not approve of this 
and recommend that Central Government should involve themselves 
actively in drawing up comprehensi ve plan for expansion/upgradation for 
the Sugar Mills.  There is a need to take pro-active acti on  on the part of 
Government in this regard. In  this  regard the Committee would like to 
emphasize that there is an imperati ve need to constitute a Coordination 

Group consisting of Financial Institutions / State Governments, 
Cooperative Organisations and Research Institutions, for the purpose.  The 
Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation  desire that a blue 
print for expansion/upgradation of technology of sugar mills  be drawn and 
action be taken thereon, without any loss of time.      
 
C. Co-Generation  Project 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
1.15 The Committee were concerned to note that only 367 MW of power was 
generated through Bagasse Ba sed Cogeneration projects  against a potential of 
3500 MW.  Due to lackluster approval of State Electricity Boards, the power so 
generated was not being properly utilized and becoming surplus.  The main 
stumbling block coming in the way of Bagasse Based Co-generation Project was 
stated to be inadequate preferential pric ing policy.  The SEBs were not coming 
forward to buy power on commercial rates.   The Committee while emphasizing 
the need to have renewable sources of energy,  recommended  that the State 
Govt. and Electricity Board should be persuaded to purchase surplus power on 
reasonable rates.   
1.16 In their Action Taken reply, the Government has stated that Sugar 
Producing State Government s and the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy 
Sources have been requested to take action on the recommendations of the 
Committee.  
1.17 In their further action taken  reply, the Department has st ated that            
”Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources have informed that they are 
promoting generation of surplus power through optimum co-generation in the 
sugar mills for the last 10 years. As a result of efforts made by the Government. 
53 projects aggregating to 412 MW c apacity have already been commissioned 
whereas 37 projects aggregating to 343 MW capacity are under implementations.  
These projects have been set up mainly by  the Private Sector Sugar Mills, which 
are feeding surplus power to grid. A ta rget of capacity addition of 450 MW have 
been set up in the 10 th Five Year Plan through co-gen eration power projects in 
sugar mills. 
 

1.18 The MNES has also informed that  Biomass Energy & Co-generation 
Programmes of Ministry of Non-Convent ional Energy Sour ces provides for 
financial assistance in the form of inte rest subsidy for co-generation power 
projects in Cooperative, Public/Joint/Private Sector Sugar Mills. 
1.19    The Committee are concerned to note that as against the potential 
of 3500 MW power which can be generated through Bagasse Based Power  
Projects, only 412 MW of power has been harnessed so far and another 343 
MW capacity is under various stages of implementation.  The Committee 
are aware that  Bagasse Based Power Projects are primarily to be set up by 
private sugar mills.  However,  in  view of lack of long term policy 
framework on the part of State Government for buying power,  the private 
sector is reluctant to come in  a bi g way.  The Committ ee are of the view 
that the policy pursued by Ministry of  Non-Conventional Source of Energy 
has failed to enthuse the private entrepreneurs.  In the opinion of the 
Committee, the sale of power generated through Bagasse can yield 
handsome dividend and improve profitability of Sugar Industry.  Reiterating 
their earlier recommendation, the Committee desire that State 
Government/SEBs be impressed upon the need to buy  power on a 
reasonable rates.  The Committee also  desire that matter should also be 
taken up with the Central/State Electricity Regulators for deciding tariff etc.    
 
D. Sick  Cooperative  Sugar Mills  
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
1.20 The Committee had observed that t he performance of existing cooperative 
sugar mills in repaying loans was far from  satisfactory.  Despite providing need 
based relief  to such sugar units,  they  continued a default on institutional dues.  
Surprisingly, the State Government wh ich had given guarantees  to sugar mills 
were also not honouring their commitments.   Taking a serious note of it, the 
Committee desired that the matter need to be urgently addressed  and 
appropriate funding support be provided to concerned sugar mills by State 
Government so as to clear their institut ional over dues.  At the same time, the 
Committee urged that the matter may be taken up with t he concerned State 
Governments so that financial institutions entertain the request of sick/new sugar 

mills for assistance.  The Committee al so desired that sickness in cooperative 
sectors be also overcome by inculcating professionalis m and managerial 
efficiencies. 
1.21 In their Action Taken reply the Government has stated  that the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee have been forwarded to State 
Governments/National Federation of Cooperative Sugar Factories for necessary 
action. 
1.22 The Committee took not e of outstanding instit utional dues and lack 
of professionalism  and managerial in efficiencies in Cooperative Sugar 
Mills.   The Committee find that Go vernment have merely forwarded the 
recommendation of the Committee for t aking up the matter with the State 
Government to the State Government and National Federation of 
Cooperative Sugar Mills for such  action which it  deemed fit.  The 
Committee do not approve of this.  It was expected of Government to take 
up result oriented follow up action so that the Cooperative Sugar Mills 
could be revived.   The Committ ee while reiterating their earlier 
recommendation desire that beside entertaining the request of Cooperative 
Sugar Mills for financial assistance by the Financial Institutions, the State 
Government be also impressed upon th e need to make all efforts to 
strengthen cooperative in Sugar Industry.    
 
E. One Time Assistance for Sugar  Mills 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
1.23 The Committee noted that Cent ral Government had approved 678.06 
crore as one time assistance to the States of Uttar Pradesh, Uttranchal, Haryana, 
Punjab and Bihar to clear the cane arrears.  However, no amount was disbursed.  
The Committee took serious note of it  and desire that the assistance be 
disbursed expeditiously.    
1.24 In their Action Taken reply the Gove rnment has stated that Ministry of 
Agriculture made, in their budget for 2003- 04, provision for one-time assistance 
to the States of UP, Uttaranchal, Hary ana, Punjab and Bihar to clear the cane 
price arrears of private mills. The assistance to State Governments was in the 
form of loan carrying interest at 4% per  annum and repayable in 6 years. The 

State Government was in turn to provide loans to private mills. One of the 
conditions for availing this assistance wa s that the State Government would not 
in future declare State Advice Price (SAP)  for sugarcane. Ministry of Agriculture 
has informed that only States of Uttaranc hal and Bihar availed of this assistance 
and were provided Rs.45.54 crores and Rs.19 crores respectively. The budget 
provision was for the year 2003-04. No provision has been made in the BE 2004-
05.   Hence, the scheme has lapsed. 
1.25 The Committee in their First Report on Demands for Grants       
(2004-05) relating to Department of Food have recommended that the 
scheme of One Time Assistance should be revived afresh as adequate 
opportunity was not  given to State Governments for availing the 
assistance.  The Committee reiterat e their earlier recommendation and 
desire that the scheme of One Time A ssistance be revived in the light of 
the judgment of Supreme Court in regard  to fixation of State Advised Price 
for sugarcane.    
 
F. Taxes on Sugar Industry 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
1.26 Taking into consideration the ov erall sickness in sugar industry the 
Committee had recommended that taxes imposed by Cent ral and State 
Governments be waived/deferred for some period. 
1.27 The Department of Food and Public Distribution in  their Action Taken reply 
have stated that the matter of withdrawal of excise duty was earlier considered 
by the Government and was not agreed to  on the grounds of huge revenue 
implications and similar demand being raised by  other industries.  In so far as 
revival of individual sick unit is concerned, the concessions/reliefs to be given by 
various stakeholders including Central and State Governments are to be decided 
upon on a case by case basis and within a overall package finalized by the 
operating agency and approved by the appropriate authority (like BIFR). 
1.28 The Committee are not  convinced that  withdrawal  of Excise Duty 
may lead to huge revenue outgo.  Taking into consideration that the sugar 
industry is reeling under heavy financial burden it would be in fitness of 
things that some sort of concessions, ei ther  in the form of Excise Duty or 

any other duty structure, be made availa ble to industry so that the Sector 
can be revived.  As there is large scale sickness in sugar industry, the 
taxes imposed by Central and State Go vernments need to be waived or 
deferred for the time being so that the industry can provide much needed 
sugar to the consumers at affordable price.   

 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT. 
 
    Recommendation No. 3  
  
 The Committee are concerned to note that presently 367 MW power is 
being generated through bagas se based co-generation pr ojects though there is 
vast potential for co-generation of power with bagasse up to 3500 MW.  
However, due to lacklustre approach of the State Electricity Boards the 
generated power is not being properly ut ilized and has thus  become seemingly 
surplus.  The main hurdle coming in  way of bagasse based co-generation 
projects are stated to be t he inadequate policy support for preferential pricing.  
The State electricity Boards/Corporations are also not coming forward to buy 
power on commercial rates.  Further, the cooperative sugar mills have 
inadequate availability of financial res ources to take up the project.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that  the State Governments and their 
Electricity Boards/Corporations be per suaded to purchase the surplus power on 
reasonable rates.  To overcome the fi nancial problems being fa ced by the Mills, 
the Committee desire that in addition to  providing loan out of SDF, matter 
regarding setting of more co-generation projects should also be taken up with 
Ministry of Non-conventional Energy Sources on priority. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Sugar Producing State Governments and the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy Sources have been  requested to take action on the 
recommendations of the Committee.  
Further Reply of the Government 
  Ministry of Non-Conventional Ener gy Sources have informed that they 
are promoting generation of surplus power through optim um co-generation in the 
sugar mills for the last 10 years. As a re sult of efforts made by the Government 
53 projects aggregating to 412 MW c apacity have already been commissioned 
whereas 37 projects aggregating to 343 MW capacity are under implementations.  

These projects have been set up mainly by  the Private Sector Sugar Mills, which 
are feeding surplus power to grid. A tar get of capacity addition of 450 MW have 
been set up in the 10 th Five Year Plan through co-gen eration power projects in 
sugar mills. 
The MNES has also informed that Biomass Energy & Co-generation 
Programmes of Ministry of Non-Convent ional Energy Sour ces provides for 
financial assistance in the form of inte rest subsidy for co-generation power 
projects in Cooperative, Public/Joint/Private Sector Sugar Mills. 
{Ministry of Consumer Affairs,  Food and Public Distribution 
OM NO. 7-10/2003-CC/3133 dated 7.10.2004} 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.19 of the Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 The Committee note that the economic utilisation of by-products of Sugar 
is of utmost importance and can improve the viability of Sugar Mills to a large 
extent.  Thus there is a need to develop the Sugar Industry as Sugar Complexes 
with complete value addition facilities for by products so that it should not remain 
only Sugar Manufacturing centres.  The Industry should theref ore be developed 
as a renewable energy produc er and supplier of chemicals apart from being a 
mere sugar producer.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that a suitable 
long term and firm policy should be evol ved wherein the ethanol, apart from 
being extracted from the molasses, is directly produced from secondary sugar 
juice over and above the domestic consumption.  For this, the matter should also 
be taken up with the Ministry of Petr oleum and Natural gas and Oil Companies 
so that the production and the consumpt ion of ethanol is encouraged in the 
country.  This will also go a long way in  not only in reducing the sugar production 
marginally but also making the sugar mills economically viable. 
    Reply of the Government  
 With a view to assisting the sugar industry in adding value to its by-
products, loans are available from t he Sugar Development Fund for bagasse 
based co-generation power projects and for production of ethanol.  The exact 
product-mix is a matter to be decided upon  by the individual entrepreneur based 
on commercial considerations. 

 The Ministry of Petroleum & Na tural Gas has a long term policy for 
encouraging production and consumption of ethanol.  In the first phase of this 
policy, blending of et hanol with petrol to the extent  of 5 per cent has been taken 
up in nine States.  In the second phase, blending is to be extended to all the 
remaining States. 
 As recommended by the Standing Commi ttee, the matter has been taken 
up with the Ministry of Petroleum & Na tural Gas for encouraging production and 
consumption of ethanol. 
{Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  
OM NO. 7-10/2003-CC/3133 dated 7.10.2004} 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
The Committee note that the production of Sugar during the Sugar season 
2002-2003 was about 200.99 lakh tonne, while the estimated internal 
consumption was to the t une of 185.00 lakh tonne. As on Ist October, 2003, the 
opening stock of sugar was 102.65 lakh tonne. If the same trend continues, 
during the sugar season 2003-2004, the country will have about 110 lakh tonne 
of surplus stock of sugar.  The Government have removed quantitative restriction 
on export of sugar and about  14,70,926 MT of Sugar has been exported during 
2002-03. The Committee feel that the quantity of sugar exported is not enough to 
mitigate the problems of sugar industry and hence a lot requires to be done by 
the Government in this regard.  T he Committee, therefor e, recommend that 
keeping in view the need of buffer sto ck, the quantity of sugar over and above  
domestic consumption needs to be exported.  For this, Government should 
provide necessary incentive by increas ing internal transport subsidy, ocean 
freight assistance and handling charges till the situation of glut normalizes on the 
country. 
Reply of the Government 
The Government have removed quantit ative ceilings on export of sugar 
which is being undertaken under the Export  Import policy.  Export of sugar is 
undertaken by sugar mills/exporters as per their commercial prudence. 
Government provides incentives to boost export of sugar, taking into 
consideration, inter alia, carryover st ocks of sugar, production and consumption 
trends, international prices, etc. In view of the high ca rryover stock and high level 

of productions in the last 4 year s, Government announced a number of 
incentives to boost export of sugar. Ho wever, with the production in 2003-04 
season being estimated at 140 lakh tonnes, the carryover stock is expected to be 
lower at the end of the season and the ‘glut’ situation of  sugar in the country is 
likely to normalize. 
Further Reply of the Government 
 
    In the sugar year 2004-05, the es timated production would be 125 lakh 
MTs while the estimated consumption wi ll be around 185 lakh MTs. Keeping in 
view the domestic consumption need, the Government has, therefore, withdrawn 
the incentive of reimbursement of expend iture on internal transport and freight 
charges, including ocean freight  & handling and marketing charges in respect of 
export shipments of sugar made by the sugar factories against release orders 
issued on or after 21.6.2004. 
{Ministry of Consumer Affairs,  Food and Public Distribution 
OM NO. 7-10/2003-CC/3133 dated 7.10.2004} 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 The committee are much concerned wit h the plight of cooperative Sugar 
Mills for whose revival no substantial effort has yet been done by the 
Government.  The board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) was 
constituted initially for private sector  Sugar Companies and later public sector 
Sugar Mills were also brought under it s ambit in 1991. However, cooperative 
Sugar Mills were not placed under BIFR even at that time.  This clearly shows 
that the Government were not very mu ch concerned with revival of Cooperative 
Sugar Mills having negative net wort h.  Though, a committee under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary (Food) was constituted in the year 2000 and 
subsequently a Committee under the Chairm anship of Joint Secretary (Sugar) 
has also been constituted in April, 2003,  however no substantial achievement 
has been noticed as not a single fully ti ed up proposal has yet been received by 
the Ministry in this regard.  Though the prime responsibility of  revival of Sugar 
Mills lies with their Management, the Government are also equally responsible 
due to their existing regulation from cultiv ation of sugarcane to sale of sugar in 
the market.  The Committee, therefore,  recommend that the Ministry should 

make sincere and positive e fforts for revival of all po tentially viable sick sugar 
mills in close co-ordination with Sugar Mills, Financial Institutions, research 
institutes and other concer ned Departments of Central and State Governments.  
For this a nodal agency having representat ives from these organisations may 
also be formed.  The Government should also ensure that no discrepancy should 
remain in working of the proposed Nationa l Company Law Tribunal as existed in 
Board of Industrial and Financial Recons truction (BIFR). Efforts should be made 
to constitute and make functional the National Company Law Tribunal without 
further loss of time. 
 Reply of the Government   
 With a view to reviving and rehabilitating potentially viable sick sugar mills 
in the Cooperative Sector, Government  have introduced a provision in the SDF 
Rules, 1983 under which a loan  upto 60% of the eligible project cost, in cases 
involving modernization; and a loan upto 90% of the cost of the scheme in cases 
involving cane development will be made av ailable from the Sugar Development 
Fund at a concessional rate of interest 6% per annum. 
 Government has also requested the State Governments to forward  its 
proposals of rehabilitation schem es of sugar factories in the Cooperative Sector 
that have a negative net-worth. As ther e has been no respons e from the State 
Governments, this Ministry has, to begin with, identified certain sugar factories in 
the Cooperative Sector that have a negativ e net-worth and have written to such 
sugar factories to furnish further details to enable the Committee of Rehabilitation 
to consider the matter of their potential viability. 
The recommendation of the Committee in regard to the proposed National 
Company Law Tribunal has bee n forwarded to the Minist ry of Finance for taking 
action.  
{Ministry of Consumer Affairs,  Food and Public Distribution 
OM NO. 7-10/2003-CC/3133 dated 7.10.2004} 
 
    
     Recommendation No.13 
 The Committee note that though there are Sugar Research Institutes like 
Sugarcane Breeding Institute (SBI), Co imbatore, Indian Inst itute of Sugarcane 
Research (IISR), Lucknow and National Su gar Institute (NSI), Kanpur under the 
Government except SBI, Coimbatore, no discernible impact seems to have 

affected the quality, recovery, productivi ty of sugar and sugarcane by other 
Institutes.  National Institute of  Sugarcane and Sugar Technology was 
established in 1993-94 out of SDF.  However, this was wound up on the 
recommendation of the Central Monitori ng Group.  In the opinion of the 
Committee, this is clear indicative of some faulty policy of the Government 
regarding Sugar and Sugarcane.  Further Vasantdada Sugar Institute (VSI) Pune 
is also doing good job in pr ivate sector, however the Institute lacks the resources 
to continue their effort in crop produc tion, sugar recovery, elimination of 
diseases, irrigation, energy production etc.   during the visit to VSI Pune, the 
Committee had come to know that wh ile advanced countries are making 
expenditure on R& D work in sugar as 1.5% to 2% of their GNP, in India it is as 
low as 0.05% of GNP.  The Committee hav e also noted that disbursement out of 
SDF for R&D has also been low for the past several years.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Cent ral Government should provide all 
facility/assistance to the Research Institutes under them so that they may be able 
to help Sugar Industry and the Cane growers in time.  Sufficient fund should also 
be allocated to Vasantdada Sugar Institute, Pune to realize their mission.  Efforts 
should also be made to have a coordinat ed network of research institutes of 
Central government, the State government, agriculture universities and the sugar 
mills in right spirit for the benefit of cane growers and the industry. 
 
Reply to the Government 
 The Central Government has been provid ing Grants-in-aid from the Sugar 
Development Fund to the Research Instit utes connected with t he sugar industry 
like the VSI, Pune, Sugarcane Breeding Institute, Coimbatore etc. for carrying out 
research aimed at the promotion and development of the sugar industry and 
such financial assistance continues to be extended for research schemes that 
are recommended by the Standing Res earch Advisory Committee of the 
development of the sugar industry estab lished under Section 6 of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. 
 The recommendation related to having a coordinated network of Research 
Institutes etc. has been forwarded to the Department of Agriculture Research and 
Education as also the Apex bodies of the Sugar Industry for action. 
 

 
Further Reply of the Government 
  In response to our letter 1-10/2004-SDF dated 23.6.2004. Indian Sugar 
Mills Association have requested their all Regional Association to take up the 
matte with their respective State Gove rnments and institutions to develop 
coordinated network of research institutions and sugar mills. 
 The Indian Council of Agri cultural Research have informed that they have 
already in place strong linkage among in ICAR Instit utions and SAUs for R&D 
activities of Agricultural and Allied Sciences. 
 
{Ministry of Consumer Affairs,  Food and Public Distribution 
OM NO. 7-10/2003-CC/3133 dated 7.10.2004} 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No.  8 
 
 The Committee note that though the Government are providing internal 
transport subsidy, Ocean Freight Assistance and handling charges, only about 
14 lakh of tonne of Sugar has been ex ported and the Sugar industry has not 
come out of its present crisis. Presently the Sugar meant for distribution through 
PDS to BPL population is not being lifted.   The Committee feel that there may be 
substantial lifting of sugar  if the scope of distribut ion is again extended to APL 
people too and that too at a low pric e ranging between Rs. 12/- per kg. and 
Rs.13/-per kg. This step may increase t he consumption of s ugar within county. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should increase levy 
percentage and distribute the sugar through Public Distr ibution System to APL 
people too at a rational price so that t he sugar industry should come out of the 
present crisis.  For this, if need be,  the recommendations of the Mahajan 
Committee may be reviewed. Besides, in or der to reduce the stocks of sugar, 
more retail outlets should be opened at  factory premises  as well in 
Taluks/Districts, Metropolitan cities and s ugar should also be transported directly 
to deficit States particularly North Eastern States. 
 Reply of the Government  
In respect of sugar industry, Govern ment has followed a policy of partial 
decontrol, under which levy obligations  of sugar factories have been brought 
down from 40% in 1999-2000 to 10% in 2001-02 season. This has been done to 
improve the financial health of sugar mill s through better realization from higher 
quota of open market sale of sugar. It is al so argued that if le vy sugar quota is 
high, free sale prices tend to be high to compensate for the  lower realization 
from levy sugar.  Thus, increasing the le vy obligation would neither benefit the 
sugar factories nor the consumer.  
 

In so far as distribution of sugar  to APL families through PDS is 
concerned, it may be mentioned that the main reason for poor offtake of levy 
sugar was that the prevaili ng market prices were more or less at par with the 
issue price of sugar in the PDS. In th is situation, incr easing the number of 
beneficiaries (by including the APL fam ilies) would not help increase offtake. 
Therefore, it is not considered nece ssary to include the APL families for 
distribution of sugar from PDS. Similarl y, opening of more outlets at factory 
premises, taluka/districts and metropolitan cities is also not likely to increase sale 
of sugar. 
In this context, it may also be ment ioned that with production of sugar in 
2003-04 season estimated at 140 lakh tonnes , it is expected that stocks would 
reduce automatically in the normal course.  
In regard to deficit Stat es like the North-East St ates, it may be mentioned 
that non-levy sugar is free to  move anywhere in the country. Levy sugar to these 
States is transported directly from surplus sugar producing States of the country.  
{Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
    OM No. 7-10/2003-CC/3133 dated 7.10.2004} 
 
Recommendation No.10 
 The Committee note that the sugar indus try is presently in a precarious 
position with huge cane pric e arrears of 1875.91 crore and the new crushing 
season has commenced.  In sugar industry bank releases funds on the basis of 
hypothecation of sugar produced as per the normative prices announced by 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and National Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development (NABARD) at the beginning of each season.  Due to huge carry 
over stocks and substantial reduction in the prices of sugar, the margins of 
cooperative and other banks, which fin anced sugar mills, has been eroded. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that assistance / loan may be released to 
State Government / sugar mills to liquidate cane price arrears.  For this the 
Central Government may take up the matt er with financial Inst itutions so that 
sugar mills may get soft credit on long term basis to pay cane price arrears.  The 
Committee are also given to understand that the Directorate of Sugar has 
already received complete claim of pay ment of 75% advance from 200 mills, 
which are being processed for expeditiou s disbursement.  The Committee desire 

that the amount of buffer subs idy should be disbursed by 31 st January at the 
latest. 
Reply of the Government 
Government have taken steps to di sburse expeditiously 75% advance 
against claims which have been received wit h full details. As on 31.3.2004, 331 
claims with complete information were  received, out of which advance was 
disbursed to 308 sugar factories.  
Further Reply of  the Government 
  Government has taken steps to  disburse expeditiously 75% advance 
against claims which have been received with full details. As on 04.10.2004, 355 
claims with complete information were  received, out of which advance was 
disbursed to 350 sugar factories amounti ng to Rs 218.33 Crores. The final buffer 
subsidy claim for the period 18-12-2002 to 17-12-2003 has been settled so far in 
respect of 149 sugar factories, amounting to Rs 34.42 Crores.  
{Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
    OM No. 7-10/2003-CC/3133 dated 7.10.2004} 

 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
    
    Recommendation No.1 
 The Committee noted that viability  of a sugar mill depends on the 
sugarcane development programme in the command area of that sugar mill.  For 
this strong relationship between the farmers and the Sugar mills is a pre-
condition.  However, the Committee feel th at though there is provision of loan for 
cane development out of Sugar Developmen t Fund (SDF), no substantial effort 
seems to have been taken by the sugar mill s in this regard.  It has also come to 
the notice of the Committee, that the loans taken out of SDF are not passed on to 
sugarcane farmers resulting in inadequate availability of sugarcane in the area of 
sugar mills.  As a result thereof, the mills are pushed towards sickness.  The 
Committee further note that the short term loan scheme of the Government to 
enable the farmers to purchase seeds, fe rtilizers and pesticides continued only 
for a very short period of five months from 22.11.97 to  31.3.1998.  This has also 
affected the cane availability in the area where mills ar e situated.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the cane development programme should 
be accorded priority and necessary measur es should be taken to ensure that the 
loans availed of by the sugar mills are ac tually passed on to Cane grower before 
ensuing season. Further, short term loan scheme for inputs like seeds, fertilizer 
and pesticides be revived at the earliest for the benefit of the farmers. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Government has written to all the sugar producing State 
Governments highlighting the need to accord priori ty to cane development 
programmes and to utilize SDF loans through the sugarcane farmers in respect 
of components of such programmes im plementing through the farmers.  The 
Government had earlier also written to the State Governments requesting them 
to urge the sugar mills situated in their St ates to avail of the SDF loans for cane 
development.   
 In so far as short-term loans for purchase of inputs like seeds, fertilizers 
and pesticides is concerned it may be mentioned that the SDF Rules 1983 that  

 
deal with matter connected with loans from the SDF contains a provision for such 
loans in Rule 17 A of the Rules. 
Further Reply of the Government 
  In response to our letter No. 1-10/2004-SDF dated 23.6.2004, 
Government of Nagaland has informed that as there is no sugar mill in Nagaland, 
therefore recommendations may not apply to  that State.  The Government of 
Punjab has circulated our letter, referred to above, to all the sugar mills of the 
State as also to the Secretary, Department of Agriculture.  
{Ministry of Consumer Affairs,  Food and Public Distribution 
OM NO. 7-10/2003-CC/3133, dated 7.10.2004} 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of the Chapter I of the Report) 
 
    Recommendation No.2 
 The Committee have been informed that  as on 30.9.2003, there are 165 
sugar mills which have capacity less than 2000 TCD.  223 sugar mills have 
capacity between 2000-2500 TCD.  At pr esent the sugar mills having the 
capacity of 3500 TCD and more are consi dered viable.  The Committee are of 
the opinion that in order to maintain economic viability, all the sugar mills of 
uneconomic size will require expansio n in capacity and upgradation in 
technology failing which they will become  sick.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Central Government  should take up the matter with the 
State Governments and the concerned su gar mils to prepare a comprehensive 
programme for expansion/upgradation of technology of the sugar mills of 
uneconomic size. 
Reply of the Government 
 As recommended by the Committee, Government has written to the sugar 
producing States as also the apex bodies of the sugar industry to initiate action 
on the Committee’s recommendation and prepare comprehensive programmes 
for expansion of capacity/upgrading of technology in cases where the existing 
capacities of the sugar factories are affecting their performance and they are 
unable to maintain economic viability.  

 
Further Reply of the Government 
In response, to our letter 1-10/2 004-SDF dated 23.06.2004, Indian Sugar 
Mills Association has informed t hat they have forwarded the above 
recommendations to the member sugar factories for taking action as recommend 
by the Committee.  
{Ministry of Consumer Affairs,  Food and Public Distribution 
OM NO. 7-10/2003-CC/3133, dated 7.10.2004} 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.14 of the Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No.6 
It has come to the notice of the Committee that the performance of the 
existing co-operative sugar mills in repayin g loan is extremely unsatisfactory.  
Despite providing need based relief, these Sugar units continue to default on 
institutional dues.  The St ate Governments which have given guarantees to the 
sugar mills are also not honoring their commitment.  The committee feel that 
matter needs to be urgently addressed as  appropriate funding support needs to 
be provided to the concerned sugar mills  by the State Governments to clear 
institutional overdues.  T he Committee, therefore, des ire that matter may be 
taken up with the concerned St ate Governments so that Financial institutions 
may entertain the request for assistance to new/sick sugar mills. For this the 
matter may also be taken up with the management of sugar mills to improve their 
functioning. Besides, since a large number  of sugar mills are saddled with the 
problem of sickness which has occurr ed due to lack of professionalism and 
managerial efficiencies, these maladies need to be addressed urgently, so as to 
introduce an element of functional efficiency in these units.  
Reply of the Government 
The recommendations/observations of the Committee have been 
forwarded to State Governments/Nation al Federation of Cooperative Sugar 
Factories for necessary action. 
{Ministry of Consumer Affairs,  Food and Public Distribution 
OM NO. 7-10/2003-CC/3133, dated 7.10.2004} 
 

Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.22 of the Chapter I of the Report) 
  
Recommendation No.11 
 At present Central Government fixe s statutory Minimum Price (SMP) of 
Sugar cane and some State Governments also notify State Advised Price (SAP). 
As a result of this a large amount of cane price arrears rema in with sugar mills. 
To overcome the situation, Central Go vernment had to approve Rs. 678.06 crore 
as one-time assistance to the states of  U.P., Uttaranchal, Haryana, Punjab and 
Bihar to clear the cane price arrears. However no amount has been disbursed as 
yet.  The Committee, therefore, desire t hat this assistance should be disbursed 
expeditiously. Further, such a policy should be evolved wherein cane growers get 
due price of sugarcane, Mills get fair r ealization from sugar and consumers also 
get sugar at reasonable price instead of highly benefiting the traders.  
 Reply of the Government  
Ministry of Agriculture made, in their budget for 2003-04, provision for one-
time assistance to the States of UP, Uttaranchal, Haryana, Punjab and Bihar to 
clear the cane price arrears of priv ate mills. The assistance to State 
Governments was in the form of loan ca rrying interest at 4% per annum and 
repayable in 6 years. The State Governm ent was in turn to provide loans to 
private mills. One of the c onditions for availing this as sistance was that the State 
Government would not in future declare State Advice Price (SAP) for sugarcane. 
Ministry of Agriculture has informed that  only States of Uttaranchal and Bihar 
availed of this assistance and were prov ided Rs.45.54 crores and Rs.19 crores 
respectively. The budget provision was fo r the year 2003-04. No provision has 
been made in the BE 2004-05.   Hence, the scheme has lapsed. 
{Ministry of Consumer Affairs,  Food and Public Distribution 
OM NO. 7-10/2003-CC/3133, dated 7.10.2004} 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.25 of the Chapter I of the Report) 
 

 
Recommendation No.12 
 The Committee note that presently basic excise duty is imposed by 
Central Government and purchase tax, cess and Cooperative Society 
Commission are imposed by the State Go vernments.  To relieve the sugar 
industry of present crisis, Government of Maharastra has waived the purchase 
tax.  The Committee feel that such an initiative will be  appreciable on the part of 
other State Governments too.  The Central Government may also help the sugar 
industry be reducing / waiving excise  duty.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that for revival of sick sugar industry, taxes imposed by Central and 
State Governments should also be waived/deferred for some period. 
      Reply of the Government   
The matter of withdrawal of excise duty was earlier considered by the 
Government and was not agreed to on the grounds of huge revenue implications 
and similar demand being raised by other indus tries. In so far as revival of 
individual sick unit is conc erned, the concessions/reliefs to be given by various 
stakeholders including Central and Stat e Governments are to be decided upon 
on a case by case basis and within an overall package finalized by the operating 
agency and approved by the appropriate authority (like BIFR). 
 
{Ministry of Consumer Affairs,  Food and Public Distribution 
OM NO. 7-10/2003-CC/3133, dated 7.10.2004} 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.28 of the Chapter I of the Report) 

 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED. 
 
Recommendation  No. 9 
 The Committee note that general reduc tion of distance between two sugar 
mills of 15 kms is also pushing the sugar mills towards sickness.  Such a 
restriction is also causing hurdles in t he expansion of sugar i ndustry to a higher 
capacity.  The Committee feel that this  general criteria of 15 kms distance is 
affecting the viability of sugar mills.  The Committee, th erefore, strongly 
recommend that distance between sugar mills should be variable depending 
upon their tonne sugar cane crushing capacity per day in order to improve their 
financial health. 
Reply of the Government 
The criterion of minimum distance of  15 Kms between two mills has been 
in vogue w.e.f 31 st August 1998 and nearly 60 mills have since expanded their 
capacity. Although distance between two su gar mills may have some bearing on 
viability, sugar mills bec ome sick on account of various factors such as 
inadequate availability of cane, unecono mic size of the factory, outdated 
machinery/technology, etc. In order to im prove the financial health of the sugar 
factory, Government provides loans from SDF for cane development, 
modernization and expansion. SDF also pr ovides loans for co-generation, and 
production of ethanol in order  that byproducts are better utilized. However, the 
issue of distance between sugar mills is being examined in consultation with the 
Committee on Revitalization of Sugar Industry set up by the Government. 
{Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
    OM No. 7-10/2003-CC/3133 dated 7.10.2004} 
 
 
 
New Delhi      DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV 
22 November, 2004       C h a i r m a n  
1 Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)  Standing Committee on Food, Consumer 
 Affairs and Public Distribution 

APPENDIX I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON 
MONDAY, THE 22ND NOVEMBER, 2004. 
 
 The Committee sat from 15.00 hrs. to 15.30 hrs.  in  Committee  Room 
No. 62, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Ranen Barman 
4. Shri Alakesh Dass 
5 Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
6. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann 
8. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
9. Shri Ajit Kumar Singh 
10. Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
11. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Narayan Singh Kesri 
13. Smt. Bimba Raikar 
14. Shri  Nabam Rebia 
15. Shri Thanga Tamil Selvan 
16. Shri Vijay Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. (Smt.) Paramjit K aur Sandhu - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director 

 
 At the outset Hon’ble Chairman welc omed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee. The Committee then took up the Draft Third Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Reco mmendations/Observations contained in 
the Twenty-Seventh Report  (Thirteenth Lok  Sabha) on “Sick Sugar Industry and 
Sugar Development Fund” for consider ation and adopted the same with the 
following amendments/modifications:- 
 
Page 
No. 
Para No. Line Amendments/Modifications 
4 1.10 3 
(from bottom) 
After the words “ improved” add the 
following:- 
 
“In this context, the Committee would like to 
recommend that it should be ensured that the 
loans to the farmers for cane development 
under SDF  be easily made available to 
them.  At the same time,  the Committee 
would also like to recommend that there is 
need to review short term loans made 
available under the Scheme for the farmers”.  
 
6 1.14 4 
(from bottom 
After the words “in this regard” add the 
following:- 
“In this regard the Committee would like to 
emphasize that there is an imperative need 
to constitute a Coordination Group consisting 
of Financial Institutions/State Governments, 
Cooperative Organisations and Research 
Institutions, for the purpose.” 
 
11 1.25 5 Delete “The Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire that the scheme 
of One Time Assistance be revived afresh” 
and  add the following:-  
 
“The Committee reiterate their earlier  
recommendation and desire that the scheme 
of One Time Assistance be revived in the 
light of the judgment of Supreme Court in 
regard to fixation of St ate Advised Price for 
sugarcane”.   
 
 
 The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the Report and 
present the same to Parliament on their behalf. 
 
The Committee, then adjourned 
 

 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the twenty-seventh Report of the Standing Committee on 
Food, Civil Supplies and Public Distribution (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
(i) Total  Number of Recommendations     13 
 
(ii) Recommendations/obser vations which have been  
accepted by the Government: 
Recommendation Nos.3, 4,5,7 and 13 
T o t a l           5  
Percentage          38  
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
 Government’s replies: 
Recommendation Nos. 8 and 10 
T o t a l           2  
Percentage         16 
      
(iv) Recommendations/obser vations in respect of  
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation  Nos. 1, 2,  6, 11 and 12 
 T o t a l           5  
 Percentage   
           3 8  
(iv) Recommendations/observati ons in respect of which  
replies of the Government are still awaited. 
Recommendation No. 9 
 T o t a l            1  
 P e r c e n t a g e          8  