          
 
 
 15  
        
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION 
(2006-2007) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Twelfth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants  
(2006-2007) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
  
 FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2006  /, Kartika,1928 (Saka) 

 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2006-2007) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the  Twelfth Report of the Committee  on Demands for Grants  
(2006-2007) of the Ministry of  Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of  Food and Public Distribution)}  
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  …06.12. 2006  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on    …06.12. 2006  
  
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2006 /, Kartika, 1928 (Saka) 

 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGES 
Composition of the Committee 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………… 1- 
 
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been  
 accepted by the Government………………….. 
 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the   
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
 the Government’s replies…………………….. 
 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee ……………………………………. 
 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   
 the final replies of the Government are still  awaited  ………. 
 
 
APPENDICES 
(i) Statement showing sugar season  wise, State wise and sugar mill 
wise position of cane price arrears as on 30.6.2006. 
(II) Minutes of the Seventh si tting of the Committee held on 10.11 
2006. 
 
 
(II) ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT    
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTH 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE.

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2006-07 
  
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Govinda Aroon Ahuja 
3. Shri Alakesh Das 
4.        Shri  Atma Singh Gill 
5.        Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
7.       Shri  Baliram Kashyap 
8.       Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
9.       Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak 
9.  Shri Parsuram Majhi 
10.      Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
11.      Shri Harikewal Prasad  
12.       Shri Munshi Ram 
13.       Shri Daroga  Prasad Saroj 
14.  Adv. P. Satheedevi 
15.  Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
16.  Shri Ramakant Yadav 
17.  Smt. V. Radhika Selvi 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri T.S. Bajwa 
23. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
24.       Shri  Shantaram Laxman Naik 
25.       Shri Thanga Tamil Selvan 
26. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
27.       Shri Rajniti Prasad  
28. Shri Nabam Rebia 
29. Shri Matilal Sarkar 
30. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu 
31. Vacant 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. (Smt.) Paramjit Kaur Sandhu - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Bhandari   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
5. Shri Rakesh Bhardw aj   - Committee Officer 
 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Commi ttee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution (2006-2007) having been authorised by the Committee to 
submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fifteenth Report on Action Taken 
by the Government on the recommendat ions/observations contained in the 
Twelfth Report of the Committee (14 th   Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2006-2007) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
 
2. The Twelfth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 22 May, 2006.  The Government furn ished their replies indicating Action 
Taken on the recommendations contained in the Report on 8th September, 2006. 
 
3.  This Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 10th November, 2006. Minutes of the sitting form Part –II of the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
Recommendations/observations contained in the Report is given in Appendix- II.   
 
NEW DELHI      DEVE NDRA PRASAD YADAV, 
13 November, 2006.                 Chairman, 
22 Kartika,1928 (saka) 
 Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution. 
 
 

   
         CHAPTER -I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on  Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution deals with the Acti on Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report (14 th  Lok 
Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2006-2007 )” pertaining to the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution). 
1.2 The Report was presented to Lok S abha and laid on t he Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 22nd May, 2006. It contained 26 recommendations/observations. Action 
Taken Notes in respect of all the 26 obs ervations/recommendations contained in 
the Report have been received and these have been categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government : 
 
Serial Nos.- 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, 11,12,13, 15, 20, 21, 24, 25 and 26. 
(Paragraph Nos. - 1.13, 2.70, 2.72, 2.73, 2.74, 2.77, 2.78, 3.21, 
3.23, 4.31, 5.34, 5.37, 6.24 and 6.25) 
 
      (Chapter –II , Total   14 ) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government 
 
Serial Nos. 10, 14, 16, 18, 19 and 23. 
(Paragraph Nos- 2.76, 3.22, 3.24, 3.26, 4.30 and 5.36) 
      
      (Chapter –III , Total  6  ) 
 
 
 
 

(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
 
Serial Nos.  2, 3, 5, 9 17 and 22. 
(Paragraph Nos. -2.68, 2.69, 2.71, 2.75, 3.25 and 5.35) 
 
      (Chapter – IV, Total 6)   
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
       - N i l -  
 
 (Chapter – V, Total Nil) 
 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations for which only interim replies have been 
received from the Government be furnished to the Committee 
expeditiously. 
 
1.4 The Committee strongly emphasi ze that utmost importance be 
accorded to the implementation of Observations/Recommendations 
accepted by the Government. In case where it is not possible for the 
Government to implement the recommenda tions in letter and spirit for any 
reason, the matter be reported to the Committee in time with reasons for 
non-implementation. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with acti on taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

A.         Even Distribution of Plan Expenditure 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para No. 1.13) 
     
 
1.6 The Committee had emphas ised the need to spread the 
expenditure evenly in all the quarters of the y ear in their earlier report and 
expressed their unhappiness over t he non-compliance of the financial 
rules in the matter.  
1.7 The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes while admitting that the 
quarterly expenditure of Plan Rules was not uniform have stated that they 
were engaged in close monitoring of the expenditure at all stages for 
achieving optimal utiliz ation of budgetary provisi ons and to ensure that 
expenditure is spread evenly.  
 The Ministry has also info rmed that the modified Cash 
Management System has been introduc ed and a system for working out 
monthly expenditure plan for t he Financial year 2006-07 has been 
introduced wef. April 2006.   Accordi ng to them the Monthly Expenditure 
Plan would form the basis of Quarterly Expenditure Allocation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1.8 The Committee cannot but reiterate the need for even 
spreading of expenditure over the four quarters of the year to ensure 
the proper utilization of the budgete d allocations.   Now, that the 
Ministry has introduced the modified  Cash Management System wef. 
April 2006, the Committee hope and trust that the Plan expenditure 
will be distributed evenly.  The Committee would like to be informed 
of the progress of the system.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
B SUBSIDY TO APL POPULATION 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Paragraph 2.68) 
 
1.9 Taking note of the fact  that an element of subs idy was involved in food 
grains supplied to beneficiaries of A bove Poverty Line (APL) families, the 
Committee had desired that there was a need to bar APL population from 
receiving subsidized foodgrains. The Committee had also recommended that 
there was a need to reduce allocation of foodgrains for APL category especially 
wheat and also revise the rate in a su ch way, that there was hardly any gap 
between ruling market prices and wheat supplied to APL beneficiaries. The 
Committee had desired to be apprised of th e action taken by the Government in 
this regard. 
1.10 The Ministry in their Action Taken Re ply stated that the suggestion made 
by the Parliamentary Standing Committee of the Ministry has been examined.  
This Department reiterates  its earlier stand that co mpletely excluding the APL 
population from the TPDS would adversely affect t he population in several major 
States as well as the North Eastern States, where the APL off-take is sizable.  
According to them, the Government had, inter-alia, decided on 6.1.2006 to 
reduce allocation of foodgrains for APL  households to 20 Kg. per family per 
month from the earlier allocation of 35 Kg. per family per month,  or the off-take 
during 2004-05, whichever is lower. It was also decid ed that APL Central Issue 
Prices (CIPs) of foodgrains, which were la st fixed in July 2001, to be revised 
upwards by Rs. 85 per quintal and Rs. 95 per quintal for wheat & rice 
respectively. However, keeping in view the representations from some State 

Governments, Political parties and Public s entiments, the implementation of the 
decision taken on 6.1.2006 has been postponed for the time being.  
  
However, Department of Food & Public Distributi on has rationalized the 
allocation of wheat under the Above Pove rty Line (APL) category to each State’s 
average offtake for the last three years or  the last year’s offtake, whichever is 
lower. A 25 % cut of wheat allocation for APL households has also been imposed 
in respect of rice-consuming States and Delhi.  

 
 
1.11 The Committee note that the Government have not accepted the 
recommendation of the Committee to bar APL population from TPDS as it 
would adversely affect the populati on in several major States where APL 
offtake is sizeable.  The Committee do not  subscribe to this view of the 
Government in this regard.  The Committee feel that food subsidy have 
been designed, for the poor and the vulnerable section of the society, 
which cannot afford to buy the foodgrains from the open market.  Further, 
APL population neither require nor need subsidy at BPL level to sustain 
their livelihood.  The Committee note that on one hand, the Government 
have resorted to large scale import of  wheat in order to replenish the 
dwindling stocks so as to maintain supply chain and thereby manage and 
operate TPDS and other welfare schemes, on the other hand, the 
Government continue to fritter away the foodgrains to undeserving APL 
population which has a substantial amount of subsidy involved therein. 
The Committee note that Government with a view to restrict food 
subsidy bill have taken steps for Sl ashing down the foodgrains quota of 
APL population and at the same time recommended revision of Central 
Issue Price of foodgrains upwardly fo r APL population.  However, this 
decision of the Government has been held in abeyance for the time being.  
The Committee apprehend that the deci sion to defer the implementation of 
the decision of the Government, to restrict allocations of foodgrains to APL 
population by reducing the eligible m onthly quota and rise in Central Issue 
Price have been taken on considerat ion other than sound economic sense 
to benefit less deserving section of th e Society.  The Committee have been 
informed that there has been mis-match between BPL estimation by the 
Union Government and the State Governm ents.  As a result of which the 
State Governments have to incur a heavy subsidy Bill to cover BPL 
population which have been left out in this exercise.  Reiterating their 
earlier observation, the Committ ee strongly recommend that APL 

population be barred from the purview of  TPDS in respect of foodgrains.  
At the same time, the foodgrains save d by excluding APL population, be 
made available to BPL beneficiaries.   The Committee would also like the 
Government to reassess the number of BPL beneficiaries so that the States 
do not have to foot extra bill to feed  them and the exist ing system may be 
allowed to continue till the pro cess of reassessment is completed and 
implemented. 

 
 
 
C  FOOD SITUATION IN THE COUNTRY 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Paragraph 2.69) 
 
1.12 The Committee while noti ng that the food situation in the country was far 
from satisfactory had observed that t he food situation in the country was so 
alarming that Government had to take a decision to import 10 lakh tonnes of 
wheat in April/May, 2006 and another 30 lakh million tonnes approved to be 
imported later on during the year. Such being the scenario, the Government may 
find difficult to replenish their dwindling buffer stocks, operate and manage Public 
Distribution System replenish their dwin dling buffer stocks. The Committee, had 
therefore, recommended that  Government had a relook at their food policy, 
afresh in the interest of farmers and consumers alike. 
  
1.13 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply stated that  the production of wheat 
 which was 76.37 million tonnes in 1999-200 0 declined to 68.64 million tonnes in 
crop year 2004-05 against a target of 72 million tonnes.  Due to less than 
targeted production in crop year 2004-05 as well as high  open market prices and 
higher private participation in RMS 2005-06,  the procurement of wheat in that 
year was only 147.83 lakh tonnes wh ich was 20 lakh tonnes less than the 
procurement of wheat in RMS 2004-05.  The offtake of wheat in 2005-06 was 
161 lakh tonnes and due to less procur ement and higher offtake the stocks of 
wheat were 20 lakh tonnes less than the buffer stock as on 1st January, 2006. 
 To augment stocks of wheat  in the Central Pool and also to keep a check 
on open market prices of wheat, the Govern ment took the decisions to import 5 
lakh tonnes of wheat in February, 2006. 
 The production of wheat in cr op year 2005-06 was 69.48 million tonnes 
against a target of 75.53 m illion tonnes. Due to less than targeted production of 
wheat in crop year 2005-06 as well as hi gh open market prices, negative market 
sentiments due to low stocks of wheat in Central Pool and higher private 
participation in RMS 2006-07,  the procurement of w heat was only 92.2 lakh 

tonnes in RMS 2006-07.  To make up the shortfall of wheat in the Central Pool 
the Government took a decisi on in April, 2006 to import fu rther 30 lakh tonnes of 
wheat. 
 
The Government is also considering a few other proposal s to save wheat 
such as   allocation of coarse grains in place of  wheat, etc.  Once these 
proposals are implemented ther e will be sufficient sto ck of wheat to meet the 
requirements under TPDS and welfare sc hemes as well as to maintain the 
prescribed buffer norm as on 1st April, 2007. 
 As far as rice is concerned, ther e has been record pr ocurement in KMS 
2005-06 of 273.8 lakh tonnes (as on 27.07.2006) compared to 236.9 lakh tonnes 
in the  corresponding period in KMS 2004-05.  In addition to this 11.4 lakh tonnes 
of coarse grains have al so been procured (as on 27 .7.2006) compared to 7.8 
lakh tonnes in the corresponding period in KMS 2004-05. 
 In the RMS 2006-07, the targeted quantit y of wheat could not be procured 
even after proving an incentive of Rs. 50 per qtl. due to much higher open market 
prices.  In order to ensure that there is no shortfall in procurement of qualities of 
foodgrains required for the TPDS and Welfare Schemes, the Department of Food 
and Public Distribution has formulated a proposal to purchase wheat during RMS 
2007-08 at a procurement price higher than MSP.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1.14 The Committee is unhappy to  note that although there was a 
marginal decrease in the production of  wheat during 2005-06 as compared 
to 2004-05, the procurement decreased alarmingly forcing the Government 
to import huge quantities (35 lakh tonnes) of wheat to replenish the stocks 
in central pool to augment the buffe r stocks. The Committee note that the 
low procurement of wheat was due to high prices of wheat in open market 
as compared to those being offered by the Government. In this context the 
Committee would like to emphasise th at Government should encourage 
staggered procurement of goodgrains lin ked with proper pricing especially 
for the benefit of small and marginal farmers. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their recommendation and d esire that the Government should 
have a look at their procurement  poli cy afresh in the interest of both the 
farmers and consumers alike. The Committee, is, however, satisfied to note 
the increase in procurement of rice as well as coarse grains during the year 
2005-06 as compared to 2004-05. The Co mmittee still desire that efforts 
need to be stepped up.  
  

D  BAN ON FORWARD/FUTURE TRADING OF WHEAT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5 Para no. 2.71) 
1.15 Taking note of the fact that the prices of wheat  were showing an upward 
trend and hardening day by day and the speculative trading indulged into had 
affected the prices of wheat, the Co mmittee were of the view that the 
future/forward trading in w heat had a deleterious effect on the retail prices of 
wheat. The future/forward tr ading in wheat, which was conceived for the benefit 
of farmers, had not yielded desired results fo r them and in fact the speculation in 
wheat price had affected the consumer  at large. The Forward Market 
Commission had failed to monitor the future  price of wheat. The decision of the 
Government to import wheat had emitted negative signal in regard to stock of 
wheat in the country.   The Committee were  of the view that with the permission 
to undertake forward/future trading in wheat, the price of wheat have skyrocketed 
in the retail market, without realizing the commensurate benefits to the farmers.  
The Committee, therefore, recomm ended that Government should ban 
forward/future trading in wh eat so as to contain the prices of wheat in open 
market. The Committee desired to be ap prised of the action taken by the 
Government in this regard. 
 
1.16 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply stated that production of wheat 
was 69.48 million tonnes in crop year  2005-06 (as per the fourth advance 
estimate) against a target of 75.53 mil lion tonnes. Due to  lower than targeted 
production in crop year 2005 -06 as well as higher pr ivate participation in 
purchase of wheat in RMS 2005-06 and ne gative market sentiments due to low 
stocks of wheat in Central Pool, the open market prices had shown a rising trend 
from December, 2005.  Regarding forward trading in wheat, the nodal Ministry for 
the same which is the Department of Consumer Affairs has informed as under: 
 
“Future contracts in wheat are pr esently traded on the three National 
Exchanges viz. the National Multi Commodity Exchange (NMCE), Ahmedabad, 
the National Commodity and Derivative s Exchange (NCDEX), Mumbai and the 
Multi Commodity Exchange (MCX), Mumbai.  Wheat futures trading commenced 
in NMCE w.e.f. 13
th  December, 2003.  NCDEX Mumbai, w.e.f. 6th July, 2004 and 
MCX Mumbai w.e.f. 2 nd September, 2004.  At presen t, major part of trading in 

wheat is taking place at NCDEX and the other two Exchanges have negligible 
share. 
 
 It is true that prices of wheat both in spot and futures markets have 
hardened during the first quarter of this  year.  The main reasons for 
comparatively higher futures prices are lower production estimates and lower 
arrivals this year in Mandis as compared to the last y ear.  During 2004-05, the 
production of wheat was 68.64 million tones,  which was 3.47 million tonnes less 
as compared to 2003-2004.  The tar get for wheat production for 2005-06 was 
75.53 million tonnes.  However, the second advance production estimates (as on 
22.2.2006) and third advance production estimates (as on 5.5.2006) have placed 
the production at a lower level of 73.06 million tonnes and 71.54 million tones, 
showing successive shortfall in both the estima tes.  It is learnt  that the private 
trade estimates the production below the targeted level. 
 
 Futures trading largely reflect the whol esale price of the commodities.  So 
far, no specific study has been made to a ssess the impact of futures prices on 
retail prices of the commodity.  Future s markets, however, give an advance 
forecast of the prices.  The forecast gets reflected in the wholesale prices of the 
commodities.  The wholesale prices have an  impact on the retail prices.  In an 
efficient distribution system, the impact on wholesale prices and retail prices 
should have an appropriate relationship.  The reason for higher futures prices 
quoted for December, 2006 contract at MCX and NCDEX is that the futures 
prices being quoted at these Exhanges fact or in various components such as 
expected price, (based on demand and suppl y scenario), cost of carrying the 
goods, international trade etc.  The cost of carry is equivalent to the interest cost, 
storage charges and other in cidental expenses in carrying (holding) the good 
over a period of time (i.e. till the maturity of the contract). 
 
 Forward Markets Commission (FMC) which is the Regulator for 
commodity futures trading under the pr ovisions of Forward Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1952 has been keeping a cl ose watch on the futures trading in 
wheat.  Detailed formats have been prescribed through which the Exchanges are 
required to submit the trading details ever y day at the close of  the trading. FMC 
has prescribed a daily maximum price b and of 4% followed by a cooling off 
period of fifteen minutes and thereafter a further increase/decrease of 2% is 

permitted.  The open position details of members and clients with a high value of 
trade are also monitored closely.  FMC has also imposed a limit on open position 
in wheat contracts separately for member s and clients with a high value of trade 
are also monitored closely.  FMC has  also imposed a limit  on open position in 
wheat contracts separately for members and clients and margin money in the 
range of 5 – 5.23%.  To avoid squeeze and cornering by the buyers, wheat 
contracts have provisions for seller’s opt ions with regard to physical delivery.  
The trading details in the commodity  Exchanges including for wheat are 
deliberated in the weekly meetings chair ed by Chairman.  FMC.  The large client 
participation in wheat futures contracts (in the mongh of April/May the average 
client participation has been more t han 6000 from across 500 centers.) is 
indicative of transparent price discovery. 
 
 Futures trading enable the various stakeholders such as producers.  
Processors, exporters etc. to shift the risk involved in their activities arising out of 
adverse price fluctuations through hedging to those who are willing to assume it 
in the hope of making some profit.  Futures trading also render services to the 
farmers/cultivators.  Hedg ing facilities would enable those farmers who grow 
commodities in very large quantities to hold on to their crops or stocks, spread 
out the sales of such sto cks over a period of time and  thereby realize a better 
average price for their produce.  A futures market provides to the farmer at time 
of sowing an advance indication to the ex pected levels of prices of different 
commodities during the marketing peri od, thereby enabling him to undertake 
proper crop planning.  Smaller farmers pr esently do not gain directly form the 
futures trading but their realization in creases due to efficient and transparent 
price discovery.  This has been evid ent in the past two years in many 
commodities. 
 
 In view of the above, it is submitt ed that futures trading in wheat and other 
essential items need not be banned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1.17 Taking note of hardening of wheat prices in the market, the 
Committee had recommended that Government should ban forward/future 
trading in wheat so as to contain the prices of wheat in open market.  The 
Committee had also urged that the es sential items of mass consumption 
need not be included in the list for which forward/future trading be 
permitted.  The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have outlined the 
various steps taken by the Regulator – the Forward Market Commission 
and the Commodity Exchanges - MCX and NCDEX in the matter.  Inspite of 
action by these agencies, the prices of wheat in future market have risen 
disproportionately.  Sadly, the purpose for which the future/forward market 
was permitted to trade in foodgrains  including wheat has not yielded the 
desired result, especially to small fa rmers.  However, consequent upon the 
rise in future/forward price of wheat, th e end retail prices have also risen.   
As a result of which, on one hand the farmers have not been able to reap 
the benefit of future trading and on th e other hand, the consumer is made 
to pay high price, on account of  speculation and other market 
manipulations.  Reiterating their earlier recommendation, the Committee 
recommend that Government should reconsider their decision and ban the 
forward/future trading in wheat an d other essential items of mass 
consumption.              
 

 
 
 
 
 
E TARGETED PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7 Paragraph 2.73) 
 
1.18  The Committee learnt from the Pre ss that a large scale of diversion of 
PDS foodgrains in North Ea stern States had been detected and the committee’s 
examination revealed that  100% diversion of wheat meant for PDS had been 
diverted to open market in the State of  Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura. Taking a serious note of the fact that the very 
objective of PDS would be defeated if the foodgrains meant for PDS did not 
reach the targeted group and instead were diverted to open market, the 
Committee had recommended that the Minist ry should evolve a foolproof 
mechanism in a time bound manner to c heck the diversion of foodgrains. The 
Committee would also await the response of the State Governments in this 
regard. 
 
While noting that the management and operation of  Public Distribution 
System in the country was the joint responsibility of Central and State 
Government concerned, the Committee had recommended that in the event of 
off-take being more than 60-65% there should be a joint special audit by the 
officials of FCI and State Government  concerned.  The Committee had also 
emphasized that diversion of subsid ized foodgrains needed to be tackled with 
utmost seriousness and criminal liability be invoked, for such offence.  The 
Committee desired to be apprised of the acti on taken by the Government in this 
regard. 
 
 
 
1.19 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply stated that t he Government has 
taken a serious view on the reports of diversion of foodgrains in the States. The 
Government organized five Regional Conferences at five regions for  

strengthening TPDS in the r egion during last financial year.  Besides discussing 
various issues, all State and UT Governments were advised to take all necessary 
steps to strengthen TPDS.  It was also stressed that Vigilance Committees be 
constituted at all levels fo r monitoring of   TPDS and functioning of fair price 
shops. A special meeting of the Ministers / Secretaries of t he States wherefrom 
the diversions have been reported was held under the Chairmanship of the 
Hon’ble Minister of Agriculture, Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution and 
all the States/UTs have been directed strongl y to curb the instances of diversion 
and to take all steps for strengthening of the TPDS.  Consequent upon the 
Meeting, an action plan has been prepar ed on curbing leakage/diversion of 
foodgrains under TPDS as recommended in the above Conferences.  A 
concurrent evaluation study  covering six States has also been given to NCAER 
to evaluate the performance of TPDS. 
 
 Regarding the issue of joint audit by the officers of the FCI and the State 
Governments for States where off-take is more than 60-65%, it may be stated that it is 
not desirable to conduct such joint special audits.  Foodgrains are allocated @ 35 Kg 
per ration card and the endeavour of the D epartment has been to ensure that State 
Governments lift all the alloca tion of foodgrain an d distribute to the beneficiaries.  
Higher off-take of foodgrains does not nece ssarily mean it is being diverted.  To 
ensure correct distribution, the Departm ent has given to NCAER a concurrent 
evaluation of the TPDS in six States. 
 
 Further, all the State Governments hav e been requested to furnish information 
quarterly in proforma on action taken under Clause 8 & 9 of the PDS (Control) Order, 
2001 wherein the States are required to furnish information on the number of 
inspections made, number of raid s conducted, number of persons 
arrested/prosecuted/convicted, number of licenses suspended/cancelled, show-cause 
notice issued, value of goods seized.  In formation thus received would be compiled 
and used for monitoring purpose. 

 
 
1.20 The Committee note that the diversion/leakage of foodgrains and 
strengthening of TPDS was discussed at various meetings and 
conferences held from time to time.  In these meetings, the States/UTs were 
directed to curb the instances of diversion and take adequate steps for 
strengthening of TPDS.  Subsequently, an action plan prepared for curbing 
leakage/diversion of foodgrains under TPDS .  NCAER was also directed to 
conduct concurrent evaluation study covering six States where major 
diversion/leakage of foodgrains is taki ng place.  The Committee are not at 
all satisfied with the action taken by the Government in the matter.  It is 
worthwhile to mention that earlier also studies were conducted by ORG 
Marg and PEO of Planni ng Commission.  The y have studies the subject in 
greater detail and came out with recommendations, which the State 
Governments were required to implement in letter and spirit.  However, the 
State Governments have not been able to take result-oriented steps.  As a 
result of which, the leakage/diversion of foodgrains is going on unabated.  
It is in this context, the Committee recommend that the concept of “food 
coupons” as vogue in Kerala be introduced in the other parts of country so 
as to eliminate the various ills aff ecting the proper implementation of 
TPDS.  At the same time, the Committee would also like to be apprised of 
evaluation study conducted by NCAER and the follow up action taken 
thereon. 
The Committee note that the Stat e Governments have been asked to 
furnish information quarterly under Clause 8 and 9 under PDS (Control) 
Order, 2001.  The Committ ee would like to be appr ised of the information 
received from the concerned State Governments in this regard.   
 
 

 
F HILL TRANSPORT SUBSIDY (HTS) SCHEME 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9 Paragraph 2.75) 
  
1.21 The Committee noted that Hill Transport Subsidy Schemes was 
introduced for predominantly hilly Stat es for opening of godowns by FCI at 
Principal Distribution Centres for reimbur sement of the transportation cost upto 
these centres. The Committ ee had been informed that t he Government of India 
had requested the Central Vigilance Comm ission on 27.5.2005 to conduct an 
enquiry into the alleged irregularities in  implementation of the Hill Transport 
Subsidy Scheme in Arunachal Pradesh. Th ey had also informed that the matter 
had been referred to the CBI for investigat ion. No report has been submitted by 
CBI so far. The Committee desired that the enquiry by CBI be expedited and they 
be apprised of the findings of CBI and the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations of CBI. 
 
1.22 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply stated that CBI, vide their letter 
dated 14.6.2006 has informed that they have not yet initiated any enquiry into the 
matter due to the pendency of PIL, on the subject, in the Guwahati High Court. 

 
 
1.23 The Committee express their di spleasure at the way the matter 
regarding enquiry into alleged irre gularities in implementation of HTS 
scheme in Arunachal Pradesh is being dealt with by the Government. The 
Committee believe that the Government is not at all serious in the matter as 
any enquiry is yet to be initiated by CBI who have been entrusted the job of 
investigation in the irregularities. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and desire that enquiry by CBI be taken up 
expeditiously in the matter, if need be by getting the stay vacated at the 
earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised of the findings of CBI and 
action taken thereon by the Government of the recommendations of CBI. 

 
G DIVERSION OF FOOD GRAINS 
 
Recommendation  (Serial No.  11 Paragraph 2.77) 
 
1.24 The Committee noted with concern that over 36 percent of the budgetary 
subsidy was siphoned off by the supply chain and another 21 percent reaches 
the APL households.  The Committee also noted that Government had brought to 
the notice of State Governments t he recommendations made by Operation 
Research Group (ORG) and Programme Evaluation Organization (PEO) of 
Planning Commission on the issue of dive rsion of foodgrains and removal of 
ghost ration cards as foodgrains against t hem were being distributed from Fair 
Price Shops (FPSs). It had also been suggested that doorstep delivery of 
foodgrains may be taken into consider ation. The Committ ee had, therefore, 
strongly recommended that the suggestion of removal of ghost ration cards 
should be got implemented strictly so as  to stop the leakage/diversions of 
foodgrains. 
 
  
1.25 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply stated that paragraph 2(8) of the 
Annexure to the PDS (Control) Order, 200 1 states that elim ination of bogus 
ration cards as well as bogus units in the ration cards shall be a continuous 
exercise by the State Governments to c heck diversion of essential commodities.  
The issue was discussed in the recent ly held Regional Conferences and the 
participating States were requested to take immediate necessary action to 
overcome the problem.  Consequent upon the Regional Conferences, States like 
Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka have tak en up review in right earnest and set 
right lot of inclusion and exclusion erro rs with a view to identify the correct 
beneficiaries.   
 
 The issue of door step delivery was al so discussed in the said meetings.  
It was decided that the door step deliver y mechanism should be encouraged and 
all the States/UTs were requested to take immediate action for the introduction of 
door step delivery.  Governments of Himachal Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh are 
already taking door step delivery quota at FPS level. 

 
 
1.26 The Committee are satisfied to not e that the advice of the Committee 
for removal of ghost (bogus) ration cards and door step delivery of 
foodgrains has been taken up with the States/UTs. It has also been brought 
to the notice of the Committee that process of removal of ghost ration 
cards has been initiated by Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka. The Committee 
has also been informed that doorstep delivery quota at FPS level is already 
being undertaken by Himachal Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh. The 
Committee, however, further desire that other States may be persuaded  to 
strictly implement the above measur es (i.e. removal of ghost ration cards 
and doorstep delivery of foodgrains) to check the leakage/diversion of 
foodgrains in a time bound manner.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in the matter. 

 
 
H Out standing dues against vari ous Central Ministries/State 
Governments and their agencies. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13 Paragraph 3.21) 
 
1.27  The Committee were deeply concer ned to note that outstanding dues of 
Food Corporation of India (FCI) agains t various Central Ministries were 
constantly on rise. The Committee were of  the view that since interest accrued 
on account of delayed payment was loaded on Food Subsidy Bill of the 
Government, it was imperative that Government found ways and means to 
liquidate their outstanding.  The Committ ee, therefore, recommended that FCI 
should follow the principle of “cash and carry” while allocating foodgrains to 
Central Ministries/State Government s etc. for running/operating Welfare 
Schemes including Public Distribution System and also liquidate the outstandings 
fully at the earliest. 
1.28 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply stated that the matter is being 
continuously pursued at the highest le vel with the concerned Ministries/ 
Departments/ State agencies and also with the Ministry of Finance for 
expeditious liquidation of the outstanding dues of the FCI.   In pursuance of the 
decision taken in the Cabinet Meeting held on 16.03.2006, the Ministry of 
Finance, Department of Ec onomic Affairs have been requested to issue Special 
Securities to the Food Corporation of India (FCI) to the extent  of Rs.16,200 crore  
for liquidation of the outst anding dues of the Ministry of Rural Development for 
foodgrains supplied by FCI for SGRY schemes etc. till 30.04.2005.  For 
settlement of the remaining dues and futu re claims of the FCI, the matter has 
separately been taken up with the Ministry of Rural Development at the level of 
the Minister. 

 
 
1.29 The Committee in their earlier re port did not approve of the partial 
settlement of outstanding dues of FC I and recommended to find ways and 
means to liquidate their outstanding.  The Ministry in their action taken 
notes have reiterated the issue of speci al securities to FCI to the extent of 
Rs. 16,200 crore only.  The Co mmittee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation to liquidate the outstanding in full instead of a partial 
liquidation.  The Committee, however, further desire that the FCI should 
take stringent measures against var ious Ministries/Departments for 
liquidation of the outstanding dues.  The Committee also reiterate its earlier 
recommendation and desire that FCI shoul d henceforth follow the principle 
of “cash and carry” while allocating f oodgrains to Central Ministries/State 
Governments etc. for running/operati ng Welfare Schemes including Public 
Distribution System.    

  
I PROXY LABOUR IN FCI 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.17 Paragraph 3.25) 
 
 
1.30 Taking note of partial implementat ion of the suggestion of the Committee 
to curb proxy labour, the Committee in their 9th Report had recommended that all 
their four suggestions to regulate the Attendance system in FCI should be 
implemented in letter and spirit uniforml y across all the Regions/States and not 
selectively.  The Committee were at  loss to understand as to why the 
Government had not been able to implement  their suggestions to curb proxy 
labour through out the country, when it could be done in some of the States.  The 
Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation had de sired that their 
suggestions to regulate the Attendance system in FCI be implemented 
throughout the country without any reserv ation.  The Committee desired to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
1.31 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply stated that To implement the 
Recommendations of the Standing Committee on curbing the proxy labour 
following steps have been taken by the FCI :- 
(i)   The process of implementing A ttendance by putting  signature or thumb 
impression has already been implemented in the FCI Depots located in the 
regions of   Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Haryana,  Rajasthan, Maharashtra 
(Mechanical Devices installed in all 7 depots),  Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, 
Uttranchal, Gujarat, Nagaland  and Manipur (N&M). This  step is implemented 
partially in Uttar Pradesh (in 24 out of 32 Depots), West Bengal (in 11 out of 23 
depots), Madhya Pradesh (in 1 Depot), Chattisgarh (in 2 Districts) and Assam.  In 
Assam, J&K and Bihar the labour unions/workers are opposing the 
implementation of this system.  Efforts are being made to persuade the unions 
and the workers to cooperate in this regard.    
(ii)   Mechanical Entry Device has been in stalled in Delhi, Rajasthan and 
Maharashtra. This recommendation has be en implemented partially in Punjab, 
Uttar Pradesh, Uttranchal, Gujarat, A.P., Karnataka, West Bengal, Orissa and 
Bihar. Apart from this, tenders are called  for installing Mechanical Entry Devices 

in Haryana, J&K, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala, Chhatisgarh, Tamil Nadu, Jharkhand.  
However, administrative/la w and order problems are being faced at Assam, 
Nagaland & Manipur and Meghalaya.  
(iii)    Further,  payment of wages to all workers through cheque as per the 
provisions of Income Tax Act has been in troduced in all the r egions except J&K. 
In J&K Region workers are not acceptin g cheque on the plea that they are 
illiterate and cannot operate bank accounts.  Sincere efforts are being to provide 
facilities to these workers. 
(iv)    A system regarding signing of  daily work output slip by each labour at the 
end of day and countersigned by the Mo ndal/Sardar/Shed Inch arge  has been 
introduced in Kerala, Rajasthan, Gujarat,  J&K, Haryana, Karnataka, Meghalaya 
and Uttranchal Regions.    This system has also been implemented partially in 
Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal Regions. 
(a) In Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, AP,  Maharashtra, Jharkhand, Bihar, 
Assam, Nagaland and Manipur work slips are being signed by Sardar & Mondal 
only. 
  
(b)  This system is not yet implemented in Uttar Pradesh, Chhatisgarh, Orissa 
and Delhi regions due to labour resistance.  

 
  
1.32  The Committee find that the s uggestions of the Committee to curb 
‘proxy labour’ in the FCI has not b een implemented in letter and spirit, 
uniformly across all the Regions/States.   The Labour Unions/workers have 
been blamed for the inability to implement attendance system of putting 
signature or thumb impression in the FCI Depot.  Administrative/Law and 
Order problems have been cited as reasons for not putting in place the 
Mechanical Entry Devices in some of th e States.  Further, illiteracy among 
the workers have been stated to be  reasons for not implementing the 
recommendation of payment of wages to workers by cheque.  Further, 
countersign by Mondal/Sardar/Depot Inch arge has not been put in place of 
a number of States due to labour r esistance.  It is beyond the 
comprehension of the Committee as to  why the Government has not been 
able to implement the suggestions of the Committee in the whole country, 
when it could be done in some States/Regions.  The Commi ttee view it very 
seriously and again reiterate its earlie r recommendation and desire that for 
abolishing system of proxy labour in FCI, the suggestions made by the 
Committee in its earlier Report be observed and implemented without any 
reservation.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

J ESTABLISHMENT COST OF CENTRAL WAREHOUSING 
CORPORATION (CWC) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20 Paragraph 4.31) 
 
1.33 The Committee noted that the profit  of the Corporation came down to 
22.43 crore in 2003-04 as compared to 43.29 crore during 2002-03.  The reasons 
for decline in profit were stated to be heavy expansion and in troduction of new 
accounting standards.  The Committee were concerned over the state of affairs 
in the Corporation and had desired that they should take measures to reduce the 
establishment costs and to enhance its pr ofits.  The Committee desired to be 
apprised of the steps taken in the matter. 
 
1.34 The Ministry in their Action Taken R eply stated that in order to reduce the 
 establishment cost and to enhance its pr ofit, the Corporation had re-introduced 
SVRS 2005 for all Groups in Engineering C adre and only for B, C and D in other 
cadres.  The request of 283 employees have been accepted for SVRS.  Further, 
the Corporation has merged RO, Kochi wi th RO, Chennai and also reduced its 
Construction Cells to six.  These measures would redu ce the establishment cost 
and enhance its profit.  However, the actual impact would be known in due 
course of time.   
 
 
The percentage of establishment co st to total cost has shown a 
decline as compared to the previous years as given below: 
 
 
     Year   % of Establishment Cost 
1999-2000 65.39 
2000-2001    61.71     
 2001-2002    60.35 
 2002-2003    56.79 
 
 2003-2004    59.18 
2004-2005 56.84 
 

 The profitability of the Corporat ion has also show n an upward trend and 
increased from Rs.22.43 crores in the year 2003-04 to Rs.41.30 crores in the 
year 2004-05 and expected to achieve Rs.63.72 crores in the year 2005-06. 

 
 
1.35 The Committee note that the establishment cost of Central  
Warehousing Corporation which was  in the vicinity of  65% has come 
down to 56% over the years.  Duri ng the year 2004-05, the percentage of 
establishment cost was 59.18%, which has now declined to 56.84% in the 
year 2004-05.  The Committee note th at Government have taken certain 
steps like merging of RO, Kochi with RO, Chennai and restructuring of its 
construction cells.  The Committee are of the view that no organisation can 
sustain itself, if the establishment cost  is as high as 65% to 56%.  The 
Committee is further of the view that  when FCI can sustain itself by 
expanding 3 to 4% on their establishment, there is no reason as to why this 
cannot happen in CWC since the business profiles of these two 
organisations are somewhat similar.   The Committee have taken note of 
measures for reducing establishment cost of CWC but feel that these are 
still not sufficient to yield the desire d results.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier observation a nd recommend that Government should 
find ways and means, including und ertaking an exercise by leading 
management institutions like ASCI, Hyderabad, for restructuring and 
reorienting the policy, plan and pr ogramme of CWC.  The Committee hope 
and trust that the scientific study, should also suggest measures to contain 
the establishment cost to a barest mini mum level of 3 to 4% of its total 
costs. 
 
 
 
 
        

K CANE PRICE ARREARS 
Recommendation (Serial No. 22 Para no. 5.35) 
 
1.36 Expressing concern ov er the fact that more than Rs.1050 crore of cane 
arrears pertaining to 2005-06 sugar s eason are still outstanding, the Committee 
were pained to note that although the payment of sugarcane is required to be 
made within 14 days of supply of cane, it is seldom done. The Committee were 
concerned to note that c ane arrears pertaining to sugar season 2003-04 and 
earlier are still outstanding and yet action ha s not been taken against sugar mills 
to recover the cane price arrears alongwith interest @ 15% as per the provisions 
of Sugarcane (Control) Order,1966. The Co mmittee would, theref ore, like to be 
apprised of the details of s ugar mills which are still to liquidate their outstanding 
arrears against the farmers and the r easons for not paying the outstanding 
arrears alongwith interest. The Committ ee while emphasizing that there was a 
need to protect and promote the interest of  farmers in such a manner that they 
continue to cultivate sugar cane, without any hindrance, for which, the farmers 
need to be paid remunerative price immediat ely on the delivery of his agriculture 
produce.  The outstandings by sugar entrepreneurs act as an disincentive to 
grow sugarcane. In order to preserve the interest of farmers in cultivation of 
sugarcane, the Committee had recommended that all the 
incentives/aid/assistance given to a sugar mill should be contingent upon 
liquidation of cane arrears by the mill. In  the event of default on this account, 
such aid/assistance should be held in abeyance.    
 
1.37 The Ministry is their Action Taken reply stated that a statement indicating 
the details of sugar season-wise, State-wise and sugar mill-wise position of cane 
price arrears along with the reasons for pending cane price arrears is enclosed.  
 
The recommendation of the Standing Committee is t hat all the incentives/ 
aid/ assistance given to a sugar mill should be contingent upon liquidation of 
cane price arrears by the m ill and that in the event of default on this account, 
such aid/assistance should be kept in  abeyance is highly appreciable and the 
Central Government, in principle, agr ee with the views of the Committee.  
However, there are practical difficultie s in implementing this recommendation.  
Usually, the cane price arrears build up in the years of low sugar prices, e.g. in 
2002-03 sugar season when the open market prices of non-levy sugar prices 

declined almost to the level of levy sugar prices, the Government created a buffer 
stock of 20 lakh tonnes to mitigate t he difficulties of sugar factories and help 
them to pay cane price arrears to s ugarcane growers.  As per the Sugar 
Development Fund Rules, 1983, the buffer stock subsidy is to be exclusively 
utilized for payment of cane price incl uding cane price arrears.  Had the 
proposed condition imposed on sugar factor ies, then it would not have been 
possible for the Government to pay the buffer subsidy to sugar mills and 
sugarcane growers would have suffered. Similarly, the assistance from Sugar 
Development Fund is extended to sugar factories for modernization, expansion 
of capacity, cane development, setting up of cogeneration and ethanol 
manufacturing facilities with the purpose of improving their financial viability so 
that they can give remunerative cane price to the sugarcane growers.  In view of 
such practical difficulties, the implem entation of this recommendation of the 
Committee may lead to unexpected and undesirable consequences.    
 
As on 31 st May, 2006, the percentage of c ane arrears was only 2.6% as 
against 25.8% on 31st May, 2003 and 14.6% on 31st May, 2004. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1.38 The Committee have taken note of reasons for huge cane arrears of 
earlier sugar seasons.  Some of the reasons assigned for outstandings 
includes drought or critical financia l conditions, matter being subjudice, 
closure of sugar mills permanently and poor liquidity.  The Committee are 
of the firm view that all these reasons  act as a disincentive for a sugarcane 
grower to retain his interest in the cultivation of sugarcane.  The Committee 
feel that perhaps concerted efforts were not made by the sugar 
entrepreneurs in the matter and the a rrears allowed to be piled up year 
after year.  Sadly, none of the State Government has invoked the provision 
of Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1996 unde r which the recovery of cane price 
arrears alongwith interest @ 15% is levi ed in the event of delay of payment 
beyond 14 days.  Reiterating thei r earlier observation, the Committee 
recommend that all the incentive/aid/ assistance given to a sugar mill 
should be contingent upon liquidation of  cane arrears.  In the event of 
default on this account such aid/assist ance should be held in abeyance 
and if need be used for direct liqui dation of farmers’ arrears who supplied 
sugarcane to the mills.         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE 
 BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1 Para no. 1.13) 
 
The Committee are deeply concerned to  note uneven utilization of 
budgetary allocation under Plan & Non-Pl an budget during 2005-06.  For 
instance the actual plan expenditure for the first quarter was 1.43% which rose to 
37.80% in the last quarter.  The Commi ttee are also unhappy to note the decline 
in the percentage utilization of plan f unds during 2005-06 as compared to 2004-
05.  It was 95.15% during 2004-05 whic h declined to 49.20% in 2005-06.  The 
reasons for uneven spread were stated to be the late approval of the Village 
Bank Scheme.  The Committee in their earlier reports had been impressing upon 
the need to spread the expenditure evenly dur ing the year but it seems that the 
recommendations of the Committee have not been taken seriously.  The 
Committee are also unhappy to note that  even the financial rules of the 
Government which clearly stipulate spreading of expenditure evenly over the four 
quarters and bars the rushing of utilization in the last  quarter, have also been 
ignored.  The Committee, also, strongly recommend that the Government should 
ensure spreading of expenditure evenly over all the four quarters of the year. 
   
Reply of the Government  
 
 At the outset, the Department would like to assure the Committee that the 
observations conveyed on the subject of budgetary utilisati on have been duly 
noted. The Committee has rightly observe d in para 1.19 that  the plan funds 
utilisation during the Ist quarter of 2005-06 was 1.43% only, with reference to RE.  
The provision of Plan Funds for the year 2005-06 was Rs. 93.87 crore at BE 
stage and Rs. 60.00 crore at RE stage.  The total ex penditure incurred upto 
31/3/2006 under plan funds is Rs. 58.03 crore against RE of Rs. 60.00 crore i.e. 
utilisation of 96.72%. Thus, t he plan funds’ utilisation in 2005-06 is higher by 
1.57% as compared to the plan funds utilisation during 2004-05. 
  It is, further submitted that the reasons for uneven spread of  Plan  
expenditure, in the last quarter of 2005-06 were main ly due to the fact that  the 
main scheme “Village Grain Bank Schem e ” having a budgetary allocation of Rs. 
20.20 crore (inclusive of funds for NE Re gion) in RE, was revised and was finally 

approved by Govt. in February, 2006.  Also , the   Re-appropria tion of Rs. 11.88 
crore under the scheme “ Construction of  Godowns by FCI etc.” required the 
approval of Ministry of Finance and was finally obtained on 2.1.2006. The 
quarterly utilisation of non-pl an funds in 2005-06 was, largely, uniform.  The 
overall utilisation of  non-plan funds upto 31 st March, 2006 was Rs. 23467.33 
crore against RE of  Rs. 23719.53  crore, i.e. 98.94%. 
 
 It is submitted that though the quarterl y utilization of Pl an funds was not 
uniform on account of the above explai ned reasons, the Department has been 
engaged in close monitoring of the expenditu re at all stages, in keeping with the 
recommendations of the Committee and financ ial instructions/guidelines of the 
Government, for achieving optimal utiliz ation of budgetary pr ovisions and to 
ensure that expenditure is spread evenly. 
 
 The modified Cash Management System  has been introduced by Ministry 
of Finance w.e.f.1/10/2005 and t he Department of  Food & Public Distribution is 
among the Departments where the modified cash management system has been 
introduced which, inter-alia, provides  for Monthly Expenditure Plan.  These 
instructions were issued to all concer ned (copy annexed). Further, a system for 
working out Monthly Expenditure Plan for the financial year 2006-07 has been 
introduced w.e.f. April, 2006. Monthly Expe nditure Plan would form the basis of 
Quarterly Expenditure Allocation, beyond which the Ministry would not issue 
cheques without prior consent of Ministry of Finance.  
 Instructions have been issued to all concerned to take note of the 
recommendations of the Committee and to  ensure that the expenditure is 
incurred in accordance with the Monthly Expenditure Plan. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
F.No.    I-34/5/2004-05 Budget dated 16.6.2006] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

 
                         Recommendation (Serial no. 4 para no. 2.70)                       
  
   The Committee note that reforms in agriculture sector which inter-alia, 
envisages removal of all controls on f oodgrains viz licensi ng, stock limits and 
restriction on inter-state movement has not yielded the desired results. This 
policy of Government further contemplates that any dealer can freely buy stock, 
sell,  transport, distribute, dispose, ac quire, use or consume any quantity of 
wheat. The Committee find that Multinat ional Companies and private traders 
have entered into the market in a big way and procured wheat from the market in 
excess of their requirement, leading to profiteering, hoarding and blackmarketing 
of wheat. The Committee are of the view that the liberal policy of the Government 
of free trade and movement of agriculture produce been negated and undue 
advantages taken by private traders and Multinational Companies. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that Government should examine whether any 
reasonable quantitative restriction on such  Multinational Co mpanies and private 
traders can be placed. It is pertinent to m ention that the State of Uttar Pradesh 
have already imposed quantitative lim its on procurement of wheat by 
multinational companies during the curr ent year. The Committee feel when the 
State Government of UP can impose su ch reasonable restrictions on private 
traders to procure wheat, in the interest of consumers, the Central Government 
and other State Governments can also  put similar ceiling on them. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of t he action taken by the Government in 
this regard. 
  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 After the promulgation of the Removal of (licensing, requirements, stock 
limits and movement restrictions) on Specified Foodstuffs Order, 2002, the 
Central Government ahs maintained a ca utious watch on the availability and 
prices of foodgrains and su itable remedial measures have been taken whenever 
considered necessary. 
 To remove the availability of wheat  so as to met the requirements of 
TPDS/OWS and buffer norms, a decision to import 3.5 million tons of wheat has 

been taken. Further, to improve the availa bility in the open market and keep in 
check the prices of wheat, decision has  also been taken to permit import of 
wheat under OGL at %% duty. 
 In terms of the order issued in 2 002, the State Governments still retain 
powers to issue control orders to regulate the availability and prices of foodgrains 
through imposition of licensing, stock limits etc. under the Essential Commodities 
Act, 1955. States/UTs are also implement ing the prevention of  Black Marketing 
Act, 1980 to check unethical trade practices like hoarding, black marketing etc. 
 The Government of Uttar Pradesh has not imposed any quantitative 
restrictions on procurement of wheat  by Multinational Companies from 
purchasing wheat in the St ate. The State Government  has reported that during 
the Rabi Marketing Seas on 2006-07, the ITC was aut horised to purchase 2.00 
lakh MT of wheat only at the MSP or  higher rate under the Bulk Purchase 
Scheme on the condition t hat wheat so purchased would be utilised in their 
processing units and not to be export ed. The ceiling of wheat purchase was 
subsequently raised to 5.00 lakh MT. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
F.No.    2 (LS) 1/2005-PY.III (Pt.) 
 dated 28.8.2006] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6 Para no. 2.72) 
 
The Committee find that a large number  of Multinational Companies are 
purchasing huge quantity of wheat over and  above the price of MSP fixed by the 
Government. It is pertinent to mention t hat wheat is already placed under OGL 
but its import attracts an import dut y @ 50%.  The Co mmittee apprehends that 
the wheat procured by Mult inational Companies and pr ivate traders is offloaded 
to roller flourmills and other manufactu rers of wheat and w heat products at a 
much higher price. The Committee is not  against the procurement of wheat by 
Multinational Companies and private traders per se. However, the Committee 
would like to caution the Government t hat the activities of multinational 
companies and private trader s need to be monitored.  This action of the 
Government may act as a deterrent to t hese companies not to jack up the prices 
of wheat artificially. The Committee also recommend that Government should 
permit the manufacturers of Atta, Mai da, suji and other wheat products at 
international prices at zero duty basis and on the same terms and conditions of 
import as applicable to Government of  India.  The Committee find that 
Government have already received repr esentations in this regard. The 
Committee would like to emphasize that Go vernment should permit the import to 
such manufacturers so that the prices of wheat in th e market is not jacked up 
artificially. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 The Government has already allowed import of wheat by private traders at 
a reduced duty of 5%.  
 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
F.No.156 (4)/2006-PY-I, dated 31st July, 2006 
 
 

 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7 Para no. 2.73) 
 
 The Committee have learnt from the Pr ess that a large scale of diversion 
of PDS foodgrains in Nort h Eastern States has been detected. According to the 
Government, a recent study conducted by Operation Research Group (ORG) on 
evaluation of Targeted Pub lic Distribution System (TPDS) in the country has 
revealed diversion of foodgrains in most of the States.  The committee’s 
examination also reveals t hat 100% diversion of w heat meant for PDS has been 
diverted to open market in the State of  Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland,  Sikkim and Tripura. The Ministry has asked all the State 
Governments to prepare a time bound acti on plan to stop such diversion within 
six months and submit a report for being placed befor e the Parliament.  The 
Ministry has also circulated the reports submitted by ORG Marg and PEO 
amongst all States for seeking their comments to check diversion of foodgrains.  
The Committee takes  serious view of the fact that the very objective of PDS is 
defeated if the foodgrains meant for PDS do not reach the targeted group and 
instead are diverted to open market and re commend that the Ministry should 
evolve a foolproof mechanism in a time bound manner to check the diversion of 
foodgrains. The Committee would also await the response of the State 
Governments in this regard. 
The Committee note that the management and operation of Public Distribution 
System in the country is the joint respons ibility of Central a nd State Government 
concerned.  Whereas procurement and al location of foodgrains is the 
responsibility of Central Governm ent, the State and their agencies are 
responsible for the distributi on of foodgrains in one’s State.  In order to prevent 
diversion of foodgrains, the Committee recommend that in the event of off-take 
being more than 60-65% there should be a join t special audit by the officials of 
FCI and State Government concerned.  The Committee would like to emphasise 
that diversion of subs idized foodgrains need to be tackled with utmost 
seriousness and criminal liability be invoke d, for such offence.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Government in this regard. 
 
 

Reply of the Government  
 The Government has taken a serious view on the reports of diversion of 
foodgrains in the States. The Government organized fi ve Regional Conferences 
at five regions for strengthening TPDS in  the region during last financial year.  
Besides discussing various issues, all St ate and UT Governments were advised 
to take all necessary steps to str engthen TPDS.  It was also stressed that 
Vigilance Committees be constituted at all levels for monitoring of   TPDS and 
functioning of fair price s hops. A special meeting of the Ministers / Secretaries of 
the States wherefrom the diversions have been reported was held under the 
Chairmanship of the Hon’ble Minister of Agriculture, Consumer Affairs, Food & 
Public Distribution and all the States/UTs have been directed strongly to curb the 
instances of diversion and to take all steps for strengthening of the TPDS.  
Consequent upon the Meeti ng, an action plan has been prepared on curbing 
leakage/diversion of foodgrains under TPDS as recommended in the above 
Conferences.  A concurrent evaluation st udy covering six St ates has also been 
given to NCAER to evaluate the performance of TPDS. 
 Regarding the issue of joint audit by the officers of the FCI and the State 
Governments for States where off-take is more than 60-65%, it may be stated that it is 
not desirable to conduct such joint special audits.  Foodgrains are allocated @ 35 Kg 
per ration card and the endeavour of the D epartment has been to ensure that State 
Governments lift all the alloca tion of foodgrain an d distribute to the beneficiaries.  
Higher off-take of foodgrains does not nece ssarily mean it is being diverted.  To 
ensure correct distribution, the Departm ent has given to NCAER a concurrent 
evaluation of the TPDS in six States. 
 Further, all the State Governments have been requested to furnish information 
quarterly in proforma on action taken under Clause 8 & 9 of the PDS (Control) Order, 
2001 wherein the States are required to furnish information on the number of 
inspections made, number of raid s conducted, number of persons 
arrested/prosecuted/convicted, number of licenses suspended/cancelled, show-cause 
notice issued, value of goods seized.  In formation thus received would be compiled 
and used for monitoring purpose. 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution)  
F.No. 18/1/2006-PD-II dated 12th July 2006] 
Comments of the Committee 
(please see para no. 1.20  of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8 Para no. 2.74) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry  has appointed Area Officers for 
different States / UTs for regular and effe ctive monitoring of the PDS. The Area 
Officers are required to visit their alloca ted States at least once in quarter and 
conduct review of PDS. The Committee’ s examination rev eals that during 2005-
06, no visits were made by Area Officers  in States / UTs such as Andaman 
Nicobar Islands, Delhi, G oa, Lakshadeep, Manipur, Nagaland, Orissa, Tripura, 
Uttaranchal and U.P. The Area  Officers did not visit even once in three years in 
the States of U.P., Tripur a and Goa. Accordingly to the Ministry, Area Officers 
could not visit all the States due to exigencies of work. The Committee are 
dismayed that no visits were made during the last three years in some States. 
The Committee view it as an indication of lackadaisical approach of the Ministry 
and the Area Officers so appointed.  The Committee had in their sixth Report 
(14th Lok Sabha) recommended that the services of the Officers of Subordinate 
Offices and the Officers in the Department be  pressed into service to review and 
monitor the working of PDS in a given State.  But it seems the recommendation 
of the Committee has not been implement ed by the Ministry.  The Committee 
express their displeasure and reiterate their earlier re commendation. They would 
like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
  
The Area Officer Scheme was launched on 21 st February, 2000 in 
Department of Food a nd Public Distributio n with the main objective of providing 
mechanism to coordinate with the States /UTs for regular and effective review 
and monitoring of PDS in the States/Uts .  However, the Scheme was not meant 
to take over the entire monitoring of  TPDS. The Scheme was not found very 
effective and it was decided to keep it in  abeyance in July, 2004.  Subsequently, 
the Parliament Standing Committee viewed that enforcement machinery have to 
be stepped up, criminal  liability clause under PDS (Control) order has to be 
invoked and Area Officer visit may be made compulsory for effective 
implementation of PDS.    Acting on the suggestion of the Committee, the 

Department reviewed the Scheme and de cided to make another effort through 
Area Officers to improve the implementation of the TPDS. 
 
 The Committee’s recommendation for inclusion of Officers of sub-ordinate 
offices has been implemented and allotment of State(s)  to CD (Sugar) as Area 
Officer is under consideration.  All offi cers at the level of Director/Deputy 
Secretary in the Department of Food have already been designated as Area 
Officers with strict instructions to visit their allotted States once in a quarter. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution)  
F.No. 18/1/2006-PD-II dated 12th July, 2006]  
 
 
 

 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11 Para no. 2.77) 
 
The Committee note with concern that  over 36 percent of the budgetary 
subsidy is siphoned off by the supply chain and another 21 percent reaches the 
APL households.  The Committee also note that Government has brought to the 
notice of State Governments the recommendations made by Operation Research 
Group (ORG) and Programme Evaluati on Organization (PEO) of Planning 
Commission on the issue of diversion of foodgrains and removal of ghost ration 
cards as foodgrains against them are bei ng distributed from Fair Price Shops 
(FPSs). It has also been suggested that doorstep delivery of f oodgrains may be 
taken into consideration. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
suggestion of removal of ghost ration cards should be got implemented strictly so 
as to stop the leakage/diversions of foodgrains. 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
   
Paragraph 2(8) of the Anne xure to the PDS (Control) Order, 2001 states 
that elimination of bogus ration cards as well as bogus units in the ration cards 
shall be a continuous exercise by the St ate Governments to check diversion of 
essential commodities.  The issue was di scussed in the recently held Regional 
Conferences and the participa ting States were requested to take immediate 
necessary action to overcome the pr oblem.  Consequent upon the Regional 
Conferences, States like Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka have taken up review in 
right earnest and set right lot of inclus ion and exclusion errors with a view to 
identify the correct beneficiaries.   
 
 The issue of door step delivery was al so discussed in the said meetings.  
It was decided that the door step deliv ery mechanism should be encouraged and 
all the States/UTs were requested to take immediate action for the introduction of 

door step delivery.  Governments of Himachal Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh are 
already taking door step delivery quota at FPS level. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution)  
F.No. 18/1/2006-PD-II  dated 12th July, 2006] 
   
Comments of the Committee : 
 
(please see para no. 1.26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12 Para no. 2.78) 
The Committee note that fifty eight per cent of the subs idized foodgrains 
issued from the Central Pool do not reach the BPL families because of 
identification errors, non-tr ansparent operation and un-eth ical practices in the 
implementation of the TPDS.  Taking in to account all the inefficiencies in the 
PDS, Government of India spent Rs . 3.65 through budgetary food subsidy to 
transfer Rs. 1 to the poor, thus the obj ective of TPDS of benefiting the poor 
households and reducing the quantum of budgetary food subsidy have not been 
realized meaningfully so far. Further the cost of handling of food grains by public 
agencies is also very high.  This does indi cate that the strategy to move from a 
universal PDS to TPDS was inappropriate.  The Committee is therefore, of the 
view that successful implementation of  targeted welfare programme requires 
major systemic reforms.  It is, therefore, recommended that Government should 
find ways and means of reducing the cost of transferring grains through PDS.  
Because of the very high cost in pu blic transfer, the budgetary subsidy of 
Rs.3061 crore in 2003-04 is worth only Rs .1990 crore to the BP L families.  The 
Committee feels that the diversion of the foodgrains from Fair Price Shops 
(FPSs) to the open markets is a very se rious matter which needs to be looked 
into urgently.  The Committee note that one of the major reasons for diversion of 
foodgrains has been due to very less ma rgin for the fair price shops owners 
whereby a dealer is tempted to indulge in malpractice.  The committee, therefore, 
desire that matter be taken up with State Governments to increase the margin for 
FPSs owners so as to curb malpractice like adulteration, under measurement 
and diversion of foodgrains meant for PDS to open market.  The Committee, 
desire that they be apprised of the action taken by the Government in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
The PEO Report of Planning Commissi on has made the observation as 
pointed out by the Committee.  The iss ue was discussed in recently held Five 
Regional Conferences and also in the Food Mini sters/Food Secretaries 
Conference held on 29.03.2006 under t he Chairmanship of the Hon’ble 
MOCAF&PD.  The participating States  and other agencies were requested  to 
take necessary steps to overcome the problem. 

 
 The Participating States/UTs were  also requested to take necessary 
action to increase the number of commodi ties for sale through the FPSs, apart 
from the PDS items to make the Fair Price Shops(FPSs) more viable. 
 
 The scheme of Decentralized Procurement of foodgrains was also 
introduced by the Government in 1997-98 with  a view to effecting savings in the 
form of reduction in the out go of food subsidy, en hancing the efficiency of 
procurement and PDS and enc ouraging local procurement to the maximum 
extent thereby extending the benefits of MSP to local farmers.  Under the 
decentralized procurement sch eme, the State Governm ent itself undertakes 
direct purchase of paddy  and wheat on behalf of Gove rnment of India for 
contribution in the Central Pool.  The quantity of foodgrains procured by the State 
Government under DCP is utilized against the allocation made to them under 
TPDS and other welfare sc hemes.  If stocks of foodgrains procured by a State 
falls short of the allocation, the Central Government, through FCI meet the deficit.  
Similarly the excess stock of foodgrains  purchased by the State Government are 
handed to the FCI in the Cent ral Pool account.  Till dat e 11 States viz. West 
Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Chattisgarh, Uttaranchal, Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands, Orissa, Tamil Nadu,  Gujarat, Karnatake and Kerala have 
adopted this scheme. 
 The issue of increase of margins for FPS owners to curb mal practices like 
adulteration, under measurement, diversion of foodgrains meant for PDS into 
open market has been examined and it was decided to do away with any capping 
of the retail price of foodgrains.  The State Governments/UTs fix the commission 
and the transportation cost etc. keeping in  view the local cond itions.  It is also 
pertinent to mention here that increase in the margins of FPS owners may lead to 
price rise and may not be desirable.   
 The issue was also discussed in the recently held Five Regional 
Conferences and also the Food ministers/Food Secretaries Co nference held on 
29.03.2006 under the Chairmanship of  MOCAF&PD and requested the 
participating States to take necessary action on the above line. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
F.No. 18/1/2006-PD-II  dated 12th July, 2006  

 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.13   Para no 3.21) 
The Committee are deeply concerned to note that outstanding dues of 
Food Corporation of India (FCI) against vari ous Central Ministries are constantly 
on rise.  FCI has total Rs.25,656.35 cr ore as outstanding dues against various 
Central Ministries as on 28.02.2006.  The Committee note that Government have 
approved the issue of Special Securities to  an extent of Rs.16,200 crore towards 
partial settlement of the dues.  The Committee do not approve of partial 
settlement of dues.  The Committee are of the view that since interest accrued on 
account of delayed payment is loaded on Food Subsidy Bill of the Government, it 
is imperative that Govern ment should find ways and means to liquidate their 
outstanding.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that FCI should follow the 
principle of “cash and carry” while allocating foodgrains to Central 
Ministries/State Governments etc. for running/operating Welfare Schemes 
including Public Distributi on System and also liquidate the outstandings fully at 
the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
The matter is being continuously pursued at the highest level with the 
concerned Ministries/ Department s/ State agencies and also with the Ministry of 
Finance for expeditious liquidation of the outstanding dues of the FCI.   In 
pursuance of the decision taken in the Cabinet Meeting held on 16.03.2006, the 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs have been requested to 
issue Special Securities to the Food Corpor ation of India (FCI) to the extent of 
Rs.16,200 crore  for liquidati on of the outstanding dues of  the Ministry of Rural 
Development for foodgrains supplied by  FCI for SGRY schemes etc. till 
30.04.2005.  For settlement of  the remaining dues and future claims of the FCI, 
the matter has separately been taken up wit h the Ministry of Rural Development 
at the level of the Minister. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution)  
F.No. 197(3)/2006-FC A/Cs  
dated 29th June, 2006 ]  
Comments of the Committee: 
(please see para no. 1.29 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15 Para no. 3.23 ) 
 
 
The Committee note that there is adequat e storage capacity held by FCI, 
CWC, and SWCs in all the major States in the country  except the North Eastern 
States and Jammu and Kashmir.  No rth Eastern States  are the most 
disadvantaged States in terms of miniscule level of infrastructure, communication 
and rail/road network. The Committee are pained to note that physical and 
financial targets set during the financial ye ars 2005-06 for the region,   in respect 
of, food storage construction programme, were not achieved.  Total percentage 
of achievement in respect of physical target set was nil.  Inadequacy of storage 
capacity in North East States and Jammu and Kashmir poses a serious threat to 
running of efficient Public Distributi on System. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that FCI should gear  up their efforts in stepping up the 
construction of godowns in North Eastern Regions on a priority basis so that 
benefits of public distribution system percolate down to people living there. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 
Storage Construction Programme under Plan Scheme 
 
 During 2005-06, a capacit y of 39,580 MT was targeted for completion.  
Against a target of 39,580 MT, a capacity of 22,510 MT was realized as per the 
details given below:- 
 
Sl.No. Name of Centre Capacity realized
1. Leh (J&K) 10,000 MT
2. Badgaon (J&K) 1,250 MT
3. Tumkur 
(Karnataka) 
5,000 MT
4. Salem (Tamilnadu) 3,340 MT

5. Lunglei (Mizoram) 2,920 MT
Total 22,510 MT
 
 There was an overall s hortfall of 17,070 MT capacit y which includes 7500 
capacity in area other t han NE and J&K (5000 MT at Tumkur/Karnataka and 
2500 MT at Kelong/HP).  However, reason for shortfall of capacity in NE and J&K 
region is as under: 
 
Badgaon/J&K/1250 MT and KUPWARA/J&K/5000 MT  : The work has been 
entrusted to SICOP – an undertaking of J &K Govt. on deposit work basis.  The 
progress of work has suffered badly due to  heavy snowfall and closer of roads.  
The works are targeted to be completed by October,2006. 
 
LAWNGTLEI/MIZORAM/3340 MT  : The work has been entrusted to CWC on 
deposit work basis.  The progress of wo rk has suffered due to difficult site 
conditions and slow progress of contractor of CWC. The work is targeted to be 
completed by June,2006. 
 
Further, the work at the following centres in NE Region are in progress :- 
 
Sl.No. Name of Centres Capacity 
1. Senchowa/Assam 1670 MT 
2. Chandarpur/Tripura 5000 MT 
3. Bualpui/Mizoram 5000 MT 
4. Chaulkhowa/Assam 4170 MT 
 
    Tender for Badarpurghat/Assam for a capacity of 5000 MT is being re-
invited. 
 
    The above mentioned works are ta rgeted to be completed during 2006-
07. 
 
 
CONSTRUCTION OF STORAGE GODOWNS BY THE STATE 
GOVERNMENTS OF NORTH EAST REGION AND JAMMU & KASHMIR 
 

A decision has been taken in consul tation with the Planning Commission 
to make changes in the existing Plan Scheme for construction of godowns by 
FCI.  Earlier, under the scheme the funds were released to the FCI as equity, 
now as per the revised provisions, funds will also be releas ed to the Central 
Warehousing Corporation and State Govern ments of North Ea st Region and 
Jammu & Kashmir as grant in aid.   The proposals have been received from the 
State Governments of North Eastern R egion and Jammu & Kashmir which is at 
various stages of examinations in the FC I.  The Department in consultation with 
FCI has finalized the following proposals for construction of godowns :- 
 
Name of the 
State/Centre 
Proposed 
Capacity  
Estimated 
Costs  
Lethpora/J&K 6160 MTs Rs.3.41 crore 
Champai/Mizoram 
 
3000 MTs Rs.1.74 crore  
Serchip/Mizoram 3000 MTs Rs.1.74 crore  
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
F. No.8-2/2006-FC-II  dated 1st August, 2006] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Serial No 20 Para no. 4.31) 
 
The Committee note that the profit of the Corporation ca me down to 22.43 
crore in 2003-04 as compared to 43.29 cr ore during 2002-03.  The reasons for 
decline in profit are st ated to be heavy expansion and introduction of new 
accounting standards.  According to the Corporation, they have diversified their 
investment for the development of infrastructure, and have set up railside 
warehouses at 22 locations and introduc ed a Special Voluntary Retirement 
Scheme for its employees to reduce es tablishment cost.  The Committee are 
concerned over the state of affairs in the Corporation and desire that they should 
take measures to reduce the establishment cost and to enhance its profits.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to reduce the establishment  cost and to enhance its profit, the 
Corporation had re-introduced SVRS 2005 for all Groups in Engineering Cadre 
and only for B, C and D in other cadres.  The request of 283 employees have 
been accepted for SVRS.  Further, the Co rporation has merged RO, Kochi with 
RO, Chennai and also reduced its Constr uction Cells to six.   These measures 
would reduce the establishment cost and enhance its profit.  However, the actual 
impact would be known in due course of time.   
 
 The percentage of establishment cost to  total cost has shown a decline as 
compared to the previous years as given below: 
 
 
     Year   % of Establishment Cost 
1999-2001 65.39 
2000-2001    61.71     
 2001-2002    60.35 
 2002-2003    56.79 
 2003-2004    59.18 

2004-2006 56.84 
 
 The profitability of the Corporat ion has also show n an upward trend and 
increased from Rs.22.43 crores in the year 2003-04 to Rs.41.30 crores in the 
year 2004-05 and expected to achieve Rs.63.72 crores in the year 2005-06. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
F.No. 1-2/2006-SG dated  22nd June, 2006]   
 
Comments of the Committee: 
 
(please see para no. 1.35  of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21 Para no.  5.34) 
 
The Committee are deeply concerned to note the number of claims settled 
on account of reimbursement of inter nal transport charges is mere 19 during 
2005-06 as compared to 418 during 2003-04 and 392 during 2004-05.  The 
Committee also note that 162 claims we re settled against ocean freight and 
handling and marketing c harges during 2005-06 wher eas no claims on this 
account were settled during 2003-04 an d 2004-05.  Total expenditure on both 
these heads has been Rs. 18.50 crores on ly against Budget Estimates of Rs. 
90.00 crores.  The Committee view this seriously and recommend that efforts 
should be made to settle  more claims so that huge amount blocked under these 
heads is not required to be surrendered.  The Committee would also like be 
apprised of the reasons for not settling any claim against ocean freight and 
handling and marketing charges duri ng 2003-04 and 2004-05.  The Committee 
also recommend that the cumbersome  procedural formalities which are gone 
into, for clearance/settlement of claims  should be entrepreneur  friendly and be 
made simple, so that the claims are settled expeditiously.   
  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 As mentioned in this para it is subm itted that 19 claims on account of ‘re- 
imbursement of internal transport and freight charges’ and 162 claims on account 
of ‘neutralization of ocean freight and handling & marketing charges’ were settled 
upto December,2005.  However, as on 31.3.2006, the number of claims settled 
by the Department is 44 and 270 respecti vely.  Against the budgetary provision 
of Rs.90 crores, a total of Rs. 37.44 crores was spent upto March,2006. 
 
As per rules and procedure prescribed for settlement of the claims, certain 
specific documents and certificates from relevant au thorities are required.  In a 
large number of cases the claims c ould not be settled due to incomplete 
documentation, absence of required certifications in the cl aims as also claims for 

the same Release Order (R.O) being rece ived in part, delayed/incomplete reply 
to clarification sought and non fulfillm ent of other procedural aspects for 
settlement of claims.   
 
 A decision to settle claims against ocean freight and handling & marketing 
charges was taken only in 2004-05.   The concurrence of Ministry of Finance was 
obtained in July,2005.    T herefore, claims on this account could not be settled in 
2003-04 and 2004-05. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
F.No. 6-1/2006 SPF    dated 2nd June, 2006]   
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 24 Para no. 5.37) 
 
The Committee is concerned to note the low disbursal of funds from Sugar 
Development Fund (SDF) on account of loans to sugar mills for bagasse based 
cogeneration power projects  as well as loans for production of anhydrous 
alcohol/ethanol.  Out of Rs.100 crore  allocated for loan to sugar mills for 
bagasse based cogeneration power projec ts during 2005-06 only Rs.12.32 crore 
were disbursed.  Similarly, out of Rs.40.00 crore allocated as loans for production 
of anhydrous alcohol/ethanol during 200 4-05 and Rs.75.00 crore during 2005-06 
only Rs.19.48 could be disbursed during 2004-05 whereas no disbursement was 
made during 2005-06 on this account.  Th e Committee take a serious view and 
recommend that the disbursal of funds fr om SDF be increased so that the sugar 
mills could use the amount for their dev elopment.    They would like to be 
apprised of the reasons for no disbursement of funds during the year 2005-06. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
An amount of Rs. 62.73 crores  wa s disbursed during 2005-06 to sugar 
mills for bagasse based cogeneration power projects.  Similarly for production of 
anhydrous alcohol/ethanol an amount of   Rs. 7.23 crores   was disbursed during 
2005-06.  
 
 The lower actual expenditure was on account of sugar factories, who had 
been sanctioned loan but were not able to complete all prescribed formalities and 
furnish required documents for disburse ment of the loan before the end of 
financial year.  There were also fewer app lications for the loans than what were 
expected.  The lower expenditure was on account of the inability of the sugar 
factories to furnish securi ties for the loan in time.  During the period 2005-06 a 
sum of Rs.47.02 crores was sanctioned to 5 sugar mills for co-generation 
projects and Rs.10.02 crores was sancti oned to two sugar mills for production of 
ethanol.  These amounts could not be disbursed as prescribed terms & 
conditions and required documentation could not be completed.  In case of 
ethanol less number of applic ations were received an d therefore less amount 

was disbursed.  The Government is, however, taking steps for blending of 
ethanol upto 5% in all states in the firs t phase which would be increased to 10% 
in the second phase.       
 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
F.No.  3-1/2006-SDF dated 14th June, 2006]   

 
Recommendation (Serial No. 25 Para no. 6.24) 
 
 
The Committee are concerned to note that only 60-63% of edible oil 
requirement of the country is met indi genously and the remaining bout 40% is 
met through imports resulting in huge ou tgo of precious foreign exchange.  
Sadly, in spite of rise in  import duty on edible oils ov er the years, the imports 
have shown a rising trends.  The Committee have taken note of the measures 
taken to increase the production of edible oils both from prim ary and secondary 
sources.  The production of oilseeds from primary sources have risen from 
148.39 lakh tonnes in the year 2002-03 to 261.03 lakh tonnes in 2004-05 but it is 
still short of the total requirement of t he country but production from secondary 
sources has remained static ranging in the vi cinity of 19 lakh tonnes for the last 
two years. To bridge the gap between demand and supply of edible oils, the rise 
in production and productivity is imperat ive.  The Committ ee, therefore, 
recommend that there is a need to review  and restructure Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme “Integrated Scheme for Oilseed s, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize 
(ISOPOM) as neither the production nor th e productivity of oilseeds have shown 
a rising trend.  The Committee recomm end that other ways and means should 
also be explored to increase the producti on and productivity of traditional oilseed 
crops.  To reduce the dependen cy on imported edible oils, result oriented action 
should be taken to promote and popularize  the use of non-tr aditional secondary 
source of edible oils. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 
 The subject matter primarily relate s to production and productivity of 
oilseeds, which lies within the purview of Ministry of Agriculture.  According to 
Ministry of Agriculture:- 
 “As regards to the recommendation of the Committee to restructure 
ISOPOM, it may be mentioned that since the ISOPOM has already been 
restructured by merging the four erst while schemes of Oilseeds Production 
Programme, National Pulses  Development Project, Oil Palm Development 
Programme and Accelerated Maize Development Programme during Xth Plan on 

the advise of Planning Commission and being implemented w.e.f. 2004-05 in the 
country, there is no need for further restru cturing of the scheme at this stage.  
Due to the efforts of Govt. of India through ISOPOM the production of oilseeds 
has been 243.54 lakh tonnes in 2004-05.  As per 3 rd advance estimates of Govt. 
of India, the production of oilseeds has been 266.97 lakh tonnes  during 2005-06.   
However, due to significant rise in per capi ta consumption of edible oils in recent 
years, total demand in the country has risen at a very high rate and has created a 
big gap between domestic produ ction and consumption, which is being filled by 
imports. 
 
 Govt. of India is making effo rts to promote the production and 
popularization of the use of non-traditional secondary sources of edible oils such 
as rice bran, tree borne oilseeds etc.  A Central Sector Sc heme of Integrated 
Development Tree Borne Oilseeds is  being implemented through National 
Oilseeds and Vegetable Oils Development (NOVOD) Board.  Under the scheme, 
assistance is provided for nursery raising, model plantation, in stallation of pre-
processing and post-processing facilities capacity building , need based research 
etc. development of tree borne oilsee ds like neem, wild apricot simarouba, 
cherua, jojoba, kokum, tung, mahua etc.” 
 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
F.No. 6/2/2006-EXP.  Dated 7th June, 2006]  
 

 
Recommendation (Serial No. 26 Para no. 6.25) 
 
The Committee are concerned to not e that the number of inspections 
carried out by the officials of DVVO&F as well as number of samples analyzed 
have been on the decline.  For instance, th e number of samples examined in the 
year 2000 were 16, 289, wh ich declined to 15,650 in the year 2003.  Similarly, 
the number of samples found to be adulte rated was 1693 and 1578, during the 
period under reference.  The Committee ar e of the view that in a huge country 
like India, where the main cooking medium is edible oil, the number of samples 
drawn are very low as adulteration in edibl e oils is rampant in the country.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that to check the widespread adulteration in 
edible oils apart from drawing large num ber of samples from all parts of the 
country and exemplary punitive action be taken against the culprits.  
The Committee find that DVVO&F is char ged with regulatory, developmental and 
advisory functions in respect of all matters  relating to vegetable oils, particularly 
edible oils and vanaspati.  The Committee are concerned to not e that the prime 
reasons for decline in number of inspection by DVVO&F officials, is shortage of 
manpower.  The Committee do not approv e this.  The Committee recommend 
that Government should make good the shortage of manpower at the earliest 
and if need be, this function of DVVO&F be outsourced, for the sake of protecting 
the health of citizen.  The Committee also  desire that the regulatory function of 
DVVO&F be de-linked from it and performed by an independent autonomous 
authority outside Government control an d DVVO&F should co nfine itself to 
matter of policy, developmental and advisor y role.  The Committ ee would like to 
be apprised, of the action in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
 
 The subject matter relating to adulterati on of edible oils primarily relates to 
Ministry of Health, Directorate General of  Health Services (PFA). The matter has 
been taken up with that Ministry.  According to Ministry of Health:- 
 
 “The implementation of  the PFA Act, 1954 & Rules framed thereunder 
vest with the Food (Health) Authorities of the States/U.Ts.  The enforcement staff 

of the concerned State/ UT draws the samples of commonly used food 
commodity suspected to be adulterated/mi sbranded.  As such, the total number 
of food samples examined during the year 2000 were 82701 and 8877 food 
samples were found adulterated, whereas in 2003, the total number of food 
samples examined were raised to 99071  and samples found to be adulterated 
were 10928 (information from the State of Tamil Nadu is still awaited). 
  
 However, the concern of the Committ ee to draw large number of samples 
of edible oils is being sent  to all Food (Health) Authorit ies of the States/U.Ts. for 
compliance”. 
  
 The Directorate of Vanaspati, Veget able Oils & Fats (DVVO&F) of the 
Ministry of Consumer Affa irs, Food & Public Distribut ion is the only specialized 
organization in the field of vegetable oils and fats  and vanaspati at the 
Government level (both Central and State).  Therefore, it may not be desirable to 
de-link regulatory functions from DVVO&F. 
 
 In addition to the action initiated by the Ministry of Health towards 
compliance with the directives of the Standing Committee, the Directorate of 
VVO&F has also intensified efforts for drawal of maximum number of samples. 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
F.No. 6/2/2006-EXP.  Dated 7th June, 2006] 

 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE  
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN  
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10 Para no. 2.76) 
 
The Committee was concerned to note that  during the last three years 3.08 
lakh MTs of foodgrains valuing Rs.197.56 crores got damaged and declared unfit 
for human consumption.  As such, FCI di d not distribute these foodgrains, when 
these were fit for consumption thereby incurring huge loss to the country.  The 
Committee feel that the matter is being approached in a very casual manner b y 
the government.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that utmost care should 
be taken to ensure that the foodgrains are distributed when these are fit for 
human consumption and not allowed to be rotten in the godowns thereby 
avoiding huge loss on this account. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 The recommendation of the committee to take utmost care in storage & 
preservation of stock has been noted for compliance by the FCI.   
 It is further clarified that the act ual loss suffered in the disposal of 
damaged foodgrains is Rs.79.00 crores instead of Rs.197.56 crores because on 
sale of these damaged foodgrains an am ount of Rs.118.56 crores has been 
realized.  It may be noted that total sale s of foodgrains by FCI during these three 
years was 1332.92 lakh MTs which as co mpared to 3.08 lakh MT of damaged 
foodgrains comes to only 0.25% which is negligible.   As per extant procedure, 
FCI already ensures that the foodgrains are distributed as per the principle of first 
in first out (FIFO) so that damage to foodgrains due to prolonged storage is 
avoided.  Detailed procedures have also  been prescribed to minimise damage to 
stocks during storage. 

  
 However, further guidelines are bei ng issued by this Department, in 
consultation with FCI, to prevent damage to foodgrains durin g storage, transit, 
releases etc. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution)  
F.No.6/1/2006-PY-IV dated 26th July, 2006]   
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14 Para no.  3.22) 
  
 
The Committee note that the establis hment cost of FCI has shown a 
declining trend.  In the Financial year  2005-06, Rs. 1455.73 crore was incurred 
on meeting Establishment Cost as co mpared to Rs. 1902.25 crore during the 
Financial year 2004-05.  The Committee, howe ver, feels that there is still scope 
to further reduce this cost.  The Committ ee find that the Establishment Cost of 
FCI is loaded on the Food Subsidy Bill of the Government.  Since food subsidy is 
basically meant for poorest section of the society, the inclusio n of Establishment 
Cost over Food Subsidy Bill does not reflec t the correct picture of food subsidy.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that ways and means should be devised 
to further reduce the Establishment Cost.  At the same time, FCI should not load 
Establishment Cost over Food Subsidy Bill, but be shown separately, from the 
Food Subsidy. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 
 The Food Corporation of  India (FCI) is the implementation arm for the 
foodgrains policies of the Government of India.  For this purpose FCI needs to 
have appropriate establishment and man-pow er.  As far as food subsidy is 
concerned, it is stated t hat food subsidy is the diffe rence between the economic 
cost of foodgrains and the issue price.  The economic cost of foodgrains includes 
the basic acquisition price, viz., MSP, ta xes, other procurement incidentals, and 
cost of storage, freight, interest and establishment.  As may be seen in the 
statement below, the establishment cost forms only a small portion of the 
economic cost.  As the establishment cost is an integral part of economic cost, it 
would not be appropriate to separate this from the food subsidy bill.  However, 

the establishment cost is separately shown in the Performance Budget and 
Annual Accounts of the Corporation. 
 
 It is also pertinent to note that even in States where decentralised 
foodgrain operations are carried out, the respective States include the related 
establishment and administrative charges in their claims for Subsidy. 
 
 
Establishment Cost of FCI vis-a-vis Food Subsidy and Volume of Operations  
 
Year Establishme
nt Costs (Rs. 
Crore) 
Food 
Subsidy 
Incureed 
(Rs. Crore) 
Establishment 
Cost as a % of 
Food Subsidy 
Volume of 
operations 
(Lakh MT) 
Establishme
nt Cost per 
MT of 
Volume of 
operations 
(Rs./MT) 
% change 
over 
previous 
year 
% 
change 
over 
2000-01 
2000-01 1191 10334 11.53 718.96 165.66   
2001-02 1271 18006 7.06 1037.61 122.49 -26.06 -26.06 
2002-03 1380 25322 5.45 1398.86 98.65 -19.46 -40.45 
2003-04 1365 21587 6.32 1431.76 95.34 -3.36 -42.45 
2004-05 1545 20774 7.44 1391..56 111.03 16.46 -32.98 
2005-06 
(RE) 
1456 22422 6.49 1311.79 110.99 -0.03 -33.00 
 
 The FCI’s manpower is engaged in the procurem ent storage, movement 
and distribution of foodgrains.  As these activities benefit the producers and 
consumers, the establishment cost of the FCI is also reimbursed in the form of 
food subsidy. 
 
 The steps are being taken to fu rther reduce establishment cost.  
Internationally renowned consultancy firm M/s Mckinsey & Co. has been 
engaged to improve FCI’s efficiency including in  the field  of staf f rationalization.  
An exhaustive exercise has already been undertaken for rationalization of staff.  
On completion of the same, it is expect ed that expenditure on establishment cost 
shall further decrease. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 (Department of Food and Public Distribution)  
F. No.8-2/2006-FC-II dated 1st August, 2006] 

 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16 Para no. 3.24) 
The Committee are un-happy to note t hat Government is not taking the 
recommendation of the Committee with seriousness it deserves.  The Committee 
in its earlier report stress ed maximum utilization of owned capacity and minimize 
dependency on hired capacity.  In spite of this suggestion,  it has been noted that 
the percentage of utilization of hired capacity is on the rise with respect to owned 
godowns.  The Committee express their de ep anguish over under utilisation of 
owned capacity.  Further, now present stock of wheat and rice has fallen short as 
against the prescribed buffer norms and country is on the threshold of turning net 
importer of commodity (mainly wheat).  Under these circumstances, Committee 
strongly recommend that FCI,  should go in for de-hiring of hired godowns as 
enough space is owned by it.  In de-hiring  process, priority should be given to 
dehire the private godowns followed by godown of other public agencies.  
Secondly, Committee also desire that FC I should give on rent its own godowns 
for storage of various commodities which will help in generating revenue.   
Reply of the Government  
 
The position of availability and r equirement of storage capacity for 
foodgrain stocking is reviewed on mont h to month basis and the capacity 
considered surplus is imm ediately dehired/released by the FCI. In this process, 
during the years 2002-03 to  2005-06, huge surplus storage capacity has been 
dehired/released by FCI as will be seen as under:-  
                                                                                 (Fig in lakh MTs) 
  
Year Covered CAP Total 
31.3.2002  151.60 55.85  207.45  
31.3.2003  137.70 28.78  166.48  
Capacity dehired during 2002-
03  
(-) 13.90 (-) 27.07  (-) 40.97  
31.3.2003  137.70 28.78  166.48  
31.3.2004  108.50 13.64  122.14  
Capacity dehired during 2003- (-) 29.20 (-) 15.14  (-) 44.34  

04  
31.3.2004  108.50 13.64  122.14  
31.3.2005  104.61 4.13  108.74  
Capacity dehired during 2004-
05  
(-) 3.89 (-) 9.51  (-) 13.40  
31.3.2005  104.61 4.13  108.74  
31.3.2006  99.05 5.09  104.14  
Capacity dehired during 2005-
06  
(-) 5.56 (+) 0.96  (-)4.60  
Capacity dehired during 2002-
03 to 2005-06  
52.55 50.76  103.31  
 Instructions for optimum utilisatio n of FCI owned godown storage capacity 
already exist and these are reiterated among the field staff from time to time for 
their strict compliance.     
  FCI has already taken action in t he direction of hiring out of surplus 
storage capacity.  During the year 2005-06, surplus capacity of 5, 74,256 MTs in 
different States has been rented out by FCI and the rent earned is Rs.6.34 crores 
(approximately).   Details of capacit y rented out and ear ning thereon are as 
under:-.  
REGIONWISE RENT OUT OF SURPLUS STORAGE SPACE & SAVING UPTO 19.5.06 
Sl.No.  Name of 
Region  
Surplus capacity 
identified  
Capacity rented 
out (in MTs)  
 
Rate of rent 
(in Rs. Per 
sq.ft.)  
Amount 
saving/ 
progressive 
rent  
As per 
Report 
for the 
month of  
1  Kerala  nil  nil  7.43  1,68,426.00  March,06 
5.00  2  
  
Maharashstra  
  
1,81,000  
  
33,000  
  1.50  
1,03,46,645.30 
  
Mar'06 
  
3  Gujarat  136000  50000  2.25  7,91,127.00  Mar'06 
4  
Madhya 
Pradesh  19,837  19,837  1.50  22,77,041.00  Mar-06 
14.60 MT  107810 MT 
covered  
  0.80 MT  
5  
  
U.P.  
 
2.99 lakh  
  
21120 MT CAP  0.50  
1,32,96,617.20 
  
March,06 
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.18  
  
  
  
  
6  Uttaranchal  2500 MTs  833  0.80  8,94,600.00  Dec.2005 
4.15 per bag 3,39,22,239  
7  
  
Andhra 
Pradesh  
  
7,57,560  
  
1,42,148  
  1.75/1.50    
Mar-06 
  
8  Haryana  nil  nil  nil  24,689.00  
Jan. 
2006 
9  Rajasthan  1,19,670  1,89,508  1.50 per sq.ft 16,30,535  Mar-06 
 10. Punjab  1,07,215  10,000    nil    
 Total  13,23,782  5,74,256    6,33,51,919.50   
*Capacity rented out in the month of April 2006  
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
F. No.8-2/2006-FC-II  dated  1st August, 2006] 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18 Para no.  3.26) 
 
The Committee note that there is a proposal  to allow an incentive of Rs. 10 
per farmers for direct procurement of wheat in FCI Depots. The Committee find 
that this proposal has been approved by the Government subject to condition 
that there is a saving of more than Rs. 10 per quintal in terms of reduced costs 
for transportation and handing expenses, artiya charges etc.  The Committee 
recommend that the proposal should be im plemented at the earlie st and they be 
apprised of the action taken by Government in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 This Department has approved the proposal  of FCI to allow an incentive of 
Rs. 10 now already written to FCI to approv ing the incentive of Rs. 10 per qtl. to 
farmers for direct procurement of wheat in FCI Depot subject to the condition that 
No objection should be taken from the Stat e Govts. For direct procurement of 
wheat in FCI depots (where such depots have not already been declared as 
mandis).  A letter has also been written to  the Govt. of Punjab to expedite the no 
objection sought by FCI to induce the farme rs to bring their produce for direct 
procurement by FCI.   
 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
F.No. 156(4)/2006-PY-I, dated 31st July, 2006] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19 Para no. 4.30) 
 
The Committee note that the capacity ut ilization of CWC for owned, hired 
and open and plinth are 63%, 85% and 67% respectively.  The rent paid by CWC 
for the last three years i.e. 2002-03,  2003-04 and 2004-05 is  Rs.22.17 crore, 
Rs.21.11 crore and Rs.23.23 crore respectively.  The Committee observe that on 
the one hand, the capacity utilization of CWC in respect of its own warehouses is 
only 63% and a substantial amount, on the other hand, is spent on hiring of 
warehouses.  It clearly reflects la ck of planning and improper management on 
the part of CWC.  The Committee recomm end that CWC should dehire the hired 
godowns and make maximum use of owned warehouses.  The Committee are 
happy to learn that CWC have entered into MOU with Railways for setting up of 
Railside Warehousing Complex (RWCs) at  various strategic locations during 
2006-07.  The Committee would like to be appr ised of the latest status of each of 
the RWCs.  The Committee are also unhappy to note that bad debts written off 
during the year 2004-05 increased to Rs.4 ,32,525/- from Rs. 17,009/- during the 
year 2003-04.  The Committee would like to be apprised  about the reasons for 
huge jump in the written off bad debts and would like the Ministry to keep a watch 
on this trend. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 The occupancy pattern of the wa rehouses as on 1.5.2006 goes on to 
show that CWC is operat ing 516 Warehouses with 102.43 lakh MT capacity with 
occupancy of 91%, having 91.11 lakh MT stocks. 
 
 The break up of occupancy of c onstructed warehouses and hired 
warehouses is as follows : 
 

66.64 (C)     86% 
35.79 (H)   95% 
 
 So far as the hiring of warehouses ar e concerned, while it is correct that 
the rental paid did show a slight in crease during 2004-2005 viz a viz 2003- 2004; 
the fact of the matter is that there is  no lack of planning in this regard as the 
warehouses are hired after due diligence, availability of business at the particular 
center and need of the depositors.  Besides, as the mixed storage of 
commodities can not be resorted to e.g.  sugar and foodgrains, fertilizer and 
foodgrains, cement and foodgrains; ther e are instances when the constructed 
warehouses could not be fully utilized but hiring had to be resorted to, to meet 
the demand of storage of a particular commodity.  
 
 The hiring / dehiring of godowns is a continuous process.  Nevertheless 
the CWC on account of unvia bility/ decrease in utilization / need having been 
over, dehired 2.58 lakh MT and 2.18 lakh MT of hir ed capacity during 2003-04 
and 2004-2005. 
 
follows : 
 
 
S.N0
. 
A. 
CENTRES GM/ DRM PARTICULARS 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
B. 
Bangalore-II South 
Western Rly 
Hubli/  
Bangalore 
Construction of 15,500  MT in full swing – 
completion expected by  May 2006 end. 
However, 28 wagons carrying wheat 
belonging to I.T.C. has been unloaded as 
transit cargo in the sheds and delivered 
after a period of one week. 
 
1 Nishatpura 
(Bhopal) 
West Central 
Rly. 
Jabalpur/ 
Bhopal 
Construction of 16,700 MT in progress – 
completion expected by August, 2006. 
 

2 Shakurbasti 
(Delhi) 
Northern Rly 
Delhi/ Delhi 
Construction of 19,900 MT started – 
completion expected by August, 2006.  
 
3 Sanathnagar 
(Hyderabad) 
South Central  
Rly 
Secunderaba
d/ Hyderabad 
Construction of 13,200 MT started. 
Completion likely by Oct., 2006. 
4 Ghaziabad Northern Rly 
Delhi/  Delhi 
Construction started on 8.2.06. Project 
expected to completed by Dec. 2006. 
5 Alamnagar 
(Lucknow) 
Northern Rly 
Delhi/ 
Lucknow 
Construction of 17,000 MT capacity 
started. – Completion expected by 
October, 2006 
 
6 Roza 
(Shahjahanpu
r) 
Northern Rly 
Delhi/ 
Moradabad 
 
Construction of 18,400 MT capacity 
started.  – Completion expected by 
October, 2006. 
 
7 Nasik Road. 
 
Central Rly 
Mumbai/  
Bhusawal 
Work started after signing of agreement 
with Railways. Projected completion 
expected by May’2007. 
 
8 Badnera 
(Amravati) 
Central Rly 
Mumbai/ 
Bhusawal 
Work awarded after signing of agreement 
with Railways. Projected completion 
expected by May’2007. 
9 Kandla Western Rly. 
Mumbai/  
Agreement signed on 16th May, 2006. Cost 
estimates received. PR shall be  put up for 
approval of Executive Committee after 
which tenders shall be called for.  
10 Saswad Rd. 
(Pune) 
Central Rly. 
Mumbai/ Pune 
The decision for dismantling & 
reconstruction of quarters coming in the 
godown area awaited from Railways after 
which the agreement shall be in a position 
to be signed, paving way for tender to be 
called for construction.   
 

11 Yamuna 
Bridge 
(Agra) 
North Central 
Rly. 
Allahabad/ 
Agra 
 
Approval of the revised plan awaited from 
North Central Railway Allahabad  which 
shall pave way for signing of agreement. 
 
12 Naini 
(Allahabad) 
North Central 
Rly 
Allahabad/ 
Allahabad  
REVISED PLAN SUBMITTED HAS BEEN 
APPROVED BY  NORTH CENTRAL 
RAILWAY ALLAHABAD. SIGNING OF 
AGREEMENT BEING FINALIZED.  
 
 
13 Koodalnagar 
(Madurai) 
Southern Rly 
Chennai/ 
Madurai 
 
Plan approved by Railways. The 
agreement shall be signed by middle of 
2006 paving way for further construction.  
 
14 Dankuni 
(Kolkata) 
Eastern Rly 
Kolkata/ 
Howrah 
Location to be finalized after joint visit to 
the site, before submission of plan seeking 
approval of Eastern Railway. 
  
15 Itarsi 
(Bhopal) 
West Central 
Rly. 
Jabalpur/ 
Bhopal 
Agreement signed on 2.5.05 at the level of 
DRM Bhopal has been re-signed on 
27.2.2006 at the instanc e of GM’s office. 
Approval of the Plan sought for, from DRM 
Bhopal awaited.  
 
16 Sambalpur 
 
East Coast 
Rly. 
Bhubaneshw
ar/ Sambalpur
On the advice of CCM Bhubneshwar 
office, DRM Sambalpur has written to 
CWC on 20.2.2006 to go ahead with the 
planning to be done after visiting the site.  
17 Hatia 
(Ranchi) 
South 
Eastern Rly 
Kolkata/ 
Ranchi 
Approval of plan submitted on 11.6.2004 
still awaited.  
 
18 Malda 
(West Bengal) 
Eastern Rly 
Kolkata/ 
The location and land needs to be finalized 
after a joint visit along with respective 

Malda Railway Officials. 
19 Mancheswar 
(Bhubaneswar
) 
East Coast 
Rly. 
Bhubaneswar
/ Sambalpur 
Potential existing; further plan can be 
drawn up only after freezing of plan of 
closure of BBSR Railway siding by 
Railways once Mancheshwar R.W.C. 
comes into operation. 
 
20 Manmad Central Rly 
Mumbai/ 
Bhusawal 
Plan submitted to Central Rly. Approval 
awaited. 
 
21 Burdwan Eastern Rly 
Kolkata/ 
Asansol 
The location and land needs to be finalized 
after a joint visit along with respective 
Railway Officials. 
22 Kalamboli Central Rly., 
Mumbai/ 
Mumbai 
Potential has been a ssessed. A Railway 
over bridge shall have to be constructed 
by Railways to overcome the problem of 
approach to the site. This needs 
affirmation along with land availability. 
 
 
            The management of the Corporat ion considered prudent to write off all 
those outstanding dues from the compani es which have been referred to bifr.  
These amounts were outstanding for more than five years and the recovery of 
the same was very remote, therefore, in accordance with the accounting 
standard issued by chartered accountants of india, the corporation had written off 
these amounts. 
 
  
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
F.No. 1-2/2006 SG dated 22nd June, 2006 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 23 Para no.5.36) 
 
The Sugar Development Fund (SDF) wa s created for the financing of 
activities for the development of sugar industry.  The Committee  note that during 
the period 1982-83 to 30.9. 2005 an amount of Rs. 415206.00  thousands were 
collected as cess,  out of which Rs. 325600.00  thousands only were transferred 
to  Sugar Development Fund.  An amount of Rs.307230.00 thousands were 
disbursed for the development of sugar industry.  The Committee take this 
seriously.  They are of the views that the purpose for which this SDF was created 
will be defeated if the amount is not disbursed.  They , therefore, recommend that 
the maximum amount be disbursed for the development of sugar factories.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 The Sugar Development Fund Act, 1982, provides that an  amount  
equivalent to  the proceeds  of  the duty of excise levied and collected under the 
Sugar Cess Act, 1982 reduced by the cost of collection as determined by the  
Central Government, toget her with any money rece ived by the Central 
Government for the purpose  of this Ac t, shall after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law, be credited to t he Fund.  Under the Sugar Cess Act, 1982, a 
Cess of Rs. 14.00 per quintal is being collected on all sugar produced by any 
sugar factory in India.  
 
 During the period 1982-83 to 2005-06 an amount of Rs .4306.73 Crores 
has been collected as cess out of wh ich an amount of Rs. 3506.00 crores  has 
been transferred to Sugar Development Fund . A sum of Rs.3225.00 crores  has 
been disbursed. 
 
 Under the Sugar Devel opment Fund Act, the Fund has to be utilized by 
the Government of India for the following: 
 

(a) Making loans for facilitating the rehabilitation and modernization of any 
sugar factory or any unit thereof including potentially viable sugar 
undertaking. 
 
(b) Making loans for undertaking any scheme for development of 
sugarcane in the area in  which any sugar factor y is situated, including 
to a potentially viable sugar undertaking.  
 
(c) Making grants for the purpose of carrying out any research project 
aimed at the promoti on and development of any aspect of Sugar 
Industry. 
 
(d) Defraying expenditur e on internal transport and freight charges on 
export shipment of sugar. 
 
(e) Making loans to any Sugar Factor y having an installed capacity of 
2500 Tonnes Crushing Per Day or higher and approved financial 
assistance from a Financial Institution or Scheduled Bank to implement 
a project of bagasse-based co-generation of power.  
 
(f) Making loans for production of anhy drous alcohol or ethanol from 
alcohol or molasses. 
 
(g) Defraying expenditure for the purpose of building up and maintenance 
of Buffer Stock with a view to stabilizing price of sugar. 
 
(h) Defraying any other expenditure  for the purpose of the Act. 
   
 The disbursal of fund depends on the number of complete and eligible 
applications received and also comple tion of other required formalities and 
proper documentation.  It has always been  the endeavor of the Government to 
help the sugar industry.  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
F.No. 3-1/2006-SDF dated 14th June, 2006   

 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.  2. Para no. 2.68) 
 
The Committee find that an element of s ubsidy is involved in food grains 
supplied to beneficiaries of Above Poverty Line (APL) families.  The wheat 
supplied to APL families is @ 6.10 per kg., whereas the prevailing open market 
rate of wheat is Rs.8.50 per kg. Diversi ons of APL foodgrains in open market 
makes a good business and commercial sens e and it is a bonanza for black –
marketers to divert the wheat  issued under APL. Taking note of the fact that it is 
the commitment of the Government to  target food subsidy towards poor 
household, there is a need to bar APL population from receiving subsidized 
foodgrains. At the same time, the Commi ttee also recommend that there is a 
need to reduce allocation of  foodgrains for APL category especially wheat and 
also revise the rate in a such way, that there is hardly any gap between ruling 
market prices and wheat supplied to APL beneficiaries. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken by the Government in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
The suggestion made by the Par liamentary Standing Committee of the 
Ministry has been examined.  This Departm ent reiterates its earlier stand that 
completely excluding the APL  population from the TPDS  would adversely affect 
the population in several major States as well as the North Eastern States, where 
the APL off-take is sizable.  
 
 The Government had, inter-alia, decid ed on 6.1.2006 to reduce allocation 
of foodgrains for APL households to 20 Kg. per family per month from the earlier 
allocation of 35 Kg. per family per m onth, or the off-ta ke during 2004-05, 

whichever is lower. It was also decided t hat APL Central Issue Prices (CIPs) of 
foodgrains, which were last fi xed in July 2001, to be revised upwards by Rs. 85 
per quintal and Rs. 95 per quintal for w heat & rice respectively. However, 
keeping in view the repres entations from some Stat e Governments, Political 
parties and Public sentim ents, the implementation of  the decision taken on 
6.1.2006 has been postponed for the time being.  
  
 However, Department of  Food & Public Distribut ion has rationalized the 
allocation of wheat under the Above Poverty Line (APL) category to each State’s 
average offtake for the last three years or  the last year’s offtake, whichever is 
lower. A 25 % cut of wheat allocation for APL households has also been imposed 
in respect of rice-consuming States and Delhi.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
F.No.156 (4)/2006-PY-I dated 31st July, 2006] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(please see para no. 1. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3 Para no. 2.69) 
 
The Committee note that the food sit uation in the country is far from 
satisfactory. On one hand there has been a ma rginal decline in the production of 
wheat, from a level of 72. 15 million tonnes in 2004-05 to 71.54 million tonnes 
during 2005-06, the procurem ent of wheat for crop ye ar 2005-06 declined to 70 
lakh tonnes from a figure of 90 lakh t onnes obtained during last year.  There has 
been a decline in stock of wheat, below t he buffer norm. For instance, the stock 
of wheat in the Central Pool as on 1. 2.2006 was 61.68 lakh tonnes, as against 
buffer norms of 82 lakh tonnes. Similarl y, as against buffer norm of 40 lakh 
tonnes as on 1.4.2006, the actual stock of wheat was 20.09 la kh tonnes. Further 
the prices of wheat star ted showing a sharp increase from December, 2005 with 
the annual rate of inflation of wheat going  over 10% in Januar y, 2006. The food 
situation in the country been so alarming that Government had to take a decision 
to import 10 lakh tonnes of wheat in April/May, 2006 and another 30 lakh million 
tonnes approved to be imported later on during the year. Such has been the 
scenario that Government may find di fficult to operat e and manage Public 
Distribution System and replenish their dwindling bu ffer stocks. The Committee, 
therefore recommend that Government should  have a relook at their food policy, 
afresh in the interest of farmers and consumers alike. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 The production of wheat which was 76. 37 million tonnes in 1999-2000 
declined to 68.64 million tonnes in crop year 2004-05 against a target of 72 
million tonnes.  Due to less than targeted production in crop year 2004-05 as well 
as high open market prices  and higher private partici pation in RMS 2005-06, the 
procurement of wheat in that year was only 147.83 lakh tonnes which was 20 
lakh tonnes less than the procurement of  wheat in RMS 2004-05.  The offtake of 
wheat in 2005-06 was 161 lakh tonnes and  due to less procurement and higher 
offtake the stocks of wheat were 20 lakh  tonnes less than the buffer stock as on 
1st January, 2006. 

 To augment stocks of wheat  in the Central Pool and also to keep a check 
on open market prices of wheat, the Govern ment took the decisions to import 5 
lakh tonnes of wheat in February, 2006. 
 The production of wheat in cr op year 2005-06 was 69.48 million tonnes 
against a target of 75.53 m illion tonnes. Due to less than targeted production of 
wheat in crop year 2005-06 as well as hi gh open market prices, negative market 
sentiments due to low stocks of wheat in Central Pool and higher private 
participation in RMS 2006-07,  the procurement of w heat was only 92.2 lakh 
tonnes in RMS 2006-07.  To make up the shortfall of wheat in the Central Pool 
the Government took a decisi on in April, 2006 to import fu rther 30 lakh tonnes of 
wheat. 
 
  The Government is also consideri ng a few other proposals to save wheat 
such as   allocation of coarse grains in place of  wheat, etc.  Once these 
proposals are implemented ther e will be sufficient sto ck of wheat to meet the 
requirements under TPDS and welfare sc hemes as well as to maintain the 
prescribed buffer norm as on 1st April, 2007. 
 As far as rice is concerned, ther e has been record pr ocurement in KMS 
2005-06 of 273.8 lakh tonnes (as on 27.07.2006) compared to 236.9 lakh tonnes 
in the  corresponding period in KMS 2004-05.  In addition to this 11.4 lakh tonnes 
of coarse grains have also been procur ed  (as on 27.7.2006) compared to 7.8 
lakh tonnes in the corresponding period in KMS 2004-05. 
 In the RMS 2006-07, the targeted quant ity of wheat could not be procured 
even after proving an incentive of Rs. 50 per qtl. due to much higher open market 
prices.  In order to ensure that there is no shortfall in procurement  of qualities of 
foodgrains required for the TPDS and Welfare Schemes, the Department of Food 
and Public Distribution has formulated a proposal to purchase wheat during RMS 
2007-08 at a procurement price higher than MSP.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
F.No.156 (4)/2006-PY-I, dated 31st July, 2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(please see para no. 1. 14  of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
 
 
 Recommendation (Serial No. 5 Para no. 2.71)  
 
The Committee find that the prices of wheat is showing an upward trend and 
hardening day by day.  In the principa l wheat markets of Hapur, Karnal and 
Delhi, the prevailing rate of wheat was between Rs.800/- to 850/- per qntl; during 
the month of April-May, 2006 as against Rs. 625/- to 6 75/- ruling last year during 
the same period.  There has not been any  major down fall in the production of 
wheat.  At the same time, the speculative trading indulged into have affected the 
prices of wheat. For instance, the fu ture price of wheat on MCX and NCDEX 
quoted for November-December, 2006 seri es is Rs.1050/- per qntl. The 
Committee are of the view that the fu ture/forward trading in wheat has a 
deleterious effect on the retail prices of wheat. The future/forward trading in 
wheat, which was conceived for the benefit  of farmers, has not yielded desired 
results for them and in fact the speculation in wheat price has affected the 
consumer at large. The Forward Market  Commission, which is responsible for 
protecting the interest of farmers, under which, remunerative prices to farmer is 
ensured, have failed to monitor the future price of wheat. Inspite of limits on open 
position, price limits, up front margin pr escribed to control unbridled speculation 
in the market and to contain monopolistic condition in future market, there has 
not been any let up in the price of whea t. The decision of the Government to 
import wheat has emitted negative signal in regard to stock of wheat in the 
country.   The Committee are of the vi ew that with the pe rmission to undertake 
forward/future trading in wheat, the pric e of wheat have skyrocketed in the retail 
market, without realizing the commens urate benefits to the farmers.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that Go vernment should ban forward/future 
trading in wheat so as to contain the prices of wheat in open market. Even 
otherwise, essential items of mass consumption need not  be included in the list 
for which forward/future trading should be permitted.  The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the action taken by the Government in this regard. 
 
 
 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
The production of wheat was 69.48 m illion tonnes in crop year 2005-06 
(as per the fourth advance estimate) against a target of 75.53 million tonnes. Due 
to  lower than targeted production in cr op year 2005-06 as well as higher private 
participation in purchase of wheat in RMS 2005-06 and negative market 
sentiments due to low stocks of wheat in Central Pool, the open market prices 
had shown a rising trend from December, 2005.  Regarding forward trading in 
wheat, the nodal Ministry for the same wh ich is the Department of Consumer 
Affairs has informed as under: 
 
“Future contracts in wheat are pr esently traded on the three National 
Exchanges viz. the National Multi Commodity Exchange (NMCE), Ahmedabad, 
the National Commodity and Derivative s Exchange (NCDEX), Mumbai and the 
Multi Commodity Exchange (MCX), Mumbai.  Wheat futures trading commenced 
in NMCE w.e.f. 13th  December, 2003.  NCDEX Mumbai, w.e.f. 6th July, 2004 and 
MCX Mumbai w.e.f. 2 nd September, 2004.  At presen t, major part of trading in 
wheat is taking place at NCDEX and the other two Exchanges have negligible 
share. 
 
 It is true that prices of wheat both in spot and futures markets have 
hardened during the first quarter of this  year.  The main reasons for 
comparatively higher futures prices are lower production estimates and lower 
arrivals this year in Mandis as compared to the last y ear.  During 2004-05, the 
production of wheat was 68.64 million tone s, which was 3.47 mi llion tonnes less 
as compared to 2003-2004.  The tar get for wheat production for 2005-06 was 
75.53 million tonnes.  However, the second advance production estimates (as on 
22.2.2006) and third advance production estimates (as on 5.5.2006) have placed 
the production at a lower level of 73.06 million tonnes and 71.54 million tones, 
showing successive shortfall in both the estima tes.  It is learnt  that the private 
trade estimates the production below the targeted level. 
 
 Futures trading largely reflect the whol esale price of the commodities.  So 
far, no specific study has been made to a ssess the impact of futures prices on 
retail prices of the commodity.  Future s markets, however, give an advance 
forecast of the prices.  The forecast gets reflected in the wholesale prices of the 

commodities.  The wholesale prices have an  impact on the retail prices.  In an 
efficient distribution system, the impact on wholesale prices and retail prices 
should have an appropriate relationship.  The reason for higher futures prices 
quoted for December, 2006 contract at MCX and NCDEX is that the futures 
prices being quoted at these Exhanges fact or in various components such as 
expected price, (based on demand and suppl y scenario), cost of carrying the 
goods, international trade etc.  The cost of carry is equivalent to the interest cost, 
storage charges and other in cidental expenses in carrying (holding) the good 
over a period of time (i.e. till the maturity of the contract). 
 
 Forward Markets Commission (FMC) which is the Regulator for 
commodity futures trading under the pr ovisions of Forward Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1952 has been keeping a cl ose watch on the futures trading in 
wheat.  Detailed formats have been prescribed through which the Exchanges are 
required to submit the trading details ever y day at the close of  the trading. FMC 
has prescribed a daily maximum price b and of 4% followed by a cooling off 
period of fifteen minutes and thereafter a further increase/decrease of 2% is 
permitted.  The open position details of members and clients with a high value of 
trade are also monitored closely.  FMC has also imposed a limit on open position 
in wheat contracts separately for member s and clients with a high value of trade 
are also monitored closely.  FMC has also imposed a limit on open position in 
wheat contracts separately for members and clients and margin money in the 
range of 5 – 5.23%.  To avoid squeeze and cornering by the buyers, wheat 
contracts have provisions for seller’s opt ions with regard to physical delivery.  
The trading details in the commodity  Exchanges including for wheat are 
deliberated in the weekly meetings chair ed by Chairman.  FMC.  The large client 
participation in wheat futures contracts (in the mongh of April/May the average 
client participation has been more t han 6000 from across 500 centers.) is 
indicative of transparent price discovery. 
 
 Futures trading enable the various stakeholders such as producers.  
Processors, exporters etc. to shift the risk involved in their activities arising out of 
adverse price fluctuations through hedging to those who are willing to assume it 
in the hope of making some profit.  Futures trading also render services to the 
farmers/cultivators.  Hedg ing facilities would enable those farmers who grow 
commodities in very large quantities to hold on to their crops or stocks, spread 

out the sales of such sto cks over a period of time and  thereby realize a better 
average price for their produce.  A futures market provides to the farmer at time 
of sowing an advance indication to the ex pected levels of prices of different 
commodities during the marketing peri od, thereby enabling him to undertake 
proper crop planning.  Smaller farmers pr esently do not gain directly form the 
futures trading but their realization in creases due to efficient and transparent 
price discovery.  This has been evid ent in the past two years in many 
commodities. 
 
 In view of the above, it is submitt ed that futures trading in wheat and other 
essential items need not be banned. 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
F.No.156 (4)/2006-PY-I, dated 31st July, 2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee:  
(Please see para no. 1.17   of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9 Para no. 2.75) 
 
 
The Hill Transport Subsidy Schemes wa s introduced for predominantly hilly 
States for opening of godowns by FCI at  Principal Distribution Centres for 
reimbursement of the transportation cost upto these centres. The Committee has 
been informed that the Government of I ndia has requested the Central Vigilance 
Commission on 27.5.2005 to conduct an enquiry into the alleged irregularities in 
implementation of the Hill Transport Subsidy Scheme in Arunachal Pradesh. 
They have also informed that the ma tter has been referred to the CBI for 
investigation. No report has been submitted by CBI so far. The Committee desire 
that the enquiry by CBI be expedited and t hey be apprised of the findings of CBI 
and the action taken by the Government on the recommendations of CBI. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 
CBI, vide their letter dated 14.6.2006 has informed that they have not yet 
initiated any enquiry into the matter due to the pendency of PIL, on the subject, in 
the Guwahati High Court. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
F.No. 2.(LS)/1/2005-PY.III dated 3rd July, 2006]  
Comments of the Committee 
(please see para no. 1.23  of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17 Para no. 3.25) 
 
 
Taking note of partial implementati on of the suggestion of the Committee 
to curb proxy labour, the Committee in their 9th Report had recommended that all 
their four suggestions to regulate the Attendance system in FCI should be 
implemented in letter and spirit uniformly across all the Regions/State and not 
selectively.  The Committee are at lo ss to understand as to why the Government 
has not been able to implem ent their suggestions to curb proxy through out the 
country, when it could be done in some of the States.  The Committee reiterating 
their earlier recommendation,  desire that their suggestions to regulate the 
Attendance system in FCI should be implemented throughout the country without 
any reservation.  The Committee would li ke to be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 To implement the Recommendations  of the Standing Committee on 
curbing the proxy labour following steps have been taken by the FCI :- 
(i)   The process of implementing A ttendance by putting  signature or thumb 
impression has already been implemented in the FCI Depots located in the 
regions of   Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Haryana,  Rajasthan, Maharashtra 
(Mechanical Devices installed in all 7 depots),  Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, 
Uttranchal, Gujarat, Nagaland and Manipu r (N&M). This step is  implemented 
partially in Uttar Pradesh (in 24 out of 32 Depots), West Bengal (in 11 out of 23 
depots), Madhya Pradesh (in 1 Depot), Chattisgarh (in 2 Districts) and Assam.  In 
Assam, J&K and Bihar the labour unions/workers are opposing the 
implementation of this system.  Efforts are being made to persuade the unions 
and the workers to cooperate in this regard.    
(ii)   Mechanical Entry Device has been in stalled in Delhi, Rajasthan and 
Maharashtra. This recommendation has been implemented  partially in Punjab, 
Uttar Pradesh, Uttranchal, Gujarat, A.P., Karnataka, West Bengal, Orissa and 
Bihar. Apart from this, tenders are called  for installing Mechanical Entry Devices 
in Haryana, J&K, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala, Chhatisgarh, Tamil Nadu, Jharkhand.  

However, administrative/la w and order problems are being faced at Assam, 
Nagaland & Manipur and Meghalaya.  
(iii)    Further,  payment of wages to all workers through cheque as per the 
provisions of Income Tax Act has been  introduced in all the regions  except J&K. 
In J&K Region workers are not acceptin g cheque on the plea  that they are 
illiterate and cannot operate bank accounts.  Sincere efforts are being  to provide 
facilities to these workers. 
(iv)    A system regarding signing of  daily work output slip by each labour at the 
end of day and countersigned by the Mo ndal/Sardar/Shed Inch arge  has been 
introduced in Kerala, Rajasthan, Gujarat,  J&K, Haryana, Karnataka, Meghalaya 
and Uttranchal Regions.    This system ha s also been  implemented partially in 
Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal Regions. 
(a) In Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, AP,  Maharashtra, Jharkhand, Bihar, 
Assam, Nagaland and Manipur work slips are being signed by Sardar & Mondal 
only. 
  
(b)  This system is not yet implemented in Uttar Pradesh, Chhatisgarh, Orissa 
and Delhi regions due to labour resistance.  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
F. No.H-11013/1/2006-FC.3 dated 12th July, 2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1. 32 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Recommendation (Serial No. 22 Para no. 5.35) 
 
The Committee are concerned to note t hat more than Rs.1050 crore of 
cane arrears pertaining to 2005-06 sugar season are still outstanding (moreover, 
more than Rs.250 crore of cane price arrears pertaining to sugar season 2003-04 
and earlier are still outstanding) . Sugar mills in all the se ctors, i.e. public, private 
and cooperative sector are in default. The Committee are pained to note that 
although the payment of sugarcane is requi red to be made within 14 days of 
supply of cane, it is seldom done. The Committee are concerned to note that 
cane arrears pertaining to sugar season 2003-04 and earlier are still outstanding 
and yet action has not been taken against sugar mills to recover the cane price 
arrears alongwith interest @ 15% as per the provisio ns of Sugarcane (Control) 
Order,1966. The Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised of the details of 
sugar mills which are still to liquidat e their outstanding arrears against the 
farmers and the reasons for not pay ing the outstanding arrears alongwith 
interest. The Committee would like to em phasize that there is a need to protect 
and promote the interest of farmers in such a manner that they continue to 
cultivate sugarcane, without any hindrance. For achieving this objective, the 
farmers need to be paid remunerative pr ice immediately on the delivery of his 
agriculture produce.  The outstandings by sugar entrepreneurs act as an 
disincentive to grow sugarcane. In order to  preserve the intere st of farmers in 
cultivation of sugarcane, the Co mmittee recommend that all the 
incentives/aid/assistance given to a sugar mill should be contingent upon 
liquidation of cane arrears by the mill. In  the event of default on this account, 
such aid/assistance should be held in abeyance.    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 A statement indicating the details of sugar season-wise, State-wise and 
sugar mill-wise position of cane price arrears along wit h the reasons for pending 
cane price arrears is enclosed.  
 
The recommendation of the Standing Committee is t hat all the incentives/ 
aid/ assistance given to a sugar mill should be contingent upon liquidation of 
cane price arrears by the mill and that  in the event of default on this account, 
such aid/assistance should be kept in  abeyance is highly appreciable and the 

Central Government, in principle, agr ee with the views of the Committee.  
However, there are practical difficultie s in implementing this recommendation.  
Usually, the cane price arrears build up in the years of low sugar prices, e.g. in 
2002-03 sugar season when the open market prices of non-levy sugar prices 
declined almost to the level of levy sugar prices, the Government created a buffer 
stock of 20 lakh tonnes to mitigate t he difficulties of sugar factories and help 
them to pay cane price arrears to s ugarcane growers.  As per the Sugar 
Development Fund Rules, 1983, the buffer stock subsidy is to be exclusively 
utilized for payment of cane price incl uding cane price arrears.  Had the 
proposed condition imposed on sugar fact ories, then it would not have been 
possible for the Government to pay the buffer subsidy to sugar mills and 
sugarcane growers would have suffered. Similarly, the assistance from Sugar 
Development Fund is extended to sugar factories for moderni zation, expansion 
of capacity, cane development, setting up of cogeneration and ethanol 
manufacturing facilities with the purpose of improving their financial viability so 
that they can give remunerative cane price to the sugarcane growers.  In view of 
such practical difficulties, the implem entation of this recommendation of the 
Committee may lead to unexpected and undesirable consequences.    
 
As on 31 st May, 2006, the percentage of c ane arrears was only 2.6% as 
against 25.8% on 31st May, 2003 and 14.6% on 31st May, 2004. 
 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
File No. 7-2/2006-Stat.II dated: 5th September, 2006 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1.38  of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 

 
 
                                           
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE  
                                         STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI      DEVE NDRA PRASAD YADAV, 
13 November, 2006.                 Chairman, 
22 Kartika,1928 (saka) 
 Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution. 
 

 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANIDING COMMITTEE  
       ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2006-  
        2007) HELD ON FRIDAY, 10th NOVEMBER, 2006. 
 
The Committee sat from 1530 hours to 1600 hours in Committee 
Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
  
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav     -      Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
    LOK SABHA 
2.     Shri  Alakesh Das 
3.     Shri  Atma Singh Gill 
4.     Shri  Baliram Kashyap 
5.     Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
6.     Shri  Harikewal Prasad 
7.     Shri  Munshi Ram 
8.     Adv. P. Satheedevi 
9.    Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
10.    Shri Parshuram Majhi 
11.    Smt. V. Radhika Selvi 
12.    Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
13.      Shri  T.S. Bajwa 
14.      Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
15.      Shri Rajniti Prasad 
16.     Shri Matilal Sarkar 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri    R.S. Kambo                         -          Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri     B.S. Dahiya       -          Under Secretary 
3.        Shri    Jagdish Prasad                      -          Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
 

2.  At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairm an welcomed the Members to the sitting 
of the Committee. The Committee then t ook up Draft Report on Action Taken by 
the Government on the recommendations /observations contained in the 12 th 
Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution on Demands for Grants (2006-07)  pertaining to the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution  for consideration and  adopted the same with some 
minor modifications/ amendments. 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to  finalise the Draft Report in the 
light of consequential changes and present the same to Parliament on their 
behalf in the ensuing Winter Session of Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT    ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWELFTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFA IRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations   26 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have 
 been accepted by the Government : 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 15, 20, 21, 24, 25 and 26. 
Total          14 
 Percentage         54 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
Recommendation  Nos. 10, 14, 16, 18, 19 and 23. 
      
 T o t a l          6    
  
Percentage       23 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
Recommendation Nos. 2, 3, 5, 9 17 and 22. 
 
 T o t a l          6  
Percentage         23 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government are still awaited  
 
 -Nil- 
 
T o t a l           N i l  
Percentage   

 
 
 
    

 
 
 