 
5 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2004-2005) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the  
Second Report of the Committee  on Demands for Grants  (2004-2005). of the Ministry of Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs.}  
 
 
 
 FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2005  /Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka) 
 
 
 

 FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the  
Second Report of the Committee  on Demands for Grants  (2004-2005) of the Ministry of Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs.}  
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  27.4.2005    
Laid in Rajya Sabha on    27.4.2005  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2005  / Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
           
 
Composition of the Committee 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Chapter I Report 
 
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
 accepted by the Government 
 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
 the Government’s replies 
 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
 replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee  
 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
 which final replies of the Government are  
still awaited 
 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Committee held on 8.4 2005. 
 
(II) Analysis  of the Action  Taken by the Government    on the recommendations contained 
in the Second Report of the Committee.

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2004-05 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Suresh Angadi 
4. Shri Ranen Barman 
5. Shri Alakesh Dass 
6. Shri Tukaram Gadakh 
7. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
8. Shri Govinda 
9. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
10. Shri Jaiprakash* 
11 Shri Baliram Kashyap 
12. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
13. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
14. Shri Zora Singh Mann 
15. Shri K.P. Naidu 
16. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
17. Smt. Daggubati Purandareswari 
18. Shri Ajit Kumar Singh 
19 Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
20. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
21. Shri Harish Nagpal 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia** 
23. Shri T.S. Bajwa 
24. Shri Palden Tsering Gyamtso  
25. Shri Narayan Singh Kesri 
26. Shri Lalitbhai Mehta 
27. Smt. Bimba Raikar 
28. Shri  Nabam Rebia  
29. Shri Thanga Tamil Selvan 
30. Shri Vikram Verma 
31. Shri Vijay Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.D.T. Acha ry   -  Secretary 
2. Dr. (Smt.) Paramjit Kaur Sandhu  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
5. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director 
 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 19 th April, 2005 vide Bulletin Part II (Lok Sabha) No. 
 1116 dated  19th April, 2005. 
** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f 24 th April, 2005 vide Bulletin Part II  (Rajya Sabha) No. 
42642 dated 25th April 2005. 
 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I,  the Chairman of the Standing Co mmittee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution ( 2004-2005) having been authoris ed by the Committee to 
submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fifth Report on Action Taken by 
the Government on the recommendations/obs ervations contained in the Second  
Report of the Committee (Fourteenth  Lok Sabha ) on Demands for Grants 
(2004-2005) of the Ministry of Consumer  Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs). 
 
2. The Second  Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 25th  August, 2004.  The Gove rnment have furnished their replies indicating 
Action Taken on the recommendations  contained in the Report on 19 th 
Novemebr,2004 . The Draft Report wa s considered and adopted by the 
Committee at their sitting held on 8th April, 2005. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by  the Government on Recommendations 
contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.   
 
 
NEW DELHI         Devendra Prasad Yadav 
21st   April, 2005___            Chairman 
1 Vaisakha 1927 (Saka)    Standing Committee on Food, Consumer 
Affairs and Public Distribution 
 

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Standing Committ ee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution deals with the Ac tion Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contai ned in the Second Report (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) on  “Demands for Grants (2004- 2005)” pertaining to the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs). 
 
1.2 The Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 25th August, 2004. It contains 13 recommendations/observations. 
 
1.3 Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 13 observations/recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received and categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/observati ons which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
Recommendations Nos. 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 12 and 13 
     (Chapter –II, Total 7) 
(ii) Recommendations/observati ons which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Recommendations Nos. 3, 8 and 11 
     (Chapter – III, Total 3) 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendations  Nos. 2,  and 10 
      (Chapter – IV, Total 2) 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are still awaited. 
Recommendation No. 9 
     (Chapter – V Total 1) 
1.4 The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations for wh ich only interim replies have been 
received from the Government s hould be furnished to the Committee 
expeditiously. 
 
1.5 The Committee strongly emphasize that  utmost importance should be 
given to the implementation of Observat ions/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government.  In cases where it is not possible for the Government to implement 
the recommendations in letter and spirit  for any reason, th e matter should be 
reported to the Committee in time with reasons for non-implementation. 
 
1.6 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
A. Allocation of Funds for Consumer Awareness  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2 Paragraph No. 2.21) 
 
1.7 Expressing their concern over  meagre allocation by Planning Commission 
for consumer protection programmes and plans, the Committee had  
recommended that Planning Commission s hould reconsider their decision of 
reducing the budgetary allocation for the Tenth Plan and  instead step up 
allocation for the purpose. 
 
1.8 The Department of Consumer Affairs  in their Action Taken Reply       
 inter-alia stated that they have  been making all out efforts for enhancement of 
the budget provisions during 10 th Plan period as well as for the financial year 
2004-05 also by bringing the concerns ex pressed by the Standing Committee.  
However, Dy. Chairman, Planning Commissi on while appreciating the important 
responsibilities the Departm ent has to shoulder, has expressed inability to 
provide any extra funds due to other pressing demands.  The observations and 
recommendations of the Standing Committee are being brought to the notice of 
the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission  by Hon’ble Minister for Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (f ile under submission) to facilitate the 
allocation of funds as sought since the cu rrent allocation is grossly inadequate to 
undertake any meaningful/w orkable programme, to enable the Department to 
proceed with programmes on consumer protection during rest of the years of 10th 
Plan Period. 
 
1.9 The Planning Commission, while agreeing with the important 
responsibilities entrusted to the Department of Consumer Affairs, stated that it 
was at the initiative of the Planning Commission that a National Action Plan and 
Strategy for Consumer Awareness, R edressal and Enforcement was drafted. 
Tenth Five Year Plan outlay for the Department has been approved at Rs. 55  
crores.  Because of other pressing hi gh priority competing demands on limited 
GBS made available to the Planning Co mmission, it has not been possible to 
step up the level of Plan s upport during the subsequent Annual Plans.  However, 
Planing Commission has suggested to the D epartment to explore alternative for 
funding the activities of the Department of Consumer Affairs as part of the Mid 
Term Appraisal of the Tenth Five Year Plan. 
 
1.10 The Committee  regret to note  the plea of the Planning Commission that 
because of other pressing high priority competing demands on limited GBS,  it 
has not been possible to st ep up the level of Plan support during the subsequent 
Annual Plans.  The Committee feel that while on one hand, the Planning 
Commission has identified C onsumer Protection as a thrust area and  on the 
other, it has not been able  to fulfill its commitment to provide adequate funds to 
meet the requirement of the Scheme.  The Committee wonder that when the 
Department of Consumer Affa irs is already starved of  funds, how it can explore 
alternatives for funding its activities.  The Committee feel that  unless  and until 
adequate infrastructure and  manpower is provided to  all District Fora and 
Publicity Programmes for Consumer Awareness, the Consumer Movement would 
remain on paper only.  The Committee, while reit erating their earlier 

 
 
 
recommendation, desire that  Planning Commission should  fulfill its commitment 
and provide adequate funds to  enable the Department of Consumer Affairs to 
proceed with programme on Consumer Protection durin g the remaining part of  
the Tenth Five Year Plan.  
 
B Levy of Court Fee on Small Consumers 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4 Para No. 2.23) 
 
1.11 To relieve small consumers fee,  the Committee recommended  that the 
Court fee should be exempted from consum ers having a pecuniary  limit of Rs. 1 
to 20,000. All cases above this pecuniary limit be subjected to court fee as 
contemplated in the 2002 am endment carried cut in the Consumer Protection 
Act, 1986. 
 
1.12 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated that the Department 
has considered this suggestion received fr om other quarters. It was felt that 
providing a blanket relaxation for all cat egories of consumers from payment of 
fee may not be desirable. Therefore, in consultation with Ministry of Finance and 
Ministry of Law, it is being considered to  provide exemption of  fee only for those 
consumers who are “Antyodaya Anna Yo jana” cards holders living under Below 
Poverty Line for a claim valuing upto Rs. 1.00 lakh. 
 
1.13 The Committee note that Government  propose to exempt levying of fee 
only for those consumers who are “Antyo daya Anna Yojana” ca rd holders living 
under Below Poverty Line fo r a claim valuing upto Rs. 1.00 lakh. The Committee 
are of the view that since a large num ber of beneficiaries of Antyodaya Anna 
Yojana live in rural area s only, a large number of ur ban small consumers will be 
deprived of this concession. The Committee,  accordingly, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire that all consumers whose claim does not exceed Rs. 
20,000 should be exempted from the provision of court fee. 
 
C.       Search and Seizures by BIS 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10 Paragraph No. 4.12) 
 
1.14 Taking serious note of  the misuse of ISI mark and also    conviction rate,  
the Committee recommended  that Enforcem ent Department of  BIS should be 
activated and adequate number of officers appointed in the regions and branch 
offices of BIS so as to prevent the mi suse of ISI mark.  The Committee also 
desired that market surveys, visits to ex hibitions, interactions with industry and 
trade associations, feed back from BIS li cencees and other sources be stepped 
up  in  the interest of the consumers. 
 
1.15 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated that the activity of 
Search and Seizure has shown marked improvement during the year 2003-04 as 
compared to the performance in the earlier years due to the initiative taken by the 
Government.  Search and Seizure carried out during the year 2003-04 were 206 
which are significantly higher than the number of such operations conducted 

 
 
 
during earlier years.  Fo r the current year i.e. 2004-05 targets for search and 
seizure have been further raised to 250 on all India basis.  All the Regional and 
Branch offices of BIS are working in this direction to achieve prescribed target.  
The activity is being undertaken on proactive basis and covers visits to 
markets/exhibitions, feedback from industr y/trade association and BIS licensees 
in addition to complaints received.  Co-coordinators at the Regional/Branch 
Offices have been named for effectivel y and efficiently carrying out the 
enforcement activity amongst existing officers.   
The cases against persons violating different provisions of BIS Act and 
rules framed thereunder including misuse of  ISI Mark have to be  filed within one 
year of detection.  Hence, the cases against the violations  detected during the 
year 2003-04 are still being filed in the court against violations are likely to further 
increase.  During the current year 2004-05 upto 30.9.2004, 115 cases have been 
registered out of which crimi nal complaints have been filed in courts in 85 cases.  
One case has so far been decided in favo ur of BIS and the accused has been 
convicted. 
  
1.16   The Committee are no t satisfied with action taken by th e Government to 
prevent misuse of ISI mark.  The Commi ttee are concerned to note that upto 
September 2004, 115 cases have been registered out of which criminal 
complaints have been filed in  85 cases and conviction was  only in one case.  
The Committee feel that very few cases are being filed  and the conviction rate is 
even lesser.  The Committee are of the view that unless  and until strict 
enforcement measures are carried out,  the misuse of ISI mark will go unabated. 
The Committee apprehend that the  reas ons for low prosec ution may be on 
account of  the cases  not being carefu lly examined and scrut inized by the legal 
department of BIS. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire that  before filing a case in the court, it should be 
vetted in Legal Department  of Regional Office and Branch Office and 
loopholes/infirmities etc.  removed so that the cases are not dismissed  in the 
Court of Law on flimsy grounds.  The Commi ttee would also like to be apprised 
of the position of pending 29 cases filed by BIS.  

 
 
 
        
         
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation 
(Serial No: 1   Paragraph: 1.12) 
 
 
       The Committee find that the Ac tual Expenditure of Plan Schemes of the 
Department of Consumer Affairs during the years 2002-03, 2003-04 was Rs.7.14 
and Rs.8.37 crores respectively.  As such, the utilization of pl an expenditure of 
the Department of Consumer Affairs which was 95% during the year 2002-03 
dropped to 86% in the year 2003-04.  The under-utilisation of funds is stated to 
be on the grounds of non-approval of cons truction of building of the National 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (NCDRC) by the Planning 
Commission, delay in construction of National Test House at Jaipur and 
stoppage of work for the construction of  Building of Regional Reference 
Standards Laboratory, Guwahati.   In the opinion of the Committee, the reasons 
cited by the Department point towards the administrative slackness on the part of 
the Department of Consumer Affairs.   The Committee have now been informed 
that the problems confront ed in the construction of buildings have been resolved 
amicably.  The Committee further find that the allocation for the year 2004-05 has 
been stepped up to Rs. 18.25 crores.  T he Committee strongly recommend that 
concrete and result oriented steps should be  taken by the Government to ensure 
that the higher allocated funds during the financial year 2004-05 are fully utilized.  
For this, the projects and various acti vities proposed to be undertaken during the 
year should be closely monitored at t he highest level in each quarter so that 
there is no slippage in the targets set forth for the purpose. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Plan allocation, actual expenditure and percentage expenditure 
during 2002-03 and 2003-04 were as under: - 
(Rs. In crore) 
Year BE RE Actual 
Expenditure
Percentage 
reference to 
BE 
Expenditure with 
RE 
2002-03 10.15 7.50 7.14 70.34 95.20 
2003-04 9.67 9.67 8.37 86.56 86.56 
 
 It may be seen from above that t he percentage expenditure during 2002-
03 was higher when it was worked out with reference to RE 2002-03. The 
percentage expenditure with reference to BE 2002-03 during that year was 
70.34%. This was due to reduction in Pl an funds which was reduced from Rs. 
10.15 crore in BE to Rs. 7.50 crore in RE. 
 

 
 
 
 During the year 2003-04, the Departm ent constantly monitored the Plan 
expenditure as a result of which there was no reduction in plan funds during 
2003-04. The percentage expenditure of 86. 56% with reference to BE 2003-04 is 
higher than the percentage expenditure of 70.34% with reference to BE 2002-03. 
 
  The construction of NTH, Jaipur has been entrusted to the Central Public 
Works Department under the administrativ e control of Ministry of Urban 
Development and Poverty Alleviation.  As per the report received from the 
Central Public Works Department, Jaipur  against the authorized fund of Rs.30 
lacs during the financial year 2002- 03, the expenditure incurred was 
Rs.29,66,783/-.  During the year 2003-04, fund to the tune of Rs.40 lacs was 
allocated to CPWD against which CP WD incurred in expenditure of 
Rs.14,97,687/-.   However, constant liaison has been kept with the Central 
P.W.D at the regional level by the Scientist In charge, NTH, Jaipur and at the 
Headquarters level by NTH Administration , Kolkata for full utilization of the 
allocated fund and timely completion of th e building. The pace of construction of 
RRSL Guwahati has also been stepped and is  being closely monitored by the 
Department. 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. G-11027/1/2004-P&C Dated 25
th November, 2004 
 
Recommendation 
( Serial No.  4  Paragraph   2.23  ) 
 
The Committee are also of the view that introduction of small Court fee 
goes against the spirit of inexpensive just ice to the consumer. In this connection, 
the Committee recommend that Court fee should not be charged for cases 
having a pecuniary limit of Rs. 1 to 20,000. All cases above this pecuniary limit 
be subjected to court fee as contempl ated in the 2002 amendment carried out in 
the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department has considered th is suggestion and the suggestions 
received  from other quarters. It was felt that providing a blanket  relaxation  for 
all categories of consumers from pay ment of   fee may not be desirable. 
Therefore, in consultation with Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Law, it is being 
considered to   provide  exemption of  fee only for those consumers who are  
“Antyodaya Anna Yojana” card holders li ving under  Below Poverty Line for a 
claim valuing upto Rs. 1.00 lakh.  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of  
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. G-11027/1/2004-P&C  Dated 25th November, 2004. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of the Chapter I of the Report) 

 
 
 
 
 
 Recommendation 
( Serial No.  5  Paragraph   2.24 ) 
 
  The Committee are concerned to not e the ever increasing number of 
non-functional District Fora. Last year, the number of District Fora which were 36, 
have swelled to 53 this year. The Commi ttee find that cases in a consumer 
redressal agency set up at National/State/ District levels are to be disposed of 
within a period of 90 days and 150 days,  where laboratory test is to be 
undertaken. However, the cases have not been decided within the stipulated time 
period, as many of the Consumer Fo ra remained non-functional. It has been 
brought to the notice of the Committee that the main  reasons for non-functional 
Fora, is the delay in filling up the vacant  posts. With a view to streamlining the 
system, so that the Fora  function even in the absence  of the President, two 
important provisions have been incorporated in the recent amendment made to 
the Consumer Act, 1986, i.e., (i) Provision for senior most members to preside 
over the Consumer Forum in the absence of President for any reason; and (ii) 
Sitting Judge of the High Court to preside over the Selection Committee for 
selection of President and Members of t he  State Commission and District Fora, 
when State Commission President is ab sent for any reason. The Committee 
hope and trust that the recent  amendments, would go a l ong way, in clearing the 
Consumer Court cases.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
These observations are being brought to the notice of all the Chief 
Ministers of the States and Lt. Governors of  Union Territories as well as to the 
President, National Consumer Disput es Redressal Commission by Hon’ble 
Minister for Consumer Affairs, F ood and Public Distribution (file under 
submission) for their notice and appropriate action. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. G-11027/1/2004-P&C Dated 25
th November, 2004 
 
Recommendation 
( Serial No.   6  Paragraph   2.25 ) 
 
  It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that out of 53 non-
Functional Consumer Fora, 33 were in  the State of Uttar Pradesh. The 
unanimous recommendation of the State Selection Commi ttee, forwarding the 
names of suitable persons against vacanc ies, were turned down by the State 
Government. The State Selection Commi ttee expressed their reservations and 
requested State Government to issue notification for appointing recommended 
persons. The Committee find that such unh ealthy trends have also been noticed 
in the case of Punjab & Haryana w here the State Governments have turned 
down the recommendations made by the State's Selection Committee. The 
Committee take a serious note of such  incidents and recommend that in the 

 
 
 
interest of Consumer Protection, the States should honour the recommendations 
made by the Selection Committee for appointment of Presidents and other 
Members of the Forums, the Committee hope and trust that Department  of 
Consumer Affairs will bring to the not ice of State  Governments the views 
expressed by the Committee in this regard. The Committee also desire that 
Department Of Consumer Affairs should mo nitor the vacancy position in various 
Consumer Fora in the various Stat es/UTs closely and impress upon the 
States/UTs to fill the same at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
These observations are being brought to the notice of all the Chief 
Ministers of the States and Lt. Governors of  Union Territories as well as to the 
President, National Consum er Disputes Redressal Commission by the Hon’ble 
Minister for Consumer Affairs, F ood and Public Distribution (File under 
submission) for their notice and appropriate action. 
 
     In so far as the vacancy posit ion is concerned the department is already 
monitoring the same. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. G-11027/1/2004-P&C Dated 25th November, 2004. 
 
Recommendation 
(Serial No.  7   Paragraph 2.26) 
 
      The Committee find that t he publicity campaign launched by the 
Department of Consumer Affairs has not yielded the desired results, especially in 
the rural and other inaccessible areas, wher e exploitation of consumers is on the 
higher side. Although, a budget provision of 2.77 crore has been proposed in the 
year 2004-05,this seem to be inadequate, c onsidering the difficult task which the 
Department has to undertake. Further, educating more than 100 crore people on 
various subjects of consumer interest which are being dealt  with under different 
Ministries /Department is no doubt a gigantic task and thee same cannot be 
undertaken as a sustained national Budge t. Even the Department of Consumer 
Affairs have proposed an allocation of Rs .2.00 crores during Tenth Plan for 
generating and strengthening consumer awareness in the country. The 
Committee have taken note of various steps taken by the Department to 
generate awareness about rights cannot be fructifies unless adequate budgetary 
support is provided to the Department .The Committee further  recommend that 
the budgetary allocation for publicity measure should be enhanced considerably 
for protecting thee rights of consumers.” 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The para was already replied at para No.  2.21  
 
 The observations and recommendations made by the Standing 
committee are being  brought  to t he notice of the Deputy Chairman of 

 
 
 
Planning Commission  and request  is being  made to enhance the allocation 
of funds  to enable the Department to proceed with the Consumer awareness 
programme during the rest of the years of 10 th Plan period since the current 
allocation is inadequate for launching the aggressive consumer awareness 
campaign throughout the country. 
 
            Some of the important measures taken by the Central Government during 
the year 2004-05 to generate consumer aw areness, within its limited budget  are 
given as under; - 
 
¾ “Jago Grahak Jago” weekly radio programme – Radio, being cheapest 
and having widest reach, a 15 minute weekly programme “Jago Grahak 
Jago” is being broadcasted through 70 st ations in 20 regional languages.  
To make the programme popular, a pr ize of Rs.500/- per programme in 
every language, is given.    
 
¾ Gyanvani Channel: The Department has provided programmes produced 
in the field of consumer protection  for broadcasting through Gyanvani FM 
Radio Stations functioning under Indi ra Gandhi National Open University 
(IGNOU) for the benefit of Students. 
 
¾ Radio Spots: The Department has produced 6 audio spots of 20 seconds 
duration on various consumer related issues such as M.R.P. (Maximum 
Retail Price) Short Measurement, Expiry date on medicine, adulteration, 
ISI mark, Redressal system and st arted broadcast from October 14 th 
Onwards in All India Radio, Radio Mirchi and Radio City stations.    
 
¾ Video programmes ‘Grahak dost’ : A 12 episode Video programme 
namely, ”Grahak Dost” of 30 mi nutes duration was produced by the 
Department in Hindi language which wa s telecast on Doordarshan. This 
programme is further made in 4 r egional languages to spread the 
massage of consumer awareness in remote areas. It has also been 
decided by the Department to provi de copies of these entire programmes 
to the Field Publicity Units of Minist ry of Information and Broadcasting for 
creating awareness particularly in rural areas.  
 
¾ Video programmes for school: Department also prepared 4 video 
programme in Hindi each of 30 minut es duration specially targeting 
primary, upper –primar y and secondary level student of school during the 
year and got it telecast through D oordarshan .The programme will be 
made available in CD to schools, c onsumer clubs in the school, State 
Governments and other concerned to  involve the students in the 
consumer movement 
 
¾ . Kissan Channel: The Department has decided to pr ovide the copies of 
video programmes produced in the fiel d of consumer protection for 
telecast through Kissan Channel func tioning under Indira Gandhi Nation 
Open University (IGNOU) for the benefit of Farmers.  
 

 
 
 
¾ Video Spots: The Department has produced 6 video spots of 20 seconds 
duration on various consumer related issues such as M.R.P. (Maximum 
Retail Price) Short Measurement, Expiry date on medicine, adulteration, 
damaged product, Redressal system and started the telecast from 
October 14th onwards through Door darshan and also planning to telecast 
in private news channels. 
 
¾  Quarterly Magazine “ Upabhokta J agran”- Department is bringing out a 
bilingual quarterly magazin e which is sent free of  Cost to Voluntary 
consumer organization, State Cons umer Protection Council (CCPC) 
members, State Governments and other concerned to disseminate 
consumer related information at the grass root level. 
 
¾ Booklet on welfare scheme of the Mi nistry: Department has distributed 
booklet on welfare schemes of the Mi nistry in Hindi and English language 
up to block level for giving wide publicity and to enable the people to 
derive benefit from the schemes. 
 
¾ Newspaper advertisements are being brought out on the occasion of 
National Consumer Day on 24 th December and World Consumer Right 
Day on 15 th March. Department is also considering to issue regular 
advertisements for creating awareness among the consumer during Dec. 
2004 to March, 2005, i.e., between “N ational Consumer Day” and World 
Consumer Right Day” 
 
¾ Repeated News Paper Advertisement s: To educate the consumers about 
their rights and responsibilities, the Department has started publishing 
small advertisements repeat edly in leading dailies  of Delhi and North 
Eastern Regions  from 6th October 2004 onwards.     
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. G-11027/1/2004-P&C Dated 25th November, 2004 
 
 
The Planning Commission, in their reply stated that the Planning 
 Commission agree that the Department of Consumer Affairs is entrusted with  
very important responsibilities. In fact, it was at the initiative of the Planning 
Commission that a National Action Plan an d strategy for Consumer Awareness, 
Redressal and Enforcement was drafted. Tenth Five Year Plan outlay for the 
Department has been approved at Rs. 55 cr ore. Because of other pressing high 
priority competing demands on limit ed GBS made available to the Planning 
Commission, it has not been possible to st ep up the level of plan support during 
the subsequent Annual Plans. 
 
 However, Planning Commission has suggested to the Department to 
explore alternatives for funding the acti vities of the Department of Consumer 
Affairs as  part   of the Mid-Term Appraisal of the Tenth Five Year Plan.     
 
Planning Commission (I&M Division) M –13024/62/2/2004-I&M. 

 
 
 
  
Recommendation 
(Serial No. 12  Paragraph 5.8) 
 
 The Committee are happy to note t hat future trading is permitted and 
legalized in certain commodi ties notified by the Govern ment with effect from 1 st 
April, 2003.  Now the commodity ex changes can trade in futures of any 
commodity.  It will not only benefit the farmers by preventing distress sale of 
agriculture produce but also help stabilizing the prices of commodity in a market.  
Further it will also impr ove liquidity position in agr iculture sector thereby 
benefiting farmers to a large extent.  The Committee find that the farmers and 
growers may not directly participate in the future market.  They benefit through 
the price signals emitted by futures mark ets.  The futures market lead to the 
reduction in the amplitude of seasonal pr ice variation and help the farmers in 
realizing somewhat better price at the time  of harvest.  This helps the farmer in 
planning cultivation in advance as well as  to determine the kind of crop which he 
would prefer to raise by taking advantage of the advance information of the price 
and probably supply and demand of various  commodities in advance.  By 
providing the manufacturers  and the bul k consumers, a mechanism for price 
risk, the futures market induces them to pay higher price to the producers, as the 
need to pass on price risk to farmers is obviated.   The manufacturers are able to 
hedge their requirement of the raw materi al and also to hedge their finished   
products.   This results in greater compet ition in the market and ensures viability 
of the manufacturing units. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The FMC has been impressing upon the Exch anges from time to time to 
disseminate future and spot prices of t he commodities in which futures trade is 
organised at their Exchanges.  The future s prices of the commodities traded at 
the Exchanges are disseminated through el ectronic media (like price tickers on 
TV channels such as CNBC and Doordar shan and Radio) and print media. The 
futures prices of the commodities traded at the Exchanges are published in the 
local dailies.  Most of the Exchanges have set their own Website giving volume 
and price related details.  FMC has al so set up its own Website where the 
Exchanges update price and volume relate d details on a daily basis for wider 
dissemination.   
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. G-11027/1/2004-P&C  Dated 25
th November, 2004 
 
Recommendation 
(Serial No. 13  Paragraph 5.9) 
 
 The Committee are of the view that consequent upon lifting of prohibition 
on futures trading in all commodities and conversion of mutualised exchanges 
into de-mutualised ones, there is an urgent need to strengthen the Forward 
Markets Commission.  The Committee fi nd that the proposal to create 50 
additional posts in the Forward Market s Commission is pending.  The Committee 

 
 
 
desire that the proposal be approved at the earliest.  At the same time the 
Committee desire that the process of de -mutualisation in t he various trading 
exchanges be done in a transparent manner .  The Committee find that the 
average trading volume  in  the three de-mutualised exchanges ranges from 
Rs.600 to 700 crores per day.  Besides tr ading is carried out in other trading 
exchanges also. Most of the items traded in futures are agro commodities.  A 
better handling and dissemination of inform ation emerging from such trading 
have the potential to change the face of Indian Agriculture.   The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that t he price signals of agricultu ral products emitted by 
activities of futures trading in t he exchanges be dovetailed to the best 
advantages of Indian farmers.    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per the revised proposal of the Department, Ministry of Finance has 
agreed to the creation of 39 additional posts in FMC. 
 
A consultancy was assigned to the Indi an Institute of Capital Markets, 
Vashi, Navi Mumbai for preparing a ‘Road Map for Transition of Mutual Form of 
Exchanges into Demutualised Ones’.  T he report outlines the major steps to be 
taken by Exchanges, FMC and the Govern ment for converting themselves into  
for- profit corporations.  Based on the inputs of the consultant, draft guidelines for 
demutualization of existing mutual exchang es was attempted by the FMC, which 
were sent to the Ministry for their approval.  However, in view of the proposal for 
convergence of commodities and secu rities market (including FMC and SEBI) 
and new demutualization model, being unfolded in the securities market (with the 
issue of a reported ordinance for demutual ization of stock exchanges) the same 
is being modified / revised based on new inputs.   
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. G-11027/1/2004-P&C  Dated 25
th November, 2004. 
 

 
 
 
  
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES. 
 
Recommendation 
( Serial No.  3  Paragraph   2.22  ) 
 
The Committee find that the Consum er Protection Act, 1986 was enacted 
to provide inexpensive and qui cker redressal of consumers' complaints. As per 
the provision of the Act, the cases would be required to be decided within a 
period of 90 to 150 days. Sadly, the freedom given to Legal Practitioners to 
appear in Consumer Courts have contribut ed considerable delays in deciding the 
cases. At times, the Legal Practitioners replicate the nitty-gritty of the Courts 
leading to delays. The Committee have been informed that with the recent 
amendment carried out in the Act, under whic h time limit has been prescribed for 
various stages in the disposal of the co mplaints, restriction on adjournments that 
may be granted, coupled with awarding of cost, would then lead to speedier 
disposal of complaints.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
These observations are being brought to the notice of all the Chief 
Ministers of the States and Lt. Governors of  Union Territories as well as to the 
President, National Consumer Disput es Redressal Commission by Hon’ble 
Minister for Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution for their notice and 
appropriate action (file under submission). 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. G-11027/1/2004-P&C  Dated 25
th November, 2004. 
 
Recommendation 
(Serial No.  8  Paragraph 3.18) 
 
  The Committee  finds that the liabi lity of Super Bazar after deducting the 
value of assets as on date is 113.56 crore, of  which  certain dues are of 
suppliers, Government  loan before liqu idation and after liquidation and loan 
required for retrenchment of employees.  The Committee further find that 700 
employees of Super Bazar have opted for Voluntary Separation Schemes and 
another 102  employees are  still on the payroll of Super Bazar whose services 
are being utilized for liqui dation of the completion proceedings.  The Committee 
desire that Government should impress upon the official liquidator to complete 
the proceedings at the earliest so that the pending liabilities of Super Bazar could 
be liquidated.  The Committee also desire t hat the remaining 102  employees  of 
Super Bazar should be either persuaded to  opt for Voluntary Retirement  
Scheme or gainfully employed after  giving them some  training in some other 
Department of the Government. 

 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Official Liquidator, Super Bazar has informed that the Liquidation 
proceedings in  the Super Bazar  could not be completed within the stipulated 
period as the group of the employees and their Unions  filed various writ petitions 
in Delhi High Court challenging the winding  up  of the Super Bazar.  The writ 
petition were dismissed on 19.12.2003.  A revision pettion filed by the employees 
was also dismissed on 19.3.2004.  As so on as the liquidation proceedings were 
restarted, the Super Bazar Karamchari Dalit Sangh fil ed a Special leave petition 
in Supreme Court of India challenging the order of the Delhi High Court.  At the 
admission stage on 20.8.04, the petitioners submitted a proposal for taking over 
Super Bazar. 
 
           The Apex Court on 15.10.2004, after hearing the aforesaid appeal 
adjourned the case for eight weeks with the direction to the petitioners to furnish 
a concrete proposal indicating the defin ite source of money for purchasing the 
assets of Super Bazar on present market value as well as the liability of the 
Society.    
 
  The legal barriers are not allowing  the completion of the proceedings in a 
time bound manner.  Efforts have been made to defend the issues in an effective 
manner in the courts.  However,   the SLP is yet to  be decided.by Supreme Court 
of India. 
 
  There is no provision in the MS CS Act  to absorb the 102 employees 
already working as the skeleton staff, in  any other society.  However, these 
employees are being persuaded to opt for vo luntary retirement scheme.  As on 
date 88 employees are on the role of S uper Bazar engaged as the skeleton staff 
required for the completion of liquidation proceedings.   
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. G-11027/1/2004-P&C  Dated 25th November, 2004 
 
 Recommendation 
(Serial No. 11   Paragraph 4.13) 
 
 The Committee find that a large number of technical posts are lying vacant 
in BIS.  The Committee recommend that sincere efforts should be made to fill up 
all the posts lying vacant at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
There was a ban on direct recruitment but due to vigorous efforts made by 
this Department, the same has been lifted in the case of BIS.  This Department 
granted permission to BIS for recruitment of officers to 37 technical posts out of 
which 23 technical officers have already been selected.  The process is on for 
the selection of the remaining officers.  For filling up of va cancies arisen during 
1.4.2002 to 31.3.2004 and also for residual vacancies in the recent recruitment,  

 
 
 
the matter is under process in BIS.  Further, in order to take care of the shortage 
of the technical officers, BIS has recently  taken a decision to utilize the services 
of outside technical experts including retired BIS officers having requisite 
expertise in relevant activities.  This would ease the situation to some extent.  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. G-11027/1/2004-P&C  Dated 25
th November, 2004 
 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE. 
 
 
Recommendation 
( Serial No.  2  Paragraph   2.21 ) 
 
 
In accordance with the decision taken in the 50 th  National Development 
Council meeting held on 21.12.2002, the Consumer Protection has been 
identified as a thrust ar ea and the Department of C onsumer Affairs assigned a 
role to evolve a "National Action Pl an For Consumer Awareness And Redressal 
and Enforcement of Consumer Protecti on Act 1986". In pursuance to this 
direction, the Department of Consumer Affairs prepared a National Action Plan 
and sought Rs.279.11 crore for consumer protection i.e., Rs. 200 crores for 
publicity programme Rs.79.11 crores to  strengthen Consumer Forums in the 
States including computer network, Rs.11 crores for construction of building for 
National Commission and another Rs.21.71 crores for strengthening the State 
Laboratories of the Weights-and Measures during the Tenth Plan period and also 
revised Annual Plan 2004-05 to  Rs.158.30 crores for in itiating/formulating the 
meaningful and workable schemes for generating consumer awareness and 
strengthening the Consumer Protection Acti vities nationwide. The Committee are 
constrained to note that a meager budget  of Rs.3.1 0 crore has been provided 
per annum in the Tenth Plan for cons umer protection which is not only 
inadequate to undertake any meaningful an d sustained programme at National 
level but also frustrates the National Action Plan programme  undertaken for the 
purpose. The Committee are of the vi ew that unless higher and adequate 
budgetary support is provided to the Depar tment of Consumer Affairs by the 
Planning Commission, the consumer move ment in the country would remain a 
distant dream and the consumers would c ontinue to be exploited as before with 
no one to fall upon. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Planning 
Commission should reconsider their decision of reducing the budgetary allocation 
for the Tenth Plan and step up the allocati on in accordance with the wishes of 
this Standing Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department of Consumer Affair s has been making all out efforts for 
enhancement of the budget provisions during 10 th Plan period as well as for the 
financial year 2004-05 also by bringing the concer ns expressed by the Standing 
Committee. However, Dy. Chairman, Planning Commission while appreciating 
the important responsibilities the Depar tment has to shoulder, has expressed 
inability to provide any  extra funds due to other pressing demands. The 
Commission has however, promised to explor e alternatives to provide additional 
funds during the mid-term review of the Tenth Plan vide his letter No. M-
13024/62/2004-I&M / DCH / 11/04/928 dated 13
th October, 2004.  The 

 
 
 
observations and recommendations of  the Standing Committee are being 
brought to the notice of t he Deputy Chairman, Planni ng Commission by Hon’ble 
Minister for Consumer Affairs, F ood and Public Distribution (file under 
submission) to facilitate the allocati on of funds as sought since the current 
allocation is grossly inadequate to undertake any meaningful/workable 
programmes., to enable the Department to proceed  with programmes on 
consumer protection during rest of the years of 10
th Plan period  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. G-11027/1/2004-P&C  Dated 25
th November, 2004 
 
The Planning Commission, in their reply stated that the Planning 
 Commission agree that the Department of Consumer Affairs is entrusted with  
very important responsibilities. In fact, it was at the initiative of the Planning 
Commission that a National Action Plan an d strategy for Consumer Awareness, 
Redressal and Enforcement was drafted. Tenth Five Year Plan outlay for the 
Department has been approved at Rs. 55 cr ore. Because of other pressing high 
priority competing demands on limit ed GBS made available to the Planning 
Commission, it has not been possible to st ep up the level of plan support during 
the subsequent Annual Plans. 
 However, Planning Commission has suggested to the Department to 
explore alternatives for funding the acti vities of the Department of Consumer 
Affairs as  part   of the Mid-Term Appraisal of the Tenth Five Year Plan.     
 
Planning Commission (I&M Division) M –13024/62/2/2004-I&M. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of the Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
(Serial No.  10   Paragraph 4.12) 
 
 The Committee find that the Search and Seizures carried out for the 
misuse of ISI mark is fa r from satisfactory.  Du ring the year 2001-02 only 30 
Search and Seizures were conducted.  The figures for t he years 2002-03 and 
2003-04 are 12 and 206, respectively.  T he Committee find that the conviction 
rate of such Search and Seizures is also  not satisfactory.  For instance, out of 
206 raids conducted during the year 2003-04,  56 prosecution were filed and 
only in one case the accu sed pleaded guilty and convicted, other 55 cases are 
under-trial. In this context, the Committ ee desire that enfor cement Department 
of BIS should be activated and adequate number of officers appointed in the 
regions and branch offices of BIS so as to prevent the misuse of ISI mark.  
There is also a need to step up market surveys, visits to exhibitions, interaction 
with industry and trade associations, feed back from BIS licensee and other 
sources.  This will go a long way in protecting the interests of the consumers. 
 

 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The activity of Search & Seizure has shown marked improvement during 
the year 2003-04 as compared to the performance in the earlier years due to the 
initiative taken by the Government. S earch and Seizure  carried out during the 
year 2003-04 were 206 which are significa ntly higher than the number of such 
operations conducted during earlier year s. For the current  year i.e. 2004-05 
targets for search and seizure have been further raised to 250 on all India basis. 
All the Regional and Branch offices of BIS are working in this direction to achieve 
prescribed target.  The activity  is  being undertaken on pr oactive basis and 
covers visits to markets/ exhibitions, feedback from in dustry/ trade association & 
BIS licensees in addition to complain ts received.  Co-coordinators at the 
Regional/ Branch Offices have been named for effectively and efficiently carrying 
out the  enforcement activity amongst existing officers. 
 
The cases against persons violating  di fferent provisions of BIS Act and 
rules framed thereunder including misuse of  ISI Mark have to be  filed within one 
year of detection. Hence, the cases agai nst the violations detected during the 
year 2003-04 are still being filed in courts  as these are with in limitation period 
and therefore, the number of cases filed in the court agai nst violations are likely 
to further increase.  During the current year 2004-2005 upto 30.9.2004, 115 
cases have been registered out of which cr iminal complaints have been filed in 
courts in 85 cases.  One case has so  far been decided in favour of BIS and the 
accused has been convicted.   
 
 Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. G-11027/1/2004-P&C  
Dated 25th November, 2004 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of the Chapter I of the Report) 
 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation 
       (Serial No.  9   Paragraph 4.11) 
 
   The Committee find that in pursuanc e to Inquiry Committee on Pesticides 
Residues on Bottled Water, test method  for pesticides residues to meet the new 
limits were specified in the Indian St andard IS 14543 pack aged drinking water 
(other than packaged natural mineral wate r) after due notificati on by the Ministry 
of Health.  The new limits of pesticides residue for packaged   mineral water (IS 
13428) has been recommended to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.  
The certification of packaged drinking water (IS 14543) and packaged natural 
mineral water (IS: 13428) are under mandatory BIS Certif ication.  Surprisingly, 
the notifications on new limits of pesti cides for packaged natural mineral water 
and packaged drinking water by the Ministry  of Health, which is the Regulatory 
Authority are still awaited.  Taking into c onsideration, the health point of view, the 
Committee recommend that Ministry of H ealth and Family Welfare be impressed 
upon to issue the notification at the earliest, so as the protect the health of the 
consumers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 Ministry of Health and Family We lfare has implemented revised stringent 
limits for pesticides residues in t he packaged drinking water w.e.f. 1 st January, 
2004.  However, the revised limits for pesticides residues in the packaged natural 
mineral water have not yet been finalized by  the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare.  The concerned Sectional Co mmittee of BIS has already recommended 
revision of the pesticide re sidue limits for packaged na tural mineral water along 
with revised lists of pesticides on the lines similar to the packaged drinking water.  
The matter is being pursued by Bureau of  Indian Standards with Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare.   
  
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. G-11027/1/2004-P&C Dated 25th November, 2004. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI         Devendra Prasad Yadav 
21st   April, 2005___            Chairman 
1 Vaisakha 1927 (Saka)    Standing Committee on Food, Consumer 
Affairs and Public Distribution 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENT H SITTING OF THE STANIDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON 
FRIDAY, THE 8TH APRIL, 2005. 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 to 1800  hours. in Committee Room ‘53’, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
 
Present 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
     LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Alakesh Dass 
4. Shri Atma Singh Gill  
5. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
6. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
7. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
8. Smt. Daggubati Purandareswari 
9. Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
10. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri T.S. Bajwa 
12. Shri Palden Tsering Gyamtso  
13. Shri Lalitbhai Mehta 
14. Smt. Bimba Raikar 
15. Shri Thanga Tamil Selvan 
16 Shri Vikram Verma  
17. Shri Vijay Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. (Smt.) Paramjit K aur Sandhu - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director  
 

 
 
 
 
2.  xxx    xxx     xxx 
3. The Committee, then, took up following two draft Reports for 
consideration:  
(i) xxx    xxx    xxx 
 
(ii)  Draft Fifth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in their Second Report on Demands 
for Grants (2004-2005) relating to Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs).  
 
4. The Committee adopted the draft Repor t at (i) above with minor changes.  
The Committee, then, authorised the C hairman to make consequential changes 
in the Report and present/lay the same in  both the Houses of parliament in the 
ongoing Budget Session. 
 
5. xxx     xxx    xxx 
 
6. xxx     xxx    xxx 
7. A copy of the verbatim proceedings  of the sitting of  the Committee have 
been kept on records. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
___________________________________________________________ 
XXX  Not related to this Report.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer 
Affairs and Public Distribution (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
(i) Total  Number of Recommendations     13 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have been  
accepted by the Government: 
Recommendation Nos.1, 5,6,7, 12 and 13 
T o t a l           6  
Percentage          46%  
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
 Government’s replies: 
Recommendation Nos. 3,8  and 11 
T o t a l           3  
Percentage         23% 
      
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of  
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation  Nos.  2, 4 and 10  
 T o t a l           3  
 Percentage   
           2 3 %  
(iv) Recommendations/observati ons in respect of which  
replies of the Government are still awaited. 
Recommendation No. 9 
 T o t a l            1  
 P e r c e n t a g e          8 %  