 
 
 
  STANDING  COMMITTEE ON  
         FOOD,CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
         AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
       (2007-2008) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
             MINISTRY  OF   CONSUMER   AFFAIRS,  
            FOOD    AND   PUBLIC   DISTIRBUTION  
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations, 
contained    in    the  Eighteenth  Report  of  the Committee on  Demands 
for   Grants   (2007 - 2008)   of    the    Ministry   of    Consumer    Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution)} 
 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SBHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DLEHI 
December, 2007/Agrahayanaa, 1929 (Saka) 
21 

 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2007-2008) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
            MINISTRY  OF   CONSUMER   AFFAIRS,  
            FOOD    AND   PUBLIC   DISTIRBUTION  
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on  the recommendations/observations, 
contained    in    the  Eighteenth  Report  of  the Committee on  Demands 
for   Grants   (2007 - 2008)   of    the    Ministry   of    Consumer     Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution)} 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on …………………………. 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ……………………………… 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SBHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DLEHI 
December, 2007/Agrahayanaa, 1929 (Saka) 
 
 

 
CONTENTS 
 
   
 
   
 
CHAPTER  I Report ……………………………………………………………… ………….. 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
Recommendations/ Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government ……………………………………………… 
 
…………. 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
Recommendations/ Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies……. 
 
…………. 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Recommendations / Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the 
committee…………………………………………………………. 
 
 
…………. 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited. …………………… 
 
…………. 
 
 
  
APPENDICES 
 
 
I  Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Committee held on 
14.12.2007………………………… 
…………. 
 
II Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report of the 
Committee………………………………………………………….. 
 
…………. 
 
III 
 
 
 
Statement showing sugar seasons -wise, State -wise and sugar 
mill-wise position of cane price arrears as on 
31.05.2007…………………………………………………………. 
 
 
…………. 
                                       
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION  (2007-2008). 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav     -   Chairman      
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Govinda Aroon Ahuja  
3. Shri Suresh Angadi 
4. Shri Alakesh Das 
5. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
6. Shri G. V. Harsha Kumar 
7. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
8. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
9. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna  
10. Shri Wangyuh W. Konyak 
11. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
12. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
13. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
14. Shri Ghuran Ram 
15. Shri Munshi Ram 
16. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
17. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
18. Adv. (Smt.) P. Satheedevi 
19. Shri Chandra Bhan Singh 
20. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri T.S. Bajwa 
23. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai  
24. Shri Ajay Maroo 
25. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik   
26. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
27. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
28. Shri Nabam Rebia 
29. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu 
30. Shri Matilal Sarkar   
31. Shri Thanga Tamil Selvan 
 
 

 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Dr. (Smt.) Paramjit Kaur Sandhu   -  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P. K. Misra     -  Joint Secretary 
3. Smt.  P.K. Sandhu    -  Director 
4. Shri Jagdish Prasad    -  Deputy Secretary-II 
5. Shri Rakesh Bhardwaj    -  Executive Officer 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
1. I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
 and Public Distribution (2007-2008) having been authorized by the Committee 
to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Twenty - first Report on action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Eighteenth 
Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2007-2008) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
  
2. The Eighteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid  in   Rajya  
Sabha on 27 April, 2007. The Government furnished replies indicating action 
taken on the recommendations contained in the Report on 20 August, 2007. 
The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 14 December, 2007.  
 
3.       An     analysis    of    the    action   taken   by   the   Government on the   
     recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI       DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV 
31 December, 2007        Chairman 
10 Pausa, 1929 (Saka)     Standing Committee on Food,  
                                                       Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
 
 
  

CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standin g Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Eighteenth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2007 -2008) 
pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department 
of Food and Public Distribution). 
 
 
1.2 The Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on          
27 April, 2007. It contained 43 recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the         
43 recommendations contained in the Report have been received and categorized as 
follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 
Serial Nos.  – 1, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 12, 17, 19, 20, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31,  
32, 34, 35, 38, 39, 41, 42 and 43 
 
(Paragraph Nos.  – 2.29, 3.27, 3.28, 3.29, 3.31, 3.32, 3.40, 3.55, 3.78, 3.91, 
3.94, 4.16, 4.25, 4.32, 4.33, 4.44, 4.52, 4.53, 4.56, 5.8, 5.18, 5.32, 6.33, 6.34, 
6.36, 7.22 and 7.23) 
 
(Chapter –II Total 27) 
 
 
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government: 
 
Serial Nos.  – 33 
 
(Paragraph Nos.  – 5.15) 
 
(Chapter –III, Total 1) 
 
 
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
Serial Nos.  – 2, 3, 7, 15, 18, 22, 36, 37, and 40 
  
(Paragraph Nos.  –  2.30, 2.31, 3.30, 3.76, 3.90, 4.12, 6.31, 6.32, and 6.35  
 
(Chapter –IV Total 9) 
 

 
 
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which the final replies of the Government are 
still awaited: 
 
Serial Nos.  – 10, 13, 14, 16, 21 and 25 
 
(Paragraph Nos.  –  3.33, 3.74, 3.75, 3.77, 4.7 and 4.26) 
 
(Chapter –V, Total    6) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the 
recommendations f or which only interim replies have been received from the 
Government be furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation 
of the Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee strongly emphasize that utmost importance be accorded to 
the implementation of reco mmendations accepted by the Government.  In case 
where it is not possible for the Government to implement the recommendations in 
letter and spirit for any reason, the matter be reported to the Committee in time with 
reasons for non-implementation. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   
 
 
A Under spending under various important schemes and rush of expenditure 
at the fag end of the financial year. 
 
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 2 & 3, (Para Nos. 2.30 and 2.31) 
 
1.6   The Committee had recommended as below: 
 
“The Committee observe that there is huge under spending under different Non- 
plan Schemes during 2005 -06 and 2006 -07, particularly in the programmes related to 
loans and Grants -in-Aid provided to va rious Sugar Mills for modernization and 
rehabilitation.  Besides, under Plan head also, there is huge underspending under the 
following schemes during the Tenth Plan Period: - 
 
(i) Construction of Godowns; 
(ii) Integrated Information System for Food grain Management; 
(iii) Evaluation, Monitoring and Research of Public Distribution System; 
and 
(iv) Village Grain Bank. 
 
 The position is particularly grave during the year 2006 -07, since ‘NIL’ expenditure 
is reflected in the Budget documents in respect of the following schemes: - 
 
(i) Integrated Information System for Food grain Management (IISFM); 
(ii) Research and Development and Modernization of VVO&F; and 
(iii) Computerization of Public Distribution System (PDS). 
 
The reasons furnished by the Department for under spending which indicate 
modifications of original scheme of smart card and earlier unspent balances under IISFM 

are unacceptable to the Committee.  Almost Nil expenditure under the important schemes 
of the Department is a matter of serious concern.  The Department has admitted that huge 
cut at RE stage under different schemes is due to under spending under different 
schemes.  The Committee while deploring the way important schemes are being 
implemented recommend to the Department to take all the corrective action so that the 
position of under spending is not repeated during the year 2007-08. 
      (Recommendation Para No. 2.30) 
 
“The Committee have repeatedly been emphasizing on the expenditure of outlay 
under different schemes/heads in a phased manner during the whole year.  Although t he 
Department has initiated exercise of quarter -wise targets and achievements in the 
Outcome Budget at the instance of the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance, the 
actual quarter-wise spending during the year 2006 -07 (under plan schemes), as reflected 
in the Budget document, indicate that there is no improvement in this regard.   
 
The quarter-wise data, as indicated below, substantiate the aforesaid observation of the 
Committee: - 
 
  
Quarter-wise expenditure during 2006-07 in percentage 
 
First Quarter 5.75 
    Second Quarter 10.55 
Third Quarter 63.65 
   Fourth Quarter 67.54 
  
The Committee deplore the tendency of making major part of expenditure during the last 
two quarters of the year.  Such a rush of expenditure towards the end of the year results 
into huge opening balances with the State Governments and the scope of misutilization 
also increases.  The Committee strongly recommend to the Department to ensure that the 
aforesaid situation of rush of expenditure during the last months is not repeated during the 
year 2007-08.” 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.31) 
 
 
1.7 The Department in the action taken note has stated as under:- 
 
‘The Department is ensuring expenditure as per the scheme Monthly Expenditure 
Plan and Quarterly physical/financial targets for 2007-08 for plan schemes are being fixed 
and these targets will be closely watched for corrective action during monthly expenditure 
review meetings during 2007-08.’  
 

 
1.8 On the serious concern expressed by the Committee with regard to 
huge under spending under different plan and non -plan schemes during the 
years   2005-06 and 2006-07, the Department in the action taken reply has not 
addressed the issue seriously. Even when the expenditure under some of the 
schemes during the year 2006 -07 was reported to be  nil, as observed by the 
Committee, nothing has been done to review the position scheme -wise and 
corrective action taken accordingly. The Department has simply stated that 
expenditure under plan head will be ensured as per the monthly expenditure 
plan and quarterly financial/physical target for 2007-08 for plan schemes.  
The Committee feel that without knowing the root cause of under 
spending in each of the schemes, the issue of under spending cannot be 
addressed effectively. Not only that, nothing has been  stated about the under 
spending under non -plan heads as pointed out by the Committee in the 
recommendations. The Committee are unhappy over the way the Department 
has responded to the recommendation. While reiterating the earlier 
recommendation, the Commi ttee would like that the reasons for under 
spending under the different schemes as pointed out by the Committee may 
be probed and corrective action taken accordingly. The Committee may be 
kept apprised in this regard. 
 
B Need to review the position of buffer stock of foodgrains 
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 4 & 5, (Para Nos. 3.27 and 3.28) 
 
1.9         The Committee had recommended as below: 
 
“The Committee find that the Department of Food and Public Distribution is the  
nodal Department with regard to formulation a nd implementation for various national 
policies on foodgrains relating to procurement, movement, scientific research, storage, 
distribution and sale. As regards the procurement of foodgrains particularly of wheat and 
grains, during the year 2005 -06 and 200 6-07, the situation is far from satisfactory. The 
actual procurement during these years is far below the estimates of procurement. During 
the year 2005 -06, against the estimates of procurement of 180 lakh tonnes, actual 
procurement of wheat was 147.85 lakh  tonnes i.e 82.5 per cent. During the year        
2006-07, the position is even worse. Against the estimates of procurement of 162.07 lakh 
tonnes, the actual procurement of wheat is only 92.31 lakh tonnes, which is 57 per cent of 
the estimates. As regards procurement of rice during the year 2006-07, it was 204.09 lakh 
tonnes whereas in the same period during the previous year, procurement of rice was 

recorded to the tune of 276.56 lakh tonnes. Various reasons such  as mismatch between 
the demand and supply of wheat with an increased domestic demand and decline in 
wheat production leading to increased purchase by private traders have been cited as the 
reasons for lesser procurement of wheat during the year 2006 -07. With regard to 
minimum buffer norms for wheat, the Committee find that as on 1 January, 2007 the actual 
stock was 54.28 lakh tonnes against the minimum buffer norms of 82 lakh tonnes. The 
situation in rice was however better as against the minimum buffer norms of 82 lakh 
tonnes, the actual stock was  119.77 lakh tonnes. As regards the total availability of 
foodgrains, the actual stock was 174.05 lakh tonnes against the minimum buffer norms of 
200 lakh tonnes.” 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.27) 
 
 
1.10 “The Department has informed that a Committee of officers/experts was formed to  
examine various strategic options and recommend appropriate procurement strategy for 
Rabi Marketing Season (RMS) 2007-08 and the recommendations have been acted upon 
appropriately by the Government. The Government has taken a series o f steps to 
enhance the procurement of wheat in RMS 2007 -08 which include import of 55 lakh 
tonnes of wheat to enhance the existing stocks, increase in MSP from Rs. 650 to 750 for 
wheat along with Rs. 100 per quintal as incentive bonus, ban on export of whe at for 
private trade and import of wheat on private account at zero duty. 
  
The Committee find that inspite of efforts made by the Government to improve the 
 supply position through market interventions as well as strategic decisions with regard to 
export/import of wheat, the situation has not improved to the desired level as is evident 
from the data of procurement as well as buffer stocks. The Committee note that the 
foodgrains stocks falling below the buffer stocks is a matter of serious concern, 
particularly when the foodgrains are required for distribution through PDS to the poorest of 
the poor as well as to fulfill the demand of foodgrains in the areas affected by natural 
calamities. Not only that, the minimum buffer stocks is also required for resortin g to 
various market interventions to stabilize the prices of foodgrains in the market. Keeping in 
view all these factors, the Committee strongly recommend that the Government should 
review the position of buffer stocks and take all desired actions to ensur e the minimum 
required procurement of foodgrains.” 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.28) 
 
 
1.11 The Department in the action taken note has stated as under: 
 
‘With reference to para 3.27 and 3.28 of the Report, it is informed that the stocks of 
wheat and rice in the Central Pool vis-à-vis the buffer stocks  are above the buffer norms 
as on 1 April, 2007 as may be seen below : 
 
(figures in lakh tonnes) 
 
 Stocks as on 1 April,2007 Buffer norms 
Wheat 47.03 40 
Rice 131.71 122 
 

          To enhance procurement of wheat in RMS 2007-08 the following action has 
been taken by the Government: 
 
i) The MSP for wheat was fixed at Rs. 750 per quintal for RMS 2007 -08, an 
increase of Rs. 100 per quintal, in order to encourage farmers to grow more 
wheat.  Now, according to the Thi rd Advance Estimates of the Department of 
Agriculture  & Cooperation, the estimated production of wheat is likely to be 
73.7 million tonnes in crop year 2006 -07 compared to 69.3 million tonnes in 
crop year 2005-06.  
ii) An incentive bonus of Rs 100 per quintal  over and above the MSP is also 
being given in RMS 2007-08.  
iii) Import of 55 lakh tonnes of wheat was done in 2006 -07 which has improved 
the stock position of wheat in the Central pool and the wheat stocks (as on 
1.4.2007) were more than the buffer norms of 4 0 lakh tonnes at the start of 
RMS 2007-08.  
iv) Wheat exports on private account have been banned upto 31 December 2007.  
Wheat exports from Central Pool are also banned.  
v) Decision was taken to release 4 lakh tonnes of wheat under OMSS in February 
and March 2007 to cool the market prices before the start of RMS 2007-08.  
vi)  A notification titled “Wheat (Stock Declaration by Companies or Firms or 
Individuals) Order 2007 has been issued under the Essential Commodities Act 
1955 on                1 March 2007. The order provides that any Company or Firm 
or individual which purchases wheat beyond 50,000 tonnes during 2007 -08 
shall furnish to the Central Government a return indicating the name/address 
of the company, quantity of wheat purchased and quantity of wheat hel d in 
stock. 
vii) Department of Consumer Affairs has extended upto 31August, 2007 
notification under  the EC Act enabling State Governments to impose stock 
limit on wheat and pulses.  
viii) Import of wheat on private account at zero duty has been permitted upto                   
31 December 2007.  
ix) 13128 centers for wheat procurement have been opened by Government 
agencies in RMS 2007-08 as compared to  8985 centers in RMS 2006-07.  
x) Senior Officers of Department of Food and Public Distribution and FCI are 
frequently visiting wheat procuring States to personally assess the situation. 
xi)  In order to encourage wheat procurement in States like U.P., Madhya 
Pradesh, etc Commission to Societies/sub -agents has been enhanced to 2.5 
per cent on the lines of      the Arthiya Commission in Punjab and Haryana.  
xii) NAFED has been engaged to procure wheat on behalf of FCI in States of U.P., 
Bihar and Rajasthan.   
  
  Due to the above steps, wheat procurement in RMS 2007 -08 is 106.7 lakh 
tonnes as on 4 June 2007, which is 14.4 lakh tonnes mo re than the wheat procured      
(92.3 lakh tonnes) in RMS 2006 -07. To ensure that there is sufficient wheat to meet 
the requirements for TPDS and welfare schemes as well as to ensure adequate 
buffer stocks of wheat, the Government has taken a decision to i mport 3 to 5 million 
tonnes of wheat in 2007-08.  

 Procurement of rice in KMS 2006 -07 (upto 4.6.2007) was 230.1 lakh tonnes and 
procurement in this season is expected to be sufficient to meet the requirements of TPDS 
and welfare schemes as also to meet the required buffer norms for rice.’  
 
1.12 The Committee note that the Department has taken various steps to 
improve the position of food stocks pursuant to the earlier recommendation 
of the Committee. As a result, the stocks of wheat and rice as on 1 April, 2007 
were above the buffer norms. While analyzing the point -wise action taken by 
the Government, the Committee note that the Government has to resort to 
import of wheat to improve the position of buffer stocks. During the year 
2006-07, the Government had imported 55 lakh tonnes of wheat.  During the 
current year 2007 -08, the Government have again decided to import 3 to 5 
million tonnes of wheat even when there is some improvement in the 
procurement position. The Committee reiterate their earlier recommenda tion 
to review the position of buffer stocks from time to time. Besides, all the 
desired steps in consultation with the Ministry of Agriculture and other 
related agencies should be taken to increase the production of foodgrains in 
the country so that the country need not have to resort to imports to meet the 
requirement of PDS, welfare schemes and for food security.  
C Need to discourage the procurement of foodgrains through private 
companies  
Recommendation Sl. No. 7 (Para No. 3.30) 
 
1.13 The Committee had recommended as below: 
 
“The Committee further find that in 2006-07 FCI has taken the services of National  
Collateral Management Services Ltd, (NCMSL, a subsidiary of NCDEX) and National Bulk 
Handling Corporation (NHBC, a subsidiary of MCX) for procuremen t of paddy in Madhya 
Pradesh, Orissa, Bihar and Rajasthan and for wheat in Uttar Pradesh, NCMS has 
procured 6.32 lakh MT paddy in Orissa, Madhya Pradesh and Bihar and NHBC has 
procured 12854 MT paddy in Madhya Pradesh as on 30 March 2007. The Committee also 
note that FCI does not incur any additional cost for the companies  who are carrying out 
procurement operations on behalf of FCI. Further it has been clarified by the Department 
that one percent extra commission being provided to cooperatives is not being provided to 
these companies.  The Committee note that aforesaid companies i.e. NCMSL and NHBC 
are the direct wings of forward trading exchanges of commodities. The Committee in their 
Seventeenth Report on the Forward Contract (Regulation) Amendment Bill,  2006 have 
strongly recommended to ban forward trading in foodgrains. The Committee also note that 
in pursuance of the recommendation of the Committee the Government have also banned 

forward trading in wheat and rice w.e.f. 27 February, 2007. The Committee  fail to 
understand how the FCI is using the services of certain subsidiaries of commodity 
exchanges for the purpose of procurement of foodgrains specifically when the forward 
trading of wheat and rice has been banned by the Government. The Department may 
furnish the clarification in this regard so as to analyze the situation and comment further.  
The Committee strongly recommend that procurement of foodgrains through private 
companies should be discouraged. FCI should give more emphasis to small farmers an d 
cooperatives for the purpose of procurement of foodgrains.” 
 
1.14 The Department in the action taken note has stated as under: 
 
‘This Ministry had earlier allowed NCMSL/NBHC to be involved in purchase of  
foodgrains only in areas where the infrastructure  of FCI and State agencies was weak.  
This was to widen the scope of MSP operations in order to benefit more farmers.  
Instructions were also issued to FCI to take No -objection from State Governments for 
engagement of these agencies. FCI has informed that to maximise procurement of 
paddy/rice for the Central Pool, services of NCMSL/NBHC were utilized  during KMS 
2006-07 in the States of M.P., Orissa  and  Bihar for the procurement of paddy. FCI has 
further informed that as regards giving more emphasis to sm all farmers and cooperatives 
they have engaged NAFED,  as an agent of FCI for procurement of wheat during RMS 
2007-08 in wheat procuring States like U.P., M.P., Rajasthan, Bihar and Uttarakhand. 
 
New guidelines  have  been issued by the Ministry in April, 2007  regarding 
 involvement of Cooperatives/State undertakings/Private Companies for procurement 
operations for Central Pool from those areas where FCI infrastructure is weak and State 
Government establishments are not adequate for the procurement operati ons. These 
guidelines will be applicable for wheat procurement in RMS 2007 -08 and for paddy 
procurement in KMS 2007 -08.  The guidelines include the stipulation that in such cases 
where need for involving other agencies is felt, FCI should in the first inst ance use the 
services of State Government Undertakings/Cooperative Agencies or Central Government 
undertakings for procurement. In case, there are areas where these agencies are not able 
to open procurement centers, these areas should be covered through Ce ntral PSUs or 
companies/organizations in which Central Government or nationalized banks/financial 
institutions have at least 51 per cent equity. 
 
As a last option, private companies can be engaged subject to the State  
Government recommending the proposal of a private company to be engaged as an 
agency for procurement. In such a case, the State Government has to supervise the 
procurement operations to ensure that such a cooperative/company does not pay below 
MSP to any farmer. Stringent conditions should al so be imposed for ensuring that the 
agency opens adequate number of procurement centers in backward areas. The FCI will 
also have to ensure that the cost of procurement is lower than that of the State 
Government agency or FCI, whichever is lower.’ 
 
 
 

1.15 The Committee in the earlier recommendation had raised serious 
concern over taking the services of various wings of forward trading 
exchanges/commodity exchanges for procurement of foodgrains during the 
year 2006 -07. The Department has informed that the s ervices of 
NCMSL/NBHC were used where the infrastructure of FCI and State agencies 
were weak after taking no objection from State Governments. The Committee 
in the earlier recommendation had expressed concern over the use of some 
of the subsidiaries of com modity exchanges for the purpose of procurement 
of foodgrains by the Government even when the forward trading of wheat and 
rice has been banned by the Government. No clarification in this regard has 
been furnished by the Government.  
The Committee fail to understand how some of the subsidiaries of 
commodity exchanges could be converted into procurement agencies. 
Further, the Committee find that pursuant to the recommendation of the 
Committee, the Department has issued new guidelines. As per the new 
guidelines, private companies can be engaged as a last option subject to the 
State Governments recommending the proposal of a private company to be 
engaged as an agency for procurement. Earlier, FCI had to take no objection 
from State Government for engagement of private agencies. The Committee 
feel that there is hardly any difference between the earlier and the existing 
position as per the revised guidelines. The Committee while reiterating their 
earlier recommendation to give more emphasis on small farmers and 
cooperatives for the purpose of food security would like that it should be 
strictly ensured by FCI that the stipulated guidelines are strictly followed and 
the procurement by private companies is done only as a last resort. Besides, 
the Committee feel that t here should be some stock limit for private 
traders/companies. Such companies purchase foodgrains from small farmers 
and do hoardings. They create artificial scarcity in the market.  FCI has to 
resort to procurement from these companies to meet the buffer norms.  Such 
a stock limit would enable small farmers and cooperatives to avail of the 
maximum benefit of procurement by FCI. 
 

D Need to devise a modified APL Scheme covering at least 20 per cent  
of the poor persons who are just above the poverty line ie. BPL 
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 13 & 14 (Para Nos.3.74 & 3.75) 
 
1.16     The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that Public Distribution System (PDS) is an important part of  
Government Policy for management of food by providing foodgrains to poorest of the poor 
through Public Distribution System. The Public Distribution System is operated under the 
joint responsibility of the Central and State Governments. The Central Government 
through FCI has taken the responsibility for procurement, storage, transportation in bulk of 
foodgrains to the State Governments. The operational responsibility rests with the State 
Governments. At present foodgrains are distributed through the network of more than 4.89 
lakh fair price shops.  
 
Under the Targeted Public Distribution System, 2.5 crore poorest of the poor families  
from among the BPL families covered under TPDS within the States are being provided 
foodgrains at a highly subsidized rate of Rs. 2 per Kg. for wheat and Rs. 3 per Kg. for rice 
under the Antyodaya Anna Yojana. The scale of issue of foodgrains is 35 kg. per family 
per month. As per the information provided by the Department, total number of ration 
cards issued by States/UTs for different category of persons are 2,291.82 lakhs, out of 
which 1,291.91 lakhs are APL, 765.82 lakhs BPL and 234.10 are AAY.  
 
The Committee further note that the identification of BPL is done by the Ministry of  
Rural Development and the Department of Food and Public Distribution do not conduct 
any independent survey. The Committee are also aware of the fact that the results of BPL 
census 2002 could not be finalized so far by the various State Governments and as such 
the data of BPL persons identified during the year 1997 is being depended upon. The 
Committee note from the position of off-take of foodgrains as compared to allotment under 
BPL/APL and AAY categories that the off-take was around 78 per cent under BPL, around 
27 per cent under APL and around 93 per cent under AAY during the year 2006-07.”  
 
        (Recommendation no. 3.74) 
 
1.17 The Committee while examining Demands for Grants for 2006-07 (refer para 2.68  
of Twelfth Report) had recommended that there is a need to reduce allocation of 
foodgrains for APL category especially wheat. In this regard, while examinin g the 
Demands for Grants of this year, the Committee have observed that the off -take of APL 
persons is very low. It is only 27 per cent during the year 2006 -07. Further as stated 
above, the revised data of BPL persons is not available with the various Stat e 
Governments. The benefits of subsidized food provided to BPL/AAY persons through PDS 
are actually being diverted. The issue of diversion has been dealt in detail in the 
succeeding part of the report. Keeping all the factors in consideration, the Committee note 
that there is a category of persons who are little above BPL but are actually being 
deprived of the benefits of TPDS in most of the States/UTs. The rising prices in the last 
couple of years has hit hard specifically this category of persons who are actually suffering 
from food insecurity but are technically above poverty line and deprived of the special 
benefits of PDS being provided to BPL persons. The Secretary during the course of oral 
evidence has acknowledged the need to provide the benefit of f ood security through 
subsidized foodgrains to this category of persons on the lines of the subsidized foodgrains 
provided to BPL persons. In view of the aforesaid position, the Committee reconsider the 
earlier recommendations and strongly recommend to the Government to devise a 

modified APL scheme covering at least 20 per cent of the poor persons who are above 
poverty line i.e just above BPL. The proposed modified APL Scheme would be in addition 
to the existing BPL Scheme and APL Schemes of various State Go vernments/Union 
Territory Administrations. The Committee would also like that the modalities of the 
proposed scheme should be worked out and placed before the Cabinet expeditiously. The 
action taken in this regard should be communicated to the Committee.  
 
(Recommendation no. 3.75) 
 
 
1.18 The Department in the action taken note has stated that the matter is under  
examination in the Department in consultation with the Planning Commission.  
 
 
 
1.19 The Committee find that their earlier recommendation to devise the 
modified APL scheme covering 20 per cent of the poor persons who 
are above poverty line i.e. just Above Poverty Line is under 
examination in the Department in consultation with the Planning 
Commission. The Committee while noting the status of the 
recommendation urge the Government to take the decision 
expeditiously and inform the Committee accordingly. 
 
 
E Need to devise a strategy to provide 2 Kg. pulses and 1 Kg. of edible 
oil at subsidised rates to each BPL family through PDS. 
Recommendation Sl. No. 15 (Para No. 3.76) 
 
1.20 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee further note that malnutrition, specifically among women and  
children is the area of concern. The malnourished children are unlikely to reach their 
human potential. Besides, due to malno urishment, women are also affected by anemic 
and other problems related to malnourishment. There is an urgent need to provide 
adequate nourishment and health care to every citizen particularly the children and 
women. Pulses are a rich source of protein and  other nutrients. The considerable rise in 
the prices of pulses and edible oil has affected the poorest of the poor hard and as such 
there is an urgent need to provide certain quantity of pulses and edible oil at subsidized 
rates to poor persons through PDS. The Committee are aware of the fact that due to mis -
match between demand and supply of cereals and edible oil, the Government has to 
resort to imports considerably. The Secretary has informed that at present, edible oil to 
the tune of 45 -50 lakh tonnes and pulses to the tune of 20 -25 lakh tonnes are being 
imported. On the suggestion of the Committee to provide pulses and edible oil to the BPL 
families, the Secretary expressed certain constraints such as need to resort to more 
imports due to the shortage and consequent increase in subsidy. The Committee would 
like that all these concerns should be adequately addressed to and the Government 
should evolve a strategy to provide 2 kg of pulses and 1 kg. of edible oil at subsidized 
rates to each family through PDS. The proposed scheme in this regard should be worked 

out after taking into account all the factors keeping in view the aforesaid observations of 
the Committee and placed before Cabinet expeditiously. “ 
 
 
1.21 The Department in the action taken note has stated as under: 
 
‘This issue has been examined in detail in the Ministry and it has been decided 
that the State/UT Governments, desirous of importing pulses and edible oils for 
distribution to ration cards holders may avail of services of Central Public Sector 
Undertakings and NAFED for this purpose. The State and UT Governments have 
been informed accordingly and the Central PSUs and NAFED have been 
requested to give priority to import pulses and edible oils if requests are received 
from the State/UT Governments.’ 
 
 
1.22 The Committee are unhappy to note the vague reply of the Department  
in response to one of the important recommendations of the Committee 
concerning poorest of the poor in the country. The Committee had 
recommended to evolve the strategy to pro vide 2 kg of pulses and 1 kg of 
edible oil at subsidized rates to each family through PDS to address the 
problem of malnutrition specifically among women and children. The 
Department has taken the recommendation very casually and in a vague 
manner responded that State/UT Governments desirous of importing pulses 
and edible oil for distribution to ration card holders may avail of services of 
Central Public Sector Undertakings and NAFED for the purpose. The 
Committee deplore the way the Government has tried to  side track the 
recommendation. Such an attitude of the Government to an issue related to 
the poor is not fair. The Committee would like that the aforesaid 
recommendation of the Committee should be implemented expeditiously in 
the interest of poorest of th e poor in the country and Committee informed 
accordingly. 
 
 

F Need for Involvement of women, Self- help Groups and Panchayati  
Raj Institutions under PDS 
  
Recommendation Sl. No. 18 (Para No.3.90) 
 
1.23     The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee find that diversion of foodgrains meant for poorest of the poor to 
be allocated through PDS is the biggest menace in the functioning of one of the 
important welfare schemes of Government i.e. PDS. In this regard, the revelation 
made under ORG Marg Report and PEO Report are a matter of concern. As per 
the ORG Marg Report, excepting 11 States/UTs, in all the States, there were large 
scale diversions of wheat and rice. The worst is the position in North -Eastern 
States. In Manipur diversion is 97.7 per cent followed by Nagaland and Arunachal 
Pradesh where diversion is 88.6 per cent and 64 per cent, respectively. In States 
other than the North -Eastern States, the diversion is maximum in hilly States of 
Himachal Pradesh (58 per cent) and Uttaranchal (53 pe r cent). All India diversions 
of foodgrains are 39 per cent for rice and 53.3 per cent for wheat. Further, as per 
PEO Report, the All India diversion data is 36.38 per cent. The foodgrains leakage 
through ghost cards is 16.67 per cent and foodgrains leakag e on FPS is 19.71 per 
cent.  
 
The Committee also note that there are various monitoring mechanisms of the  
Department to have better monitoring and deal with all the issues including diversion of 
foodgrains. The Ministry has constituted a Task Force Team t o monitor and check the 
various irregularities in the functioning of PDS. Besides, the Ministry has an Area Officer 
Scheme under which the various officers of the Ministry visit various States to know about 
the ground position with regard to the working of  PDS. In addition, under PDS Control 
Order, 2001, the constitution of Vigilance Committees by the States/UTs at State/District 
and FPS level is mandatory. 
 
In addition to the aforesaid systems, the Ministry get the utilization certificates from  
various State Governments which also help in monitoring of the PDS scheme. Inspite of 
the elaborate system of monitoring, the diversion of foodgrains continues.  
 
The Committee note that besides evolving various system of monitoring  
mechanism, it is pertinent that these systems work properly. In this regard, the information 
furnished by the Department indicates that the systems are not working properly. For 
example, Vigilance Committees could not be constituted in Assam, Bihar, Haryana, 
Jharkhand, M.P. Maharashtra, Manipur, Orissa, Punjab, Tripura, Uttaranchal, U.P. A &N 
Island and Daman & Diu. The Ministry has no mechanism to take note of the meetings of 
these Committees, although it is mandatory to have one sitting in each quarter by these 
committees as per the afo resaid control order. As regards the working of Area Officers 
Scheme, the Committee note from the data furnished by the Ministry that in 2006 -07, 
visits were undertaken only in 7 States/UTs. In the year 2005 -06, the position was better 
when visits were und ertaken in 11 States/UTs. In view of the aforesaid position, the 
Committee strongly recommend to the Department to ensure that the various monitoring 
mechanisms work properly failing which the objective of having detailed mechanism of 
monitoring is really defeated.  
 
The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to involve more and more women  
in the various activities related to Public Distribution System (PDS). As noted earlier, there 
are 4.89 lakh Fair Price Shops (FPS) spread throughout the country fo r the purpose of 

distribution of foodgrains to various entitled categories like BPL, AAY and APL persons. 
 The Committee feel that there is a need to increase the number of fair price shops 
for the convenience of masses and the Committee strongly recommend  to provide 
licenses to women for Fair Price Shops. Besides, Self-help Groups can also be involved in 
various activities related to PDS. The Committee desire that the data of women FPS 
license holders should be separately maintained to know the status of i nvolvement of 
women in PDS.  
 
The Committee feel that greater responsibilities should be given to Panchayati Raj 
 Institutions particularly elected women members in design implementation and monitoring 
of location specific food security schemes particularly PDS. The monitoring of PDS can be 
emphasized through social audit by Gram Sabhas. Besides, Panchayati Raj Institutions 
should also be made responsible for initiating action under the PDS Control Order, 2001. 
The Committee strongly recommend that necessar y action should be taken in the light of 
the aforesaid observations of the Committee for involvement of women, Self -help Groups 
as well as Panchayati Raj Institutions under PDS. The Committee should also be kept 
apprised in this regard.” 
 
1.24 The Department in the action taken note has stated as under: 
 
‘The recommendation of the Committee that ‘ the Department should ensure that  
the various monitoring mechanisms work properly failing which the objective of having 
detailed mechanism of monitoring is reall y defeated ‘ has been noted.  It will be constant 
endeavour of the Department to ensure proper functioning of various monitoring 
Mechanism. 
 
Regarding involvement of women in the various activities related to PDS, it may be 
 stated that instructions have a lready been issued to all States/UTs to give priority in the 
matter of allotting FPS licenses to Cooperatives of Women and Ex -servicemen, vide letter 
No .D.O. 6(7)2004 -PD-I (Pt. File -IV) dated 29.11.2004.   Further vide this Department’s 
letter dated 18.2. 2005, all States/UTs were requested to involve Self Help Groups in the 
management of Fair Price Shop under PDS.  It was also stated that to achieve this 
objective, the Self Help Groups may be imparted training in the operation of Fair Price 
Shop in their r espective areas.  With a view to strengthening of TPDS, 
instructions/guidelines have also been issued to all State Governments to involve 
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRI) vide letters dated 23.6.1999 and 3.11.1999.’ 

 
 
1.25 The Committee in the earlier recommendation while noting the serious 
 position of diversion of foodgrains as reported in Organisation and Research 
Group (ORG) Marg Report and Programme Evaluation Organisation (PEO) 
Report had made a series of suggestions. Taking note of the fact that various  
monitoring mechanism do not work properly, the Committee had emphasized 
on implementation of the various systems. The Committee had also 
recommended to involve more and more women in the various activities 
related to PDS. Besides, involvement of greater r esponsibility for Panchayati 
Raj Institutions and self -help Groups was also emphasized in the 
recommendation.  
The Department has not taken such an important recommendation 
seriously and taken a casual stand. It has simply been stated that the 
recommendation has been noted. Not only that various other circulars 
issued way back with regard to involvement of women, Panchayati Raj 
Institutions have been quoted as compliance to the recommendation of the 
Committee.  The Committee fail to understand how a circula r issued in 1999 
could be adequate to address to such serious issues involved in the 
recommendation. The Committee disapprove the way the recommendation 
has been responded to and strongly recommend the Government to take all 
the actions suggested in the ea rlier recommendation. The Committee also 
strongly recommend that the Government should take action on their 
recommendations after analyzing the position seriously and not try to 
mislead the Committee by such a vague reply. 

 
 
G Establishment cost of Food Corporation of India (FCI) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 22 (Para No.4.12) 
 
1.26 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee have persistently been recommending in their respective reports  
to bring down the total establishment cost incurred by FCI wh ich adversely affects the 
total subsidy for foodgrains meant for the poorest of the poor.  Any deduction on the total 
establishment cost will result in increased allocation  for foodgrains component since the 
establishment cost is part of the total foodgra ins subsidy package. Inspite of pursuing the 
matter by the Committee in the respective reports, the data indicated in the various 
Budget documents as reflected in the previous parts of the report indicates that the 
establishment cost which includes staff c ost and other administrative expenses is 
increasing year after year.  Total establishment cost which was Rs. 1,455.73 core during 
the year 2005 -06 has increased to 1,723 crore which is around 20 per cent.  The 
Committee further find that M/s McKinsey & Co. while reviewing the operations of FCI has 
made certain recommendations for revised norms of deployment of staff for different 
offices at district level based on the volume of operations.  The various recommendations 
of M/s McKinsey & Co. are still being e xamined.  The Committee strongly recommend to 
take final decision on the various issues relating to bringing efficiencies in the 
administration involved in the handling of foodgrains. Such efficiencies would definitely 
result in curtailment of establishment cost.  The follow up action should be communicated 
to the Committee.  The Committee note that all expenses including establishment cost in 
the Food Corporation of India are made from the Budgetary support of the Ministry by 
means of food subsidy.  The Co mmittee strongly recommend that the establishment cost 
of FCI should be separately indicated while allocating resources for food subsidy.  Such 
an information would enable the Government to monitor the allocation and utilization of 
funds separately for est ablishment and other component of food subsidy.  Besides any 
increase/decrease in the establishment cost would not affect the total package of food 
subsidy. “ 
 
1.27 The Department in the action taken note has stated as under: 
 
‘The Establishment Cost of FCI for the last four years are as under : 
(Rs. In Crore) 
Year Staff Cost Other 
Admin Exp. 
Total Total 
subsidy 
incurred 
Establishment 
cost as % of 
subsidy 
2003-04 1255.11 109.55 1364.66 21587 6.32 
2004-05 1499. 63 117.81 1617.44 20773 7.79 
2005-06 
(Provisional) 
1195.69 157.02 1352.71 21460 6.30 
2006-07 (RE) 1509.07 214.06 1723.13 26265 6.56 
 
Thus, as a percentage of subsidy, there has not been any significant increase in 
 establishment cost of FCI. The total increase in staff cost in 2006 -07 (RE) over 20 05-06 
(Prov) is Rs. 313.92 crore.  Increase in  other Administrative  cost is     Rs. 57.04 crore in 
the same period, out of which, the major portion is on account of Pay, DP. DA. HRA, LTC, 

PLI, Medical and OTA.  The reasons for increase in staff cost in 2006-07 over 2005-06 are 
as under : 
 
Item Reason 
Pay During 2006 -07, the FCI decided to provide full Pay Scale benefits to 
employees on deployment to higher posts.  This is in addition to normal 
increase due to increments and regular promotion and resulted  in increase in 
pay component. 
DP The employees under CDA Scale have been provided with 50% merger of DA 
which is treated as DP, the major impact of which have come in 2006-07 only. 
DA Normal DA increase due to increase in inflation index and additional impact of 
DA on DP. 
HRA HRA to CDA employees is now payable on Basic + DP i.e. 50% more than 
before.  Further, due to higher benefit from HRA,  a large number of CDA 
employees earlier availing leased accommodation benefits have shifted to 
HRA. 
 
 
LTC 2006 was the extended year from Block 2002 -2005.  It was also the first year 
for Block 2006 -2009.  Consequently, the incidence of LTC 
availment/encashment during 2006-07 was higher. 
PLI Due to completion of arrears of Accounts, PLI for the years 2003 -04 and 2004-
05 have been finalized and paid during the year 2006-07 
Medical Due to the increasing age profile of the employees and higher costs of 
treatment the medical expenses are higher. 
OTA Due to continuous depletion of staff strength and exigencies like im port of 
Wheat, the existing staff have to be deployed on OTA basis to get the work 
done.  
 
The FCI is the major implementation agency for the Foodgrain Policy of the  
Government of India.  For this purpose, it needs to have appropriate infrastructure and 
man-power.  However, these costs form only a small part of the total food subsidy.  Such 
infrastructure is necessary for the effective functioning of any organization and can not be 
dispensed with.  In order to carry out the mandate given to the Corporatio n, such 
expenditure has to be incurred.  As these costs are directly linked to the execution of the 
mandate given to the FCI, loading of the same over food subsidy is fully justified.  
However, such establishment costs are separately identified and shown i n the Annual 
Report and Performance Budget of the Corporation. 
 
It is also pertinent to mention that even in States where decentralized procurement  
operations are carried out, the respective States include the related establishment and 
administrative char ges in their claims of subsidy.  Further, even the State Agencies 
carrying out only procurement operations (as against the procurement storage-movement-
distribution done by FCI on behalf of the Central Pool) are also reimbursed establishment 
charges @ 2.5% of the MSP.  And in all such cases, establishment charges form part of 
the total subsidy reimbursement made to them. 
 
The Standing Committee has recommended that the establishment cost of FCI  
should be separately indicated while allocating resources for food subsidy for better 
monitoring purposes.  As the establishment costs are already separately indicated in the 
Annual Accounts of the Corporation, the Department’s view is that the present system of 
accounting already enables the FCI and Government to closely monitor the allocation and 

utilization of funds for establishment expenses of FCI.  In the Department’s budget 
therefore there is no need to separately indicate establishment cost of FCI.’ 
 
 
1.28 The Department in the action taken reply has not addressed to the  
first part of the recommendation. M/s McKinsey & Co. while reviewing the 
operations of FCI had made certain recommendations for revised norms 
regarding deployment of staff for different offices at district level based on 
the volume of operations. W hile examining the Demands for Grants, the 
Committee had been apprised that the various recommendations of M/s 
McKinsey and Co. were being examined. The Committee had recommended 
to take final decisions on the various recommendations/suggestions of the 
said company which may result in curtailment of establishment cost. The 
Department has not responded at all to the aforesaid part of the 
recommendation. The Committee would like the Department to inform about 
the follow-up action of the recommendations made by M/s McKinsey and Co. 
The Committee in the later part of the recommendation had  
recommended to indicate establishment cost of FCI separately in the various 
budget documents. From the action taken reply, the Committee find that 
although FCI in its Annual Report and Performance Budget has been 
indicating the establishment cost separately, the Department could not 
agree to the recommendation of the Committee to indicate the same in the 
budget documents. The Committee fail to understand why the establishment 
cost that is already being reflected in various documents of FCI could not be 
reflected in the budget documents. The Committee feel that there would be 
more transparency if the establishment cost is indicated in the various 
budget documents. Besides indica tion of establishment cost separately in 
the Budget document would give the exact picture of increase/decrease in 
food subsidy. The Committee would, therefore, like to reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and urge the Department to indicate the establishment cost 
separately in the budget documents of the year 2008-09.   
 
H Proxy labour in FCI 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.  31 (Para No.4.56) 
 
1.29 The Committee had recommended as under: 

 
“The Committee note with satisfaction that their various recommendations 
 Committee to curb the menace of proxy labour have been followed by the State 
Governments.  Most of the State Governments have implemented the 
recommendations.  However, in some States, recommendations are partially 
implemented.  In Assam, J&K, Bihar, Delhi and Andhra Pradesh, labour union 
workers are opposing the implementation of the instant recommendation of the 
Committee according to which each / every worker is required to put one’s 
signature or thumb impression as a token of attendance.  The Committee w ould 
like that efforts should be made by State Governments to convince the workers in 
this regard.  Further, with regard to the recommendation of the Committee that 
payment of the wages to all workers be made by cheque, the workers are hardly 
accepting cheque in J&K and Chhattisgarh on the plea that they are illiterate.  The 
Committee would like that these workers should be persuaded by educating them 
about the benefits of getting wages through cheque.  Further pursuance is 
required in States where the reco mmendations of the Committee are partially 
implemented.  The follow up action should be intimated to the Committee.”  
 
1.30 The Department in the action taken reply has stated as under: 
 
‘The matter is being actively pursued and follow up action is being taken  
with the various zones / regions of the FCI for implementation of the 
recommendations. The action taken so far on suggestions of the Committee from 
time to time is enclosed herewith as Annexure ‘A’. 
 
Major Labour Unions have been formally asked to co nvince the workers 
with regard to the recommendations of the Committee to curb proxy labour.  
General Managers of Regions are also holding the meetings with local leaders of 
the Unions for speedy implementation of the recommendation of the Committee. 
 
Regional Heads of the States where the recommendations of the 
Committee are partially implemented have been asked in the Monthly 
Performance Review Meeting held on 29.01.2007 and 21.05.2007 that all the 
recommendations of the Parliamentary Committee may be implemented urgently 
in the remaining States. 
 
The whole matter was also placed before the Executive Committee of FCI 
 in its meeting held on 30.05.2007 to formulate a time bound action plan to 
implement the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee. 
 
Annexure ‘A’ would reveal that there has been further improvement in J&K  
as the recommendation of the Committee for payment through cheque has now 
been implemented.  
 

Annexure ‘A’ 
 
 
Action Taken by Government on recommendations of the Committee  
 
             RECOMMENDATION OF PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
Sl. 
No. 
State Each & every 
worker should put 
one’s signature or 
thumb impression 
as a token of 
attendance  
Introduction of 
Mechanical Gate 
Entry Devices, 
Punching Card 
System with thumb 
impression 
Payment of 
Wages to all 
Workers through 
Cheque as per 
provisions of 
Income Tax Act 
Signing of Daily Work 
output slip by each 
labour a the end of 
the day & counter 
signed by the 
Mandal/ Sardar/ 
Shed Incharge  
1. PUNJAB Implemented  Partially Implemented Implemented  In Progress 
2. HARYANA Implemented In Progress Implemented Implemented 
3. UTTAR 
PRADESH 
Partially 
Implemented 
Implemented Implemented Implemented 
4. UTTARANCHAL Implemented Partially Implemented Implemented Implemented 
5. RAJASTHAN Implemented Implemented Implemented Implemented 
6. J&K Mechanical 
Devices installed in 
6 depots  
In Progress Implemented Partially Implemented 
7. DELHI N.Y.I* Implemented Implemented N.Y.I* 
8. HIMACHAL 
PRADESH 
Implemented Implemented Implemented Implemented 
9. MAHARASHTRA Implemented  Implemented Implemented In Progress  
10. GUJARAT Implemented Partially Implemented Implemented Implemented 
11. MADHYA 
PRADESH 
Partially 
Implemented 
Partially Implemented Implemented Partially Implemented 
12. CHATTISGARH Implemented Implemented N.Y.I* N.Y.I* 
13. ANDHRA 
PRADESH 
N.Y.I* Implemented Implemented Implemented 
14. KARNATAKA Implemented Implemented Implemented Implemented 
15. TAMILNADU Implemented In Progress Implemented Partially Implemented 
16. KERALA Implemented Partially Implemented Implemented Implemented 
17. WEST BENGAL Partially 
Implemented 
Partially Implemented Implemented Partially Implemented 
 
 
18. ORISSA In Progress (N.Y.I.) 
Resistance by 
Unions. 
Partially Implemented Implemented N.Y.I* 
19. BIHAR N.Y.I* Partially Implemented Implemented In Progress 
20. JHARKHAND In Progress In Progress Implemented  In Progress 
21. ASSAM Partially 
Implemented 
N.Y.I* Implemented Partially Implemented 
22. NAGALAND & 
MANIPUR 
Implemented In Progress Implemented In Progress 
23. MEGHALAYA In Progress In Progress Implemented Implemented  
 
*  N.Y.I           = Not Yet Implemented 
Partially implemented = Only those  states where  the  recommendation has been  
  implemented in some  of the depots while in other depots  
  action is underway for implementation in the same region. 
Implementation in  = The recommendation have been conveyed by the Regions 
Progress   to their Area Managaers for strict compliance in the depots 
    under their respective jurisdictions. 

1.31 The Committee appreciate the follow-up of the recommendation made 
 by the Committee while examining Demands for Grants 2005 -06 and 
pursued further during the year 2006 -07 and 2007 -08 in the respective 
reports. Most of the States had implemented the recommendations of t he 
Committee as reported during examination of Demands for Grants (DFG) 
2007-08, which would go a long way in curbing the menace of proxy labour 
in FCI. Out of some of the States, which could not succeed in 
implementation of the recommendation, the follow up action during the year 
2007-08 could result in implementation of recommendation in Jammu and 
Kashmir also. The Committee urge the Department to continue further with 
the efforts being made in this regard so that the recommendations are 
implemented in al l the States/ Uts within a stipulated time frame. The 
Committee may be kept informed in this regard.  
 
I Underspending of funds under various schemes for which allocation 
 is being made out of Sugar Development Funds (SDF) 
 
 Recommendations Sl. Nos. 36 & 37 (Para Nos. 6.31 & 6.32) 
 
1.32     The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee find that a cess of Rs. 14 per quintal is being collected as a  
duty of excise on all sugar produced by any sugar factory in India under Sugar 
Cess Act, 1982 and the proceeds, reduced by the cost of collection as determined 
by the Central Government, together with any money received by the Central 
Government for the purposes of the Act after due appropriation made by the 
Parliament are credited to the Sugar Developmen t Fund (SDF). In this regard 
during the period from 1982 -83 to 2006 -07, (upto 30 November, 2006), a cess 
amount of Rs. 4,448.44 crore has been collected out of which Rs. 3,506 crore has 
been transferred to the Sugar Development Fund. The Sugar Development Fund 
has been created for financing of accounts for the development of Sugar Industry 
to achieve the objectives of the aforesaid Act.  
 
The Committee find from the position of financial achievement with regard  
to various schemes as reported by the Departm ent in the Budget documents that 
there is huge underspending during the year 2005 -06 and 2006-07. The following 
data substantiates the aforesaid observation of the Committee.  
 
 
                            Scheme 
 
Underspending in percentage as 
compared to Revised Estimate  
 
                                                    2005-06  2006-07  
 

Loans for 
modernization/rehabilitation of 
sugar mills.  
 
63  80  
Loans for Cane development  36  48  
Loans to Sugar mills for 
Bagasse based cogeneration 
power projects  
54  48  
Loans for production of 
anhydrous alcohol /ethanol  
72  60  
 
(Recommendation no. 6.31) 
 
 
1.32 ” The Department has indicated receipt of incomplete applications as  
required under SDF rules as well as non execution of timely Tripartite Agreemen t 
(TPA) as the reasons for the huge underspending. Further analysis of the data 
reveal that the amount allocated at Budget Estimates (BE) stage is enhanced even 
when the trends of utilization of expenditure are lesser than the allocation made at 
the BE stage.    For example under the scheme ‘Loan for sugar mills for Bagasse 
based cogeneration power projects’ the allocation was enhanced from Rs. 100 
crore to Rs. 125 crore at RE stage during the year 2005 -06.   However, it resulted 
in to expenditure of just R s. 62.73 crore which is far lesser than the allocation of 
Rs. 100 crore at BE stage. During the following year i.e. 2006 -07 again the 
allocation made at BE stage has been enhanced from to Rs. 100 crore to Rs. 120 
crore, whereas the actual expenditure is again Rs. 62.5 crore.  
 
The Committee conclude from the aforesaid scenario that the objectives of  
creation of Sugar Development Fund are not being fully achieved. The reasons for 
under achievement are well within the domain of the Government. There is an 
urgent need for simplifying the procedures for advancing loans to various sugar 
mills under the respective schemes. Besides, the owners of the sugar mills need 
to be assisted in completing the formalities for sanction of the loans under the 
schemes. There is  an urgent need to publicise the aforesaid schemes so that 
maximum applications are received. The Committee further note that India is one 
of the largest producers of sugar and sugarcane in the world and as such there is 
great potential for bagasse based c ogeneration power projects and production of 
anhydrous alcohol / ethanol. The Sugar Development Fund can be a boom to 
these sugar mills particularly when the Sugar Development Fund has the definite 
source of funding i.e. the cess of Rs. 14 per quintal as a  excise duty on all sugar 
produced by any sugar factory. The Committee strongly recommend to the 
Department to take all the desired steps in the light of the aforesaid observations 
of the Committee and the Committee be kept apprised.”  
 
       (Recommendation no. 6.32) 
 
1.34 In reply to recommendation Sl. No. 36, (Para No. 6.31) Department in the  
    action taken note has stated as under: 
 

‘Disbursement of Loan from Sugar Development Fund for all the schemes 
 is dependent on completion of necessary documentatio n, furnishing of security 
etc. in time.  Even though there were a number of loans sanctioned for the 
schemes, the loans could not be disbursed as expected due to the fact that the 
factories did not complete the formalities and submit the required documents  and 
security in time.  
 
Underspending in percentage as compared to Revised Estimates for the  
year 2006-2007 were as follows: 
 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme RE 2006-07 
  
 
(Rs. in crore) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
2006-07 
(Rs. in 
crore) 
Percentage 
Underspendin
g  
1 Loans for modernization/ 
rehabilitation of   sugar 
mills: 
 
125 86.46 30.83 
2 Cane Development 25 14.81 40.76 
3 Bagasse based co -
generation 
120 92.02 23.32 
4 Loan for production of 
ethanol 
30 2.27 92.43 
 
             (Reply to recommendation no. 6.31) 
 
‘The full text of SDF Rules, 1983, scheme-wise, has been placed on the  
official web -site of the Department so that the sugar factories could make 
themselves aware of the various schemes under the rules.  Besides, the State 
Governments and Sugar Mills Associations all over the country are informed about 
the policies of the Government on Sugar Development Fund who in turn 
disseminate the information to sugar factories.      
  
Efforts are continuously made to simplify and improve the procedure and 
other formalities while ensuring that financial requirements are adequately met.  A 
special meeting of the Standing Committee on SDF is being held shortly to discuss 
the Rules and norms of SDF and recommend any improvement/ changes in the 
same.   
 
During 2006-07, the actual expenditure under the scheme for bagasse  
based cogeneration power project was Rs.92.02 crore and not Rs.62.50 Crores.’ 
 
1.35 The Committee are not inclined to accept the reply furnished by the  
Department in response to their recommendation to take all the corrective 
action to ensure hundred per cent spending of the allocations made under 

different schemes for which the money is being allocated from Sugar 
Development Fund. Instead of probing the reasons for such a huge under 
spending, the Department has chosen to furnish the same reasons for non -
completion of formalities and required documents by Sugar Mills, as 
furnished during the course of examination of Demands for Grants. The 
Committee again emphasize that Sugar Development Fund has the definite 
source of funding i.e. a cess of Rs. 14 per quintal as a excise duty on all 
sugar produced by any sugar factory in India under Sugar Cess Act, 1982 
and as such the fund can be a boom for the sugar industry. The Committee 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and would like the Department to take 
action on the suggested lines. 
 
 
J Inspection of sugar factories 
 
Recommendation Sl. no. 40 (Para No. 6.35) 
 
1.36 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that during the year 2006-07, only four sugar 
 factories were visited and the number of sugar samples drawn for testing 
was just 131.  The Committee are concerned to note that the number of 
factories being visited as well as the number of samples being drawn for 
testing is very low taking into acco unt the large number of installed sugar 
factories in the country.  The Committee felt that when the priority of the 
Government is to provide good quality sugar to the consumers, proper quality 
control measures should be taken.  More and more factories need  to be 
inspected/visited.  The Committee feel that mere issuing of show cause 
notices would not serve the purpose of keeping a check on sugar factories to 
maintain high quality standards.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
some very stringent action , including monetary penalties may be imposed on 
sugar factories whose samples fail the quality tests.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter.” 
 
1.37 The Department in their action taken note has stated as under: 
 
‘The Committee has recommended that (i) the number of sugar factories to 
 be inspected/visited should be increased and (ii) stringent action, including 
monetary penalties on factories whose samples failed in the quality tests should 
be imposed. 
 
As regards (i), Directorate of Sugar is having limited staff consisting of 1  
Assistant Director and 2 inspecting officers, therefore, it is difficult to carry out 
large number of inspection.  However, Directorate of Sugar will endeavour to 

increase the number of inspecti on. As regards (ii), sugar inspections are carried 
out under the provisions of the  
Sugar (Control) Order, 1966 which has been issued in exercise of the powers 
conferred by Section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955.  The Act does not 
authorizes an e xecutive  officer of the Central Government to impose fine on a 
sugar factory whose sample fails in the quality tests.  Hence, it is difficult to impose 
monetary penalties on such factories.  The fine on a sugar factory can be imposed 
only by a court.  
  
It is pertinent to mention that the sugar samples degraded by the  
Directorate has to be sold in the market by the factory as per the findings and such 
sugar will realize less price than the price for the grade which the factory had 
marked originally.  Ther efore, the monetary loss in this manner is the punishment 
to the erring sugar mills.  Moreover, the sugar determined as BISS/MOIST has to 
be either reprocessed or sold to bulk consumers, by which also the factory will be 
loser monetarily.  Thus, the factor y, who has mis -graded the sugar in quality are 
penalized by means of less realization at the time of sale.’ 
 
1.38 The Committee in the earlier recommendation had strongly 
recommended to take stringent action including monetary penalties 
on sugar factories whose samples fail the quality test. The Committee 
find from the reply that the legal position in this regard do not permit 
monetary penalties on such factories as per the provisions made 
under Section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955. There is a 
provision of indirect punishment by way of degrading the quality of 
the sugar by the inspectors, which will result in realization of lesser 
price than the price for the grade which the factory had originally 
marked. It has further been stated that the sugar dete rmined as 
BISS/MOIST has to be either reprocessed or sold to bulk consumers 
by which also the factory would be loser monetarily. The Committee 
are really perturbed to note the aforesaid position. The Committee feel 
that ultimately the low quality sugar wil l be distributed in the market 
and reach to the end user i.e. consumer, and he may be penalized for 
no fault on his part. The Committee strongly recommend that Section 
3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 should be suitably amended 
so as to make provis ion for stringent penalties against the sugar 
factories whose samples fail the quality test. 
With regard to observation of the Committee of having very less  

visits and number of samples drawn for testing during the year 2006 -07, the 
Committee note that st aff constraint has been cited as the reason for lesser 
number of inspections. The Committee strongly recommend that the staff of 
Directorate of Sugar should be suitably increased so that more inspections 
can be carried out and the interest of the consumers is protected.  

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
Recommendations/ Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 1 (Para No.2.29) 
 
2.1 The Committee note that the allocation of the Department at BE stage during 
2007-08 is Rs.26, 406.20 cr ore under Non -Plan schemes and Rs.85 crore under Plan 
schemes.  In the allocation under Non -Plan schemes, of which food subsidy is one of the 
main components, there is enhancement of outlay to the tune of Rs.1,506.50 crore i.e. 
around 6 per cent increase o ver the previous year i.e. 2006 -07.  However, when 
compared to the allocation made during 2004-05 and 2005-06, the allocation during 2007-
08, is lesser by Rs.648.99 crore and Rs.649.24 crore, respectively.  Further, the allocation 
made to the Department during 2006-07 at BE and RE stage is far less than the proposed 
allocation. 
 
2.2 The Committee finds that whereas there is a hike of 28.01 per cent in the tax 
revenue during the year 2006 -07, as compared to previous year, the enhancement in 
Non-Plan outlay i s just around 6 per cent.  The Committee strongly recommend to the 
Government to provide adequate allocation under various schemes of the Department 
particularly when food subsidy is the major component of the outlay of the Department.  
There should not be  a cut at the Revised Estimates Stage.  The Department should be 
allocated the outlay as per the projections so that benefit envisaged under different 
schemes, particularly the food subsidy under which subsidized food grains are made 
available to the poore st of the poor, reach the intended beneficiaries.  While 
recommending higher outlay, the Committee also strongly recommend to the Department 
to take all initiatives to ensure that the outlay earmarked for different schemes/ 
programmes is fully utilized. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
2.3 As regards the recommendation of the Standing Committee that there should be 
no cut at the Revised Estimates Stage, the recommendation has been forwarded to 
Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs – Budget Division) and Planning 
Commission (DP Division and Plan Coordination Division) for future compliance. 
 
 As regards the recommendation to take all initiatives to ensure that the outlay 
earmarked for different schemes/programmes (plan and non -plan) is fu lly utilized, the 
recommendation of the Standing Committee has been noted by Department of Food and 
Public Distribution for strict compliance, and circulated to all Divisional Heads in the 
Department for ensuring strict adherence to these recommendations. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F.No.4/1/2006-Plan. 
Dated.18.06.2007] 

 
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 4 & 5 (Para Nos.3.27 and 3.28) 
 
2.4 The Committee find that the Department of Food and Pu blic Distribution is the 
nodal Department with regard to formulation and implementation for various national 
policies on foodgrains relating to procurement, movement, scientific research, storage, 
distribution and sale. As regards the procurement of foodgr ains particularly of wheat and 
grains, during the year 2005 -06 and 2006 -07, the situation is far from satisfactory. The 
actual procurement during these years is far below the estimates of procurement. During 
the year 2005 -06, against the estimates of procu rement of 180 lakh tonnes, actual 
procurement of wheat was 147.85 lakh tonnes i.e 82.5 per cent. During the year 2006 -07, 
the position is even worse. Against the estimates of procurement of 162.07 lakh tonnes, 
the actual procurement of wheat is only 92.31 lakh tonnes, which is 57 per cent of the 
estimates. As regards procurement of rice during the year 2006 -07, it was 204.09 lakh 
tonnes whereas in the same period during the previous year, procurement of rice was 
recorded to the tune of 276.56 lakh tonnes. V arious reasons such  as mismatch between 
the demand and supply of wheat with an increased domestic demand and decline in 
wheat production leading to increased purchase by private traders have been cited as the 
reasons for lesser procurement of wheat during  the year 2006 -07. With regard to 
minimum buffer norms for wheat, the Committee find that as on 1 st January, 2007 the 
actual stock was 54.28 lakh tonnes against the minimum buffer norms of 82 lakh tonnes. 
The situation in rice was however better as against  the minimum buffer norms of 82 lakh 
tonnes, the actual stock was 119.77 lakh tonnes. As regards the total availability of 
foodgrains, the actual stock was 174.05 lakh tonnes against the minimum buffer norms of 
200 lakh tonnes. 
 
 The Department has informe d that a Committee of officers/experts was formed to 
examine various strategic options and recommend appropriate procurement strategy for 
Rabi Marketing Season (RMS) 2007-08 and the recommendations have been acted upon 
appropriately by the Government. The Government has taken a series of steps to 
enhance the procurement of wheat in RMS 2007 -08 which include import of 55 lakh 
tonnes of wheat to enhance the existing stocks, increase in MSP from Rs. 650 to 750 for 
wheat along with Rs. 100 per quintal as incentive bonus, ban of export of wheat for private 
trade and import of wheat on private account at zero duty. 
  
 The Committee find that inspite of efforts made by the Government to improve the 
supply position through market interventions as well as strategic d ecisions with regard to 
export/import of wheat, the situation has not improved to the desired level as is evident 
from the data of procurement as well as buffer stocks. The Committee note that the 
foodgrains stocks falling below the buffer stocks is a matt er of serious concern, 
particularly when the foodgrains are required for distribution through PDS to the poorest of 
the poor as well as to fulfil the demand of foodgrains in the areas affected by natural 
calamities. Not only that, the minimum buffer stocks  are also required for resorting to 
various market interventions to stabilize the prices of foodgrains in the market. Keeping in 
view all these factors, the Committee strongly recommends that the Government should 
review the position of buffer stocks and t akes all desired actions to ensure the minimum 
required procurement of foodgrains. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.5 With reference to para 3.27 and 3.28 of the Report, it is informed that the stocks of 
wheat and rice in the Central Pool vis -à-vis the buffer stocks are above the buffer norms 
as on 1st April, 2007 as may be seen below:  

(figures in lakh tonnes) 
 Stocks as on 1st April,2007 Buffer norms 
Wheat 47.03 40 
Rice 131.71 122 
 
To enhance procurement of wheat in RMS 2007-08 the following action has been 
taken by the Government: 
 
i)   The MSP for wheat was fixed at Rs. 750 per quintal for RMS 2007 -08, an increase 
of Rs. 100 per quintal, in order to encourage farmers to grow more wheat.  Now, 
according to the Third Advance Estimates of the Department of A griculture  & 
Cooperation, the estimated production of wheat is likely to be 73.7 million tonnes 
in crop year 2006-07 compared to 69.3 million tonnes in crop year 2005-06. 
(ii) An incentive bonus of Rs 100 per quintal over and above the MSP is also being 
given in RMS 2007-08. 
iii) Import of 55 lakh tonnes of wheat was done in 2006 -07 which has improved the 
stock position of wheat in the Central pool and the wheat stocks (as on 1.4.2007) 
were more than the buffer norms of 40 lakh tonnes at the start of RMS 2007-08. 
iv) Wheat exports on private account have been banned upto 31.12.2007.  Wheat 
exports from Central Pool are also banned. 
v)  Decision was taken to release 4 lakh tonnes of wheat under OMSS in February 
and March 2007 to cool the market prices before the start of RMS 2007-08.  
vi) A notification titled “Wheat (Stock Declaration by Companies or Firms or 
Individuals) Order 2007 has been issued under the Essential Commodities Act 
1955 on 1.3.2007. The order provides that any Company or Firm or individual  
which purchases wheat beyond 50,000 tonnes during 2007 -08 shall furnish to the 
Central Government a return indicating the name/address of the company, 
quantity of wheat purchased and quantity of wheat held in stock. 
vii) Department of Consumer Affairs has  extended upto 31 st August, 2007 notification 
under  the EC Act enabling State Governments to impose stock limit on wheat and 
pulses 
viii)Import of wheat on private account at zero duty has been permitted upto  
31.12.2007. 
ix) 13128 centers for wheat procurement have been opened by Government agencies 
in RMS 2007-08 as compared to  8985 centers in RMS 2006-07. 
x) Senior Officers of Department of Food and Public Distribution and FCI are 
frequently visiting wheat procuring States to personally assess the situation. 
xi) In order to encourage wheat procurement in States like U.P., Madhya Pradesh, 
etc  
      Commission to Societies/sub-agents has been enhanced to 2.5% on the lines of       
      the Arthiya Commission in Punjab and Haryana. 
xii) NAFED has been engaged to procure wheat on behalf of FCI in States of U.P., 
Bihar and Rajasthan.   
  
Due to the above steps, wheat procurement in RMS 2007 -08 is 106.7 lakh tonnes 
as on 4.6.2007 which is 14.4 lakh tonnes more than the wheat procured (92.3 lakh 
tonnes) in RMS 2006 -07. T o ensure that there is sufficient wheat to meet the 
requirements for TPDS and welfare schemes as well as to ensure adequate buffer 
stocks of wheat, the Government has taken a decision to import 3 to 5 million tonnes 
of wheat in 2007-08.  

 
Procurement of ri ce in KMS 2006 -07 (upto 4.6.2007) was 230.1 lakh tonnes and 
procurement in this season is expected to be sufficient to meet the requirements of 
TPDS and welfare schemes as also to meet the required buffer norms for rice.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F.No.156(6)/2007-Py.I 
Dated 7th June, 2007] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 1.12 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 6 (Para No.3.29) 
 
2.6 The Committee find  from the data of procurement as indicated in various 
documents that procurement of wheat is mainly from Haryana and Punjab.  The 
procurement of rice is mainly from Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Haryana, Chattisgarh 
and Andhra Pradesh. When the production  is compared to the procurement in Uttar 
Pradesh, the procurement is only 15 lakh tonnes against the production of 255 lakh 
tonnes. Similar is the position of lower procurement ratio as compared to production in 
Uttaranchal, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and B ihar. The Secretary during the course of 
oral evidence has acknowledged that Uttar Pradesh is the largest producer of wheat but it 
contributes the lowest to the pool. To address this problem, FCI has opened, 1,000 
centres in Uttar Pradesh. The Department h as taken certain initiatives to address the 
problem of lesser procurement from non -traditional states.  The State Governments have 
been given relaxation to do procurement through cooperative societies. Besides, the 
Ministry also provides one per cent extra  commission to cooperatives. The Committee 
note that inspite of the initiatives taken by the Department to address the problem of 
lesser procurement as compared to production in non-traditional states the procurement is 
not up to the mark. The Committee st rongly recommend to the Department to take this 
matter urgently. Besides, the Committee urge that small farmers should be given priority 
while undertaking procurement of foodgrains by FCI. Desired initiatives to address the 
aforesaid issues should be taken by the Department. The Committee should also be kept 
apprised.                                                          
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.7 The states of Punjab and Haryana have a much higher marketable surplus of 
wheat compared to States like U.P., M.P., Rajasthan and Bihar, where a sizeable amount 
of wheat is retained by the farmers for their self -consumption. It may also be mentioned 
that taxes on foodgrains in Punjab and Haryana are above 10.5 % as compared to 6.5% 
in Uttar Pradesh, 3% in R ajasthan, 1% in Bihar and 2.2% in Madhya Pradesh. Moreover, 
the latter states are closer to major consumption centers of wheat in West, East and 
South India leading to lesser transportation cost. Therefore in states of U.P., Rajasthan, 
Bihar and M.P. private participation in procurement of foodgrains is more and purchase by 
Government agencies is far more in Punjab and Haryana as compared to these states. 
 
In order to widen the scope of MSP operations in States other than Punjab and 
Haryana, in order to ben efit the small farmers and to maximize procurement of wheat in 

the States of U.P., Rajasthan, M.P. and Bihar, the number of procurement centers in 
these states was increased from 6517 in RMS 2006 -07 to  10,748 in RMS 2007 -08. In all 
states taken together, 13128 centres were opened for wheat in RMS 2007 -08 as 
compared to 8985 centres opened in RMS 2006 -07.  The Government has also allowed 
commission to societies/sub-agents of the rate of 2.5% in U.P., M.P. and Bihar to increase 
procurement in these States. 
 
     In order to maximize procurement of wheat during 2007 -08 officers of the Department 
of Food & Public Distribution and FCI are visiting mandis and personally reviewing wheat 
procurement operations. State Govts. have also been requested to take strong s teps to 
ensure that all levies and taxes are paid by private traders/companies. In view of late 
market arrivals of wheat in Punjab and Haryana period of procurement of wheat in RMS 
2007-08 has been extended upto 15.6.2007 in these states. Consequent upon t he efforts 
made so far the procurement of wheat during RMS 2007 -08 in the states of U.P., Bihar, 
Rajasthan and M.P. is 8.1 lakh tonnes in RMS 2007 -08 (upto 5.6.2007) as compared to 
0.1 lakh tonnes in RMS 2006-07.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F.No.156(6)/2007-Py.I 
Dated 7th June, 2007] 
Recommendation Sl. No. 8 (Para No. 3.31) 
 
2.8 The Committee find that there has been a recent rise in prices, particularly of 
foodgrains. The Finance Minister in his Budget (2007 -08) speech has highlighted that the 
average inflation in 2006 -07 is estimated to be between to be between 5.2 and 5.4 per 
cent as compared to 4.4 per cent last year. The Economic Survey also indicates that in 
cereals and pulses s ub-groups, the inflation was in excess of 5 per cent during 2006 -07. 
In other non -food articles, edible oil seeds recorded significant price rise. The domestic 
production is far below the demand coupled with decline in world production have been 
cited as the reasons in the Economic Survey for increase of price in case of wheat. Inspite 
of the import of wheat and pulses to ameliorate the shortfall in domestic output relative to 
domestic demand had a little impact on domestic prices because of firm internatio nal 
prices.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.9 As reported by the Department of Consumer Affairs the prices of certain essential 
commodities such as wheat and pulses started showing an upward trend from the early 
part of the year 2006. The reasons for rise in prices of food items are shortfall in domestic 
supplies relative to demand and hardening of international prices. During the last year 
2006-07 the rate of inflation in terms of Wholesale Price Index numbers ranged between 
3.85% to 6.61%  
 
 Prices of wheat and some varieties of pulses have stabilized or declined during the 
recent past on account of various measures taken by the Government. Some of the 
important measures taken by the Government are given below:- 
 State Trading Corporation contracted for import  of 55 lakh tonnes of wheat to 
supplement domestic availability during 2006-07. Government has also decided to 
import 5 million tonnes of wheat in suitable tranches in 2007 -2008 to augment the 
buffer stocks of the Government. 
 Period of validity of import of wheat at zero duty was extended up to 31.12.07. 

 Government decided to release in February and March, 2007 upto 4 lakh tonnes of 
wheat under the Open Market Sale Scheme (Domestic). 
 Export of wheat has been banned w.e.f. 09.02.07. The ban will remain in fo rce up 
to 31.12.2007.  
 Customs duty on import of pulses was reduced to zero on June 8, 2006 and the 
period of validity of import of pulses at zero duty has been extended from 
31.3.2007 to 1.8.2007 and further to 31.3.09.  
 A ban was imposed on export of pul ses with effect from June 22, 2006 (except 
export of kabuli chana w.e.f. 7.3.07). The period of validity of prohibition on exports 
of pulses which was initially upto 31.3.2007 was further extended upto 31.3.2008, 
vide DGFT Notification dated 9.3.2007. 
 At t he initiative of the Government, National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing 
Federation of India Ltd. (NAFED) executed a contract for import of 49,300 MTs of 
pulses during 2006-07. 
 NAFED, PEC Ltd, MMTC and STC would target to import 1.5. Million Metric 
Tonnes (MMT) of pulses during 2007-08. 
 Forward Markets Commission (FMC) vide letter dated 23.01.2007 has directed the 
three National Exchanges, namely (a) Multi Commodity Exchange of India Ltd., (b) 
National Commodity & Derivatives Exchange Ltd., (c) National  Multi Commodity 
Exchange of India Ltd., to delist all contracts of tur and urad and to close out all 
outstanding positions in all Tur and Urad contracts at the closing price on 
23.01.07. FMC has also stated that no further contract shall be launched witho ut 
its prior approval and permission already granted to launch contracts in Urad and 
Tur stands withdrawn. 
 FMC has on 27.2.2007 directed all the three National Exchanges that no new 
wheat and rice contracts be launched. In the letter to the Exchanges, FMC has 
stated that permission already granted for yet to be launched contracts stands 
revoked and that in respect of running contracts in these commodities no new 
position should be allowed to be taken. Only squaring up of position should be 
allowed. 
 Keeping in view the prevailing price situation, the Central Government had issued 
a Central Order dated 29.08.2006 under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 to 
enable the State Governments to invoke Stock Limits in respect of wheat and 
pulses for a period of 6 mon ths. By virtue of this Order, the State Governments 
/UTs Administrations have been empowered to take effective action to bring out 
the hoarded stock of these items to ensure their availability to the common people 
at reasonable prices. Government has, on 2 7.2.07, extended the validity of the 
Central Order by another six months.   
 
 Production of wheat, pulses and oilseeds since 2005 -06 and 3 rd Advance 
estimates are given at Annexure- B. The domestic production of wheat during 2006 -07 is 
estimated to be 73.7 0 million tonnes (3 rd advance estimate) as against 69.35 million 
tonnes during 2005 -06 (final estimate). In case of pulses, domestic production after 
reaching 14.9 million tonnes during 2003 -04 declined to 13.4 million tonnes in 2005 -06 
and is now estimated to be 14.10 million tonnes during 2006 -07. Production of oilseeds is 
estimated to be 232.64 lakh tonnes (3 rd advance estimate) during 2006 -07 as against 
279.79 lakh tonnes of 2005-06 (final estimate).  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F. No 156(6)/2007-Py.I 
Dated 4th July, 2007] 
 

ANNEXURE-B 
 
(Million Tonnes) 
Crop Season 2005-06  2006-07 
 3rd 
Advance 
Estimates 
Final 
Estimates 
Targets 2nd Adv. 
Est 
3rd Adv. 
Est. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Rice  Kharif 77.81 78.27 80.78 77.43 78.54 
 Rabi 12.07 13.52 2.02 12.7 12.51 
 Total  89.88 91.79 92.8 90.13 91.05 
Wheat  Rabi 71.54 69.35 75.53 72.5 73.7 
Maize Total 14.89 14.71 15.39 13.56 13.85 
Coarse 
Cereals 
Total 34.67 34.06 36.52 32.02 32.92 
Cereals Total 196.09 195.2 204.85 194.65 197.67 
Tur Kharif 2.52 2.74 2.9 2.64 2.51 
Gram Rabi 5.85 5.6 6.2 6.16 5.97 
Total 
Pulses 
Total 13.92 13.39 15.15 14.52 14.1 
Total 
Foodgrains 
Total 210.01 208.6 220 209.17 211.78 
 
(Lakh Tonnes) 
 
Crop Season 2005-06  2006-07 
 3rd 
Advance 
Estimates 
Final 
Estimates 
Targets 2nd Adv. 
Est 
3rd Adv. 
Est. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Groundnut Kharif 62.74 62.98 71 31.82 33.52 
 Rabi 14.84 16.95 25.02 12.29 16.31 
 Total  77.58 79.93 96.02 44.11 49.83 
Rapeseed 
& Mustard 
Rabi 71.69 81.31 73.7 75.68 66.94 
Sunflower Total 14.34 14.39 13.06 11.42 11.19 
Soyabean Kharif 83.55 82.74 86.92 86.82 86.68 
Total Nine 
Oilseeds 
Total 266.97 279.79 294 236.19 232.64 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Recommendation Sl. No. 9 (Para No. 3.32) 
 
2.10 The Committee further note that wh eat production during 2006 -07 is likely to be 
72.5 million tonnes as compared to 69.35 million tonnes in the previous year. The 
Committee note that more stress need to be given to increase the domestic production of 
foodgrains. The Committee also note that  although the various issues related to increase 
in production of foodgrains fall under the jurisdiction of Ministry of Agriculture, the 
Department of Food being the nodal Department for Management of Food, has also to 
play an important role. In this regar d, the Committee find that the Ministry of Food 
emphasized at the highest level the need to enhance production of wheat, rice and coarse 
grains to ensure that there is no mismatch between demand and supply of foodgrains. 
The Committee strongly recommend to  the Department to continue the efforts in this 
regard. The Committee also feel that there is an urgent need to take steps to accelerate 
the production of various foodgrains in the country. In this regard the various critical areas 
related to the productio n of foodgrains such as irrigation, availability of agricultural land, 
research in various techniques of agriculture,   Development of   seeds etc. need to be 
addressed for which detailed consultation with various concerned Ministries is required. 
For this , the Government should think of launching some accelerated programmes to 
increase the productivity of foodgrains specifically wheat, pulses and oil seeds for which 
the Government has to resort to imports. The Committee would like that Accelerated 
Wheat Pr oduction Programme should be framed in coordination with the Ministry of 
Agriculture and other stake holders so that we may not have to resort to import. Besides 
to increase the productivity of pulses and oil seeds farmers should be given minimum 
support p rice so that they take interest in growing pulses and oil seeds by getting the 
economic protection.       
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.11 The Department of Agriculture & Cooperation have informed that as per the third 
advance estimates released on 4 th April 2007, production of wheat is estimated at 73.7 
million tonnes during 2006-07 as compared to 69.35 million tonnes last year.  Table below 
shows the crop-wise demand and projected production of foodgrains for the terminal year, 
2011-12, of the Eleventh Five  Year Plan given by the Sub -Group on demand – supply 
projections constituted by the Planning Commission. 
 
(Million Tonnes) 
Crop Demand Projected Production 
Rice 98.79 97.56 
Wheat 77.36 72.34 
Coarse Cereals 38.19 37.76 
Cereals 214.35 207.66 
Pulses 19.91 16.06 
Foodgrains 234.26 223.72 
 
Notes: 
1. Demand is based on behaviouristic approach.  The rate of growth of per capita 
disposable income is 4.8%.  Demand includes seed, feed and wastage. 
2. Projected production is based on the CAGR of 1.04% for cereals and 3.44% 
for pulses.  It is assumed that the technology and resource use efficiency in 
cereals is uniformly distributed on rice, wheat and coarse cereals.   
   

 Regarding the matter of increasing production of wheat the Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation have informed that the States have been sensitized to promote 
timely sowing, resources conservation technologies like Zero tillage, Farrow irrigated 
raised bud system, input use and high yielding varieties, micronutrients etc.  To raise the 
production and  productivity of wheat a special rolling plan targeting 138 districts in 9 
States viz. U.P., Bihar, Punjab, Haryana, Madya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Maharashtra, 
Gujarat and West Bengal has been formulated.  The proposed intervention included in the 
Action Plan are demonstration of improved packages, zero tillage, micronutrients, soil 
amendments etc.   
 
   Regarding increasing the production of Oilseeds and pulses the Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation have informed that Government of India is implementing a  
Centrally Sponsored Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize 
(ISOPOM) w.e.f. April, 2004 for increasing production and productivity of oilseeds and 
pulses in 14 major States viz., Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhatisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar 
Pradesh & West Bengal.   
 
   Under the scheme, financial assistance is provided for critical inputs viz., seeds, 
plant protection chemicals, bio-fertilizers, gypsum, sprinklers etc. to encourage farmers to 
undertake oilseeds and pulses cultivation on a large scale.  Besides, in order to 
disseminate information on improved production technologies amongst the farmers, block 
demonstrations and Integrated Pest Management (IPM) demo nstrations are organized 
through State Department of Agriculture and Front Line Demonstrations through ICAR.   
 
 Further, in order to overcome the constraints and to close the gaps between 
existing yields and yields achieved in FLDs and to increase product ion of oilseeds, 
following steps have been initiated as short term measure during Kharif 2007.   
 
 The major Kharif oilseeds (viz. groundnut, soybean and sunflower) growing states 
such as Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka 
have been targeted for focused approach to enhance production and productivity 
of oilseeds during Kharif 2007. 
 An area expansion of 12.75 lakh ha. is proposed through replacement of Kharif 
paddy in tail ends of command areas, intercropping with bajra, jowar and maize, 
redgram, cotton, castor etc. in 5 major states during Kharif season.     
 Allocated large number of seed minikits of newly released improved 
varieties/hybrids of oilseed crops (55389 qtls.) to the farmers for cultivation during 
Kharif 2007.  The other interventions proposed are to conduct 33090 
demonstrations in groundnut, 43750 demonstrations in soybean and 70625 
demonstrations in sunflower of one acre size each in target states through State 
Departments of Agriculture during Kharif 2007.  
 The in terventions proposed for XI plan inter alia, include supply of quality seed, 
large scale Front Line Demonstrations of improved production technologies, and 
promotion of use of INM and IMP, promotion of sprinkler irrigation sets and 
extension and training to farmers.   
 
The Department of Agriculture & Cooperation have further informed that to 
increase production of pulses the following steps have been initiated during Kharif 2007. 
 
 The short term plan is to be implemented in 7 major pulses producing States v iz., 
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Gujarat 
and Maharashtra, which contributed to about 80% of total pulses production.  A 

total of 159 districts have been targeted in these States in the ensuring Kharif 
season for increasing pulses production. 
 Two pronged strategy involving area expansion and productivity enhancement is 
proposed to be implemented in 17 major pulse growing states; 
- Area Expansion (20.47 lakh ha.)  : -  Intercropping with pigeon pea, 
cultivation in waste l ands, reclaimed lands, replacement of rainfed 
upland paddy.   
- Additional area of 2 million ha. to be brought under pulse cultivation by 
utilizing rice follows in major rice growing states. 
- Productivity enhancement of 700 kg./ha. by bridging the existing ga ps 
between National, State and FLD yields.   
 
 The other proposed interventions include conduct of full package demonstrations, 
supply of quality seed of improved varieties under minikits distribution (17309 
qtls.), certified seeds of 27000 qtls. for full p ackage demonstration and Extension 
and Training of farmers. 
 
Further, to encourage farmers to cultivate oilseeds and pulses, Government of 
India announces Minimum Support Price every year to give the remunerative price to the 
farmers to their produce.  NAF ED is the Nodal Agency for procurement of oilseeds and 
pulses under Price Support Scheme.   
The commodity wise Minimum Support Prices announced for 2006 -07 is given as 
under. 
Crops MSP for 2006-07 
OILSEEDS  
Rapeseed/Mustard 1715 
Groundnut-in-shell 1520 
Sunflower seed 1500 
Soybean (Black) 900 
Soybean (Yellow) 1020 
Sesamum 1560 
Safflower 1565 
PULSES  
Moong 1520 
Arhar 1410 
Urad 1520 
Gram 1445 
Masur(Lentil) 1545 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F.No. 156(6)/2007-Py. I 
Dated 4th July, 2007]

 
Recommendation Sl. No. 11 (Para No.3.40) 
 
2.12 The Committee note that the Decentralized Procurement Scheme was introduced 
by the Government in 1997 -98 with a view to encouraging local procur ement to the 
maximum extent, thereby extending the benefit of MSP to local farmers, to enhance 
efficiency of procurement and PDS. Besides, such a system helps to provide foodgrains 
under PDS more suited to the local taste and also results in savings in tra nsportation and 
handling cost of FCI. Till date, 11 States viz. West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya 
Pradesh, Chattisgarh, Uttaranchal, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, 
Gujarat, Karnataka and Kerala have adopted the system of decentralized proc urement. 
The Committee further note that there is considerable improvement in the procurement 
from these States after the decentralized scheme of procurement has been adopted. The 
procurement of rice has increased in the decentralized States from 40 lakh t onnes in 
Kharif Marketing Season (KMS) in 2002 -03 to 110 lakh tonnes of KMS in KMS 2006 -07. 
The Committee further note that the State Governments that have adopted the 
Decentralized Procurement Scheme have requested the Ministry for the sanction of 
adequate cash credit limits by Reserve Bank of India RBI) and full reimbursement of 
expenses and timely release of subsidy by the Central Government. The Committee also 
note that the Department is taking up the issue of sanction of adequate cash credit limits 
with RBI. Besides, the Department has recommended to Banking Division and RBI to 
consider the value of stocks of State agencies at acquisition cost for 12 months instead of 
the existing limit of 3 months. The Committee recommend to the Department to further 
pursue all the issues with RBI and Banking Division to ensure further efficiency in the 
States who have adopted the Decentralized Procurement Scheme. Besides, in the 
remaining States FCI should create necessary infrastructure for procurement of 
foodgrains i n coordination with State Governments and motivate them to adopt the 
scheme of decentralized procurement. The specific benefits of adopting the system along 
with the achievement of Decentralized Procurement Scheme (DCP) States should be duly 
communicated through various meetings with State Secretaries and at the highest level so 
as to motivate these States to adopt Decentralized Procurement Scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.13 The Department is constantly pursuing the issue of valuation of stocks of the S tate 
agencies at the acquisition cost for a period of 12 months.  Recently a meeting was 
convened under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Financial Sector), Ministry of Finance on 
12th March, 2007 which was attended by Senior Officers of Department of Food & Public 
Distribution, MD, FCI alongwith the officers of RBI/SBI and other Banks of the consortium 
wherein it was decided that RBI would review the existing guidelines of valuation of stocks 
held by State agencies and issue revised guidelines. RBI is being pursued in this matter.   
  
 Due to the encouragement given by the Central Government, most of the States 
having marketable surplus of rice (Chattisgarh, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, UP, West Bengal etc 
and wheat (UP and Madhya Pradesh) have already joined the Decentralized Procurement 
Scheme, while in the other major states like Punjab and Haryana, State agencies are also 
purchasing foodgrains on behalf of FCI for the Central Pool. This has considerably 
widened the coverage of MSP operations throughout the country.  In all meeting held in 
the Department of Food & PD, States such as Assam who have not yet adopted the DCP 
scheme are being urged to join this scheme such as:  
 
(i) It brings benefits of MSP operations to farmers. 

(ii) It increases efficiency of the PDS and enables procurement of more foodgrains 
suited to the local taste. 
(iii) It reduces transportation costs of FCI as well as pressure on Railways to move 
foodgrains to such States.   
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution 
F. No 156(6)/2007-Py.I) 
Dated 4th July, 2007] 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 12 (Para No.3.55) 
 
2.14 The Committee find that Rs. 25,696.20 crore have been allocated under Food 
subsidy (including sugar) for the year 2007 -08 against the allocation of R s. 24,200 crore 
during the previous year. The allocation made during the year 2007 -08 is thus around 5 
per cent above the allocation made during the previous year. However, if the allocation 
made for food subsidy during 2007 -08 is compared to 2005 -06, it i s Rs.503.80 crore 
lesser. The data with regard to proposed and accepted outlay during different year at 
Budget Estimates (BE) stage and Revised Estimates (RE) stage indicates that there is 
huge difference particularly during the year 2006 -07 and 2007-08. During the year 2006 -
07 out of the proposed allocation of 31,804,79 crore at RE Stage, allocation made was 
Rs. 24,203.92 crore which is about 24 per cent lesser.  Further, during  2007 -2007, the 
allocation made at B.E. stage was Rs. 25,696.20 crore against proposed allocation of Rs. 
30,819.31, which is about 19% lesser.  As regards the Impact of getting lesser food 
subsidy than the projections, the Secretary has informed that although it won’t affect the 
distribution of foodgrains through TPDS and welfare sc hemes, the allocation of lesser 
outlay would definitely affect the management of FCI. The Secretary also substantiated 
that there is need for higher amount of subsidy due to non -revision of issue price of 
foodgrains, whereas MSP of wheat has substantially increased. Besides the rate of 
interest of banks has gone up and there is also increase in freight cost, etc.  Keeping in 
view the aforesaid scenario, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of 
Finance/Planning Commission should be pursued to al locate adequate food subsidy for 
the efficient management of various operations of FCI. The concerns of the Committee in 
this regard should be communicated to the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
 2.15 The matter is being  regularly pursued with the Ministry of Finance to allocate 
adequate food subsidy for the efficient management of various operations of FCI such as 
Minimum Support Price operations and distribution of foodgrains to various FCI godown 
located all over the country.  The concerns of the Committee have been communicated to 
the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F.No.197(6)/2007-FC A/Cs 
Dated 19th June, 2007] 
 

 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 17 (Para No.3. 78) 
 
2.16 The Committee note that the Government has issued instructions to all State 
Governments/UTs allowing them to sell non PDS commodities of daily use such as soap, 
tea powder, iodized salt, etc. in the F PS to increase the availability of FPS. Besides, the 
Government is also exploring the possibility of selling postal items and railway tickets 
through the FPS. The State of Gujarat has gone to the extent of making FPS as rural mall 
shops where almost all th e items of daily consumption are allowed to be sold in those 
shops. The Committee would like that the experience of Gujarat need to be replicated in 
other States so that the people from rural areas specifically those living in tribal areas can 
get the items of daily use easily from FPS. The Department should pursue with the State 
Government/Union Territory Administrations and take all the steps to make the FPS viable 
and the Committee should also be kept apprised.  
 
The Committee further note that in Gujara t, ration cards are being issued to 
migrant labourers. The Department is pursuing with the State Governments to replicate 
the idea of issuing ration cards to migrant labourers on the lines of the State Government 
of Gujarat. The Committee would like the De partment to pursue further with the State 
Governments in this regard and inform the Committee about the follow up action.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.17 A statement showing additional commodities being distributed through PDS outlets 
other than wheat, ric e coarse grain, sugar & Kerosene Oil (as reported by respective 
State/UT) is enclosed (Annexure-I).  It may be seen from the statement that many of the 
states are allowing selling of non -PDS items of daily needs with a view to make FPS 
viable.   
  
 All the  State/UT Governments have been apprised with the experience of the 
Gujarat Government for their information and adoption. The Government has further 
asked the State Governments to furnish detailed information on converting of FPS into 
Model Fair Price Shops or rural malls.  
 
 With regard to issuance of ration cards to migrant labourers, the State 
Governments have once again been stressed upon to issue the ration cards on the 
pattern of State Government of Gujarat.  A letter in this regard has been sent to all  
State/UT Governments. (Copy enclosed for ready reference) – Annexure - II. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F.No.9 (3)/2007-PD III 
Dated 10th August, 2007] 

Recommendation Sl. No. 19 (Para No 3.91) 
 
2.18 The Committee further note that Finance Minister in his speech on Budget 2007 -
08 has referred to a Plan Scheme for evaluation, monitoring, management and 
strengthening of the targeted PDS to be implemented in 2007 -08, which will inclu de 
computerization of PDS and an Integrated Information System in the Food Corporation of 
India. The Committee note that already two elaborate schemes viz. Integrated Information 
System for Foodgrains Management  and Research in Public Distribution System are in 
operation since the Tenth Plan.  The performance of these schemes is worst during the 
year 2006-07.  Under the Integrated Information System for Foodgrains Management, the 
expenditure incurred is NIL.  Further, under the Evaluation, Monitoring and R esearch in 
Public Distribution System, the expenditure is just marginal i.e. 0.20 crore.  As discussed 
in detail in the preceding part of the report, the Ministry has furnished certain reasons for 
huge under spending indicating delay in signing of MOU and tendering process by some 
of the States resulting in low financial achievement under IISFM.  The Committee 
understands that all these issues were well within the domain of the Ministry and such 
under spendings could have been avoided with proper planning.  The Committee desire 
the explanation of the Department particularly on the NIL expenditure under IISFM.   
 
The Committee note that the monitoring of PDS system can be made more effective with 
the recent technological interventions.  Further, with the exis ting pace of implementation 
of the schemes which propose to use computers for monitoring, there seems to be no 
hope in this regard.  The Committee strongly recommend to the Government to take the 
issue of monitoring seriously since crores of rupees are bei ng spent for allocating 
subsidised foodgrains to the poorest of the poor. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.19 Under the Integrated Information System for Foodgrains Management (IISFM) 
Project the reasons for  under spending in the Year 2006-07 are as under:  
 
1.       Leftover funds from previous years were  available  with FCI / NICSI / BSNL for 
utilization in the Year 2006-07. 
 
        The year-wise position of left over funds from previous years and  utilization thereof 
is tabulated as under:  
 
Year Allocation Expenditure Balance 
2003-04 15.50 13.28 2.22 
2004-05 39.14 24.99 16.37 
2005-06 15.00 15.70 15.67 
2006-07 0 2.23 13.44 
Total 69.64 56.20 13.44 
(FCI Accounts Division has been requested to create liability of balance amount of Rs 
13.44 crore with the approval of Associate Finance/Competent Authority.) 
 
2.      Out of nine identified States, MoU / Agreements as applicable in respect of major 
procuring / distributing Sates/State Agencies could be signed with two States of Orissa 
and Tamil Nadu in second quarter of 2006-07 and five States of UP, Chattisgarh, Andhra 
Pradesh, Haryana and Karnataka in third quarter  of 2006 -07 after constant    persuasion 
by FCI & Ministry. Two States of Punjab and Madhya Pradesh  are yet to sign it. 

 
3.   Tender process of ‘ Financial Accounting Package (FAP) of FCI’ was completed in 
third quarter of 2006-07. Earlier tender in this regard was scrapped as no bidder qualified 
for the technical bid. Hardware sizing and software environment for the same depended 
upon the overall consultant of the IISFM Project i.e. NIC ; and the system implementer of 
FAP i.e. M/ s TCS Ltd (finalized through tender process).  No funds could be utilized for  
Financial Accounting Package (FAP) during 2006-07.  
 
4.    Release of payment by FCI is governed by the terms and conditions laid down in the 
Tripartite agreement dated 24.09.2003. National Informatics Centre Services Inc. (NICSI) 
has to furnish proof of dispatch, complete bills along with installation certificates etc., duly 
certified by National  Informatics Centre (NIC) as laid down in ‘Tripartite Agreement’ for 
release of payment by FCI.  Supply of Hardware/Software and submission of complete 
bills/documents by NIC/NICSI took time for final settlement resulting in non -utilization of 
funds. 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food & Public Distribution 
F.No. 8-2/2007-FC-I(Pt.) 
Dated 10th July,2007 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 20 (Para No. 3.94) 
  
2.20 The Committee note that the main objective of the Village Grain Bank Scheme is 
to provide safeguard against starvation to all Below Poverty Line (BPL) and Antyodaya 
Anna Yojana (AAY) families in chronically food scarce areas.  The committee note with 
concern that though the scheme was launched during 1996 -97 (i.e. about ten years ago) 
yet Village Grain Banks have been established only in these States namely Andhra 
Pradesh, Orissa and Chhatisgarh, till date.  The Committee feel that the Scheme has not 
proved to be a major success as starvation deaths are still being repo rted not only from 
the three States where Village Grain Banks have been established but from other states 
ass well.  The Committee therefore, recommend that to meet the objective of the Scheme 
the Government should direct the State Governments to make seri ous concerned efforts 
for establishing more and more Village Grain Banks in their States.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 2.21 The Scheme was transferred to Department of Food & Public  Distribution from 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs on 24 th November 2004.  It was approved by EFC on 29 th 
November 2005.  Based on this, the scheme was circulated in Feburary 2006 to all 
States/UTs  for sending their proposals.  During 2005 -06, 3286 VGBanks was sanctioned 
for Rs. 19.76 crore in 7 states i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Chattisgarh, M.P., Jharkhand, 
Tripura, Meghalaya on their requests. During 2006 -07, 8191 VGBanks were sanctioned 
for Rs. 51.00 crore in 13 states i.e. Utter Pradesh, Assam, Sikkim, H. P., Gujrat, West 
Bengal, Nagaland, Andhra Pradesh, Utranchal, Chhatisgarh, Maharashtra, Manipur and 
again in Maharashtra.  So far the Government of Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, West 
Bengal, Madhya Pradesh , Chattisgarh and Meghalaya have reported establish ment of 
VGBanks in their states and have given the Utilization Certificates.  Other States have 
also setup Village Grain Banks and are in the process of establishing additional  Grain 
Banks. They have been asked to send their implementation  report and Uti lization 

Certificates.  Now on recommendations of the Standing Committee, a request has been 
made on 29.5.2007 to all States/UT’s Governments to send their fresh proposals for 
setting up of Village Grain Banks during the 11 th Plan in their States/UT’s for 
establishment of more Village Grain Banks to provide safeguard against starvation to BPL 
and AAY families in chronically food scarce areas. 
 
  Since the scheme of VGBank was transferred to Department of Food and Public 
Distribution on 24.11.2004 and it was approved in Feburary 2006, this Department started 
sanctioning the Grain Banks to different States/UTs only in the month of March,2006 
onwards.  Thus no evaluation of the VGBanks could be made so far by their department.  
However the WFP Bhopal sub -office conducted a small sample study of the Grain Banks 
formed under this scheme in August 2006 in Betul and Barwani districts of Madya 
Pradesh.  The study was undertaken by the WFP Districts Coordinators of these districts 
to make a broad assessment of their c urrent level of activity, their management 
processes, community ownership and the problems encountered by members in 
sustaining the Grain Banks.  This report has been received in June 2007. The report is 
enclosed. 
 Additionally the World Food Programme has been requested by this department to 
evaluate concurrently the Village Grain Banks Scheme in Madhaya Pradesh, Chhatisgarh 
& Orissa.  
 For the continuation of VGBanks Scheme during the 11 th five years plan, approval 
of the Expenditure Finance Committee is being obtained.  Once it is received, proposals 
of State and UT Governments would be processed for sanction. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F.No 13-6/2007-BP.II 
Dated 26 June, 2007] 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 23 (Para No.4.16) 
 
   
2.22 The Committee note with concern the comparative position of utilisation of owned 
and hired storage capacity available with FCI. During the year 2005 -06 whereas the 
utilisation of owned storage capacity was 4 1 per cent, the utilisation of hired capacity was 
62 per cent.  During the year 2006-07, the same trend continued.  The utilization of owned 
storage has increased slightly from 41 per cent to 42 per cent.  For hired storage capacity, 
there is marginal redu ction from 62 per cent to 57 percent. The Committee fail to 
understand the reasons for such a gross under -utilisation of storage capacity. The 
Committee further find that Rs.403.67 crore is the total rent paid during the year 2005 -06 
for the hired storage from different areas.  As regards the issue of using more of the hired 
capacity than the owned Capacity, the Department has stated that the hired capacity of 
9.4 million tonnes includes 7 million tonnes taken over under seven year guarantee 
scheme and FCI has to use these godowns on priority basis as per the contractual 
agreements.  The Committee deplore the way the contracts have been made with several 
agencies without taking note of FCI’s owned storage capacity resulting in a situation 
where huge rents ar e being paid for rented storage whereas owned storage is 
underutilized.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the detailed process of making 

contracts so as to enable the Committee to analyse the position and comment further in 
this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.23 So far as the FCI is concerned, detailed instructions already exist to maximize the 
use of owned godown capacity.  Hiring of additional  capacity is resorted to only when  
there is no FCI’s owned  godown capacity   or the  storage cap acity of FCI owned is 
inadequate.   For hiring the additional capacity as and when required, preference is given 
to hire  only CWC,SWC and State Govt’s capacity.   The terms and conditions  for hiring  
the capacity are laid down by these agencies  and they  have separate rates for the 
reserved capacity and the capacity used on general warehousing terms. 
  
However, the reasons for underutilization of the FCI’s owned capacity and higher 
utilisation percentage of the hired capacity are explained as under:  
 
REASONS FOR UNDER -UTILISATION OF FCI OWNED CAPACITY AS COMPARED 
TO HIRED CAPACITY: 
 
i)  There has been drop in procurement of foodgrains on FCI account as also the 
overall during 2006 -07 as compared to 2005 -06 (during 2006 -07, over all 
procurement of wheat was 92.31 lakh tonnes as against 147.87 lakh tonnes during 
2005-06. and rice procurement during 2006 -07 upto 4.6.2007 was 228.81 lakh 
tonnes as against 275.63 lakh tonnes during 2005-06.  On FCI account,  wheat 
procurement during 2006-07 was 13.43 lakh tonne s as against 22.30 lakh tonnes 
during 2005-06 and rice procurement during 2006 -07 was 59.29 lakh tonnes as 
against 92.77 lakh tonnes during 2005 -06).  Resultantly, movement of foodgrain 
stocks to the consuming States as also utilisation of Storage capacity  in these 
States was affected. 
  
ii)  Out of FCI’s owned storage capacity of 15.23 million tonnes,   8.20 million tonnes 
is in the procuring States i.e. Punjab 2.87, Haryana 1.09, Rajasthan 0.86, UP 1.91 
and AP 1. 47.   Stocks so procured in these procurin g regions immediately start 
moving out to create adequate space before the next procurement season 
whereby the utilisation percentage gets decreased month after month.  In UP, 
there is decentralized procurement due to which FCI’s share of procurement is just 
limited.  Rajasthan procures only meager quantity which is issued out in the PDS, 
thus lowering the percentage of godown utilisation in the Region.  
 
REASONS FOR HIGHER UTILISATION OF HIRED CAPACITY AS COMPARED TO 
OWNED CAPACITY: 
 
i)  5.12 million capac ity including 3.19 million tonnes 7 year guarantee scheme 
capacity, has been hired on those locations where the FCI does not at all have any 
owned godown  capacity. 
 
ii)   Another 3.73 million tonnes capacity hired under 7 year guarantee scheme during 
2000-01, 2001-02 can not be dehired till the guarantee period continues. 
 
iii)  Total 6.92 million tonnes 7 year guarantee scheme capacity had to be created 
under compelling circumstances  when the FCI  was over -flowing with the 
foodgrains stocks during 2000 -01 i.e. 28.4 million tonnes  with 90% utilisation of 
the godowns capacity and none of the agencies was prepared to construct the 
godowns without 7 year guarantee as the constructing agencies were not 

expecting any returns on their investments until SYGS was  extended . 
Unfortunately, due to change in the offtake policy, the stock started depleting from 
2002-03 by which time the godowns constructed under SYGS had by and large 
been taken over by FCI and release of these godowns before 7 year period is not 
possible. 
 
iv) At some of the FCI’s owned depots, there is departmental labour whose 
productivity is poor leading to higher cost of operations.  Therefore, to minimize the 
operational cost, utilisation of hired godowns is preferred.   
 
However, in order to redu ce the rentals of these 7 year guarantee scheme 
godowns got constructed by the agencies by private participation, the FCI w.e.f. 1.5.06 
restricted the rent in respect of such godowns to the extent as entered into between by the 
private parties and the Stat e Agencies  and maintenance/preservation charges + 15% as 
supervisory charges. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F.No. 8-2/2007.FC-II (Vol.II) 
Dated. 25th June, 2007] 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.24 (Para No.4.25) 
2.24 The Committee  find that under the scheme for construction of storage godowns, 
grants in aid are made to FCI, CWC and State Governments for construction of godowns 
in North East and Jammu & Kashmir.  The actual construction work is entrusted to CPWD, 
NBCC and HUDCO.  The Committee further note that as per the study done by IIM 
Banglaore, there was a need of additional capacity to be created.  Maximum requirement 
is in Jammu & Kashmir for 90 MT followed by Meghalaya- 63 MT and Assam-58 MT.  The 
Committee deplore the under achievement of targets to the extent of 17. 07 lakh tonnes 
during the year 2005 -06. The Committee feel that in difficult areas of Jammu & Kashmir 
and North East, there is an urgent need to pay more attention to the c reation of 
infrastructure for storage of foodgrains and, as such,  strongly recommend to the 
Department to take up the issue of achievement of targets with the various agencies 
involved like FCI, CWC and the construction agencies like NBCC, HUDCO and CPWD. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.25 Regular meetings are held in the Ministry to review the progress made by the FCI 
in construction of storage godowns under the Plan Scheme and action proposed to be 
taken/initiated by the Ministry for timely achievement of ph ysical as well as financial 
targets set.   
 
 The progress of construction of storage godowns are also monitored on monthly 
basis in the FCI Headquarters.  
 
During 2005 -06, Annual Plan was drawn for a storage capacity of 39,580 MTs.  
During the year 2006-07 the spill over capacity of 2005-06 has been complemented to the 
tune of 12,090 MT and balance 5,000 MT capacity (Tumkur) is likely to be complete by 
the end of June, 2007. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F.No. 8-2/2007.FC-II (Vol.II) 
Dated. 25th June, 2007] 

 
Recommendation Sl. No 26 (Para No. 4.32) 
 
2.26 The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants of the previous year 
(refer para 2.75, 12 th Report) had been informed that the Gov ernment of India had 
requested the Central Vigilance Commission on 27th May, 2005 to conduct an enquiry into 
the alleged irregularities in implementation of Hill Transport Subsidy Scheme in Arunachal 
Pradesh. The CBI vide letter dated 14 th June, 2006 had i nformed to the Ministry that no 
action could be initiated due to the pendency of a PIL on the subject in the Guwahati High 
Court. Further, the Department in its written reply on the aforesaid recommendation of the 
Committee has stated that pendency of the PIL should not be a reason for delay in 
investigation by CBI. CVC has been requested on 12 February, 2007 to tender advice as 
to whether CBI can investigate a case during the pendency of a PIL in High Court. The 
Department has again written to the CBI on 6  March, 2007 with a copy to the CVC 
reiterating its stand in the matter. The CBI has been requested to look into the matter and 
arrange to get the case investigated as early as possible and send CBI's findings/report 
alongwith recommendations of CVC to the  Department. The Department has also stated 
that no stay order has been granted by the Guwahati High Court on the PIL. While 
noticing the contents of the follow up of the action in this regard, the Committee 
recommends to pursue the matter further and the enquiry should be expedited after 
getting the advice of the CVC. The Committee should also be kept apprised of the 
developments in the case.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.27 The CBI in reply to this Department’s letter dated 6.3.2007 has informed that the 
Government of Arunachal Pradesh has registered 4 cases with regard to irregularities 
committed in operation of the Hill Transport Subsidy Scheme.  In the PIL No.50/2004, the 
Hon’ble Guwahati High Court in its order dated 21.12.2006 has ordered as under :- 
 
 “On the date of hearing the learned Govt. Advocate, Arunachal Pradesh, Shri B. 
Banerjee will place before the Court the copy of the Charge -sheet in Itanagar P.S. Case 
No.03/2003. We are of the further view that the investigating agency presently engaged in 
investigation of Itanagar PS Case No.07/2005 and Crime Branch  PS Case No.08/2005 
shall not close the investigation and file charge sheet in the abovesaid cases without the 
leave of this Court” 
 
 In view of the above the CBI will take up investigation of  3 our of 4 crime branch 
cases irrespective of the fact that a PIL is pending in the Hon’ble Guwahati High Court. In 
this connection notifications u/s 6 & 5 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act 
(DSPE) are to be issued by the State Government and C entral Government respectively. 
Further the Home Ministry has requested the Government of Arunachal Pradesh on 
10.5.2007 to issue relevant notification and provide the services of investigating officers 
and Staff. State Government has also been directed by Ministry of Home Affairs to provide 
logistic support to the CBI. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F.No.2 (LS) 6/2007/Py-III 
Dated 29th May, 2007] 

 
Recommendation Sl. No. 27 (Para No.4.33) 
 
2.28 FCI/CWC is not having godowns on the island and FCI is issuing  foodgrains and 
sugar to the UT Administration of Lakshadweep or its nominated agencies, at the 
mainland (Mangalore Port), as per the allocation made by the Government under 
Targeted Public Distribution System and other Welfare Schemes.  During monsoon, the 
Lakshadweep is cut off from the mainland and foodgrains do not reach there.  The 
Committee are very happy to note that a decision has been taken to construct a FCI 
godown (2, 500 MTs ) at Lakshadweep subject to providing a suitable land by UT 
Administration of Lakshadweep.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that FCI 
should gear up their efforts in stepping up the construction of godowns at UT 
Administration of Lakshadweep an d various hilly areas also so that benefit of PDS 
percolates down to people living there.    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.29 The FCI in coordination with the Lakshadweep Administration has already 
identified two locations viz. Kavaratti & Androth for constr uction of storage godowns by 
FCI at one of these places.  The Executive Director(South Zone), FCI has been advised to 
finalize either of these sites keeping in view the operational and economical viability.   
 
In addition to Lakshdweep, FCI has included va rious locations for construction of 
storage godowns in the in North East States, Sikkim, Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal 
Pradesh, other procuring and distributing States in the 11 th Five Year Plan.  The 
construction of storage godowns will be taken up subject to availability of resources made 
available by the Planning Commission.   The details of the locations identified for 
construction of storage godowns by FCI in North East States, Sikkim, Jammu & Kashmir, 
Himachal Pradesh  & Lakshadweep are as  under :-  
 
Zone/State/Centre Capacity in MT 
NORTH EAST 
Assam 
Changsari 25,000 (with siding) 
Dibrugarh 25,000 (with siding) 
Nowgaon 15,000 (with siding) 
Karimganj 5,000 
Kokrajhar 5,000 
Tripura 
Kumarghat 5,000 
Nandannagar 2,500 (within existing) 
Nagaland  
Dimapur 5,000 
Kohima 5,000 
Meghalaya 
Shillong 5,000 
 
Sikkim 
Jorthang 5,000 
Manipur 

Jiribam 7,500 (within existing 
complex) 
NORTH 
J&K 
Pulwama 2,500 
Srinagar Valley 20,000 
.Udhampur 15,000 
Himachal Pradesh  
Kinnaur 1,670 
SOUTH 
Lakshadweep (U.T.) 2,500 
 
 In addition to the above, the following proposals received from the Governments of 
Assam, Mizoram and Jammu & Kashmir have been finalized for construction of storage 
godowns by the State Government with Central Assistance in the form of Grants in Aid 
under Plan Scheme. 
 
ASSAM  
 
Name of the Centre  Capacity  
(in MTs) 
Pachim Boragaon 6000 
Amingaon 4000 
Satgaon  4000 
Azara 4000+24000 Tea Chests 
Total  18000+24000 Tea Chests 
JAMMU AND KASHMIR 
 
Name of the Centre. Capacity 
(in MTs) 
Lethpora 
 
6160 
 
MIZORAM  
 
Name of Centre Capacity 
(In MTs) 
Champhai  3,000 
Serchib 
 
3,000 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F. No 8-2/2007-FC II (Vol. II). 
Dated 19th July, 2007] 

 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 28 (Para No.4.44) 
 
2.30 The Committee note that as a result of the various initiatives taken by the Ministry 
to reduce the storage and transit losses, these losses have decreased from 0.53% during 
the year 2004 -05 to 0.36% during the year 2005 -06.  The Committee feels that efforts 
need to be continued more vigorously so as to ensure that every paisa earmarked for the 
poorest of the poor reaches them.  The Committee hope that during the financial year 
2006-07, the said losses would further be reduc ed.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.31 It has been the constant endeavour of the Food Corporation of India to control/ 
minimise storage and transit losses; for which purpose various effective/ remedial/ 
preventive measures have been/ are being taken.  The percentages of storage & transit 
losses, as mentioned in the above point, are total grains shortages on purchase and sales 
quantities during the respective year (as indicated below) in view of the enclos ed relevant 
extracts from the FCI Performance Budget for 2006-07:    
  2004-05 (P)   -  0.53 %  
  2005-06 (RE)  - 0.36 %  
       
 However, generally the storage and transit losses are measured separately.  
Storage loss is calculated on percentage of quanti ty issued and transit loss is calculated 
as a percentage of quantity despatched.  The storage and transit loss for the last 3 years 
upto 2005-06 are given below: 
   
Storage  Shortages         
 (Qty. in lakh MT/ Value in crore of Rupees) 
 
Year  Qty Shortage Value Total Qty. 
Issued 
% age of Shortage on 
Qty. Issued 
2003-04 2.32 244.59 821.18 0.28 
2004-05 1.46 156.36 767.02 0.19 
2005-06* 1.19 130.91 714.41 0.17 
 
Transit  Shortages 
(Qty. in lakh MT/ Value in crore of Rupees) 
 
Year  Qty Shortage Value Total Qty. moved %age of Shortage 
on Qty. moved 
2003-04 1.70 150.48 341.74 0.50 
2004-05 1.83 149.94 382.77 0.48 
2005-06* 1.29 126.55 351.80 0.37 
 
(* Provisional) 
  
 It will be seen that the losses in percentage terms have been coming down  year 
after year.  F igures for 2006 -07 will be available after finalisation of accounts by 
December, 2007.  Final figures of 2005-06 will be available by July, 2007. 
 

 The Ministry, in the MOU with the FCI, has fixed the following targets for storage 
and transit losses during 2007-08: 
  
 Storage losses  : 0.18% 
 Transit losses  :  0.36% 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F.No 8-2/2007.FC-II (Vol.II) 
Dated. 25th June, 2007] 
 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 29 (Para No.4.52) 
 
 
2.32 The Committee are deeply concerned to note the constant rise in corruption cases 
despite various remedial measures taken in this regard.  The Committee feel that in most 
of Regional / Zonal Headquarters where these corrupt activities are mainly confined, junior 
employees might have been suspended/terminated and no fingers are raised at senior 
officials.  The Committee desires that vigilance mechanism should be tightened up and 
should be made  more transparent and effective.  Responsibility sho uld also be fixed on 
senior officers so as to uproot the evil of corruption.  It is felt by the Committee that Public 
Distribution System (PDS) should be made more transparent and accountable.  Further 
the Committee also desire that staff should be transfe rred from one post to another after 
every three years to avoid creation of vested interests.  The Department should act on the 
suggested lines and inform the Committee about the action taken in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.33 As regards action taken against senior officials, it is stated that disciplinary action 
is taken against the employees of the Corporation i.e. senior and junior officials keeping in 
view the gravity of the corruption charges.  The details of penalties imposed upon 
delinquent senior / junior officials in the corruption cases during the last 3 years i.e. 2004, 
2005 & 2006 is as under:- 
 
Sl. 
No 
Nature of 
penalty 
imposed 
2004 2005 2006 Total 
Cat.I Cat.II, 
III  
Total Cat
.I 
Cat. 
II, III  
Total Cat
.I 
Cat.II, 
III  
Total Cat.I Cat.II, 
III 
Total 
1 Dismissal/ 
removal/ 
compul-
sorily 
retired 
2 35 37 1 43 44 3 76 79 6 154 160 
2 Reduction 
in rank 
 
1 38 39 0 30 30 0 30 30 1 98 99 
3 Reduction 
in time 
scale of 
pay 
4 357 361 2 311 313 2 216 318 8 984 992 

4 Withhol- 
ding of 
increment 
3 165 168 2 116 118 1 215 216 6 496 502 
5 Recovery 
from pay 
of the loss 
caused to 
FCI 
2 1344 1346 2 884 886 23 1704 1731 27 3936 3963 
6 Withhol-
ding of 
promotion 
0 6 6 0 5 5 0 2 2 0 13 13 
7 Censure 10 479 489 6 301 307 6 376 382 22 1156 1178 
8 Warning 
issued/ 
exonera-
tion/ 
cases 
closed 
11 401 412 5 243 248 4 319 323 20 963 983 
 Total 33 2825 2858 18 193
3 
1951 39 2938 3081 90 7800 7890 
 
 
S.No. Category Total 
strength 
No. of cases in which 
punishment imposed on 
account of corruption charges 
during the last 3 years i.e. 
2004, 2005 & 2006 
Percentage 
1. Senior officials 
i.e. Cat.I 
584 90 15.41% 
2. Junior officials 
i.e. Cat.II & III 
29742 7800 26.22% 
 
 Besides above, a number of cases are pending against IAS officers with DOP&T 
for their tenure in FCI. 
 
 In view of the position indicated above, it is crystal clear that 1 5.41% senior 
officials were punished in corruption cases during the last 3 years i.e. 2004, 2005 & 2006 
and 26.22% junior officials were punished on account of corruption cases during the 
period referred to above.  Thus senior officials are also not spared in corruption cases. 
 
 It is also assured that the vigilance mechanism will be further tightened up and will 
be made more transparent and effective. 
 
 As regards the Public Distribution System (PDS) to be more transparent and 
accountable, it is mentioned that this subject matter relates to the State Government. 
 
 So far as transfer of staff from one post to another after every three years to avoid 
creation of vested interest is concerned, it is mentioned that suitable instructions have 
already been issued to all concerned in the Corporation for strict compliance in order to 
avoid creation of vested interests and the employees posted on sensitive posts are being 
rotated as is evident from the following figures of rotational transfers during last three 
years. 
 

 Year  No. of employees rotated 
 
 2004   1268 
 2005   3670 
 2006   1750 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F. No 8-2/2007.FC-II (Vol. II) 
Dated. 25th June, 2007] 
 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 30 (Para No.4.53) 
 
2.34 The Committee note that during the year 2006, there are 2,004 vigilance cases 
pending in FCI and only one case had been referred to CBI / CVC each.  During 2006, 
1,195 cases are pending against FCI officers on account of transit a nd storage losses.  
The Committee feel that delay in disposal of vigilance case further encourages incidence 
of corrupt practices and undermines the authority of law.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that all efforts should be made for quick disposal of vigilance cases. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.35 So far as quick disposal of 2004 vigilance cases including 1195 cases on account 
of storage and transit losses pending during 2006 is concerned, it is mentioned that out of 
these 2004 cases, only 500 cases are more than one year old.  Rest of the cases have 
been initiated in the year 2006 itself.  It may be appreciated that during the year 2006, FCI 
have finalized / disposed of 3081 vigilance cases. However, the target for disposal of 
cases has already been fixed.  As more than 70% of the pending vigilance cases referred 
to above relate to Punjab Region, the management has fixed the target of disposal of 
1000 cases by General Manager (Region), Punjab during the year 2007 -08.  It is further 
intimated that the pending cases are reviewed by ED(V) -CVO and CMD in the monthly 
performance review meetings held in the Headquarters and these pending cases would 
be finalized within a reasonable time limit. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F. No. 8-2/2007.FC-II (Vol. II) 
Dated. 25th June, 2007] 
 

Recommendation Sl. No.  31 (Para No.4.56) 
 
2.36 The Committee note with satisfaction that their various recommendations 
Committee to curb the menace of proxy lab our have been followed by the State 
Governments.  Most of the State Governments have implemented the recommendations.  
However, in some States, recommendations are partially implemented.  In Assam, J&K, 
Bihar, Delhi and Andhra Pradesh, labour union Workers  are opposing the implementation 
of the instant recommendation of the Committee according to which each / every worker 
is required to put one’s signature or thumb impression as a token of attendance.  The 
Committee would like that efforts should be made by  State Governments to convince the 
workers in this regard.  Further, with regard to the recommendation of the Committee that 
payment of the wages to all workers be made by cheque, the workers are hardly 
accepting cheque in J&K and Chhattisgarh on the plea that they are illiterate.  The 
Committee would like that these workers should be persuaded by educating them about 
the benefits of getting wages through cheque.  Further pursuance is required in States 
where the recommendations of the Committee are partial ly implemented.  The follow up 
action should be intimated to the Committee.  
 
Reply of Government 
 2.37 The matter is being actively pursued and follow up action is being taken with the 
various zones / regions of the FCI for implementation of the recommendations. The action 
taken so far on suggestions of the Committee from time to time is enclosed herewith as 
Annexure ‘A’. 
 
   Major Labour Unions have been formally asked to convince the workers with 
regard to the recommendations of the Committee to curb pro xy labour.  General 
Managers of Regions are also holding the meetings with local leaders of the Unions for 
speedy implementation of the recommendation of the Committee. 
 
 Regional Heads of the States where the recommendations of the Committee are 
partially implemented have been asked in the Monthly Performance Review Meeting held 
on 29.01.2007 and 21.05.2007 that all the recommendations of the Parliamentary 
Committee may be implemented urgently in  the remaining States. 
 
  The whole matter was also placed b efore the Executive Committee of FCI in its 
meeting held on 30.05.2007 to formulate a time bound action plan to implement the 
recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee. 
 
  Annexure ‘A’ would reveal that there has been further improvement in J &K as the 
recommendation of the Committee for payment through cheque has now been 
implemented.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F. No.H-11013 (1)/2007-FC.3 dated 15.06.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para no. 1.31 of Chapter I of the Report)

 
Recommendation Sl. No. 32 (Para No. 5.8) 
 
 
2.38 The Committee are deeply concerned to note continuous rise in outstanding dues, 
during 2003 -04, 2004 -05 and 2005 -06 i.e. Rs. 174.70 crore , Rs. 218.20 crore and Rs. 
232.72, crore respectively of CWC.  The Committee, therefore, recommend for liquidation 
of outstanding fully at the earliest.  The Committee are unhappy to note unusual increase 
in bad debts written off to the tune of Rs. 17009 R s. 4,32,525 and Rs. 17,17,935 
respectively during the last three years i.e. 2003 -04, 2004 -05 and 2005 -06.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised about the reasons for huge jump in the written off 
bad debts and would like the Ministry to keep a close vigil on this trend. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
2.39 (i)   The turnover during the preceding three years has increased from 436.86 in the 
year 2003 -04 to Rs. 568.83 crore in the year 2005 -06 i.e. an increase of 30.2%.  
Comparatively the outstanding dues have increa sed by 13.8% from Rs. 174.79 crore to 
Rs. 196.86 crore in the year 2005 -06 excluding Rs. 33.86 crore due from Income Tax 
Department for which appeals are pending.  The total outstanding dues also includes a 
sum of Rs. 67 crore (out of this Rs. 53.71 crore alone are due from FCI) which is more 
than ten years old.  Efforts are being made to reduce the outstanding dues.  Provision for 
bad and doubtful debts has also been made for Rs. 47.11 crores against the old 
outstanding dues which have been considered doub tful of recovery.  As regards the 
outstanding dues in respect of FCI, there is already an existing procedure in place 
whereby the MDs of CWC and FCI are required to meet every three months to review the 
outstanding dues between the two organizations. 
 
(i) As regards the bad debts written off the Corporation has taken a judicious decision 
to write off only those cases where there is no possibility of recovery due to factors like 
closure of the units, sickness of the company etc. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F. No 1-3/2007-SG 
Dated 22nd June, 2007] 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 34 (Para No. 5.18) 
 
 
2.40 The Committee note that the perspective plan drawn by CWC for construction of 
godowns during the financial year 2007-08 do not include any of the North Eastern States.  
While appreciating the difficulties in construction of godowns in North Eastern States due 
to difficult geographical conditions, the Committee feel that more focus needs to be given 
to these areas so that the poor persons are not deprived of the benefit of PDS.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that construction of godowns at NE region 
should also be included in the perspective plan drawn and maximum possible efforts 
should be made to initiate construction of godowns in NE region at the earliest. 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
2.41 The existing available capacity in North East Region is not being gainfully utilized 
for want of adequate demand for storage space.  CWC shall have n o problems in 
constructing the godowns in needy areas subject to the condition that Government land is 
made available at affordable/reasonable price and long term business guarantee by the 
FCI/State Govt. Agencies is made available. 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F.No 1-3/2007-SG 
Dated 22nd June, 2007] 
 
Recommendation Sl.  No. 35 (Para No. 5.32) 
 
 
2.42 The Committee have noted that the rent paid by the Corporation for the last three 
years is constantly on rise viz 21.11 crore, 23.23 crore and 30.21 crore in 2003 -04, 2004-
05 and 2005 -06 respectively which indicates that owned capacity is not being put to 
maximum utilization and a substantial amount is spent on payment of rent.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly, recommend that CWC should resort to dehiring of hired 
godowns on priority basis and made optimum utilization of owned capacity. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.43 Regarding hiring of godowns, I s stated that hiring of godowns is a pla nned 
exercise. Warehouse are hired after due diligence, availability of business at the particular 
center and need of the depositors. Besides, as the mixed storage of commodities cannot 
be restored to e.g. sugar and foodgrains, fertilizers and foodgrains, cement and 
foodgrains; there are instances when the constructed warehouses could not be fully 
utilized but hiring had to be resorted to, to meet the demand of storage of a particular 
commodity. 
 The hiring/de-hiring of godowns is a continuous process. The decision regarding 
de-hiring of capacity is taken only on business consideration after carrying out cost/benefit 
analysis. Every unit is treated as profit center and if it consistently underperforms, a 
decision is taken to de -hire the same. Hired capacity is taken over only in case own 
constructed capacity is not available or is not sufficient to meet the demand of the 
depositors. Efforts are made to accommodate stock in own constructed godowns.  
 Instructions have also been issued to de -hire private godown s having a 
utilization/occupancy less than 25%. 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F.No 1-3/2007-SG 
Dated 22nd June, 2007] 
 

           Recommendation Sl. No. 38 (Para no. 6.33) 
 
2.44 The Committee note that as on 31 December, 2006, Rs. 739 crore is outstanding 
on account of recovery of funds as financial assistance provided to sugar mills from SDF. 
Out of Rs. 739 crore, the default on account of cooperative and public sector units is Rs. 
593 crore. The Committee further find that the reasons for poor recovery include 17 sugar 
mills involving default of Rs. 160 crore as sick and registered with BIFR/AAIFR or closed 
as on 31 December, 2006. Adverse sugar seasons during 2002 -03 and 2003 -04 hav e 
further been attributed as the reasons for poor repayment of SDF loans. The Committee 
further find that the bold initiatives have been taken by the Department which include 
dialogues with Chief Secretaries to impress upon them to make the payments of the  dues 
where the State has given Government guarantee i.e. amounting to Rs. 388 crore, the 
proposal to adjust the outstanding against Central grants against the loan granted by the 
State Governments and issuing of legal notices to the defaulting mills etc. With the 
aforesaid initiatives of the Department, concrete results could be achieved as reflected in 
the data according to which percentage recovery as compared to outstanding which was 
17.69 per cent during 2005 -06, has considerably improved to 26.76 per cent. The 
Committee feel that the objective of providing loan to sugar mills from SDF funds is 
defeated if the amount advanced to these mills is not spent on various activities for the 
development of sugar industry. The Committee strongly recommend to the Ministry to 
continue the pro -active initiatives being taken recently so as to improve the recovery 
position of loans provided to sugar mills from SDF.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.45 The Committee’s recommendation to the Ministry to continue the pro -active 
initiatives taken recently so as to improve the recovery position of SDF loans is noted for 
compliance.  
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F. No.3-1/2007-SDF 
                                                       Dated 13.07.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para no.  of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation   Sl. No.39  (Para no.  6.34 ) 
 
2.46 The Committee note that as a result of effective steps taken by the State 
Governments for liquidation of old outstanding dues of farmers, the cane price arrears for 
the sugar seasons 2003 -04 to 2005 -06 have considerably reduced. As informed by the 
representatives of the Department, cane price arrears to be paid by the sugar mills hav e 
been brought down to 1 percent which was about 30 percent during the last three years. 
The Committee are further concerned to note that during the year 2006-07, the cane price 
arrears have again started mounting and risen to the tune of Rs. 1,900 crores.  As regards 
the State –wise position, the arrears are maximum in the States of Uttar Pradesh and 
Maharashtra apparently due to the fact that these States are having maximum agricultural 
production of cane.   
 

The Committee are pained to note that although the payment of sugarcane is 
required to be made within 14 days of supply of cane, it is seldom done. The Committee 
are concerned to note that cane arrears pertaining to sugar seasons 2005 -06 and earlier 
are still outstanding and yet action has not been tak en against sugar mills to recover the 
cane price arrears along with interest @ 15 percent, as per the provisions of Sugarcane 
(Control) Order,1966. The Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised of the details of 
sugar mills who are yet to liquidate t heir outstanding arrears against the farmers along 
with the reasons for not paying the outstanding arrears along with interest. The Committee 
further emphasize to protect and promote the interest of farmers in a such a way that they 
continue to cultivate sugarcane and any aid/or assistance may be given to the sugar mills 
only on timely liquidation of cane price arrears by them to the farmers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.47 A statement showing the State -wise, Sector -wise and sugar mill wise details of 
cane price arrears outstanding, as on 31.5.2007, for the sugar season 2006 -07, 2005-06 
and 2004-05 & earlier is enclosed at Annexure. 
 
2.   The views/comments of the State Governments on outstanding cane price 
arrears are as under:- 
 
Punjab: There are no outstan ding cane price arrears for sugar seasons prior to 2006 -07. 
Sugar mills are paying State-Advised Price (SAP) of sugarcane which is much higher than 
Statutory Minimum Price (SMP) of sugarcane fixed by the Central Government. Therefore, 
sugar mills are not b eing compelled to pay interest on the cane price arrears for delayed 
payment.  
 
Uttarakhand: There are no outstanding cane price arrears for sugar seasons prior to 
2006-07. Sugar mills are paying State -Advised Price (SAP) of sugarcane which is much 
higher than Statutory Minimum Price (SMP) of sugarcane fixed by the Central 
Government.  
 
Gujarat: In Gujarat, all the sugar mills are in the cooperative sector and they pay 
sugarcane prices on pooling basis and in three instalments viz. First installment at the 
time of registration of sugarcane, Second instalment by April/May and the Third & final 
instalment is decided after considering the income & expenditure position. The old 
outstanding dues of cane price arrears (Rs.38.38 lakhs) are in respect of Talala suga r mill 
and the State Government has instructed the sugar mill to clear the dues as early as 
possible. 
 
Andhra Pradesh: There are no outstanding cane price arrears of earlier sugar seasons 
except for sugar season 2002 -03 where a sum of Rs.34.95 crore is due  from the private 
sugar mills and the matter is sub -judice before the Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh 
in W.P. No.3464 of 2003 wherein the sugar mills have got an interim order dated 
12.7.2005 that the respondents shall not take coercive steps for recovery of the enhanced 
cane price.  
 
Maharashtra:  The State Government has informed that during sugar season 2002 -03, 
due to drought conditions and steep fall in sugar prices, sugar mills were not in a position 
to pay the sugarcane price dues as per SMP. In  the current sugar season 2006 -07 as 
well, the sugar prices have registered steep fall and short margin has been created on 
pledge accounts of sugar mills as a result of which sugar mills are not in a position to pay 
cane price dues as per SMP. The Rane Co mmittee appointed by the State Government 
has identified 74 cooperative sugar mills of the State as sick.  The Technical Committee of 

NABARD has approved rescheduling of term loans of 91 cooperative sugar mills and that 
of one sugar mill has been approved by IDBI. The State Government has assisted sugar 
mills by way of medium term loans raised through Open Market Borrowing. Rent 
Recovery Certificates (RRC) have been issued to 3 sugar mills for liquidation of cane 
price arrears of 2002-03 season and to one sugar mill for liquidation of cane price arrears 
of 2006-07 season.     
 
2. The views/comments in the matter are awaited from the State Governments of 
Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. 
 
3. During the current sugar season 2006 -07, the pro duction of sugar in the country is 
provisionally estimated to be at a record level of over 275 lac tons as against  the 
estimated domestic consumption of about 190 lac tons.  Taking into account the closing 
balance of 44 lac tons as on 1.10.2006, the total  availability of sugar in 2006 -07 sugar 
season is estimated to be 319 lac tons.  The high production of sugar has resulted in 
decline in domestic sugar prices.  The international prices of sugar are also low.  This has 
affected adversely the capacity of su gar mills to pay cane price to sugarcane farmers. In 
order to ensure that the excess production of sugar does not lead to mounting cane price 
arrears, the Central Government has taken the following steps:- 
 
(i) Buffer stock of 20 lac tons has already been crea ted for a period of one year 
from 1.5. 2007 to 30.4.2008.  Another 30 lac tons of buffer stock has also been approved 
for a period of one year from 1.8.2007 to 31.7.2008. This will involve a subsidy amount of 
Rs. 945 crore from Sugar Development Fund. The banks, on creation of buffer stock, 
would provide additional credit of Rs. 1150 crore.  The buffer subsidy amount and the 
additional credit are to be exclusively used for clearance of cane price arrears of 
sugarcane growers; 
 
(ii) Export assistance to defray th e expenditure on internal transport, marketing 
and handling charges and ocean freight @ Rs. 1350/ - per tonne for sugar factories 
located in coastal areas and Rs. 1450/ - per tonne for sugar factories located in non -
coastal areas have been announced.  This involves an outgo of Rs. 205 crore from Sugar 
Development Fund; and  
 
(iii) ban on export of sugar has been removed. 
 
4. As regards the suggestion of the Committee that any aid/or assistance may be given 
to the sugar mills only on timely liquidation of cane price arrear by them to the farmers, the 
Central Government, in principle, agrees with the views of the Committee.   However, 
there are practical difficulties in implementing this recommendation. Usually, the cane 
price arrears build up in the years of low sugar p rices as it happened  in 2002 -03 sugar 
season and is happening in 2006 -07 season. The Government create buffer stock to 
mitigate the difficulties of sugar factories and help them to pay cane price arrears to 
sugarcane growers.  As per the Sugar Development  Fund Rules, 1983, the buffer stock 
subsidy is to be exclusively utilized for payment of cane price including cane price arrears.  
If the  suggestion of the Committee is imposed on sugar factories, it would not have been 
possible for the Government to pay the buffer subsidy to sugar mills and in turn, 
sugarcane growers would suffer.  Similarly, the assistance from Sugar Development Fund 
is extended to sugar factories for modernization, expansion of capacity, cane 
development, setting up of cogeneration and ethanol manufacturing facilities with the 
purpose of improving their financial viability so that they can give remunerative cane price 
to the sugarcane growers. In view of such practical difficulties, the implementation of this 
recommendation of the Commit tee may lead to unexpected and undesirable 
consequences. Therefore, the recommendation of the Standing Committee that any aid/or 

assistance may be given to the sugar mills only on timely liquidation of cane price arrear 
by them to the farmers cannot be accepted due to practical difficulties in implementing this 
recommendation. 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
Directorate of Sugar 
 F. No. 7-1/2007-Stat-II 
Dated  31.07.2007] 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No 41 (Para No. 6.36) 
 
 
2.48 The Committee are deeply concerned to note that number of claims settled on 
account of reimbursement of internal transport charges was mere 31 during 2006 -07 and 
44 during 2005 -06 as compared to 418 during 2003 -04 and 392  during 2004 -05. The 
Committee also note that 270 claims were settled against ocean freight and handling and 
marketing charges during 2005-06 whereas no claims on this account were settled during 
2003-04 and 2004 -05. The total expenditure on both these hea ds has been Rs. 37.44 
crore only against Budget Estimates of Rs. 90 crore in 2005 -06 and Rs. 16.16 crore 
during 2006 -07 out of BE of Rs. 50 crore. The Committee view this seriously and 
recommend that efforts should be made to settle more claims so that hug e amount 
blocked under these heads is not surrendered. The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of the reasons for not settling any claim against ocean freight and handling and 
marketing charges during 2003 -04 and 2004-05. The Committee further recomme nd that 
the tedious procedural formalities which are presently gone into for clearance/settlement 
of claims should be simplified, so that the claims are settled expeditiously. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
  
2.49 The reimbursement of internal transport charges , ocean freight and handling and 
marketing charges were decided to be paid to sugar factories for export of sugar w.e.f. 
June 2002 to August 2004. It was decided in June 2004 by the Govt. to reimburse internal 
transport charges for the export of sugar. How ever, decisions to pay ocean freight and 
handling and marketing charges @ Rs. 350 per tonne and Rs. 500 per tonne respectively 
were announced later and made effective for the exports made on or after 14 th February 
2003 and 3 rd October 2003 respectively. Further, approval of M/o Finance for payment of 
ocean freight and handling and marketing charges was received only in July 2005.  
 
 It may, therefore, be mentioned that since the policy to reimburse internal transport 
charges was announced in June 2002 and m ost of the claims from the sugar factories 
were received immediately thereafter, the claims settled in 2003 -04 and 2004 -05 are 
significantly higher than thereafter. Not only the number of claims pending for settlement 
for internal transport charges is less after 2005-06 but more of these claims are either not 
complete or require further clarification/information from the sugar factories. In a number 
of cases, the sugar factories have exported sugar even after the validity date of the 
release orders issued b y the Directorate of Sugar, requiring that these release orders 
have to be extended. In other words, the cases pending are mostly for compliance by the 
factories and, therefore, the number of cases now being settled would be much less than 
what was settled in 2003-04 and 2004-05.  
 

 As regards ocean freight charges and handling and marketing charges, since the 
final approval of M/o Finance was obtained only in July 2005, these claims were settled 
only thereafter. Therefore, as correctly pointed out by the C ommittee, no claims were 
settled during 2003 -04 and 2004 -05. Most of the claims i.e. totaling to 270 claims, could 
be settled in 2005-06. 
 
 The above claims are being settled as per Sugar Development Fund Rules 
prescribed in 2002. Therefore, the requiremen ts as laid down therein cannot be relaxed 
today. However, considering the view / advice of the Standing Committee, the export 
assistance to be given by the Govt. for the export of sugar made from April 2007 to April 
2008 would be given as per new SDF Rules  to be prescribed shortly wherein the 
procedural requirements are being kept as simple and as convenient as possible without 
compromising on the basic requirement of checking and confirming the exports for such 
reimbursement of expenditure.   
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F. No 6-1/2007-SPF 
Dated 26.06. 2007] 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 42 (Para No. 7.22) 
 
2.50 The Committee note the various initiatives being undertaken by the Government 
which include the efforts made by Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) in 
continuously developing improved varieties of production and protection technologies in 
oilseeds. Demonstrations of the various technologies are being organized through State  
Department of Agriculture and Front Line Demonstrations through ICAR under the 
Centrally Sponsored ‘Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize’ 
(ISOPOM). With the concerted efforts made from various quarters, the production of 
edible oils i n the country has improved from 72.47 lakh tonnes during 2004 -05 to 83.16 
lakh tonnes during 2005-06. The increase in production of edible oils has been negated by 
the growth in population and increased demand of edible oils due to improved living 
standard of people in the country. As such, there is no relief with regard to dependence on 
imports to meet the requirement of oilseeds in the country. As against 45.42 lakh tonnes 
import of edible oils during 2004 -05, 42.88 lakh tonnes have been imported during 2 005-
06, which marks an increase of 0.46 lakh tonnes. In the aforesaid scenario, the 
dependency on imports with regard to edible oils is around 35 to 40 per cent.  
 
While taking note of the status of indigenous production and imports along with the 
overall demand and supply position of oilseeds and edible oils in the country as given in 
the preceding paras of the report, the committee feel that there is an urgent need to pay 
more attention to R&D for improved varieties of seeds and improved technologies for 
production of oilseeds. such R&D initiatives need to be demonstrated to farmers to ensure 
the transfer of R&D from lab to land. Besides this, the initiatives need to be taken to 
provide incentives to the farmers for opting of production of oilseeds through various result 
oriented schemes/plans. More attention  need to be paid to increase the productivity and 
production of traditional oilseeds crops. Besides, result oriented schemes/plans should be 
chalked out/drawn to promote and popularize the use of non -traditional secondary source 
of edible oils, so as to reduce the dependency on imported edible oils. The Committee 
recommend to the Department to take the initiatives on the lines suggested in consultation 
with the other Ministries involved in the task.  
 
 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.51 The subject matter primarily relates to production & productivity of oilseeds which 
lies within the purview of Ministry of Agriculture.  The matter has been taken up with that 
Ministry.  According to Ministry of Agriculture:- 
Government of India is Implementing a Centrally Sponsored ‘Integrated Scheme of 
Oilseeds, Pulses, Oilpalm & Maize’(ISOPOM) in 14 major oilseeds growing States with a 
view to increase the production and productivity of oilseeds in the country.  Under the 
scheme, assistance is provided for purchase of breeder seed, production of foundation 
seed, production and distribution of certified seeds, distribution of seed  minikits, 
distribution of plant protection chemicals, plant protection equipments, weedicides, supply 
of rhizobium culture/phosphate solubilising bacteria, distribution of 
gypsum/pyrite/liming/dolomite, distribution of sprinkler sets and  water carrying pipes, 
publicity etc. to encourage  farmers to grow oilseeds. In order to disseminate information  
on improved production technologies amongst the farmers, block demonstrations and 
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) demonstrations are organized through State 
Department of Agriculture and Front Line Demonstrations through Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR). 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) is continuously developing 
improved varieties, production and protection technologies in oilseeds for increasing the 
production and productivity and also to make oilseeds cultivation profitable to the farmers. 
In order to increase the production and productivity of oilseeds, oil palm, pulses 
and maize in the country, an amount of Rs.300.00 crores has been allocated under 
ISOPOM for 2007-08.  A target of 312 lakh tonnes has been fixed for oilseeds  production 
during 2007-08. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
Directorate of Vanaspati Vegetable Oils & Fats 
F. No. 6/6/2007-EXP 
Dated 11.06.2007 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 43 (Para No. 7.23) 
 
2.52 The committee are concerned to note that the number of inspections carried out by 
the officials of DVVO&F as well as the number of samples analysed is on the decline. The 
number of inspections carried out in 2005 -06 was 1,275 which declined to just 9 00 during 
2006-07. The number of samples examined in the year 2005 -06 were 3,254 which 
declined to 3,207 in the year 2006-07. The Committee are anguished to note that only two 
States i.e. Kerala and Sikkim have submitted their Annual Reports for the year 2 006 
indicating number of samples examined and found adulterated. The Committee are 
perturbed to note that no inspection by Field officers of DVVO&F has been carried out of 
the Institutes funded for conducting R&D projects under the Plan Scheme of the DVVO&F. 
The Committee are of the view that in a vast country like ours where edible oils are the 
main cooking medium and adulteration in edible oils is so widespread, the number of 
inspections being carried out and samples being analysed are almost negligible. The 
Committee recommend that to keep a check on the adulteration in edible oils which is so 
rampant in our country, apart from increasing the number of inspections and drawing of 
large number of samples, some harsh actions should be taken against the offenders. 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.53 The subject matter primarily relates to Ministry of Health.  The matter has been taken up 
with that Ministry.  According to Ministry of Health:- 
The implementation of the Prevention of Food Adulteration (PFA) Act, 195 4 and Rules 
framed there under are vested with the Food (Health) Authorities of the States/UTs.  The 
Enforcement Staff of the concerned State/UT draw samples of commonly Food articles 
suspected to be misbranded/adulterated. As such total number of samples examined during the 
year 2004 were 98082 and 9214 samples were found to be misbranded /adulterated resulting 
9.39 %age of adulteration in all food commodities (This does not include the information from 
the State of Jharkhand). 
The concern of the Committee  to draw large number of samples of edible oils is being 
sent to all Food (Health) Authorities of the States/U.Ts for compliance . 
 As regards action taken against adulterated samples of edible oils and fats, the 
concerned States/U.Ts Government take neces sary action under the provisions of the 
Prevention of Food Adulteration (PFA) Act, 1954 and Rules framed thereunder. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
Directorate of Vanaspati Vegetable Oils & Fats 
F. No. 6/6/2007-EXP 
Dated 11.06.2007] 

 
CHAPTER-III 
 
Recommendations/ Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies 
 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 33  (Para No. 5.15) 
 
3.1 The Committee are concerned to note steep rise in establishment cost of CWC for the 
last three years i.e. 2004 -05, 2005-06 and 2006-07 i.e. 188.40 crore, 197.25 crore, and 209.80 
crore respectively despite various cost reduction strategies adopted by the Corporation.  The 
Committee also desire to implement the recommendations of TCS (Tata Consultancy Service) 
fully at the earliest.  The committee, therefore, reiterate its earlier recommendation and desire 
that Government should find ways and means, including undertaking an exercise by le ading 
management institutions like ASCI, Hyderabad for restructuring the policy, plan and programme 
of CWC to reduce the establishment cost and enhance its profits. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 In order to reduce the Administrative Cost/Establishment Cost , the Corporation had 
introduced Voluntary Retirement Scheme/Special Voluntary Scheme on different occasions 
during 1994, 1998, 2002 and recently during 2005.  During these Schemes, 2470 employees 
opted for Voluntary Retirement.  Further, the Corporation i s not resorting to any fresh 
recruitment for last many years. 
 
 In addition to these efforts, the Construction Cells of the Corporation have been 
progressively merged and the present number of Construction Cells is 6, CWC, RO, Kochi has 
also been merged with RO, Chennai in order to reduce the Establishment/Administrative Costs.  
Further, in order to reduce other expenses, measures such as conservation of energy, water, 
use of telephones, travel by air are also reduced.  Some of the activities like watch and  ward, 
house keeping have also been outsourced in order to reduce the Establishment Expenses.  
Efforts are being made to reduce the Establishment expenses further. 
 
 As regards the implementation of recommendation of TCS, as mentioned in the 
preceding para it has been partially accepted by reducing Construction Cells from 17 to 6 and 
merging Regional Office Kochi with Regional Office Chennai.  The implementation of remaining 
recommendations of the TCS like phasing out the Engineering Cadre, reduction in num ber of 
Regional Office from 17 to 11 are under consideration of the management and efforts are being 
made to expedite the same. 
 
 As regards, the suggestion for undertaking an exercise by leading management 
institutions like ASCI, Hyderabad for restructuring the policy/plan programme of CWC to reduce 
the establishment cost and enhance its profits, it may be mentioned that TCS report is currently 
under active consideration for the purpose of implementation.  This report was commissioned to 

go into the Organi zational Restructuring & Human Resource Systems.  The terms of reference 
included establishment cost reduction. 
 
 It is informed that the percentage of establishment cost to the total turnover has reduced 
from 39.38% to 31.84% during the year 2003-04 to 2005-06.  Though there is an increase in the 
establishment cost in absolute terms yet per employee income has increased from 6.79 lakh to 
Rs. 9.66 lakh.  The increase in establishment cost over the preceding three years is as under: 
 
Year Establishment Cost 
(Rs./Crore) 
Percentage Increase 
2003-04 182.28 - 
2004-05 188.40 3.36 
2005-06 197.25 4.70 
2006-07 (Provisional) 209.00 5.95 
 
 The increase in establishment cost is only on account of factors like Dearness 
Allowance, Annual Increment etc. as Corporation has not gone for any new recruitment and has  
reduced manpower by implementing Special Voluntary Retirement Schemes. 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F. No 1-3/2007-SG 
Dated 22nd June, 2007] 

CHAPTER- IV 
 
 
Recommendations / Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the committee 
 
 
Recommendations Sl. No. 2 & 3 (Para Nos. 2.30 and 2.31) 
  
4.1 The Committee observes that there is huge under spendi ng under different Non -plan 
Schemes during 2005 -06 and 2006 -07, particularly in the programmes related to loans and 
Grants-in-Aid provided to various Sugar Mills for modernization and rehabilitation.  Besides, 
under Plan head also, there are huge underspen ding under the following schemes during the 
Tenth Plan Period: - 
 
(v) Construction of Godowns; 
(vi) Integrated Information System for Food grain Management; 
(vii) Evaluation, Monitoring and Research of Public Distribution System; and 
(viii) Village Grain Bank. 
 
 The position is  particularly grave during the year 2006 -07, since ‘NIL’ expenditure is 
reflected in the Budget documents in respect of the following schemes: - 
 
(iv) Integrated Information System for Food grain Management (IISFM); 
(v) Research and Development and Modernization of VVO&F; and 
(vi) Computerization of Public Distribution System (PDS). 
 
 The reasons furnished by the Department for under spending which indicate 
modifications of original scheme of smart card and earlier unspent balances under IISFM are 
unacceptable to the Com mittee.  Almost Nil expenditure under the important schemes of the 
Department is a matter of serious concern.  The Department has admitted that huge (cut in) 
amount at RE stage under different scheme is due to under spending under different schemes.  
The Committee while deploring the way important schemes are being implemented, recommend 
to the Department to take all the corrective action so that the position of under spending is not 
repeated during the year 2007-08. 
 
4.2 The Committee have repeatedly been emphasizing on the expenditure of outlay under 
different schemes/heads in a phased manner during the whole year.  Although the Department 
has initiated exercise of quarter -wise targets and achievements in the Outcome Budget at the 
instance of the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance, the actual quarter -wise spending 
during the year 2006 -07 (under plan schemes), as reflected in the Budget document, indicate 
that there is no improvement in this regard.  The quarter -wise data, as indicated below, 
substantiate the aforesaid observation of the Committee: - 
 
 Quarter-wise expenditure during 2006-07 in percentage 
 
First Quarter 5.75  
Second Quarter 10.55 
Third Quarter  63.65 
Fourth Quarter  67.54  

  
The Committee deplores the tendency of making major part of  expenditure during the 
last two quarters of the year.  Such a rush of expenditure towards the end of the year results 
into huge opening balances with the State Governments and the scope of misutilization also 
increase.  The Committee strongly recommend to  the Department to ensure that the aforesaid 
situation of rush of expenditure during the last months is not repeated during the year 2007-08. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.3 The Deptt is ensuring expenditure as per the scheme Monthly Expenditure Plan and 
Quarterly physical/financial targets for 2007 -08 for plan schemes are being fixed and these 
targets will be closely watched for corrective action during monthly expenditure review meetings 
during 2007-08.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F .M. No 4-1/2006-Plan 
Dated 18.06.2007] 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para no. 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 7 (Para No.3.30) 
 
 
4.4 The Committee further find that in 2 006-07 FCI has taken the services of National 
Collateral Management Services Ltd, (NCMSL, a subsidiary of NCDEX) and National Bulk 
Handling Corporation (NHBC, a subsidiary of MCX) for procurement of paddy in Madhya 
Pradesh, Orissa, Bihar and Rajasthan and for wheat in Uttar Pradesh, NCMS has procured 6.32 
lakh MT paddy in Orissa, Madhya Pradesh and Bihar and NHBC has procured 12854 MT paddy 
in Madhya Pradesh as on 30.3.2007. The Committee also note that FCI does not incur any 
additional cost for the compani es  who are carrying out procurement operations on behalf of 
FCI. Further it has been clarified by the Department that one percent extra commission being 
provided to cooperatives is not being provided to these companies.  The Committee note that 
aforesaid companies i.e. NCMSL and NHBC are the direct wings of forward trading exchanges 
of commodities. The Committee in their Seventeenth Report on the Forward Contract 
(Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2006 have strongly recommended to ban forward trading in 
foodgrains. The Committee also note that in pursuance of the recommendation of the 
Committee the Government have also banned forward trading in wheat and rice w.e.f. 27 
February, 2007. The Committee fail to understand how the FCI is using the services of certain 
subsidiaries of commodity exchanges for the purpose of procurement of foodgrains specifically 
when the forward trading of wheat and rice has been banned by the Government. The 
Department may furnish the clarification in this regard so as to analyze the situ ation and 
comment further.  The Committee strongly recommend that procurement of foodgrains through 
private companies should be discouraged FCI should give more emphasis to small farmers and 
cooperatives for the purpose of procurement of foodgrains. 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
4.5 This Ministry had earlier allowed NCMSL/NBHC to be involved in purchase of foodgrains 
only in areas where the infrastructure of FCI and State agencies was weak.  This was to widen 
the scope of MSP operations in order to benefit more  farmers.  Instructions were also issued to 
FCI to take No-objection from State Governments for engagement of these agencies.  
 
FCI has informed that to maximise procurement of paddy/rice for the Central Pool, 
services of NCMSL/NBHC were utilized  during K MS 2006-07 in the states of M.P., Orissa  and  
Bihar for the procurement of paddy. 
 
FCI has further informed that as regards giving more emphasis to small farmers and 
cooperatives they have engaged NAFED,  as an agent of FCI for procurement of wheat during  
RMS 2007-08 in wheat procuring States like U.P., M.P., Rajasthan, Bihar and Uttarakhand. 
 New guidelines have been issued by the Ministry in April, 2007 regarding involvement of 
Cooperatives/State undertakings/Private Companies for procurement operations for Central 
Pool from those areas where FCI infrastructure is weak and State Govt. establishments are not 
adequate for the procurement operations. These guidelines will be applicable for wheat 
procurement in RMS 2007 -08 and for paddy procurement in KMS 200 7-08.  The guidelines 
include the stipulation that in such cases where need for involving other agencies is felt, FCI 
should in the first instance use the services of State Government undertakings/Cooperative 
agencies or Central Government undertakings for  procurement. In case, there are areas where 
these agencies are not able to open procurement centers, these areas should be covered 
through Central PSUs or companies/organizations in which Central Government or nationalized 
banks/financial institutions have at least 51% equity. 
 
As a last option, private companies can be engaged subject to the State Government 
recommending the proposal of a private company to be engaged as an agency for procurement. 
In such a case, the State Government has to supervise the procurement operations to ensure 
that such a cooperative/company does not pay below MSP to any farmer. Stringent conditions 
should also be imposed for ensuring that the agency opens adequate number of procurement 
centers in backward areas. The FCI will als o have to ensure that the cost of procurement is 
lower than that of the State Government agency or FCI, whichever is lower.  
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F. No. 156(6)/2007-Py.I 
Dated 7th June, 2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para no. 1.15 of Chapter I of the Report)

  
Recommendation Sl. No. 15 (Para No. 3.76) 
 
4.6 The Committee further note that malnutrition, specifically among women and children is 
the area of concern.  The malnourished children are unlikely to reach their human potential. 
Besides, due to malnourishment, women are also affected by anemic and other problems 
related to malnourishment. There is an urgent need to provide adequate nourishment and 
health care to every citizen particularly the children and women. Pulses are a rich source of 
protein and other nutrients. The considerable rise in the prices of pulses and edible oil has 
affected the poorest of the poor hard and as such there is an urgent need to pro vide certain 
quantity of pulses and edible oil at subsidized rates to poor persons through PDS. The 
Committee are aware of the fact that due to mis -match between demand and supply of cereals 
and edible oil, the Government has to resort to imports considera bly. The Secretary has 
informed that at present, edible oil to the tune of 45-50 lakh tonnes and pulses to the tune of 20-
25 lakh tonnes are being imported. On the suggestion of the Committee to provide pulses and 
edible oil to the BPL families, the Secretary expressed certain constraints such as need to resort 
to more imports due to the shortage and consequent increase in subsidy. The Committee would 
like that all these concerns should be adequately addressed to and the Government should 
evolve a strategy to provide 2 kg of pulses and 1 kg. of edible oil at subsidized rates to each 
family through PDS. The proposed scheme in this regard should be worked out after taking into 
account all the factors keeping in view the aforesaid observations of the Committee and placed 
before Cabinet expeditiously.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
4.7 This issue has been examined in detail in the Ministry and it has been decided that the 
State/UT Governments, desirous of importing pulses and edible oils for distribution to ration 
cards holders may avail of services of Central Public Sector Undertakings and NAFED for this 
purpose. The State and UT Governments have been informed accordingly and the Central 
PSUs and NAFED have been requested to give priority to import pulses and edibl e oils if 
requests are received from the State/UT Governments. 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F. No. 9(3)/2007-PD III 
Dated 10th August, 2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para no. 1.22   of Chapter I of the Report)

Recommendation Sl. No.  18 (Para No. 3.90) 
 
4.8 The Committee find that diversion of foodgrains meant for poorest of the poor to be 
allocated through PDS is the biggest menace in the functioning of one of the impo rtant welfare 
schemes of Government i.e. PDS. In this regard, the revelation made under ORG Marg Report 
and PEO Report are a matter of concern. As per the ORG Marg Report, excepting 11 
States/UTs, in all the States, there were large scale diversions of whe at and rice. The worst is 
the position in North-Eastern States. In Manipur diversion is 97.7 per cent followed by Nagaland 
and Arunachal Pradesh where diversion is 88.6 per cent and 64 per cent, respectively. In States 
other than the North -Eastern States, the diversion is maximum in hilly States of Himachal 
Pradesh (58 per cent) and Uttaranchal (53 per cent). All India diversions of foodgrains are 39 
per cent for rice and 53.3 per cent for wheat. Further, as per PEO Report, the All India diversion 
data is 3 6.38 per cent. The foodgrains leakage through ghost cards is 16.67 per cent and 
foodgrains leakage on FPS is 19.71 per cent.  
 
The Committee also note that there are various monitoring mechanisms of the 
Department to have better monitoring and deal with al l the issues including diversion of 
foodgrains. The Ministry has constituted a Task Force Team to monitor and check the various 
irregularities in the functioning of PDS. Besides, the Ministry has an Area Officer Scheme under 
which the various officers of t he Ministry visit various States to know about the ground position 
with regard to the working of PDS. In addition, under PDS Control Order, 2001, the constitution 
of Vigilance Committees by the States/UTs at State/District and FPS level is mandatory. 
 
In a ddition to the aforesaid systems, the Ministry get the utilization certificates from 
various State Governments which also help in monitoring of the PDS scheme. Inspite of the 
elaborate system of monitoring, the diversion of foodgrains continues.  
 
The Committee note that besides evolving various system of monitoring mechanism, it is 
pertinent that these systems work properly. In this regard, the information furnished by the 
Department indicates that the systems are not working properly. For example, Vigilan ce 
Committees could not be constituted in Assam, Bihar, Haryana, Jharkhand, M.P. Maharashtra, 
Manipur, Orissa, Punjab, Tripura, Uttaranchal, U.P. A &N Island and Daman & Diu. The Ministry 
has no mechanism to take note of the meetings of these Committees, a lthough it is mandatory 
to have one sitting in each quarter by these committees as per the aforesaid control order. As 
regards the working of Area Officers Scheme, the Committee note from the data furnished by 
the Ministry that in 2006 -07, visits were unde rtaken only in 7 States/UTs. In the year 2005 -06, 
the position was better when visits were undertaken in 11 States/UTs. In view of the aforesaid 
position, the Committee strongly recommend to the Department to ensure that the various 
monitoring mechanisms work properly failing which the objective of having detailed mechanism 
of monitoring is really defeated.  
 
The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to involve more and more women in the 
various activities related to Public Distribution System (PDS). As noted earlier, there are 4.89 
lakh Fair Price Shops (FPS) spread through out the country for the purpose of distribution of 
foodgrains to various entitled categories like BPL, AAY and APL persons. The Committee feel 
that there is a need to increase the number of fair price shops for the convenience of masses 
and the Committee strongly recommend to provide license to women for Fair Price Shops. 
Besides, Self -help Groups can also be involved in various activities related to PDS. The 
Committee desire that the data of women FPS license holders should be separately maintained 
to know the status of involvement of women in PDS.  

 
The Committee feel that greater responsibilities should be given to Panchayati Raj 
Institutions particularly elected women members in design implementation and monitoring of 
location specific food security schemes particularly PDS. The monitoring of PDS can be 
emphasized through social audit by Gram Sabhas. Besides, Panchayati Raj Institutions should 
also be made responsible for initiati ng action under the PDS Control Order, 2001. The 
Committee strongly recommend that necessary action should be taken in the light of the 
aforesaid observations of the Committee for involvement of women, Self-help Groups as well as 
Panchayati Raj Institution s under PDS. The Committee should also be kept apprised in this 
regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.9 The recommendation of the Committee that “ the Department to ensure that the various 
monitoring mechanisms work properly failing which the objective of ha ving detailed mechanism 
of monitoring is really defeated” has been noted.  It will be constant endeavor of the Department 
to ensure proper functioning of various monitoring Mechanism. 
 
 Regarding involvement of women in the various activities related to PD S, it may be 
stated that instructions have already been issued to all States/UTs to give priority in the matter 
of allotting FPS licenses to Cooperatives of Women and Ex -servicemen, vide letter No .D.O. 
6(7)2004-PD-I (Pt. File -IV) dated 29.11.2004.Further vide this Department’s letter dated 
18.2.2005, all States/UTs were requested to involve Self Help Groups in the management of 
Fair Price Shop under PDS.  It was also stated that to achieve this objective, the Self Help 
Groups may be imparted training in th e operation of Fair Price Shop in their respective areas.  
With a view to strengthening of TPDS, instructions/guidelines have also been issued to all State 
Governments to involve Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRI) vide letters dated 23.6.1999 and 
3.11.1999. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F. No. 9(3)/2007-PD III 
Dated 10th August, 2007]  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para no. 1.25  of Chapter I of the Report)

 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.22  (Para No.4.12) 
 
4.10 The Committee have persistently been recommending in their respective reports to bring 
down the total establishment cost incurred by FCI which adversely affects the total subsidy for 
foodgrains meant for the poorest of the poor.  Any deduction on the total establishment cost will 
result in increased allocation  for foodgrains component since the establishment cost is part of 
the total foodgrains subsidy package.  In spite of pursuing the matter by the Committee in the 
respective reports, the data indicated in the various Budget documents as reflected in the 
previous parts of the report indicates that the establishment cost which includes staff cost and 
other administrative expenses is increasing year after year.  Total establishment cost which was 
Rs. 1,455.73 core during the year 2005-06 has increased to 1,723 crore which is around 20 per 
cent.  The Committee further find that M/s McKinsey & Co. while reviewing the operations of FCI 
has made certain recommendations for revised norms of deployment of staff for different offices 
at district level based on the volume of operations.  The various recommendations of M/s 
McKinsey & Co. are still being examined.  The Committee strongly recommend to take final 
decision on the various issue s relating to bringing efficiencies in the administration involved in 
the handling of foodgrains. Such efficiencies would definitely result in curtailment of 
establishment cost.  The follow up action should be communicated to the Committee.  The 
Committee note that all  expenses including establishment cost in the Food Corporation of India 
are made from the Budgetary support of the Ministry by means of food subsidy.  The Committee 
strongly recommend that the establishment cost of FCI should be separately in dicated while 
allocating resources for food subsidy.  Such as information would enable the Government to 
monitor the allocation and utilization of funds separately for establishment and other component 
of food subsidy.  Besides any increase/decrease in the  establishment cost would not affect the 
total package of food subsidy.  
 
Reply of Government 
4.11 The Establishment Cost of FCI for the last four years are as under : 
(Rs. In Crore) 
 
Year Staff Cost Other 
Admin Exp. 
Total Total 
subsidy 
incurred 
Establishment 
cost as % of 
subsidy 
2003-04 1255.11 109.55 1364.66 21587 6.32 
2004-05 1499. 63 117.81 1617.44 20773 7.79 
2005-06 
(Provisional) 
1195.69 157.02 1352.71 21460 6.30 
2006-07 (RE) 1509.07 214.06 1723.13 26265 6.56 
 
Thus, as a percentage of subsidy, the re has not been any significant increase in 
establishment cost of FCI. .  The total increase in staff cost in 2006-07 (RE) over 2005-06 (Prov) 
is Rs. 313.92 crore.  Increase in  other Administrative  cost is Rs. 57.04 crore in the same 
period, out of which , the major portion is on account of Pay, DP. DA. HRA, LTC, PLI, Medical 
and OTA.  The reasons for increase in staff cost in 2006-07 over 2005-06 are as under : 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Item Reason 
Pay During 2006 -07, the FCI decided to provide full Pay Scale benefits to 
employees on deployment to higher posts.  This is in addition to normal 
increase due to increments and regular promotion and resulted in increase 
in pay component. 
DP The employees under CDA Scale have been provided with 50% merger of 
DA which is treated as  DP, the major impact of which have come in 2006 -
07 only. 
DA Normal DA increase due to increase in inflation index and additional impact 
of DA on DP. 
HRA HRA to CDA employees is now payable on Basic + DP i.e. 50% more than 
before.  Further, due to higher  benefit from HRA,  a large number of CDA 
employees earlier availing leased accommodation benefits have shifted to 
HRA. 
LTC 2006 was the extended year from Block 2002 -2005.  It was also the first 
year for Block 2006 -2009.  Consequently, the incidence of L TC 
availment/encashment during 2006-07 was higher. 
PLI Due to completion of arrears of Accounts, PLI for the years 2003 -04 and 
2004-05 have been finalized and paid during the year 2006-07 
Medical Due to the increasing age profile of the employees and hig her costs of 
treatment the medical expenses are higher. 
OTA Due to continuous depletion of staff strength and exigencies like import of 
Wheat, the existing staff have to be deployed on OTA basis to get the work 
done.  
 
The FCI is the major implementation agency for the Foodgrain Policy of the Government 
of India.  For this purpose, it needs to have appropriate infrastructure and man -power.  
However, these costs form only a small part of the total food subsidy.  Such infrastructure is 
necessary for the eff ective functioning of any organization and can not be dispensed with.  In 
order to carry out the mandate given to the Corporation, such expenditure has to be incurred.  
As these costs are directly linked to the execution of the mandate given to the FCI, lo ading of 
the same over food subsidy is fully justified.  However, such establishment costs are separately 
identified and shown in the Annual Report and Performance Budget of the Corporation. 
 
 It is also pertinent to mention that even in States where decen tralized procurement 
operations are carried out, the respective States include the related establishment and 
administrative charges in their claims of subsidy.  Further, even the State Agencies carrying out 
only procurement operations (as against the procu rement storage-movement-distribution done 
by FCI on behalf of the Central Pool) are also reimbursed establishment charges @ 2.5% of the 
MSP.  And in all such cases, establishment charges form part of the total subsidy 
reimbursement made to them. 
 
 The Standing Committee has recommended that the establishment cost of FCI should 
be separately indicated while allocating resources for food subsidy for better monitoring 
purposes.  As the establishment costs are already separately indicated in the Annual Accounts  
of the Corporation, the Department’s view is that the present system of accounting already 
enables the FCI and Government to closely monitor the allocation and  

 
utilization of funds for establishment expenses of FCI.  In the Department’s budget therefore  
there is no need to separately indicate establishment cost of FCI.   
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F.M. No.  8-2/2007-FC-I (Pt.) 
Dated   10.07.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see para no. 1.28 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 36 (Para no. 6.31) 
 
4.12 The Committee find that a cess of Rs. 14 per quintal is being collected as a duty of 
excise on all sugar produced by any sugar factory in India under Sugar Cess Act, 1982 and the 
proceeds, reduced by the cost of collection as determined by the Central Government, together 
with any money received by the Central Government for the purposes of the Act after due 
appropriation made by the Parliament are credited t o the Sugar Development Fund (SDF). In 
this regard during the period from 1982 -83 to 2006 -07, (upto 30 November, 2006), a cess 
amount of Rs. 4,448.44 crore has been collected out of which Rs. 3,506 crore has been 
transferred to the Sugar Development Fund. The Sugar Development Fund has been created 
for financing of accounts for the development of Sugar Industry to achieve the objectives of the 
aforesaid Act.  
 
The Committee find from the position of financial achievement with regard to various 
schemes as re ported by the Department in the Budget documents that there is huge 
underspending during the year 2005 -06 and 2006 -07. The following data substantiates the 
aforesaid observation of the Committee.  
 
 
                            Scheme 
 
Underspending in percentage as 
compared to Revised Estimate  
 
                                                       2005-06  2006-07  
 
Loans for 
modernization/rehabilitation of 
sugar mills.  
 
63  80  
Loans for Cane development  36  48  
Loans to Sugar mills for Bagasse 
based cogeneration power 
projects  
54  48  
Loans for production of 
anhydrous alcohol /ethanol  
72  60  

 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.13 Disbursement of Loan from Sugar Development Fund for all the schemes is dependent 
on completion of necessary documentati on, furnishing of security etc. in time.  Even though 
there were a number of loans sanctioned for the schemes, the loans could not be disbursed as 
expected due to the fact that the factories did not complete the formalities and submit the 
required documents and security in time.  
 
Underspending in percentage as compared to Revised Estimates for the year 2006-2007 
were as follows: 
 
 
S.No. Name of the Scheme RE 2006-07 
  
 
(Rs. in crore) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
2006-07 
(Rs. in crore) 
% age 
Underspending  
1 Loans f or modernization/ 
rehabilitation of   sugar mills: 
 
125 86.46 30.83 
2 Cane Development 25 14.81 40.76 
3 Bagasse based co-generation 120 92.02 23.32 
4 Loan for production of ethanol 30 2.27 92.43 
 
             
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F. No.3-1/2007-SDF 
                                                       Dated 13.07.2007] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
   (Please see para no.1.35 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 37(Para no. 6.32)   
 
4.14 The Department has indicated receipt of incomplete applications as required under SDF 
rules as well as non-execution of timely Tripartite Agreement (TPA) as the reasons for the huge 
underspending. Further analysis of the data  reveal that the amount allocated at Budget 
Estimates (BE) stage is enhanced even when the trends of utilization of expenditure are lesser 
than the allocation made at the BE stage.    For example under the scheme ‘Loan for sugar mills 
for Bagasse based cog eneration power projects’ the allocation was enhanced from Rs. 100 
crore to Rs. 125 crore at RE stage during the year 2005 -06.   However, it resulted in to 
expenditure of just Rs. 62.73 crore which is far lesser than the allocation of Rs. 100 crore at BE 

stage. During the following year i.e. 2006 -07 again the allocation made at BE stage has been 
enhanced from to Rs. 100 crore to Rs. 120 crore, whereas the actual expenditure is again Rs. 
62.5 crore.  
The Committee conclude from the aforesaid scenario that th e objectives of creation of 
Sugar Development Fund are not being fully achieved. The reasons for under achievement are 
well within the domain of the Government. There is an urgent need for simplifying the 
procedures for advancing loans to various sugar mil ls under the respective schemes. Besides, 
the owner of the sugar mills need to be assisted in completing the formalities for sanction of the 
loans under the schemes . There is an urgent need to publicize the aforesaid schemes so that 
maximum applications are received. The Committee further note that India is one of the largest 
producers of sugar and sugarcane in the world and as such there is great potential for bagasse 
based cogeneration power projects and production of anhydrous alcohol / ethanol . The Sug ar 
Development Fund can be a boom to these sugar mills particularly when the Sugar 
Development Fund has the definite source of funding i.e. the cess of Rs. 14 per quintal as a 
duty excise on all sugar produced by any sugar factory. The Committee strongly r ecommend to 
the Department to take all the desired steps in the light of the aforesaid observations of the 
Committee and the Committee be kept apprised.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.15 The full text of SDF Rules, 1983, scheme -wise, has been placed on the o fficial web-site 
of the Department so that the sugar factories could make themselves aware of the various 
schemes under the rules.  Besides, the State Governments and Sugar Mills Associations all 
over the country are informed about the policies of the Gove rnment on Sugar Development 
Fund who in turn disseminate the information to sugar factories.      
Efforts are continuously made to simplify and improve the procedure and other 
formalities while ensuring that financial requirements are adequately met.  A sp ecial meeting of 
the Standing Committee on SDF is being held shortly to discuss the Rules and norms of SDF 
and recommend any improvement/ changes in the same.   
 
During 2006 -07, the actual expenditure under the scheme for bagasse based 
cogeneration power project was Rs.92.02 crore and not Rs.62.50 Crores.   
   
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F. No.3-1/2007-SDF 
                                                       Dated 13.07.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para no.1.35 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 40 (Para No. 6.35) 
 
4.16 The Committee note that during the year 2006 -07, only four sugar factories were visited 
and the number of sugar samples drawn for t esting was just 131.  The Committee are 
concerned to note that the number of factories being visited as well as the number of samples 
being drawn for testing is very low taking into account the large number of installed sugar 
factories in the country.  The  Committee felt that when the priority of the Government is to 
provide good quantity sugar to the consumers, proper quality control measures should be taken.  
More and more factories need to be inspected/visited.  The Committee fee that more issuing of 
show cause notices would not serve the purpose of keeping a check on sugar factories to main 
high quality standards.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that some very stringent action, 
including monetary penalties may be imposed on sugar factories whose sam ples fail the quality 
tests.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.17 The Committee has recommended that (i) the number of sugar factories to be 
inspected/visited should be increased and (ii)  stringent action, including monetary penalties on 
factories whose samples failed in the quality tests should be imposed. 
 
 As regards (i), Directorate of Sugar is having limited staff consisting of 1 Assistant 
Director and 2 inspecting officers, therefore, it is difficult to carry out large number of inspection.  
However, Directorate of Sugar will endeavour to increase the number of inspection.  
 
 As regards (ii), sugar inspections are carried out under the provisions of the Sugar 
(Control) Order, 1966 whi ch has been issued in exercise of the powers conferred by Section 3 
of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955.  The Act does not authorizes an executive  officer of 
the Central Government to impose fine on a sugar factory whose sample fails in the quality 
tests.  Hence, it is difficult to impose monetary penalties on such factories.  The fine on a sugar 
factory can be imposed only by a court.  
  
 It is pertinent to mention that the sugar samples degraded by the Directorate has to be 
sold in the market by the f actory as per the findings and such sugar will realize less price than 
the price for the grade which the factory had marked originally.  Therefore, the monetary loss in 
this manner is the punishment to the erring sugar mills.  Moreover, the sugar determine d as 
BISS/MOIST has to be either reprocessed or sold to bulk consumers, by which also the factory 
will be loser monetarily.  Thus, the factory, who has mis -graded the sugar in quality are 
penalized by means of less realization at the time of sale. 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food & Public Distribution 
 Directorate of Sugar 
File No. INSP.F1 (3)/200t-Standing Committee/723 
 Dated 6.07.2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para no.1.38 of Chapter I of the Report)

 
CHAPTER- V 
 
 
Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Government 
are still awaited 
 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 10 (Para No. 3.33) 
 
 
5.1 The Committee note that a notification has been issued by the Government under the 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955 on 1 March, 2007 according to which any company or firm or 
individual which purchases wheat beyond 50,000 tonnes during 2007 -08 shall furnish to the 
State Government a return indicating the name/address of the company, quanti ty of wheat 
purchased and quantity of wheat held in stock. The validity of said order has further been 
extended up to 31 August, 2007 to enable the State Governments to impose stock limit on 
wheat and pulses. The Committee also find that non -compliance of the provisions of the order 
would attract penal action under the Essential Commodities Act. To ensure the implementation 
of the aforesaid order, a copy of the notification has been forwarded to all State Food 
Secretaries of wheat producing States to give w ide publicity to the provisions, of the 
notification/order through the electronic/print media to ensure that buyers of wheat arriving in the 
mandis are suitably informed and comply with the requirements.  
 
The Committee find from the information provided b y the Department that in pursuance 
of the aforesaid order, only two companies viz. ITC Ltd., Secunderabad, Andhra Pradesh and 
Kargil India Pvt. Ltd., Haryana, have filed the declaration so far. The Committee note from the 
aforesaid developments that the aforesaid order issued under Essential Commodities Act is not 
being implemented at all in the various State Governments. The declaration made by only two 
companies all over the country speaks volumes about the ineffective implementation of the 
aforesaid order. The Committee feel that traders are hoarding stocks of food grains specifically 
of wheat due to continuous rise in prices and create artificial scarcity resulting into further 
increase in prices. In these circumstances, there is an urgent need to take s tringent measures 
to curb these tendencies of the traders. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
pressure should be exerted on the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations so as to 
ensure the implementation of the aforesaid order. The Committee should be apprised about the 
follow up action in this regard.  
 
The Committee further feel that the Government should consider of reducing the existing 
limit of 50,000 tonnes so as to curb the tendency of hoarding by private companies for making 
profits. The action taken in this regard should be communicated to the Committee.  

Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 At present five companies viz. ITC, Cargill, AWB, Britannia and Delhi Flour Mills have 
sent declarations about wheat purchases above 50,000 Mt. 
 
 A letter has been sent to all the wheat producing State Governments on 11.5.2007 
requesting them to immediately issue suitable orders to Mandis in the State so that all traders 
file their returns under the Wheat (Stock Declaration by Companies or Firms or Individuals) 
Order, 2007 within the stipulated time.  The State Governments have been further requested 
that wheat purchases by private parties may be closely monitored and action taken against 
defaulters for violation of the Wheat (Stock Declaration by  Companies or Firms or Individuals) 
Order, 2007 under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955.   
 
It is felt that reducing the limit of 50,000 MT at Government of India level for making it 
mandatory for any Company or Firm or Individual to file returns regardi ng purchases of wheat 
made would send adverse market signals and, therefore, any such action at this point of time 
might prove counter productive.  Moverover, State Governments have been authorised to impose 
stock limits on wheat & pulses vide notification  dated 29.8.2006.  The validity of the said 
notification has been extended by another 6 months vide notification dated 27.2.2007.   
However, comments of the State Governments have been asked regarding reduction in the 
cumulative procurement limit of 50,000  MT for filing declaration under Wheat (Stock 
Declaration by Companies or Firms or Individuals) Order, 2007. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F. No. 2 (LS)/6/2007/Py.III 
Dated 23.05.2007] 
Recommendation Sl. No.  13 (Para No. 3.74) 
 
5.3 The Committee note that Public Distribution System (PDS) is an important part of 
Government Policy for management of food by providing foodgrains to poorest of the poor 
through Public Distribution System. The  Public Distribution System is operated under the joint 
responsibility of the Central and State Governments. The Central Government through FCI has 
taken the responsibility for procurement, storage, transportation in bulk of foodgrains to the 
State Governments. The operational responsibility rests with the State Governments. At present 
foodgrains are distributed through the network of more than 4.89 lakh fair price shops. Under 
the Targeted Public Distribution System, 2.5 crore poorest of the poor families from among the 
BPL families covered under TPDS within the States are being provided foodgrains at a highly 
subsidized rate of Rs. 2 per Kg. for wheat and Rs. 3 per Kg. for rice under the Antyodaya Anna 
Yojana. The scale of issue of foodgrains is 35 kg. per  family per month. As per the information 
provided by the Department, total number of ration cards issued by States/UTs for different 
category of persons are 2,291.82 lakhs, out of which 1,291.91 lakhs are APL, 765.82 lakhs BPL 
and 234.10 are AAY.  
The Committee further note that the identification of BPL is done by the Ministry of Rural 
Development and the Department of Food and Public Distribution do not conduct any 
independent survey. The Committee are also aware of the fact that the results of BPL censu s 
2002 could not be finalized so far by the various State Governments and as such the data of 
BPL persons identified during the year 1997 is being depended upon. The Committee note from 

the position of off -take of foodgrains as compared to allotment under BPL/APL and AAY 
categories that the off -take was around 78 per cent under BPL, around 27 per cent under APL 
and around 93 per cent under AAY during the year 2006-07.  
 
Reply of the Government 
These are the observation of the Committee and no action-taken-report has been sought 
from the Department.   
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F. No. 9(3)/2007-PD III 
Dated 10th August, 2007] 
Recommendation Sl. No.  14 (Para No.3.75) 
 
5.4 The Committee  while examining Demands for Grants for 2006 -07 (refer para 2.68 of 
Twelfth Report) had recommended that there is a need to reduce allocation of foodgrains for 
APL category especially wheat. In this regard, while examining the Demands for Grants of this 
year, the Committee have observed that the off-take of APL persons is very low. It is only 27 per 
cent during the year 2006 -07. Further as stated above, the revised data of BPL persons is not 
available with the various State Governments. The benefits of subs idized food provided to 
BPL/AAY persons through PDS are actually being diverted. The issue of diversion has been 
dealt in detail in the succeeding part of the report. Keeping all the factors in consideration, the 
Committee note that there is a category of persons who are little above BPL but are actually 
being deprived of the benefits of TPDS in most of the States/UTs. The rising prices in the last 
couple of years has hit hard specifically this category of persons who are actually suffering from 
food insecu rity but are technically above poverty line and deprived of the special benefits of 
PDS being provided to BPL persons. The Secretary during the course of oral evidence has 
acknowledged the need to provide the benefit of food security through subsidized foo dgrains to 
this category of persons on the lines of the subsidized foodgrains provided to BPL persons. In 
view of the aforesaid position, the Committee reconsider the earlier recommendations and 
strongly recommend to the Government to devise a modified APL  scheme covering at least 20 
per cent of the poor persons who are above poverty line i.e just above BPL. The proposed 
modified APL Scheme would be in addition to the existing BPL Scheme and APL Schemes of 
various State Governments/Union Territory Administrations. The Committee would also like that 
the modalities of the proposed scheme should be worked out and placed before the Cabinet 
expeditiously. The action taken in this regard should be communicated to the Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.5 The m atter is under examination in the department in consultation with the Planning 
Commission.  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F. No. 9(3)/2007-PD III 
Dated 10th August, 2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para no. 1.19   of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.  16 (Para No.3.77) 
 
5.6 The Committee note that as per the existing practice, certain monthly quota of sugar are 
being provided to various State Governments for  distribution through PDS. Limited special 
quota of sugar on the occasions of festivals are also being provided to various State 
Governments. The Committee recommend that the Department should review the policy of 
providing sugar through quota to various State Governments/Union Territory Administration and 
decontrol the same.   
 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
5.7 The Central Government has been following policy of partial control over sugar under 
which a part of sugar production is requisitioned as levy sugar f or distribution in the Public 
Distribution System (PDS) at a uniform price throughout the country.  The remaining production 
is allowed to be sold as non-levy (free sale) sugar subject to the regulated release mechanism. 
 
2. The Government is committed to decontrol of sugar.  As a step towards decontrol of 
sugar, the levy obligation of sugar factories has been brought down from 40% in 1999 -2000 to 
10% in 2001 -02.  However, decontrol of sugar has to be irreversible. Therefore, the Central 
Government has been  assessing the interests of three paramount stakeholders viz., the 
sugarcane growers, the sugar industry and the consumer.   
 
3. In order to lay down the modalities of comprehensive deregulation of the sugar sector, 
the Central Government has decided to se t up a ‘Group of Experts’.    On receipt of the 
recommendations of the ‘Group of Experts’, appropriate action will be taken in the matter.   
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F.No.15 3/2006-SP 
              Dated 30thJuly, 2007] 

 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 21 (Para No.4.7) 
 
5.8 The Committee find that Food Corporation of India is providing foodgrains for 
various welfare schemes of respective Ministries of Union Government on payment 
basis. The information provided by the Ministry indicates that there are huge outstanding 
dues against various Ministries. The maximum outstanding dues are from the Ministry of 
Rural Development for supply of foodgrains being provided under Food for Work 
Programme, SGRY and special component of SGRY. The total outstanding dues from 
different Ministries are to the tune of Rs. 20,064.51 crore, out of which the dues 
outstanding from Ministry of Rural Development in respect of the aforesaid schemes are 
Rs. 17,740.40 cr ore. The Committee further note from the information provided by the 
Department in various Budget documents and during the course of oral evidence that 
the matter of outstanding dues has been taken up at the highest level.  As a result of the 
pursuance of the matter at the Cabinet level, it has been decided by the Cabinet to 
approve the issue of special securities to an extent of Rs. 16,200 crore towards partial 
settlement of the dues of the Ministry of Rural Development. Still, a balance of roughly 
Rs. 17,740.40 crore is yet to be received from the Ministry of Rural Development.   As 
regards the future strategy to avoid such situation, the matter was placed before the 
Committee of Secretaries and it was decided that Ministry of Finance would provide 
Budgetary support to the Ministry of Rural Development for meeting the requirement  of 
funds for supply of foodgrains by FCI in the next financial year onwards.  The Committee 
feel that outstanding dues to the extent of Rs. 20,064.51 crore from various Ministries  is 
a matter of serious concern and it would affect the functioning of FCI adversely.  The 
Committee strongly recommends to pursue further with various ministries, particularly 
the Ministry of Rural Development to clear all outstanding dues.  Besides the e fforts 
being made to take up the matter at the highest level needs to be pursued further. As 
regards the future strategy, the Ministry has to take up the issue again at the highest 
level and strictly tell various ministries to make provisions for foodgrain s component at 
the Budget Estimates stage. The concern of the Committee in this regard should be duly 
communicated to the various concerned Ministries as well as the Ministry of Finance and 
Planning Commission.    
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
5.9 The issue o f liquidation of outstanding dues of the FCI pending against the 
Ministry of Rural Development as well as the need for provision of adequate budgetary 
support to that Ministry for supply of foodgrains under their welfare schemes on 
prepayment basis is being taken up at the highest level.  The concerns of the Committee 
have been communicated to the Ministry of Rural Development as well as Planning 
Commission/Ministry of Finance. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
 F.No.197 (6)/2007-FC A/Cs dated 19.6.2007] 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 25 (Para No.4.26) 
 
5.10 The Committee note that the Centrally sponsored scheme of construction of 
godowns which has been operative since 1983 -84 and under which fina ncial assistance 
was given to the State Governments /UTs  for construction of small godowns upto 2000 
MTs has been discontinued by the Planning Commission in the Tenth Plan.  The  

Committee feel that after discontinuation of the scheme, there is no agency/ scheme to 
cater to the needs of small farmers for storage of their produce.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that a comprehensive survey should be conducted for assessing 
storage need of states at micro level and if need be, the storage capacity be 
strengthened accordingly so that the farmers do not suffer for want of storage facilities 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.11 Construction of small godowns is not undertaken by FCI. Besides, the FCI does 
not cater to the needs of farmers for storage of their produ ce. The FCI procures 
foodgrains under the MSP by and large through arhtias and stores them at the nodal 
points. Even in those States where FCI procures foodgrains directly from the farmers, it 
carries the stocks to the linked FCI godowns.   
 
 However, a st udy has been got conducted by the FCI through MANAGE 
(National Institute of Agricultural Extension Management) Hyderabad for the assessment 
of storage gap for construction of godowns during XIth Five Year Plan.  MANAGE 
submitted its report to the FCI durin g March 2007 indicating a storage gap of 79.42 lakh 
MTs in various States. The report is being examined in consultation with the FCI.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
F.No. 8-2/2007.FC-II (Vol.II) 
Dated. 25th June, 2007] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI       DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV 
31 December, 2007        Chairman 
10 Pausa, 1929 (Saka)     Standing Committee on Food,  
                                                       Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
 

APPENDIX - I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON 
FRIDAY, THE 14TH DECEMBER, 2007. 
 
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1215 hrs. in Committee Room 
No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Alakesh Das 
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
4. Shri Parshuram Majhi 
5. Shri  Harikewal Prasad 
6. Shri Munshi Ram 
7. Shri Ghuran Ram 
8. Shri Chandra Bhan Singh 
 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
10. Shri Ajay Maroo 
11. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
12. Shri  Rajniti Prasad 
13. Shri Nabam Rebia 
14. Shri Matilal Sarkar 
15. Shri  Thanga Tamil Selvan 
  
    SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri P.K. Misra - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra - Director 
 3. Shri Jagdish Prasad - Deputy Secretary-II 
 
 
At the outset Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft report on 
Action Taken by the Government on recomm endations contained in the 

Eighteenth Report  (14 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution on Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of 
the Department of Food and Public Distribution (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution) and adopted the same with a slight modification in 
one of the recommendations.  
2. *******       ********                   ********   *********. 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the aforesaid reports in t he 
light of consequential changes and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.  
4. The Committee then decided that the next sitting may be convened on 
Thursday, 3 January, 2008 to take evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Consumer A ffairs, Food and Public Distribution on the subject ‘Targeted Public 
Distribution System (TPDS) – a review.’ 
 
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX – II 
(Vide introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GVOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTEENTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFIARS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
Total Number of Recommendations      43 
 
(i) Recommendations/ Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos.  – 1, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 12, 17, 19, 20, 23, 24, 26, 27, 
28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 34, 35, 38, 39, 41, 42 and 43 
 
Total          27 
 
Percentage        63 
 
(ii) Recommendations/ Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 
Recommendation No.  – 33 
 
Total              1 
 
Percentage            2 
 
 
(iii) Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 
Recommendation Nos.  – 2, 3, 7,15, 18, 22, 36, 37 and 40 
  
Total             9 
 
Percentage             21 
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/ observations in respect of which the final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
Recommendation Nos.  – 10, 13,14, 16, 21 and 25 
 
Total                    6 
 
Percentage              14 
 
 
 

APPENDIX – III 
(vide para 2.47  of  the Report) 
 
Statement showing sugar seasons -wise, State -wise and sugar mill-wise position 
of cane price arrears as on 
31.05.2007…………………………………………………………. 
 