  
 
 
28 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION   
(2008-2009) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
[Action Taken Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty fourth Report of the Committee 
on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)] 
 
 
 
TWENTY- EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka) 
 
 
 

  
  TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2008-2009) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
  
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND  
PUBLIC DISTIRBUTION  
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
{Action Taken Report on Action Taken by the Government on the observations 
/recommendations, contained in the Twenty fourth Report of the Committee on Demands 
for Grants  (2008-2009) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on …………………………. 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ……………………………… 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka) 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………. 
 
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………. 
…………(ii) 
 
…………(iii) 
 
CHAPTER  I Report ……………………………………………………………… …………6 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government ……………………………………………… 
 
………24 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies…….. 
 
………39 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Observations /Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
committee…………………………………………………………. 
 
 
………44 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
Observations /Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited. …………………… 
 
………48 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I Minutes of the Fourteenth sitting of the Committee held on  
16.01.2009…………………………………………………………. 
 
………….52 
 
II Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty -fourth Report of 
the Committee……………………………………………………... 
 
 
………….54 
 
                                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2008-2009. 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav   - Chairman   
   
                                                                MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Govinda Aroon Ahuja  
3. Shri Suresh Angadi 
4. Shri Alakesh Das 
5. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
6. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
7. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
8. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
9. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna  
10. Shri Wangyuh W. Konyak 
11. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
12. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
13. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
14. Shri Munshi Ram 
15. Shri Ghuran Ram 
16. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
17. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
18. Adv. (Smt.) P. Satheedevi 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
23. Shri Mangala Kisan 
24. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
25. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
26. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
27. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
28. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu 
29. Shri Matilal Sarkar 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant  
                     Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh    -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma   -  Director 
3. Shri B. S. Dahiya    -  Deputy Secretary-I 
4. Shri Jagdish Prasad    -  Deputy Secretary-II 
         (ii) 
 

  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution (2008-2009) having been authorized by the Committee to 
submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty -eighth Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the observations /recommendations contained in 
the Twenty -fourth Report of t he Committee (14 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2008 -2009) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
 
2. The Twenty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 16 th April, 2008. The Government furnished their replies indicating 
Action Taken on the observations /recommendations contained in the Report on 
4th December, 2008. 
 
3.  Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 16th January 2009. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI ;                 DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV 
  16 February, 2009       Chairman, 
Magha,1930 (Saka)                         Standing Committee on Food,  
                                                               Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

  
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty -fourth Report of the 
Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (2008 -09)’ relating to the Department of 
Consumer Affairs. 
1.2 The Twenty-fourth report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha 
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 16 th April, 2008. The action taken 
replies of the Government on all the 27 observations/recommendations 
contained in the report have been received on 4 th December, 2008 and 
categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Serial Nos.  4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 22, 26 and 27. 
 
(Paragraph Nos. 4.11, 4.12, 4.19, 4.27, 4.51, 4.52, 4.53, 4.62, 4.63,  5.34, 
5.35, 5.36, 6.10, 8.5 and 8.6) 
 
(Chapter –II Total 15) 
 
(ii) Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 
Serial Nos.15, 20 and 23  
 
(Paragraph Nos. 5.33, 5.38 and 7.14)  
 
(Chapter –III Total 3) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the   
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 
  Serial Nos. 1, 2, 12 and 21 
  
 (Paragraph Nos. 3.13, 3.14, 4.54 and 6.9)      
 
(Chapter –IV Total 4) 
 
 
 
 
 

  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final replies of  the 
Government are still awaited: 
     
 Serial Nos. 3, 8, 19, 24 and 25 
  
 (Paragraph Nos. 3.15, 4.36, 5.37, 7.15 and 7.16)  
(Chapter –V Total 5) 
 
1.3 In their Twenty -fourth report, the Committee had recommended for 
strengthening of monitoring mechanism to ensure full utilization of funds during 
2008-09, timely approval and appraisal of the schemes alongwith monthly 
reviewing Expenditure Plan, comple tion of the procedural formalities required for 
getting the approval of the competent authority as well as for amendment in the 
Act so that the bill regarding Consumer Protection Act was introduced during the 
current financial year, making concerted effort s to increase awareness in the 
most neglected areas of the North -Eastern region through private TV Channels, 
to put all the Consumer related information on the website of State 
Governments/UTs and to provide the necessary location/infrastructure to NIC for  
installation of computer hardware for the purpose, proper functioning of District 
Fora, which have become non -functional overtime, speedy disposal of cases 
pending in the National Commission, State Commissions and District Fora, 
recovery of funds from def aulting NGOs with interests or filing of cases in the 
court of law, following the Central Order as well as Essential Commodities Act 
uniformly in order to fight the menace of hoarding and black marketing by 
unscrupulous traders, penal provision in the BIS Act, 1986 to prevent the sale of 
inferior quality of Gold Jewellery, bringing Hallmarking under compulsory 
certification regime and procurement of necessary equipments like secondary 
standard and mobile kits for strengthening of ‘Weight and Measures’ and i ts 
introduction in the Parliament.  
 
1.4 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I and 
recommendations contained in Chapter V of this report for which only 
interim replies have been received fro m the Government be furnished to 
the Committee at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of 
the presentation of the Report. 
    
 
 

  
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations which need reiteration or merit comments.  
 
(A) Need for full utilization of funds  
 
Recommendation(Sl.No.1,Para No.3.13) 
 
1.6 The Committee in Para No. 3.13 of  their earlier report had recommended 
as below:- 
  
“The Committee note that the Planning Commission ha d 
allocated  Rs. 213 crore to the Department of Consumer Affairs for 
its Plan Scheme for the year 2007 -08. The allocation was 
drastically reduced to Rs. 150 crore at the Revised Estimates 
Stage. The Department, however, could not even utilize the 
reduced funds allocated to them and the expenditure incurred up to 
17th March, 2008 was only Rs. 86.42 crore. There was NIL 
expenditure in respect of the schemes viz. (i) Construction of 
NCDRC Building (ii) Consumer Education and Training 
HRD/Capacity Building and (iii) Standardization of Quality Control. 
Further, there was huge under utilization of funds under some of 
the schemes like ‘Strengthening of Weights and Measures’, where 
against the allocation of Rs. 16.31 crore, the expenditure was only 
Rs. 3.31 crore up  to 17 th March, 2008. Similar was the position in 
respect of the schemes ‘Strengthening of Forward Market 
Commission’ where out of Rs. 10 crore, the expenditure was Rs. 
1.86 crore. The plea of the Government that the shortfall in 
expenditure was due to del ay in approval of the major schemes by 
the Planning Commission reflects lack of professionalism on the 
part of the Department of Consumer Affairs. The Committee are 
constrained to observe that foresightedness was missing on the 
part of the Department, as t hey could not take timely action for 
evaluation of the schemes and getting procedural formalities 
completed before the expiry of the Xth Plan. The Committee are not 
happy with the situation and recommend that the Department of 
Consumer Affairs should get t he performance of the schemes 
evaluated as desired by the Planning Commission and strengthen 
its monitoring mechanism to ensure full utilization of funds during 
2008-09. They also desire that procedural formalities for getting 
approval should also be curta iled by the Planning Commission in 
order to release funds in time to the Department for schemes of 
National Importance.”  
 

  
 
 
1.7 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under:-  
 
  “Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for 
compliance.  Secretary(CA) is taking regular meetings of Divisional 
Heads with the objective that the scheme are evaluated without any 
delay and expenditure of the schemes is incurred as per targets.  
As a result  the expenditure in 2008 -09 is better than th e 
expenditure in 2007 -08.  Last year  upto 30.9.2007, the Plan 
expenditure was Rs. 10.31 Crores, where in the current year the 
Plan expenditure was Rs.68.49 crores is on 30.9.2008.” 
 
 
Recommendation(Sl.No.2,Para No.3.14) 
 
1.8 The Committee  had recommended as below:- 
 
 “The Committee are constrained to note the quarter -wise 
utilization of funds for the plan schemes of the Department of 
Consumer Affairs during 2007 -08. The Committee observe that out 
of the revised allocation of Rs. 150 crore, the Department utilized 
Rs. 6.13 crore in the 1 st Quarter, Rs. 4.08 crore in the 2 nd Quarter, 
Rs. 16.05 crore in 3 rd Quarter and Rs. 60.16 crore ( up to 17 th 
March, 2008) in its plan schemes. The argument put forth by the 
Department that the late approval of the schemes by the Planning 
Commission, which was received in September 2007, has largely 
accounted for low expenditure in the initial months, is not 
convincing to the Committee. During the course of oral evidence, 
various reasons were put forth for the under -utilization of funds 
during the first three quarters of the year. It was explained that the 
firm allocation of the Eleventh Five Year Plan could become 
available to the Department sometime in September 2007 whereas 
the Eleventh Plan commenced from April 2007. Furt her, as per 
extant instructions of Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance, the 
schemes which continued from Tenth to Eleventh Plan required 
pre-evaluation before they could be taken up for implementation 
during the first year of the Eleventh Plan. Also, a ll such schemes 
required appraisal/approval of the Competent Authority before 
implementation. The expenditure under the plan schemes cannot 
be incurred even if funds are available in the budget, unless the 
schemes have been appraised and approved by the Co mpetent 
Authority. The appraisal is done through the mechanism of SFC, 
EFC and PIB. Approval is required at the level of the Department, 
the Finance Ministry and the CCEA, depending upon the funds 
allocated for the scheme for the entire Five Year Plan. Wit h a view 
to avoiding the above mentioned procedural delays and also for the 
smooth and fast implementation of the plan schemes right from the 
beginning of the first year of the plan period, the Committee 
recommend that the Department of Consumer Affairs sh ould 
convince the Planning Commission to give approval and appraisal 

  
of the schemes expeditiously and well in time. The Committee also 
hope that the Department of Consumer Affairs will follow the 
concept of Monthly Expenditure Plan strictly and ensure that  
expenditure is reviewed on monthly basis so that there is no rush of 
expenditure at the fag end of the financial year.” 
 
 
1.9 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under:-  
 
 
  “Secretary(CA) reviews the progress of plan  expenditure 
regularly with a view to ensure that the expenditure is incurred 
proportionately through out the year as far as possible.” 
  

  
 
 
1.10 The Committee while observing that the Ministry did not take timely 
action for evaluation of schemes and getting procedural formalities 
completed before the expiry of X Plan had recommended for strengthening 
of monitoring mechanism to ensure full utilization of funds. They had also 
desired that Planning Commission should curtail procedural formalities for 
getting approval so th at the funds could be released in time. The 
Department of Consumer Affairs in action taken replies compared the 
expenditure for the corresponding year stating that the expenditure upto 
30.09.2007 was Rs. 10.31 crore whereas the expenditure upto 30.09.2008 
was Rs. 68.49 crore. The Committee are not at all satisfied with the action 
taken replies and observe that the Department of Consumer Affairs have 
not responded to their major concern regarding evaluation of the schemes 
and simplifying the procedural forma lities to ensure full utilization of funds 
during the financial year. The Committee, therefore, while reiterating their 
earlier recommendation that the Ministry should strengthen its monitoring 
mechanism, desire that it should be impressed upon the Plannin g 
Commission to evaluate the schemes and curtail the procedural formalities 
for releasing the funds to Departments for the schemes of National 
Importance. The Committee further desire that the Department of 
Consumer Affairs should follow the concept of mon thly expenditure plan 
strictly so that there is no rush of expenditure at the fag end of the financial 
year.  
 

  
 
(B) Need to get timely approval for full utilization of funds under the 
programme of Consumer Protection.          
  
 
 Recommendation(Sl.No.4,Para No.4.11) 
 
1.11 The Committee in their earlier report had recommended as below:- 
 
“The Committee note that the Government has 
accorded a high priority to the programmes of consumer 
protection and taken a number of steps for creating 
awareness amongst th e consumers of all sections of the 
society. Further, the Committee note that the Planning 
Commission has been very liberally allocating funds to the 
Department for creating the awareness among the masses 
which is evident from the fact that the outlay which  was Rs. 
15 crore in the Xth Five Year Plan has been increased to Rs. 
409 crore during the XIth Five Year Plan. Although the 
Department of Consumer Affairs has utilized the entire funds 
from 2002 -03 to 2005 -06, but for the last two years, the 
actual expend iture for consumer awareness programmes 
has been less than the Budget provided by the Planning 
Commission which is evident from the fact that out of an 
allocation of Rs. 58.50 crore, the Department could utilize 
only Rs. 46.00 crore during 2007 -08, which is 25% less than 
the Revised Estimates. The Committee feel that the 
Department has failed to come up to the expectation of the 
Planning Commission by not utilizing the entire funds for the 
purpose it was allocated. The Committee cannot accept the 
contention of the Department that the reasons for under 
utilization of funds during 2007 -08 are the procedural 
requirements such as obtaining approval in principle of the 
Planning Commission and preparation of Memorandum for 
EFC/CCEA, etc. which took time. In their opinion, the 
consumers, especially those living in remote, hilly and 
backward areas, are ignorant of their rights and are subject 
to exploitation by the unscrupulous traders. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should make all 
out efforts to complete the procedural formalities required for 
getting the approval of the competent authority in time so 
that funds do not remain unutilized at the end of the financial 
year and benefits are passed on to the targeted masses.”  
 
1.12 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under:-  
 
  “Secretary(CA) reviews the expenditure head -
wise/scheme-wise regularly to ensure that funds are utilised 
as per the expenditure budgeted and in accordance with the 
guidelines for ensuring that not mor e than 33% is spent in 
the last quarterr.   However, consumers the especially living 

  
in remote, hilly and backward areas will be given adequate 
attention regarding the publicity programme so that the 
benefits of the awareness scheme could reach them.” 
  
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.5,Para No.4.12) 
 
1.13 The Committee in their earlier report had recommended as below:- 
 
“The Committee are constrained to note that the publicity campaign 
for creating awareness amongst the people of the North -Eastern 
States is far fro m satisfactory. Although the Government is 
coordinating with the Song and Drama Division to organize musical 
events/folk song programmes for the North -Eastern region yet the 
message is not being spread through the modern methods of print 
and electronic med ia due to very limited newspapers and TV 
channels empanelled with DAVP. The Department has stated that 
besides an in -depth evaluation of the scheme would be initiated in 
2008-09. The creatives, both print and electronic would also be 
designed keeping the s pecial target audience in view. The 
Committee hope that the Department would make concerted efforts 
to increase awareness in the most neglected areas of the North -
Eastern region through private TV channels so that justice is not 
denied to the consumers due  to lack of awareness especially 
amongst the people of remote, rural, hilly and backward areas.” 
 
 
1.14 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under:-  
 
“Adequate attention will be given to the rural, remote and North 
Eastern Regions.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
1.15 The Committee while noting that the Department of Consumer Affairs 
had failed to utilize the budgeted allocation for the Consumer Awareness  
Programme during the last two years had recommended in their earlier 
report that procedural formalities be completed in time so that the funds do 
not run unutilized and the benefits are passed on to the targeted masses. 
The Committee had also desired the Department of Consumer Affairs to 
make concerted efforts to increase awareness in the most neg lected areas 
of North-Eastern region. From the action taken replies of the Government, 
the Committee find that the Department has not given due weightage to the 
recommendation of the Committee regarding programmes of Consumer 
Protection. It has simply stat ed that adequate attention regarding publicity 
programme will be given especially for the consumers of rural, remote and 
North-Eastern Regions. The Committee feel that consumers of rural, 
remote and hilly areas are subject to exploitation by the unscrupulo us 
traders for want of awareness about their consumer rights. The Committee, 
while reiterating its earlier recommendation desire that the Department of 
Consumer Affairs should make concerted efforts to complete procedural 
formalities required for getting approval of competent authority and ensure 
that the entire fund is utilized on publicity campaign for creating awareness 
amongst the most neglected people of remote, rural and hilly areas of 
North-Eastern Region.    
  
 
     

  
 
 
 
(C) Need for timely disposal of cases by State Commissions and District 
Foras              
 
Recommendation(Sl.No.12,Para No.4.54) 
 
 
1.16 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
 
 
 “The Committee observe that the National Commission is maintaining data 
with regard to disposal of cases by the State Commission and District Fora within 
90 days and 150 days and beyond 90 -150 days. However, some of the States 
namely, Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Delhi, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, 
Sikkim and Uttar Pradesh are not sending the information t o the National 
Commission. Similarly, the States namely, Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Dadra 
and Nagar Haveli, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh are not sending 
the information in respect of the cases disposed off by the District Fora within the 
prescribed time. The Committee desire that all the States should be persuaded to 
furnish the details regarding disposal of cases by the State Government/UTs 
within the prescribed period in order to enable the National Commission to 
analyze the reasons for non -disposal of cases by the State Commission and 
District Fora. It will also help the National Commission to provide useful remedial 
measures to State Commissions and District Fora to d ispose of cases in an 
expeditious manner and within time frame laid down for the purpose.” 
 
1.17 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under:-  
 
  “The concerns of the Committee have been conveyed to the States/UTs 
vide D.O. letter No. 5(3)/2008-CPU dated 23.05.2008 from Secretary (CA) 
addressed to the Chief Secretaries. This will be followed up with the State 
Governments in future also.”  
 

  
 
 
1.18 The Committee in their earlier report had observed that some of the 
States/UTs were not se nding the information regarding disposal of cases 
by the State Commissions and District Fora within the prescribed time of 
90 days to 150 days. They had, therefore, desired that all the States/UTs  be 
persuaded to furnish the details about disposal of case s within prescribed 
period so as to enable the National Commission to analyze the reasons for 
non-disposal of cases by the State Commissions and District Fora. The 
Department of Consumer Affairs in their action taken reply has simply 
stated that the concer n of the Committee had been conveyed to the 
States/UTs vide letter addressed to Chief Secretaries. The Committee 
deplore the casual approach of the Government in the matter. In the 
opinion of the Committee, simply forwarding of their recommendation to 
the States/UTs will not give any tangible result. The Committee, therefore, 
emphasize that the Department of Consumer Affairs should take up the 
matter with the States/UTs at highest level to obtain the actual number of 
cases disposed off by the State Commissi on and District Fora to arrive at a 
right conclusion for disposal of cases in an expeditious manner and within 
time frame laid down for the purpose.  
 
 

  
 
 
(D) Need to create State Welfare Fund. 
 
                Recommendation(Sl.No.13,Para No.4.62) 
 
 
1.19 The Committee in their earlier report had recommended as below:- 
 
 “The Committee note that under the scheme ‘Consumer 
Welfare Fund’, financial authority is provided to States/UTs in the 
form of seed money to promote and protect the welfare of the 
consumers, generate consumer awareness and strengthen 
consumer movement in the country. Despite the fact that the ratio 
of amount of seed money has been increased from 1:10 to 50:50 
(Centre:State), only 19 States/UTs viz Andhra Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Maharashtra, 
Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamilnadu, Uttar Pradesh, West 
Bengal, Arunachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, J&K, Mizoram, Sikkim 
and  Tripura have created the State Consumer Welfare Fund in 
their respective States Budget and the rema ining States/UTS are 
lagging behind as they have not been able to first deposit in 
advance in separate account the matching share of 50:50 and 
90:10 ( in case of Special Category States/UTs) from their own 
side. The Committee are of the opinion that these States and in 
particular the Special Category States/UTs have not accorded the 
Consumer Welfare due priority it deserves. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the matter may be taken up with the 
State Governments/UTs at the highest level and impress up on 
them the importance of the Fund in order to create the State 
Consumer Welfare Fund in their respective State Budgets to 
protect the interests of the consumers.” 
 
 
1.20 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under:- 
 
 “The advice of th e Committee has been noted for 
compliance.   On 16 th June 2008, this was   reviewed with State 
Secretaries and they were requested to start Consumer Welfare 
Fund  in their States where they have not done so, so far.” 
 
 

  
 
 
1.21 The Committee had noted that despite the ratio of amount of seed 
money been increased from 1:10 to 50:50 (Centre:State), only 19 States had 
created Consumer Welfare Fund. The Committee had recommended that 
the matter be taken up at highest level and State Governments/UTs be 
impressed upon to create State Consumer Welfare Fund in their respective 
State Budgets. From the action taken reply, the Committee note that 
although the Department of Consumer Affairs have reviewed the position 
with State Secretaries on 16 th June, 2008, yet 16 Stat es/UTs have not 
created the State Consumer Welfare Fund in their State Budget. The 
Committee take it seriously and desire that the Ministry should pursue the 
matter with remaining States/UTs to create State Consumer Welfare Fund 
in their respective State Budgets to protect the interests of the consumers.  
 

  
 
 
(E) Detention Cases under Section 3 of Prevention of Black Marketing 
and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980. 
 
                 
Recommendation (Sl.No.18,Para No.5.36) 
 
1.22 The Committee in their earlier report had recommended as below:- 
 
 “The Committee note that as per Section 3 of the ‘Prevention 
of Black -Marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential 
Commodities Act, 1980’, the State Governments/UTs are required 
to report the details of detention cases to the Central Government 
within 7 days from the date of approval of detention case by the 
State Governments/UTs. The Committee find that only 5 State 
Governments have furnished information in this regard to the 
Department of  Consumer Affairs during the year 2005, 2006 and 
2007. According to the Department, as the other State 
Governments have not furnished any information so it may be 
construed that these State Governments/UTs have not made any 
detention under the said Act. Th e Committee are surprised by the 
plea of the Department that except 5 State Governments/UTs, 
other State Governments/UTs have not made any detention under 
the Act. It appears to the Committee that the Department of 
Consumer Affairs is being kept in the dar k by most of the State 
Governments by not abiding by Section 3 of the aforesaid Act. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the State Governments should be 
prevailed upon to supply the information of detention cases within 
the prescribed time limit as per the Act.” 
 
1.23 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under:- 
 
“The enforcement of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 
lies with the State Governments/ Union Territories. The State 
Governments/UT Administrations have been delegated power s to 
take necessary action under the provisions of both “The Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955” and “The Prevention of Blackmarketing of 
Essential Commodities Act, 1980”, to prevent mal -practices in 
essential commodities.  Besides, Central Government  is als o 
regularly monitoring actions being taken by various States/UTs 
under the aforementioned two Acts.  
 
2. Directions have been given to States/UTs from time to time 
to take necessary actions under both the Acts to prevent hoarding 
and smuggling.      Secret ary (Consumer Affairs) has also vide his 
d.o. letter dt. 14.06.2007 advised Chief Secretaries of all 
States/UTs, to strengthen the enforcement machinery to prevent 
mal practices in essential commodities and take necessary action 
against the unscrupulous pe rsons indulging in hoarding and 
blackmarketing of essential commodities. 

  
 
3.    For this purpose this Department has asked all state 
Governments/UT Administrations to submit monthly reports to the 
Central Government (this Department) indicating the action taken 
under the provisions of these two Acts.  Conferences with the 
Secretaries of Consumer Affairs, Food & Civil Supplies 
Departments of all States/UTs are held by this Department 
periodically in which all the State Governments/UT Administrations 
are emph asized upon to take necessary actions under the 
provisions of these two Acts to check hoardings, smugglings etc. of 
essential commodities by unscrupulous traders/persons. Another 
meeting with State Secretaries has been held on 16 th June, 2008 in 
which it h as been emphasized upon them to take all necessary 
measures to prevent hoarding and blackmarketing which lead to 
non-availability of essential commodities coupled with rise in prices. 
Further, periodical video conferences are also arranged with 
States/UTs under the chairpersonship of Additional Secretary 
(Consumer Affairs) wherein the need for taking effective action 
under these two Acts by the States/UTs is reiterated.  So far seven 
such video conferences have been held between May, 2006 and 
May, 2008.  Th is was taken up in the recently held Chief 
Secretaries conference under the chairmanship of Cabinet 
Secretary on 22.04.2008.   
 
4. It is also mentioned that the recommendations of the 
Committee contained in its 24 th Report on Demands for Grants 
(2008-09) of Department of Consumer Affairs, have already been 
communicated to the State Governments/UTs vide Secretary 
(Consumer Affairs)’s d.o. letter No.2/1/2008 -ECR&E dated 
16.06.2008 for taking immediate action to check price rise in 
essential commodities and ke ep this Department posted with the 
action taken by them.   For this purpose this Department has asked 
all state Governments/UT Administrations to submit monthly reports 
indicating the action taken under the provisions of these two Acts.  
 
5. Because of the  regular interaction with the State 
Governments, State Government of Andhra Pradesh have taken 
action against unscrupulous persons and reported 3 cases  of 
detention under the Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance 
of Supplies of Essential Commodities  Act, 1980.  The number of 
detention reports received from various State Governments during 
the current year 2008 (Upto 26 th September, 2008) is as given 
below: 
 
S.No. Name of the State 
Govt. 
During 2008 
(January to 26th September,2008) 
1. Gujarat 13 
2. Tamil Nadu 89 
3. Maharashtra - 
4. Madhya Pradesh - 
5. Andhra Pradesh 03 
 TOTAL: 105 

  
 
 
 
1.24 The Committee express their dismay over the fact that only 105 
detention orders have been reported by the three States viz Gujarat (13), 
Tamil Nadu (89) and An dhra Pradesh (3) during 2008 (from January to 26 th 
September, 2008). From the action taken reply, the Committee observe that 
most of the States/UTs are not serious to check hoarding and smuggling of 
the essential commodities by unscrupulous traders/persons in their States. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should 
impress upon the State Governments/UTs to strengthen their enforcement 
machinery and take all necessary measures to prevent hoarding and 
blackmarketing which lead to non -availability of essential commodities 
resulting in rise in prices and submit a monthly report to the Central 
Government.  

  
 
(F) Under utilization of funds earmarked for Price Dissemination Project 
of FMC.  
 
Recommendation(Sl.No.21,Para No.6.9) 
 
1.25 The Committee in their earlier report had recommended as below:- 
 
 “The Committee note that an amount of Rs.20 crores was 
allocated to the Department of Consumer Affairs for strengthening 
the Forward Market Commission during 2007 -08, which was 
reduced to Rs.10 crore at RE stage but the actual expenditure 
during the year was Rs.2.17 crore.  The reasons put forth by the 
Department for underutilization of fund was non -finalization of rent 
agreement by the owner of building for office premises and delay in 
getting approval for price dissemination project. The Committee feel 
that these are very trivial issues which could have been tackled by 
the Department very easily. In the opinion of the Committee, if the 
Department would have made advance planning for settling the 
aforesaid issues, the question of surrendering large some of funds 
during 2007-08 would not have arisen.  The Committee hope that 
all the procedural formalities required for getting the building for 
office premises on rent and the ground work required for 
implementation of price dissemination project would be completed 
expeditiously to ensure that the funds earmarked for the purpose 
do not remain unutilized in financial year.” 
 
1.26 The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated as under:- 
 
  “As conside rable ground work (like discussions with 
AGMARK, NIC, State Governments, finalisation of technical 
specifications of the ticker board, identification of the mandis, etc.) 
was involved in case of the price dissemination project, it took 
some time to complete these works. 
 
  Since sufficient ground work has already been done, the 
project would pick up pace during 2008 -09.  The shifting to a new 
office requires availability of a suitable office premises.  A premise 
was identified during 2007-08. However, the owners of the property 
did not rent it on the valuation done by the CPWD. Fresh efforts 
would be initiated in the current financial year for identification of 
suitable premises.   Fresh Technical and financial bids have 
already been invited by FMC through a dvertisements in the current 
financial year. The short listed properties will be sent to CPWD for 
valuation. However, it may be mentioned that FMC is facing 
difficulties in hiring premises due to rents quoted by the owners 
being much higher than the valuation done by CPWD.” 
 

  
 
 
1.27 The Committee in their original report had expressed concern over 
the underutilization of funds earmarked for strengthening of FMC and 
desired that the procedural formalities regarding rent agreement for office 
premises for Pric e Dissemination Project be completed expeditiously so 
that the funds do not remain unutilized. The Committee regret to note that 
the rent agreement of the premises have not yet been finalized. The 
Committee are surprised that the short listed properties id entified for office 
premises have not yet been sent to CPWD for valuation which in the 
opinion of the Committee is slackness on the part of FMC. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate that all the formalities required for getting the office 
premises on rent s hould be completed within a period of three months for 
Price Dissemination Project.  
 

  
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMNEDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 4,  PARA NO.4.11 ) 
 
2.1 The Committee note that the Govern ment has accorded a high priority to 
the programmes of consumer protection and taken a number of steps for creating 
awareness amongst the consumers of all sections of the society. Further, the 
Committee note that the Planning Commission has been very liber ally allocating 
funds to the Department for creating the awareness among the masses which is 
evident from the fact that the outlay which was Rs. 15 crore in the Xth Five Year 
Plan has been increased to Rs. 409 crore during the XIth Five Year Plan. 
Although the Department of Consumer Affairs has utilized the entire funds from 
2002-03 to 2005 -06, but for the last two years, the actual expenditure for 
consumer awareness programmes has been less than the Budget provided by 
the Planning Commission which is evide nt from the fact that out of an allocation 
of Rs. 58.50 crore, the Department could utilize only Rs. 46.00 crore during 
2007-08, which is 25% less than the Revised Estimates. The Committee feel that 
the Department has failed to come up to the expectation o f the Planning 
Commission by not utilizing the entire funds for the purpose it was allocated. The 
Committee cannot accept the contention of the Department that the reasons for 
under utilization of funds during 2007 -08 are the procedural requirements such 
as obtaining approval in principle of the Planning Commission and preparation of 
Memorandum for EFC/CCEA, etc. which took time. In their opinion, the 
consumers, especially those living in remote, hilly and backward areas, are 
ignorant of their rights and ar e subject to exploitation by the unscrupulous 
traders. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should make 
all out efforts to complete the procedural formalities required for getting the 
approval of the competent authority in time so that f unds do not remain unutilized 
at the end of the financial year and benefits are passed on to the targeted 
masses.   
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.2 Secretary(CA) reviews the expenditure head -wise/scheme-wise regularly 
to ensure that funds are utilised as per th e expenditure budgeted and in 
accordance with the guidelines for ensuring that not more than 33% is spent in 
the last quarter.   However, consumers the especially living in remote, hilly and 
backward areas will be given adequate attention regarding the pub licity 
programme so that the benefits of the awareness scheme could reach them. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C  Dated 4.12.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No.1.15 of Chapter I of the Report) 

  
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 5,  PARA NO.4.12) 
 
2.3 The Committee are constrained to note that the publicity campaign for 
creating awareness amongst the people of the North -Eastern States is far from 
satisfactory. Although the Government is coordinating with the Song and Drama 
Division to organize musical events/folk song programmes for the North -Eastern 
region yet the message is not being spread through the modern methods of print 
and electronic media due to very li mited newspapers and TV channels 
empanelled with DAVP. The Department has stated that besides an in -depth 
evaluation of the scheme would be initiated in 2008 -09. The creatives, both print 
and electronic would also be designed keeping the special target aud ience in 
view. The Committee hope that the Department would make concerted efforts to 
increase awareness in the most neglected areas of the North -Eastern region 
through private TV channels so that justice is not denied to the consumers due to 
lack of aware ness especially amongst the people of remote, rural, hilly and 
backward areas. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.4 Adequate attention will be given to the rural, remote and North Eastern 
Regions. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C Dated 4.12.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No.1.15 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 6,  PARA NO.4.19) 
 
2.5 The Committee are constrained to note that the funds are being released 
only to 21 States/UTs under the ‘Integrated Project on Consumer Protection’.  
According to the Department, the aim of the scheme is to fill up the critical gap in 
infrastructure on actual need basis so as to ensure that every consumer forum is 
provided with a minimum level of facilities required for its effective functioning. 
The remaining States are not availing the benefits of the scheme as they could 
not fulfill the pre -condition for receiving the funds because they were either 
unable to r eport full utilization of the assistance under the scheme of ‘One Time 
Grant’ of 1995 and 2004 -05 or were not able to identify land for building of 
Consumer Fora. The Committee are unable to understand the reasons for non -
submission of utilization certific ates even after a time gap of 13 years and 
identification of land for construction of building of Consumer Fora. In the opinion 
of the Committee, there seems to be some lethargy on the part of the 
Department due to which such an important issue could not b e resolved for the 
smooth functioning of the Consumer Fora. The Committee, therefore, strongly  

  
 
 
recommend that the Department should take up the matter at the highest level 
with the concerned States/UTs to resolve the issue in order to enable them to 
avail the benefits of the scheme of ‘Integrated Project on Consumer Protection’.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.6 The Department of Consumer Affairs has regularly been taking up the 
matter at the highest levels viz.  with the concerned Chief 
Secretaries/Administrators or Secretaries in -charge of Consumer Affairs to meet 
the pre -conditions under the scheme of ‘Integrated Project on Consumer 
Protection’ (IPCP) for release of grant for strengthening the infrastructure of 
Consumer Fora. However, in spite of this Departm ent’s best efforts, many of the 
States still did not meet the necessary conditions & therefore could not avail the 
benefits under the scheme of ‘Integrated Project on Consumer Protection’ 
(IPCP).  
 
The scheme of ‘Integrated Project on Consumer Protection’ (IPCP) has 
since come to a close on 31.03.2008. The new scheme of ‘Strengthening 
Consumer Fora’ is to be formulated for appraisal/approval after the scheme of 
IPCP is got evaluated for which action has already been initiated. It is expected 
that all these States/UTs which could not avail grant under the scheme of IPCP 
would be able to do so under the new scheme. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C Dated4.12.2008] 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 7,  PARA NO.4.27) 
 
2.7 The Committee regret to note that despite their recommendation made in 
Para 4.22 of their 19 th Report on Demands for Grants (2007 -08) to make 
provisions in the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 for constitution of Circuit 
Benches, the Government has not yet introduced the Bill in Parliament. The 
Department has informed that they have circulated the proposed amendment in 
the Act to the Ministries and are hoping to bring amendment to the bill in 
Parliament early. The Committe e do not appreciate the lackadaisical attitude of 
the Department in making the amendment in the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 
as they took more than one year in finalizing the draft proposal. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation  and desire that the Government 
should complete all the procedural formalities required for amendment in the Act 
and ensure that the Bill is introduced during the current financial year, so that 
more and more Circuit Benches are set up in the States/UTs fo r early disposal of 
cases at the door -step of the consumers, which are piling up at different District 
Forums.  
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.8 The views of the Standing Committee have been noted and all efforts are 
being taken to enable introduction of t he Bill for amending the Consumer 
Protection Act at the earliest. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C Dated4.12.2008] 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 9,  PARA NO.4.51) 
 
2.9 The C ommittee are highly perturbed to note that the number of non -
functional District Fora which were 22 in 2006 has increased to 52 in 2007. The 
Committee view this development as a serious hurdle in imparting justice to the 
aggrieved consumer in many parts of the country. The Committee find the plea of 
Government that it was due to delay in issuing the appointment order to the 
selected candidates is very unconvincing. The argument of the Department that 
filling up of vacancies in the Consumer Fora and ensuring  that they remain 
functional is entirely the responsibility of the State Government seems to be the 
excuse of the Department to wash of their hands from their responsibility in this 
regard. The Committee are of the view that the Department of Consumer Affa irs 
is equally responsible for the smooth functioning of the District Fora as the State 
Governments are.  Sufficient amount of funds are released to States/UTs for 
strengthening the infrastructural facilities of District Fora. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department of Consumer Affairs should take up 
the matter with State Governments/UTs on priority basis and persuade them to 
take all possible measures for proper functioning of these District Fora, which 
have become non-functional overtime. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.10 The concerns of the Committee have been conveyed to the States/UTs 
vide D.O. letter from Secretary (CA) addressed to the Chief Secretaries.   
 
  Apart from this, the Central Government in collaboration with the National 
Commission, conducted three Conferences on 17 th -18th August, 2007, 14 th -15th 
March, 2008 & 16 th -17th August, 2008 respectively with the Presidents of the 
State Commissions and the Secretaries in -charge of Consumer Affairs in 
States/UTs. In these meetings, the wo rking of consumer disputes redressal 
machinery was reviewed and ways & means were suggested to improve the 
working of Consumer Fora. In order to ensure that the Consumer Fora remain 
functional, the States/UTs were advised to take action well in advance for  filling 
up the vacant posts of Presidents & Members and also to maintain a panel of the 
suitable candidates for immediate appointment so that Consumer Fora do not 
become non-functional due to vacancies. They were also advised to attach the 

  
non-functional Forum with the neighbouring functional Forum or depute the other 
President or Members to such Forum so that it functions till regular arrangements 
are made. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C Dated4.12.2008] 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 10,  PARA NO.4.52 ) 
 
2.11 The Committee further note that the vacancy position of President and 
Members in State Commissions and District Fora has increased in 2008 as 
compared to 2007.  As on  26.03.2007, two posts of President and a post of 
Member were vacant in different States whereas the position of vacant posts of 
President and Members as on 30.03.2008 has increased to 6 and 15, 
respectively. Similarly, the position of vacant post of Presi dent and Members in 
District Fora has increased from 49 and 181 in 2007 to 109 and 291 in 2008, 
respectively. In the opinion of the Committee, the non -filling up of vacant posts in 
State Commissions and District Fora are making them non -functional and 
causing denial of justice to the consumers of the respective regions. The 
Committee regret to note that the Department has passed on the responsibility to 
State Government/UT for any shortcoming noticed in the functioning of the 
District Fora. The Committee de sire that as a remedial measure, the Department 
should take up the matter with the State Governments/UTs and persuade them 
to urgently prepare a panel of Presidents and Members for the posts which are 
likely to fall vacant and issue appointment letters imm ediately so that the vacant 
posts of President and Members are filled up in time. The Committee also desire 
that training programme for presiding officers should be conducted regularly so 
that they become well versed with the techniques of working of State  
Commission and District Fora. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.12 The concerns of the Committee have been conveyed to the States/UTs 
vide D.O. letter No. 5(3)/2008 -CPU dated 23.05.2008 from Secretary (CA) 
addressed to the Chief Secretaries.   
 
Apart from this, the  Central Government in collaboration with the National 
Commission, conducted three Conferences on 17 th -18th August, 2007, 14 th -15th 
March, 2008 & 16 th -17th August, 2008 respectively with the Presidents of the 
State Commissions and the Secretaries in -charge of Consumer Affairs in 
States/UTs. In these meetings, the working of consumer disputes redressal 
machinery was reviewed and ways & means were suggested to improve the 
working of Consumer Fora. The States/UTs were advised to take action well in 
advance for filling up the vacant posts of Presidents & Members and also to 
maintain a panel of the suitable candidates for immediate appointment. They 
were also advised to attach the non -functional Forum with the neighbouring 
functional Forum or depute the other President or Members to such Forum so 
that it functions till regular arrangements are made.  

  
 
  Training programmes for Presidents and Members of District Fora & 
Members of State Commission are being organized regularly every year through 
IIPA under the gu idance of NCDRC. So far, 1444 persons have been trained in 
59 training programmes. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C Dated 4.12.2008] 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 11,  PARA NO.4.53 ) 
 
2.13 The Committee observe that although 74.30% cases were disposed off by 
the National Commission and State Commissions during 2007-08 yet the position 
of disposal of cases in respect of the States namely, Assam, Haryana, 
Maharashtra, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh was dismally poor as only 53.04%, 57%, 
58.12%, 60.87% and 35.78% cases respectively were disposed off during the 
same year. According to the Department, the performance/disposal rate in any 
Consumer Forum depended on various factors such as uninterrupted functioning, 
workload, number of adjournments being given, availability of requisite 
infrastructure, staff and funds, etc. In this connection, the Committee find that 
some of the State Commissions are performing creditably well despite many 
shortcomings encountered by them. The poor performing State Commissions 
should take a cue from them to improve the disposal of cases pending with them. 
Incidentally, the Committee are of the opinion that a number of schemes are 
being implemented by the Dep artment for consumer protection and there is no 
dearth of funds to resolve the issues mentioned above. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Department of Consumer Affairs should vigorously 
pursue with the State Governments to avail the benefits of the  scheme and 
continue to make efforts to take remedial action, wherever necessary, for 
improvement in the performance of the disposal of cases pending in the National 
Commission, State Commission and District Fora.    
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.14 The concern s of the Committee have been conveyed to the States/UTs 
vide D.O. letter No. 5(3)/2008 -CPU dated 23.05.2008 from Secretary (CA) 
addressed to the Chief Secretaries. During periodical meetings held by this 
Department with the Secretaries in -charge of Consume r Affairs in States/UTs to 
review working of Consumer Fora and progress of Consumer Protection 
measures, the States/UTs have been advised to take remedial action for 
improvement in the performance of disposal of pending cases. Quarterly & 
Monthly Progress Reports are also called for from all States/UTs & remedial 
measures for improving their performance suggested after analyzing these 
reports. 
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C  Dated 4.12.2008] 
 

  
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 13,  PARA NO.4.62 ) 
 
2.15 The Committee note that under the scheme ‘Consumer Welfare Fund’, 
financial authority is provided to States/UTs in the form of seed money to 
promote and protect the welfare of t he consumers, generate consumer 
awareness and strengthen consumer movement in the country. Despite the fact 
that the ratio of amount of seed money has been increased from 1:10 to 50:50 
(Centre:State), only 19 States/UTs viz Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh Goa , 
Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, 
Tamilnadu, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Arunachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, J&K, 
Mizoram, Sikkim and  Tripura have created the State Consumer Welfare Fund in 
their respective States Budget a nd the remaining States/UTS are lagging behind 
as they have not been able to first deposit in advance in separate account the 
matching share of 50:50 and 90:10 ( in case of Special Category States/UTs) 
from their own side. The Committee are of the opinion that these States and in 
particular the Special Category States/UTs have not accorded the Consumer 
Welfare due priority it deserves. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
matter may be taken up with the State Governments/UTs at the highest level and  
impress upon them the importance of the Fund in order to create the State 
Consumer Welfare Fund in their respective State Budgets to protect the interests 
of the consumers. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.16 The advice of the Committee has been noted for complian ce.   On 16 th 
June 2008, this was   reviewed with State Secretaries and they were requested 
to start Consumer Welfare Fund  in their States where they have not done so, so 
far. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C Dated 4.12.2008] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No.1.21 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

  
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 14,  PARA NO.4.63 ) 
 
 
2.17 The Committee note with concern that utilization certificates in respect of  
Rs. 40,25,200 released to 46 VCOs/NGOs from 1995 onwards  have not been 
received by the Department of Consumer Affairs so far. Only one NGO namely, 
Shiv Ganga District of Tamil Nadu have been black listed on the 
recommendation of the State G overnment. The Department has put the names 
of the defaulting NGOs on the website of the Department and District Collectors 
are being reminded to obtain utilization certificates or take action against the 
defaulting organizations. It has also been informed  that the Department have 
revised their guidelines for Consumer Welfare Fund and asked the State 
Governments to modify them as per their requirements. In the opinion of the 
Committee, the funds have been released to VCO/NGOs without properly 
verifying thei r credentials as well as antecedents from the State 
Governments/UTS. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that in future 
the funds should be released only to the reputed VCO/NGOs whose performance 
is known to be satisfactory. The Committee, therefo re, desire that funds may be 
recovered from these defaulting NGOs with interest, failing which a case may be 
filed in the Court of Law against them for early recovery of funds released to 
them.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.18 The directions/advice of the committee have been noted.  In order to keep 
a check on the misuse of funds by the grantee institutions particularly 
VCOs/NGOs, concerned State Govt./UT Admn. are asked to send their 
comments/recommendations on the basis  of antecedents/bonafides and  also  
the past activities of the applicant organisation with project sustaining capability 
during post grant period of the VCO/NGO.   
 
  Regarding blacklisting/recovery with penal interest of grant from defaulting 
VCOs/NGOs who have not been settling accounts of th e grant released earlier, 
the State Govt./UT Administration have been requested  to take action against 
such organizations at the earliest.  
 
  Intensive efforts  have been made by the Department to recover funds, as 
a result of which 10 UCs for an amount of Rs. 18,88,700/- were  recovered in the 
last one year.  
 
  While providing funds to VCOs procedure of obtaining views of States/UTs 
regarding credibility and capacity is being followed 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C Dated4.12.2008] 
 
 
 

  
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 16,  PARA NO.5.34 ) 
 
2.19  In order to control the prices of foodgrains, the Central Government had 
issued a Central Order dated 29.08.2006 under ‘The Essential Commodities Act, 
1955’ to enable State Governments to invoke stock limits in respect of wheat and 
pulses for a period of six months. By virtue of this order, the State 
Governments/UT Administrations have been empowered to take effective action 
to bring out the hoarded stock of these items to ensure availability to the common 
people at reasonable prices. The Government has on 1 st March, 2008 extended 
the validity of the Central Order by another six months. From the information 
furnished to the Committee, it is observed that there is no uniformity in following 
the Central Order by the States/UTs, as while 13 States/UTs have issued 
notifications for fixing stock limits/licensing/stock declaration requirements in 
respect of wheat and pulses, 11 other States/UTs namely, Andaman and 
Nicobar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Lakshadweep, Madhya 
Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Pondicherry and Tripura are not in 
favour of fixing any stock limit, whereas 6 States are still considering the issue of 
stock limits and finally the remaining  5 States/UTs are silent on the issue. In the 
opinion of the Committee, this attitude of some of the States/UTs does not augur 
well for controlling the price rise of essential commodities. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that Department of Consumer Affairs should impress upon 
all the States to follow the Central Order uniformly in order to fight the menace of 
hoarding and black marketing by unscrupulous traders.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.20 To enable the State Governments/ UT Administrations to continue to take 
effective action for undertaking de -hoarding operations under the Essential 
Commodities Act,1955, the price situation was further reviewed by the 
Government and it was decided with the approval of the Cabinet to furth er 
impose similar restrictions in addition to wheat and pulses with respect to edible 
oils, edible oilseeds and rice for a period of one year vide Central Order dated 
07.04.2008, so as to tackle the rising trend of prices as well as availability of 
these c ommodities to the common people.  Further it has been decided by the  
Cabinet in its meeting on 21.08.2008 that  similar restriction may be  imposed by 
keeping  in abeyance some provisions of the Central Order dated 15.02.2002 for 
a period upto 30.04.2009 with respect to Paddy, so as to tackle the rising trend of 
prices as well as availability of these commodities  to the common people.  An 
Order dated 27.08.2008 has been published in Gazette of India to this effect. 
 
2. Upto 26 th September, 2008 only 17 Sta te Governments/UTs  have either 
issued stock limits for all the five items or wheat and pulses only or have issued 
only licensing requirements/ stock declaration (of these 17, 12 States/UTs have 
actually issued stock limit Orders/ in the process of issuing .  5 States/UTs have 
issued licensing requirements/stock declarations).    7 States are considering to 
issue stock limit orders. 7 States/UTs have decided not to issue stock limit 
orders. The remaining 4 States/UTs have  not responded at all. 
 
3. While forwarding the recommendations of the Committee contained in 
its 19 th Report on Demand for Grants (2007 -08), Department of Consumer 

  
Affairs, have communicated to the State Governments/UTs vide Secretary 
(Consumer Affairs)’s d.o. letter No.10(3)/2007 -ECR&E dat ed 14.06.2007 for 
taking necessary action to fix stock limits for wheat and pulses and to strengthen 
their enforcement machinery to prevent malpractices in essential commodities 
and take necessary action against the unscrupulous persons indulging in 
hoarding and black-marketing of essential commodities. Such actions on the part 
of State Governments would enable controlling price rise in essential 
commodities. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C  Dated 4.12.2008] 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 17,  PARA NO.5.35 ) 
 
2.21 The Committee note that as per the ‘Standing Order’, all the State 
Governments/UT Administrations have to submit monthly reports to the 
Department of Consumer Affair s indicating the action taken under the provisions 
of ‘Essential Commodities Act, 1955’ as also ‘Prevention of Black Marketing and 
Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980’. The State 
Governments and UT Administrations are not regularly f urnishing the monthly 
reports inspite of reminders sent to them from time to time. It is observed from 
the information furnished to the Committee that during the years 2005, 2006 and 
2007, some of the States are furnishing ‘NIL’ reports and some are not 
submitting any report at all. According to the Department, going by the ‘NIL’ 
reports sent by some State Governments/UTs, it can be presumed that these 
State Governments/UTs might not have conducted any raids nor have detained 
any persons for indulging in ma lpractices in essential commodities. The 
Committee deplore the lackadaisical approach of State Governments/UTs in 
either not furnishing any ‘monthly action taken reports’ or by giving ‘NIL’ reports. 
They desire that the Department should impress upon the S tate 
Governments/UTs to strictly follow the ‘Standing Order’ to regularly submit the 
‘monthly action taken reports’ and also conduct raids on hoarders and black 
marketers in order to have a saluting effect on them. According to the 
Committee, it will also help the Government to keep a check over the rising 
prices of essential commodities.  
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.22 The State Govts./UTs in accordance with the powers delegated to them by 
the Central Govt. action under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 an d 
Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential 
Commodities Act, 1980 are empowered to take action to conduct raids, arrests 
and institution of cases, etc. against unscrupulous persons indulging in 
malpractices in essential commodities. 
 
2. In order to ensure that the State Govts./UTs are taking adequate action to 
prevent malpractices in essential commodities, the Central Govt. had devised 
monthly reporting system long back and also prescribed two different formats viz. 

  
one for repor ting  action taken under the Essential Commodities Act,. 1955 and 
other for the action taken under the Prevention of Blackmarketing and 
Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980.  Regular follow up 
action to obtain the “monthly action repo rts” from the State  Govts./UTs are 
carried out by the Central Government.  In this connection it may be mentioned 
that despite regular reminders, some State Govts. either do not respond at all or 
continue to furnish monthly reports in an irregular manner.   The matter was also 
taken up at high levels with the State Govts./UTs vide D.O.letter No.13/1/2003 -
ECR&E dated 20.10.2003 from Additional Secretary (Consumer Affairs). 
Directions are given to States/UTs from time to time to take necessary actions 
under both the Acts to prevent hoarding and smuggling.      Secretary (Consumer 
Affairs) has earlier vide his d.o. letter dt. 14.06.2007 written  to Chief Secretaries 
of all States/UTs, advising them to strengthen the enforcement machinery to 
prevent mal -practices in essential commodities and take necessary action 
against the unscrupulous persons indulging in hoarding and blackmarketing of 
essential commodities and also to send regularly monthly reports on the action 
taken by them under the aforesaid two Acts. 
 
3.             Conferences with the Secretaries of Consumer Affairs, Food & Civil 
Supplies Departments of all States/UTs are also held by this Department 
periodically in which all the State Governments/UT Administrations are 
emphasized upon to take necessary action under the provisions of these two 
Acts to check hoardings, smugglings etc. of essential commodities by 
unscrupulous traders/persons. During the last two years, such Conferences with 
State Secretaries were held on 25.8.2006, 19.1.2007 and 16.06.2008. 
 
4.   Further, periodical video conferences are also arranged with States/UTs 
under the chairpersonship of Additional Secretary (Consumer Affairs) wherein 
the need for taking effective action under these two Acts by the States/UTs is 
reiterated.  So far s even such video conferences have been held between May, 
2006 and May, 2007.   
 
5. It is  also mentioned that the recommendations of the Committee  
contained in its  24 th  Report  on Demand  for Grants (2008 -09),  have already 
been communicated to the State  Governments/UTs vide Secretary (Consumer 
Affairs)’s d.o. letter No.2/1/2008 -ECR&E dated 16.06.2008 for taking immediate 
action to check price rise in essential commodities and keep this Department  
posted with the action taken by them.  For this purpose t his Department has 
asked all state Governments/UT Administrations to submit monthly reports 
indicating the action taken under the provisions of these two Acts. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C  Dated 4.12.2008] 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 18,  PARA NO.5.36 ) 
 
2.23 The Committee note that as per Section 3 of the ‘Prevention of Black -
Marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980’, the 
State Governments/UTs are required to report the details of detention cases to 

  
the Central Government within 7 days from the date of approval of detention 
case by the State Governments/UTs. The Committee find that only 5 State 
Governments have furnished information in t his regard to the Department of 
Consumer Affairs during the year 2005, 2006 and 2007. According to the 
Department, as the other State Governments have not furnished any information 
so it may be construed that these State Governments/UTs have not made any 
detention under the said Act. The Committee are surprised by the plea of the 
Department that except 5 State Governments/UTs, other State 
Governments/UTs have not made any detention under the Act. It appears to the 
Committee that the Department of Consumer A ffairs is being kept in the dark by 
most of the State Governments by not abiding by Section 3 of the aforesaid Act. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the State Governments should be 
prevailed upon to supply the information of detention cases within the  prescribed 
time limit as per the Act.  
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.24 The enforcement of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 lies with the 
State Governments/ Union Territories. The State Governments/UT 
Administrations have been delegated powers to take neces sary action under the 
provisions of both “The Essential Commodities Act, 1955” and “The Prevention of 
Blackmarketing of Essential Commodities Act, 1980”, to prevent mal -practices in 
essential commodities.  Besides, Central Government is also regularly monitoring 
actions being taken by various States/UTs under the aforementioned two Acts.  
 
2. Directions have been given to States/UTs from time to time to take 
necessary actions under both the Acts to prevent hoarding and smuggling.      
Secretary (Consumer Affairs) has also vide his d.o. letter dt. 14.06.2007 advised 
Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs, to strengthen the enforcement machinery to 
prevent mal practices in essential commodities and take necessary action 
against the unscrupulous persons indulging in hoarding and blackmarketing of 
essential commodities. 
 
3.    For this purpose this Department has asked all State Governments/UT 
Administrations to submit monthly reports to the Central Government (this 
Department) indicating the action taken under the provisions of these two Acts.  
Conferences with the Secretaries of Consumer Affairs, Food & Civil Supplies 
Departments of all States/UTs are held by this Department periodically in which 
all the State Governments/UT Administrations are emphasized upon to t ake 
necessary actions under the provisions of these two Acts to check hoardings, 
smugglings etc. of essential commodities by unscrupulous traders/persons. 
Another meeting with State Secretaries has been held on 16 th June, 2008 in 
which it has been emphasiz ed upon them to take all necessary measures to 
prevent hoarding and blackmarketing which lead to non -availability of essential 
commodities coupled with rise in prices. Further, periodical video conferences 
are also arranged with States/UTs under the chairp ersonship of Additional 
Secretary (Consumer Affairs) wherein the need for taking effective action under 
these two Acts by the States/UTs is reiterated.  So far seven such video 
conferences have been held between May, 2006 and May, 2008.  This was taken 

  
up in the recently held Chief Secretaries conference under the chairmanship of 
Cabinet Secretary on 22.04.2008.   
 
4. It is also mentioned that the recommendations of the Committee contained 
in its 24th Report on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of  Department of  Consumer 
Affairs, have already been communicated to the State Governments/UTs vide 
Secretary (Consumer Affairs)’s d.o. letter No.2/1/2008 -ECR&E dated 16.06.2008 
for taking immediate action to check price rise in essential commodities and keep 
this Departm ent posted with the action taken by them.   For this purpose this 
Department has asked all State Governments/UT Administrations to submit 
monthly reports indicating the action taken under the provisions of these two 
Acts.  
 
5. Because of the regular intera ction with the State Governments, State 
Government of Andhra Pradesh have taken action against unscrupulous persons 
and reported 3 cases of detention under the Prevention of Blackmarketing and 
Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980.  The number of 
detention reports received from various State Governments during the current 
year 2008 (Upto 26th September, 2008) is as given below: 
 
 
 
S.No. Name of the State Govt. During 2008 
(January to 26th 
September,2008) 
1. Gujarat 13 
2. Tamil Nadu 89 
3. Maharashtra - 
4. Madhya Pradesh - 
5. Andhra Pradesh 03 
 TOTAL: 105 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C Dated 4.12.2008] 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No.1.24 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 22,  PARA NO. 6.10 ) 
  
2.25 The Committee note that the Planning Commission has given due 
weightage to the Price Dissemination Project and allocated Rs. 10 crore each 
year during the XIth Fi ve Year Plan. The project will be implemented through 
AGMARKNET Mandis and later carried forward to other mandis. One of the 
objectives of “Price Dissemination Project” is to empower the farmers by 
providing them with useful price information that would fa cilitate decision making 
in the pre -sowing and post harvest period.  Price Dissemination would not only 

  
increase the farmers bargaining capacity but also reduce the impact of 
middleman and traders on price realization by farmers.  The Government 
contemplates to implement the project in 300 rural post offices in the States of 
Haryana, Rajasthan, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu and have taken up the matter with 
some Nationalised Banks.  The Committe e, while appreciating the concept of 
Price Dissemination Project, desire that the project may be implemented in other 
States also, so that the small and marginal farmers may also be benefited by the 
price discovery. 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.26 The price d issemination project is proposed to be implemented through 
AGMARKNET and Rural Post Offices in the first phase. The location of the price 
ticker board has been decided on the basis of availability of   infrastructural 
capacity of the proposed sites to host  the price ticker board. Thus, in the first 
phase, the price ticker boards are proposed to be installed in 1000 APMCs, 
identified under the AGMARKNET. These APMCs are spread over EIGHTEEN 
States. The price ticker boards are also proposed to be placed in 30 0 rural post 
offices identified by the Postal Department based on the IT capability of these 
locations. These post offices are spread over 9 States. FMC would endeavour to 
ensure that the project is extended to all the States during the XIth Plan. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C Dated 4.12.2008] 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 26,  PARA NO. 8.5 ) 
 
2.27 The Committee note that like other schemes of the Department, the 
expenditure in the scheme for strengthening of ‘Weight and Measures’ is not 
satisfactory.  Amongst all the schemes, this is the only scheme where the BE has 
been increased substantially at revised estimate stage.  Despite that, the 
Department could not fulfill the expectation of the Planning Commission and the 
actual expenditure was only to the tune of Rs.4.27 crore.  The Committee feel 
that the ‘Weight and Measures Wing’ of the Department failed to get the required 
number of mobile kits from Director General of Sup ply and Disposal (DGS&D) 
due to non-fulfillment of the terms and conditions laid down by the DGS&D. The 
Committee view this lapse on the part of the ‘Weight and Measures Wing’ 
seriously and desire that they should complete all the procedural formalities fo r 
procurement of necessary equipments like secondary standard and mobile kits in 
time, so that the intended purpose of these devises is not defeated.  
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.28 The supply of equipments by DGS & D has since improved and is meeting 
the target, set by the Department.  The expenditure progress is monitored on a 

  
regular basis.  Since the progress has been good, the scheme is being expended 
beyond the budgetary provision. 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C Dated 4.12.2008] 
 
  
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 27,  PARA NO.8.6 ) 
 
2.29    The Committee are happy to note that the Government have accepted 
their recommendation to merge Standards of Weight and Measures Act, 1 976 
and Standard of Weight and Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985 and have 
decided to bring a fresh Bill namely  ‘Indian Legal Metrology Bill’.  The draft Bill 
along with a draft note for Cabinet has been sent to Ministry of Law on 
20.4.2008.  Taking into consideration the paramount importance of the consumer 
and to protect their rights relating to ‘Weight and Measures’, the Committee 
desire that the aforesaid Bill be introduced in the Parliament at the earliest. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.30 The Legal Metrolog y Bill, 2008 integrating the provisions of the existing 2 
Acts on Weights and Measures and incorporating the recommendations of 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution as confirmed in the Xth Report, including the  unification of the 2 Acts 
into single Act has since been introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 24 th October, 
2008. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C  Dated 4.12.2008]

  
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 15,  PARA NO.5.33 ) 
  
3.1 The Committee express their concern over the rising trend in the prices of 
most of the essential commodities during the last six months. The Department of 
Consumer Affairs is entrusted, inter alia, with the task of monitoring of the prices 
and availability of essential commodities in the country. The Price Monitoring Cell 
(PMC) in the Depar tment regularly monitors on a daily basis the retail prices of 
14 essential commodities viz. rice, wheat, atta, gram, tur/arhar, tea, milk, sugar, 
vanaspati, mustard oil, groundnut oil, potato, onion and salt. Report in this regard 
is sent regularly to PMO , Cabinet Secretariat, Ministry of Finance and other 
concerned Departments. Despite the monitoring mechanism being in place, it is 
observed from the information furnished by the Department that the price rise in 
case of pulses and edible oils is more marke d as compared to other essential 
commodities. The main reason for rise in prices have been stated to be shortfall 
in domestic supplies relative to demand and hardening of international prices as 
well as seasonal factors. The Secretary, Department of Consum er Affairs also 
stated  during evidence that due to progressive policies of the Government 
money in the hands of the people in rural areas has increased, thereby 
increasing their purchasing power, which has also contributed to rise in prices. 
The steps tak en by the Government to contain the price rise include measures 
like augmenting domestic supplies of wheat and pulses through imports at 
reduced rates of duty and ban on exports. The Government has also imposed 
stock limits for wheat, pulses, edible oil, o ilseeds and on rice. On the monetary 
side, RBI has increased CRR by .25 points on two occasions to reduce money 
supply in the market to reduce inflationary pressures on prices. For improving 
productivity and production in the medium -term in the agricultura l sector, the 
Government have taken initiatives such as National Food Security Mission and 
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana. The Committee note that 40 per cent of the edible 
oil requirement of the country is met by the imports which is susceptible to 
international pressures on price front. Therefore, its impact is felt on the price rise 
of the edible oils in domestic sector also. The Committee feel that although the 
Government is vigilant about the adverse impact of price rise on the economy of 
the country cu lminating into inflationary trends yet the measures taken by the 
Government are not proving to be effective in bringing down the prices of the 
essential commodities. The Committee desire that the Department in 
consultation with other concerned Departments should chalk out a long -term 
strategy to meet such a situation so that it does not assume gigantic proportions, 
affecting the development and growth of the country. They should also take such 
steps that would insulate the prices in the country from interna tional price 
fluctuations. 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
3.2 (i)   The situation of prices of essential commodities is regularly monitored 
by the High Level Meetings such as Committee of Secretaries (COS),  Cabinet 
Committee on Prices (CCP) and the Cabinet Co mmittee on Economic 
Affairs(CCEA), notes of which are prepared and circulated by the PMC(Price 
Monitoring Cell) on the basis of information/ suggestion/comments/inputs 
collected from different Ministries/Departments. Policy measures whether short 
term, med ium term or long term to increase production, productivity of 
agricultural commodities come under the purview of the concerned Departments. 
 
(ii)  It is not possible to insulate the prices in the country from international price 
fluctuations since India is not self–sufficient in some of the essential commodities 
like edible oils and pulses.  Import dependence on POL also make India 
susceptible   to price rise in international market.  In this context, Government 
has been taking a series of measures to prote ct the vulnerable sections of 
society from the impact of global price rise.  Due to these measures, even when 
prices were spiraling in the world market, domestic prices did not rise much.   For 
example,   The FOB prices for rice for Pakistan rose from $275   per tonne to 
$820  per tonne (198%) on 03.05.08 as compared to last year. Similarly, for 
Vietnam it rose from US$ 290 per tonne to US$ 602 per tonne (108%) and for 
Thailand from US$ 306 per tonne to US$ 602 per tonne (97%) over the same 
period. World prices of wheat reflected in the Chicago Board of Trade rose over 
the year, from US$ 172 to $292 per tonne (100%) (as on 2.5.08). It had touched 
$438 on 14.3.2008. However, the domestic price of rice has increased by 20% 
over the year, while that of wheat, by  only 8.33%.  The international prices of 
edible oils have increased between 60.71 (Crude Palm oil) to 80.64 (soya oil) to 
about 48.955% (sunflower oil) as on 05.05.08. During the last one year, prices of 
soyabean oil, mustard oil,  sunflower oil, RBD Palmo lein and vanaspati in the 
domestic market increased by 15.51%, 21.15%, 19.54%, 17.72% and 13.04% 
respectively (as of 05.05.2008). 
 
iii) In the recent past the overall level of inflation has come down and it is now 
less than 9% ( as on 8.11.2008). 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C  Dated 4.12.2008] 
 

  
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 20,  PARA NO.5.38 ) 
    
3.3 The Standing Committee had examined the Forward Contracts 
(Regulation) A mendment Bill, 2006 and presented their Seventeenth Report to 
Parliament on 19 th December, 2006. In their Report, the Committee had strongly 
recommended that agricultural commodities especially foodgrains including 
coarse grains, pulses and sugar need not be permitted to be traded in the 
Commodity Market, including forward/future trade derivatives and options. The 
Committee also desire that edible oils should also be omitted from being traded 
in the Commodities Market, including forward/future trade derivat ives and 
options. In this context, the Government has set up an Expert Committee under 
the Chairmanship of Prof. Abhijit Sen, Member, Planning Commission to 
examine the impact of forward trading on prices of agricultural commodities but 
the Report is yet t o be submitted by the Committee. The Committee feel that 
considerable time has elapsed since this Expert Committee was constituted by 
the Government. The Committee desire that the Government should expedite the 
submission of report by the Expert Committee,  so as to assess accurately the 
impact of forward trading on prices of essential commodities and take 
appropriate remedial action in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
3.4 The Expert Committee set up by the Government under the Chairmanship  
of Professor Abhijit Sen to study , inter-alia, the extent of impact, if any, of futures 
trading on wholesale and retail prices of agricultural commodities submitted its 
Report to the Government on 29.05.2008.  The Expert Committee set up by the 
Government has analyzed the daily, weekly and monthly data on price volatility 
(spot price).  The analysis made by the Expert Committee led it to conclude as 
follows: 
“Given these conflicting results from daily as against weekly and 
monthly data, no strong conclusion can be drawn  on whether 
introduction of futures trade is associated with decrease or increase 
in spot price volatility”    
       The Expert Committee also analyzed annual growth rate in prices of 
sensitive commodities (food grains and sugar) in pre -future period and post 
future period and concluded that although inflation clearly increased post -futures 
in some sensitive commodities that have higher weight in consumer price 
indices, it is not possible to make any general claim that inflation accelerated 
more in commodities with futures trading. 
 
     In view of observations of the Expert Committee, the Government has not 
agreed to the recommendation of the Standing Committee. However, as a matter 
of abundant caution the Government has suspended futures trading in eight 
commodities namely, tur and urad w.e.f. 23.1.2007,wheat and  rice w.e.f. 
27.2.2007 and  rubber, soy oil, chana and potato w.e.f. 7.05.2008. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C  Dated 4.12.2008] 
 

  
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 23,  PARA NO.7.14 ) 
 
3.5  The Committee are deeply concerned to note that the Department of 
Consumer Affairs could not utilize even one crore out of the revised estimate of 
Rs.16 crore allocated during 2007 -08 for the Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery 
Scheme.  The Committee are unable to accept the contention of the Government 
that the shortfall in expenditure was due to non -approval of the Projects under 
the Hallmarking of the Gold Jewellery Scheme and deplore th e  slackless on the 
part of the Government in this regard.  The Committee feel that if the Department 
could have made advance preparations for getting the approval at the end of the 
Xth Five Year Plan i.e. in 2007 -08 or early in the 2007 -08, such problem c ould 
have been resolved. The Committee desire that the Department should make 
sincere efforts for obtaining the approval of the whole scheme in the current year 
itself so that the fund is fully utilised in the subsequent financial years. Similarly, 
adequate funds may be released to the State/UTs well in time for creating 
awareness of the scheme so that the people, particularly who live in backward 
and hilly areas, are not deprived of the benefits which may accrue to them by the 
BIS Schemes. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 3.6 It is clarified that the Scheme on Gold Hallmarking was approved during 
the Xth Five Year Plan period.  The funds allocated for the Scheme during 2007 -
08 was only Rs.4.00 crores (and not Rs.16.00 crores as inadvertently indicated in 
this para) o ut of the total XIth plan outlay of Rs. 10.5 crore for it. Against this 
allocation, an amount of Rs.1.00 crore was utilised during that year. Inadequate 
utilisation of funds was mainly due to lack of response from entrepreneurs to set 
up Hallmarking & Assa ying Centres under the scheme. The Scheme also 
includes provision for training of artisans, personnel of Hallmarking & Assaying 
Centres and BIS officers. Two programmes for artisans have already been 
conducted out of   a total of 15 programmes planned for them. Programmes for 
the other categories would also be taken up shortly. 
                                          
  The Scheme for setting up of Gold Hallmarking & Assaying Centres with 
central assistance was introduced with a view to provide incentive  to 
entrepreneurs for creation of adequate infrastructure facilities in different parts of 
the country, particularly in remote and backward areas,  in view of Government’s 
intention to bring gold jewellery under compulsory certification in a phased 
manner.  Under the scheme, financial incentive of 15% of the cost of machinery 
and equipment required for setting up of the Centres, subject to a maximum of 
Rs.15 lakhs (30% of cost of machinery and equipment subject to maximum of 
Rs.30 lakhs in North -Eastern Regi on and special category states of Himachal 
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Uttarakhand) is extended.  Subject to 
availability of applicants, priority is given for setting up of the Centres in locations 
where such Centres do not exist. Assistance under the Sch eme is released 
directly to the beneficiaries and not through States/UT Govts. The Scheme 
however has not been popular, apparently since such Centres may not be viable 
in the States and cities which are not major gold consuming/producing centres.  
As sugge sted by the Planning Commission, an evaluation study is being 
undertaken to assess the effectiveness or otherwise of the Scheme, the reasons 

  
for lack of interest of entrepreneurs to avail the assistance under the Scheme, 
suggest measures for its more effec tive implementation, etc. and based on the 
findings of the study, suitable modifications may be considered at a later stage. 
 
  It may be mentioned here that BIS has been operating a Hallmarking 
Scheme since the Xth Five Year Plan period under which Hallma rking & 
Assaying Centres for gold and silver jewellery are set up by organisations in 
private or public sector and authorisation for hallmarking is given to them subject 
to their meeting the conditions laid down by BIS. As on 30.9.2008.117 such 
Hallmarking & Assaying Centres were functioning in 16 States and Union 
Territories in the country. Against the XI plan target of 50 such Centres, 19 have 
already been set up and recognized by BIS.   The Gold Hallmarking Scheme with 
central financial assistance was in troduced to give a further boost to that 
Scheme. 
 
  As per the World Gold Council data, offtake of gold in the 7 major 
consuming States of Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Gujarat & Delhi constitute about 67% of the total gold of ftake and 
88% of gold jewellery is produced in 67 cities in the country with only the 
remaining 12% being produced in all other towns, villages and backward areas 
put together. As such the requirement of Hallmarking & Assaying Centres is 
more in those majo r consuming/producing centres and accordingly more such 
Centres have come there.  Apparently the insignificant quantum of jewellery 
being produced in small towns, villages and backward/remote areas is the 
reason for lack of response from entrepreneurs to s et up such Centres in these 
areas where they may not be viable. Majority of jewellers in the rural/remote 
areas are not manufacturers but only retailers who purchase jewellery items from 
the cities.  Since the cities that produce major part of the jeweller y are already 
having a number of Hallmarking & Assaying Centres, consumers in the 
villages/remote areas are also beneficiaries of hallmarking. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C  Dated 4.12.2008] 
 
 

  
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 1,  PARA NO.3.13) 
 
4.1 The Committee note that the Planning Commission had allocated  Rs. 213 
crore to the Department of Consumer Affairs for its Plan Scheme for the year 
2007-08. The allocation was drastically reduced to Rs. 150 crore at the Revised 
Estimates Stage. The Department, however, could not even utilize the reduced 
funds allocated to them and the expenditure incurred up to 17 th March, 2008 was 
only Rs. 86.42 crore. There was NIL expenditure in respect of the schemes viz. 
(i) Construction of NCDRC Building (ii) Consumer Education and Training 
HRD/Capacity Building and (iii) Standardization of Quality Control. Further, there 
was huge under utilization of funds under some of the schemes like 
‘Strengthening of Weights and Measures’, where against the allocation of Rs. 
16.31 crore, the expenditure was only Rs. 3.31 crore u p to 17 th March, 2008. 
Similar was the position in respect of the schemes ‘Strengthening of Forward 
Market Commission’ where out of Rs. 10 crore, the expenditure was Rs. 1.86 
crore. The plea of the Government that the shortfall in expenditure was due to 
delay in approval of the major schemes by the Planning Commission reflects lack 
of professionalism on the part of the Department of Consumer Affairs. The 
Committee are constrained to observe that foresightedness was missing on the 
part of the Department, as they could not take timely action for evaluation of the 
schemes and getting procedural formalities completed before the expiry of the 
Xth Plan. The Committee are not happy with the situation and recommend that 
the Department of Consumer Affairs should get the performance of the schemes 
evaluated as desired by the Planning Commission and strengthen its monitoring 
mechanism to ensure full utilization of funds during 2008 -09. They also desire 
that procedural formalities for getting approval should also be curt ailed by the 
Planning Commission in order to release funds in time to the Department for 
schemes of National Importance.  
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 4.2 Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.  
Secretary(CA) is taking regular meetings  of Divisional Heads with the objective 
that the scheme are evaluated without any delay and expenditure of the schemes 
is incurred as per targets.  As a result  the expenditure in 2008 -09 is better than 
the expenditure in 2007-08.  Last year  upto 30.9.2007, the Plan expenditure was 
Rs. 10.31 crores, where in the current year the Plan expenditure was Rs.68.49 
crores is on 30.9.2008. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C  Dated 4.12.2008] 
 

  
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 2,  PARA NO.3.14 ) 
 
4.3 The Committee are constrained to note the quarter -wise utilization of 
funds for the plan schemes of the Department of Consumer Affairs during 2007 -
08. The Committee observe that out of the revised allocation of Rs.150 crore, the 
Department utilized Rs. 6.13 crore in the 1 st Quarter,  Rs.4.08 crore in the 2 nd 
Quarter, Rs. 16.05 crore in 3 rd Quarter and Rs. 60.16 crore ( up to 17 th March, 
2008) in its plan schemes. The argument put forth by the Dep artment that the 
late approval of the schemes by the Planning Commission, which was received 
in September 2007, has largely accounted for low expenditure in the initial 
months, is not convincing to the Committee. During the course of oral evidence, 
various reasons were put forth for the under -utilization of funds during the first 
three quarters of the year. It was explained that the firm allocation of the Eleventh 
Five Year Plan could become available to the Department sometime in 
September 2007 whereas the  Eleventh Plan commenced from April 2007. 
Further, as per extant instructions of Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance, 
the schemes which continued from Tenth to Eleventh Plan required pre -
evaluation before they could be taken up for implementation durin g the first year 
of the Eleventh Plan. Also, all such schemes required appraisal/approval of the 
Competent Authority before implementation. The expenditure under the plan 
schemes cannot be incurred even if funds are available in the budget, unless the  
schemes have been appraised and approved by the Competent Authority. The 
appraisal is done through the mechanism of SFC, EFC and PIB. Approval is 
required at the level of the Department, the Finance Ministry and the CCEA, 
depending upon the funds allocated for the scheme for the entire Five Year Plan. 
With a view to avoiding the above mentioned procedural delays and also for the 
smooth and fast implementation of the plan schemes right from the beginning of 
the first year of the plan period, the Committee recom mend that the Department 
of Consumer Affairs should convince the Planning Commission to give approval 
and appraisal of the schemes expeditiously and well in time. The Committee also 
hope that the Department of Consumer Affairs will follow the concept of Mo nthly 
Expenditure Plan strictly and ensure that expenditure is reviewed on monthly 
basis so that there is no rush of expenditure at the fag end of the financial year. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 4.4 Secretary(CA) reviews the progress of plan  expenditure regula rly with a 
view to ensure that the expenditure is incurred proportionately through out the 
year as far as possible. 
  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C  Dated 4.12.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No.1.10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
  
 
 

  
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 12,  PARA NO.4.54) 
 
4.5 The Committee observe that the National Commission is maintaining data 
with regard to disposal of cases by the State Commission and District Fora within 
90 days and 150 days and beyond 90 -150 days. However, some of the States 
namely, Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Delhi, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, 
Sikkim and Uttar Pradesh are not sending the information to the National 
Commission. Similarly, the States namely, Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Dadra 
and Nagar Haveli, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh are not sending 
the information in respect of the cases disposed off by the District Fora within the 
prescribed time. The Committee desire that all the States should be persuaded to 
furnish the details regarding disposal of cases by the State Government/UTs 
within the prescribed period in order to enable the National Commission to 
analyze the reasons for non -disposal of cases by the State Commission and 
District Fora. It will also help the National Commission to provide useful remedial 
measures to State Commissions and District Fora to dispose of cases in an 
expeditious manner and within time frame laid down for the purpose. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 4.6 The concerns of the Committee have been conveyed to the States/UTs 
vide D.O. letter No. 5(3)/2008 -CPU dated 23.05.2008 from Secretary (CA) 
addressed to the Ch ief Secretaries. This will be followed up with the State 
Governments in future also.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C  Dated 4.12.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No.1.18 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.21 PARA  NO. 6.9) 
 
 
4.7 The Committee note that an amount of Rs.20 crores was allocated to the 
Department of Consumer Affairs for strengthening the Forward Market 
Commission during 2007-08, which was reduced to Rs.10 crore at RE stage but 
the actual expenditure during the year was Rs.2.17 crore.  The reasons put forth 
by the Department for underutilization of fund was non -finalization of rent 
agreement by the owner of building for off ice premises and delay in getting 
approval for price dissemination project. The Committee feel that these are very 
trivial issues which could have been tackled by the Department very easily. In the 
opinion of the Committee, if the Department would have mad e advance planning 
for settling the aforesaid issues, the question of surrendering large sum of funds 
during 2007 -08 would not have arisen.  The Committee hope that all the 
procedural formalities required for getting the building for office premises on ren t 
and the ground work required for implementation of price dissemination project 

  
would be completed expeditiously to ensure that the funds earmarked for the 
purpose do not remained unutilized in financial year. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 4.8 As considerable gr ound work (like discussions with AGMARK, NIC, State 
Governments, finalisation of technical specifications of the ticker board, 
identification of the mandis, etc.) was involved in case of the price dissemination 
project, it took some time to complete these works. 
 
  Since sufficient ground work has already been done, the project would 
pick up pace during 2008 -09.  The shifting to a new office requires availability of 
a suitable office premises.  A premise was identified during 2007 -08. However, 
the owners of  the property did not rent it on the valuation done by the CPWD. 
Fresh efforts would be initiated in the current financial year for identification of 
suitable premises.   Fresh Technical and financial bids have already been invited 
by FMC through advertise ments in the current financial year. The short listed 
properties will be sent to CPWD for valuation. However, it may be mentioned that 
FMC is facing difficulties in hiring premises due to rents quoted by the owners 
being much higher than the valuation done by CPWD. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C  Dated 4.12.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No.1.27 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

  
 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECEOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 3,  PARA NO.3.15 ) 
 
 5.1 The Committee are constrained to note that while on the one hand, the 
Planning Commission has identified consumer protection as the thrust area in the 
Tenth Five Year Plan and on the other, it has not approved the projected demand 
of the Department of Consumer Affairs for Rs. 1484 crore for the Eleventh Five 
Year Plan (2007 -12). Inspite of the fact that the Working Group of  the Planning 
Commission had deliberated on the Eleventh Plan and given a total requirement 
of Rs. 2165 crore, the Planning Commission had approved only Rs. 1083 crore 
for the entire Eleventh Five Year Plan period, which is half of the funds estimated 
by the Working  Group. The Committee are of the opinion that consequent upon 
the awareness invoked amongst the consumers of rural, remote and backward 
areas of their rights, the scope of the consumer welfare has widened and more 
funds will be required in the y ears to come. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department of Consumer Affairs should convince the 
Planning Commission for allocation of additional funds so that the schemes being 
implemented by the Department do not suffer for want of funds dur ing the 
Eleventh Plan Period. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
5.2 As the XI Plan final allocation has been finalise, this would be taken up 
with the Planning Commission at the time of Mid Year Review, if it is found 
necessary to ask for additional allocation. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C  Dated 4.12.2008] 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 8  PARA NO.4.36) 
 
5.3 The Committee note that the Scheme ‘Computerization and Computer 
Networking of Consumer Fora’ in the country (CONFONET) was launched in 
March, 2005 with a view to facilitating the consumers to file cases online and 
assess the status of their cases pending with the State Commissions and District 
Forum. Every year a large amount is released to NIC for providing necessary 
hardware and sustain software, developing application software and providing 
maintenance and necessary training to officials of Consumer Fora. At present, 12 
State Commissions and 255 District Fora and NCDRC have sta rted hosting the 
cause of list and judgement on web. Out of 628 locations where hardware is  
 

  
supplied, the installation has been completed in 504 District Fora and at all State 
Commissions. Installation in 61 locations is in process and is pending in bala nce 
28 locations either due to lack of space or office being shifted. The Committee 
are of the view that with the advancement of technology, everything should be 
available on the website and internet.  Thus, there is an urgent need to put all the 
consumer related information on the website of State Governments/UTs. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend to vigorously pursue with the State 
Governments/UT Administrations to provide the necessary location/ 
infrastructure to NIC for installation of comput er hardware for the purpose. The 
Committee also recommend that a Bill to amend the Consumer Protection Act, 
1986 may be brought before the Parliament at the earliest to facilitate the online 
filing of cases by the aggrieved consumer. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
5.4 So far, National Commission, 34 State Commissions and 593 District Fora 
have been supplied the required computer systems with peripherals and 
software. Out of these 628 locations, computer systems have been installed in 
528 District Fora and 33 State C ommissions. The concerned State Governments 
are being requested regularly to give their full cooperation in implementation and 
timely completion of the project & to provide the necessary location/infrastructure 
to NIC for installation of computer hardware for the purpose. Simultaneously, the 
Government is also processing for getting the evaluation of the performance of 
the implementation of the scheme so far. 
  
  Efforts are also being made for early finalization of proposals for 
amendments to the Consumer Protection Act and for introduction of the Bill in the 
Parliament. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C  Dated 4.12.2008] 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 19,  PARA NO. 5.37 ) 
 
5.5 The Committee note that Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and Prevention 
of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 
1980 empowers the State Governments/UTs to take action against the 
unscrupulous persons indulging in hoardin g and blackmarketing of essential 
commodities. During 2007, 6474 persons were arrested and 4481 persons were 
prosecuted but only 348 persons were convicted. The Committee find that the 
conviction rate of persons arrested is as low as 5.37% and 7.76%, if co mpared 
with persons prosecuted. The Committee desire that in view of the low 
convictions in such cases, the Department should examine whether there is any 
lacunae in the Act due to which most of them go scot free despite serious 
offences. The outcome of th e examination alongwith the suggestions of the 
Department for bringing in any new amendment to  meet the situation may be 
reported to the Committee within six months of the presentation of this report to 
the Parliament.  The Committee recommends effective use of Essential 

  
Commodities Act specially against those hoarding large quantity of foodgrains, 
rather than small traders. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 5.6 The recommendations of the Committee contained in its   24 th  Report  on 
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Department of Consumer Affairs, have already 
been communicated to the State Governments/UTs vide Secretary (Consumer 
Affairs)’s d.o. letter No.2/1/2008 -ECR&E dated 16.06.2008 .  They have  been 
requested to send their views on the recommendation made by the  Committee in 
para 5.37 whether there is any lacunae in the Essential Commodities Act due to 
which most of the unscrupulous person go scot free despite serious offences. 
Some of the States have furnished their views. The response from other 
States/UTs are awaited.  However, as directed by the Committee, a report is 
being submitted to the Committee separately.   
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C  Dated 4.12.2008] 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 24,  PARA NO.7.15 ) 
 
5.7 The Committee note with dismay that out of 162 samples of Gold and 
Gold Jewellery collected from 16 cities, only 16 samples passed and 146 failed 
the test of purity.  It is more disturbing that in the capital, all the samples collected 
failed the test of purity of Gold.  The scheme of Hallmarking of gold was launched 
in 2000 with the aim to prevent sale of inferior quality of gold and boost the 
confidence of the consumers and assure them the intrinsic value of their 
holdings.  But from the above facts, the Committee feel that the very purpose of 
launching the scheme has been defeated.  The Committee therefore recommend 
that the BIS should strengthen its enforcement activities by conducting regular 
survey, particularly of the shops who have opted for the Hallmarking of Gold 
Jewellery.  If need be, a penal provision in the BIS Act, 1986 may be made to 
prevent the sale of inferior quality of Gold Jewellery.   
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 5.8 The survey referred to in this paragr aph was carried out in 2006 on non -
hallmarked gold jewellery not coming within the purview of BIS Hallmarking 
Scheme and 146 out of 162 samples collected from 16 cities were found to be 
failing in purity. Another survey was proposed  to be conducted, cover ing both 
hallmarked and non -hallmarked gold jewellery in some more centres including 
semi urban and rural areas. The proposal has however been kept in abeyance 
pending completion of an evaluation study of the existing Gold Hallmarking 
Scheme. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C  Dated 4.12.2008] 
 
                         RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO. 25,  PARA NO.7.16 ) 
 

  
5.9 The Committee note with dissatisfaction that the Departme nt could not 
fulfill its commitments made before the Parliamentary Committee during the 
examination of Demands for Grants for the year 2007-08 to bring the Hallmarking 
of Gold Jewellery under the mandatory certification w.e.f. 1.1.2008.  Instead, the 
Department proposed an amendment in Bureau of Indian Standard Act, 1986 to 
bring the Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery under compulsory certification regime.  
The Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs has admitted during evidence 
that there is a slight peculiar  trade practice in the Jewellery so they are willing to 
change the BIS Act. The Committee, therefore, desire that a Bill in this regard 
should be introduced in the Parliament at the earliest to bring the Hallmarking 
under compulsory certification regime. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
6.0 It was proposed to bring hallmarking of gold jewellery under mandatory 
certification w.e.f 1st January, 2008 in a phased manner – in the four metro cities 
of Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai in the first phase and in the rest of the 
country later, based on the experience gained in the four metros. The Scheme 
however could not be introduced so far as the enabling legislative framework for 
its implementation under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act is actively being 
pursued.  A draf t Bill for amendment of the Act is presently under consideration 
of The Ministry of Law (Legislative Department). Necessary legislation would be 
brought before Parliament after approval of the competent authority. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. G11027/8/2008-P&C Dated 4.12.2008] 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
NEW DELHI;      DEVENDER PRASAD YADAV, 
16February, 2009     Chairman 
27Magha, 1930 (Saka)      Standing Committee on Food,  
        Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution.

  
 
APPENDIX I 
 
 
 
Minutes of the Fourteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution held on Friday, the 16th January, 
2009. 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1200 hrs. in Committee Room 
‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
     
LOK SABHA 
  
2. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
3. Shri  Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
4. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
5. Shri Munshi Ram 
6. Shri  Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
7. Shri  Daroga Prasad Saroj 
8. Smt.  Adv. P. Satheedevi 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Smt.  Mohsina Kidwai 
10. Shri  Shantaram Laxman Naik 
11. Shri  Kanjhibhai Patel 
12. Shri  Matilal Sarkar 
13. Shri  Rajniti Prasad 
14. Shri  Mangala Kisan  
15. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri  A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary (AK)   
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
 2. Shri B. S. Dahiya  - Deputy Secretary-I 
 3. Shri Jagdish Prasad  - Deputy Secretary-II 
 
 
 

  
 
At the outset Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to th e sitting of 
the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft report on 
Action Taken by the Government on observations/recommendations contained in 
the Twenty-fourth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer A ffairs and Public Distribution on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) and adopted the same with slight modifications. 
 
2. The Committee then authorized the Chairman  to finalise the aforesaid report 
and present the same to the Parliament in the ensuing Session of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  _____________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF T HE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total  Number of Recommendations     27 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have been  
accepted by the Government: 
Recommendation Nos. 
4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 22, 26 and 27. 
Total          15 
 
Percentage          56  
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government: 
Recommendation Nos. 15, 20 and 23 
Total          3 
 
Percentage         11 
      
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of  
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
Recommendation  Nos. 1, 2, 12 and 21 
 
  
Total          4 
  
Percentage                                                                            15 
 
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect of which the  
replies of the Government are still awaited. 
Recommendation No. 3, 8, 19, 24 and 25  
Total           5 
  
Percentage         18 