 
 
 
 
 
 
14    
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2006-07) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 The Warehousing (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2005 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
, 2006/ 1928 (Saka)  

 
   
 
14 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2006-07) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution ) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH    REPORT 
 
The Warehousing (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2005 
 
 
 
 
   Presented to Lok Sabha on ___________ 
 
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on  _____________ 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
, 2006/             1928 (Saka) 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
(i) Composition of the Committee 
 
(ii) Introduction 
 
(iii) Report 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
(i) Minutes of the sitti ngs of the Committee. 
  
     APPENDIX 
 
(i) The Warehousing (Development and Regulation) Bill, 
2005

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2006-07 
  
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Govinda Aroon Ahuja 
3. Shri Alakesh Das 
4.        Shri  Atma Singh Gill 
5.        Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
6.       Shri  Baliram Kashyap 
7.       Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
8.       Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak 
9.  Shri Parsuram Majhi 
10.      Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
11.      Shri Harikewal Prasad  
12.       Shri Munshi Ram 
13.       Shri Daroga  Prasad Saroj 
14.  Adv. P. Satheedevi 
15.  Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
16.  Shri Ramakant Yadav 
17.  Smt. V. Radhika Selvi 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri T.S. Bajwa 
23. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
24.       Shri  Shantaram Laxman Naik 
25.       Shri Thanga Tamil Selvan 
26. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
27.       Shri Rajniti Prasad  
28. Shri Nabam Rebia 
29. Shri Matilal Sarkar 
30. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu 
31. Vacant 

 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. (Smt.) Paramjit Kaur Sandhu - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Bhandari   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
5. Shri Rakesh Bhardw aj  - Committee Officer 
 
 

 
 
  
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution ( 2006-07) having been authoris ed by the Committee to 
submit the Report on thei r behalf, present this 14 th    Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on 
“The Warehousing (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2005”  relating to Ministry 
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Depar tment of Food and 
Pubic Distribution). 
2. Hon’ble Speaker referred this Bill  to the Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution (2005-06) under Rule 331E of the Rules 
of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha on 19 th December, 2005 for 
examination and report. However, on being requested, Hon’ble Speaker granted 
extension of time to the Committ ee for three months i.e. upto 18 th June, 2006 for 
presentation of the Report on the Bill.  
 3. The Committee (2005-06) examined th e Bill and took evidence of the 
representatives of the State Govern ments and other organisations connected 
with the Bill and the representat ives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution) at their 
sittings held on 15th June, 2006 and 16th June, 2006 respectively. The Minutes of 
the sittings form Part-II of the Report.  
4. The Committee (2006-07) considered and adopted the draft Report on the 
Bill at their sitting held on   29th September, 2006.  
5. The Committee express their thanks to the representatives of Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution), State Governments, Conf ederation of Indian Industry (CII) and 
National Commodity and Derivatives Ex change Limited (NCDEX) for tendering 

 
evidence before the Committee and for furnishing to the Committee detailed 
information/material desired in connection with the examination of the Bill. 
6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the Committee on 
Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution (2005-06) for obtaining 
information and taking evidence on the Bill. 
7. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi 
,    2006    DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV 
           , 1928 (Saka)      Chairman,  
       Standing Committee on Food, 
       Consumer Affa irs and Public Distribution 
      
 
 
 

 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
The Warehousing (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2005 was 
introduced in Lok Sabha on 7 th December, 2005 and was referred to the 
Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution on 19 th 
December, 2005 for examination and report. 
BACKGROUND 
1.2 According to the Ministry of C onsumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution) the warehousing 
receipts at present do not enjoy the fiduciary trust of depositors and banks, as 
there is fear of not being able to recove r the loans in events,  such as fraud, or 
mis-management on behalf of the warehouse or insolvency of depositor. The 
available legal remedies are also time consuming and inadeq uate. Further, the 
format of warehouse receipts used in the country is not uniform.  Hence, there 
are impediments in the negotia bility of warehouse receipts creating difficulties to 
the farmers and other depositors of goods. Having regard to the above, it is 
proposed to establish a negotiable warehouse receipt system for all commodities 
including agricultural co mmodities. On the one hand, it will make warehouse 
receipts a prime tool of  trade and facilitate finance  against it throughout the 
country, on the other, it will allow banks to improve the quality of their lending 
portfolio and enhance their interest in l ending in respect of  goods deposited in 
warehouses.  It is, therefore, proposed to lay down the requirements for 
warehouse receipts to become valid negotiable instruments. 
 
OBJECTIVES OF THE BILL 
 
1.3 The Bill inter-alia seeks to provide for :- 
 
(i) the regulation of ware housing business by registering warehouses issuing 
negotiable warehouse receipts; 
(ii) the establishment and incorporation of an Authority to be called the 
Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority (WDRA);  
 
-2- 
 

 
(iii) the registration of accreditation agencies for warehouses which  would 
issue accreditation certificates to the warehouses following certain 
required norms; 
(iv) the conditions for ne gotiability of war ehouse  receipts by delivery and 
endorsement;  
(v) Constitution of the Wa rehousing Advisory Committee. 
 
1.4 According to Ministry of Consumer  Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) it is expected that the system of 
negotiable warehouse receipt would result in large benefits, both at macro as 
well as micro levels viz. 
a) increase in the liquidity in the rural areas; 
b) encourage  scientific warehousing of goods; 
c) lower cost of financing; 
d) shorter and more efficient supply chains; 
e) enhanced rewards for grading and quality; and 
f) better price risk management. 
 
This would in turn result in higher returns to farmers and better 
services to consumers.  
 
 
1.5 On being asked as to  how the Bill is likely to benefit the farmers 
and consumers, the repres entative of Confederati on of Indian Industry 
(CII) during evidence stated as follows:  
“the major problem that is faced by  the farmer is the post-harvest 
lack of marketing facility and liquidity against the commodity that he 
has produced on his farm land. T oday he has no other option but 
go to the nearest mandi and sell it. All of us know that immediately 
after harvesting, the prices are at all-time low. He will get 
remunerative price onl y if he can wait for some time. But, 
unfortunately, he cannot because he has a lot of needs for funds 
because he has to pay back the crop loan that he has taken to 
meet his consumption needs.  He has also to take care of the need 
of the next harvesti ng. He needs liquidity against that. Once 
warehouse receipt gets this kind of tradability and negotiability and 
when the warehouses becomes res ponsible and regulated, banks 
will come wholesale to finance against warehouse receipt financing.    
-3- 
It is a matter of concern that duri ng the last 30 or 40 years of direct 
lending by banks, not more than 20 to 22 per cent of the farmers 
have actually got bank credit till date. 

 
Secondly, it is a fact that not more than 35 per cent of the 
actual value of produce is being released by the farmer when he 
has to sell immediately after the harvesting.  So, this Bill will give 
liquidity to his commodity even without selling it. He can keep it in 
warehouse and take loan.  I have been dealing with these kinds  of 
cases in National Bulk Handlin g Corporation and Banks because 
we give quality and quantity guarantee as the warehouses are 
managed by us completely. So , banks are now being more 
encouraged lending against warehouse receipts.  It is also a matter 
of fact that country wide receip t financing is a preferred way of 
lending. But in India despite the fa ct that agriculture is such an 
important sector, warehouse receipts have not been given that kind 
of footing till date so as to give liquidity to the farmers. I would like 
to submit that despite the fact  that agriculture produce market size 
into hundreds and thousands of crores, but still banks have lend 
just about Rs. 15,000 crore agains t commodities why  because the 
credibility of the warehouse receipts  was suspect till now.  Once 
this Act comes farmers would benefit a great deal.” 
 
1.6 On being asked to give details of specific provisions proposed in 
the Bill by the Government to pr otect the interests of farmers and 
consumers, the Ministry in their written reply stated that  to safeguard the 
interest of the farmers, the power maybe given to Authority to give primacy 
to agriculture produce for storage in  the registered warehouses.  The 
Ministry suggested that following enabling clause be a dded in CHAPTER 
(Power and Functions of Authority): 
      “35(2)(p): To give primacy to agricultural produce    for storage in the 
registered warehouses.” 
Moreover, there is a proposal to reserve 10% storage capacity for 
the storage of agricultural produce in the proposed Bill 
1.7 During evidence of the Minist ry, the Committee directed that a 
study be commissioned to ascertain the economical viability if 
storage capacity is used for agriculture produce. A Committee was, 
constituted, for the purpose wit h following composition and terms 
and reference:-  
 
Composition:- 
(i) Managing Director, Centra l Warehousing Corporation 
(ii)  Managing Director, Maharashtra  State Warehousing Corporation 
-4- 
 
(iii) Managing Director, Karnatak a State Warehousing Corporation 
(iv) Managing Director, Uttar Prades h State Warehousing Corporation 

 
(v) Managing Director, Andhra Pradesh State Warehousing 
Corporation 
Terms and Reference:- 
(i) Find out the present average oc cupancy by agriculture produce in 
the warehouses; 
(ii) Recommend as to what sh ould be a viable percentage of 
warehousing space to be kept reserved for agriculture produce 
keeping in view the economic viability of warehouses. 
The above Committee took into consi deration the fact that the total 
utilization of Maharashtra SWC warehouse for agricultural produce was to 
the tune of 45% to 55% on an average for the last five years whereas 
Karnataka SWC reported 50% of t heir capacity being utilised for 
agricultural produce.  Similar experi ence of approximatel y 50% utilization 
of agricultural produce was seem s to be with CWC on an average 
whereas for APSWC the percentage was as high as 85%.  The 
Maharashtra SWC recommended a minimum level of 40% of total storage 
space to be reserved for agricultu ral produce wherea s the percentage of 
the same was recommended as 25% by the Karnataka SWC.  The CWC 
data also showed recommendation for reservation to the tune of 40% of 
the warehousing capacity available at its general warehouses. 
The details of the modalities work ed out and decision arrived at by 
the said Committee is given in Annexure. 
The Committee was further informed that the said Committee which 
went into the aforesaid study, agreed t hat keeping in view the tax holiday 
which is applicable to a person fo r the 10 years under the income tax 
provision for such infrastructure and long term viability, a minimum of 25% 
of total capacity of the warehouse be earmarked as committed for 
agricultural produce storage. 
-5- 
 
The Committee submitted their Report to the Ministry of Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Pub lic Distribution for their consideration.  The 
Ministry recommended that 20% storage capacity be earmarked for the 
storage of agriculture pr oduce in the proposed Bill.  The said decision of 

 
the Government was communicated to the Parliamentary Committee for 
their consideration.      
1.8 On being enquired as to what ext ent the objectives are likely to be 
achieved by the said Bill, the Minist ry in a written not e stated that the 
objective of the proposed Bill is to make warehouse receipt a fully 
negotiable instrument. On enactment of this legislation, the warehouse 
receipt would become a negotiable instrument backed by Central 
Legislation. 
1.9 As regards the present mec hanism of managing and regulating 
warehousing business, the Committee have been informed by the Ministry 
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Publ ic Distribution (Department of Food 
and Public Distribution) that the warehousing business of Central 
Warehousing Corporation in the country is at present managed and 
regulated by Warehousing Corpor ation Act, 1962 and Warehousing 
Corporation Rules, 1963. The oper ation and regulat ion of State 
Warehousing Corporations are carried out as per the respective State 
Warehousing Corporation Acts. 
1.10 The Committee enquired as to what  extent the present set up of 
warehouses business fell short of expectations, thereby needing a 
separate legislative back-up and how fa r the Bill propose to fill the gaps, 
the Ministry in their written reply st ated that the warehouse receipt issued 
by various warehouses against the receipt of goods in their warehouses is 
not a fully negotiable instrument back ed by a suitable legislations and, 
therefore, banks are reluctant to give loan against such warehouse 
receipts to farmers/depositors.
 
1.11 On being asked in which list of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution, the subject "Warehousing" falls? Is it in State, Central or  
-6- 
 
Concurrent List and in the event of passage of this  Bill, what would be the 
fate of State Acts as State Govern ments have separate Legislation to 
govern Warehousing Business, the repr esentative of the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Dis tribution (Department of Food and 
Public Distribution) during evidence stated: 

 
“Warehousing’ is not shown in any of t he Lists- neither in the Union List 
nor in the State List. CW C Act was the first Central Act to be made in 
1958. Moreover, the rules say that wher e the Central Act is already there, 
that will prevail. CWC Act was the first Act to be made. It is not mentioned 
in the list. We took advice of the Legislative Department also. It was found 
that no law is there. The Central Government enacted the CWC Act at that 
time.” 
 
1.12   Ministry in their post evidence reply further clarified that as per 
Department of Legal Affairs, subject matter of the proposed Bill falls under 
Entry 46 read with Entry 97 (Residuary Powers) of the Union List of the 
Constitution.   The proposed legislation will not interfere in the working of 
the various States Acts. The warehouses  operating under the States Acts 
who are not interested to issue negot iable warehouse receipt will continue 
to operate as such under the State Acts. 
 
1.13 The Committee enquired when almost all the States have their own 
warehousing Act, what necessitated t he Union Government to enact an 
Act on the subject, the Ministry in t heir post evidence reply stated that the 
State Warehousing Acts are mainly for giving licence to the persons who 
are interested to carry out the wa rehouse business in the respective 
States. Since long there was a demand that for increasing the financial 
liquidity in the rural areas, the warehouse receipt issued by various 
warehouses should be made a fully negot iable instrument. Previously, it 
was considered if it can be achieved by making amendments in the 
Negotiable Instrument (NI) Act, 1881. However, the NI Act deals with the  
 
-7- 
monetary instruments only, i.e., cheque,  bill of exchange and promissory 
notes. Therefore, it was suggest ed by RBI and De partment of Legal 
Affairs that a separate Central Legisl ation should be enacted for making 
the warehouse receipt a fully negotia ble instrument. The present State 
laws do not make the warehousing receipt a negotiable instrument. 
1.14 On being asked whether the Centra l Act will hinder the activities of 
present warehousing facilities in the States and their present Acts, the 
representative of the Ministry during evidence stated : 

 
“actually we want to promote and simplify the lending process from 
financial institution on the basis of recipients of commodities kept in 
warehouses.  That is why this cent ral Act is being enacted.  We 
want to simplify the procedure.  We provide promissory note, 
cheques or bills, similarly same rules for borrowing loans on the 
basis of warehouse receipts in the country would make it 
convenient for the peasants. I submit  that an accreditation agency 
would help to operate the things at  same scientific methodology in 
the country.  It will be good enough to have a central Act in this 
regard.” 
1.15 On being asked wh ether the State Governments and National 
Association of Warehouse Corporations were consulted at the time of 
drafting the proposed Bill and whether their views have been incorporated 
in the proposed Bill, the representative of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distributi on (Department of Food an d Public Distribution) 
during evidence stated: 
“I would like to draw the attention of the Committee towards the fact 
that an inter-ministerial Task Force was constituted on the 
recommendations of the Expert Committee that was formed in 
December, 2000.  They had suggested that a Committee be 
formed, a draft report be submi tted after discussing with all 
concerned and that draft was submitted to the MD in 2004 and was 
later submitted to the Government.  On the basis of this draft, the 
Government decided to form a core group.  As a result a 
Committee consisting of 15 members including all the stake holders 
of legislative department, RBI, Mini stry of Finance, Ministry of 
Agriculture, NABARD, NAFED etc. was constituted.  After working 
for four months, the Committee submitted its Report after taking 
into consideration each and every section.  Later on a draft Bill was  
 
-8- 
 
prepared by making improvement s in it and the same was 
circulated to all the Ministries.  This draft Bill was also submitted to 
the State Governments for their comments”. 
1.16 The Ministry in their post evidenc e reply further stated that the draft 
Warehousing (Development and Regula tion) Bill, 2005 was circulated 
among Managing Directors of State Wa rehousing Corporations by Central 
Warehousing Corporation. Secretary (F&PD) had discussed the draft Bill  
with the Managing Direct ors of Assam SWC and Karnataka SWC (MD, 
Karnataka SWC is the Chairman of  the National Association of 

 
Warehousing Corporation) and their suggestions were incorporated in the 
draft Bill. The main demand of the National Association of Warehousing 
Corporations was to make the wa rehouse receipt fully negotiable 
instrument, which is the main objective of the proposed legislation. 
1.17 On being asked that the nomenclature of the Bill is Warehousing 
(Development and Regulation) Bill, 2005,  but the scrutiny of the bill 
reveals that there is nothi ng about the 'Development' in the Bill, it only 
speaks of ‘Regulations', the representat ive of the Ministry during evidence 
stated:  
“We have named this Bill as “Warehouse Bill”.  You have discussed 
the word “development” also.  Still  there are many things proposed 
to be done through the Bill whic h will ensure the growth of 
Warehousing Development in the coun try.  First of all we propose 
that through this Bill and thr ough regulation being formulated under 
it, scientific warehousing system shoul d be evolved in the country.  
The suggestion to constitute a ccreditation agency will ensure that 
whatever goods are kept in warehousing, are stored scientifically. 
Secondly, we have also discussed grading and quality of the goods 
that will be kept in warehouses.  Thir dly, since the supply chain unit 
will be smaller and more efficient, hence, warehousing activity will 
go up. 
Since all these will be done sci entifically and we hope that 
warehouses will be set up at many pl aces which will support our 
objective of having smaller and efficient supply chain. It will give our 
farmers comparatively better faci lity for price risk management.  It 
will enhance warehousing activities. When the farmer will come to 
know as to how we have negotiated warehousing and proposed the 
names of places, he will understand and find it easier to manage  
 
-9- 
 
price risk in a better way.  It will promote warehousing activity.  So 
we have specifically used the word development in it.” 
 
1.18 The Ministry in their post evid ence reply further clarified that 
besides, making the warehouse receipt a fully negotiable instrument, the 
objective of the proposed legislation is  to bring reforms and modernization 
in the warehousing sector. In the Bill, it is proposed to provide necessary 
administrative mechanism and legi slative back-up for regulating and 
streamlining the warehous ing sector issuing warehouse receipt. The 
proposed legislation, inter alia, seeks to provide for –  

 
(i) to specify the qualifications , code of conduct and practical 
training for warehousemen and staff engaged in 
warehousing business; 
 
(ii) to promote efficiency in conduct of warehouse business; 
 
(iii) to promote professional organizations connected with the 
warehousing business; 
 
Thus, according to the Ministry, the name of the propos ed Bill appears to 
be appropriate. 
1.19 The Committee pointed out that the scrutiny of the Bill revealed that 
the Bill promoted centralization of pow er in the hands of Union Government 
at the expense of State Governments, the Ministry in their post evidence 
reply stated that the proposed Central Legislation is considered to make the 
warehouse receipt a fully negotiable in strument for increasing financial 
liquidity in rural areas. A law of this  nature should have uniform features 
throughout the country. Banks and financia l institutions having an all India 
presence will have an impor tant role in the propos ed law.  Therefore, 
uniformity in provisions is esse ntial which can be ensured through the 
central role of the Union Government.  It will not interfere in the working of 
the various States Acts. The warehouses  operating under the States Acts 
and who are not interested to iss ue negotiable warehouse receipt will 
continue to operate as such.  
-10- 
 
1.20 On being asked about the role the State Governm ents will play in 
the present Bill, the Ministry in their post evidence reply stated that the 
warehouses operated by various State Warehousing Corporations as well 
as by State Governments may register  with the Authority proposed in the 
legislation; in case these are interested to issue negotiable warehouse 
receipt. 
1.21 On being asked whether the State Government s will not be able to 
constitute accreditation agencies on th eir own, the representative of the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution during evidence 
stated as follows: 

 
“Accreditation Agency can be appointed by a regulator who will decide 
the guidelines.  It be SWC or some ot her agency.  Of course, SWC will 
not give accreditation certificate fo r its own godowns but  it can do so 
for other godowns.  This regulator will decide the guidelines for a 
godown.  Suppose the godown is for edi ble oil, it will be a separate 
commodity. They will be able to se t norms for such godowns.  These 
norms will be followed by various godowns. Suppose there is a 
godown in the village and it does not  meet the requirement of the 
accreditation.   For improving the godown, they can take loan from the 
bank.  When we are talking of l oan for improving the godowns, 
ultimately it will also increase the warehousing activity.”   
    
1.22 According to the Ministry the Note  for the Cabinet and draft Warehousing 
(Development and Regulation) Bill, 2005 were sent to the Cabinet and the Cabinet in 
its meeting held on 29th September, 2005 had approved the proposal of the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution for introducing the Bill in the Parliament.  
1.23 The above said Bill was made ava ilable on the websit e of Lok Sabha 
http://www.parliamentofindia.nic.in on Internet and also advertised in various 
prominent Dailies/Regional newspapers fo r general public. The Committee invited 
the comments/suggestions on the said Bill from the public at large.  The Committee 
received a number of r epresentations/memoranda fr om experts/NGOs/State 
Governments containing their suggestions /views on the proposed legislation both 
favouring and opposing the legislation under reference.  
 
-11- 
 
1.24 The Committee took evidence of the representatives of various NGOs, 
experts and State Governments on 15th June, 2006 and the Ministry of Consumer  
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution) on 
16th June, 2006.   
1.25 The Committee’s views on the basis of written replies received from the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution and oral evidence of the representatives 
of the Department of F ood and Public Distribution and the evidence of the 
representatives of NGOs, experts and St ate Governments are given in following 
paragraphs.  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-12- 
 
1.26 The Committee recommend that the Bill may be passed subject to the 
suggestions/recommendations made in the subsequent paragraphs. 
1.27 The Committee note that at pr esent the warehousing receipt issued 
by various warehouses is not a negotiabl e instrument backed by a suitable 
legislation.  Therefore Banks are reluctant to give loan against such 
warehouse receipt to farmers and other depositors.  While attempting to 
make the warehouse receipts fully negotiable instrument, the Committee 
note that the present Bill lays emphasis only on one aspect of the problem.  
The other aspects about the Bill is to increase the liquidity in the rural 
areas, scientific warehousing of goods at lower cost of financing, improved 

 
supply chains, enhanced rewards for quality and better price risk 
management.    This would, in turn, is stated to, result in higher returns to 
farmers and better services to consumers.  The Committee while 
welcoming the making of warehouse receipt  negotiable, feel that it is not 
going to help in achieving all the obj ectives mentioned above.  Thus, there 
is a need to make suitable provisions in the Bill to achieve the aforesaid 
objectives as mentioned in the Statemen t of Objects & Reasons appended 
to the Bill. 
 
 
 
 
-13- 
 
1.28 During the course of evidence, the Committee specifically asked the 
representatives of State Governments  of Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, 
Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra who appeared before the 
Committee as to whether they were consulted at the stage of drafting of the 
Bill. The Committee were informed that  no consultations were made by the 
Central government with the State Governments. The Committee feel that 
State Governments which are the ma jor stake holders in the warehousing 
business need to be properly consulted in the matter.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that State Governments be consulted and their 
views incorporated in the Bill to make it widely accepted piece of 
legislation. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-14- 
1.29 The nomenclature of the Bill talks of Development and Regulation.  
However, a number of State Governments  pointed out that the Bill stresses 
on regulation and talks nothing about  the development of warehousing 
business.  When asked as to how th e objective of development was 
proposed to be achieved by the proposed legislation, the Ministry in their 
reply stated that it is proposed to provide necessary administrative 
mechanism and legislative back up to regulate and streamline the 
warehousing sector issuing negotiabl e warehouse receipt.  The Committee 
feel that there is a need to incorporat e more specific provisions in the Bill 
about development aspects of the warehousing business which are 
missing at present. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-15- 
1.30 The Committee’s examination r eveals that the subject Warehousing 
is not specified in any of the lists i.e. Union List, the State List and the 
Concurrent List of the Constitution of  India.  The Committee was informed 
that as per the Department of Legal A ffairs, subject matter of the proposed 
bill falls under Entry 46 read with Entr y 97 of the Union List i.e. residuary 
powers available to the Union Gover nment under the Constitution. Since 
both the Central Government and State Governments are presently 
involved in warehousing, the Committee desire that for the sake of clarity, 
the subject “Warehousing” be included in the Concurrent List and the 
Constitution of India be amended accordingly. 
  The Ministry has contended that the proposed legislation will not 
interfere in the working of the var ious State Acts as the warehouses 
operating under the State Acts which are not interested to issue negotiable 
warehouse receipts will continue to ope rate as such under the State Acts.  
The Committee, however, note that this intention of the Government is not 
properly reflected anywhere in the Bill,  giving rise to speculation in the 
minds of State Governments that the s ystem presently working in different 

 
States will be adversel y affected by the proposed Bill. The Committee 
recommend that suitable provisions should be made in the Bill clearly 
stating that Warehouses which do not propose to issue negotiable 
warehousing receipt need not apply for any registration under the 
proposed Bill and they can continue to work under their respective State  
 
-16- 
laws. Most of the States desired during their evidence before the 
Committee that if warehouse receipt is made negotiable that will greatly  
help warehousing business.  But so far as other matters are concerned, 
they were satisfied with the present system working in  their States and 
they did not desire any interferen ce from the Central Government. The 
Committee, therefore, feel that it w ould be a better preposition if a model 
Act is framed as chalked out by the Union Government and implementation 
thereof is left to the respective State Governments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
-17- 
1.31 The Committee note that the basic ai m of the present Bill is stated to 
provide higher returns to farmers and better services to consumers.  
However, there does not appear to be any provision for giving primacy to 
agricultural produce for storage in the registered warehouses issuing 
negotiable receipts. The representatives of State Governments and CII have 
also supported to keep certain percen tage of storage capacity reserved for 
agricultural produce in the warehouses. The Committee note that in 
pursuance to their suggestion to co mmission a study for ascertaining the 
economic viability of warehouses wh ere capacity is used for storing 
agricultural produce, a Committee c onstituted for the purpose, proposed 
that at least 25% storage capacity of  a warehouse should be earmarked for 
agricultural produce.    However, the Committee note that some of the 
States have expressed their opinion that  25% to 40% of space be reserved 
for agricultural sector. The Government, on the other hand, have 
recommended that 20% storage capacity of a warehouse be earmarked for 
agricultural produce. The Committee are in agreement with the views of the 
Committee set up for the purpose and desi re that at least 25% of space be 
reserved for agricultural produce.  The possibility of providing higher 
percentage of space, say 50% or more for reservation of agricultural 
produce should also be explored. 
 

 
 
 
-18- 
1.32 The Committee note that a very im portant role has been assigned to 
the accreditation agencies in the proposed Bill.  The accreditation agencies 
under Clause 5 will issue Certificate of Accreditation to any person for 
carrying on the business of warehousing issuing negotiable warehouse 
receipts.  However, the Bill does not provide any details about its 
constitution, power and working etc.  The Committee feel that being a very 
important agency assigned an important  role under the Bill, sufficient 
details about its constitution, worki ng, power and duti es etc. should be 
clearly mentioned in the Bill. The Committee further note that a large 
number of powers have been retained  by the Central Government without 
providing any specific details.  The Committee, therefore,  desire that a 
specific provision about the constitu tion, qualification for appointments, 
mode of selection, functions, terms of office and conditions of service of 
members, removal of members, workin g and the  powers to be exercised 
by various authorities under this Bill s hould be clearly specified in the Bill 
itself.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
-19- 
1.33         The Bill provides for setti ng up of accreditation agencies to issue 
certificate of accreditation to any pers on carrying on the business of warehouse 
subject to their satisfying certain terms  and conditions.  As per Bill, these 
accreditation agencies can be both priv ate and public bodies.  The Committee 
feel that instead of privat e agencies being authorized to issue the certificate, the 
State Governments can be authorized to do this work subject to certain terms and 
conditions, which can be laid down by th e Union Government.  This will give a 
sense of participation to the State Governmen ts as well as enable them to ensure 
that local and municipal laws are also  being complied with by the persons 
carrying on warehousing business. At the same time, the Committee recommend 
that wherever possible Stat e based Advisory Councils consisting of nominees of 
State Governments be constituted a nd States be consulted for warehousing 
activities within the State.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-20- 

 
 
1.34 The Committee note that various provisions of the Bill go against the spirit 
of Sales of Goods Act.  As the Bill provide for negotiable warehouse receipts, 
where goods can be sold by way of endo rsement of the warehousing receipts, it 
is very essential that the basic principle of the Sales of Goods Act is kept in mind, 
i.e.  the title of purchaser cannot be better than that of the seller.  However, in the 
Bill, it has been provided that irrespective of the title of the seller, purchaser will 
get valid title if he has obtained receipt for valid consideration (clause 15, 16, 17 & 
18).  The Committee feel that this may give rise to criminal activities where a 
holder of the receipt may be forced by unscrupulous elements to part with the 
negotiable warehouse receipt under duress and that receipt may be endorsed to a 
purchaser for a valid consideration.  Thi s will leave the original holder of the 
receipt with no legal remedy.  The Committee desire that the Bill should be 
suitably amended. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-21- 
CHAPTER II 

 
REGULATION OF WAREHOUSING BUSINESS 
Clause 3: Requirement of registration for warehouses issuing negotiable                
warehouse receipt 
 2.1 Clause 3(1) stipulates as under:- 
“No person shall commence or carry on the warehousing business unless he 
has obtained a registration ce rtificate in respect of th e concerned warehouse or 
warehouses granted by the Authority under this Act: 
Provided that a person carrying on the warehouses business immediately 
before the commencement of this Act shall be allowed to carry on such business, 
in case he has made an application for registration within thirty days from the 
date of such commencement. 
Explanation.—for the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that a 
warehouse registered under this Act shall also be eligible to issue non-negotiable 
warehouse receipts”. 
2.2 Govt. of UP have stated that there is provision in the clause 3 (I) of the Bill 
in Question that no person can start or operate any 'Warehousing Business' until 
he has acquired a Register ed Certificate (license)  regarding Warehouse or 
Warehouses from the 'Authority' to be 'constituted under this Act or an 
empowered agency register ed by the said authority or agency (accreditation 
Agency). Under the definition of Accreditation-Agency, those agencies have been 
kept which would be registered by the 'authority' under clause-5 of the Bill, 
notwithstanding the confi guration (constitution) of the above agency. The 
Accreditation Agency will work on similar lines as the authority itself. 
2.3 The Ministry have in a reply stated that there appears to be some 
confusion in this suggestion.  Therefore, it is again clar ified that for carrying out 
the business of warehousing (for issuing negotiable warehouse receipt), all the 
warehouses would have to be registered with the proposed Warehousing 
Development and Regulatory Authority as per clause 3(1) of the proposed Bill.  
-22- 
 
2.4 Govt. of Andhra Pradesh have stated that a provision may be made that 
all the godowns I warehouses including cold storage units owne d by Agricultural 
Market Committees, Co-operative Institutions, Gram Panchayats shall be brought 

 
under the provisions of Warehousing Act, and the war ehouse receipts issued by 
the Market Committees shall be treat ed as a negotiable instrument for the 
purpose of securing bank loans from all the nationalized and scheduled banks on 
the pledge of agricultural produce. 
2.5 The Ministry have in a reply stated t hat as per clause 3(1) of the proposed 
Bill, no person shall commence or carry on the warehousing business unless he 
has obtained a registration ce rtificate in respect of th e concerned warehouse or 
warehouses granted by the Authority under this Act. Therefore, all the 
warehouses which intend to issue negotia ble warehouse receipt may get them 
registered with the Authority and come within the purview of this Act. 
 
2.6 Clause 3(2) stipulates as under:- 
“Notwithstanding anything c ontained in sub-section ( 1), the Authority may, 
subject to such regulations and guidel ines issued by it, authorise any person 
registered under clause 5 as an accredi tation agency to issue certificate of 
accreditation to any person for carrying on the business of warehousing issuing 
negotiable warehouse receipts.” 
2.7 Govt. of Delhi feels that the discretionary powers to the regulatory 
authority to impose certain terms and condit ions may lead to misuse and there is 
need to provide safeguards against such misuse of powers by the regulatory 
authority. 
2.8 The Ministry have in a reply stated that Clause 3 of Chapter II (Regulation 
of Warehouse Business) provides that no person shall commence or carry on the 
warehousing business unless he has obtained registration certificate in respect of 
concerned warehouse or warehouses grant ed by the Authority under this Act. 
This is the most important requirement proposed in the Bill and the warehouses  
 
-23- 
 
who are not interested to issue negotia ble warehouse receipt need not to be 
registered with the Authority. Thus, there are no discretionary powers to the 
Authority, which may be misused. The Government will take necessary action if it 
feels that the power of the Authority is being misused. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-24- 
2.9 The Committee note that as per Clause 3 of the Bill all persons who 
want to carry on the warehousing business issuing negotiable warehouse 
receipts shall have to obtain a Registra tion Certificate in respect of the 
concerned warehouse or warehouses granted by the authority under this 
Act.  It has been further stated in Sub Clause (ii) that the authority may 

 
authorize any person registered under Clause 5 as an Accreditation agency 
to issue certificate of accreditation to any person for carrying on the 
business of warehousing issuing Negotiable Warehouse Receipts. 
However, it has not been clearly me ntioned that warehouses not issuing 
negotiable receipt need not get themsel ves registered with the authority.  
The Committee desire that this position should be suitably clarified in the 
Bill. 
 The Committee also note that before getting themselves registered 
with the authority the persons carry ing on warehouse business shall have 
to get a certificate of accreditation from  a registered accreditation agency.  
The Committee desire that this should also be clarified that for applying for 
the registration with the authority it would be necessary to get a certificate 
from the accreditation agency. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-25- 
  Clause 5: Registration of Accreditation Agencies 
2.10 Clauses 5(1), 5(2), 5(3) & 5(4) stipulate: 
5. ( 1) “The Authority shall, from time  to time, determine the number of 
accreditation agencies as it may authorise to  issue certificate of accreditation to 
warehouses issuing negotiable warehouse receipts.” 
CII have suggested to add ‘public or priv ate’ after the words ‘accreditation 
agencies’ in clause 5(1). 

 
5(2) “Any person fulfilling the qualific ations and other requirements as may 
be prescribed and desirous of functioning  as an accreditat ion agency under this 
Act may make an application to the Auth ority seeking its registration as such 
under this Act.” 
5(3) “Every application under sub-section ( 2) shall be in such form and 
manner and shall be accom panied by such fees and security deposit as may be 
prescribed.” 
5(4) “The form in which and the terms and conditions subject to which a 
certificate of registration as an accr editation agency may be issued under this 
section shall be such as may be prescribed.”    
2.11 Govt. of Haryana has stated that  parameters/pre-qualification for 
registration of accreditation agency may be  provided in the Bill. They   have 
further stated that in Claus e-5, it has been provided that “the form in which and 
the terms & conditions subject to which a certificate of registration as an 
accreditation agency may be issued under this Clause shall be such as may be 
prescribed. It is felt that parameters /pre-qualification for registration of 
accreditation agency may be provided in  the Warehousing (Development & 
Regulation) Bill, 2005. 
2.12 The Ministry have in a reply stated t hat clause 5(4) of the Bill provides the 
form in which and the terms and conditions  subject to which a certificate of 
registration as accreditation agency may be issued shall be such as prescribed.  
      
-26- 
 
 
The format of forms and other terms and conditions including parameters/pre-
qualification for registration of an a ccreditation agency would be described under 
Rules. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-27- 
 
2.13 The Committee feel that the words “public or private” may be added 
after the words accreditation agenci es in clause 5 (1) to make the 
accreditation agencies more elaborate.  The Committee further note that 
clause 5 has been very vaguely worded without specify ing anything about 
classifications, selection, constitution and functioning of an accreditation 
agency and certifying agency. It has been simply stated that “these may be 
as prescribed.” The Committee desire that this is a very important clause of 
the Bill and various parameters need to be specified. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-28- 
CHAPTER III 
WAREHOUSEMEN  
 
3.1 Clause 7: Duties of Warehousemen 
7. (1) “In the absence of a lawful excuse , a warehouseman shall deliver the 
goods referred to in a negotiable or non-negot iable receipt, to the holder of the 
receipt on demand made by the holder and on the holder fulfilling all the following 
conditions, namely:– 
(a) satisfying the warehouse lien; 
(b) surrendering the receipt in ca se of non-negotiable receipt and 
surrendering the receipt with endorsements in case of negotiable receipt; 
and 

 
(c) acknowledging in writing the delivery of the goods.” 
7(2) “If a warehouseman refuses or fails to deliver the goods in compliance 
with the provisions of this section,  the burden of proof shall lie on the 
warehouseman to establish the existence of  a lawful excuse for the refusal or 
failure.” 
3.2 CII have suggested that the dut ies of the warehouseman should 
include the “Storage of goods as per the agreement betw een the owner of 
the goods and warehouse” 
3.3 Govt. of Delhi have suggested that the phrase ‘lawful excuse’ 
needs to be elaborated through an explan atory note to avoid unnecessary 
disputes. 
3.4 The Ministry have in a reply stated that certain bio-chemical 
changes continuously take place during storage of foodgrains including rice. 
However, these changes are very slow if the storage is scientific and moisture 
content is low.  
 
 
-29- 
 
Therefore, there is no problem of quality of stored commodities, including 
basmati rice, if these are stored in scientific manner by taking all necessary 
precautions during their storage. These issues, however, may be considered by 
the Authority while making Regulations. Clauses 7(1) and 7(2) are in order and 
there appears to be no discrepancy in these clauses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-30- 
 
3.5 The Committee note that Clau se 7(1) provides that in the 
absence of a lawful excuse, a warehouseman shall deliver the goods 
referred to in a negotiable or non-ne gotiable receipt, to the holder of 
the receipt subject to fulfilling cer tain conditions.  The Committee note 
that the term `lawful excuse’ should be properly worded and it should 
be changed to `lawful cause’ or ‘la wful reason’.  The Committee also 
observed that one of the conditions to be satisfied by the holder of the 
receipt for receiving the goods is to acknowledge in writing the 
delivery of the goods.  It seems to be contradictory in view of the fact 
that delivery of the goods is the duty assigned to the warehouseman 
and not the receipt holder.  It shoul d, therefore, be suitably amended 
as ‘acknowledge in writing the receipt of goods’.    

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-31- 
  
3.6 Clause 9: Special Powers of Warehouseman to deal with perishable and  
Hazardous goods 
 
Clause 9(1) stipulates as under:- 
9(1) “If the goods are of a perishable or hazardous natur e, or their keeping shall 
deteriorate greatly in value or dam age other property, the warehouseman may 
give notice that is reasonable and possible under the circumstances to the holder 
of the receipt for the goods, if the name and address of the holder is known to the 
warehouseman or if not known to the warehouseman, then, to the depositor, 
requiring that person to satisfy the lien on the goods and to remove them from 
the warehouse”. 
 
3.7 Govt. of UP have stated that under Se ction 9(1) of the Bi ll, first the notice 
of a reasonable duration shall be served on the depositor of goods, holder of 
receipt for the goods by Warehous eman for removal of perishable and 

 
inflammable items the keeping of wh ich may damage other goods / property 
stored in the warehouse. 
 
3.8 The Ministry have in a reply stated that issuing of notice by advertisement 
for all the lots of perishable or hazardous goods may not be economically viable 
for warehouses. It may also be time consum ing. Therefore, with the consultation 
with experts in the warehousing sector, pr ovision of sell of goods at public or 
private sale without advertisement has been incorporated in the proposed Bill.  
 
 
 
 
-32- 
3.9 Clause 9(2) stipulates as under:- 
9(2)”If the person to whom a notice under sub-section ( 1) is given fails to satisfy 
the lien and remove the goods within the time specified in the notice, the 
warehouseman may sell the goods at public or private sale without advertising.” 
3.10 CII have suggested that the warehousem an should not be allowed to sell 
the goods, not removed within specified time after giving a notice, without 
advertising. 
3.11 The Ministry have in a reply stat ed that Section 9(2)  has been found in 
order and for perishable commodity and small lot, warehouseman may sell the 
goods at public or private sa le without advertising.  It is not against the natural 
justice and not violating any provision c ontained in Section 45  to 64(9) of the 
Sale of Goods Act, 1930, which defines the Rights of Unpaid  Seller Against the 
Goods. This is as per prevalent practices. 
3.12 Govt. of UP have stated that Under  clause 9(2), the warehouseman has 
been empowered to sell said goods at public or private sale without advertising in 
case the goods are not removed within ti me specified in the notice, In such 
cases, there is a very possibility of adopting foul means if proper advertisement is 
not issued. 

 
3.13 The Ministry have in a reply stated that issuing of notice by advertisement 
for all the lots of perishable or hazardous goods may not be economically viable 
for warehouses. It may also be time consum ing. Therefore, with the consultation 
with experts in the warehousing sector, provision to sell goods at public or private 
sale without advertisement has been incorporated in the proposed Bill.  
3.14 Clause 9(3) stipulates as under:- 
9(3) “The notice referred to in sub-section ( 1) may be given by sending it by 
electronic mail, speed post or registered post addressed to the person to whom it 
is to be given at the last known addre ss of the person and the notice is deemed 
to be given on the third day of the mailing.” 
3.15 Govt. of UP have apprehended that the time period seems to be very 
short because the warehouse receipt is negotiable and hence, the possibility of  
-33- 
 
more time required in communicating the information to its 'holder' cannot be 
ruled out.  
3.16 The Ministry have in a reply st ated that Section 9(3) has been re-
examined and since 3 days time may not be sufficient for receiving a notice by 
the registered post, the phras e “registered post” may be deleted from the draft 
Bill.   
3.17 Clauses 9(4) & 9(5) stipulate as under:- 
9(4) “If the warehouseman after a reasonable effort is unable to sell the 
goods, the warehouseman may dispose of them such other manner as he deems 
proper and shall incur no liability for that reason.” 
9(5)” From the proceeds of any sale or disposal of goods made under this 
section, the warehouseman shall, after satisfying his lien, hold the balance in 
trust for the holder of the receipt.” 
3.18 CII have suggested that the term “R easonable effort for selling goods not 
removed within specified time” needs more clarity. 
3.19 The Ministry have in a reply stated t hat Sub clause 9(2) which provide that 
if the person to whom a notice under sub-section ( 1) is given fails to satisfy the 
lien and remove the goods within the ti me specified in the notice, the 

 
warehouseman may sell the goods at public  or private sale without advertising. 
This has been further clarified under section 9(4).   
3.20 Clause 9(6) stipulates as under:- 
9(6) “No notice shall be necessary if the warehouseman is satisfied on 
reasonable grounds that in the circumstances of the case giving such notices is 
likely to cause further prejudice to the goods.” 
3.21 CII have suggested that notice to the owner of goods must be mandatory 
under all circumstances before disposing goods 
3.22 The Ministry have in a reply stated that there is a provision of serving 
notice under section 9(1) for deteriorating, perishable or hazardous goods.  
-34- 
 
However, section 9(6) provides that in case such notice may cause further 
prejudice to the goods, notice may not be necessary. 
3.23 Clause 9(7) stipulates as under:- 
9(7) “If, at any time, the warehouseman is satisfied that the quality of any fungible 
goods or any part thereof has so deteriorated or is so deteriorating that it is 
necessary to do so, to protect the holder s of negotiable warehouse receipts from 
loss and time is not sufficient for him to seek their instructions, he may, subject to 
the regulations in this behalf, dispose o ff the goods or any part thereof and keep 
the sale proceeds after satisfying his lien in an escrow account for the benefit of 
the holders of receipts.” 
3.24  CII have suggested that the war ehouseman cannot, without consent from 
the owner or a certifying agency, determi ne that the quality of the goods stored 
have deteriorated in quality 
3.25 The Ministry have in a reply stated that in such cases warehouseman may 
seek advise from the quality assaying agencies for which regulations may be 
framed by the Authority. 
3.26 Clause 9(8) stipulates as under:- 
9(8) “In case of disposal of fungible goods under sub-section ( 7), the 
warehouseman shall, at the choice of t he holder of the receipt, either pay the 

 
sale proceeds or deliver equivalent goods of the same grade, quality and quantity 
to him.” 
3.27 Govt. of Haryana have suggested that further, the provisions of Section 
9(8) may be restricted to payment of sa le proceeds to the hol der of the receipt 
only. 
3.28 The Ministry have in a reply stated that Section 9(8) of the proposed Bill 
provides that in case of disposal of fungible goods, the holder may get either the 
sale proceeds or equivalent goods of same grade, quality and quantity. This 
matter was discussed with experts from warehouse sector and it was the  
 
-35- 
general opinion that holder should also be given option to get the equivalent 
goods in this case (goods of same grade, quantity and quality).  
 
3.29 It is clarified that the proposed  Bill would cover both Government 
warehouses as well as private warehouses. To follow the various code of  
practices of scientific storage of differ ent commodities is the general duty of 
every warehouseman. Due to va riation in moisture of f oodgrains at the time of 
deposit and issue, sometimes there is gain as in case of wheat or loss due to 
driage as in case of paddy and rice. Ther e are certain laid down norms in this 
regard, which are being followed by t he storing agencies. The issue will be 
addressed by the Authority. 
3.30 CII have opined that clause 9(7) & 9(8)  are contradicting since it would not 
be practically possible for the warehousem an to satisfy the receipt holder on 
quality and grade when holder of the receipt ask fo r equivalent goods of same 
grade, quality and quantity, after the material is sold. They have also 
apprehended that this wi ll lead to numerous disputes and litigations. What is the 
reaction of the Ministry thereto? 
3.31 The Ministry have in a reply stat ed that Sub clause 9(7) and 9(8) are 
complimentary to each other and not contradictory as mentioned by CII. In sub 
clause 9(7), there is a provision for dispos ing off the goods or any part thereof in 
case the same is deteriorating and ther e is no sufficient time to seek the 
instructions from the holder of the receipt. Clause 9(8) provides that in case of 
disposal of fungible goods under sub cl ause 9(7), the holder may get the sale 

 
proceeds or equivalent goods of the same  grade, quality and quantity from the 
warehouseman. In case the receipt holder  is not satisfied with the quality and 
grade of the goods, he may get it tested from the quality certifying agency for 
which regulations may be framed by Authority. 
3.32 Clause 9(3) has been re-examined and since 3 days time may not be 
sufficient for receiving a notice by the registered post, the phrase “registered 
post” may be deleted from the draft Bill.  Clause 9(2) has been found in order and  
 
-36- 
for perishable commodity and small lot; warehouseman may sell the goods at 
public or private sale without  advertising.  It is not agai nst the natural justice and 
not violating any provision contained in Section 45 to 64( 9) of the Sale of Goods 
Act, 1930, which defines the Rights of Un paid Seller against the Goods. This is 
as per prevalent practices. Clauses 9( 4)(5)(6) (7) and (8) have been found to be 
in order. The mixing of defective f ungible goods with good qua lity goods would 
amount to unfair trade practices and action would be taken by the Authority in 
such cases. 
 
3.33 On being asked whether the Ministry was satisfied with the special powers 
of warehouseman to deal with perishabl e and hazardous good as it has been 
apprehended that this power can be misused,  what safeguards the Ministry have 
to prevent the misuse, the Ministry have in  a reply stated that the special powers 
of the warehouseman to deal with the perishable and hazardous goods have 
been drafted carefully keeping in view the interest of the warehouseman as well 
as that of depositor.  Warehousing Development and Regul atory Authority 
proposed in the legislation (B ill) would ensure that this  power is not misused by 
warehouseman and is exercised judiciously. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-37- 
 
3.34 The Committee note that Clause 9 provides for special powers to 
warehouseman to deal with perishable  or hazardous goods.  This clause 
requires the warehouseman to give not ice to the holder of the receipt 
requiring that person to satisfy the lien on the goods and to remove them 
from the warehouse.  It provides that notice would be given to the holder if 
his name and address is known to the warehouseman or if not known then 
to the depositor. The Committee feel th at it should be made obligatory on 
the part of the endorser and endorsee to  intimate the address of the holder 
of the receipt to the warehouseman after every endorsement of the receipt 
so that the notice can be given to the proper person.  This clause also lays 
down the method by which the notice can be sent.  The Committee suggest 
that this notice may be sent telephonically  and telegraphically also.    This 
clause should be amended suitably.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
-38- 
3.35 Clause 10: Lien of Warehouseman on Goods 
 
Clause10(5), 10(6),10(7) & 10(10) stipulate as under: 
10(5) “If the goods on which a lien exists  were not deposited by the owner or by 
his authority but by a person entrusted by  the owner or his authority with the 
possession of the goods, the warehouseman shall, within two months after the 
date of deposit, give notice of the lien to  the owner of the goods on which a lien 
exists or to the person owning the right of property of the goods.” 
10(6) “The notice under sub-section (5) sha ll be in writing an d contain all the 
details about the goods, the location of  warehouses, date of deposit, name of 
depositor and a statement of  lien claimed by the warehouseman for the goods 
stored in the warehouse. 
10(7)” If a warehouseman fails to issue the notice required by sub-section (5), his 
lien, as against the person to whom he has failed to issue notice shall become 
void from the expiration of a period of tw o months from the date of deposit of the 
goods.” 
10(10) “The notice under sub-section (7) shall – 
(a) contain all the details about the goods, the location of warehouse, date of 
deposit, the name of depositor and a st atement of lien claimed by the 
warehouseman for the goods stored in the warehouse; and 
(b) state that unless the charges are paid within the stipulated time 
mentioned in the notice, t he goods shall be advertised for sale and sold by 
public auction at a time and place as specified in the notice.” 
3.36 CII have sought clarific ation on operative part [cl ause 10(5)] as to how 
would the warehouseman verify  whether it is the owner  who is depositing goods 
or somebody else? 

 
3.37 The Ministry have in a reply stated that this issue will be addressed by the 
Authority 
 
-39- 
3.38 The Committee note that as per cl ause 10(5) of the Bill if the goods 
on which a lien exists were not deposited  by the owner or by his authority 
but by a person entrusted by the owner or his authority with the 
possession of the goods, the warehouseman shall, within two months after 
the date of deposit, give notice of th e lien to the owner of the goods on 
which a lien exists or to the person owning the right of property of the 
goods. The Committee note the apprehen sion of CII as to how would the 
warehouseman verify whether it is th e owner who is depositing the goods 
or somebody else. The Committee also note the contention of the 
Government that this issue would be  addressed by the Authority. The 
Committee feel that the duty imposed on warehouseman to give notice of 
his lien to the actual owner where the goods have been deposited by a 
person entrusted by the owner or his authority. The notice, shall be in 
writing and contain all details about  the goods and location of warehouses 
etc. to the owner. The Committee fail to understand the idea behind putting 
an owner’s obligation on the warehou seman to inform the owner of the 
goods about the lien of the warehouseman. In fact this duty should be cast 
on the person who has deposited the goods with the warehouseman. The 
warehouseman has always a lien on the goods stored in his warehouse to 
recover his lawful storage and hand ling charges and w hosoever deposited 
the goods or is the holder of the ne gotiable warehouse receipt shall be 
responsible to clear the lien of wa rehouseman. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that sub clauses 5, 6, 7 and 10 of clause 10 should be amended 
accordingly. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
-40- 
 
3.39 Clause 10(11) stipulates as under:- 
10(11) "If the charges are not paid on or before the day menti oned in the notice, 
then, unless any other mode of sale is spec ified by the Authorit y, by regulations 
an advertisement of the sa le shall be published in a leading newspaper having 
circulation in the locality where the sale  is to be held and the sale shall be held 
not less than fourteen days from the date of first publication of the advertisement. 
3.40 CII have suggested that the adverti sement for auction needs to be 
published in at least one newspaper in the place where the owner of the goods is 
located 
3.41 The Ministry have in a reply st ated that Section 10(11) has been re- 
examined and appears to be appropriate since it is not necessary to publish the 
notice for sale of advertisement in the news paper in the place where the owner 
of the goods is located. The publicati on is proposed in a leading news paper 
having circulation in the locality, where the sale is to be held.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-41- 

 
3.42 The Committee note that as pe r clause 10(11) of the Bill if the 
charges are not paid on or before th e day mentioned in the notice, then, 
unless any other mode of sale is specified  by the Authority, by regulations 
an advertisement of the sale shall be published in a leading newspaper 
having circulation in the lo cality where the sale is to be held and the sale 
shall be held not less than fourteen days from the date of first publication 
of the advertisement. The Committee f eel that advertisement for auction 
needs to be published in at least one  leading  newspaper in the place 
where the owner of the goods is located and recommend that the 
advertisement for auction may be published in a leading newspaper where 
the owner of the goods is located so that he may get to  know about the 
sale as there are chances that he ma y not have received the notice of the 
sale due to some reasons. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-42- 
CHAPTER 1V 
WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS 

 
 4.1 Clause 11: Warehouse Receipts 
11 (1) A warehouse receipt, which may be ei ther in writing or in electronic 
form, shall be a document of title to goods in  writing if it contains all the following 
particulars, namely:– 
(a) receipt number;  
(b) warehouse registration number and date up to which it is valid; 
(c) name of the warehouse and its complete postal address; 
(d) name and address of the person by  whom or on whose behalf the 
goods are deposited; 
(e) date of issue of the warehouse receipt; 
(f) statement that the goods received shall be delivered to the holder 
thereof, or that the goods shall be delivered to the order of a named person;” 
4.2 Clause 11(1) (g) stipulates as under:- 
“rates of storage charges and handling charges” 
4.3 On being asked that the proposed Bi ll provides for 'handling charges" and 
“storage charges” to be levied then what is the necessity of deciding the handling 
charges and storage charges at the central level. The handling charge differs 
from godown to godown then why the h andling charges be decided at Central 
level and why it cannot be left to the States to levy the handling charges, the 
Ministry in their post evidence reply st ated that the storage and handling charges 
would not be decided at  central level by the Authority, As per Section 11(1)(g) of 
the proposed Bill, the rates of storage charges and handling charges are required 
to be mentioned on the warehouse receipt by the warehouseman (whosoever 
decides these charges).    
4.4 Government of Andhra Pradesh as we ll as Government of Karnataka have 
suggested for deleting ‘and han dling charges’ from sect ion 11(g) – ‘from storage 
and handling charges’ as according to th em, storage charges are by and large 
uniform throughout the State, whereas handling charges differ from warehouse to 
warehouse. 
-43- 
4.5 The Ministry have in a reply stated  that Legislative Department has opined 
that storage and handling charges should be mentioned in the format of the 
Warehouse Receipt. If the handling charges differ from warehouse to warehouse, 
the actual will be mentioned on the receipt. The prevailing storage charges and 
handling charges at the time of issue of the negotiable warehouse receipt may be 

 
mentioned by the warehouseman. There s hould not be any problem in writing 
these charges on the warehouse receipt.    
4.6 Govt. of Maharashtra have stated t hat as per Clause 11(1)(g), it is 
proposed that storage charges and hand ling charges to be written on the 
Warehouse Receipt, this cannot be practic able.  Presently only storage charges 
are written on Warehouse Receipt. For recording endorsement on Warehouse 
Receipt the TEXT may be fixed. 
4.7 The Ministry have in a reply st ated that the prevailing storage and 
handling charges would be indicated on the warehouse receipt as per the 
requirement of Section 11(1)(g) and ther e should not be any problem in this 
regard. For recording the endor sement of the receipt for fixing the text, the issue 
may be addressed by the Authority.  
4.8 Clause 11(1) (h) stipulates as under:- 
“description of the goods or of the pa ckages containing them with particulars 
of quantity and quality or  grade” 
4.9 CII have suggested that it would be difficult for the warehouseman to 
ascertain the quality of goods and even if the warehouseman try to ascertain the 
same, it will attract dispute between the warehouseman and the depositor on 
non-agreement of the grade designated by the warehouseman 
4.10 The Ministry have in a reply stated that in such cases warehouseman may 
seek advise from the quality assaying age ncies for which regulations may be 
framed by the Authority. As  per provisions contained in  Section 11(1) (h) of the 
proposed Bill, description of goods or of  the package containing them with 
particulars of quantity and quality or grade would be mentioned. In case of tinned  
 
-44- 
items, the quantity, qualit y and grade as mentioned on the packing would be 
mentioned on the warehouse receipt. Besides, the agricultural produce would be  
stored in scientific manner by adopting proper of code of practices for the storage 
of different commodities. This will result better quality for consumers. 
4.11 In reply to a query of the Committ ee as to what factors weighed in 
proposing Negotiable Warehouse System  for all commodities including 
agricultural commodities as this seem s to negate the very purpose of the 

 
recommendation made by the Committee  which went into the agriculture credit 
delivery system in rural areas and re commended that warehouses Receipt be 
made negotiable,  the Ministry  in a written reply stat ed that the recommendation 
was made to introduce negot iable receipt system for all commodities including 
agricultural commodities because warehous es allowing this facility to only 
agricultural commodities may not be economically viable and their storage 
capacity may not be utilised to  optimum level round the year. The multiplicity of 
law should be avoided. Moreover, in other countries like USA, there is only one 
Warehousing Law for all commodities. 
4.12 Clause 11(1) (i) stipulates as under:- 
“market value of the goods at the time of deposit” 
4.13 Govt. of Delhi has suggested that some documentary evidence may be 
shown while declaring the market value of the goods at the time of deposit. 
4.14 Deptt. of Food and Public  Distribution have stated that now a days price of 
agricultural and other commodities are displayed every day by APMC, 
Commodity Exchanges, newsp apers, etc. Warehouseman may take the market 
value of the goods at the time of deposit from these sources. 
4.15 CII have apprehended  that it would be difficult for the warehouseman to 
ascertain the correctness of goods declar ed by the depositor and suggested that  
some documented procedure needs to be def ined on the issue like insurance 
policy[clause. 
4.16 The Ministry have in a reply stated t hat have stated that this issue will be 
addressed by the Authority. 
-45- 
 
4.17 Clause 11(1) (k) stipulates as under:- 
 
“name of the insurance company indemnify ing  for fire, flood, theft, burglary, 
misappropriation, riots, strikes or terrorism” 
4.18 CII have suggested that responsibilit y for insurance of the goods should 
also be defined in the Act and it should lie with the depositor of the goods 

 
4.19 Govt. of Andhra Pradesh have suggested for mentioning rate of insurance 
charges in the warehouse receipt since insurance coverage is  must to take care 
of all possible risks arising out of fire, theft etc.  
4.20 The Ministry have in a reply stated that rates of insurance charges differ 
from commodity to commodity and also go on changing. It has been decided that 
a new sub section 11(4) may be added as follows: 
Sub section 11(4): “ Authority may, with the pr ior approval of Central 
Government, add, delete or modify any  particulars as specified in sub 
section (1) above for all or any commodity or class of commodities or for any 
class of warehouses.”  
 
Therefore, the Authority may mention any other par ticulars including storage 
charges on the warehouse receipt if it feels necessary.          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-46- 
 
4.21 The Committee note that clause 11( 1) enumerates various particulars 
which should appear on a negotiable warehouse receipt to make it a valid 
document.  The Committee desire that  the following two particulars should 
also be compulsorily added on the Negotiable Warehouse Receipt :- 
(i) the fact that the Warehouseman holds the lien on the 
goods deposited for his storage and handling charges. 

 
(ii) that the receipt would be va lid only till the date of expiry 
of declared shelf life of the goods for which it is issued. 
This will go a long way to protect the interest of 
Negotiable Warehouse Receipt holder.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-47- 
4.22 The Committee note that Clause 11 (1) (k) stipulates the name of the 
insurance company indemnifying fo r fire, flood, theft, burglary, 
misappropriation, riot, strikes or terrorism.  The Ministry has now proposed 
to add the following words:- 
Sub clause (11) (4) “authority may, with the prior approval of the 
Central Government, add, delete or m odify any particulars as specified in 
section 1 above for all or any commodi ty or class of commodities or for 
any class of warehouses”. 

 
The Committee do not agree with th e amendment being proposed by 
the Ministry in sub-clause 11(1) of the Bill. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-48- 
4.23 Clause 15: Warranties on Negotiation of Warehouse Receipt 
15. “A person who, for valuable c onsideration, negotiates a negotiable 
warehouse receipt by endorsement and de livery, including one who assigns 
for valuable consideration, a claim se cured by a receipt, unless a contrary 
intention appears, warrants the following: – 
(a) that the receipt is genuine; 
(b) that the person has a legal right to negotiate or transfer it; 
(c) that the person has no knowledge of any fact that would impair the 
validity of the receipt; 
(d) that the person has a right to transfer the title to the goods; and  
(e) that the goods are merchantable or fit for a particular purpose when 
those warranties would have been implied,  if the contract of the parties had 
been to transfer without a receipt the goods represented by it.” 

 
4.24 Clauses 16 17 & 18 stipulate: 
16. “The endorsement of a receipt does not make the endorser liable for any 
failure on the part of the warehouseman or  previous endorsers of the receipt 
to fulfill their respective obligations.” 
17. “The validity of the negotiation of a re ceipt is not impaired by the fact 
that– 
(a) the negotiation was a breach of  duty on the part of the person 
making the negotiation; or 
(b) the owner of the receipt was induc ed by fraud, mistake or duress to 
entrust the possession or custody of the receipt to that person, if the person 
to whom the receipt was negotiated or  a person to whom the receipt was 
subsequently negotiated, paid value for it  without knowing of the breach of 
duty, fraud, mistake or duress.” 
 18. “If a person having sold, mortgaged or pledged goods that are in the 
custody of a warehouseman and for which a negotiable receipt has been 
issued, continues in possession of the negotiable receipt, the subsequent  
 
-49- 
negotiation of it by that person under any sale or ot her disposition of the 
goods to any person receiving the rece ipt in good faith, for valuable 
consideration and without notice of t he previous sale, mortgage or pledge, 
has the same effect as if a previ ous purchaser, mortgagee or pledgee of the 
goods, as the case may be, had expr essly authorised the subsequent 
negotiation.” 
4.25 Clause 19: Stoppage of Delivery of Goods in certain cases 
19.” When a negotiable warehouse receipt has been issued in respect of any 
goods, no lien or right of stoppage of the seller in transit shall defeat the rights of 
a purchaser for value in good faith to whom the re ceipt has been negotiated, 
whether the negotiation is before or afte r notifying to the warehouseman who 
issued the receipt of the claim of the seller  to a lien or right of stoppage in transit, 

 
and the warehouseman shall not deliver the goods to an unpaid seller unless the 
receipt is first surrendered for cancellation.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-50- 
4.26 Clause 19 provides for stoppage of delivery of goods in certain 
cases.  However, it also says  that lien or right of stoppage of the seller in 
transit shall not affect the rights of purchaser for value in good faith to 
whom the receipt has been negotiate d.  It further provides that 
Warehouseman shall not deliver the goods to an unpaid seller unless the 
receipt is first surrendered for cancella tion.  The Committee feels that this 
clause has been very loos ely worded and conveys contradictory meanings 
and recommend that this should be suitably amended.  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-51- 
CHAPTER V 
THE WAREHOUSING DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATORY AUTHORITY 
5.1 Clause 25: Composition of Authority 
25. “The Authority shall consist of – 
(a) a Chairperson; and 
(b) not more than two other members, 
to be appointed by the Central Governm ent from amongst persons of ability, 
integrity and standing who have wide knowledge and experience in inventory 
management, insurance, preservation, quality control, banking, finance, 
economics, law or administration.” 
5.2 Confederation of I ndian Industry (CII) have suggested that the 
Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority (WDRA) may consist 
of five members including the chairper son having expertise in the field of 

 
management, insurance, preservations, quality control, banking, finance and 
economic, law and administration as a ccording to them three members may 
not be adequate to deal with various subjects. 
5.3 On being asked why CII wanted five Members in the Authority, the 
representatives of CII during evidence stated as under: 
 
“ we are getting into a sector which has been unregulated till now. This 
sector does not only include only warehousing, there are a lot of 
players in this to make it a real vi brant sector for which representatives 
of financial institutions, representat ives of forward market commission, 
representatives of spot exchanges like multi-commodities exchange is 
contemplated, floating its own spot exchange also which is 
unprecedented in the world. So, if these representatives are there, then 
the Authority can take always a very comprehensive view.    
Secondly, like we have requested that all commodi ties stored in 
accredited warehouses should be insured.  There will be some cost and 
there will be new angle to it. So, insurance companies, their 
representatives; may be representatives from the Insurance Regulatory 
Authority should come in.  Those will really synergise the entire affairs.” 
 
 
-52- 
5.4 Govt. of Delhi have suggested that the number of  other members 
besides the Chairperson may be three instead of two to facilitate decision 
making by majority of votes and for completion of quorum. 
5.5 Govt. of Maharashtra have sugge sted the Composition of Authority 
may have members of Central Warehousing Corporation/State 
Government/State Warehousing Corporation.  They will have to be given 
representation in Warehousing Advisory Committee. 
5.6 The Ministry have in a reply stated that Chair person and members 
of would be amongst persons of ability, integrity and understanding who 
have wide knowledge and ex perience in inventory management, insurance, 
preservation, quality control, banking, finance, ec onomics, law or 
administration. There seems to be no justification for giving representation to 
CWC / SWCs etc as proposed. They have further stated that In Clause 
25(b), there is a provision that ther e would not be more than two members 
(in addition to Chairman) and for regulatory body, the two members appear 
to be appropriate. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-53- 
 
5.7 Clause 25 deals with the composition of Warehousing 
Development and Regulation Authority  stating that the members of the 
Authority shall be from amongst pe rsons of ability, integrity and 
standing who have wide knowledge and experience in inventory 
management, insurance, preservation, quality control, banking, 
finance, economics, law or administration.  Since agricultural produce 
is likely to be the major component  of Warehousing business, at least 
one person well versed in agricultur al field must be included in the 
Warehousing Development and Regulat ion Authority.  The Committee 
desires that this clause may be amended suitably. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-54- 
 
5.8 Clause 26: Tenure of office of Chairperson and other persons 
26(1) “The Chairperson and every other me mber shall hold office for a term 
not exceeding five years fr om the date on which he enters upon his office and 
shall be eligible for re-appointment: 
Provided that no person shall hold offi ce as the Chairperson or other 
member after he has attained the age of sixty-five years.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-55- 
 
5.9 The Committee note that as per the provisions of the Bill, no person 
shall hold office of Chairperson or other member of the Authority after 
he/she attains the age of sixty five years. The Committee desires that the 
age limit for holding such office be redu ced to 60 years so as to make the 
Authority more youthful and dynamic. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-56- 
5.10 Clause 31 (2): Meetings of Authority 
31(2) “The Chairperson, or if, for any  reason he is unable to attend a 
meeting of the Authority,  any other member chosen by the members present 
from amongst themselves at the meeting shall preside at the meeting.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-57- 
5.11 The Committee note that the Warehousing Development and 
Regulatory Authority shall consist of three Members including the 
Chairperson.  It has been provided th at in the absence of the Chairperson, 
any other member chosen by the Members present from amongst 
themselves shall preside over the meeting. The Committee note that it 
would be difficult to decide the case by majority as there are only two 
members of the Authority.  And in case only one member is present, this 
provision will not be required at al l since the Member present will be 
presiding over the meeting.   The Committee desire th at this clause may be 
amended suitably by indicating th at in case where two members are 
present, the senior member should preside the meeting  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
  
 
 
 
 -58- 
 
CHAPTER VI 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF AUTHORITY 
6.1 Clause 35: Powers and Functions of Authority  
Clause 35(2) stipulates as under: 
35(2) “ the powers and functions of the Au thority shall include the following, 
namely:  
(a) to issue to the applicants fulfilling the requirements for 
warehousemen a certificate of registration in respect of warehouses, or 
renew, modify, withdraw, suspend or cancel such registration; 
(b) to regulate the registration and functioning of accreditation agency, 
renew, modify, withdraw, suspend or canc el such registration, and specify 
the code of conduct for officials of a ccreditation agencies for accreditation of 
the warehouses; 
(c) to specify the qualifications, code of conduct and practical training for 
warehousemen and staff engaged in warehousing business; 
(d) to regulate the process of pledge, creation of charges and 
enforcement thereof in respect of goods deposited with the warehouse; 
(e) to promote efficiency in conduct of warehouse business; 
(f) to make regulations laying down the standards for approval of 
certifying agencies for grading of goods; 
(g) to promote professional or ganisations connected with the 
warehousing business; 
(h) to determine the rate of, and levy,  the fees and other charges for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act; 

 
(i) to call for information from, underta king inspection of, conducting 
enquiries and investigations including audit of the warehouses, accreditation 
agencies and other organisations connected with the warehousing business; 
-59- 
(j) to regulate the rates, advantages, te rms and conditions  that may be 
offered by warehousemen in respect of warehousing business; 
(k) to specify, by regulations, th e form and manner in which books of 
account shall be maintained and statement of accounts shall be rendered by 
warehousemen; 
(l) to maintain a panel of arbitrator s and to nominate arbitrators from 
such panel in disputes between wa rehouses and warehouse receipt 
holders;” 
(m) to regulate and develop electronic system of holding and transfer of 
credit balances of fungible goods deposited in the warehouses; 
(n) to exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as 
may be prescribed.” 
6.2 On being asked about the reas ons behind the suggestion that the 
composition of arbitrator s to settle disputes between warehouse and warehouse 
receipt holders may be provided in the Bill . It was also asked what according to 
CII should be the composition of arbi trators to settle disputes between 
warehouse and warehouse receipt holder and what  is the harm if it is provided in 
the Rules, the representatives of CII during evidence stated as follows:  
“arbitrator should be one person who has no vested interest either in the 
warehousing sector or in the people who are using that business.  That is 
a very important thing.  Arbitrat or should have a go od legal background, 
should have sufficiently enough long experi ence in arbitration of one kind 
or the other. We are entering into  an area where there is a lot of 
subjectivity today. It will need a lot of patience and a lot of effort to bring 
this to a very good objective situation-  the way we see it in the western 
side where warehouse receipts and wa rehousing are one of the most 
preferred activities in the agricul tural produce area. So, our humble 
submission is that the persons w ho are being appointed as arbitrators 
should be persons of eminence, impe ccable integrity and high quality of 
mind.” 
 
6.3 The representative of NCDEX also during evidence submitted as follows:- 

 
“The next submission we have made is regarding secti on 35(L) of the proposed 
Bill which deals with arbitration.  Today , the arbitration pr ovision covers only 
warehouses and the depositories.  Our submission is that it should also cover  
-60- 
banks, grading agencies and de positories as well as co llateral managers.  The 
provision under section 35 (L) should be enla rged to give this facility to other 
participants also in the value chain.The last  thing is about natural loss.  There is 
a provision about it in Bombay Warehousing Act and Tamil Nadu Warehousing 
Act that the gains because of moisture absorption do not go to  the warehouses.  
Our submission is that losses should also  not be towards the warehouses.  The 
regulator may be permitted to stipulate comm odity-wise from time to time what is 
the maximum natural loss permitted in every commodity. 
6.4 CII have suggested that ther e should be a provision of 
classification/grading warehouse based on quality of services (star rating) and 
Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority (WDRA) should fix the 
rates/levy/fee accordingly. 
6.5 Govt. of Delhi have suggested that authority should cons ider subsidized 
rates for storage of essential commodities while regulating the rates. 
6.6 The Ministry have in a reply stated that in the Bill [Section 35(2)(j)], it has 
been provided that the Authority would regu late the rates, the advantages, terms 
and conditions that may be offered by warehouseman in respect of warehousing 
business. In case, the Authority feels to subsidize the storage charges for 
essential commodities, it may consider and make the regulation accordingly.  
6.7 Govt. of Maharashtra have pointed out that the Bill does not speak about 
stock against ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. The procedure for recovery on par with 
warehouse receipt may be provided in the Bill.  The provisions may also be made 
for issuing acknowledgement to depositor on their demand. 
6.8 The Ministry have in a reply stated that there is no provision of keeping 
stocks against acknowledgement in the pr oposed legislation. On deposit of the 
goods in the warehouse, a printed negotiable warehouse receipt would be issued 
by the warehouseman and, therefore, provision for issuing acknowledge to 
depositors on their demand has not been made in the Bill. However, this issue  
 

 
 
-61- 
will be taken care by the Authority and,  if necessary, regulations may be 
formulated by the Authority. 
6.9 Govt. of Karnataka have stated that in order to pr otect the interest of the 
farmers who are willing to store their produce to get remunerative prices in future 
and to avoid distress sale, it is necessary to assure storage facilities in the 
proposed Bill. If this is not done, the farm ers would be subjected to unnecessary 
hardship by way of distress sale, which,  on the other and would seriously affect 
the economic efficiency of th e farmers. So it is desi rable to earmark certain 
percentage of storage capacity at least mi nimum 10% so that the Agricultural 
Sector would le given priority in the proposed Bill.  Hence, after section 35(2) (m) 
to insert sub clause “(n) to earmark a minimum of 10% of the space for the 
benefit for farmers at large” and to modify the existing sub clause (n) as (o). 
6.10 The Ministry have in a reply stated that this issue has been discussed with 
experts   including the members of the Core Group constituted for drafting the 
proposed Bill and it was suggested that  some percentage (10%) of storage 
capacity may be earmarked exclusively fo r the farmers.  However, Authority 
should be empowered to exempt this co ndition in cases of warehouses where 
there is no demand in this regard.   
            An enabling Clause 35(2)(o) as s uggested below may be added in 
Chapter VI of the proposed Bill:  
“to earmark 10% of the storage capacity for the benefit of farmers. The 
Authority may exempt such warehouses in  this regard in case there is no 
demand for the storage of agriculture produce by the farmers.” 
        FICCI have so ught a standard process for claiming insurance dues on 
pledged stocks. They have also suggested for inclusion of dematerialization of 
commodity balances and subsequent strengthening of the negotiability of 
dematerialized commodity balance through a linkage to the depositories Act. 
6.11 Government of Karnataka have suggested that a sub-clause (n) be 
inserted after section 35(2) (m) to earmark a minimum of 10% of the storage 
space for the benefit of farmers at large and modify the existing sub-clause (n) as 
(o). 

 
 
-62- 
6.12 Department of Food and public Distribution hav e proposed for adding a 
sub clause in Chapter VI, Powers and functions of Authority:- 
 “35 (2)(o): If any warehouseman or accr editation agency, who is required under 
this Act or any rules or regulation m ade thereunder to follow certain guidelines, 
fails to follow such guidelines, he/it shall be liable to a p enalty of upto Rupees 
fifty thousand (Rs.50,000/-)  for each failure.” 
6.13 Department of Food a nd public Distribution have proposed for adding an 
enabling clause in Chapter VI (Powers and functions of Authority):- 
“35 (2)(p): to give primacy to agricultural produce for storage in the 
registered warehouses”. 
6.14 Department of Food and Public Distribution have proposed for adding  a 
sub clause in Chapter VI (Powers and functi ons of Authority) for prescribing the 
duties and responsibilities of warehouseman as follows:- 
35 (2)(q): “To prescribe the duties and responsibilities of the 
warehouseman.” 
6.15  Govt. of Delhi have suggested for addition of clause 35 (2) (o) to develop 
and maintain an integrated information syst em about all accred ited warehouses  
They have suggested for addition of clause 35 (2) (p)     to make 
recommendation to the Central Govt. for providing finance at lower rates for 
construction of warehouses in rural areas for benefit of farmers.    
6.16 The Ministry have in a reply stated that once the warehouses are 
registered with the Authority, it will maintain a complete information about these 
warehouses. Regarding the vacant space, etc., electronic software may be 
developed by the Authority, which need not to be specified in the Bill. There is no 
provision in the Bill for providing financial assistance for the construction of 
warehouses in rural areas. Such a scheme already exists in the Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation which are being implemented through NABARD and 
NCDC.  
-63- 
 

 
6.17 The Committee note that sub clau se (j) of clause 35(2) provides for 
regulating the rates, advantages, terms and conditions etc. to be offered by 
warehousemen in respect of warehousing business.  The Committee desire 
that a specific provision be made for the essential and agricultural 
commodities to be stored at subsidized rates.  
Sub Clause (l) provides for an au thority maintaining a panel of 
arbitrators to settle disputes between warehouses and warehouse receipt 
holders.  The Committee desire that th e persons to be placed on this panel 
should have sufficient experience in the field of warehousing.  This Clause 
may be amended accordingly. 
Provision imposing penalty on wa rehouseman or accreditation 
agency for their failure to car ry out their assigned duties and 
responsibilities may be suitably added in this Clause. 
The Committee note that Sub Clause (l) of Clause 35(2) provide for 
maintaining a panel of arbitrator s for disputes between warehouses and 
warehouse receipt holders.  However, th ere are various other parties also 
which can be involved in one or the other kind of disputes amongst 
themselves  while dealing with th e warehouse business, like banks, 
grading agencies, depositories as well as collateral manager.  The 
Committee desire that dispute amon gst these parties should also be 
referred to arbitrators, mentioned in sub clause (l).  This should be suitably 
included in the Clause 35. 
 
-64- 
 

 
CHAPTER VII 
POWERS OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
 
7.1 Clause 41: Power of Centra l Government to supersede the 
Authority 
Clause 41 (1) (a) and (c) stipulate as under: 
41(1)  If, at any time, the Central Government is of the opinion– 
(a) “that, on account of circumstances bey ond the control of t he Authority, it 
is unable to discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or 
under the provisions of this Act; “or 
 (c) “that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest 
so to do, the Central Government may,  by notification and for reasons to be 
specified therein, supersede the Author ity for such period not exceeding six 
months, as may be specified in the notification and nominate a person to 
look after the functions of the Authority: 
Provided that before i ssuing any such notific ation, the Central 
Government shall give a reasonable o pportunity to the Authority to make 
representations against t he proposed supersession and shall consider the 
representation, if any, of the Authority.” 
 
 
 
 
 
-65- 
 
7.2 The Committee note that this  Clause provides the circumstances 
where Central Government can supersede the Authority.  Sub Clause (a) of 
41(1) states that if in the opinion of the Central Government, the Authority 

 
is unable to discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed under 
provisions of this Act on account of circumstances beyond the control of 
the Authority, even then, Central Government can supersede it.  The 
Committee do not agree with this procedure when the government itself 
admit that Authority is unable to disch arge its functions on account of the 
circumstances beyond its control.  The Committee feel it would be 
unjustified to supersede the Authority and this amounts to excessive 
powers in the hands of Central Go vernment.  The Committee recommend 
that this provision should be deleted.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-66- 
CHAPTER VIII 
APPEALS 
 
8.1 Clause 42: Appeals to Appellate Authority 
Clause 42(1) & (4) stipulate as under: 

 
42. (1) “Any person aggrieved by an order of the Authority made under this 
Act, or any rules or the regulations  made thereunder may prefer an appeal to 
such person or authority appointed by the Central Government (hereafter 
referred to as the Appellate Authority) within sixty days from the date of such 
order: 
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the said period 
of sixty days but not beyond a total period of ninety days if the appellant satisfies 
the Appellate Authority that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal 
within the said period.” 
42 ( 4) “An appeal filed before the Appellate Authorit y shall be heard and 
disposed of as expeditiously as possibl e and endeavour shall be made to finally 
dispose of the appeal within a period of ninety days from the date of its filing. “  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-67- 
8.2 The Committee note that clause 42  provides for appeals to Appellate 
Authority.  But the Committee note that no details have been given for 
constitution, functioning, duties and responsibilities of Appellate Authority 
anywhere in the Bill.  It has also not  been mentioned the time within which 
the Appellate Authority would be cons tituted.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that suitable specific provis ion should be made in the Bill for 

 
constitution, composition and functi oning of the Appellate Authority 
containing the details regarding the number of persons, their 
qualifications, manner of appointme nt, terms of office, terms and 
conditions of service etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-68- 
CHAPTER IX 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
9.1 Clause 43(1): Offences and Penalties 
43. (1) “Any warehouseman knowingly i ssuing a warehouse receipt without 
taking the actual physical delivery of the goods in his warehouse or a 
warehouseman or an agent or servant of  the warehouseman who issues a 
warehouse receipt without reasonably satisf ying himself that the goods for which 
such warehouse receipt is issued have ac tually been received or the number, 
weight or grade of the goo ds corresponds to the number, weight or grade 

 
specified in the warehouse receipt or t he goods are under his actual control at 
the time of issuing such warehouse re ceipt, commits an offence and shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term whic h may extend to three years or with 
fine which may extend to four times the value of the goods or with both.” 
9.2 Govt. of UP have stated that a pr ovision in respect of offence and 
punishment therefore has been made in Section 43 (I) of  the Bill according to 
which warehouseman is to be made liable for three year s of imprisonment and a 
penalty of upto four times the value of the damaged goods  or both, which is too 
much and does not seem recoverable in case such a situation arises.  
9.3 The Ministry have in a reply stated that penalty provisions under Section 
43(1) have been got re-examined by the Department of Legal Affairs and they 
have opined that these are not too harsh.  
9.4 Clause 43(4) stipulates as under: 
43 (4) “A warehouseman who fails, on su rrender of a negotiable warehouse 
receipt by the depositor or endorsee and pa yment of all his lawful charges and 
cancellation of encumbrances endorsed on the receipt, within the declared shelf-
life of the goods, as menti oned therein to deliver t he goods represented by the 
receipt commits an offence and shall be  punishable for such offence with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may 
extend to three times the value of the goods or with both.” 
-69- 
 
9.5 Govt. of UP have stated that there is  a provision under section 43(4) of the 
Bill which provides that in case a wa rehouseman fails to give delivery of the 
stored goods then he will be punished with three years of imprisonment or with a 
penalty of up to three times of the va lue of the goods or both. In case 
warehouseman fails to deliver  the goods due to the reas ons i.e. theft, natural 
calamities etc., which are beyond his contro l, then in such situation, there should 
be made an appropriate provision treating such situations as an exception. 
9.6 The Ministry have in a reply stat ed that Section 43(4) wherein penalty 
provisions are there for warehouseman who fails to deliver the goods 
represented in the warehouse receipt even after payment of all law-full charges 
has been found to be in order.  For loss of  goods due to theft and other natural 

 
calamities which are not in the cont rol of warehouseman,  the warehouseman 
would take action as per Se ction 6(2) of the proposed Bill and the holder of the 
receipt will be paid compens ation equal to the value of  goods at the time of 
deposit of the goods shall be payable by the warehouseman. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-70- 
 
9.7 Sub Clauses (1) to (3) of Clause 43 refer to warehouse receipts 
whereas Sub Clause (4) refers to negotiable warehouse receipt.  The 
Committee is of the opinion that the term `warehouse receipt’ would cover 
both negotiable as well as non-nego tiable warehouse receipts.  By 
restricting the provisions of Sub Clause (4) to negotiable warehouse 
receipt only, no provision seems to  have been made for similar 
circumstances in case of non-negotia ble warehouse receipts.  The 
Committee desire that similar provisio ns should also be made in case of 
non negotiable warehouse receipts also. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-71- 
9.8 Clause 45: Cognizance of offences by courts 
45. (1) “No court shall take cognizance of  any offence punishable under this 
Act, save on a complaint made by the Authority or by any officer authorised in 
writing in this behalf by the authority.” 
45(2) “No court inferior to that of a Me tropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.” 
9.9 Resident Commissioner of Karnataka has stated that this draft Section 45 
is against the principle of natural justice and would be liable to be struck down by 
the Courts as unlawful. How can an affected party be debarred from making a 
complaint, and the right of complaint can vest only with the Authority? What 
would happen if there is collusion by the authorit y, or some officials working in 
the Authority, along with the “warehouseman”, or there is bribery and 
suppression of facts by the Authority? Principles of nat ural justice demand that 
anybody who is affected by an injustice can always seek justice. 

 
9.10 The Ministry have in a reply stated that Section 45(1) defines that no court 
shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act, save on a 
complaint made by the Authority or by any  officer authorized in writing in this 
behalf by the authority and 45(2) specifies that no court inferior to that of 
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magi strate of the first class shall try any 
offence punishable under this Act. These have been re-examined and found to 
be in order. In section 42(1) of the Bill, there is a pr ovision of an appeal by any 
person aggrieved by an order of the Authority.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
-72- 
9.11 The Committee note that Clause 45 provides for cognizance of 
offences by court and state that no court shall take cognizance of any 
offence punishable under this Act unless a complaint is made by authority 
or by officer authorized in writing in  this behalf by the authority.  The 
Committee feel this amounts to denial of fundamental rights to the 
warehouse receipt holder by barring thei r right of seeking judicial remedy 
which is available to him under the C onstitution.  The Committee desire 
that this clause may be reviewed and modified suitably, if need be by 
stating that any party may go to the Court after exhausting available 
remedies under the Act. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-73- 
  
CHAPTER-X 
MISCELANEOUS 
 
10.1 Clause 46: Chairperson, Members,  Officers and other employees of 
Authority to be public servants 
46. “The Chairperson, members, officers and other employ ees of Authority 
shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the 
provisions of this Act, to be public se rvants within the meaning of section 21 of 
the Indian Penal Code.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-74- 
10.2 The Committee note that under cl ause 46 the chairperson, members, 
officers and other employees of Warehousing Development and Regulatory 
Authority shall be deemed, when acti ng or purporting to act in pursuance 
of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the 
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. The Committee desire that 
the members and other employees of Appellate Authority should also be 
deemed to be public servants and this clause be amended suitably 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-75- 
10.3 Clause 49: Exemption from tax on wealth and income 
49.”Notwithstanding anything contained in the Wealth Tax Act, 1957, the Income-
tax Act, 1961 or any other enactment for the time being in force relating to tax on 
wealth, income, profits or gains, the Auth ority shall not be liable to pay wealth-
tax, income-tax or any other tax in resp ect of their wealth, income, profits or 
gains derived.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-76- 
10.4 The committee note that Clause 49 provides for exemption from tax 
on wealth and income to the Authorit y. They feel that in the era of 
economic liberalization and when the mini stry of Finance is trying to widen 
its tax net it would be contrary to that spirit if exemption is given to the 
Authority from wealth and income t ax, that too for life. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that no exemption should be given to the Authority 
from wealth and income tax 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
-77- 
10.5 Clause 50: Power of Central Government to make Rules 
50. (1) The Central Government may, by no tification, make rules for carrying 
out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any or the following matters, namely:– 
(a) the form and manner in whic h an application for obtaining a 
certificate of registration for commenc ing or carrying on the business of 
warehousing issuing negot iable warehouse receipts may be made and the 
fees which shall accompany such  application under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 4; 
(b) the form in which a certificate fo r registration of warehouses may be 
issued under sub-section (3) of section 4; 
(c) The financial, managerial and ot her eligibility criteria and 
competence which an applicant for regi stration of warehouses shall satisfy 
under sub-section (4) of section 4; 
 (d) The qualification and other requi rements which a person applying 
for functioning as an accreditation agen cy shall fulfil under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 5; 
(e) the form and manner in which an a pplication for registration as an 
accreditation agency may be made and the fees which shall accompany 
such application under sub-section (3) of section 5; 
(f) the form of certific ate of registration of accreditation agency under 
sub-section (4) of section 5; 

 
(g) the salary and allowances pay able to, and the other terms and 
conditions of service of the Chair person and other members under section 
28; 
(h) such other powers that may be exercised by the Authority under 
clause (n) of sub-section (2) of section 35; 
-78- 
(i) the form and manner of maint enance of annual statement of 
accounts to be maintained by th e Authority under sub-section ( 1) of section 
38; 
(j) the form and manner in which and the time within which returns and 
statements and particulars are to be furnished by the Authority to the Central 
Government under sub-section (1) of section 39; 
(k) the form and the manner in whic h an appeal may be made to the 
Appellate Authority and t he fee which shall accompany such appeal under 
sub-section (2) of section 42; 
(l) the procedure to be followed by t he Appellate Authority in disposing 
of an appeal under sub-section (3) of section 42; 
(m) any other matter which is required to  be, or may be, prescribed, or in 
respect of which provision is to be or may be made by rules.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
-79- 
 
10.6 The Committee note that as per clause 50 the Central Government 
shall make rules for the Warehousing Development and Regulatory 
Authority. The Committee desire that similar rules may al so be framed for 
the Appellate Authority by the Central Government. 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
,    2006    DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV 
           , 1928 (Saka)      Chairman,  
       Standing Committee on Food, 
       Consumer Affa irs and Public Distribution 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
-80- 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PU BLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON 
MONDAY, THE 16TH JANUARY,  2006. 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs. in Committee Room No. 
‘53’, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Ranen Barman 
4. Shri Alakesh Das 
5.       Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar 
6.       Shri Baliram Kashyap 
7. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
8. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
9. Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
10. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri T.S. Bajwa 
12. Shri Palden Tsering Gyamtso 
13. Smt. Bimba Raikar 
14. Shri Nabam Rebia 
15. Shri Vikram Verma 
16. Shri Vijay Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director  
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION) 
 
1. Shri Vivek Mehrotra, AS & FA 
2. Shri S.K.Srivastava, Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Anju Nigam, Director 
 

 
-81- 
At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of 
Department of Food and Public Distribution to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to have briefing by them on the Warehousing (Development and 
Regulation) Bill, 2005 as introduced in Lok Sabha on 7th December, 2005.  
The representatives of the Department of Food and Public Distribution 
made a power-point presentation before the Committee. The Committee sought 
clarifications from the representatives of the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution on the Bill. The following points emerged during the deliberations of 
the Committee:- 
(i) Salient features of the Warehousing (Development 
and Regulation) Bill, 2005; 
(ii) Applicability of War ehousing (Development and 
Regulation) Bill, 2005 to non-agricultural commodities: 
the disadvantages to agricultural commodities; 
(iii) Advantages of Negotiable warehouse Receipts; 
(iv) Regulation of Warehouse Business; 
(v) Requirement for registration of warehouses and 
advantages thereof 
(vi) Basic requirements for registration of warehouses 
(vii) Functions of Warehousing Development and 
Regulatory authority 
(viii) Provisions of penalties fo r various offences under the 
Act. 
 
 
The representatives replied to the queries raised by the Members. 
 
The Chairman then thanked the witnesse s for appearing before them and 
sharing their views with the Committee.  
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept on record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 
 
 
-82- 
 

 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON 
THURSDAY, THE 15TH JUNE, 2006. 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in Committee Room  ‘C’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
  Present 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Suresh Angadi 
4. Shri Ranen Barman 
5. Shri Alakesh Das 
6.       Shri Atma Singh Gill 
7. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
8.       Shri Baliram Kashyap 
9. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
10. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
11. Shri Ajit Kumar Singh 
RAJYA SABHA 
12. Shri T.S. Bajwa 
13. Shri Shyam Benegal 
14. Shri Surendra Motilal Patel 
15. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.K.Bhandari   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF ORGANSIATIONS/STATE GOVERNMENTS 
 
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) 
 
1. Ms. Indrani Kar   Senior  Director & Head Agriculture and 
Food Processing Confederation of 
Indian Industry (CII). 
2. Shri. D.S. Chadha   Technical Advisor (CII) 
3. Shri  Ashit Kumar   Director, ITC Ltd. 
 
 
-83- 
 
 
4. Shri  Anil Rajput   Vice President, 
   Consumer Affairs, ITC Ltd. 
5. Shri  V.K. Khur ana   Regional Manager, 

 
   Mother Dairy 
6. Shri  Anil Choudhary  Managing Director & 
CEO- National Bulk Handling Corp. 
 
 
 National Commodities & Derivatives Exchange Ltd. (NCDEX) 
 
1. Shri P.H. Ravi Kumar  MD & CEO, NCDEX 
2. Shri A. Karati    Head Institutional Group, NCDEX 
3. Shri Ravinder Sachdev  Head Legal, NCDEX 
4. Shri A. Hari Prasad   MD & CEO, NCMS Ltd. 
 
GOVERNMENT OF ANDHRA PRADESH 
 
1.  Shri Bhanwar Lal, IAS  Co mmissioner of Civil Supplies and  
Ex. Office Secretary to Government 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Civil 
Supplies Department. 
 
GOVERNMENT OF KARNATAKA 
 
2. Shri A. Ramaswamy, I AS  Principal Secretary, 
Government of Karnataka., 
Department of Agricultural and 
Horticulture and Department of           
Co-operation. 
 
GOVERNMENT OF HARYANA 
 
3. Smt. Asha Sharma, IAS  Financ ial Commissioner and Principal 
Secretary to Government of Haryana  
Agriculture Department  
 
GOVERNMENT OF MAHARASHTRA 
  
4.    Dr. Shaileshkumar Sharma    Chairman & MD Maharashtra 
 Warehousing Corp. 
 
GOVERNMENT OF UTTAR PRADESH 
 
5. Shri S.K.Srivastava   Managing Director, Uttar Pradesh 
      Warehousing Corporation 

 
-84- 
At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of Confederation 
of Indian Industry (CII) to the sitting of  the Committee convened to hear their 
views on the Warehousing (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2005.  
The representatives of CII made a power-point presentation before the 
Committee. The Committee sought further clar ifications from the representatives 
of CII on the Bill. The following points emerged during the deli berations of the 
Committee:- 
(i) Consultation with CII at t he time of drafting of the Bill 
(ii)  Benefits to the farmers and consumers in  Bill 
(iii) The composition of Warehousing Development and 
Regulatory Authority and the qu alifications for the Chairman 
and Members of the Authority 
(iv)  the composition of arbitr ators to settle disputes between 
warehouse and warehouse receipt holders 
 
The Chairman thanked the representatives of CII for expressing their 
views on the Bill. The witness then wit hdrew. The representatives of NCDEX 
were then called in 
 
Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of National Commodities 
and Derivatives Exchange Ltd. (NCDEX) to the sitting of the Committee. The 
Committee sought clarifications from t he representatives of  NCDEX on the Bill. 
The following points emerged during the deliberations of the Committee:- 
(i) consultation with NCDEX at the time of drafting of the Bill 
(ii)  Benefits to  the farmers and consumers in the proposed Bill 
(iii) Permission to the regulator to stipulate commodity-wise from 
time to time the permissible   maximum natural loss in every 
commodity. 
 
Hon’ble Chairman thanked the repres entatives of NCDEX for placing 
before the Committee their views on the Bill. The witness then withdrew. 
Hon’ble Chairman then we lcomed the representativ es of various State 
Governments to the sitting of the Committee. The Committee sought  

 
-85- 
clarifications from the repr esentatives of different St ate Governments on the Bill. 
The following points emerged during the deliberations of the Committee:- 
(i) Consultation with the Stat e Governments  at the time 
of drafting of the Bill 
(ii) Centralization of powe r in the hands of Union 
Government at the expense of State Governments in 
the  Bill 
(iii) Earmarking some percent age of the storage capacity 
of each warehouse for storage of agricultural 
commodities. 
(iv) The fate of the Stat e Warehousing Acts after the 
passing of the Bill. 
(v) No mention of the ‘De velopment’ in the  Bill 
 
The Chairman thanked the representat ives of State Governments for 
appearing before them and sharing their views with the Committee.  
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept on record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
-86- 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PU BLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON 
FRIDAY, THE 16TH JUNE, 2006. 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1215 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Suresh Angadi 
4. Shri Ranen Barmans 
5. Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar 
6.       Shri Parsuram Majhi 
7. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
8.       Shri Baliram Kashyap 
9. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
10. Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri Vikram Verma 
12. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
13. Shri Shyam Benegal 
14. Shri Surendra Motilal Patel 
15. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
16. Shri Nabam Rebia 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.K.Bhandari   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
1. Shri Vivek Mehrotra, AS & FA 
2. Shri S.K.Srivastava, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri N.K.Chaubey, MD, CWC 
 
-87- 

 
At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welc omed the representatives of the 
Department of Food and Public  Distribution to the sitti ng of the Committee. The 
Committee sought clarificati ons from the representatives of the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution on the Bill. The following points emerged during the 
deliberations of the Committee:- 
(i) Consultations with State Govern ments at the time of drafting 
of the Bill- Deptt. asked to furnish a note on the matter 
(ii) The centralization of pow er in the hands of Union 
Government at the expense of State Governments proposed 
in the Bill 
(iii) The Bill i.e. Wa rehousing (Development and Regulation) Bill, 
is silent on the ‘Developm ent’ aspect and emphasizes only 
on Regulation 
(iv) Levy of handling charges by warehouses 
(v) Possibility of framing Cent ral law for uniformity and leaving 
administration thereof to the State Governments. 
 
The representatives replied to the queries raised by the Members. 
 
The Chairman then thanked the witnesse s for appearing before them and 
sharing their views with the Committee.  
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept on record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  

 
-88- 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANIDING COMMITTEE  
       ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2006-  
        2007) HELD ON FRIDAY, 29th SEPTEMBER, 2006. 
 
The Committee sat from 1130 hours to 1215 hours in Committee 
Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
  
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav     -      Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
    LOK SABHA 
2. Shri  Alakesh Das 
3. Shri  Atma Singh Gill 
4. Shri  Abdul Mannan Hossain 
5. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
6. Shri  Harikewal Prasad 
7. Shri  Munshi Ram 
8. Adv. P. Satheedevi 
9. Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
10. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Shri  T.S. Bajwa 
12. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
13. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
14. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
15. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
16. Shri Matilal Sarkar 
17. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri R.S. Kambo                         -          Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri B.S. Dahiya    - Under Secretary 
3.        Shri Jagdish Prasad                      -          Assistant Director 
 
 
 
Cond/-….. 
 
-89- 

 
 
 
2.  At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairm an welcomed the Members to the sitting 
of the Committee. The Committee then took up Draft 14 th Report on 
“Warehousing (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2005” for consideration and   
adopted the same with some minor modifications/ amendments. 
3. The Committee authorized the Chai rman to finalise the Report after 
making consequential changes arising out of factual verification of the report by 
the concerned Department and present the Report to the Hon’ble Speaker during 
the current intersession period and thereafter presen t/lay the Report in both  the 
Houses of Parliament during the ensuing Winter session of Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
 
  to make provisions for  the dev elopment and regulat ion of warehouses, 
negotiability of warehouse receipts , establishment of a warehousing 
development and regulatory authority and  for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
———— 
(Shri Sharad Pawar, Minister of Agriculture and Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution) 

 
Bill No. 154 of 2005 
THE WAREHOUSING (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) BILL, 2005 
———— 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
———— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
REGULATION OF WAREHOUSING BUSINESS 
3. Requirement of registration for warehouses issuing negotiable warehouse 
receipts. 
4. Registration of warehouses. 
5. Registration of a ccreditation agencies. 
CHAPTER III 
WAREHOUSEMEN 
6. Liabilities of warehousemen. 
7. Duties of warehousemen. 
8. Duties of warehouseman to k eep records and accounts of warehouse 
business. 
9. Special powers of warehouseman to deal with perish able and hazardous 
goods. 
10. Lien of warehouseman on goods. 
CHAPTER IV 
WAREHOUSE  RECEIPTS 
11. Warehouse receipts. 
12. Negotiability of warehouse receipts. 
13. Negotiation of warehouse receipts by delivery. 
14. Transfer of negotiable warehous e receipt without endorsement. 
15. Warrantees on negotiation of warehouse receipt. 
16. Endorser not a guranteer. 
17. Negotiation of warehouse receipt not impaired by fraud, mistake or 
duress. 
18. Subsequent negotiation of warehouse receipts. 
19. Stoppage of delivery of goods in certain cases. 
20. Transfer of non- negotiable receipts. 

 
21. Conclusiveness of negot iable warehouse receipt. 
22. Presumption in certain cases. 
23. Issue of duplicate receipt. 
CHAPTER V 
THE WAREHOUSING DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATORY AUTHORITY 
CLAUSES 
24. Establishment and incor poration of Authority. 
25. Composition of Authority. 
26. Tenure of office of Chai rperson and other members. 
27. Removal from office. 
28. Salary, allowances and other te rms and conditions of Chairperson and 
other members. 
29. Bar on future empl oyment of members. 
30. Chairperson to be the chie f  executive of Authority. 
31. Meetings of Authority. 
32. Vacancies, etc., not to inva lidate proceedings of Authority. 
33. Officers and employees of Authority. 
34. Warehousing Advisory Committee. 
CHAPTER VI 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF AUTHORITY 
35. Powers and functions of Authority. 
CHAPTER VII 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
36. Grants by Central Government. 
37. Constitution of fund. 
38. Accounts and audit. 
39. Furnishing of return s, Annual Report, etc., to Central Government. 
CHAPTER VIII 
POWERS OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
40. Powers of Central Government to issue directions. 
41. Power of Central Governm ent to supersede Authority. 
CHAPTER IX 
APPEALS 
42. Appeals to Appellate Authority. 
CHAPTER X 

 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
43. Offences and penalties. 
44. Offences by companies. 
45. Cognizance of offences by courts. 
CHAPTER XI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
CLAUSES 
46. Chairperson, members,  officers and other employ ees of Authority to be 
public servants. 
47. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
48. Delegation of powers. 
49. Exemption from tax on wealth and income. 
50.  Power of Central Government to make rules. 
51.  Power of Authority to make regulations. 
52. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. 
53. Act to have overriding effect. 
54. Power to remove difficulties. 
 Amendment 
of Act 2 of 1899.

 
Bill No. 154 of  2005 
  
THE WAREHOUSING (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION)  
BILL, 2005 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
to make provisions for  the develop ment and regulati on of warehouses, 
negotiability of warehouse receipts, establishment of a warehousing 
development and regulatory authority and  for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
  
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Warehousing (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 2005. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “accreditation agency” means an agency, whatever be its 
constitution, registered with the Authority under section 5; 
(b) “actionable claim” shall have the meani ng assigned to it in section 3 
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882; 
(c) “Authority” means the Warehous ing Development and Regulatory 
Authority established under sub-section (1) of section 24; 
(d) “depositor” means a person who delivers goods to the 
warehouseman for storage; 
(e) “endorsee” means the person to whom the warehouse receipt is 
negotiated;  
(f) “endorsement” means signing on the warehouse receipt by the 
depositor or holder of the warehouse receipt for the purpose of its 
negotiation; 
(g) “electronic form”, with reference to information, means any 
information generated, sent, received or stored in media, magnetic, optical, 
computer memory, microfilm, comput er generated micro fiche or similar 
device; 
(h) “fungible goods” means any goods of wh ich any unit is, by nature or 
usage of trade, the equivalent of any other like unit and are received by a 
warehouseman as fungible goods; 

 
(i) “goods” means all tangible movable goods (other than actionable 
claims, money and securities), whether fungible or not; 
(j) “grade” means the quality standard of any goods as notified as grade 
designation by the Central Govern ment under the Agriculture Produce 
(Grading and Marking) Act, 1937 or any other law for the time being in force; 
(k) “holder” means,– 
(i) in relation to a negotiable wa rehouse receipt, a person who is in 
possession of such receipt and a right to goods endorsed on it; and 
(ii) in relation to a non-negotiable warehouse receipt, a person 
named in it as the person to whom the goods are to be  delivered or the 
assignee of that person; 
(l) “member” means a member of the Authority and includes its 
Chairperson; 
(m) “negotiable warehouse receipt” means a warehouse receipt under 
which the goods represented therein are deliverable to the depositor or 
order, the endorsement of which has the effect of transfer of goods 
represented thereby and the endorsee for which takes a good title; 
(n) “non-negotiable warehouse receip t” means a warehouse receipt 
other than a negotiable warehouse receipt; 
(o) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette; 
(p) “person” includes a firm, co-operat ive society or any association or 
body of persons, whether incorporated or not; 
(q) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(r) “regulation” means a regulation made under this Act; 
(s) “warehouse” means any premises (i ncluding any protected place) 
conforming to all the requirements including manpower specified by the 
Authority by regulations wherein the warehouseman takes custody of the 
goods deposited by the depositor and incl udes a place of storage of goods 
under controlled conditions of temperature and humidity; 
(t) “Warehousing business ” means the Business of maintaining 
warehouses in storage of goodos and issuing negotiable warehouse 
receipts; 
(u) “warehouse receipt” means an acknowledgement in writing or in 
electronic form issued by a warehou seman or his duly authorised 
representative of the receipt for storage of goods not owned by the 
warehouseman; 
(v) “warehouseman” means any person who is granted a certificate of 
registration in respect of any warehouse or warehouses by the Authority or 
an accreditation agency for carrying on the business of warehousing. 
CHAPTER II 
REGULATION OF WAREHOUSING BUSINESS 
3. ( 1) No person shall commence or ca rry on the warehousing business 
unless he has obtained a registration certificate in respect of the concerned 
warehouse or warehouses granted by the Authority under this Act: 

 
Provided that a person carrying on the warehouses business immediately 
before the commencement of this Act shall be allowed to carry on such business, 
in case he has made an application for r egistration within thirty days from the 
date of such commencement. 
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that a 
warehouse registered under this Act shal l also be eligible to  issue non-
negotiable warehouse receipts. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Authority may, 
subject to such regulations and guidel ines issued by it, authorise any person 
registered under section 5 as an accredi tation agency to issue certificate of 
accreditation to any person for carrying on the business of warehousing issuing 
negotiable warehouse receipts. 
4. (1) Any person desirous of commencing or carrying on the business of 
maintaining a warehouse issuing negotiable wa rehouse receipts may make an 
application to the Authority for registration in respect of one or more warehouses 
owned or occupied by him. 
(2) Every application for regi stration under sub-section ( 1) shall be in such 
form and manner and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed. 
(3) The Authority may, after such enqu iry and subject to such terms and 
conditions as it thinks fit, grant a certificate of registration of the warehouse in the 
prescribed form and bearing a registration number to the applicant authorising 
him to carry on the busine ss of maintaining a warehou se or warehouses and to 
issue negotiable warehouse receipts.  
(4) The Authority may not grant a certif icate of registration under this section 
unless it is satisfied that  the warehouse in respect of  which the application has 
been made has adequate facilities and sa feguards required to warehouse the 
goods of the nature specified in the appl ication and the applicant satisfies the 
financial, managerial and other eligibility criter ia and competence as may be 
prescribed: 
Provided that no certificat e of registration shall be  refused to any applicant 
under this section unless the applicant has been given an opportunity of being 
heard. 
5. (1) The Authority shall, from time  to time, determine the number of 
accreditation agencies as it may authorise to  issue certificate of accreditation to 
warehouses issuing negotiable warehouse receipts. 
(2) Any person fulfilling the qualificati ons and other requir ements as may be 
prescribed and desirous of f unctioning as an accreditation agency under this Act 
may make an application to t he Authority seeking its registration as such under 
this Act. 
(3) Every application under sub-section (2) shall be in such form and manner 
and shall be accompanied by such fees  and security deposit as may be 
prescribed. 
(4) The form in which and the terms and conditions subject to which a 
certificate of registration as an accr editation agency may be issued under this 
section shall be such as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER III 

 
WAREHOUSEMEN  
6. (1) A warehouseman is liable for loss of, or injury to, goods caused by his 
failure to exercise such care and dili gence in regard to the goods as a careful 
and vigilant owner of the goods of t he same bulk, quality and value would 
exercise in the custody of them in similar conditions. 
(2) In case the goods are damaged or lost  in spite of taking all care and 
precautions by the warehouseman due to  unavoidable circumstances, the 
compensation equal to the value of goods at the time of deposit of the goods 
shall be payable by the warehouseman. 
(3) In case the goods are damaged or lo st due to the negligence of the 
warehouseman, then, the compensation shall be equal to value of goods plus the 
loss of profit to the holder of the receipt. 
(4) The warehouseman shall not be responsible for any loss, destruction, 
damage or deterioration of t he goods delivered to him fo r storage attributable to 
circumstances such as force majeure , act of war, act of public enemies and the 
like. 
7. (1) In the absence of a lawful excu se, a warehouseman shall deliver the 
goods referred to in a negotiable or non-negot iable receipt, to the holder of the 
receipt on demand made by the holder and on the holder fulfilling all the following 
conditions, namely:– 
(a) satisfying the warehouse lien; 
(b) surrendering the receipt in ca se of non-negotiable receipt and 
surrendering the receipt with endorsements in case of negotiable receipt; 
and 
(c) acknowledging in writing the delivery of the goods. 
(2) If a warehouseman refuses or fails  to deliver the goods in compliance 
with the provisions of this section,  the burden of proof shall lie on the 
warehouseman to establish the existence of  a lawful excuse for the refusal or 
failure. 
8. (1) Every warehouseman shall keep in a place of safety a complete and 
accurate set of records and accounts of  all transactions pertaining to the 
operation of a warehouse including records and accounts of all goods received in 
the warehouse and withdraw n therefrom, of all uni ssued receipts in his 
possession, of all receipts issued, returned to, or cancelled, by him. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the warehouseman shall 
keep all the records and accounts of th e warehouse business in numerical 
sequence separate and distinct from t he records and accounts of any other 
business in such form and in such manner and for such period as the Authority 
may, by regulations, specify. 
(3) The warehouseman shall make availabl e to the Authority for inspection 
the records and accounts of the warehouse  business at any time as may be 
desired by the Authority. 
9. (1) If the goods are of a perishable or ha zardous nature, or their keeping 
shall deteriorate greatly in value or  damage other property , the warehouseman 
may give notice that is reasonable and possible under the circumstances to the 
holder of the receipt for the goods, if the name and address of the holder is 

 
known to the warehouseman or if not kn own to the warehouseman, then, to the 
depositor, requiring that person to satisf y the lien on the goods and to remove 
them from the warehouse. 
(2) If the person to whom a notice under sub-section ( 1) is given fails to 
satisfy the lien and remove the goods within the time specified in the notice, the 
warehouseman may sell the goods at public or private sale without advertising. 
(3) The notice referred to in sub-section ( 1) may be given by sending it by 
electronic mail, speed post or registered post addressed to the person to whom it 
is to be given at the last known addre ss of the person and the notice is deemed 
to be given on the third day of the mailing. 
(4) If the warehouseman after a reasonable effort is unable to sell the goods, 
the warehouseman may dispose of them such other manner as he deems proper 
and shall incur no liability for that reason. 
(5) From the proceeds of any sale or  disposal of goods made under this 
section, the warehouseman shall, after satisfying his lien, hold the balance in 
trust for the holder of the receipt. 
(6) No notice shall be necessary if the warehouseman is satisfied on 
reasonable grounds that in the circumstances of the case giving such notices is 
likely to cause further prejudice to the goods. 
(7) If, at any time, the warehouseman is satisfied that the quality of any 
fungible goods or any part thereof has so deteriorated or is so deteriorating that it 
is necessary to do so, to protect the holders of negotiable warehouse receipts 
from loss and time is not sufficient for hi m to seek their instructions, he may, 
subject to the regulations in this behalf, di spose off the goods or  any part thereof 
and keep the sale proceeds after satisfying his lien in an escr ow account for the 
benefit of the holders of receipts. 
(8) In case of disposal of fu ngible goods under sub-section ( 7), the 
warehouseman shall, at the choice of t he holder of the receipt, either pay the 
sale proceeds or deliver equivalent goods of the same grade, quality and quantity 
to him. 
10. (1) Every warehouseman has a lien on goods deposited with him for 
storage, whether deposited by t he owner of the goods or by  his authority, or by 
any person entrusted with the possession of  the goods by the owner or by his 
agent. 
(2) The lien of the warehouseman is for the amount of the storage and 
maintenance charges including – 
(a) all lawful charges for storage and preservation of the goods; 
(b) all reasonable charges for– 
(i) any notice required to be given under the provisions of this Act; 
(ii) notice and advertisement of sale; 
(iii) sale of goods where default is made in satisfying the lien of the 
warehouseman; and  
(iv) compliance of statutory provisions. 
(3) In case of any endorsement on the face of a negotiable warehouse 
receipt, by a bank or the warehouseman, such endorsement shall be evidence of 

 
a pledge and the pledgee shall ha ve priority over the intere st of the holder of the 
receipt. 
(4) In case of any pledge referred to in sub-section ( 3), the warehouseman 
shall not deliver the goods unless t he endorsement of t he pledge has been duly 
got cancelled. 
(5) If the goods on which a lien exists were not deposited by the owner or by 
his authority but by a person entrusted by  the owner or his authority with the 
possession of the goods, the warehouseman shall, within two months after the 
date of  deposit, give notice of the lien to the owner of the goods on which a lien 
exists or to the person owning the right of property of the goods. 
(6) The notice under sub-section (5) shall be in writing and contain all the 
details about the goods, the location of  warehouses, date of deposit, name of 
depositor and a statement of  lien claimed by the warehouseman for the goods 
stored in the warehouse. 
(7) If a warehouseman fails to issue the notice required by sub-section ( 5), 
his lien, as against the person to whom he has failed to issue notice shall 
become void from the expiration of a per iod of two months from the date of 
deposit of the goods. 
(8) In case the goods are not taken back within the declared period of 
storage, the warehouseman shall have the right to recover his charges, selling 
the goods by public auction, or in any ot her manner provided in this section any 
goods upon which he has a lien. 
(9) The warehouseman shall give a notice in writing of his intention to sell 
the goods to the person liable as debtor for the charges for which the lien exists 
or to the owner or person owning the right of property of the goods. 
(10) The notice under sub-section (7) shall – 
(a) contain all the details about the go ods, the location of warehouse, 
date of deposit, the name of depositor and a statement of lien claimed by the 
warehouseman for the goods stored in the warehouse; and 
(b) state that unless the charges ar e paid within the stipulated time 
mentioned in the notice, t he goods shall be advertised for sale and sold by 
public auction at a time and place as specified in the notice. 
(11) If the charges are not paid on or before the day mentioned in the notice, 
then, unless any other mode of sale is spec ified by the Authority, by regulations 
an advertisement of the sa le shall be published in a leading newspaper having 
circulation in the locality where the sale  is to be held and the sale shall be held 
not less than fourteen days from the date of first publication of the advertisement. 
(12) The warehouseman shall, from the pr oceeds of the sale, satisfy his lien 
and shall pay over the surplus, if any, to the person entitled thereto. 
(13) If the surplus is not demanded by th e person entitled thereto within ten 
days after the sale of goods or if ther e are different claims, the warehouseman 
shall seek instructions from the Aut hority and act as per the orders of the 
Authority. 
CHAPTER IV 
WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS 

 
11. (1) A warehouse receipt, which may be eit her in writing or in electronic 
form, shall be a document of title to goods in  writing if it contains all the following 
particulars, namely:– 
(a) receipt number;  
(b) warehouse registration number and date up to which it is valid; 
(c) name of the warehouse and its complete postal address; 
(d) name and address of the person by  whom or on whose behalf the 
goods are deposited; 
(e) date of issue of the warehouse receipt; 
(f) statement that the goods  received shall be delivered to the holder 
thereof, or that the goods shall be delivered to the order of a named person; 
(g) rates of storage charges and handling charges; 
(h) description of the goods or of t he packages containing them with 
particulars of quantity and quality or  grade; 
(i) market value of the goods at the time of deposit; 
(j) private marks of depositor on the goods or packages, if any, except in 
the case of fungible goods; 
(k) name of the insurance company i ndemnifying  for fire, flood, theft, 
burglary, misappropriation, riots, strikes or terrorism;  
(l) whether the warehouse receipt is negotiable or non-negotiable; 
(m) statement of the am ount of any advance m ade and of any liability 
incurred for which the warehouseman claims his lien;  
(n) date and signature of  the warehouseman or his authorised agent; 
and 
(o) declared shelf-life of goods. 
(2) In case a warehouseman wilfully  omits from a negotiable warehouse 
receipt any of the particulars set out in sub-section ( 1), he shall be liable for 
damages caused by such omission. 
(3) No warehouse receipt shall, by reason of the omission only of any of the 
particulars set, forth in sub-section ( 1), be deemed to be invalid for the purpose 
of settlement of disputes or claims. 
12. (1) The words in a negotiable warehous e receipt limiting its negotiability 
shall be void. 
(2) A warehouseman who issues a non- negotiable warehouse receipt shall 
cause to be plainly marked upon its fa ce the words “non-negotiable” or “not 
negotiable” in English or in the language in which it is issued. 
(3) In case of non-compliance of sub-section (2 ), a holder of the warehouse 
receipt who purchases it for valuable cons ideration believing it to be a negotiable 
warehouse receipt may, at his option, treat the receipt as  vesting in him all rights 
attaching to a negotiable warehous e receipt and imposing upon the 
warehouseman the same liabilities which he would have incurred had the receipt 
been a negotiable warehouse receipt and the warehouseman shall be liable 
accordingly. 

 
(4) A negotiable warehouse receipt shall be valid for delivery till the date of 
expiry of the declared shelf-life of the goods for which it is issued. 
13. A negotiable warehouse receipt may be negotiated by its delivery if, by 
the terms of the receipt, the warehouseman undertakes to deliver the goods to 
the order of a named pers on, and that person or a subsequent endorsee has 
endorsed it. 
14. Where a negotiable receipt is transfe rred for valuable consideration by 
delivery, and the endor sement of the transferor is essential for negotiation, the 
transferee acquires a right against the tr ansferor to compel him to endorse the 
receipt, unless a contrary in tention appears, and the negot iation takes effect as 
of the time when endorsement is made. 
15. A person who, for valuable cons ideration, negotiates a negotiable 
warehouse receipt by endorsement and deliv ery, including one who assigns for 
valuable consideration, a claim secured by a receipt, unless a contrary intention 
appears, warrants the following: – 
(a) that the receipt is genuine; 
(b) that the person has a legal right to negotiate or transfer it; 
(c) that the person has no knowledge of any fact that would impair the 
validity of the receipt; 
(d) that the person has a right to transfer the title to the goods; and  
(e) that the goods are merchantable or fit for a particular purpose when 
those warranties would have been implied,  if the contract of the parties had 
been to transfer without a receipt the goods represented by it. 
16. The endorsement of a receipt does not  make the endorser liable for any 
failure on the part of the warehouseman or previous endorsers of the receipt to 
fulfil their respective obligations. 
17. The validity of the negotia tion of a receipt is no t impaired by the fact 
that– 
(a) the negotiation was a breach of  duty on the part of the person 
making the negotiation; or 
(b) the owner of the receipt was induc ed by fraud, mistake or duress to 
entrust the possession or custody of the receipt to that person, if the person 
to whom the receipt was negotiated or  a person to whom the receipt was 
subsequently negotiated, paid value for it  without knowing of the breach of 
duty, fraud, mistake or duress. 
18. If a person having sold, mortgaged or  pledged goods that are in the 
custody of a warehouseman and for which a negotiable receipt has been issued, 
continues in possession of the negotiable receipt, the subsequent negotiation of 
it by that person under any sale or other  disposition of the goods to any person 
receiving the receipt in good faith, for valuable consideration and without notice 
of the previous sale, mort gage or pledge, has the same effect as if a previous 
purchaser, mortgagee or pledgee of t he goods, as the case may be, had 
expressly authorised the subsequent negotiation. 
19. When a negotiable warehouse receipt has been issued in respect of any 
goods, no lien or right of stoppage of the seller in transit shall defeat the rights of 
a purchaser for value in good faith to whom the re ceipt has been negotiated, 

 
whether the negotiation is before or afte r notifying to the warehouseman who 
issued the receipt of the claim of the seller  to a lien or right of stoppage in transit, 
and the warehouseman shall not deliver the goods to an unpaid seller unless the 
receipt is first surrendered for cancellation. 
20. (1) A non-negotiable warehouse receipt may be transferred by the holder 
by delivery to a purchaser or donee of  the goods in writin g executed by the 
holder. 
(2) A peson to whom the goods covered by a non-negotiable warehouse 
receipt is transferred acquires – 
(a) the title of the transferor to the goods; and 
(b) the right to deposit with the war ehouseman the receipt or duplicate 
thereof or to give notice in writing to the warehouseman of the transfer. 
(3) The transferee shall acquire the benefit of the obl igation of the 
warehouseman to hold goods in storage for him according to the terms of the 
receipt upon deposit of the transfer of the goods and on giving notice in writing of 
the transfer and upon the warehouseman  having a reasonable opportunity of 
verifying the transfer. 
21. In the hands of a hol der who has purchased a negotiable warehouse 
receipt for valuable consider ation, it shall be conclusive evidence of the goods 
described in it as against the warehouseman or any person claiming through him. 
22. In a dispute between an endorser of  a negotiable warehouse receipt and 
his endorsee unless it is proved otherwise, it shall be presumed that – 
(a) the endorsement has been made voluntarily; 
(b) the endorsement has been made for full consideration; 
(c) the endorser had full legal title in  the goods represented by the 
receipt; and 
(d) the endorsement has extinguished all the rights, title and interest of 
the endorser in the goods. 
23. (1) No warehouseman shall issue a wa rehouse receipt without actually 
receiving the goods of the quantity, quality or grade and other particulars as may 
be mentioned in the receipt. 
(2) No warehouseman shall issue more than one receipt for the same goods 
deposited by any person: 
Provided that in case of a loss or destruction, a duplicate receipt may be 
issued in such manner as may be specified by the Authority by regulations. 
(3) If a warehouseman fails to comply wit h the provisions of sub-section ( 2), 
he would be liable for all such damages caused by the failure to any person who 
has transacted on such receipt for valuable consideration, believing it to be an 
original, even though the transaction is a fter the delivery of the goods by the 
warehouseman to the holder of the original receipt. 
(4) A receipt on the face of which the word “duplicate” is plainly marked is a 
representation and warranty by the warehouseman that it  is an accurate copy of 
a receipt properly issued and uncancelle d on the date of issue of the duplicate 
warehouse receipt. 

 
CHAPTER V 
THE WAREHOUSING DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATORY AUTHORITY 
24. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification, specify in this behalf, there shall be constituted an authority to 
be called the Warehousing Developm ent and Regulatory Authority to 
exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to 
it by or under this Act. 
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid 
having perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue 
or be sued. 
(3) The head office of the Authorit y shall be at New Delhi and the 
Authority may, with the previous a pproval of the Central Government, 
establish offices at other places in India. 
25. The Authority shall consist of – 
(a) a Chairperson; and 
(b) not more than two other members, 
to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst persons of 
ability, integrity and standing who have wide knowledge and 
experience in inventory management, insurance, preservation, quality 
control, banking, finance, economics, law or administration. 
26. (1) The Chairperson and every other mem ber shall hold office for a term 
not exceeding five years fr om the date on which he enters upon his office and 
shall be eligible for re-appointment: 
Provided that no person shall hold offi ce as the Chairperson or other 
member after he has attained the age of sixty-five years. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a member may– 
(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing to the Central Government 
notice of not less than three months; or 
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of 
section 27. 
27. (1) The Central Government may remove from office any member who– 
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged as an insolvent; or 
(b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member; 
or 
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, involves moral turpitude; or 
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect 
prejudicially his functions as a member; or 
(e) has so abused his position as to render his conti nuation in office 
detrimental to the public interest. 

 
(2) No such member shall be removed under clause ( d) or clause (e) of sub-
section (1) unless he has been given a reasonabl e opportunity of being heard in 
the matter. 
28. Subject to the rules as may be made in this behalf, the salaries and 
allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of– 
(a) the Chairperson shall be the same as that of a Secretary to the 
Government of India; 
(b) the other members of the Authority shall be the same as that of 
Joint Secretaries to the Government of India. 
29. The Chairperson and the other memb ers shall not, for a period of two 
years from the date on which they cease to  hold office as such, except with the 
previous approval of the Central Government, accept any employment in any 
concern in the warehousing sector. 
30. The Chairperson shall be the chief executive of the Authority. 
 
 
31. (1) The Authority shall meet at such  times and places and shall observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings 
(including the quorum at such meetings) as may be determined by regulations. 
(2) The Chairperson, or if, for any reason he is unable to attend a meeting of 
the Authority, any other member chosen by the members present from amongst 
themselves at the meeting shall preside at the meeting. 
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be 
decided by a majority of votes by the members present and voting, and in the 
event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson, or the person presiding shall have 
a second or casting vote. 
32. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid merely by reason 
of– 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority; or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the 
Authority; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of  the Authority not affecting the 
merits of the case. 
33. ( 1) The Authority may appoint offi cers and such other employees 
as it considers necessary for the effi cient discharge of its function under 
this Act. 
(2) The terms and conditions of service of officers and other 
employees of the Authority appointed under sub-section ( 1) shall be 
governed by regulations made under this Act. 
34. ( 1) The Authority may, by notification, constitute a Committee to be 
known as the Warehousing Advisory Co mmittee to advise the Authority on 

 
matters relating to the making of regulations under section 51 and make 
recommendations for effective implementation of the provisions of this Act. 
(2) The Warehousing Advisory Committee shall consist of not more than 
fifteen members excluding the members of  the Authority to represent the 
interests of commerce, industry, engineering, agriculture, consumers, 
organizations engaged in warehousing, qual ity control, preservation and 
research bodies. 
(3) Without prejudice to the pr ovisions of sub-section ( 1), the Warehousing 
Advisory Committee may advise the Author ity on such other matters as may be 
referred to it by the Authority. 
CHAPTER VI 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF AUTHORITY 
35. (1) Subject to the provisions of this  Act and any other law for the time 
being in force, the Authority shall have the duty to regulate and ensure 
implementation of the provisions of this  Act and promote orderly growth of the 
warehousing business. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generalit y of the foregoing provisions, the 
powers and functions of the Authority shall include the following, namely: – 
(a) to issue to the applicants fulfilling the requirements for 
warehousemen a certificate of registration in respect of warehouses, or 
renew, modify, withdraw, suspend or cancel such registration; 
(b) to regulate the registration and f unctioning of accred itation agency, 
renew, modify, withdraw, suspend or canc el such registration, and specify 
the code of conduct for officials of a ccreditation agencies for accreditation of 
the warehouses; 
(c) to specify the qualifications, code of conduct and practical training for 
warehousemen and staff engaged in warehousing business; 
(d) to regulate the process of pledge, creation of charges and 
enforcement thereof in respect of goods deposited with the warehouse; 
(e) to promote efficiency in conduct of warehouse business; 
(f) to make regulations laying down the standards for approval of 
certifying agencies for grading of goods; 
(g) to promote professional or ganisations connected with the 
warehousing business; 
(h) to determine the rate of, and levy, the fees and other charges for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act; 
(i) to call for information from, underta king inspection of, conducting 
enquiries and investigations including audit of the warehouses, accreditation 
agencies and other organisations connected with the warehousing business; 
(j) to regulate the rates, advantages, te rms and conditions  that may be 
offered by warehousemen in respect of warehousing business; 
(k) to specify, by regulations, th e form and manner in which books of 
account shall be maintained and statement of accounts shall be rendered by 
warehousemen; 

 
(l) to maintain a panel of arbitrator s and to nominate arbitrators from 
such panel in disputes between warehouses and warehouse receipt holders; 
(m) to regulate and develop electronic system of holding and transfer of 
credit balances of fungible goods deposited in the warehouses; 
(n) to exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as 
may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER VII 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
36. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Authority grants of such sums 
of money as the Government may thin k fit for being utilised for the 
purposes of this Act. 
37. ( 1) There shall be constituted a f und to be called the Warehousing 
Development and Regulatory Authority Fund and there shall be credited thereto– 
(a) all Central Government grants, f ees and charges received by the 
Authority; 
(b) all sums received by the Authority from such other source as may be 
decided upon by the Central Government; 
(c) all sums realised by way of penalties under this Act. 
(2) The fund shall be applied for meeting– 
(a) the salaries, allowances and ot her remuneration of the members, 
officers and other employees of the Authority; 
(b) the other expenses of the Authorit y in connection with the discharge 
of its functions and for the purposes of this Act. 
38. ( 1) The Authority shall maintain pr oper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form and manner 
as may be prescribed by the Central Go vernment in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Authority sha ll be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India at such interv als as may be specified by him and any 
expenditure incurred in connection wit h such audit shall be payable by the 
Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other person 
appointed by him in connection  with the audit of the a ccounts of the Authority 
shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in connec tion with such audit 
as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to 
demand the production of books of account, connected vouchers and other 
documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Authority. 
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with 
the audit-report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government 
and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of 
Parliament. 

 
39. (1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central Government at such time 
and in such form and manner as may be prescribed, or as the Central 
Government may direct to furnish such returns, statements and other particulars 
in regard to any proposed or existi ng programme for the promotion and 
development of the warehousing industry as  the Central Government may, from 
time to time, require. 
(2) Without prejudice to the pr ovisions of sub-section (1), the Authority shall, 
within nine months after the close of eac h financial year, submit to the Central 
Government an Annual Report giving a true and full account of its activities 
including the activities for promoti on and development of  the warehousing 
business during the previous financial year. 
(3) Copies of the reports re ceived under sub-section ( 2) shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after they are received, before each House of Parliament. 
CHAPTER VIII 
POWERS OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
40. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Authority 
shall, in exercise of its powers and performance of its functions under this Act, be 
bound by such directions on questions of policy, other than those relating to 
technical and administrative matters, as  the Central Government may give in 
writing to it from time to time: 
Provided that the Authority shall, as  far as practicable, be given an 
opportunity to express its views before any direction is given under this sub-
section. 
(2) The decision of the Central Govern ment, whether a question is one of 
policy or not, shall be final. 
41. (1) If, at any time, the Central Government is of the opinion– 
(a) that, on account of circumst ances beyond the control of the 
Authority, it is unable to discharge the functions  or perform the duties 
imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or 
(b) that the Authority has persistent ly defaulted in complying with any 
direction given by the Central Governm ent under this Act or in the discharge 
of the functions or perfo rmance of the duties imposed  on it by or under the 
provisions of this Act and as a result of  such default the fi nancial position of 
the Authority or the administration of the Authority has suffered; or 
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public 
interest so to do, the Central Government may, by notification and for 
reasons to be specified t herein, supersede the Authority for such period not 
exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification and nominate a 
person to look after the functions of the Authority: 
Provided that before i ssuing any such notific ation, the Central 
Government shall give a reasonable o pportunity to the Authority to make 
representations against t he proposed supersession and shall consider the 
representation, if any, of the Authority. 
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section ( 1) superseding 
the authority,– 

 
(a) the Chairperson and other members shall, as from the date of 
supersession, be deemed to have vacated their offices; 
(b) all the powers, functions and dut ies which may, by or under the 
provisions of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the 
Authority shall, until the Authority is reconstituted under sub-section ( 3), be 
exercised and discharged by the per son nominated by the Central 
Government under clause (c) of sub-section (1); 
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the 
Authority is reconstituted under sub-section ( 3), vest in the Central 
Government. 
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the 
notification issued under sub-section ( 1), the Central Government shall 
reconstitute the Authority by a fresh appointment of its C hairperson and other 
members and in such case any person wh o had vacated his office under clause 
(a) of sub-section (2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified for reappointment. 
(4) The Central Government shall cause a copy of the notification issued 
under sub-section (1) and a full report of any action to be laid before each House 
of Parliament at the earliest. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law or in any contract, or 
memorandum or articles of association, on the removal of a person, from office 
under this section, that person shall not be entitled to claim any compensation for 
the loss or termination of office. 
CHAPTER IX 
APPEALS 
42. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Authority made under this 
Act, or any rules or the regulations made thereunder may prefer an appeal to 
such person or authority appointed by the Central Government (hereafter 
referred to as the Appellate Authority) within sixty days from  the date of such 
order: 
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the said period 
of sixty days but not beyond a total per iod of ninety da ys if the appeallant 
satisfies the Appellate Authority that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the 
appeal within the said period. 
(2) Every appeal made under this section shall be made in such form and 
manner and shall be accompanied by a c opy of the order appeal against and by 
such fees as may be prescribed. 
(3) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that before dis posing of an appeal, the appellant shall be given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(4) An appeal filed before the Appella te Authority shall be heard and 
disposed of as expeditiously as possibl e and endeavour shall be made to finally 
dispose of the appeal within a period of ninety days from the date of its filing.   
CHAPTER X 

 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
43. (1) Any warehouseman knowingly issu ing a warehouse receipt without 
taking the actual physical delivery of the goods in his warehouse or a 
warehouseman or an agent or servant of  the warehouseman who issues a 
warehouse receipt without reasonably satisf ying himself that the goods for which 
such warehouse receipt is issued have ac tually been received or the number, 
weight or grade of the goo ds corresponds to the number, weight or grade 
specified in the warehouse receipt or t he goods are under his actual control at 
the time of issuing such warehouse re ceipt, commits an offence and shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term whic h may extend to three years or with 
fine which may extend to four times the value of the goods or with both. 
(2) A warehouseman or an agent or servant of the warehouseman, who 
knowingly issues a duplic ate warehouse receipt without  substantially following 
the procedure for the issue of a duplicate warehouse receipt, commits an offence 
and shall be punishable for such offence with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with 
both. 
(3) A warehouseman or an agent or servant of the warehouseman, who, 
knowingly that the warehouse receipt in respect of such goods is outstanding and 
is uncancelled, delivers the goods without obtaining possession of such 
warehouse receipt at or before the time  of such delivery and thereby causes 
unlawful loss or gain to any person, co mmits an offence and shall be punishable 
for such an offence by imprisonment for a term which may exte nd to three years 
or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both. 
(4) A warehouseman who fails, on su rrender of a negotiable warehouse 
receipt by the depositer or endorsee and pa yment of all his lawful charges and 
cancellation of encumbrances endorsed on the receipt, within the declared shelf-
life of the goods, as menti oned therein to deliver t he goods represented by the 
receipt commits an offence and shall be  punishable for such offence with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may 
extend to three times the value of the goods or with both. 
(5) Any depositor, who declared as the value of the goods delivered by him 
for storage with a warehouseman an amount  which he does not have reason to 
believe to be the proper value, commits  an offence and shall be punishable for 
such an offence by imprisonment for a te rm which may extend to three years or 
with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both. 
44. ( 1) Where an offence under this Chapt er is committed by a company, 
every person, who at the time the offenc e was committed, was in charge of the 
company or was responsible for making the deposit, as the case may be, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this  sub-section shall render any such 
person liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention took place without 
his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to  prevent such 
contravention. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence 
under this Chapter has been co mmitted by a company and it  is proved that such 
an offence has been committed with the cons ent or connivance of any director, 

 
manager, secretary or other officer of t he company, such director, manager, 
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 
Explanation.– For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other 
association of individuals; and  
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
45. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this 
Act, save on a complaint made by the Au thority or by any officer authorised in 
writing in this behalf by the authority. 
(2) No court inferior to that of a Me tropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act. 
CHAPTER XI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
46. The Chairperson, members, office rs and other employees of Authority 
shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the 
provisions of this Act, to be public se rvants within the meaning of section 21 of 
the Indian Penal Code. 
  
 
47. No suit, prosecution or other l egal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government or any officer of the Central Governm ent or any member, 
officer or other employee of the Authority for anything which is in good faith done 
or intended to be done under this Act or  the rules or regulations made 
thereunder: 
Provided that nothing in this Act sha ll exempt any person any suit or other 
proceedings which might, apart from this Act, be brought against him. 
48. The Authority may, by general or spec ial order in writing, delegate to the 
Chairperson or any other me mber or officer of the Au thority subject to such 
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and 
functions (excluding the power to make re gulations under section 51) under this 
Act as it may deem necessary. 
49. Notwithstanding anything contained  in the Wealth Tax Act, 1957, the 
Income-tax Act, 1961 or any other enactment  for the time being in force relating 
to tax on wealth, income, pr ofits or gains, the Authorit y shall not be liable to pay 
wealth-tax, income-tax or any other tax in  respect of their wealth, income, profits 
or gains derived. 
50. (1) The Central Government may, by no tification, make rules for carrying 
out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice  to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any or the following matters, namely:– 

 
(a) the form and manner in whic h an application for obtaining a 
certificate of registration for commenc ing or carrying on the business of 
warehousing issuing negot iable warehouse receipts may be made and the 
fees which shall accompany such  application under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 4; 
(b) the form in which a certificate fo r registration of warehouses may be 
issued under sub-section (3) of section 4; 
(c) The financial, managerial and ot her eligibility criteria and 
competence which an applicant for regi stration of warehouses shall satisfy 
under sub-section (4) of section 4; 
 (d) The qualification and other requi rements which a person applying 
for functioning as an accreditation agen cy shall fulfil under sub-section (2) of 
section 5; 
(e) the form and manner in which an a pplication for registration as an 
accreditation agency may be made and the fees which shall accompany 
such application under sub-section (3) of section 5; 
(f) the form of certific ate of registration of accreditation agency under 
sub-section (4) of section 5; 
(g) the salary and allowances pay able to, and the other terms and 
conditions of service of the Chair person and other members under section 
28; 
(h) such other powers that may be exercised by the Authority under 
clause (n) of sub-section (2) of section 35; 
(i) the form and manner of maint enance of annual statement of 
accounts to be maintained by th e Authority under sub-section ( 1) of section 
38; 
(j) the form and manner in which and the time within which returns and 
statements and particulars are to be furnished by the Authority to the Central 
Government under sub-section (1) of section 39; 
(k) the form and the manner in whic h an appeal may be made to the 
Appellate Authority and t he fee which shall accompany such appeal under 
sub-section (2) of section 42; 
(l) the procedure to be followed by t he Appellate Authority in disposing 
of an appeal under sub-section (3) of section 42; 
(m) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed, or 
in respect of which provision is to be or may be made by rules.  
51. ( 1) The Authority may, with the prev ious approval of the Central 
Government, and in consultation with t he Warehousing Advisory Committee, by 
notification, make regulations consis tent with this Act and the rules made 
thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice  to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:– 
(a) the matters regulating the authorities of accreditation agencies under 
sub-section (2) of section 3; 

 
(b) the form and manner and the per iod for which a warehouseman 
shall keep the records and accounts of the warehousing business under 
sub-section (2) of section 8; 
(c) the manner of disposal of goods or any part thereof and the keeping 
of sale proceeds in an escrow account by the warehouseman under sub-
section ( 7) of 
section 9;  
(d) the mode of sale under sub-section (11) of section 10; 
(e) the manner of issuance of duplic ate warehouse receipt under the 
proviso to sub-section (2) of section 23;  
(f) the time and places of meetings of the Authority and the procedure to 
be followed at such meetings incl uding the quorum necessary for the 
transaction of business under sub-section (1) of section 31; 
(g) the terms and conditions of servic e of officers and other employees 
of the Authority under sub-section (2) of section 33; 
(h) the registration and functioning of  accreditation agencies, renewal, 
modification, withdrawal, suspension or cancellation of such registration and 
the code of conduct for officials of a ccreditation agencies for accreditation 
the warehouses under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 35; 
(i) the standards for approval of cert ifying agencies for grading of goods 
under clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 35; 
(j) the rate of fees and other charges to be levied for carrying out the 
provisions of this Act under clause (h) of sub-section (2) of section 35; 
 (k) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by 
regulations or in respect of which pr ovision is to be or may be made by 
regulations. 
52. Every rule made by the Central Government and every regulation made 
by the Authority under this Act shall be la id, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament , while it is in session, fo r a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprise d in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive se ssions aforesaid, both Ho uses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or 
regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or  annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity 
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation. 
53. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for time  being in force or in any 
instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act. 
54. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect  to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order, publis hed in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be 
necessary for removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of three years from the date of commencement of this Act. 

 
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is 
made be laid, before each House of Parliament. 
55. After section 8A of the Stamp Ac t, 1899, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:– 
“8B. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, negotiable 
warehouse receipts shall not be liable to stamp duty.”.  
 

 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
At present, the warehousing receipts issued by the warehouses in the 
country do not enjoy the fiduciary trust of  depositors and banks as there is a fear 
that it is not possible to recover the loans in case of fraud, mis-management, etc., 
by the warehousemen or insolvency of  the depositor. The available legal 
remedies are also time consuming and inadequate. Furt her, the format of 
warehouse receipts issued by the various warehouses in the country is not 
uniform.  Hence, there are considerab le impediments in the negotiability of 
warehouse receipts creating difficulties to the farmers and other depositors of 
goods.  Having regard to the above, it is proposed to establish a negotiable 
warehouse receipt system for all commodities including agricultural commodities. 
On the one hand, it will make  warehouse receipts a prime tool of trade and 
facilitate finance against it throughout the country, on the other, it will allow banks 
to improve the quality of their lending  portfolio and enhance their interest in 
lending in respect of goods deposited in warehouses.  It is, therefore, proposed 
to lay down the requirements for warehous e receipts to become valid negotiable 
instruments.  
2. It is expected that the system of  negotiable warehouse receipts would 
result in providing consi derable benefits, both at the macro as well as micro 
levels and increase the liquidity in  the rural areas, encourage scientific 
warehousing of goods, lower cost of fi nancing, improve supply chains, enhance 
rewards for grading and quality and better price risk management.  This would, in 
turn, result in higher retu rns to farmers and better services to consumers.  It is 
also proposed to provide necessary adm inistrative mechanism and legislative 
backup for regulating and streamlining the warehousing sector issuing negotiable 
warehouse receipts.   
3. The proposed legislation, inter alia, seeks to provide for– 
(i)  the regulation of warehousing bus iness by registering warehouses 
issuing negotiable warehouse receipts; 
(ii) the registration of accreditati on agencies for warehouses which 
would issue accreditation certificates to the warehouses following certain 
required norms; 
(iii) the liabilities, duties and lien of warehousemen; 
(iv) the contents of negotiable warehouse receipts; 
(v) the conditions for negotiability of warehouse receipts by delivery and 
endorsement; 
(v) the transfer of negotiable warehous e receipts without endorsement 
and warranties on sale of warehouse receipts; 
(vi) the issue of duplicate receipts in case of loss or destruction; 
(vii) the establishment and in corporation of an Authority to be called the 
Warehousing Development and Regulatory  Authority to regulate and ensure 
implementation of the prov isions of the proposed legislation and to promote 
orderly growth of the warehouse business in the country; 
(viii) the empowerment of the Central Government to issue directions on 
questions of policy to the Authority and to supersede the Authority in certain 
circumstances; 
(ix) the appeal to the appellate authority; and  

 
(x) defining the offences and penalties in respect of such offences. 
 4. The Notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in 
the Bill. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
NEW DELHI; SHARAD PAWAR. 
The 26th November, 2005. 

 
Notes on Clauses 
Clause 1.–This clause provides for the short title of the Bill, the area of its 
operation and its commencement. The pr oposed legislation shall not be 
applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  As ce rtain preparatory steps are 
required to be taken before the proposed legisl ation is brought into force, it is 
proposed to empower the Central Government to bring it into force from a date to 
be appointed by it. 
Clause 2.–This clause contains definitions of certain words and expressions 
used in the Bill. The definitions of “accreditation agency”, “a ctionable claim”, 
“authority”, “endorsement”, “goods”, “grade”, “negotiable warehouse receipt”, 
“warehouse” and “warehousing business” ar e some of them.  The expression 
“accreditation agency” is defined to mean an agency, wh atever be its 
constitution, registered with the Author ity under proposed section 5. It would 
certify and issue accreditation certif icates to warehouses based on certain 
norms.  The words “actionable claim” shall have the meaning assigned to it in 
section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882.  The word “Authority” means the 
Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority established under proposed 
sub-section (1) of section 24.   “Endor sement” means signing on the warehouse 
receipt by the depositor or holder of the warehouse receipt fo r the purpose of its 
negotiation.  The expression “negotiable warehouse receipt” is defined to mean a 
warehouse receipt under which the goods r epresented therein are deliverable to 
the depositor or order, the endorsement of which has t he effect of transfer of 
goods represented thereby and the endorsee for which takes a good title.  
Clause 3.–This clause provides for compulsory registration of those 
warehouses which would issue negotiabl e warehouse receipts.  They would be 
required to obtain a registration certif icate from the War ehousing Development 
and Regulatory Authority. However,  a warehouseman issuing negotiable 
warehouse receipts immediately befor e the commencement of the proposed 
legislation shall be allowed to carry  on such business if he has made an 
application for registration within thir ty days from the date of such 
commencement. The warehouses regist ered under the proposed legislation 
would be eligible for issuing non-negotiable warehouse receipts. Sub-clause (2) 
provides that the Authorit y would authorise the regist ered accreditation agencies 
to issue accreditation certificates to the warehouses based on specified norms so 
as to enable the Authority to quickly issue registration certificates.  
Clause 4.–This clause lays down the proc edure for registration with the 
Authority of the warehouses  issuing negotiable warehouse receipts.  Sub-clause 
(1) requires that any person desirous of  commencing or carrying on the business 
of warehousing issuing neg otiable warehouse receipts should make an 
application to the Authorit y for registration of the warehouse or warehouses.  
Sub-clause (2) provides for rules being made for determining the manner in 
which the application shall be made and the fee required to  be paid in respect of 
such application.  Sub-clause (3) authorises the Authority to conduct necessary 
inquiry and subject to such terms and cond itions as it thinks fit to grant of a 
certificate of registrati on bearing registration number.  Sub-clause (4) provides 
that the Authority may refuse a certificate of registration in case it feels that the 
warehouse has not adequate facilities an d safeguards required to store the 
goods of the nature specifi ed in the application and the applicant does not meet 
the financial, managerial and other eligibility criteria and competence.  

 
Clause 5.–Sub-clause (1) of this cl ause authorises the Warehousing 
Development and Regulatory Au thority to determine from time to time the 
number of accreditation agencies required fo r issuing certificate of accreditation 
to the warehouses issuing negotiable warehouse receipts.  Sub-clause (2) 
provides that any person fulfilling the requirement and qualifications laid down by 
rules as accreditation agencies may ap ply to the Authority seeking their 
registration as accreditation agencies.  Sub-clause (3) empowers the Central 
Government to lay down by rules the form and manner and the fees and security 
deposit to be paid for applying to become accreditation agencies.   
Clause 6.–Sub-clause (1) of this clause defines the liabilities of 
warehouseman in case of loss of, or inju ry to, goods caused by his failure to 
exercise such care and diligence in regard to the goods as a careful and vigilant 
owner of the goods should take in similar conditions. Sub-clause (2) specifies the 
compensation to be provided to the depos itor in case the goods are damaged or 
lost in spite of taking all the care and precaution by the warehouseman due to 
unavoidable circumstances.  The compensati on shall be equal to value of goods 
at the time of its deposit. Sub-clause (3) specifies the compensation in case the 
goods are damaged or lost due to negligence of warehouseman.  In that case the 
compensation shall be equal to value of goods plus the loss of profit to the holder 
of the receipt.   
Clause 7.–Sub-clause (1) of this clause defines the duties of warehousemen 
and lays down that in the absence of a lawful excu se, a warehouseman should 
deliver the goods referred to in a negotiabl e warehouse receipt to the holder of 
the receipt on demand made by the holder  and on the holder fulfilling all the 
conditions viz. satisfying the warehouse lien; surr endering the receipt in case of 
non-negotiable receipt and surrendering the receipt with endorsements in case of 
negotiable receipt and acknow ledging in writing the de livery of the goods. Sub-
clause (2) provides that in case a warehouseman refuses or fails to deliver the 
goods in compliance with the provisions of  this clause, the burden of proof shall 
lie on the warehouseman to establish the existence of a lawf ul excuse for the 
refusal or failure.   
Clause 8.–Sub-clause (1) of this clause pr ovides that every warehouseman 
shall maintain in a safe place the complete and accurate accounts and records of 
all transactions pertaining to  the operation of a wareh ouse including records and 
accounts of all goods received in the warehouse and withdrawn therefrom and of 
all unissued receipts in his possession as we ll as of all receipts issued, returned 
to, or cancelled, by him. Sub-clause (2 ) provides that such records and accounts 
of the warehouse business would be kept  in numerical sequence separate and 
distinct from the records and accounts of any other business. Sub-clause (3) 
provides that the warehouseman shall ma ke available all such records and 
accounts of warehouse business for the inspection of the Authority.  
Clause 9.–Sub-clause (1) of this clause cont ains certain special powers of 
the warehouseman to deal with peris hable and hazardous goods. Sub-clause (2) 
provides that if a person to whom the notice has been issued fails to satisfy the 
lien and remove the goods within the spec ified time, the warehouseman may sell 
the goods at public or priv ate sale without advertising. Sub-clauses (3) and (4) 
lays down the procedure for issuing notice to the person to whom it is to be 
given.  The notice is to be given at the last known address of the holder of the 
receipt of the goods and in case the warehouseman after making reasonable 
effort is unable to sell the goods, the wa rehouseman may dispose of them in any 

 
other manner as he may deem fit and incur no liability for that reason.  Sub-
clauses (7) and (8) lay down the st eps required to be taken by the 
warehouseman in case the quality of fungibl e goods is deteriorating.  In case of 
disposal of fungible goods, the warehouseman should, at the choice of the holder 
of the receipt, either pay the sale pr oceeds or deliver equivalent goods of the 
same grade, quality and quantity to him.  
Clause 10.–Sub-clause (1) of this clause specifies the lien of warehouseman 
on goods deposited with him for storage, whether deposited by the owner of the 
goods or by his authority, or by any person entrusted with the possession of the 
goods by the owner or by his agent. Sub-cl ause (2) clarifies that  the lien of the 
warehouseman is for the am ount of storage and maintenance charges including 
all lawful charges for storage and preservation of goods, for all reasonable 
charges for notice and advertisements for sale of goods, etc.  Sub-clauses (3) 
and  (4) provide that in case of any  endorsement on the face of a negotiable 
warehouse receipt, by a bank or warehouseman, such endorsement shall be the 
evidence of a pledge and the pl edgee shall have priority ov er the interest of the 
holder of the receipt and the warehouseman shall not deliver the goods unless 
the endorsement of the pled ge has been duly got cancell ed.   Sub-clauses (5) 
and (6) provide that if the goods on which a lien exists were not deposited by the 
owner or by his authority but by a person entrusted by the owner or his authority 
with the possession of the goods , the warehouseman shall issue a notice of lien 
to the owner of the goods on which lien exists or to the person owning the right of 
property of goods within two months after the date of deposit and the notice shall 
be in writing and contain a ll details about t he goods and warehouses, etc. Sub-
clauses (7) and (8) provide that if a wa rehouseman fails to issue the notice 
required under sub-clause (5), his lien shal l become void from the expiration of a 
period of two months from the date of deposit of goods.  Sub-clauses (9) and 
(10) lay down the procedure for issuing notice in writing and shall contain all 
details about the goods, warehouse, nam e of depositor and details of lien and a 
stipulation that if the charges are not paid within t he specified time mentioned in 
the notice, the goods shall be advertised and sold by public auction at a time and 
place specified in the notic e. Sub-clauses (11) and ( 12) lay down the procedure 
for issuing an advertisement for sale of goods in case the c harges are not paid 
on or before the date mentioned in the notice and from the proceeds of the sale, 
the warehouseman shall satisfy his lien and shall pay over the surplus, if any, to 
the person entitled thereto.  Sub-clause (13) states t hat if the surplus is not 
demanded by the person entitled thereto within ten days after the sale of goods, 
the warehouseman shall seek instructions from the Aut hority and act as per the 
orders of the Authority.  
Clause 11.–This clause enumerates the va rious particulars of a warehouse 
receipt such as receipt number, regist ration number, date of validity, name and 
address of warehouse, date of issue of receipt, description of goods, market 
value, whether negotiable or non-negot iable and signature of warehouseman, 
etc.   
Clause 12.–This clause provides that any word in a negotiable warehouse 
receipt limiting its negotiability shall be void and a warehouseman shall mark 
upon its face the words “non-negotiable” or “not negotiable” in English or in the 
language in which it is issued.  It also pr ovides that in case of non-compliance of 
sub-clause (2), a holder of the warehous e receipt purchasing it for valuable 
consideration and be lieving it to be a negotiable wa rehouse receipt may, at his 

 
option, treat the receipt as vesting in  him all rights attaching to a negotiable 
warehouse receipt and imposing same lia bilities on the warehouseman which he 
would have incurred had the receipt bee n a negotiable warehouse receipt. The 
negotiable warehouse receipt in respect of  any goods shall be valid till its 
declared shelf life.  
Clause 13.–This clause lays down the mode of negotiability of negotiable 
warehouse receipts.  It may be negotiated by its delivery if, by the terms of the 
receipt, the warehouseman undertakes to deliver the goods to  the order of a 
named person, and that person or a subsequent endorsee has endorsed it. 
Clause 14.–This clause deals with the trans fer of negotiable receipts without 
endorsement.  Where a negotia ble warehouse receipt is transferred for valuable 
consideration by delivery and the endorsement of the tr ansferor is essential for 
negotiation, the transferee acquires a right  against the transfero r to compel him 
to endorse the receipt, unless a contrary intention appears, and the negotiation 
takes effect as of the time when the endorsement is made. 
Clause 15.–This clause provides that a person who, for valuable 
consideration, negotiates a receipt by endorsement or delivery, including one 
who assigns for valuable consideration, a claim secured by a receipt, unless a 
contrary intention appears, warrants that the receipt is genuine, the person has a 
legal right to negotiate or transfer it, has no knowledge of any  fact that would 
impair the validity of the receipt, has a ri ght to transfer the title to the goods and 
that the goods are merchantable or fit for a particular purpose. 
Clause 16.–This clause provides that the endorsement of a receipt does not 
make the endorser liable for any failure on the part of the warehouseman or 
previous endorsers of the receipt to fulfil their respective obligations. 
Clause 17.–This clause stipulates that  the validity of negotiation of a 
warehouse receipt is not impaired by the fact that the negotiation was a breach of 
duty on the part of the person making the ne gotiation or the owner of the receipt 
was induced by fraud, mistake or duress to entrust the possession or custody of 
the receipt to that person, if the person to whom the receipt was negotiated or a 
person to whom the receipt was subseq uently negotiated, paid value for it 
without the knowledge of the breach of duty  or fraud or mistake or duress, as the 
case may be.  
Clause 18.–This clause provides that if  a person having sold, mortgaged or 
pledged goods that are in the custody of a warehouse and for which a negotiable 
warehouse receipt has been issued, contin ues in possession of the negotiable 
receipt, the subsequent negotiation of it by  that person under any sale or other 
disposition to any person receiving the receipt in good faith, for valuable 
consideration without notice of the prev ious sale, mortgage or pledge, has the 
same effect as if a previous purchas er, mortgagee or pledgee  of the goods, as 
the case may be, had expressly authorised the subsequent negotiation. 
Clause 19.–This clause deals with stoppage of delivery of goods in certain 
cases.  It is provided that when a negot iable warehouse receipt has been issued 
in respect of any goods, no lien or right  of stoppage of the sell er in transit shall 
defeat the rights of the purchaser for value in good fait h to whom the receipt has 
been negotiated, whet her the negotiation is before or after notifying the 
warehouseman who issued the receipt of the cl aim of the seller to a lien or right 

 
of stoppage in transit and the warehouseman shall not deliver the goods to an 
unpaid seller unless the receipt is first surrendered for cancellation.   
Clause 20.–This clause lays down the procedure for transfer of non-
negotiable receipts.  Sub-clause (1) pr ovides that a non-negotiable warehouse 
receipts may be transferred by the holder by delivery to a purchaser or donee of 
the goods in writing executed by the holder.   Sub-clause (2) provides that a 
person to whom the goods covered by a non-negotiable warehouse receipt is 
transferred acquires the title of transferer to the goods and the right to deposit 
with the warehouseman the receipt or duplicate thereof or to give notice in writing 
to the warehouseman of the tr ansfer. Sub-clause (3) clar ifies that the transferee 
shall acquire the benefit of the obligation of the wa rehouseman to hold goods in 
storage for him according to the terms of the receipt upon deposit of transfer of 
goods and on giving notice in writing of the transfer and upon the warehouseman 
having a reasonable opportunity of verifying the transfer. 
Clause 21.–This clause relates to t he conclusiveness of a negotiable 
warehouse receipt.  As per this clause, in the hands of a holder who has 
purchased a negotiable warehouse receipt for valuable consideration, it shall be 
conclusive evidence of the goods described in it as against the warehouseman or 
any person claiming through him. 
Clause 22.–This clause relates to pres umption in respect of negotiable 
warehouse receipts in certain cases.  In a dispute between an endorser of a 
negotiable warehouse receipt and his endorsee unless it is proved otherwise, it 
shall be presumed that the endorsement  has been made voluntarily and for full 
consideration and the endorser had full legal title to the goods represented by the 
receipt.  The endorsement extinguishes all the rights, title and interest of the 
endorser in the goods.  
Clause 23.–This clause deals with issue of duplicate warehouse receipts.  
Sub-clause (1) provides that no war ehouseman shall issue a warehouse receipt 
without actually receiving the specified goods as per the quantity, quality and 
other particulars as mentioned in the rece ipt.  Sub-clause (2) stipulates that no 
warehouseman shall issue more  than one receipt for the same goods deposited 
by any person.  However, in case of loss or destruction, a duplicate receipt may 
be issued in such manner as may be specif ied by the Authority by regulations. 
Sub-clause (3) provides that if a wa rehouseman fails to comply with the 
provisions of sub-clause (2), he would be liable for a ll such damages caused by 
the failure to any person who has transacted on such receipt for valuable 
consideration, believing it to be the original, even though the transaction is after 
the delivery of goods by the warehouseman to the holder of the original receipt.  
Sub-clause (4) provides that a warehouse receipt on the face of which the word 
“duplicate” is plainly marked is a representation and warranty by the 
warehouseman that it is an accurate c opy of a receipt properly issued and 
uncancelled on the date of issue of the duplicate.  
Clause 24.–This clause deals with the establishment and incorporation of an 
authority to be calle d the Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority.  
The Authority shall exercise the power s conferred on, and per form the functions 
assigned to it by or under the proposed legislation.  Sub-clause (2) provides that 
the Authority shall be a body  corporate by the name af oresaid having perpetual 
succession and common seal with power, s ubject to the provisions of the 
proposed legislation, to acquire, hold and dispose off property, both movable and 

 
immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.  Sub-
clause (3) mentions that the head office of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.  
The Authority with the previous approv al of the Central Government may 
establish offices at other places in India.   
Clause 25.–This clause defines the co mposition of the Warehousing 
Development and Regulatory Authority.  The Author ity shall consist of a 
Chairperson and not more than two ot her members to be appointed by the 
Central Government from amongst persons of ability, integrity and standing and 
having wide knowledge and experience in inventory management, insurance, 
preservation, quality control, banking, finance, economics, law or administration.   
Clause 26.–Sub-clause (1) of this clause specifies the tenure of office of 
Chairperson and other mem bers of the Authority. Th e Chairperson and other 
members of the Authority s hall hold office for a term not exceeding five years 
from the date on which they enter upon thei r office and shall be eligible for re-
appointment. However, no person shall hold office as a Chairperson or other 
member after attaining the age of sixty-five  years. Sub-clause (2) provides that a 
member may relinquish his office by gi ving a notice in writ ing to the Central 
Government of not less than three mont hs.  The Chairper son or any other 
member may be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of 
clause 27.  
Clause 27.–This clause empowers the Centra l Government to remove from 
office any member of the Authority in ce rtain cases.  In case, the member has 
been declared as an insolvent or has become physically or mentally incapable of 
acting as a member or has been convic ted of an offence or has acquired 
disappropriate assets of his income and misused of his position he could be 
removed. Sub-clause (2) provides that before a member is removed from his 
office, he should be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.   
Clause 28.–This clause deals with the sa lary, allowances and other terms 
and conditions of the Chair person and other members of the Authority.  Subject 
to rules as may be made in this behalf, the salary, allowances and other terms 
and conditions of service of the Chairper son shall be the same as that of a 
Secretary to the Government  of India and those of a member shall be equal to 
that of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India respectively.  
Clause 29.–This clause bars the Chairper son and other members of the 
Authority except with the previous approval of the Central Government from 
accepting any employment in any com pany in the warehousing sector for a 
period of two years from the date on which they cease to hold their office. 
Clause 30.–This clause stipulates that th e Chairperson shall be the Chief 
Executive of the Authority. 
Clause 31.–This clause deals with the procedure for convening the meetings 
of the Authority in regard to transaction of its business. Sub-clause (2) provides 
that if the Chairperson is unable to att end the meeting of the Authority, any other 
member chosen by the mem bers present shall preside over the meeting.  Sub-
clause (3) clarifies that all issues wh ich come up before t he meeting shall be 
decided by a majority of the votes by the members present and voting. 
Clause 32.–This clause provides that, no act or proceedings of the Authority 
shall be invalid merely by reason of any va cancy or any defect in the constitution 
of the Authority, or any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member 

 
or due to any irregularity in the procedure of  the Authority not affecting the merits 
of the case.  
Clause 33.–This clause deals wit h the appointment of officers and other 
employees of the Authority for the e fficient functioning under the proposed 
legislation.  Sub-clause (2) lays down that the terms and other conditions of 
service of officers and other employees of the Authority shall be governed by 
regulations made by the Authority.  
Clause 34.–This clause deals with the constitution of Warehousing Advisory 
Committee to advise the Authority on matters relating to the making of 
regulations under clause 51.  Sub-clause (2) lays down that the Advisory 
Committee shall consist of not more than fifteen member s excluding the 
members of the Authority to represent the interests of various organisations 
engaged in warehousing, quality control, preservation and research activities.  
Sub-clause (3) provides that the Warehousing Advisory Committee may advise 
the Authority on such other matters as may be referred to it by the Authority. 
Clause 35.–This clause deals with the powers and functions of the Authority.  
Sub-clause (1) provides that the Au thority shall regu late and ensure 
implementation of the provisions of t he proposed legislation and promote orderly 
growth of the warehousing business.  Sub-clause (2) enumerates the various 
powers and functions of the Author ity.  These functions and powers, inter alia, 
include issuing registration certific ate to warehouses issuing negotiable 
warehouse receipts, regulation of accredi tation agencies and specifying their 
requisite qualifications, code of conduct an d practical training for warehousemen 
and other staff engaged in the warehousing business, promoting efficiency in 
conduct of warehouse business, making r egulations laying down the standards 
for approval of certifying agencies for grading of goods, levying the fees and 
charges for carrying out the provisions of the Bill, appointin g arbitrators for  
adjudicating of disputes between wa rehouses and warehouse receipt holders 
and regulation and developm ent of electronic system of holding and transfer of 
credit balances of goods deposited in the warehouses.   
Clause 36.–This clause provides that t he Central Government may, after 
due appropriation made by the Parliament by law in this behalf, could provide 
grants of such sums of money to the Au thority as the Central Government may 
think fit for being utilised for the purpose of the proposed legislation. 
Clause 37.–This clause provides for cons titution of a fund to be called the 
Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority Fund.  All Central 
Government grants and the fees and charges received by the Authority shall be 
credited to this Fund.  All sums received by the Authority from such other sources 
as may be decided upon by the Central Government and all sums realized by 
way of penalties under the pr oposed legislation are also proposed to be credited 
to the Fund.  Further, the Fund shall be applied for meeting the expenses on 
salary, allowances and other remunerati on of members, officers and other 
employees of the Authority.   
Clause 38.–This clause deals with the accounts of the Authority and their 
audit.  Sub-clause (1) provides that the Authority shall maintain proper accounts 
and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such 
form as may be laid down by the Central Government by rules in consultation 
with the Comptroller and Audito r-General of India.  Sub-cl ause (2) stipulates that 
the accounts of the Aut hority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-

 
General of India.  Sub-clauses (3) and (4) provide that the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India and any other per son appointed by him for the audit of 
the accounts of the Authority shall have  the same rights and privileges as the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of I ndia shall have and he can demand the 
records and books of accounts for the purpose of audit.  The audit report certified 
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India is required to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.   
Clause 39.–This clause deals with furnishing of returns, Annual Report, etc. 
by the Authority to the Central Government.  Sub-clauses (1) and (2) require that 
the Authority shall furnish such return s, statements and other  particulars as 
regards to its programmes and activities to the Central Gove rnment.  An Annual 
Report containing full accounts of activi ties of the Authority shall also be 
submitted to the Central Government. Sub- clause (3) requires that copies of the 
Annual Reports of the Authority shall be laid before each House of Parliament. 
Clause 40.–This clause deals with the powers  of the Central Government to 
issue directions on questions of policy of the Authority. 
Clause 41.–This clause deals with the powers  of the Central Government to 
supersede the Authority in certain cases.  Sub-claus e (1) empowers the Central 
Government to supersede the Authority at  any time in case the Authority is 
unable to discharge its functions or perform its duties under the provisions of the 
proposed legislation or the Authority not compiling with any direction given by the 
Central Government under the proposed legislation or under circumstances 
which render it necessary in public interest to supersede the Authority.  However, 
reasonable opportunity shall be given by the Central Government to the Authority 
to make representation ag ainst any proposed supers ession.  Sub-clause (2) 
provides that on supersession, the C hairperson and other members of the 
Authority shall be deemed to have vaca ted their offices and shall not have any 
powers, functions or duties under the proposed enactment.  Sub-clauses (3) and 
(4) provide that on or before of the expiration of the period of supersession of the 
Authority, the Central Government shal l reconstitute a fresh Authority and 
appoint its Chairperson and other members.  The Ce ntral Government shall also 
lay a copy of the notificat ion superseding the Authority with a full report before 
each House of Parliament at  the earliest.   Sub-clause (5) stipulates that a 
person removed from his post under sub- clause (1) shall not be entitled to any 
claim or compensation on account of such removal.  
Clause 42.–This clause provides for appeal s to the Appellate Authority.  
Sub-clause (1) provides that any person aggrieved by an order of the Authority 
made under the proposed le gislation may file an appeal to such person or 
authority appointed by the Central Governm ent which would be referred to as 
Appellate Authority within sixty days.  Howe ver, the said period may be relaxed if 
the appellant satisfies the Ap pellate Authority the reasons  of delay.  Sub-clause 
(2) provides that every appeal made under this clause shall be in the form and 
manner laid down by the Central Government  by rules.  The appeal should also 
be accompanied by the fees prescribed  by the Central Government.  Sub-
clauses (3) and (4) lay down that an appellant shall be given reasonable hearing 
and that the appeal shall be disposed of within ninety days from the date of its 
filing.  
Clause 43.–This clause deals with the offenc es and penalties related to the 
proposed legislation.  Sub-clause (1) provides that any warehouseman knowingly 

 
issuing a warehouse receipt without taking actual physical deli very of the goods 
or taking less delivery of goods than the quantity mentioned on the warehouse 
receipt commits an offence and shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years or wit h fine which may be extended to four 
times the value of the goods, or with both.   Sub-clause (2) provides that a 
warehouseman or his agent who issues a duplicate warehouse receipt without 
following the prescribed procedure commi ts an offence and shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which 
may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.  In sub-clauses (3), (4) and (5) other 
related offences and penalties have been defined.   
Clause 44.–This clause deals with offenc es by companies.  Sub-clause (1) 
provides that when an offence under Chapter X is committed by a company, 
every person of the company  who at the time of committing the offence was 
responsible for making the deposits sha ll be deemed to be guilt y of the offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded and puni shed accordingly.   Sub-clause (2) 
provides that if such an offence ha s been committed with the connivance of any 
official of the company, he shall be guilty of the off ence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Clause 45. – This clauses relates to cognizance of offences by courts.  Sub-
clause (1) provides that no court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable 
under the proposed legisl ation without a complaint bei ng made by the Authority 
or an officer authorised by the Authority.   Sub-clause (2) provides that these 
offences shall not be tried by a court infe rior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate 
or the Judicial Magistrate of the first class. 
Clause 46.–This clause provides that the chairperson, members, officers 
and other employees of the Authority, while acting or purporting to act in 
pursuance of the provisions of the proposed legislation, would be public servants 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
Clause 47.–This clause seeks to provide immunity to Central Government or 
any other member or officer of the Aut hority from suits, prosecution and other 
legal proceedings in respect of anything which is done in good faith under the 
proposed legislation.  
Clause 48.–This clause provides that the Authority ma y delegate its powers 
(other than the power to make regulations under clause 51) by general or special 
order in writing to the Chairperson or any other member or officer of the Authority 
under the proposed legislation.   
Clause 49.–This clause provides that the Au thority shall not be liable to pay 
wealth tax, income tax or any  other tax in respect of it s wealth, income, profits or 
gains derived by it.  
Clause 50.–This clause empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation.  Sub-clause (2) 
enumerates the various matters in respec t of which such rules may be made.  
These matters, inter alia, include the form and manner in which an application for 
obtaining a certificate of  registration for commencing warehousing business 
issuing negotiable warehouse receipts is  to be made, the form and manner in 
which a registration certificate is to be issued, the form and manner for getting 
registration certificate by the accredita tion agencies, the fi nancial, managerial 
and other eligibility criteria for registration of warehouses, the requirements for an 

 
accreditation agency, salary and allowances payable to members of the Authority 
and all such other matters that may be ex ercised by the Aut hority under clause 
(n) of sub-clause (2) of  clause 35.   
Clause 51.–This clause empowers t he Warehousing Development and 
Regulatory Authority to make regulati ons with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and in consultati on with the Warehousing Advisory 
Committee to carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation.  Sub-clause (2) 
enumerates the various matters in respect of which such regulations may be 
made. These matters, inter alia , include procedure regulat ing the issuance of 
certificate of accreditation under clause 5 by an accreditation agency, the form 
and manner and the period for which a warehouseman shall keep the records 
and accounts of warehousing business under  sub-clause (2) of clause 8, the 
manner of disposal of goods or any part t hereof and keeping of sale proceeds in 
and escrow account by the warehouseman under sub-clause (7) of clause 9, the 
terms and conditions of service of officers and other employ ees of Authority 
under sub-clause (2) of clause 33,  the manner of issuance of duplicate 
warehouse receipt under sub-clause (2) of clause 23,  the time and place of the 
meeting of the Authority and the procedure to be followed under sub-clause (1) of 
clause 31, functioning of the grading agency, standard fo r approval of certifying 
agencies for grading of goods under clause (f ) of sub-clause (2) of clause 35,  
the fees and other charges to be levied under the proposed le gislation and any 
other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations. 
Clause 52.–This clause provides that every rule made by the Central 
Government and every regulation made by the Authority under the proposed 
legislation shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament.   
Clause 53.–The clause provides that t he provisions of the proposed 
legislation shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith 
contained in any other law for time being in force or in any instrument having 
effect by virtue of any law other than the proposed legislation. 
Clause 54.–This clause relates to the power  of the Central Government to 
remove difficulties.  Sub-clause (1) empowers the Central Government to remove 
any difficulty which may arise in giving e ffect to the provisions of the proposed 
legislation by order publis hed in the Official Gazette.  Such provisions shall not 
be inconsistent with the prov isions of the proposed legisl ation.  This power can 
be exercised only within three years fr om the commencement of the proposed 
legislation. Sub-clause (2) stipulates t hat every order issued under this clause 
shall be required to be laid before the each House of Parliament.   
Clause 55.–This clause seeks to insert a new section 8B in the Stamp Act, 
1899 so as to provide that negotiable warehouse receipts  shall not be liable to 
stamp duty. 

 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Sub-clause (1) of clause 24 of the Bill provides that the Central Government 
shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitu te for the purpose of the 
proposed legislation, an aut hority to be called the Warehousing Development 
and Regulatory Authority to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the 
functions assigned to, it by or under the proposed legislation.   
2. Clause 25 of the Bill provides t hat the Authority shall consist of a 
Chairperson and not more than two other members who are experts in the field 
of inventory management, insurance, quality control, banking, finance, 
economics, law or administration. 
3. Clause 28 of the Bill prov ides that the salaries and allowances payable to 
and the other terms and conditions of servic e of the Chairperson of the Authority 
shall be the same as that of  a Secretary to the Govern ment of India and those of 
other members shall be the sa me as that of a Joint Secretary to the Government 
of India. 
4.  Sub-clause (1) of clause 33 prov ides that the Authority may, appoint 
officers and such other employees as it considers necessary for the discharge of 
its function under this Bill.  Sub-clause (2 ) of clause 33 provides that the terms 
and conditions of service of officers  and other employees of the Authority 
appointed under clause 33  of the Bill shall be governe d by regulations made by 
the Authority.   
5. Clause 36 of the Bill pr ovides that the Central Government may after due 
appropriation made by Parliame nt by law make to the Authority grants for being 
utilized for the purposes of the proposed enactment.  Clause 37 of the Bill 
provides for the constitution of a fund to be called the Warehousing Development 
and Regulation Authority Fund.  All Ce ntral Government grants, fees and 
charges shall be credited to the said Fund. 
6. The implementation of aforesaid provisions would involve certain 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.  Ho wever, it is not possible to 
give any specific estimate of the expenditure, both recurring and non-recurring, at 
this stage as it would depend upon the s pecific decisions which may be taken 
and the manner of implementation by the Authority.  However, it is estimated that 
a sum of approximately two crores of r upees for a financial year may be required 
to meet the expenditure of  the Authority by way of grants to be given to the 
Authority by the Central Government.  During the Financial Year 2005-2006, no 
expenditure, however, is envisaged to be incurred.   
7. It is estimated that the Bill will not involve any other expenditure of a 
recurring or non-recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India.  

 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 50 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to 
make rules, by notification in the Official  Gazette, for carrying out the provisions 
of proposed legislation.  Su b-clause (2) of that claus e enumerates the matters in 
respect of which rules may be made under  the proposed legislation.  These 
matters, inter alia , relate to the form and manner  in which an application for 
obtaining a certificate of registration for commencing or carrying on the business 
of warehousing issuing neg otiable receipts is to be made and the fees which 
shall accompany such application, the form in which a certificate of registration of 
warehouses is to be issued, the form and manner in which an application for 
registration as an accreditation agency is  to be made and the fees which shall 
accompany such application, the form of certificate of registration of accreditation 
agency, the salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions 
of the service of Chairperson and mem bers of the Authorit y, the form of annual 
statement of accounts to be maintained by the Authority, the form and manner in 
which and the time within which return s and statements and other particulars are 
to be furnished to the Central Government and any other matter which is required 
to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respec t of which provision is to be, or may be, 
made by rules.   
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 51 em powers the Warehousing Development 
and Regulatory Authority to make, by not ification in the Official Gazette and with 
the previous approval of t he Central Government and not inconsistent with the 
provisions of the proposed legislat ion and the rules made there under, 
regulations to provide for matters for wh ich provision is necessary or expedient 
for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of the pr oposed legislation.  
Sub-clause (2) of that clause enumerates the matters in respect of which such 
regulations may be made under the proposed legislat ion.  These matters, inter 
alia, include procedure for regul ating the issuance of cert ificate of accreditation 
under clause 5 by an accreditation agency, the form and manner and the period 
for which a warehouseman shall keep t he records and accounts of warehouse 
business under sub-clause (2) of clause 8,  the manner of disposal of goods or 
any part thereof and keepi ng of sale proceeds in an escrow account by the 
warehouseman under sub-clause (7) of claus e 9, the terms and conditions of 
service of officers and other employees  of Authority under sub-clause (2) of 
clause 33,  the manner of issuance of duplicate warehouse receipts under sub-
clause (2) of clause 23,  the time and pl ace of meetings of the Authority and the 
procedure to be followed in such meetings under sub-clause (1) of clause 31, 
functioning of the grading agency, standard for approval of certifying agencies for 
grading of goods under clause (f) of sub-clause (2) of clause 35,  the fees and 
other charges to be levied under the proposed legislation and any other matter 
which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations. 
3.  Clause 53 of t he Bill requires that the rule s and regulations made under 
the proposed legislation shall have to be laid before Parliament.  
4. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made are 
matters of procedure or admin istrative detail and it is not practicable to provide 
for them in the Bill itself.  The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a 
normal character.   
 
 

 
 