 
 
      STANDING  COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD,CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
    (2008-2009) 
 
     FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF   CONSUMER   AFFAIRS, 
FOOD    AND   PUBLIC   DISTIRBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
PRICE RISE OF ESSENTIAL CO MMODITIES- CAUSES AND 
EFFECTS WITH SPECIAL EMPHASIS ON IMPORT OF WHEAT 
AND ENFORCEMENT OF PREVENTION OF BLACK - MARKETING 
AND MAINTENANCE OF SUPPLY OF ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES 
ACT, 1980 
 
 
 
TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SBHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DLEHI 
December, 2008/    Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) 
27 

  
 
TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2008-2009) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY  OF   CONSUMER   AFFAIRS, 
FOOD    AND   PUBLIC   DISTIRBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
PRICE RISE OF ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES - CAUSES AND 
EFFECTS WITH SPECIAL EMPHASIS ON IMPORT OF WHEAT 
AND ENFORCEMENT OF PREVENTION OF BLACK - MARKETING 
AND MAINTENANCE OF SUPPLY OF ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES 
ACT, 1980 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on ……. 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ………… 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SBHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DLEHI 
December, 2008/  Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) 
 
 
 

  
CONTENTS 
 
                                                                                                                   
PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  .. .. .. ..
         
INTRODUCTION .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
      
 
REPORT 
   
CHAPTER   I  Introductory  .. .. .. ..   
  
 
CHAPTER II  Parameters for inclusion/exclusion  
   of Essential Commodities 
 
CHAPTER III  Mechanism to monitor the prices of Essential 
                      Commodities 
  
CHAPTER IV Causes of price rise of Essential Commodities 
 
CHAPTER V  Demand and production of agricultural produce  
 
CHAPTER VI Import/export of foodgrains 
 
CHAPTER VII Imposing of taxes on Essential Commodities 
 
CHAPTER VIII Acquisition of land under Special Economic 
                                Zone(SEZ) 
 
CHAPTER IX Shortcomings in Public Distribution System (PDS) 
CHAPTER X  The Wheat (Stock Declaration) Order-2007 
 
CHAPTER XI Hoarding and Blackmarketing of Essential 
                                Commodities 
 
CHAPTER XII Forward Market Commission (FMC) 
 
CHAPTER XIII Rise in prices of Petroleum and Petroleum 
                                Products 
 
APPENDIX 
I Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 24th May, 2007 
II Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 18th July, 2007 

  
 
III    Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 4th October, 2007 
IV   Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 16th October, 2007 
V    Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 12th November, 2007 
VI   Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 18th February, 2008 
VII   Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 12th September, 2008 
VIII  Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 26th September, 2008 
IX    Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 6th October, 2008 
X     Minutes of two sittings held on 6th November, 2008 (forenoon  
        and afternoon)……………………………………………………………. 
XI     Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 26th November, 2008 
XII    Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 8th December, 2008 
XIII   Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 22nd December, 2008 

  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER   
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION  (2008-2009). 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav     -   Chairman    
  
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Govinda Aroon Ahuja 
3. Shri Suresh Angadi 
4. Shri Alakesh Das 
5. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
6. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
7. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
8. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
9. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna  
10. Shri Wangyuh W. Konyak 
11. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
12. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
13. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
14. Shri Munshi Ram 
15. Shri Ghuran Ram 
16. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
17. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
18. Adv. (Smt.) P. Satheedevi 
19. Shri Chandrabhan Singh # 
20. Smt.Meena Singh * 
21. Vacant 
  
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri T.S Bajwa** 
23. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
24. Shri Mangala Kisan 
25. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik   
26. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
27. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
28. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
29. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu  
30. Shri Matilal Sarkar 
31. Vacant  
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Shri A.K. Singh     -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt.  Veena Sharma    -  Director 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya     -  Deputy 
Secretary-I 
4. Shri Jagdish Prasad     -  Deputy 
Secretary-II 
___________________________________________________________ 
* Ceased to be a Mem ber of the Committee consequent to her resignation from Lok 
Sabha w.e.f. 11.11.2008 
** Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent to his retirement from Rajya 
Sabha w.e.f. 25.11.2008 
# Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent to his disqual ification from         
Lok Sabha w.e.f. 5.12.2008 on Ground of Defection. 

  
 INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer 
Affairs and Public Distribution (2008-09) having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty -
Seventh Report on the subject ‘Price rise of Essential Commodities – 
causes and effects with special emphasis on Import of wheat and 
Enforcement of prevention of Black Marketing and Maintenance of 
supply of Essential Commo dities Act, 1980’ relating to the Ministry of 
Consume Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs). 
2. The subject was selected by the Committee for examination 
during 2007 -08. The Committee took evidence of the representatives 
of the Department of Consumer Affairs at their sittings held on 12 th 
September, 2008, 26 th September, 2008, 6 th October, 2008 and 26 th 
November, 2008. The Committee also took evidence of the 
representatives of Department of Agriculture and Cooperation on        
4th October, 2007, Department of Food and Public Distribution on 16 th 
October, 2007, Department of Revenue and Department of Land 
Resources on 12 th November, 2007, Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation, Department of Land Reforms and Department of 
Commerce on 6 th October, 2008, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas on 6 th November, 2008.  Besides, the Committee also took 
evidence of the representatives of STC on 6 th October, 2007, HPCL, 
BPCL and IOC on 6 th November, 2008 and FMC on 26 th November, 
2008. The Committee also invited Memorandum and heard the expert 
views of Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry 
(FICCI), Confederation of Indian Industry (CII). Institute for Social and 
Economic Change, M.S. Swaminathan Research Foundation, Institute 
of Economic Growth, Jawahar Lal Nehru University. 
 
3. The Committee want to express their thanks to the officers of 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs and Department of Food and Public 

  
Distribution), Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue), Ministry of Agriculture (Department 
of Agriculture and Cooperation), Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Land Resources) and the Ministry of Commerce  and 
Industry (Department of Commerce) for placing before them the 
detailed written notes on the subject and for furnishing the information 
to the Committee, desired in connection with the examination of the 
subject. The Committee also wish to express thei r thanks to the 
representatives of the State Trading Corporation (STC), Forward 
Markets Commission (FMC), FICCI, CII, M.S. Swaminathan Research 
Foundation, JNU, HPCL, BPCL and IOC for appearing and placing 
their considered views before the Committee and fo r furnishing their 
comments and suggestions on the subject. The Committee also place 
on record their appreciation for the work done by the earlier Committee 
(2007-08). 
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at 
their sitting held on 22nd December, 2008. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been presented in thick type 
in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI    DEVENDER PRASAD YADAV 
22 December, 2008    Chairman 
1, Pausa, 1930(Saka)            Standing Committee on Food, 
                                          Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
 

  
CHAPTER I 
  
INTRODUCTORY 
 
One of the objectives of the Government of India is to ensure 
availability of essential commo dities to the public at large at an 
affordable price and to enable the poor to have access to food. The 
Government has given the highest priority to check price rise in the 
country. The Department of Consumer Affairs under the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs,  Food and Public Distribution is entrusted inter alia 
with the task of monitoring of the prices and availability of essential 
commodities in the country. In order to control the production, supply 
and distribution of, and trade and commerce in certain comm odities in 
the interest of the general public, the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 
was enacted by the Department of Consumer Affairs. It provides for 
regulation of production and manufacture, control of prices, regulation 
of transport, distribution, dispos al, use or consumption and even 
prohibition of sale of any essential commodity. The powers under the 
said Act have been exercised by various Central Government 
Ministries, apart from the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution (Departmen t of Consumer Affairs) as also by the 
State Governments to whom some of the powers have been formally 
delegated. In the exercise of these powers, various 
Ministries/Departments of Government of India as well as the State 
Governments have issued control ord ers from time to time regulating 
production, distribution, pricing and other trading aspects in respect of 
the commodities declared as essential. The 
enforcement/implementation of the provisions of the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 lies with the State Go vernments and UT 
Administrations. The State Governments and UT Administrations being 
the enforcement agencies under the Act, are regularly taking recourse 
to the Act for implementation of the provisions of the Act by taking 
action against the violators. Th e commodities declared as ‘essential’ 
under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 are reviewed from time to 

  
time in the light of changes in the economic situation and particularly 
with regard to their production and supply in consultation with the 
concerned Ministries/Departments administering these commodities as 
well as State Governments/UT Administrations.   
1.2 In the context of the liberalization of the economy and the 
changed situation, particularly with regard to the relatively more 
comfortable food situation, it was felt that restrictions such as licensing 
of the dealers, limits on stock and control on movement were no longer 
required and only hamper the growth of the agricultural sector and 
promotion of food processing industries. Facilitating free tr ade and 
movement of foodgrains would enable farmers to get best prices for 
their produce, achieve price stability and ensure availability of 
foodgrains in deficit areas. The need to relax various controls on 
agricultural products including control on inter -state movement of such 
products, was discussed in the Conference of Chief Ministers on WTO 
and Agriculture held on 21.05.2001 under the Chairmanship of the 
then Hon’ble Prime Minister wherein it was decided to form a 
Committee of Ministers incharge of fiv e Central Ministries i.e. 
Agriculture, Commerce and Industry, Finance, Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution, Rural Development as well Deputy Chairman 
of Planning Commission and Chief Ministers of eleven States i.e. 
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Ori ssa, Assam, UP, Punjab, Madhya 
Pradesh, Haryana, West Bengal, Kerala and Maharashtra. Review of 
the list of essential commodities and control orders to ensure free 
movement of agriculture products was one of the terms of reference of 
the Committee. The said Committee in its first meeting held on 6 th July, 
2001 decided that restrictions on movement of all agricultural 
commodities should be removed and that the Essential Commodities 
Act, 1955 may continue as an umbrella legislation for the Centre and 
the Stat e to use when needed but that a progressive dismantling of 
controls and restrictions was also required. There was consensus 
amongst the Chief Ministers cutting across the party lines for removing 

  
unnecessary and redundant restrictions, which distort and im pede 
operation of market forces.  
1.3 In view of the uniform decision taken by the aforesaid Standing 
Committee and with the approval of Cabinet accorded in its meeting 
held on 05.02.2002, licensing requirement, stock limits and movement 
restrictions etc. had been dispensed with in respect of the specified 
foodstuffs namely wheat, paddy/rice, coarsegrains, sugar, edible 
oilseeds, edible oils, pulses, gur, wheat products (namely maida, rava, 
suzi, atta, resultant atta and bran) and hydrogenated vegetable oil  or 
vanaspati vide central orders dated 15.02.2002 and 16.06.2003. With 
the issue of these orders, any dealer may freely buy, stock, sell, 
transport, distribute, dispose, acquire, use or consume any quantity of 
these commodities.  
1.4 On the basis of the r ecommendation of the Group of Central 
Ministers and State Chief Ministers, the Department of Consumer 
Affairs moved a proposal to amend the Essential Commodities Act, 
1955 by deleting all the items listed in clause (a) of Section 2 of the 
Essential Commodi ties Act, 1955 and simultaneously to retain only 
those commodities recommended for continuance by the concerned 
Ministries namely (i) drugs; (ii) foodstuffs including edible oilseeds and 
oils; (iii) fertilizer, whether inorganic, organic or mixed, (iv) pet roleum 
and petroleum products; (v) hank yarn made wholly from cotton; (vi) 
raw jute and jute textile; and (vii) seeds of food -crops and seeds of 
fruits and vegetables, seeds of cattle fodder, and jute seeds. These 
commodities have been considered essential  in the interest of the 
farmers and the large section of the people below poverty line. It was 
also proposed to give powers to the Central Government to add, 
remove and modify any essential commodity in the public interest. 
However, addition/modification of any essential commodity will depend 
on whether there is a scarcity or non -availability of the commodity in a 
situation like war, natural calamities, disruption or threat of disruption of 
supply such essential commodities, which cannot be tackled through 

  
normal trade channels requiring Central Government’s intervention 
under the said Act.  
1.5 The Committee have examined the various issues related to 
prices of essential commodities. The detailed analysis alongwith the 
observations/recommendations of the Co mmittee are given in the 
succeeding Chapters of the Report.  

  
CHAPTER-II 
 
PARAMETERS FOR INCLUSION/EXCLUSION  
OF ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES 
  
The list of essential commodities which was 70 in 1990 was 
gradually reduced to 15 and now under the Essential Commodit ies 
(Amendment) Act 2006 only the following seven commodities have 
been retained as essential commodities:- 
(i) drugs; 
(ii) fertilizer, whether inorganic, organic or mixed; 
(iii) foodstuffs including edible oilseeds and oils; 
(iv) hank yarn made wholly from cotton; 
(v) petroleum and petroleum products; 
(vi) raw jute and jute textile;  
(vii) seeds of food -crops and seeds of fruits and vegetables, 
seeds of cattle fodder, and jute seeds. 
 
2.2 When asked about the basic parameters for inclusion/deletion of 
any commodity in the list of essential commodities, the Department 
stated that the following four criteria/aspects are adopted to declare the 
commodity as essential:- 
(i)   The demand and supply position of the commodity during 
   the last 4-5 years and specific shortage, if any; 
 
(ii) Whether any control/regulation has been resorted to during 
the last five years or so; 
 
(iii)    Supply trends so as to indicate if price variation was far 
above the normal rate of inflation; and 
 
(iv)    Import/export policy profile of the commodity. 
 
2.3 The Committee also enquired as to whether there is any 
mechanism to periodically review the inclusion/deletion of essential 
commodities. In reply, the Ministry stated that the list of essential 
commodities has been reviewed from time to time, with reference to 
the production and supp ly of these commodities and the prevailing 
economic policies of the Government, in consultation with the 

  
concerned administrative Ministries/Departments for these 
commodities. The Ministry also informed that when the inclusion of an 
item was prima facie not justifiable with reference to its essentiality and 
the basic objectives of the Act, such an item should be covered under 
a separate legislation and not under the omnibus provisions of the 
Essential Commodities Act.  
2.4 When enquired about the sort of ex tra monitoring powers the 
Government gets after declaring a commodity as essential commodity, 
the Department informed the Committee that if any new commodities 
other than those seven commodities listed in schedule to the Essential 
Commodities (Amendment) Act, 2006 are to be declared as ‘essential’ 
under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 the validity of such 
commodities will remain essential for a period not exceeding six 
months provided Central Government may in public interest extend 
such period beyond t he said six months.  State Government/UTs have 
also been delegated powers of Essential Commodities Act, 1955 to 
monitor the implementation of Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and 
submit monthly reports to the Government.  The need to continue new 
commodities declared essential is monitored on a monthly basis with 
reference to their price trends and availability in the domestic markets.  
This Department has an Economic Division to monitor these aspects 
and these are submitted on a regular basis to the Committ ee of 
Secretaries and Cabinet Committee on Prices, for its directions, if any.   
2.5 Once a commodity is declared essential, under the provisions of 
Section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, the Central 
Government may for the purpose of maintaining  or increasing supplies 
of any essential commodity or for securing their equitable distribution 
and availability at fair prices, issue orders inter-alia to; 
 a. regulate by licenses, permits or otherwise the production 
           or manufacture of that commodity; 
b. control the price at which it may be bought or sold; 
 c. regulate by licenses, permits or otherwise its storage, 
           transport, distribution, disposal, acquisition use or 
           consumption; 
d. prohibit its withholding from sale.  

  
 
 
2.6 Asked whether the Government contemplates to declare all 
pulses and onion as essential commodities in view of scarcity and less 
production, the Committee was informed that pulses of all kinds 
whether whole or split are already included as essential comm odities 
under the nomenclature “Foodstuffs”.  Therefore, there is no need to 
declare pluses as essential commodities separately. “Onion” was 
declared as essential commodity vide Central Notification dated 
29.06.1999 and subsequently removed from the list o f essential 
commodities vide Central Notification dated 25.11.2004.  The decision 
to remove “Onion” from the list of essential commodities was taken as 
part of the policy evolved by the Committee comprising of some Union 
Ministers and Chief Ministers const ituted during the Conference of 
Chief Ministers on “WTO and Agriculture” held on 21 st May, 2001.  The 
said Committee had decided to dismantle all unnecessary and 
redundant controls on movement and distribution, particularly of 
agricultural commodities, under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955.      
2.7 During evidence the Committee enquired about the reasons for 
steep hike in the prices of onion. The Secretary responded that it was 
due to less production of onion as well as tendency of hoarding in the 
traders.  On this the Committee suggested that the onion should be 
declared as essential commodity for a particular period to check the 
hoarding, the Secretary stated that onion comes under the category of 
vegetable.   
 

  
2.8 The Committee note that under the  Essential Commodities 
(Amendment) Act, 2006, only seven commodities have been 
retained as essential commodities. The Government considers 
four aspects to declare the commodity as essential viz. (i) the 
demand and supply position of the commodity during th e last 4-5 
years and specific shortage, if any; (ii) whether any 
control/regulation has been resorted to during the last five years 
or so; (iii) supply trends so as to indicate if private variation was 
far above the normal rate of inflation; and (iv) import/export policy 
profile of the commodity.  Once the commodity is declared as 
essential, under the provision of section 3 of the Essential 
Commodities Act, the Government may issue orders inter -alia to  
(a) regulate by licenses, permits or otherwise the pro duction or 
manufacture of that commodity; (b) control the price at which it 
may be bought or sold;  (c) regulate by licenses, permits or 
otherwise its storage, transport, distribution, disposal, acquisition 
use or consumption; (d) prohibit its withholding from sale. The 
Committee also note that pulses have already been included as 
essential commodities under the nomenclature ‘Foodstuffs” and, 
therefore, the Department of Consumer Affairs does not feel the 
need to declare it as essential commodity separately .  The 
Committee feel that the due to less production of pulses, the 
country has to import pulses in a large quantity every year to 
meet the consumer demand.  In the opinion of the Committee the 
word “pulses” should be clearly mentioned in the seven 

  
commodities which have been declared as essential.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that Section 3 (iii) of the 
Essential Commodities Act, 2006, should be read as “foodstuffs 
including pulses, edible oilseeds and oils”.   

  
 
2.9 The Committee further note t hat “Onion” was declared as 
essential Commodity vide Central Notification dated 29.6.1999 
which was subsequently removed from the list of essential 
commodities vide Central notification dated 25.11.2004.  The 
Committee are concerned to note that onion is t he commodity 
which is used in every household whether rich or poor 
throughout the year.  There are instances in the past when due to 
short supply of onion in the market, the Government had decided 
to distribute the onion through Super Bazar and Kendriya 
Bhandar on control rate.  The Committee are not convinced with 
the arguments put forth by the Secretary, Department of 
Consumer Affairs that Onion cannot be declared as essential 
commodity as it comes under the category of vegetable.  The 
Committee have obse rved that at times the prices of onion are 
much high as compared to other vegetables in the market.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that in view of the gap in the 
production and demand and supply of onion, the Government 
should review its decision taken on 25.11.2004 and include the 
onion in the list of essential commodities to check hoarding and 
black-marketing and also to make available the onion to 
consumer at a reasonable prices.   

  
CHAPTER - III 
 
MECHANISM TO MONITOR THE PRICES OF ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES 
 
The Committee has been informed that the Price Monitoring 
Cell (PMC) in the Department of Consumer Affairs monitors the prices 
of essential commodities regularly. Prices of some other essential 
commodities, their availability and related development on  National 
and International level are also analyzed by the PMC and highlighted 
in the weekly notes and agenda notes prepared for the meeting of 
Cabinet Committee on Prices (CCP), Committee of Secretaries and 
High Power Prices Monitoring Board (HPPMB). 
3.2 The Price Monitoring Cell (PMC) in the Department of 
Consumer Affairs is entrusted, inter-alia, with the task of monitoring of 
the prices of 14 commodities in the country viz., rice, wheat, atta, 
gram, tur/arhar, tea, milk, sugar, vanaspati, mustard oil, g roundnut oil, 
potato, onion and salt, and other matters concerning price scenario 
based on the information received from other Ministries of the Central 
Government as well as Food and Civil Supplies Departments of the 
State Governments. Daily retail prices and weekly wholesale prices are 
collected from 18 and 37 centres respectively. With effect from 
12.7.2006, nine additional centres have been included in the Daily 
Price Report.  
3.3 The Price Monitoring Cell provides secretarial support to the 
High Powere d Price Monitoring Board, which reviews the prices and 
availability of essential commodities and recommends appropriate 
necessary action to check the rise in prices.  It also formulates 
proposals relating to export and import of essential commodities, 
market interventions etc. for COS/CCP. 
 3.4 The Department of Consumer Affairs have informed the 
Committee that since July, 2006, p rice situation is reviewed at higher 
level in meetings such as Committee of Secretaries and the Cabinet 
Committee on Prices on a regular basis in view of the importance the 

  
Government attaches to controlling price -rise in 14 specified 
commodities, covering major food -grains, pulses, edible oils and 
vegetables and ensuring adequate availability of these commodities. 
Price Monitoring Cell provides secretarial support to these Committees 
and monitors implementation of decisions taken by these Committees. 
3.5 The Committee enquired about the mechanism through which 
the Ministry of Consumer Affair and Ministry of Agriculture co -ordinates 
among themselves and control the disparity between demand and 
supply. The Ministry stated in reply that the Price Monitoring Cell of the 
Department of Consumer Affairs regularly collects, compiles and 
reviews the wholesale and retail prices at different centres. The reports 
prepared on the basis of such price -review, including the 
recommendations for containing prices constitute the basic note for the 
Committee of Secretaries (CoS) and Cabinet Committee on Prices 
(CCP). Ministry of Agriculture is represente d on these Committees and 
the notes prepared in Department of  Consumer Affairs are shared with 
Ministry of Agriculture. Department of Consumer Affairs also heavily 
depends upon Ministry of Agriculture for the various data generated or 
compiled by it, like,  Data on Acreage, Production, Yield, Crop 
prospects, imports of food -grains,  etc. Notes involving policy decision 
and requiring inter-ministerial consultations are shared with each other 
by both the Ministries and representatives of the other ministry inv ited 
for participating in the meetings taken in each Ministry, prior to the 
meetings of the Committee of Secretaries. 
3.6 When asked whether Government proposes to review the 
working of PMC/HPPMB as the prices of Essential Commodities have 
risen unabated, the Department of Consumer Affairs replied that there 
have been no HPPMB meetings for the last two years.  The high level 
meetings of the Cabinet Committee on Prices and Committee of 
Secretaries regularly monitor the price situation.   
3.7 Asked to explain  the reasons as to why despite the number of 
steps being taken to stabilize the price of Essential Commodities, there 
is steep rise in the prices during the last six months, the Department of 

  
Consumer Affairs stated that the Price Monitoring Cell (PMC) in the 
Department of Consumer Affairs is not mandated to control the prices.  
It is entrusted, inter-alia, with the task of monitoring of the prices and 
availability position of essential commodities in the country. 
3.8 The Committee enquired from the Departm ent of Food and 
Public Distribution as to whether any thinking has been given to 
establish some specialized agency to study the market condition so 
that the market intervention strategies are adopted at the right time. 
The Department of Food & Public Distr ibution stated that to keep track 
of the market situation on a daily basis, it monitors domestic prices 
based on the Reports received from the Price Monitoring Cell of the 
Department of Consumer Affairs as well as NCDEX spot prices on the 
Internet.   The i nternational prices are also monitored based on 
information available in the Web -sites of the International Grains 
Council (IGC), United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) etc. 
Regular feedback is obtained from the Department of Agriculture & 
Cooperation regarding production prospects and feedback on market 
conditions is also taken from various stakeholders from time to time.     
 
 
 
 
 
   
 

  
3.9 The Committee have been informed that the Price 
Monitoring Cell (PMC) in the Department of Consumer Affairs 
monitors the prices of 14 commodities namely rice, wheat, atta, 
gram, tur/arhar, tea, milk, sugar, vanaspati, mustard oil, 
groundnut oil, potato, onion and salt, their availability and related 
development on national and international level and prepare a 
weekly note for being placed before the Cabinet Committee on 
Prices.  This Cell recommends appropriate necessary action to 
check the rise in prices.  The Committee find that the Government 
has not been able to check the rise in prices of essential 
Commodities specially wheat, pulses and edible oil which have 
risen manifold in the past few years which in the opinion of the 
Committee is lack of foresightedness on the part of Price 
Monitoring Cell.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department of Consu mer Affairs should review the working of 
Price Monitoring Cell and adopt a strategy to watch the market 
trend of prices which are likely to rise in future, so that there is no 
shortage of Essential Commodities in the market.    

  
 
3.10 The Committee note  that High Powered Price Monitoring 
Board (HPPMB) set up by the Department of Consumer Affairs 
regularly monitors the price situation in the market. The 
Committee, however, are dismayed to note that no meeting of 
HPPMB was held during the last two years which clearly indicates 
that the Government is not at all serious towards the interests of 
consumer welfare.  The Committee feel that when common man is 
hit badly in the situation of uncontrolled price rise, it is the 
responsibility of the Government to set up a mechanism to 
regularly monitor the price situation and take remedial steps. The 
Committee fails to understand as to what purpose will be served 
by merely setting up of HPPMB if it does not hold meetings for 
such a long period. The Committee, therefore  recommend that  
the Department should give directions to HPPMB to hold sittings 
at a fixed interval so that the Government may take timely action 
to check the price rise of Essential Commodities.  
 
  

  
  CHAPTER IV 
CAUSES OF PRICE RISE OF ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES 
 The Committee enquired about the specific causes of price rise 
of essential commodities particularly since the last three years. In 
reply, the Department of Consumer Affairs stated that the basic reason 
for rise in prices of food articles is demand a nd supply mismatch.  
Demand for these commodities is growing on account of increase in 
population and income.  This has coincided with hardening of 
international prices. On the supply side, the availability of land cannot 
increase in line with the increase  in demand. In addition, there is 
increase in the cost of inputs. Moreover, the yield of many crops 
continues to be very low in India. Seasonal factors also contribute to 
price rise. Details for increase in prices as furnished by the Department 
of Consumer Affairs is as under: 
Wheat: The domestic production of wheat during 2005 -06 and 
2006-07 was estimated to be 69.35 million tonnes and 74.89 
million tonnes respectively. However the stocks of wheat had 
reached very low level because of the stagnant  product ion of 
wheat around 69 million tonnes since last 2 years, which  
combined with the global shortfall in production led to rise in 
wheat prices.   
Pulses: There has been perennial demand -supply mismatch in 
case of pulses. The domestic production of pulses af ter 
reaching 14.9 million tonnes during 2003 -04 declined to 13.4 
million tonnes in 2005 -06.  As per the Fourth Advance Estimate 
released by Department of Agriculture & Cooperation, 
production of pulses was 14.23 million tonnes during 2006-07.  
Edible Oils:   In the case of edible oils also there has been 
perennial demand -supply mismatch. On top of it, domestic 
production is estimated to have declined from 27.98 million 
tonnes (2005 -06) to 23.88 million tonnes during 2006 -07 as 
against the demand of oilseeds estimated to be 44.34 million 
tonnes for the year 2006 -07  by the Working Group of the 

  
Planning Commission. Hardening of international prices of 
edible oils and diversion of edible oils for making bio -fuel have 
also contributed to increase in domestic prices of edible oil.  
Milk:   Prices of milk have shown an increase largely due to 
higher exports of Skimmed Milk Powder during the years 2005 -
06 and 2006 -07. Subsequently, on 9.2.2007, a ban was 
imposed on the export of Skimmed Milk Powder which would 
remain valid up to 30.9.07.  Increase in the production cost of 
milk as a result of costly  feed/fodder, has also impacted on the 
prices of milk.  
Onion:  Prices of onion have registered an increase owing to 
higher exports during the year 2006 -07 recorded at 11. 61 lakh 
MT as compared to 8 lakh tonnes during 2005 -06. The overall 
onion production during the year 2006 -07 was estimated to be 
around 66.08 lakh MTs which is higher compared to last year 
production of 62.23 lakh MTs. Farmers / traders have stored 
good quality onions from Rabi produce for further marketing.  
Potato:   Potato production during the year 2006 -07 is 
estimated to be around 270.20 lakh tonnes as against 
production of 264.80 lakh tonnes during 2005 -06. At present, 
supply of potatoes is being made  mainly from cold stores since 
bulk of the potato is produced only in Rabi season. The present 
potato prices are a little higher as compared to last year, 
because of the slow release of the cold stores stock by traders / 
farmers.  
4.2 The Department of Con sumer Affairs have further informed that 
the rise in domestic prices is owing to the combined effect of the 
factors such as, growing demand on account of increase in population 
and income, hardening of international prices, changes in consumption 
pattern, diversion of food grains for fuel, adverse weather and climate 
change, increase in crude oil prices, improvement in income and living 
standards and increase in freight rate.  

  
4.3 The Additional Secretary, Department of Agriculture has 
explained the reasons for hike in prices during evidence as under:- 
“Prices are the outcome of increase in population and 
income levels, etc. Broadly, as you know well, price really 
is the outcome of interplay between demand and supply. 
If there are supply side shortages, pric e will go up; and if 
there is high demand, the price will correspondingly go 
up. Now, higher income means better purchasing power 
on the part of the people. Then, it also means that people 
who are not consuming certain things are now 
consuming those items.  Also, we have mentioned about 
the international prices would also impact on domestic 
prices. Plus, diversion to other usages. Let me give an 
example. Brazil today produces a lot of sugar; the large 
scale sugarcane producers in the world. About 6 MT like 
that but 60 per cent of that now using for out and out for 
sugar production. That means, if it is diverted to 
something else, naturally the price of sugar would go up. 
 
Similarly, a lot of soya oil is being used for bio-fuel. 
That means, the availability of  soya oil for edible 
purposes would go down and correspondingly the prices 
would go up. That is why, the Department is trying to say 
that prices would be determined by a number of factors.”
  
4.4 The Government has taken the following fiscal, administrative  
and monetary measures to bridge the gap between demand and 
supply of essential commodities and to moderate their prices:- 
 
(i) To augment availability of wheat, Public Sector Agencies 
STC, MMTC, PEC have imported about 18.0 lakh tonnes of 
wheat during 2007-08. Period of validity of import of wheat at 
zero duty was extended from 31.12.206 to 28.02.2007 and 
further to 31.12.07. It is now extended until further orders. 
 
(ii) Export of wheat was banned w.e.f. 09.02.2007 up to 
31.12.2007. The ban is now extended until further orders. 
 
(iii) In order to maximize procurement of wheat and paddy, the 
Government has been increasing MSPs and announcing 
bonus in the last 5 years. The Government has fixed the 
MSP of wheat for Crop Year 2007 -08 (to be marketed in 
RMS 2008-09) at Rs. 10 00 per quintal. It also approved an 
incentive bonus of Rs. 100 per quintal during the Kharif 
Marketing Season 2007-2008 for Paddy. 
 

  
(iv) DGFT vide its notification dated 01.04.2008 banned export 
of non -basmati rice. Department of Revenue vide its 
Notification No. 37/2008-Customs dt. 20.03.2008 has issued 
orders for reducing import duty on rice to zero up to 
31.03.2009. Government of India has imposed export duty of 
Rs. 8,000/ - per tonne on basmati rice w.e.f. 10.05.2008. 
Government also directed that the order r egarding removal 
of restrictions on licensing, stock limits and movement of rice 
be kept in abeyance for a period of one year. DGFT vide its 
notification dated 01.04.2008 raised MEP on basmati rice to 
$1200 per tonne. 
 
(v) Government has protected vulnerable s ections of society 
through Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) and 
Antodaya Anna Yojna (AAY). Under the TPDS, wheat, rice, 
sugar and kerosene oils area allocated to State 
Governments for distribution through the Fair Price Shops. 
(vi) The Central Issue P rice for rice and wheat has not been 
revised since 01.07.2002. For wheat it remains at Rs. 4.15 
per kg for BPL and Rs. 2 per kg for AAY. For rice, it is Rs. 
5.65 per kg for BPL and Rs. 3 per kg for AAY. 
 
(vii) Customs duty on import of pulses was reduced to zero  on 
June 8, 2006 and the period of validity of import of pulses at 
zero duty was extended from 31.03.07 to 01.08.2007 and 
further to 31.03.09. 
 
(viii) A ban was imposed on export of pulses with effect from June 
22, 2006 (except export of Kabuli chana w.e.f 7.3.07 ). The 
period of validity of prohibition on export of pulses, which 
was initially upto 31.02.07 was extended upto 31.03.2008. 
DGFT vide its notification dated 01.04.2008 extended the 
prohibition on export of pulses (except Kabuli chana) by 
another year up to 31.3.2009. 
 
(ix) As per initiative of Government, the State agencies (NAFED, 
PEC Ltd., MMTC and STC) have imported about 1.4 Million 
Metric Tonnes (MMT) of pulses during 2007 -08, out of which 
12.13 lakh tonnes have arrived and 10.55 lakh tonnes has 
been disposed of up to 29.5.2008. 
 
(x) During 2008-09, Government has further allowed the import 
of 1.5 million tonnes of pulses by Public Sector Undertaking 
and NAFED for a period of one year. Out of the total 
contracts of 90,000 metric tonnes made by these agencies, 
6616 metric tonnes have arrived up to 29.5.2008. 
 
(xi) Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) have imported 46,500 
tonnes of palm oils during 2007-08. 
 

  
(xii) Department of Revenue vide its notification dated 
01.04.2008 made the following changes in the import duty of 
edible oils:- 
a. Import duty on crude edible oils cut to zero; 
b. Import duty on refined and hydrogenated oils 
reduced to 7.5%; 
c. Import duty on hydrogenated vegetable oils also 
reduced to 7.5%; 
d. Customs duty on butter and ghee was reduced to 
30%. Butter oil was also included vide notification 
dated 29.04.2008. 
 
(xiii) The Government has also withdrawn the 4% additional 
countervailing duty on all edible oils. 
 
(xiv) DGFT vide its notification dated 01.04.2008 prohibited the 
export of edible oils for a year up to 31.3.2009. 
(xv) Government directed that the order regarding removal of 
restrictions on licensing, stock limits and movement of edible 
oils and oilseeds be kept in abeyance for a period of one 
year. 
 
(xvi) Government also directed that 
(i) the Tariff Rate Quota be removed on safflower oil 
 
(ii) the ban on export of castor oil, coconut oil and oils 
produced from minor forest produce, except sesame oil, be 
lifted, and that such exports be closely monitored, and that 
the export of coconut oil be allowed only from Kochi port. 
 
(iii) the ‘deemed export’ of edible oils to 100% export 
oriented units be allowed with the condition that the final 
product be non-edible. 
 
(xvii) When the onion prices stared flaring up, NAFED increased the 
MEP from USD 250 PMT in March/April 2007 to US$ 495 PMT 
in October 2007 to increase the domestic availability of onion. 
The export of onion was also put under license through 
designated canalizing agencies vide Notification No. 22 (RE -
2007)/2004-2009 dated 4 th October, 2007. Furthermore, 
Government also organiz ed sale of onion through mobile 
centers operated by Delhi Government, NAFED, Kendriya 
Bhandar as well as Mother Dairy. These outlets numbering 
around 375, sold onion at Rs 17 -18 per kg when the outside 
price was Rs. 22 -24 per kg. Subsequently, with the dom estic 
prices of onion showing a declining trend, MEP was 
successively reduced. Currently, MEP of onion is US$ 180 
PMT. The export restriction was also lifted w.e.f 16.11.07 having 
regard to the increased availability of kharif onion.  
 

  
(xviii) Custom duty for maize reduced to zero under a tariff Rate 
Quota of 5 lakh per annum vide DGFT notification dated 
01.04.2008. Export of maize has also been banned. 
 
(xix) The Department of Revenue in its notification dated 29 April, 
2008, reduced the import duty on Ski mmed Milk Powder (SMP) 
from 15% to 5%. 
 
(xx) Steps were taken by Reserve Bank of India to reduced liquidity 
in the system by increasing the cash reserve ratio, first to 7% 
w.e.f 6 th August, 2007 and then to 7.5% on 30 October, 2007. 
These steps have mopped  up liquidity in the market of more 
than Rs. 30,000 crores. CRR was hiked by 50 basis points to 
8% in 2 stages (from April 26 th and May 10 th 2008) of 25 basis 
points each. This is expected to mop up Rs. 18,500 crores from 
system. It was further hiked to 8. 25% w.e.f the fortnight 
beginning May 24, 2008. 
 
(xxi) As a measure of abundant precaution, Forward Markets 
Commission (FMC) has on23.01.07, directed the three National 
Exchanges, namely (a) Multi Commodity Exchange of India Ltd., 
(b) National Commodity & Derivatives Exchange Ltd., (c) 
National Multi Commodity Exchange of India Ltd., to delist all 
contracts of tur and urad and to close out all outstanding 
positions in all Tur and Urad contracts at the closing price on 
23.01.07. FMC has also stated that no f urther contract shall be 
launched without its prior approval and permission already 
granted to launch contracts in Urad and Tur stands withdrawn. 
 
(xxii) Similarly, FMC has on, 27.2.2007, directed all the three National 
Exchanges that no new futures contra cts in wheat and rice shall 
be launched. 
 
(xxiii) To contain volatility in the futures prices of wheat, pulses etc. 
Forward Markets Commission (FMC) has taken required 
regulatory measures such as imposition of limits on open 
position, reduction in limits o n daily price fluctuations and 
imposition of additional/special margins. 
 
(xxiv) Forward Market Commission, as on 7.5.2008 suspended futures 
trading in Gram, Potato, Soya oil and Rubber for a period of 4 
months (up to September 6, 2008) 
 
(xxv) Keeping in v iew the prevailing price situation, the Central 
Government had issued a Central Order dated 29.08.2006 
under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 to enable the State 
Governments to invoke Stock Limits in respect of wheat and 
pulses for a period of 6 months.  By virtue of this Order, the 
State Governments/UT Administrations have been empowered 

  
to take effective action to bring out the hoarded stock of these 
items to ensure their availability to the common people at 
reasonable prices. Government has, on 01.09.2 007, extended 
the validity of the Central Order by another six months. It has 
not been extended further by six months from 1.3.2008 till 
31.08.2008. Edible oils, oilseeds, rice and paddy have now also 
been included within the ambit of the above Central Order. 
 
(xxvi) Government has taken initiatives such as the National Food 
Security Mission (NFSM), Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojna (RKVY)      
to improve the production and productivity in agriculture.  
 
 
4.5 The Committee sought suggestions/views of various 
experts/organizations viz (i) Confederation of Indian Industry (CII); (ii) 
The Central Organization for Oil Industry and Trade; (iii) Institute for 
Social and Economic Change; (iv) M.S.Swaminathan Research 
Foundation; (v) Institute of Economic Growth; (vi) Ja wahar Lal 
University; and (vii) Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry (FICCI). In his memorandum, Shri M.S.Swaminathan, 
Chairman, M.S.Swaminathan Research Foundation suggested the 
following steps for reining the prices of various commoditie s in the 
country:- 
(i) Ban on futures trading in all essential commodities; 
 
(ii) Setting and enforcing strict central stock limits for wheat and 
severe action against hoarders; 
 
(iii) Move immediately towards a universal PDS so as to stabilize 
foodgrain prices and provi de relief to a large section of so -
called APL households who are often almost as poor as 
those classified as BPL; 
 
(iv) Enhance domestic procurement efforts and reduce 
dependence on imports; 
 
(v) Expand NREGS and implement it honestly and efficiently; 
 
(vi) Implement th e recommendations of the National 
Commission on Farmers in improving the productivity and 
profitability of pulses and oilseeds; 
 
(vii) Introduce the rural godown and warehousing scheme to 
prevent distress sales of farm commodities. 

  
 
4.6 The Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry 
(FICCI) in Memorandum furnished to the Committee have suggested 
the following steps to check the price rise in primary articles:- 
(i) Improve farm productivity; 
 
(ii) Strengthen agricultural extension system; 
(iii) Make India ‘One Common Market’ 
 
(iv) Increase awareness amongst farmers about futures 
trading as an effective price discovery mechanism; and 
 
(v) Encourage private sector participation in developing agri -
marketing infrastructure and in technology development 
and transfer. 
 
4.7 When aske d about the steps being taken to bring an 
improvement in marketing to reduce the excessive share going to the 
middle man and to ensure better realization for the farmers and in turn 
to reduce price rise, the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation 
stated that they are implementing Price Support Scheme (PSS) for 
procurement of oilseeds and pulses through NAFED which is the 
Central nodal agency for procurement of notified oilseeds and pulses 
at the Minimum Support Price (MSP) declared by the Government. 
NAFED undertakes procurement of oilseeds and pulses under PSS as 
and when prices fall below the MSP. Procurement under PSS is 
continued till prices stabilize at or above the MSP. Losses, if any, 
incurred by NAFED in undertaking MSP operations are fully 
reimbursed by the Central Government. Profit, if any, earned in 
undertaking MSP operations is credited to the Central Government.  
 
4.8 The Cooperation Division is also implementing Market 
Interventions Scheme (MIS) on the request of a State/UT Government 
for procurement of agricultural and horticultural commodities generally 
perishable in nature and not covered under Price Support Scheme. 
The MIS is implemented in order to protect the growers of these 
commodities from making distress sale in the event of bumper crop 

  
when there is glut in the market and the prices tend to fall below 
economic levels/cost of production. Procurement under MIS is made 
by NAFED as Central agency and by the State designated agencies. 
Losses, if any, incurred by the procuring agencies ar e shared between 
Central Government and the concerned State Government on 50:50 
basis (75:25 in case of North -Eastern States). However, the amount of 
loss to be shared between Central Government and the concerned 
State Government is restricted to 25% of th e procurement cost. Profit, 
if any, earned by the procuring agencies is retained by them. 
4.9 Further, purchases under PSS and MIS are undertaken directly 
from the farmers without involving the middleman. The objective of 
both the schemes is to help the fa rmers in getting remunerative prices 
for their produce. 
4.10 Besides, the following schemes/interventions are also 
operational to control the prices of certain agricultural inputs:- 
(i) From Kharif 2006 -07, farmers are .being provided crop 
loan upto Rs. 3.00 lakh at 7 per cent rate of interest. 
 
(ii) A Special Rehabilitation Package has been launched in 
September, 2006 in31 specially distressed districts in 
four States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka 
and Kerala. 
 
(iii) A National Rainfed Area De velopment Authority has 
been set up to expand area under irrigation, improved 
water management with watershed development and rain 
harvesting in the rainfed areas. 
 
(iv) Development/Strengthening of Agricultural Marketing 
Infrastructure, Grading & Standardization.  
 
4.11 When enquired about the mechanism through which the, 
Department of Consumer Affairs, Department of Food and Ministry of 
Agriculture co -ordinate among themselves and control the disparity 
between demand and supply of various foodgrains, the Committee was 
informed that the Department of Food & Public Distribution is mainly 
concerned with demand and supply of foodgrains for the TPDS and 
Welfare Schemes while the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation 
are concerned with the overall domestic d emand and supply of 

  
foodgrains. There are frequent meetings of the two departments to 
discuss the matter of demand and supply of  foodgrains.   
4.12 On being asked as to the long -term and short term strategies 
adopted to address the issue of mismatch betwe en demand and 
supply of these items so as to arrest the trend of hike in prices, the 
Ministry informed that the short -term strategy to contain rise in prices 
on account of mismatch between demand and supply includes: 
(a) imports and release or distribution of imported goods 
through various   PSUs;  
 
(b) reduction in import duty;  
 
(c)  subsidy to the PSUs to compensate for the loss incurred on 
imports and  distribution of goods in domestic market  
suspension of exports;  
 
(d) release of stock from the buffer stocks availab le with FCI 
through Targeted  Public Distribution System and under 
Antyodaya Anna Programme;  
 
(e) Keeping the issue prices for supply through PDS and for 
Antyodaya Anna Progamme  lower than market prices;  
 
(f) Subsidising inputs, like, fertilizers, water and electricity.  
 
  

  
 
4.13 The Committee express their concern over the rising trend 
in the prices of most of the essential commodities during the last 
two years. Prices of commodities in the physical market are 
governed by demand and supply sectors prevailing in the market. 
The Committee have noted that mismatch between demand and 
supply is the main contributor to the hike in prices of essential 
commodities specifically the foodgrains. The Committee have 
been given to understand that the rise in domestic prices is owing 
to the combined effect of the factors such as growing demand on 
account of increase in population and income, hardening of 
international prices, changes in consumption, diversion of 
foodgrains for fuel, adverse weather and climate change, increase 
in crude oil prices, improvement in income and living standards 
and increase in freight rate.  
The Committee note that various steps have been taken by 
the Government to contain the price rise which include measures 
like augmenting domestic supplies of w heat and pulses through 
imports at reduced rates of duty and ban on imports; and 
reduction in import duty on edible oils etc. The Government has 
also imposed stock limits for wheat, pulses, edible oil, oilseeds 
and rice. On the monetary side, RBI has incre ased CRR by .25 
points on two occasions to reduce money supply in the market to 
reduce inflationary pressures on prices. For improving 
productivity and production in the medium -term in the 

  
agricultural sector, the Government have taken initiatives such as 
National Food Security Mission and Rashtriya Krishi Vikas 
Yojana. The Committee note that 40 per cent of the edible oil 
requirement of the country is met by the imports which is 
susceptible to international pressures on price front. Therefore, 
its impact i s felt on the price rise of the edible oils in domestic 
sector also. The Committee feel that although the Government is 
vigilant about the adverse impact of price rise on the economy of 
the country culminating into inflationary trends yet the measures 
taken by the Government are not proving to be effective in 
bringing down the prices of the essential commodities. The 
Committee desire that the Department in consultation with other 
concerned Departments should chalk out a long -term strategy to 
meet such a sit uation so that it does not assume gigantic 
proportions, affecting the development and growth of the country. 
They should also take such steps that would insulate the prices in 
the country from international price fluctuations.  
 
 

  
4.14 The Committee fur ther note that less production of 
agricultural produce whether it is oil, pulses or wheat also 
contributes to the rise in prices of these commodities. The 
Committee note that the Planning Commission has constituted a 
Working Group on crop husbandary, agric ultural inputs, demand 
and supply projections and agricultural statistics for the Eleventh 
Five Year Plan. The Working Group has given the demand and 
supply projections for each year of the plan for foodgrains, 
oilseeds, sugarcane, cotton, jute and mesta. From the statement 
of gap between demand and production of different kinds of 
foodgrains, it has been observed that there will be gap between 
the production and demand of the agricultural produce in the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan. The Committee feel that to i ncrease 
agricultural production, there is need to improve the condition of 
soil, its nutrient content, water management and to grow 
alternative crops. In the opinion of the Committee, the 
Agricultural Ministry should organize latest researches, adopt 
new t echnologies and measures to raise agricultural production 
i.e. wheat, rice, oilseeds and pulses. The Government should 
make arrangements for telecasting the new technology for 
production of foodgrains on electronic media on the pattern of   
‘Krishi Darshan ’. As suggested by Central Organization for Oil, 
Industry and Trade (COOIT), use of vegetable oil for bio -fuel 
should not be permitted as long as local production of these oils 
is short to meet the country’s demand for food. The Committee, at 

  
the same time , also desire that conversion of vegetable oil, soya 
oil to bio fuel should be restricted; instead bio diesel plant should 
utilize only oil from non -edible oilseeds from plants grown on 
wasteland. The Committee, therefore, recommend that to increase 
supply, agriculture should be made a profitable avocation and the 
Government should give highest priority to provide the small and 
marginal farmers, opportunity for assured and remunerative 
marketing of their produce at the time of harvesting. The nodal 
ministry should also direct Agriculture Ministry and Agriculture 
Research Institutes and Universities to take up the responsibility 
for providing necessary inputs, particularly seeds of appropriate 
varieties and the nutrients needed for a good and healthy crop. 
  

  
  
CHAPTER V 
DEMAND AND PRODUCTION OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE 
 
The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation furnished the 
following data showing the demand and estimated production of wheat, 
rice, pulses and edible oil seeds for the last 5 years:- 
(a)    Rice                                          (Million Tonnes) 
Year Demand  
 
Estimated 
Production 
2002-03 86.59 71.82 
2003-04 87.92 88.53 
2004-05 89.24 83.13 
2005-06 90.54 91.79 
2006-07* 91.84 92.76 
 
(b)   Wheat           (Million Tonnes) 
Year Demand  
 
Estimated 
Production 
2002-03 66.10 65.76 
2003-04 67.16 72.15 
2004-05 68.12 68.64 
2005-06 69.25 69.35 
2006-07* 70.29 74.89 
 
(c)    Pulses                                    (Million Tonnes) 
Year Demand  Estimated  
Production 
2002-03 12.81 11.13 
2003-04 13.02 14.91 
2004-05 13.23 13.13 
2005-06 13.43 13.39 
2006-07* 13.64 14.23 
 
(d)    Oilseeds               (Million Tonnes) 
Year Demand  Estimated  
Production 
2002-03 25.26 14.84 
2003-04 25.69 25.19 
2004-05 26.12 24.35 
2005-06 26.54 27.98 
2006-07* 26.97 23.88 
 

  
5.2 As regards the efforts made by the Government to increase the 
production of foodgrains, t he Ministry of Agriculture informed the 
Committee that to increases production of cereals, wheat and rice, a 
centrally sponsored Integrated Cereal s Development Programme 
(ICDP) has been in operation from October, 2000. Under the 
programme, assistance is provided to 90:10 basis between the 
Government of India and the States for prorogation of 
improved/hybrids technology, varietal replacement and prod uction of 
certified seeds, pest management, etc. To increase the production of 
edible oil and Pulses etc., a centrally sponsored scheme called 
‘Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize 
(ISOPOM)’ is under operation since April, 2004. Under this scheme, 
assistance is provided on 75:25 basis by the Government of India and 
the State Governments. 
5.3 Asked whether the Government has any mechanism to have 
periodic demand/ supply projections of different essential commodities 
so as to take timely action in this regard, the Department of Consumer 
Affairs informed the Committee that the Planning Commission 
constituted a Working Group on “Crop Husbandry, Agricultural Inputs, 
Demand and Supply Projections and Agricultural Statistics for the 11 th 
Five Y ear Plan (2007 -2012)”.  This Working Group has given the 
demand supply projection for each year of the plan for foodgrains, 
oilseeds, sugarcane, cotton and jute & mesta. A similar Working Group 
was constituted by the Planning Commission for the 10 th Five Y ear 
Plan. A statement on the projections for 11 th Plan is given in table 
below:-   
Production 
 
Year 
 
Projected Production (Million Tonnes) 
Rice Wheat Coarse 
Cereals 
Cereals Pulses Foodgrains  Oilseeds Sugarcane 
1 2 3 4 5(=2+3+4) 6 7 (=5+6) 8 9 
2007-
08 
93.59 69.40 36.22 199.20 14.03 213.23 32.64 312.37 
2008-
09 
94.56 70.11 36.59 201.26 14.51 215.77 35.42 317.66 
2009-
10 
95.54 70.84 36.97 203.36 15.01 218.37 38.43 322.95 
2010-
11 
96.54 71.59 37.36 205.49 15.53 221.02 41.70 328.24 

  
2011-
12 
97.56 72.34 37.76 207.66 16.06 223.72 45.24 333.54 
Demand 
 
Year 
 
Demand (Million Tonnes) 
Rice Wheat Coarse 
Cereals 
Cereals Pulses Foodgrains  Oilseeds Sugarcane 
1 2 3 4 5(=2+3+4) 6 7 (=5+6) 8 9 
2007-
08 
90.91 71.19 35.14 197.25 16.77 214.02 45.56 261.75 
2008-
09 
92.87 72.72 35.89 201.49 17.51 219.01 47.43 275.91 
2009-
10 
94.83 74.26 36.65 205.75 18.29 224.04 49.35 290.74 
2010-
11 
96.81 75.80 37.42 210.04 19.08 229.12 51.34 306.28 
2011-
12 
98.79 77.36 38.19 214.35 19.91 234.26 53.39 322.54 
Gap between Production and Demand 
 
Year 
 
Gap (Million Tonnes) 
Rice Wheat Coarse 
Cereals 
Cereals Pulses Foodgrains  Oilseeds Sugarcane 
1 2 3 4 5(=2+3+4) 6 7 (=5+6) 8 9 
2007-
08 
2.67 -1.79 1.08 1.95 -2.74 -0.79 -12.92 50.62 
2008-
09 
1.69 -2.61 0.70 -0.23 -3.00 -3.23 -12.01 41.75 
2009-
10 
0.71 -3.41 0.32 -2.39 -3.28 -5.67 -10.92 32.21 
2010-
11 
-0.27 -4.22 -0.06 -4.55 -3.56 -8.11 9.65 21.97 
2011-
12 
-1.23 -5.02 -0.43 -6.69 -3.85 -10.54 -8.15 11.00 
Source: Working Group Report for the 11th plan  
 
5.4 When asked about the measures taken to increase the 
production of foodgrains, the Secretary, Department of Consumer 
Affairs stated during evidence:- 
“If the land under cultivation has to be increased, either 
the prices to the cultivator should be remunerative or 
productivity of land should b e higher. Our productivity of 
any agricultural produce, whether it is oil, pulses or 
wheat, should improve. Now, that is within the Agriculture 
Department. That is where, as my colleague mentioned, 
they have their schemes and have submitted them to the 
Planning Commission also in the Eleventh Plan 
document that they would have certain schemes to 
improve the productivity as well as the remunerative 
prices to the farmers”.   
 
5.5 When asked Whether the Department has maintained any data 
with regard to land under cultivation of specific foodgrains items, which 
have been declared as essential commodities, the Department of 

  
Consumer Affairs informed that they rely on the various estimates 
prepared in the Ministry of Agriculture in respect of land under 
cultivation of specific food -grains items, including, wheat, rice, pulses 
and edible oils. The data/estimates on the acreage of major crops, as 
on 27.7.2007, as reported in “All India Crop situation of kharif (2007 -
08)” prepared by the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation are 
given in a table below: 
              (Area in Million Hectares) 
Commodities 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08* 
(Kharif) 
Wheat 26.60 26.38 26.48 27.99   
Pulses 23.46 22.76 22.39 23.19 9.11(7.49) 
Gram 7.05 6.71 6.93 7.49  
Tur 3.52 3.52 3.58 3.56 2.86(2.75) 
Nine Oilseeds 23.66 27.52 27.86 26.51 13.74(12.91) 
Groundnut  5.99 6.64 6.74 5.62 3.91(3.46) 
Rapeseed & 
Mustard  
5.43 7.32 7.28 6.79  
Soyabean 6.55 7.57 7.71 8.33 7.80(7.34) 
 
* Area sown reported of Kharif 2007-08 as on 27.07.2007,  
5.6 The availability of agricultural land is decreasing mainly due to 
increase in population and diversion of agricultural land for non -
agricultural purposes such as urbanization, roads, industries etc. 
Therefore, there is a concern for maintaining  sustainable agricultural 
production to meet the requirement of increasing population in the 
country. However, the net shown area has been maintained at around 
140-142 million hectares during last more than 37 years. Further, 
through improvement in cropping intensity, the gross cropped area has 
increased from 165.79 million hectares in 1970 -71 to 192.80 million 
hectares in 2005 -06. Along with this yield levels have also been 
improved which enabled the country to meet the increasing demand for 
foodgrains during these years. 

  
5.7 The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has taken a 
number of initiatives during 2007 -08 in addition to the steps taken 
earlier. These include the launch of two major programmes, namely, 
the National Food Security Mission (NFSM) to step up production of 
rice, wheat and pulses and the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) 
to incentivize the States to invest more in the agriculture and allied 
sectors. A National Policy for Farmers, 2007 has been approved and 
its main aim is to focus on the economic well -being of the farmers in 
addition to production and productivity. The National Rainfed Area 
Authority (NRAA) has been operationalized to coordinate and address 
the problems of rainfed agriculture. A Weather Based Crop Insurance 
Scheme (WBCIS) has been introduced on a pilot  basis, which is under 
implementation in addition to National Agricultural Insurance Scheme 
to cover the farmers’ risk.  
5.8 Central Organization for Oil Industry and Trade (COOIT) 
presented its views on the subject an d cited the reason for price rise in 
edible oils due to demand -supply mismatch caused by stagnant 
oilseeds production in India and increasing dependence on imports.  
The Department of Agriculture informed that the area under Oilseeds 
has increased from 18. 91 million hectare in 1981 -82 to 22.64 million 
hectares in 2001 -02 and further to 26.51 million hectare in 2006 -07.  
Production of oilseeds has increased from 20.66 million tonnes in 
2001-02 to 24.29 million tonnes in 2006 -07 and it is estimated to be 
28.82 million tonnes in 2007 -08.  However, there is large gap between 
demand and supply and the gap is met through imports.  
5.9 The steps taken by the Government to increase the production 
and productivity of pulses as a medium term strategy during 11 th Five 
Year Plan are:- 
(a) Diversification of area from rice-wheat cropping system in 
the States of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar 
to chickpea and early pigeonpea; 
 
(b) Replacing less reminerative cereals by pulses in rainfed 
areas; 

  
 
(c) Introduction and popularization of short duration varieties 
of chickpea, lentil, urdbean and mungbean in rice fallows 
in eastern India (U.P., Jharkhan, Bihar and West Bengal) 
and coastal peninsula region (A.P., Karnataka and T.N.); 
 
(d) Popularization of pulses as intercrops with coarse  
cereals, cotton, sugarcane etc., 
 
(e) Popularization of Urdbean and mungbean during 
spring/summer as catch crops in intensive cropping 
system areas of northern region; 
 
(f) Promotion of water harvesting structures in rainfed areas 
growing pulse crops; 
(g) Promotion o f sprinkler sets for irrigation to bring more 
area under assured irrigation with efficient use of water; 
 
(h) Keeping in view the low seed replacement rate in pulse 
crops, the production of certified seeds of pulses has to 
be augmented substantially. The produ ction of breeder 
seed and certified seed of pulses is required to be 
doubled in the next 3 -5 years so as to raise the SRR of 
pulses from existing 5-7% to 25%. 
 
(i) The entire quantity of the breeder seeds produced by the 
ICAR/SAUs for the next 3 -5 years is to be allocated to 
the States for further multiplication into certified seeds. 
 
 
5.10 For increasing the production and productivity of oilseeds, 
oilseeds production programmes are being implemented under 
ISOPOM from 1 st April, 2004 in 14 major oilseeds growi ng States viz; 
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil 
Nadu, U.P. and West Bengal.  
5.11 Increasing productivity is one of the important measures to 
moderate the price movement and reduce import dependence. It is 
also informed that Ministry of Agriculture is involved in giving estimates 
of acreage, yield and production in respect of agricultural commodities.  
Officials of the Consumer Affairs interact with Ministry to Ag riculture in 
various forums, including various meetings convened to review/monitor 

  
prices, where all possible short, medium and long -term measures to 
contain prices are discussed.   
5.12 Department of Consumer Affairs has also informed that there is 
decline in cultivatable land, area sown and land degradation is on the 
rise. 
5.13 The Department of Agriculture & Cooperation is concerned with 
the production of wheat, rice, oilseeds and pulses. The supply and 
distribution aspect falls under the purview of Depa rtment of Food and 
Public  Distribution.  
5.14 When asked about the measures to increase the production of 
foodgrains and edible oil, the representatives of FICCI stated during 
evidence:- 
“First of all there is an urgent need to increase 
productivity of cr ops. As of now the productivity of crops has 
been falling. There is an urgent need. In this case we suggest 
that there is need for private sector participation and the private 
sector is also very keen to involve themselves in this area and 
the case of incr easing productivity has to be taken up on a war 
footing.  
As far as the question of diversification of crop as a whole is 
concerned and the area under cultivation is concerned, the 
country as a whole is going through a diversification of 
agriculture in the  sense that earlier the crop pattern was 
dominated by rice and wheat for a long time, but now in some 
States horticulture has been coming up in a major way. To what 
extent this diversification in agriculture is going to benefit Indian 
agriculture is again a researchable area. 
But as far as we see, out exports are rising and as far as 
horticulture crops are concerned, it is too early to say whether 
the proposed cultivable area under different crops is going to 
benefit because if we are diversifying from whea t and rice and 
going to grow horticulture and oilseed crops, there is the issue 
of food security. But in case we are going to grow horticulture 
crops, it is going to enhance our exports. There has to be some 
balance between the cultivable area being propos ed under 
different crops in the country.” 
 
5.15 Asked as to how the private sector can contribute in enhancing 
the productivity of different crops, the representatives of FICCI replied 
as under:- 
“Right now the Government Research Organizations are 
developing new varieties of seeds. In case the private 

  
sector is also allowed to intervene in that, that can also 
help. The most important thing is that right now extension 
system of the Government is not really working properly. 
So, if the extension system is en hanced by involving the 
private sector, that can really boost productivity of crops. 
We have the successful story of PEPSI where 
contract forming is allowed. They are giving seeds on 
their own. They have extension workers who are really 
helping the farmers in adopting new varieties. If that kind 
of a model is implemented, that can help in improving 
productivity.” 
 
5.16 In reply to above query, the Experts who appeared before the 
Committee informed that prediction of supply of essential commodities 
is very important today because the Government also needs to plan its 
Food Policy in advance, particularly in storage and to take a decision 
on export to obtain best results. This can be done through scientific 
and economic process. They also informed that the Inst itute of 
Economic Growth is a part of the process of short -term forecasting for 
two years based on econometric model and this is also done with the 
help of satellite imagery and other meteorological data. For short -term 
projection, scientific data based on  knowledge of rainfall, possibly on 
assumption that rainfall will be normal, other infrastructure variables 
and price variables are taken into consideration. For longer period 
prediction however we have to see the behaviour of the prices over a 
period of many years and then make the prediction.  
5.17 When asked whether the Department of Consumer Affairs being 
the nodal Department, on the issue of price rise of essential 
commodities, has interacted with the concerned Ministries particularly 
the Ministry of A griculture for taking note of the initiatives taken to 
increase the agricultural productivity, the Department informed that 
Officials of the Consumer Affairs interact with Ministry of Agriculture in 
various forums, including various meetings convened to review/monitor 
prices, where all possible short, medium and long -term measures to 
contain prices are discussed. Increasing productivity is one of the 
important measures to moderate the price movement and reduce 
import dependence. Ministry of Agriculture has taken steps to 

  
disseminate results of research in agricultural universities to farmers. 
An official of Department of Consumer Affairs also attends weekly 
meetings on Crop Weather Watch Group of the Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation.  This Group discu sses issues relating to 
production, yield, acreage, weather outlook, prices situation, fertiliser 
and reservoir status etc. 
 

  
 
5.18 From the Statement of demand and estimated production of 
foodgrains, the Committee observed that the production of 
foodgrains during the last five years was less as compared to 
their demand. For example, in 2002 -03, the demand of rice was 
86.59 million tonnes whereas the production was only 71.82 
million tonnes. Similarly, during 2004 -05, the demand of rice was 
89.24 million tonnes but the production was 83.13 million tonnes. 
In the case of wheat, pulses and oilseeds, the production was 
less than the demand in the country for the last five years. The 
reasons for less production of foodgrains are stated to be 
increase in popul ation and diversion of agricultural land for non -
agricultural purpose such as urbanization, roads, industries etc. 
In order to increase the production of agricultural produce, the 
Government of India has been implementing a number of 
schemes viz. Integrated Cereals Development Programme (ICDP), 
Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize 
(ISOPOM). The Department of Agricultural and Cooperation has 
also taken a number of initiatives to enhance the production of 
foodgrains during 2007-08 which includes two major programmes 
namely, The National Food Security Mission (NFSM) and 
Rashtriya Krishi  Vikas Yojana (RKVY) to incentivize the states to 
invest more in agricultural and allied sectors. A National Policy 
for Farmers 2007 has also been approved for economic well being 
of farmers. The National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA) has been 
operationalized to coordinate and address the problem of rainfed 
agriculture. Besides, a Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme 
(WBCIS) has been introduced in addition to National Agricultural 
Insurance Scheme to cover the farmers’ risk. The Committee are 
of the opinion that unless and until these schemes and 
programmes are implemented in letter and spirit, the situation will 
remain unchanged. The Committee, therefore, reco mmend that 
the Government should make sincere efforts to persuade the 

  
State Governments to implement the aforesaid programmes 
/schemes/ projects to maintain sustainable agricultural 
production to meet the requirement of increasing population in 
the country. 

  
5.19 The Committee are constrained to note that despite the 
various measures undertaken by the Government, the production 
of oilseeds in the country has not increased. Although the area 
under oilseeds has increased from 18.91 million hectare in 1980 -
81 to 22.64 million hectares in 2006 -07 and the production of 
oilseeds has increased from 20.66 million tonnes in 2001 -02 to 
24.89 million tonnes in 2006 -07, still the dependency on import to 
meet the requirement of oilseed in the country cannot be negated. 
Taking note of the indigenous production and imports alongwith 
the overall demand and supply position of oilseeds and edible oil 
in the country, the Committee feel that there is an urgent need to 
pay more attention to R&D for improved varieties of seeds an d 
improved technologies for production of oilseeds. Farmers 
should be made aware of the R&D technology and given 
incentives for opting of production of oilseeds through result 
oriented scheme/plan. The Committee feel that to bridge the gap 
between demand a nd supply of edible oil, the increase in 
production of oilseeds is desirable. To reduce the dependency on 
imported edible oils, efforts for developing improved high -
yielding varieties of oilseeds through Seed Corporation of India 
need to be geared up. For this, Government should make a policy 
to make available good quality seeds at cheaper rates and 
educate farmers about latest methods of agriculture. So far the 
water conservation and irrigation is concerned, scope of drip 
irrigation should be extended.  Th e Committee therefore, strongly 
recommend that Government should think of ways and means to 
make available disposable drip system within the reach of every 
farmer that would result in water conservation and there will be 
surety of irrigation.  Result -oriented action should also be taken 
to promote and popularize the use of non -traditional secondary 
source of edible oil. The Committee urge upon the Government to 
make available high yielding seeds and fertilizers in time to boost 
small farmers’ crop production capacity.   

  
 
CHAPTER VI 
IMPORT/EXPORT OF FOODGRAINS 
 
The Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) is primarily concerned 
with food security of the country. Government constantly reviews the  
stock position of foodgrains with it in the Central Pool vis -à-vis the 
prescribed buffer norms, production of foodgrains in the country, trend 
for procurement for Central Pool, requirement for Public Distribution 
System (PDS) and other welfare schemes, op en market prices, etc. A 
decision to import or export foodgrains on Government account is 
taken depending on the overall situation. There was no import of 
foodgrains for the Central Pool during 2004 -05. However, keeping in 
view the reduction in wheat stock s in the Central Pool, the need to 
keep a check on the open market prices of wheat as well as to 
augment the domestic availability of wheat and since the Government 
is fully committed not to compromise in the matter of food security, a 
decision was taken o n 1 st February, 2006 to permit State Trading 
Corporation to import 5 lakh MTs of wheat at the Southern ports only. 
Wheat is being imported for the last two years.   
 6.2 The Committee have been informed that the decision to export 
and import foodgrains is based on the domestic production of 
foodgrains and the demand of foodgrains within the country. Imports 
and exports are done by private/public sector importers if the item is on 
Open General License (OGL) based on their commercial 
consideration. In case of  foodgrains required for Targeted Public 
Distribution System (TPDS) and other Government schemes, the 
procurement, market prices and other relevant factors are taken into 
account and decision to import is taken to meet the requirements to the 
extent of sho rtfall.  Sometimes, Government also imports foodgrains 
for sale in the domestic market to keep prices stable and ensure 
adequate buffer stocks. 

  
 
 
6.3 The Department of Consumer Affairs has informed that the 
Government takes the decisions about import/expor t of food grains at 
the highest level in a holistic manner and after consulting all concerned 
ministries. Various objectives are prioritized before the final decision is 
taken. The objectives include: Food security, the requirement for Public 
Distribution System, increased festival demand, containing inflation, 
providing higher prices and higher income to farmers (by allowing 
exports and lowering imports), need to establish credibility of India in 
the international market as a reliable supplier.  
6.4 The De partment of Agriculture and Cooperation furnished the 
following details of import/export of wheat, rice, pulses and edible oil 
seeds for the last five years :-  
               (Million Tonnes) 
   Rice 
Year Import $             
('000 Tonnes) 
Export $             
('000 Tonnes) 
2002-03 0.87 4967.87 
2003-04 0.54 3412.06 
2004-05 - 4778.10 
2005-06 0.26 4088.17 
2006-07* 0.16 4745.52 
 
Wheat   
Year Import $             
('000 Tonnes) 
Export $             
('000 Tonnes) 
2002-03 - 3671.25 
2003-04 0.46 4093.08 
2004-05 0.22 2009.35 
2005-06 - 746.18 
2006-07* 5500**  47.83 
 
Pulses   
Year Import $             
('000 Tonnes) 
Export $             
('000 Tonnes) 
2002-03 1992.29 148.08 
2003-04 1723.33 153.88 
2004-05 1339.45 271.18 

  
2005-06 1695.95 447.44 
2006-07* 2255.65 247.42 
 
 
Oils 
                                                     (‘000 tonnes) 
Year Vegetable Oil  
Export$ Import$ 
2002-03 NA 4365.03 
2003-04 NA 5290.30 
2004-05 NA 4542.00 
2005-06 NA 4288.10 
2006-07* NA 4269.37 
2007-08 NA 4902.80 
NA : Not Available 
 
6.5 The country -wise import of wheat for the year 2006 -07 and 
2007-08 is given below:- 
Country of Origin Qty. imported (Lakh 
MT) 2006-07 
Qty. Contracted 
(Lakh MT) 2007-08 
Australia 14.282 0.05 
Canada 11.855 3.06 
CIS 20.18 9.95 
France 2.602 - 
Argentina 1.521 - 
Hungary 4.10 - 
Grand Total 54.540 13.06 
 
6.6 The Department of Food and Public Distribution informed that 
estimates of production and consumption demand of foodgrains are 
periodically received from the Department of  Agriculture a nd 
Cooperation.  These are examined in detail in the Department of Food 
& Public Distribution in order to make timely and appropriate action as 
necessary. For example whenever the production of foodgrains is 
lesser than the demand, recommendations may be m ade for export 
bans and zero duty imports on private account in order to improve the 
domestic availability and contain rise in prices. Various agencies of the 
Central Government such STC, PEC and MMTC facilitate imports. 
Global tenders are floated as per t erms and conditions finalized from 

  
time to time. NAFED, PEC Ltd, MMTC and STC target to import 1.5 
Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) of imports of pulses during 2007 -08.  Out 
of the total contracts of 10.40 lakh tonnes made by these agencies, 
2.43 lakh tonnes ha ve arrived up to 31.7.07. Depending on differential 
between domestic and international prices, the Government would try 
to limit its imports to the level of gap between domestic demand and 
supply. 
6.7 When asked about the reasons for import of wheat during  the 
year 2006-07 as well as the proposed imports during the year 2007-08, 
specifically when the availability of wheat in the country exceeds the 
demand during each of the year, the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution replied that the production of wheat in Crop year 2005 -06 
(which was marketed in RMS 2006 -07) was 69.35 million tonnes while 
the demand of wheat in 2005 -06 was 69.25 million tonnes of wheat.    
At the start of the RMS 2006 -07, i.e. on 1 st April, 2006, the stocks of 
wheat in the Central Pool were only 20.1 lakh tonnes against the buffer 
norm of 40 lakh tonnes of wheat.  During RMS 2006 -07   procurement 
of wheat for the Central Pool was only 92.3 lakh tonnes due to high 
open market prices, less than targeted production, less market arrivals, 
negative market sentiments and more private participation.   In order to 
make up the shortfall for the TPDS and Welfare Schemes, the 
Government took decisions to import 5.5 million tonnes of wheat in 
order to ensure food security. As further informed by the Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation, production of wheat in Crop Year 2006 -
07 ( which was marketed in RMS 2007 -08)  is estimated  to be 74.89 
million tonnes while the demand of wheat according to the Department 
of  Agriculture and Cooperation, i s estimated to be 70.29 million 
tonnes. This demand is for the country as a whole.    At the start of the 
RMS 2007-08, i.e. as on 1.4.2007, the stocks of wheat in the Central 
Pool were 45.6 lakh tonnes against the buffer norm of 40 lakh tonnes.   
However, procurement of wheat in RMS 2007 -08 was only 111 lakh 
tonnes against the requirement of 150 lakh tonnes for the TPDS and 
Welfare Schemes.   In order to make up the shortfall, the Government 

  
took decisions to import wheat for the Central Pool. The State Tra ding 
Corporation of India Ltd.(STC), New Delhi were authorized by 
Government  for import of wheat on Government Account during 2006 -
07 and 2007-08. 
6.8 The Department of Food and Public Distribution also informed 
that the stocks of wheat, rice, coarse grains and sugar as on 01.3.2007 
with FCI and State agencies were 51.0 lakh tons, 139.67 lakh tons, 
0.05 lakh tons and 139 lakh tons, respectively. The Government is not 
maintaining stock position of edible oil and pulses.  The existing 
minimum buffer norms fo r stocking of foodgrains in the Central Pool 
with effect from April 2005 and stock position during current year are 
as follows: 
                                                               (in lakh  tons) 
AS ON W H E A T R I C E T O T A L 
Actual 
stock 
Minimu
m buffer 
norms 
Actual 
stock 
Minimum 
buffer 
norms 
Actual 
stock 
Minimum 
buffer 
norms 
01.04.2007 47.03 40.00 131.72 122.00 178.75 162.00 
01.07.2007 129.27 171.00 109.77 98.00 239.04 269.00 
01.10.2007 101.21 11 0.00 54.89 52.00 156.10 162.00 
 
6.9  It would be seen from the above table that the stock of wheat in 
the Central Pool on 1.7.2007 and 1.10.2007 is lower than the buffer 
norms.  Thus, imports have been done on private/Government account 
to meet the shortfall. As regards sugar, as per the norms,  stock of 
sugar for two & half months to three months requirement for internal 
consumption is to be maintained which was about 40 -47 lac tons in 
2006-07 sugar season.  The stock of sugar of about 139 lac tons was 
available in the country as on 1 st March, 2007 and there is no shortage 
of sugar in the country.  However, there has been a shortage of 
domestic edible oils production in the country.  Import of edible oils has 
been resorted to for more than two decades.  Government has allowed 
import of all edible  oils under open general license except coconut oil.   
There is no shortage of rice in the country.      
6.10 The Committee also enquired whether any analysis of the 
Government’s policy of procurement has been made to know the 

  
reasons for lesser procurement of wheat. The Department of Food and 
Public Distribution stated in reply that as per the present procurement 
policy, the Government agencies (FCI and State Agencies) carry out 
procurement operations in all districts having marketable surplus of 
foodgrains. All the foodgrains conforming to the prescribed 
specifications offered for sale by farmers at the specified procurement 
price (MSP plus bonus) are bought by the Government agencies.  This 
policy gives the option to farmers to sell their produce to the 
Government agencies at their procurement price or at higher prices to 
the private parties, which ensures remunerative prices to them. This 
policy also serves to procure stocks for the Central Pool for the TPDS 
and welfare schemes as well as for buffer stock s for food security.  
This policy has been working successfully for past several years. The 
low level of procurement of wheat in RMS 2006 -07 was on account of 
many factors like high ruling open market prices, lower than the 
targeted production of wheat, ne gative market sentiments, low market 
arrivals, low stocks of wheat in the Central Pool and  more active 
participation by private traders.  
6.11 The Committee have been furnished the following statement 
showing the Import/Export Duty Structure in respect of  pulses, wheat, 
rice, oilseed and sugar during the last five years i.e. from 2003 -04 to 
2007-08:- 
(i) RICE, WHEAT, PULSES AND OILSEEDS 
S.No Commodity Customs duty rate 
  2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 
1. Pulses 10% 10% 10% 10%/0%3 0% 
2. Rice in husk 80% 80% 80% 80% 80% 
3. Husked rice (brown 
rice, broken rice) 
80% 80% 80% 80% 80% 
4. Semi milled or 
wholly milled rice 
70% 70% 70% 70% 70% 
5. Wheat 50% 50% 50% 50%/01 0%2 
6. Sugar 60% 60% 60% 60%/0%4/60% 60% 
 
 
Oilseeds* 
 
   
30% 30% 30% 30% 

  
 
 
6.12 When enquired about the measures taken by the Government 
to augment the availability of foodgrains in the domestic market, the 
Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs stated during evidence:- 
 
“If you take wheat, wheat has been de -listed from futures 
trading. Export is banned at the moment. Import can be 
done at zero duty. For stockholding limits we have 
authorized the States and the States have fixed dif ferent 
stockholding limits from time to time. Rice again has 
been de-listed from futures trading and export is banned 
at the moment in the case of non -basmati rice. In the 
case of basmati rice, of course, we have export subject to 
an MEP.” 
 
 
6.13 The Depar tment of Consumer Affairs have also informed that 
despite various remedial steps which have been taken by the 
Government such as reduction of custom duty on import of pulses to 
zero and which were extended upto 31 st March, 2007 and ban on 
export on wheat a nd rice which has been extended till further order, 
the Government have not succeeded in curbing the price rise of 
essential commodities.  The Committee have also observed that with 
high rate of inflation the prices of food and fuel products are rising and  
thus the consumers are hit from all sides.   
 
6.14 The Committee wanted to know the methodology for calculating 
the import duty. The Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs stated 
during evidence as under:- 
“Sir, import duty is calculated on the tariff value. So, we 
have kept it low intentionally. A review of it is taken every 
fortnight. If we increase this, the landed cost of oil will 
become quite high. Then, two things will happen. First, 
people will not import because the domestic price to that 
1 W.E.F. 09.09.2006 
2 W.E.F. 30.03.2007 
3 W.E.F. 08.06.2006 
4 During 23.6.2006 to 30.9.2006 
   

  
extent will be slightly lower than the imported cost. 
Today, we are importing about 4.7 million tonnes. If for 
this reason, imports do not take place, then similar 
demand will chase only 7.52 million tonnes, or may be 
slightly a million tonne here and there – about 8 million 
tonnes, of edible oil, availability of which is 12 million 
tonnes. So, the prices may further increase. This is one 
method by which tariff value is kept lower, fixed or not 
increased to contain prices. It means that average duty 
on oil is 31 per cent. This is a method – either you 
decrease the duty or keep the tariff value constant. 
Government has thought that to keep tariff value constant 
is better for two reasons. First, it gives stability and you 
do not have to keep on increasing or decreas ing so that 
long-term contracts are met. Secondly, prices can be 
moderated. That is the reason why tariff value is kept 
constant.” 
 
6.15 The Committee enquired about criteria of taking a decision to 
cut or reduce import duty to 0% on essential commodities,  the nodal 
Ministry stated that cuts or reductions in import duty on commodities 
like wheat, sugar, edible oils etc during the last one year have been 
prescribed by the Department of Revenue based on recommendations 
of the Cabinet Committee on Prices (CCP)  or Committee of 
Secretaries (COS) which monitors price situations of such commodities 
on a regular basis. The major criterion for taking such a decision is to 
induce importers to import adequate quantity of essential commodities 
to augment domestic supply , with a view to containing the rise in 
prices.  
6.16 On being asked whether any study has been done to know the 
impact of cut in duty of essential commodities on the overall availability 
and prices of foodgrains, the Ministry replied that no specific study has 
been done by this Department to know the relationship between impact 
of cut in duty of essential commodities on the overall availability and 
prices of foodgrains. However, the likely impact of cut in duty of 
essential commodities on the overall avail ability and prices of food 
grains is reviewed in periodical meetings on prices. Since a host of 
factors influence the availability and prices of commodities in a 
dynamic manner, it would be difficult to segregate the impact of cut in 

  
duty in precise quanti tative terms. Broadly, it is observed that rise in 
prices of edible oils in domestic market was moderate as compared to 
the rise in prices in international market. 
 

  
6.17 The Committee observe that the Government of India is 
fully committed to provide food  security to every citizen in the 
country. Due to less production of wheat in the country in 2006 -
07, there was reduction in wheat stock in the Central Pool. The 
Committee have been informed that at the start of RMS 2007 -08, 
i.e. as on 01/04/07, the stock of wheat in the Central Pool was 45.6 
lakh tonnes against the buffer norms of 40 lakh tonnes. The 
procurement of wheat in RMS 2007 was only 111 lakh tonnes 
against the requirement of 150 lakh tonnes for the TPDS and 
other welfare schemes. In order to make up the shortfall as well 
as to keep the prices stable and ensure adequate buffer stock, the 
Government took decision to import wheat for the Central Pool. 
The custom duty on import of wheat was reduced to zero and a 
ban on export of wheat and rice was impo sed. Accordingly, in 
2006-07, a quantity of 54.540 lakh metric tonnes of wheat was 
imported from Australia, Canada, CIS, France, Argentina and 
Hungary. Besides, a quantity of 13.06 lakh metric tonnes was 
contracted for the year 2007-08.  
The Committee find that despite putting a ban on export of 
wheat and rice and reduction of custom duty in the import of 
pulses to zero, the Government could not succeed in curbing the 
price rise of essential commodities. However, consequent upon 
the ban on export of wheat,  the prices of wheat declined by 3.92 
per cent during this period. The Committee fail to understand the 
reasons for import of wheat in 2007 -08 when the availability of 

  
wheat in the country exceeded the demand. In the opinion of the 
Committee, the Governmen t could not take timely steps to 
address the issues viz. high open market prices, less than 
targeted production, less market arrivals, negative market 
sentiments and more private participation which contributed to 
less procurement of wheat. With the high r ate of inflation, the 
prices of foodstuffs have risen considerably and the consumers 
are hit from all sides. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Government should make sincere and timely efforts to 
address the aforementioned issues. In this regard , the 
Government should also take steps for procurement of wheat 
directly from the farmers by giving them remunerative prices. To 
increase the production of foodgrains in the country, the farmers 
should also be encouraged to adopt modern methods and 
modern technology of agriculture. The Government should also 
ensure that the buffer stocks of foodgrains especially wheat and 
rice in the Central Pool do not fall below the buffer norms so as to 
meet any eventualities in future.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

  
CHAPTER VII 
 
IMPOSING OF TAXES ON ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES 
 
As per entry No. 54 of State List of the 7 th Schedule to the 
Constitution of India, the taxation on sale and purchase within a state 
of goods, including essential commodities, is a State subject. The VAT 
system of taxation on sale and purchase of commodities in any State is 
accordingly under the purview of the respective State Government. 
The intent at the time of introduction of the VAT system was to have a 
harmonized tax structure in respect of all commodities. This w as 
worked out by the States themselves through the Empowered 
Committee (EC) of State Finance Ministers in accordance with 
convergence parameters identified and agreed among the States. The 
rates of VAT for various commodities were accordingly agreed to be 
uniform across the States. 
7.2 Regarding the tax rate for foodgrains, the EC of State Finance 
Ministers had initially decided to keep the VAT rate on foodgrains at 
4%. However, the EC reviewed the matter in the light of requests made 
by a number of States to exempt foodgrains from VAT and decided in 
its meeting held on 17 January, 2005 that ‘Only for 2005 -06, States 
would have the option of exempting foodgrains from VAT’. The EC 
again discussed the issue in its meeting held on 15 July, 2006 and 
decided to g ive option to the States to exempt foodgrains from VAT 
during 2006-07 as well. Thus, the EC itself has provided the flexibility 
to the States in this regard, which has resulted in some States levying 
tax on foodgrains like rice and wheat, while some other have exempted 
these items from levy of VAT.  
7.3 It has been suggested by the experts to rationalize entry 
tax/octroi/toll tax and remove restriction on stock limit and inter -State 
movement restriction on agricultural produce under the Essential 
Commodities Act. Reform in the excise and other levies viz Mandi tax, 
Sales tax, VAT by the system of one single uniform tax at the rate of 4 
per cent across the States has also been suggested. When asked to 

  
comment on aforesaid suggestion of experts, the Ministry s tated that 
domestic market in our country is fragmented and subjected to 
plethora of laws and regulations. Since the issues relating to 
administration of various legislations governing internal trade and 
harmonization of various taxes entail coordination a mong various 
States, the Inter State Council has to initiate consultation process with 
various State and Regional authorities to remove artificial trade 
barriers and harmonize tax structure. 
7.4 In this context, the Additional Secretary, Department of 
Revenue deposed before the Committee during evidence as under:- 
“The reform of introduction of VAT has helped in reducing 
the disparities and it has also probably helped in avoiding 
price increase because many of the other taxes have 
been subsumed in VAT. It i s because at the State level, 
there were a lot of other taxes which have gone into and 
which were got merged with VAT. VAT by itself, of 
course, is not the ultimate objective. Again, as hon. 
Committee is aware, there is a decision to introduce 
goods and se rvices tax w.e.f, 1 st April, 2010. This will be 
a joint effort of the Central and State Governments and 
the Central Government is now working with the 
Empowered Committee (EC) of the State Finance 
Ministers to arrive at a workable package for the 
implementation of VAT w.e.f. 1.4.2010. With the 
introduction of GST, the Central Sales Tax - which is a  
Central levy on the inter -state sale of goods will be zero 
rated. We have already started that process by reducing 
the rate of CST to three per cent w.e.f. 1 st of April, 2007. 
It will be reduced by one per cent in each of the coming 
years till it is phased out and it is zero rated in 2010.” 
 
7.5 When asked whether some States/UTs have exempted 
foodgrains from the purpose of VAT, the Ministry in its written reply 
stated that States/UTs of Chattisgarh, NCT of Delhi, Gujarat, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, 
Pondicherry and West Bengal have exempted food grains from Value 
Added Tax (VAT). State of Tamil Nadu has exempted food grains from 
VAT, except wheat which is being taxed in the State at the rate of 2%. 

  
7.6 The Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry 
(FICCI) suggested to make India a common market. During evidence, 
the representatives of FICCI further elaborated:- 
“We have been talking about one common market for 
India because in the presence of these barriers, goods 
cannot move from one State to another. Besides that, we 
have entry tax, octroi tax and toll tax. It is not only 
agricultural commodities but it is for i ndustrial 
commodities also. It is acting as a major hindrance to the 
development of India as one market. Then, for 
agricultural commodities as such, there are of course, 
restrictions on stock limits and inter -State movements 
under the Essential Commodities Act. Then you have got 
to remove physical checks at various locations and 
borders, namely, national, State borders and district 
borders, bridges alongwith the system of administration 
and mechanism of checking payment of taxes. These not 
only cause the st oppage of movement from one State to 
another State and one area to another area but this is a 
huge harassment also. You have to take all -India 
permits, regional permits, local permits to move and 
these kinds of hassles are there. We would suggest that 
the tax burden should be kept at four per cent because 
agricultural commodities are essential items. Since 
agricultural commodities are essential commodities, we 
would suggest for checking and keeping the prices at low 
level. Otherwise, the cascading effect al so increased the 
final prices to a much higher level. Excise and other 
levies such as mandi tax, sales tax, VAT should be 
replaced bya system of one single uniform tax. We have 
already mentioned this. The mandi tax should be made 
uniform because this is va ried in different States. It is 
very difficult for us to arrive at uniform foodgrains prices 
throughout the country. We are going through a major 
revolution in agricultural marketing with futures trading 
with private sector, retails coming in. There will b e 
pressure on prices and the prices will go down because 
of competition amongst competing agencies. In that kind 
of a situation, we should also aid this process of 
downward pressure on prices to settle them at a low level 
so that agricultural goods prices are not a burden for the 
common man.” 
 
7.7 It has been observed that  some States are levying tax on 
foodgrains like rice and wheat, while some others have exempted 
these items from levy of VAT. Asked as to why the specific foodgrains 

  
like wheat, rice and pulses are not brought under the category of items 
which are exempted from VAT, the representatives of Department of 
Revenue stated during evidence:- 
“ The power of the Central Government in respect of 
sales tax rate is only through the Central Sales Tax Ac t – 
Section 14 and 15 – which gives the Central Government 
the power to declare certain commodities as goods for 
special importance in inter-State rate and commerce. So, 
most of the essential commodities are brought under this 
category. This covers crude o il, jute, LPG, oil seeds, 
pulses etc. All these things are covered in this definition 
of declared goods under the Central Government which 
the Central law has provided. But what the law provides 
is that no State law shall fix a tax rate more than four per 
cent on these items. So, up to four per cent, the States 
are free to fix the rates because the taxation of sale of 
goods is something which the States are free to tax. But 
in a particular State in which the sales tax is zero, the 
Central Sales Tax will als o be zero. But the maximum a 
State can impose is four per cent.” 
 
7.8 From the data given by the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution, the Committee has observed that there is a large -scale 
variation in levying of various taxes like Mandi Tax, DEMI, ID fee, VAT 
etc. by various State Governments.  
Statement showing taxes levied by different States on Rice 
(Rates in percentage) 
S.No. State Market 
Fee 
Dami RD 
Cess 
ID 
Fee 
VAT Mandi 
Tax 
Total Remarks 
1. Haryana 2 2.5 2 0 4 0 10.5  
2. Punjab 2 2.5 2 1 4 0 11.5  
3. Rajasthan 1.6 2 0 0 4 0 7.6 FCI 
exempted 
from VAT 
4. Himachal 
Pradesh 
0 0 0 0 4 0 4  
5. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0  
6. Delhi 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  
7. Uttar 
Pradesh 
2.5 0 0 0 4, 
Trade 
Tax 
0 6.5  
8. Uttarakhand 2.5 0 0 0 4 0 6.5  
9. Madhya 
Pradesh 
0 0 0  0 0 0.1 Nirashrit 
Shulk (NS) 
0.1 
10. Chhattisgarh 2 0 0 0 0 0 6.2 Commission 
on Tax 4 

  
NS 0.2 
11. Maharashtra 1.05 0 0 0 4 0 5.05  
12. Gujarat 0.5 to 
1 
0 0 0 0 0 0.5 
to 1 
 
13. Andhra 
Pradesh 
1 0 5 on 
Paddy2 
0 4 0 10  
14. Tamil Nadu 0 0 0 0 2 0 2  
15. Kerala 7 0 0 0 1 0 8  
16. Karnataka 1.5  0 0 4 0 5.5  
17. West Bengal 0.5 0 0 0 0 0 0.5  
18. Bihar 0 0 0 0 1 0 8 Entry Tax 4, 
Addl. Tax 3 
19. Jharkhand 1 0 0 0 4 0 5  
20. Orissa 1 on 
Paddy 
0 0 0 4 0 5  
21. Assam 1 0 0 0 2 0 3  
22. Meghalaya 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  
23. Nagaland & 
Manipur 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0  
 
Statement showing taxes levied by different States on Wheat 
(Rates in percentage) 
S.No. State Market 
Fee 
Dami RD 
Cess 
ID 
Fee 
VAT Mandi 
Tax 
Total Remarks 
1. Haryana 2 2.5 2 0 4 0 10.5  
2. Punjab 2 2.5 2 1 4 0 11.5  
3. Rajasthan 1 2 0 0 4 1.6 8.6 FCI 
exempted 
from VAT 
4. Himachal 
Pradesh 
0 0 0 0 4 0 4  
5. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0  
6. Delhi 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  
7. Uttar 
Pradesh 
2.5 0 0 0 4, 
Trade 
Tax 
0 6.5  
8. Uttarakhand 2.5 0 0 0 4 0 6.5  
9. Madhya 
Pradesh 
2 0 0 0 0 0 2.2 Nirashrit 
Shulk 
(NS) 0.2 
10. Chhattisgarh 2 0 0 0 0 0 2.2 Nirashrit 
Shulk 
(NS) 0.2 
11. Maharashtra 1.05 0 0 0 4 0 5.05  
12. Gujarat 0.5 to 
1 
0 0 0 0 0 0.5 
to 1 
 
13. Andhra 
Pradesh 
1 0 0 0 4 0 5  
14. Tamil Nadu 0 0 0 0 2 0 2  
15. Kerala 7 0 0 0 1 0 8  
16. Karnataka 1.5 0 0 0 4 0 5.5  
17. West Bengal 0.5 0 0 0 0 0 0.5  
18. Bihar 0 0 0 0 1 0 8 Entry Tax 
4, Addl. 
Tax 3 

  
19. Jharkhand 1 0 0 0 4 0 5  
20. Orissa 1 0 0 0 4 0 5  
21. Assam 0 0 0 0 2 0 2  
22. Meghalaya 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  
23. Nagaland & 
Manipur 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0  
 
7.9 The net impact of these taxes varies from State to State which 
is highest in the case of Punjab, which is 11.5 per cent and lowest in 
Jammu and Kashmir, Delhi, Meghalaya, Nagaland and Maniput where 
the tax levied is nil. In Madhya Pradesh, it is 0.1 per cent and in West 
Bengal, it is 0.5 per cent. In this context, the Committee enquired 
whether any reforms have been suggested to have some sort of 
uniformity in levying taxes of essential commodities in var ious taxes to 
avoid large scale disparity in prices of essential commodities, the 
representatives of Department of Revenue stated:- 
“As I indicated earlier, the Empowered Committee 
of State Ministers wanted uniformity. They tried to work 
out uniformity but  different States  had very strong, 
different views on this mainly based on the historical 
experience. For example, Andhra Pradesh was having 4 
per cent earlier. The State wanted to continue that rate. 
Haryana and Punjab were having 4 per cent purchase 
tax which continues. Himachal Pradesh was having 3.5 
per cent which has been rationalized to 4 per cent. Again, 
Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhan were 
haning 4 per cent. So, that has been a continuation of the 
practice which the particular States w ere adopting. On 
the other hand, Delhi, Gujarat, Jammu and Kashmir, 
Jharkhan, Karnataka, Maharasthra, Puducheery and 
Tamil Nadu – except wheat- had zero per cent even in 
the pre -VAT ear, in the Sales Tax System. They have 
chosen to continue that system. Si nce this was 
something on which the State Finance Ministers could 
not reach an agreed view for implementation, it was 
agreed that the States should have different rates for the 
initial period. Perhaps, the only occasion will now arise 
only with the introdu ction of Goods and Service Tax in 
the year 2010. An immediate solution may not be 
forthcoming because in spite of the best efforts of the 
State Finance Ministers, they have not been able to 
arrive at a consensus which was acceptable to all the 
States.” 
7.10 Asked whether the Department can issue any guidelines to 
maintain uniformity in imposing the tax and VAT, the witness stated:- 

  
“No, Sir, because constitutionally, it is the States’ power. 
So, the Government of India will have no authority to 
issue any guidelines in this matter.’ 
 

  
 
7.11 The Committee note that as per entry no. 54 of the State list 
of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India, the Taxation 
on Sale and Purchase within a State of goods, including essential 
commodities, is a State su bject. The Committee observe that 
there is a large scale variation in levying of various taxes like 
Mandi Tax, DEMI, IDF, VAT by the State Governments. The 
concept of Value Added Tax (VAT) was introduced with a view to 
having a harmonized tax structure in respect of all commodities. 
The rates of VAT for various commodities were accordingly 
agreed to be uniform across the States by the Empowered 
Committee of State Finance Ministers. The Empowered 
Committee of State Finance Ministers had initially decided to keep 
the VAT rate of foodgrains at 4%. Subsequently, the EC itself 
provided the flexibility to the States in this regard which resulted 
in some States levying tax on foodgrains like rice and wheat, 
while some others have exempted these items from levy of V AT. 
Consequently, 11 States namely, Chhattigarh, NCT of Delhi, 
Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra, 
Madhya Pradesh, Pudducherry and West Bengal have exempted 
foodgrains from VAT. State Government of Tamil Nadu has 
exempted foodgrain s except wheat which is being taxed at 2%. 
The Committee strongly recommend that the remaining 
States/UTs should be persuaded to exempt the foodgrains from 
VAT provided that the State Government be consulted and the 

  
difficulties of the States be resolved b efore making such 
exemptions.  

  
7.12 The Committee further note that all the taxes like Sales Tax, 
Local Municipal Taxes and other market taxes have been merged 
with VAT except the Central Sales Tax (CST) which is levied by 
the Central Government on sale or purchase of goods in the 
course of inter -State Trade and Commerce. The Government 
proposes to phase out the CST by 1.04.2010. The Committee do 
not appreciate the multiple tax pattern like Mandi Tax, Sales Tax, 
Local Municipal Tax like entry tax, octroi tax and toll tax levied on 
the foodgrains which ultimately lead to increase in the prices of 
essential commodities. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Government should remove restrictions on the inter-State 
movement on agricultural commodities a nd introduce single 
uniform tax pattern across the States on essential commodities 
especially on foodgrains.  
 

  
  CHAPTER-VIII 
 
Acquisition of land under Special Economic Zone(SEZ) 
 
 Land is one of the biggest resources for any country.  With the 
enormous expansion of the State’s role in promoting public welfare and 
economic development since Independence, acquisition of the land for 
public purpose has become far more important than ever before.  
Further, with the changing scenario of industrialization, li beralization, 
urbanization and new economic policy there is an immense pressure 
on land.  Now -a-days, land is being acquired for setting up Special 
Economic Zones (SEZs) so as to generate employment through 
industries activity of land acquisition for publi c purposes as well as for 
setting up industries, the issue related to land acquisition and 
rehabilitation of the affected persons whose land is being acquired 
have been the matter of debate recently.  The Committee note that 
land and its management falls u nder the State List.  However, the 
Union Government has played a crucial role in the advisory capacity as 
well as a facilitator since Independence.  In this scenario, the 
responsibility of the Department of Land Resourses, being the nodal 
Union Department, to deal with the issues related to land is immense.   
  
8.2 Land being a State subject, a decision to earmark the land for 
various uses including  SEZ is taken by the respective State 
Governments in accordance with the policies laid down by them.  The 
Department of Commerce has not laid down any specific policy for 
acquisition of land for SEZs.  The Board of Approval considers only 
those proposals which are duly recommended by State Government.  
At National level, as per Allocation of Business Rules – 1961 (as 
amended from time to time), the matter relating to Land Acquisition 
and Land Reform etc. falls under the purview of Ministry of Rural 
Development.   
  

  
8.3 State Governments have been advised that in case of land 
acquisition for Special Economic Zones, first priority should be for 
acquisition of waste and barren land and if necessary single crop 
agricultural land could be acquired for the SEZs.  If perforce a portion 
of double cropped agricultural land has to be acquired to meet the 
minimum area requirem ents, especially for multi -product Special 
Economic Zones, the same should not exceed 10% of the total land 
required for the SEZ. The Ministry of Commerce have further stated 
that only those Developers who are in possession of land are given 
formal approva ls. Those who do not have possession or are in the 
process of acquiring/purchasing land are not given formal approvals.  
The total land area in 404 valid formal approvals granted till date is 
about 54280 hectares.  Out of this 95 approvals are in respect o f State 
Industrial Development Corporations and State Government agencies 
involving land areas of approximately 20000 hectares.  172 SEZs have 
been notified as of 30 November 2007.  In the case of proposals which 
have been granted formal approval, the land  was already in 
possession of the private developer or the State Government bodies. 
  
8.4 The Ministry of Commerce have informed the Committee that 
the Empowered Group of Ministers (EGOM) for discussion on issues 
relating to Special Economic Zones (SEZ) in cluding acquisition of land 
in its meeting held on 5 th April 2007, have taken following main 
decisions: 
(a) In respect of pending applications for SEZs, these may 
be processed for in principal, formal approval and, 
notifications subject to the condition that t he State 
Governments would not undertake any compulsory 
acquisition of land for such SEZs. 
(b) The minimum processing area limit to be fixed uniformly 
at 50% for multi product SEZs as well as sector specific 
SEZs. 

  
(c) Upper limit of the area required for multi pro duct SEZs to 
be fixed at 5000 hectares.  However, State Governments 
may prescribe a lower limit. 
(d) Ministry of Rural Development to be requested to 
reformulate a comprehensive Land Acquisition Act to 
address all relevant issues. 
(e) A comprehensive Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy 
be worked out ensuring livelihood from the project to at 
least one person from each displaced family.  
8.5 When asked whether food security and prices of Essential 
Commodities will be effected by acquiring the land under SEZ, the 
Ministry of Agriculture informed that so far, the acquisition of land for 
the SEZ purposes is very nominal in comparison to the total cultivated 
lands (182.57 million ha. in 2005-06). Therefore, the acquisition of land 
for SEZ has not  much adverse effect on the Food Security of the 
country, at this stage.  On being enquired about the impact of 
acquisition of land, the Ministry of Agriculture informed that t he 
cultivable land has decreased from 185.09 million ha. in 1980 -81 to 
182.57 million ha. in the year 2005-06 in the country.  During the same 
period, land under non agricultural uses has increased from 19.66 
million ha. to 24.94 million ha. (increased by about 5.28 m.ha.). 
8.6 The availability of agricultural land is decreasing mainly due to 
increase in population and diversion of agricultural land for non -
agricultural purposes such as urbanization, roads, industries etc.  
Therefore, there is a concern for maintaining sustainable agricultural 
production to meet the requirement of increasing population in the 
country. On being asked what steps have been taken/being 
undertaken in this regard, the Ministry of Agriculture has informed that 
the Ministry has taken following steps in this matter: 
1. Department of Commerce has been provided with a 
check-list (D. O. N o. 52/Secy.(A&C)/06 dated September 
25, 2006) to facilitate the Board of Approval while taking 
a decision on the issue of diversion of agricultural land.  

  
The check -list has been circulated on 3 rd November, 
2006  to all the State Govts. by the Ministry of Commerce 
to be considered while proposing a SEZ plan. In addition, 
Hon’ble Union Minister of Agriculture has written a D.O. 
letter in October, 2006 to Union Minister of Commerce 
expressing concern regarding transfer of agricultural land 
for SEZ.   
2. The 19 a ction points of National Land Use Policy 
Outlines (NLPOs) have been circulated to all the State 
Governments and UTs. for follow up. These NLPOs 
provide for suitable steps for prevention of diversion of 
agricultural land for non - agricultural purposes by t he 
State Governments, besides suggestion for utilization of 
land as per land capabilities for sustaining agricultural 
production.  
 
8.7 In addition to above, Government of India is implementing 
various programmes namely, (i) National Watershed Development  
Project for Rainfed Area (NWDPRA), (iii)Soil Conservation for 
Enhancing the  Productivity of Degraded Lands in the Catchments of 
River Valley Project and Flood Prone River (RVP & FPR), 
(iii)Reclamation of  Alkali Soil (RAS), (iv)Watershed Development 
Project in Shifting Cultivation Areas (WDPSCA), (v)Drought Prone 
Area Programme (DPAP), (vi)Desert Development Programme (DDP),  
(vii)Integrated Waste -land Development Programme (IWDP) for 
development of degraded lands in the country.  Under the these  
programmes, since inception upto end of X Five Year Plan, an area of 
50.83 million hectare has been developed.  Part of such developed 
land is also brought under cultivation to maintain balance in different 
type of land uses.  
8.8 The representative of the Department of Land Resources during 
oral evidence stated that the Department of Land Resources had 
constituted Parthasarthy Committee during the year, 2003.   Steps 

  
taken for the treatment and to increase food production to eliminate 
poverty are given in this re port as wasteland and rainfed areas is 
spread throughout the country.  He further informed that by merging 
three programmes IWDP, DDP, DPAP - a single programme is being 
made that i.e.  IWSP which still has to receive cabinet approval.  As 
per the Parthasarthy Committee the total food production upto the year 
2020 will be upto 307 million tonnes.  He has also informed that 
productivity of foodgrains during the year 2007 -08 in respect of 
foodgrains and pulses is the highest productivity that we have 
achieved which can be due to land treatment water shed project and 
application of quality, seed, fertilizer etc.    
8.9 When asked whether any criterion has been fixed for acquiring 
the land for Special Economic Zone (SEZ), the Additional Secretary, 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry stated during evidence:- 
   
“We give approval to the SEZ based on the 
recommendation of the State Government. Now we have 
advised the State Governments that first priority must be 
given for acquisition and use of waste land and single 
crop land. In any case not more than 10 per cent of land 
could be taken of double crop land if it is absolutely 
essential. We have also indicated that from 5 th April, 
2007, the Government will not approve any proposals 
where land is compulsorily acquired or proposed to be 
compulsorily acquired.” 
 
8.10 The Committee have been furnished the following Statement 
showing the State-wise area of SEZ as on 26.11.07:- 
          
        (In Hectares)  
State  Valid Formal 
approvals 
Notified SEZs Total area of 
formal 
approvals 
Andhra Pradesh 862.615 6124.617 6987.232 
Chandigarh 0 58.45 58.45 
Chattisgarh 10.77 0 10.77 
Dadar & Nagar 105.59 0 105.59 
Delhi 16.06  16.06 
Goa  120.51 249.475 369.985 
Gujarat  12881.7 7104.967 19986.667 

  
Haryana 731.79 857.9563 1589.7463 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
0  0 
Jharkhand  0 36.4218 36.4218 
Karnataka  986.7209 1661.11 2647.8309 
Kerala 52.76 513.582 566.342 
MP 281.36 50.907 332.267 
Maharashtra 6896.51 4302.055 11198.565 
Nagaland  450  450 
Orissa 2299.4 211.265 2510.665 
Pondicherry  346  346 
Punjab 221.49 46.124 267.614 
Rajasthan  181.23 96.09 277.32 
Tamil Nadu 3833.209 1321.467 5154.676 
Uttaranchal 454.2 13.5426 467.7426 
UP 384.94 99.65 484.59 
West Bengal 306.701 108.8943 415.5953 
Total  31423.5559 22856.574 54280.1299 
 
 
8.11 During evidence the Committee enquired as to what is the 
parameter for assessment and to make difference between single crop 
agricultural land, waste and barren land. The Additional Secretary, 
Department of Land Resources stated:- 
“Let me state at the very outset that this particular subject 
belongs to the Ministry of Commerce and, this particular 
advisory which has gone out to the States, has also been 
issued by them.  In the course of issuing this advisory to 
the States, at one time, we had been asked whethe r we 
had any views on the subject.  After careful 
consideration, the advice of the Ministry of Rural 
Development to the Ministry of Commerce was that only 
barren and waste lands should be used.  The utilization 
of agricultural land should be avoided all to gether but as 
far as possible should be kept to the minimum.  Apart 
from this, we have also said that if at all there is any 
agricultural land, which is used for this purpose, then, to 
that extent, you should try and compensate for that 
agricultural land b y improving the productivity of other 
agricultural lands.  Also, if you are giving barren lands, 
then the extent to which the barren land is given, you 
should try to locate other barren lands and develop them 
into agriculturally sound productive lands.   
 Sir, we are fully aware and we are fully concerned 
about the fact that in the recent past the SEZs have 
proliferated, and that is why, the Group of Ministers, after 
very careful consideration, had indeed placed on 

  
embargo on giving any further permission f or SEZ until 
the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act also came into 
force.  It is because not only is this issue of land for SEZ 
an issue by itself but wherever SEZs are given to people 
or persons or firms, the issue of displacement also 
comes into the picture.  So, there is on the one hand this 
delicate balance between food security and also on the 
other hand there is displacement of people.  In our 
country, today these have become very major problems 
which we need to tackle, so, from our side we are fully  
cognizant of it and we are doing our best.” 
 
 
8.12 Asked whether the Ministry of Rural Development 
maintains any record of land which has been converted from 
barren land to agricultural land, the witness stated:- 
“I would just like to inform you that this  data unfortunately 
has not been maintained by us so far.  Regarding the 
data as to exactly how much has been converted into 
agricultural land, we have not maintained that data from 
the very beginning of this Watershed Programme.  But 
now, in view of the e xtreme importance of the question 
that you have asked, we are advising the States to collect 
this data.  What happens is that in most of the 
programmes where we treat these barren lands, after 
treatment, these lands do not necessarily become 
agriculturally productive lands.  Some of it is used for 
bushes.  We try to green the area but that does not 
necessarily mean that it converts into food productive 
agricultural land.  So, the question you have asked is a 
very important question.  But as, I have indicate d in my 
formal reply, that data has not so far been collected by 
us.  Now, in the light of extreme concerns of food 
security, that is the data that we will try to compile.” 
  

  
 
 
8.13 The Committee are concerned to note that the availability of 
agricultural land is decreasing mainly due to increase in the 
population and diversion of agricultural land for non -agricultural 
purposes such as urbanization, roads, industries etc. The 
Committee have been informed that the land is being acquired for 
setting up Spe cial Economic Zones (SEZs) to generate 
employment through industries. Till now, the Government have 
given approval to 404 projects under SEZ for about 54,280 
hectares land from 23 States/UTs out of which 95 approvals are in 
respect of State Industrial Deve lopment Corporation of State 
Government Agencies involving land areas of approximately 2000 
hectares. The Committee note that the Empowered Group of 
Ministers (EGOM) had discussed some important issues relating 
to SEZ viz (i) Norms for disposal of pending applications for SEZ; 
(ii) Fixing of minimum as well as maximum limit of land required 
for multi -product SEZs; (iii) Reformulation of a comprehensive 
Land Acquisition Act; and (iv) Working out a comprehensive 
Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy.  
The Committee further note that to maintain the sustainable 
agricultural production to meet the requirement of agricultural 
production in the country, the Ministry of Agriculture has 
formulated a 19 Action Points of National Land Use Policy Outline 
(NLPOS) for p revention of diversion of agricultural land for non 
agricultural purposes by the State Governments. The Committee 
are of the opinion that setting up of large number of SEZ will 
affect not only agriculture adversely but also threaten food 
security and will undermine availability of resources for 
development. Industrialization is good for the prosperity of the 
country but not at the cost of agricultural land. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Government should not give the formal 
approval without obta ining a certificate from the State 

  
Government to the effect that waste land/degraded land/barren 
land was not available in the district for setting up of SEZ in the 
particular areas of State. The State Government should identify 
wasteland for development i n lieu of agricultural land being 
acquired. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government should give priority to acquire only barren and waste 
lands not exceeding 10% of the total land required under the SEZ. 
In case of utilization of agricultur al land, if required for the 
purpose, the State Governments should try to compensate the 
agricultural land by improving the productivity of other 
agricultural lands. Further, they should try to locate other barren 
land and develop them into agriculturally sound productive land 
and formulate a Land Use Policy to minimize and regulate the 
conversion of agricultural land for other uses. The Committee are 
aware that the Land Acquisition Bill, 2007 is pending in Lok 
Sabha for discussion. The Committee desire tha t in the meantime 
the Government should frame model rules under the Land 
Acquisition Act for early implementation of the Act.  
 

  
 
8.14 The Committee further note that Ministry of Rural 
Development is not maintaining the data of waste land which has 
been converted into agricultural land rather they depend only on 
the information provided by the State Governments. The 
Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development have promised during 
evidence that they will try to compile and calculate the data of 
agricultural land from State Governments which have been 
converted into agricultural land. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Ministry of Rural Development (Department of 
Land Resources) should collect the data of waste land converted 
into agricultural land from all the States/UTs which would help the 
Government to take the desired initiatives for food security for 
large population of the country and have a fair idea of conversion 
of agricultural land into other uses. 

  
CHAPTER IX 
 
SHORTCOMINGS IN PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM (PDS) 
  
The Public Distribution System (PDS) has been evolved as a 
system of management of scarcity and for distribution of foodgrains at 
affordable prices. Over the years Targeted PDS has become an 
important part of Government’s policy for manag ement of food 
economy in the country. TPDS is supplemental in nature and is not 
intended to  make available the entire requirement of any of the 
commodities distributed under it to a household or a section of the 
society. 
9.2 The Targeted Public Distributi on System (TPDS) is operated 
under the joint responsibility of the Central and the State Governments. 
The Central Government, through FCI, has assumed the responsibility 
for procurement, storage, transportation and bulk allocation of 
foodgrains to the Stat e Governments for distribution to the public 
through a network of more than 4.93 lakh Fair Price Shops (FPS). The 
operational responsibility including allocation within State, identification 
of families below the poverty line, issue of ration cards, monito ring and 
supervision of functioning of FPS, rests with the State Governments. 
The foodgrains are allocated to different categories of poor people 
through TPDS as per the following details:- 
9.3 The Antyodaya Anna Yojana  (AAY) was launched in 
December 2000 for one crore poorest of the poor families. AAY 
contemplates identification of poorest of the poor families from 
amongst the BPL families covered under TPDS within the States and 
providing them foodgrains at a  highly subsidized rate of Rs. 2 per kg. 
for wheat and Rs. 3 per kg. for rice. The scale of issue that was initially 
25 kgs. per family per month has been increased to 35 kgs per family 
per month with effect from 1 April,. 2002.  
 
 

  
 
Objective of TPDS 
9.4 Objective of  TPDS is to supply subsidized food grains to the poor 
families. The concurrent evaluation of TPDS conducted by the Deptt. of 
Food and Public Distribution through NCAER has shown decrease in 
leakages and diversions, which points to the fact that TPDS is improving 
over a period of time. Becau se of implementation of 9 Point Action Plan 
from July, 2006, more than 96.90 lakh ineligible/bogus ration cards have 
been cancelled.  
9.5 For improving TPDS, the Deptt. of Food and Public Distribution has 
received certain suggestions from time to time. Som e of them are as 
follows: 
i) Foodgrains allocations by the Govt. of India should be 
linked with strict compliance with the stipulations under the 
PDS (Control) Order, 2001 by State and UT Governments 
and other directions of the Government of India so that 
failure of a particular State or UT Government in 
compliance should lead to curtailment of the allocations. 
 
ii) Based on the evaluation feedback on TPDS there should be 
provision of penal action against defaulting States and UT 
Govts. This may be in the form of reduction in Central 
assistance in monetary value linked to the value of 
foodgrains diverted and leaked. 
 
iii) In major States, FCI may retain the role of only MSP -based 
procurement operations. The rest all responsibility for 
procurement, storage, transportatio n and distribution of 
foodgrains under TPDS should be delegated to the 
concerned State Governments. By this the concerned State 
Governments will have full responsibility for all the 
operations under the TPDS and would be fully answerable 
for performance. To such State Governments, Govt. of India 
may release funds for the subsidy involved in the form of 
Central assistance. 
 
iv) Transfer of Central food subsidy to targeted families can 
also be done in cash instead of foodgrains as is being done 
currently, by crediting respective amounts of food subsidy to 
their accounts in specified banks. However, this will still 

  
suffer from exclusion/inclusion errors which are the major 
area of concern. 
 
9.6 When asked about the existing strategy of the Government to 
help the poorest of the poor in the context of rise in prices of essential 
commodities, the Department of Food and Public Distribution stated in 
a note furnished to the Committee that the following strategy is being 
followed by the Govt. to help the poorer sections of the society:- 
 
(i) Out of total 6.52 crore accepted number of BPL families 
for allocation, the poorest among them (2.43 crore AAY 
families) are being distributed foodgrains at highly 
subsidized issue prices @35 kg per family per month. 
The extent of food sub sidy being provided to these 
AAY families is 86% on wheat and 82% on rice.  
 
(ii) AAY families are thus being distributed rice and wheat 
at issue price of wheat at Rs.3 per kg and rice at Rs.2 
per kg. These issue prices for AAY families have been 
retained at the level of December, 2000. 
 
(iii) The extent of subsidy on foodgrains to BPL families 
other than AAY is 71% on wheat and 66% on rice, 
calculated in terms of their economic cost of FCI. Issue 
price for these BPL families has been retained at the 
same level as it was in July, 2001. 
 
(iv) In addition to foodgrains, the Govt. is also providing 
imported edible oils to State and UT Governments with 
a subsidy of Rs.15 per kg. to be distributed @ l kg per 
BPL/AAY family per month. 
 
(v) Distribution of subsidized foodgrains and ed ible oils not 
only makes them available to the weaker sections, their 
distribution also helps in augmenting the total 
availability of these commodities, thereby softening the 
prices.  
 
(vi) In addition to the above, to contain the price rise of 
essential commod ities in the market, depending upon 
their availability in the Central Pool, allocations of 
foodgrains are also being issued for APL families. 

  
 
(vii) Apart from the normal allocation of rice and wheat for 
APL category under TPDS during current year 6.2 lakh 
tons of wheat and rice have also been issued as adhoc 
and festival allocations. 
 
(viii) To keep price rise under check, as a market 
intervention measure, 9 lakh tons of wheat have been 
issued to State Govts. and UT administration under the 
Open Market Sale Scheme. Ope n Market Sale of 
wheat is also under contemplation for bulk consumers. 
 
9.7 Asked whether it is a fact that the shortcomings in the TPDS 
also contribute in rising of prices of essential commodities, the 
Department stated that generally rise in price of a p articular commodity 
is response to demand -supply equilibrium of that commodity. If the 
demand remains at the same level or increases but there is decline in 
supply of that commodity or there is no increase in its supply, then the 
price is expected to rise.  In the context of functioning of TPDS, even if 
some malpractices take place, because of which the intended ration 
card holder families may get distributed some less quantity of the 
commodities, the pilfered/diverted quantity also becomes available in 
the market, thereby overall availability of that commodity not getting 
reduced. As a result the shortcomings in TPDS do not seem to be 
contributing to rise in prices of essential commodities. 
 
9.8 A study was conducted by the National Council of Applied 
Economic Research (NCEAR) to evaluate the function of Targeted 
Public Distribution System (TPDS) the major finding the study are as 
under: -  
“On the one hand, food was being delivered to the poor 
quite regularly during the survey period in majority of the 
selected states.  The fact that poorest of the poor do 
obtain their entitlement quite regularly indicates allocative 
efficiency of the TPDS system including that of fair price 
shops.  On the other hand, deeper probing revealed 
gross irregularities indicating la rge-scale identification 
errors, excess cards issued and widespread diversion of 
food entitled for the poor.  These issues need to be 

  
corrected if the functioning of the TPDS system is to be 
improved.  The correct identification of the beneficiary is 
the f irst step in that direction. Although, attempts have 
been made to decentralize the identification process by 
involving the Panchayats and other Local Bodies, the 
latter process has also to some extent politicized the 
whole process of identification of the poor.  This is 
happening because of complete lack of monitoring of the 
system )of identification) at any stage.  Given the ground 
reality, it would not be possible to improve the PDS 
system unless the consumer especially the poorest ones 
become aware of th eir rights.  The problem of 
identification error arises because of lack of 
information/awareness among the poor about the 
eligibility criteria for the AAY or BPL or any other welfare 
schemes for that matter.  The people in the lower strata 
seems to be unaw are of the criteria being followed in 
issuing AAY, BPL or APL card.  It would not be possible 
to improve this system unless the consumers are 
properly educated on these issues.  For this purpose 
mass information system like local language 
newspapers, regional radio and television stations should 
be used to keep the villagers informed and updated 
about the criteria, entitlement, price of PDS grains etc. 
Proper monitoring of the system and effective 
punishment against the culprit for wrong identification 
would be needed.  It would be more appropriate if there 
are multiple authorities cross checking the identification.  
In the long run, distribution system should be 
computerized and all FPS and civil supply godowns 
should be connected online.  This will bring m ore 
efficiency and transparency in the system and reduce the 
scope for diversion of benefits away from the 
beneficiaries.”  
 
9.9 When enquired about the steps taken for strengthening the Fair 
Price System (FPS), the Secretary, Department of Food and Public  
Distribution stated during evidence as under:- 
 
“You also talked about strengthening the Fair Price 
Shop(FPS) system, and making available more 
foodgrains in terms of price rise. Unfortunately, some 
States are not able to run their Civil Supplies 
Corporations or their Civil Supplies Distribution properly 
because it is not always possible to cover everybody 
through the FPS. One of the reasons is that we cannot 
really push more grains into the market even through the 
FPS unless there is sufficient stock in t he FCI. So, one of 

  
the ways to prevent profiteering is that the State Civil 
Supplies Corporation should play a more proactive role 
during the harvesting season, and then sell without profit 
or with some marginal profit. The State Civil Supplies 
Corporation does not function properly in many States, 
and that is one of the problems that we are confronted 
with.” 
 
9.10 The State-wise procurement of wheat of different States during 
the last five years is as under:- 
(Lakh MT) 
State 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 
Haryana 51.22 51.15 45.29 22.29 33.50 
M.P. 1.88 3.50 4.84 Neg. 0.57 
Punjab 89.38 92.40 90.10 69.46 67.81 
Rajasthan 2.59 2.79 1.59 0.02 3.83 
U.P. 12.13 17.40 5.60 0.49 5.46 
Others 0.81 0.71 0.43 0.00 0.11 
All India 158.01 167.95 147.85 92.26 111.28 
 
9.11 From the above statement, it may be seen that in 2006 -07 and 
2007-08, the FCI could not purchase the required quantity of wheat. 
During evidence, when the Committee enquired as to why the 
procurement has failed, the Secretary, Department of Food and Public 
Distribution stated:- 
“If we were to buy 15 million tonnes domestically and say 
at whatever price you can tender, that is a different 
operational formula. But what we are trying to do is to 
provide Minimum Support Prices to farmers. Whoseve r 
wants to sell at that price, sells it; if he thinks he will get a 
higher price later or in a private trade, he sells to the 
private trade. So, the freedom is with the farmer. It is 
almost impossible to go correctly to a target. Sometimes, 
you are below t he target; sometimes, you are above the 
target, depending on how the market behaves. Now this 
particular year, in the wheat, a lot of people are on record 
advising farmers not to sell and saying that prices will 
rise, please do not sell at this price. Now,  it is another 
matter that prices did not rise too much and those 
advisors are no more seen. But this sentiment that 

  
looking at the previous year the prices may rise – if I 
remember correctly, in November last year, the price of 
wheat was about Rs. 1130 or  Rs. 1140 in Delhi – or will 
be high in September/October and we will hold it back or 
some traders would have bought it and held it back. 
Obviously, in the market, the FCI did not get as much as 
it thought it will get. This is one of the reasons why we 
could not procure as much as we would like to.”  
 
9.12 As regard availability of good quality of essential commodities to 
the common man at reasonable rate, the Committee was informed that 
the Government has taken following steps to make available good 
quality foodgrains to the consumers through Public Distribution System 
and Other Welfare Schemes:- 
 
(i) Ample opportunities are provided to the officials of the State 
Governments/UT Administrations to inspect the stocks prior 
to lifting from the Food Corporation of India (FCI) godowns. 
 
(ii) Instruction have been issued to all the State 
Governments/UT Administrations that an officer not below 
the rank of Inspector should be deputed to check the quality 
of foodgrains before lifting from the FCI godowns. 
 
(iii) The samples of foo dgrains are to be jointly drawn and 
sealed by the officers of the State Governments/U.T. 
Administrations and the FCI from the stocks for display at 
the counters of Fair Price Shops (FPSs) for the benefit of 
consumers. 
 
(iv) The officers of the State Governments  and the Ministry pay 
surprise checks to the FPSs, to over see the quality of 
foodgrains being distributed through PDS. 
 
9.13 In reply to another question regarding increasing availability of 
commodities during the periods of price increase, the Committee have 
been informed that the Government is planning to set up a non -formal 
Public Distribution System (PDS) to spruce up supplies of essential 
commodities to control prices through State Civil Supplies’ 
Corporations and Consumers’ Marketing Federations to e nable these 
agencies to effectively intervene in the market by increasing availability 
of commodities during periods of price increases. The scheme would 
involve providing non -plan assistance to these agencies subject to 

  
certain performance benchmarks. The se measures are aimed at 
increasing domestic availability and a consequent reduction in prices 
through improved supply management. However, this scheme is yet to 
be formulated.  
 

  
9.14 The Committee are concerned to note that the 
Government has not been  able to fulfill its commitment  to help 
the poor in the context of rise in prices of essential commodities 
through PDS. The Committee note that the Government supplies 
subsidized foodgrains to the poor families under Public 
Distribution System. FCI has be en given the responsibility for 
procurement, storage, transportation and distribution of 
foodgrains to the public through a network of more than 4.93 lakh 
Fair Price Shops (FPS). Identification of beneficiaries, issue of 
ration cards, monitoring and superv ision of FPS, rest with the 
State Governments/UTs. Under Antodaya Anna Yojana (AAY), 
foodgrains to the poorest of the poor families at a highly 
subsidized rate i.e. Rs. 2 per kg for wheat and Rs. 3 per kg for rice 
is supplied. The Committee find that altho ugh the Government 
has formulated and is following the strategy to issue foodgrains, 
edible oils and pulses at subsidized rates to the BPL, AAY and 
APL families, yet it has not been able to help the poorer sections 
of the society due to the shortcomings in  the functioning of PDS. 
The Committee strongly recommend that 20% of the poor persons 
who are above poverty line i.e. just above BPL should be 
considered for supply of PDS foodgrains at subsidized rates. One 
of the menace in the proper functioning of PDS is the leakage and 
diversion of foodgrains at large scale, which fact has also been 
corroborated in the evaluation study conducted by NCAER. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that to stop the 
leakage and diversion of foodgrains, Government shoul d 
introduce Vehicle Movement System to track the delivery of 
foodgrains to Fair Price Shops (FPS). The Government should 
also persuade the States/UTs to strengthen its enforcement 
machinery to take action in case of diversion and leakage of 
foodgrains. The Committee are of the view that the very purpose 
of supply of foodgrains at highly subsidized prices is defeated if 
the benefit of TPDS does not reach to the intended persons of 

  
AAY, BPL and APL families and are diverted to open market for 
sale at higher r ates. The Committee feel that although the 
management and operation of PDS is the joint responsibility of 
Central and State Governments concerned, yet it is the Central 
Government which procures and allocates the foodgrains to the 
State Governments which i n turn distribute foodgrains through 
their agencies within their respective States. It is, therefore, the 
responsibility of the Central Government to devise a mechanism 
to obviate the diversion of foodgrains meant for distribution to 
poorer people of the s ociety. The Committee, therefore, 
emphasize that the issue of diversion of foodgrains should be 
tackled with utmost seriousness and recommend that to check 
the diversion of foodgrains, a joint special audit by officials of FCI 
and State Governments should be conducted in the event of 
offtake being abnormally high. 

  
9.15 The Committee further note that the Government 
contemplates to strengthen the Public Distribution System (PDS) 
by setting up  a new scheme viz. ‘Non -Formal Public Distribution 
System’ to sp ruce up supplies of essential commodities at 
control price. The scheme will be implemented through State Civil 
Supplies Corporations and Consumers’ Marketing Federations by 
increasing availability of commodities during period of price 
increase. While appre ciating the efforts made by the Government 
to spruce up supplies of essential commodities at control price 
during price increase, the Committee desire that the scheme of 
Non-formal PDS should be introduced and implemented in the 
current financial year itself.   

  
CHAPTER-X 
The Wheat (Stock Declaration) Order-2007 
 
The Department of Consumer Affairs informed the Committee 
that in the context of the liberalization of the economy and the changed 
situation, particularly with regard to the relatively more comfor table 
food situation, it was felt that restrictions such as licensing of the 
dealers, limits on stock and control on movement are no longer 
required and only hamper the growth of the agricultural sector and 
promotion of food processing industries. Facilita ting free trade and 
movement of foodgrains would enable farmers to get best prices for 
their produce, achieve price stability and ensure availability of 
foodgrains in deficit areas. 
 
10.2 The need to relax various controls on agricultural products 
including control on inter -state movement of such products, was 
discussed in the conference of Chief Ministers on WTO and Agriculture 
held on 21.05.2001 under the chairmanship of the then Hon’ble Prime 
Minister wherein it was decided to form a Committee of Ministe rs 
incharge of five Central Ministries i.e. Agriculture, Commerce and 
Industry, Finance, Consumer Affairs, Food and PD, Rural 
Development as well Deputy Chairman of Planning Commission and 
Chief Ministers of eleven States. Review of the list of essential 
commodities and control orders to ensure free movement of agriculture 
products was one of the terms of reference of the Committee. 
 
10.3 The said Committee in its first meeting held on 6 th July, 2001 
decided that restrictions on movement of all agricultural  commodities 
should be removed and that the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 may 
continue as an umbrella legislation for the Centre and the State to use 
when needed but that a progressive dismantling of controls and 
restrictions was also required.  
 

  
10.4 In view of the uniform decision taken by the aforesaid Standing 
Committee and with the approval of Cabinet accorded in its meeting 
held on 05.02.2002, licensing requirement, stock limits and movement 
restrictions etc. had been dispensed with in respect of th e specified 
foodstuffs namely wheat, paddy/rice, coarsegrains, sugar, edible 
oilseeds, edible oils, pulses, gur, wheat products (namely maida, rava, 
suzi, atta, resultant atta and bran) and hydrogenated vegetable oil or 
vanaspati vide central orders dated 15.02.2002 and 16.06.2003. These 
Notifications, however, do not restrict the Central Government or the 
State Governments from operating the Public Distribution System 
(Control) Order, 2001 in respect of Public Distribution System (PDS) 
items, operation of the rice/paddy levy orders issued by the State 
Governments for the purpose of procurement of rice and regulating 
procurement and distribution of sugar.  The “Removal of Licensing 
Requirement Stock Limit and Movement Restrictions on specified 
Foodstuffs (Am endment) Order 2006” , which enabled the State 
Governments to impose stock limits on wheat and pulses was issued 
by Department of Consumer Affairs on 29.08.2006. All the States and 
UTs were also requested to take effective action using the powers 
vested with them under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, to bring 
out the hoarded stocks of these items into the open market. The 
validity of this Central Order was extended further by six months w.e.f. 
1.3.2007 vide Central Order dated 27.2.2007 .  After reviewin g the 
situation, Government has decided to further extend the validity of the 
Central Order by another six months w.e.f 1.9.2007. 
 
10.5 Pursuant to issue of “Removal of Licensing Requirement 
Stock Limit and Movement Restrictions on specified Foodstuffs 
(Amendment) Order 2006” dated 29.8.2006 under Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955, stock limits for wheat and pulses have been 
fixed by 11 States/UTs.  
  

  
10.6 The “Wheat (Stock Declaration by Companies or Firm or 
Individuals) Order, 2007”, makes it mandatory for any 
company/firm/individual purchasing wheat in excess of 50,000 tonnes 
during RMS 2007 -08 to file returns regarding purchases made and 
stocks held by them.  The State Governments of wheat producing 
States were advised to give wide coverage to this Order a nd ensure 
that private traders declared their purchases and stocks as stipulated 
in this Order.  The State Governments were also asked to verify the 
records available in their Agriculture Marketing and Trade Tax 
Department and compare it with the returns f iled by various 
companies/firms/individuals with Government of India.  The State 
Governments have also been asked to investigate any instance of 
misreporting/under reporting purchases of wheat by any 
company/firm/individual and to take stringent action as per the 
provisions of Essential Commodities Act, if any violation of the “Wheat 
(Stock Declaration by Companies or Firm or Individuals) Order, 2007” 
is detected. 
 
10.7 The Committee also enquired as to how many companies have 
actually filed the declaration  under the “Wheat (Stock Declaration by 
Companies or Firm or Individuals) Order, 2007”, the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution stated that till end of September 2007, 
nine companies have filed the declarations under the “Wheat (Stock 
Declaration by Companies or Firm or Individuals) Order, 2007”. 
 
10.8 The Committee have been informed that the States too had a 
responsibility in containing prices of essential commodities.  The Chief 
Ministers had the power to issue control order under the Essential 
Commodities Act with Central Permission.  Despite such a vast power 
granted to State Governments, prices of essential commodities are still 
soaring high.  Asked as to how the Government of India would 
strengthen its monitoring mechanism over the functioning of the State 
Governments, the Department of Consumer Affairs informed the 

  
Committee that In the context of unprecedented rise in prices of some 
essential commodities in the mid 2006,  there had been wide spread 
concern from various corners for taking immediate steps to mitigate the 
rising trend of prices of essential commodities.  Representations from 
the Chief Ministers of Punjab and Delhi and also from the Govt. of 
Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan and Maharashtra were received for 
restoration of powers under the  Essential Commodities Act, 1955 for 
undertaking dehoarding operations in view of the assumption that there 
is speculative holding back of stocks particularly of wheat and pulses in 
anticipation of further rise in prices.  Central Govt. has already taken a  
number of steps to control the price rise in essential commodities by 
trying to augment supply including through imports by reducing the 
duty level on import of both wheat and pulses to zero.  
 
 10.9 These actions have physically improved the supply posit ion.  
The situation was further reviewed by the Govt. and it was decided 
with the approval of the Cabinet to keep in abeyance some provisions 
in the Central Order dated 15.2.2002 for a period of six months with 
respect to wheat and pulses (whole and split), so as to tackle the  crisis 
on availability and prices of these commodities.  Accordingly, the 
Central Govt.  issued a Central Order No. 1373(E) dated 29.8.2006  by 
virtue of which the words or expressions made in respect of purchase, 
movement, sale, sup ply, distribution or storage for sale in the 
“Removal of (Licensing requirements, Stock limits and Movement 
Restrictions) on Specified Foodstuffs Order, 2002” notified on 
15.02.2002 have been kept in abeyance for commodities namely 
wheat and pulses for a p eriod of six months. The transport, distribution 
or disposal of wheat and pulses (whole or split) to places outside the 
State as well as to import of these commodities have been kept 
outside the purview of the aforesaid Order of 29.08.2006.  The Order 
of 29.08.2006 was initially in force for a period of 6 months, which was 
extended thrice for a period of 6 months each by Central Notification 
dated 27.02.2007,31.8.2007 and 28.02.2008.  This order is currently in 

  
force upto 31.8.2008. The same has now again b een extended up to 
30.04.2009 vide Central Notification dated 27.08.08. The Order has 
permitted State/UT Governments to fix stock limits in respect of wheat 
and pulses.  
  
10.10    So far as implementation of these orders is concerned it has 
been mentioned  that only 17 State Governments/UTs have either 
issued stock limits for all the five items or wheat and pulses only or 
have issued only licensing requirements/stock declaration (of these 17, 
12 States/UTs have actually issued stock limit orders/in the proc ess of 
issuing.  5 States/UTs have issued licensing requirements/stock 
declarations).  7 States are considering to issue stock limit orders.  7 
States/UTs have decided not to issue stock limit orders.  The 
remaining 4 States/UTs have not responded at all.   
  
10.11   During evidence the Committee enquired about the status of 
implementation of the Stock Declaration Order by the States/UTs. The 
Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs stated:-   
“It is quite clear that the supply constraints are certainly in 
position in the sense that supply is not meeting the 
demand.  Hoarding, as I was submitting, is a function of 
putting into place a stock limit regime which six or seven 
State have done.  Other five or six States have not put 
limits but they have asked for  declaration both by 
wholesalers and retailers, which means about a dozen 
States have some sort of a monitoring mechanism or the 
other.  Other States have clearly mentioned that they 
would not like to put the stock limit, whatever be the 
reasons.  Hoarding  is a function of the expectations 
whether the price will increase or otherwise.  Some 
amount of hoarding is also there.  I am not talking about 
wheat but in terms of perishable goods where total 
demand at that point of time is not there, so they will be 
put in the warehouse.  I would not venture to say with any 
authority that hoarding has happened in large measure 
because States have not taken steps to have a hoarding 
limit beyond six.  This is a function of the State 
Government trying to do something with in their 
respective States. Apart from that, the Hon’ble Prime 
Minister has asked the Chief Ministers, we have taken 
that sort of feed back, to constitute Committees.  

  
Meetings are held, as suggested by the Prime Minister, 
and we also have the reports of t hese meetings.  That is 
the mechanism we have.  Our Minister has written to the 
Chief Ministers that they should consider putting limits.  
We have again written to the Chief Secretaries that six 
States have done and based on the powers given to 
them they should put a stock limit.” 
 
 

  
10.12   The Committee note that the Central Government has 
taken a number of steps to control the prices of essential 
commodities. One of the major initiatives taken by the 
Government was to issue Wheat (Stock Declaration by 
Companies or Firms or Individuals) Order, 2007 through which it 
was made mandatory for any company, individual to file return if 
they purchase wheat in excess of 50,000 metric tonnes.  So far as 
implementation of these orders is concerned it has been 
mentioned that only 17 State Governments/UTs have either 
issued stock limits for all the five items or wheat and pulses. 5 
States/UTs have issued licensing requirements/stock 
declarations).  7 States are considering to issue stock limit 
orders.  7 States/UTs have decided not to issue stock limit orders.  
The remaining 4 States/UTs have not responded at all.  The 
Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs admitted during 
evidence that there is some amount of hoarding because except 
six, the other States have not tak en steps to put the stock 
hoarding limit of wheat. In the opinion of the Committee, a large 
number of multi national companies or private traders have 
entered into the market in a big way and are purchasing huge 
quantity of wheat over and above Minimum Sup port Price (MSP) 
fixed by the Government. They procure wheat in excess of their 
requirement which leads to profiteering, hoarding and 
blackmarketing of wheat. The Committee feel that only filing the 
return by the individual or traders or companies will not  give any 
tangible result to curb the hoarding of wheat by them. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the matter should be taken 
at the highest level of the remaining States to implement the 
stock hoarding limit in letter and spirit to fight the menace  of 
hoarding and blackmarketing of essential commodities thereby 
helping in curbing the price rise.  

  
CHAPTER XI 
 
Hoarding and Blackmarketing of Essential Commodities 
 
  
The Committee have been informed that the Department of 
Consumer Affairs is the noda l Department under the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, which is entrusted 
inter-alia with the work of Prevention of Black Marketing and 
Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities. Action against 
hoarders and blackmarketers is undertaken by the State Governments 
under the provisions of The Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and the 
Prevention of Black -marketing and Maintenance of Essential Supplies 
Act, 1980 for prevention of unethical trade practices like hoarding and 
black-marketing. The Act empowers the State Governments to detain 
persons whose activities are found to be prejudicial to the community. 
As informed by the Department, directions have been given to 
States/UTs from time to time to take necessary actions under both the 
Acts to prevent hoarding and smuggling.    Secretary (Consumer 
Affairs) has also  vide his d.o. letter dt. 14.06.2007 advised Chief 
Secretaries of all States/UTs, to strengthen the enforcement machinery 
to prevent mal -practices in essential commodities  and take necessary 
action against the unscrupulous persons indulging in hoarding and 
blackmarketing of essential commodities. The Department has also 
asked all State Governments/UT Administrations to submit monthly 
reports indicating the action taken unde r the provisions of these two 
Acts. They have been requested to send their views on the 
recommendations made by the Parliamentary Standing Committee as 
to  whether there is any lacunae in the Essential Commodities Act due 
to which most of the unscrupulous persons go scot free despite serious 
offences.  
 
11.2 The Department has informed the Committee that besides, 
Conferences with the Secretaries of Consumer Affairs, Food & Civil 
Supplies Departments of all States/UTs are held by this Department 

  
periodically in which all the State Governments/UT Administrations are 
emphasized upon to take necessary actions under the provisions of 
these two Acts to check hoardings, smugglings etc. of essential 
commodities by unscrupulous traders/persons. It has been 
emphasized upon them to take all necessary measures to prevent 
hoarding and blackmarketing which lead to non -availability of essential 
commodities coupled with rise in prices. Further, periodical video 
conferences are also arranged with States/UTs under the 
Chairpersonship of Additional Secretary (Consumer Affairs) wherein 
the need for taking effective action under these two Acts by the 
States/UTs is reiterated.  This was also taken up in the Chief 
Secretaries conference held under the Chairmanship of Cabinet 
Secretary on 22.04.2008.   
11.3 The Department of Consumer Affairs has furnished the following 
statement showing the number of persons arrested, prosecuted and 
convicted for violations of Essential Commodities Act, 1955 during 
2008 (up to 31.08.2008):- 
 
S. 
No. 
States/UTs No. of 
Raids 
conducted 
No. of 
persons 
arrested 
No. of 
persons 
prosecuted 
No. of 
persons 
convicted 
Value of 
goods 
confiscated 
in Rs. Lakh 
Reported 
upto 
1 Andhra Pradesh 12367 15 4 - 19.98 July 
2 Assam 508 11 19 Nil 0.04 July* 
3 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
15 Nil Nil Nil Nil June 
4 Bihar 9 9 Nil Nil Nil June 
5 Chhattisgarh 225 1 32 1 102.03 March 
6 Delhi 133 120 96 4 61.7 August 
7 Gujarat 22867 17 78 Nil 174.85 August 
8 Goa 31 Nil Nil Nil Nil July 
9 Haryana 3 Nil Nil Nil Nil June 
10 Himachal 
Pradesh 
9418 6 40 Nil 3.3 April 
11 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
103 66 27 Nil Nil March 
12 Jharkhand Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil April 
13 Karnataka 1883 49 1 1 23.13 June 
14 Kerala 58346 10 Nil Nil 3.33 July 
15 Madhya 
Pradesh  
14921 52 107 Nil 405.15 April 
16 Maharashtra 1496 1791 1371 Nil 2009.4 June 
17 Manipur 69 1 Nil Nil 0.09 July 
18 Meghalaya 36 1 2 1 0.05 August 
19 Mizoram 43 Nil Nil Nil Nil March 

  
20 Nagaland      Not 
Reported 
21 Orissa 1497 8 64 Nil 13.66 July 
22 Punjab 20584 15 4 1 1.95 June 
23 Rajasthan 137 Nil 57 Nil 10.89 February 
24 Sikkim 1 2 2 Nil 0.01 June 
25 Tamil Nadu 11106 1095 608 761 431.7 June 
26 Tripura 17 3 Nil Nil 0.43 May 
27 Uttaranchal      Not 
Reported 
28 Uttar Pradesh 19869 536 845 Nil 696.1 July $ 
29 West Bengal 71 32 5 Nil 10.73 April 
30 A&N Islands 203 Nil Nil Nil Nil July 
31 Chandigarh 3 4 Nil Nil 0.27 March ** 
32 D&N Haveli 8 1 Nil Nil 0.07 July 
33 Daman & Diu      Not 
Reported 
34 Lakshadweep Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil July 
35 Pondicherry 381 54 54 1 4.9 July 
 Total 176350 3899 3416 770 3973.76  
        
 * -  Except January & February 
 ** - Except January 
 $ - Except May 
 
11.4 From the above Statement, the Committee find that a large 
number of States/UTs have furnished a ‘Nil’ report regarding the 
persons arrested and persons prosec uted as well as convicted. When 
asked as to why some of the State/UTs have submitted “NIL” report to 
the Department of Consumer Affairs and whether they have 
implemented the Essential Commodities Act in their respective State, 
the Department stated that going by the “NIL” reports sent by some 
State Governments/UTs, it can be presumed that these State 
Govts./UTs might not have conducted any raids/not have detained any 
persons for indulging in mal -practices in essential commodities.  In 
respect of those State s/UTs, who have not sent any “monthly action 
taken report”, it would be very difficult to come to any conclusion on the 
action taken by them under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and 
Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of 
Essential Commodities Act, 1980. However the States/UTs have been 
addressed separately to submit the monthly Action Taken Reports as 
required. 

  
11.5 During evidence, the Committee pointed out that upto 
31.08.2008, 1,76,350 raids were conducted but only 770 persons w ere 
convicted under the Act and enquired the reasons for low conviction. 
The Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs stated:- 
“This is with the State Governments. We, in fact, at the 
level of our Ministers as well as at my level have been 
impinging upon the State Governments that this should 
be tightened up. In various conferences and at other 
levels these two points have been emphasized. At the 
State level, the hon. Prime Minister had written a letter to 
Chief Ministers to strengthen this machinery and m ostly, 
by and large, in the States they have formed these 
committees under the Chairmanship of the Chief 
Minister.” 
 
11.6 The Committee have also furnished the following information 
regarding the action taken by States/Union Territories under the 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and Prevention of Black -marketing 
and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980 
during the last three years i.e. 2005, 2006 and 2007 (upto 15.4.2008) :- 
 
Year No. of 
Raids 
No. of 
persons 
arrested 
No. of persons 
prosecuted 
No. of persons 
convicted 
2005 94356 4421 2449 39 
2006 134025 5421 3244 498 
2007 235405 6944 4872 1022 
2008 
(1.1.2008 
to 
31.5.2008) 
116967 
 
 
1799 1792 759 
 
11.7 From the above statement it has been noted that the number of 
raid/persons arrested/p rosecuted/convicted under Essential 
Commodity Act, 1980 and prevention of black -marketing and 
maintenance of supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980 during 
the last three years is constantly on the rise, which is indicating that 
tendency of hoarding an d black -marketing by traders is also rising 
creating artificial scarcity leading to price rise. In this context, the 

  
Committee enquired about the steps being taken to curb these 
activities. The Department of Consumer Affairs in their written reply 
furnished to the Committee stated that the enforcement of the 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955 lies with the State Governments/ 
Union Territories. The State Governments/UT Administrations have 
been delegated powers to take necessary action under the provisions 
of both “The Essential Commodities Act, 1955” and “The Prevention of 
Blackmarketing of Essential Commodities Act, 1980”, to prevent mal -
practices in essential commodities.  Besides, Central Government  is 
also regularly monitoring actions being taken by variou s States/UTs 
under the aforementioned two Acts.  Letters have also been written at 
the level of Additional Secretary (CA) to all the States/UTs indicating 
the lapses observed in the Action Taken Reports being sent by them 
monthly.   
11.8 Asked whether the low prosecutions was due to lack of proper 
investigation of cases on the part of the enforcement machinery, the 
Secretary stated during evidence:- 
“We have separately also brought to the notice of the 
States, in fact, not only the concern of the Standing 
Committee but as a concern of all of us that this is very 
important for the States to follow. We will repeat those 
instructions and find out as to what are the reasons for 
this.” 
 
11.9 Asked whether there is a proposal for strengthening the 
enforcement machinery to take stringent action against these people, 
the Department of Consumer Affairs stated that action under the 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and Prevention of Blackmarketing 
and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980 is 
undertaken by the State/UTs.  The raids, arrests and institution of 
cases, etc. are also done by them.  These two Acts provide adequate 
powers to the State Govts./UTs to take actions against unscrupulous 
persons indulging in hoarding and black marketing of essenti al 
commodities.  State Governments are therefore periodically advised to 

  
take effective action against such unscrupulous persons under the 
provisions of these Acts. 
11.10 The Department of Food and Public Distribution in reply to 
recommendation contained i n Para No. 4.25 of 23 rd Report on 
Demands for Grants (2008 -09) stated that the Department of 
Consumer Affairs has sought views of State/UT Governments 
regarding any lacunae in the Essential Commodities Act and the 
‘Prevention of Black Marketing and Mainten ance of Supplies of 
Essential Commodities Act, 1980’ and suggestions regarding changes, 
if any, required to make them more effective in curbing hoarding and 
black-marketing of Essential Commodities. During evidence, the 
Committee enquired whether there is any need to make modification in 
the Essential Commodities Act, the Secretary stated :- 
“I do not feel that more powers to the investigating 
agencies at the State level be given because it will 
impede firstly the market as a whole and secondly one 
cannot foresee what use they will  be made at the State 
level. The provisions in respect of stock holding limits and 
blackmarketing are two potent provisions. As the Hon. 
Minister had indicated, if we implement them properly 
and with vigour, I think, it should be adequate.” 
 
11.11 He further added:- 
“I personally do not feel, Sir, that our law is inadequate. 
In any case, the EC Act was amended in 2006 after 
widespread States consultations. So, I do not think that 
there is any need to change that. But about technolo gy, 
yes, I agree. That depends on the nature of the 
technology used by the miscreants to try to get out of the 
clutches of the law.”   
 
11.12 The Committee have been informed that there is standing order 
issued to all the State Governments/UT Administratio n to submit 
monthly reports to the Department of Consumer Affairs indicating the 
action taken under provisions of Essential Commodities Act, 1955 as 
also Prevention of Black Marketing   and Maintenance of supplies of 
Essential Commodities Act, 1980. Asked whether the Government is 
receiving the required information from all the States / UTs regularly, 

  
the Committee was informed that regular follow up action to obtain the 
“monthly action reports” from the State Government/UTs are carried 
out by the Central G overnment.  Despite regular reminder, some State 
Governments either do not respond at all or furnish  monthly reports in 
an irregular manner.  The matter was also taken up at high levels with 
the State Governments/UTs.  The Committee have observed that as 
per Section 3 of the ‘Prevention of Black -Marketing and Maintenance 
of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980’, the State 
Governments/UTs are required to report the details of detention cases 
to the Central Government within 7 days from the date of ap proval of 
detention case by the State Governments/UTs.  When enquired about 
the detention cases reported by various States under   Prevention of 
Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential 
Commodities Act, 1980  for the year 2007 and 2008 (upto 18.09.2008), 
the Committee was furnished the following information:- 
 
 
 
11.13 The States/UTs which have not furnished the reports have been 
addressed by Additional Secretary (CA) vide his letter dated 
10.09.2008.  This letter emphasized upon the need of timely 
submission of the reports being sent by the States/UTs. 
 
Name of State 2007 2008 
(As on 18.09.2008) 
 Gujarat 50 13 
Tamil Nadu 65 85 
Maharashtra 1 - 
Madhya Pradesh 3 - 
Andhra Pradesh - 03 
Total 119 101 

  
11.14   The Committee note that the Depa rtment of Consumer 
Affairs is entrusted with the responsibility to prevent unethical 
trade practices like hoarding and blackmarketing through two 
Acts viz. The Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and Prevention of 
Blackmarketing of Essential Commodities and Ma intenance of 
Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980. Action against 
hoarders and blackmarketers is undertaken by the State 
Governments under the provision of these acts. The Department 
of Consumer Affairs from time to time takes views of the State 
Governments/UTs to know whether there is any lacuna in the Acts 
due to which most of the unscrupulous persons go scot free 
despite serious offences. From the information furnished by the 
Government, the Committee find that despite a large number of 
raids cond ucted by the enforcement machinery of State 
Governments/UT Administration, the number of persons 
prosecuted and convicted were very minimal which may be due to 
shortcomings in the Acts. The Secretary, Department of 
Consumer Affairs during evidence stated t hat the provisions of 
the Acts are adequate provided these are implemented properly 
with vigour. However, he admitted that due to technology used by 
miscreants, they try to get out of the clutches of the law. The 
Committee feel that since the number of per sons arrested and 
convicted under the Acts are on the rise, indicating the 
corresponding rise in cases of hoarding and blackmarketing, 
there is inadequacy in the provisions of the Acts to take action 

  
against unscrupulous persons indulging in hoarding and 
blackmarketing of essential commodities. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Government should make 
amendments in the penal provisions of the Acts in consultation 
with the States/UTs so that the offenders do not escape for want 
of the requisite provision in the law.  

  
11.15    The Committee note that Essential Commodities Act, 
1955 and Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of 
Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980 empowers the State 
Governments/UTs to take action against the u nscrupulous 
persons indulging in hoarding and blackmarketing of essential 
commodities. From the information furnished by the Department 
of Consumer Affairs, the Committee find that during 2008, the rate 
of conviction of the persons arrested is very low as compared to 
the persons prosecuted for violation of the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955. Out of 1,76,350 persons arrested during 
this period, 3416 persons were prosecuted and only 770 persons 
were convicted. It is more surprising that in Andhra Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Kerala and Uttar Pradesh where 12,367, 22,867, 58, 346 
and 19,869 respectively raids were conducted but not a single 
person was convicted. In respect of Punjab, 20,584 raids were 
convicted but only 15 persons were arrested and out of 4 
prosecution, only one person was convicted under the said Acts. 
The Committee are not satisfied with the argument of Department 
of Consumer Affairs that the enforcement of the Essential 
Commodities Acts lies with the State Governments and Union 
Territories to take acti on against the hoarders and 
blackmarketers. In the opinion of the Committee, the Central 
Government cannot shrink with its responsibility for the proper 
implementation of the Acts. According to the Department, going 
by the ‘NIL’ reports sent by some State Governments/UTs, it can 

  
be presumed that these State Governments/UTs might not have 
conducted any raids or not have detained any persons for 
indulging in malpractices in essential commodities. The 
Committee deplore the lackadaisical approach of State 
Governments/UTs in either not furnishing any ‘monthly action 
taken reports’ or by giving ‘NIL’ reports. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Department should 
strengthen its enforcement machinery and direct the State 
Government/UTs to conduct r egular raids to catch hold the 
hoarders and blackmarketers who create artificial scarcity leading 
to price rise and to ensure that the persons arrested are 
prosecuted strictly in accordance with the law of land. It will also 
help the Government to keep che ck over the rising in prices of 
essential commodities.  

  
 11.16   The Committee note that as per Section 3 of the 
‘Prevention of Black -Marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of 
Essential Commodities Act, 1980’, the State Governments/UTs are 
required to rep ort the details of detention cases to the Central 
Government within 7 days from the date of approval of detention 
case by the State Governments/UTs. The Committee find that only 
5 State Governments have furnished information in this regard to 
the Departmen t of Consumer Affairs during the year 2007 and 
2008 (upto 18.09.2008). The Committee are of the view that other 
State Governments have not furnished any information so it may 
be construed that except 5 State Governments/UTs, other State 
Governments/UTs have not made any detention under the Act. It 
appears to the Committee that the remaining States/UTs are not 
serious in the implementation of the Acts and, therefore, 
Department of Consumer Affairs is being kept in the dark by most 
of the State Governments by  not abiding by Section 3 of the 
aforesaid Act. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
State Governments should be persuaded to supply the 
information of detention cases within the prescribed time limit as 
per the Act.  
 
 
 
 

  
CHAPTER-XII 
 
 
FORWARD MARKET COMMISSION 
 
 
 The Concept of Forward trading in India has its inception 
since 1875 when Bombay Cotton Trade Association Ltd. introduced 
forward trading in cotton. Subsequently many regional Exchanges 
came into existence. Forward Markets Commission (FM C) got its 
statutory status under the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952. 
The Futures Market performs two important economic functions, 
namely, of price discovery and price risk management with reference 
to a given commodity. In order to minimize the  risk factors associated 
with the futures market, regulation of forward trading is done by a three 
tier regulatory structure, viz., the Central Government, Forward 
Markets Commission and the recognized Commodity Exchanges / 
Associations. It functions under  the administrative control of the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution; Department 
of Consumer Affairs, Govt. of India.  
 
12.2 The subject 'futures trading' is in the Union List of Seventh 
Schedule of the Constitution. The Parliament e nacted the Forward 
Contracts (Regulation) Act, in 1952 and the same has been on the 
statute book since then.  This Act governs forward trading in India.  
The Act governs goods which have been defined to exclude actionable 
claims, money and securities, i.e. , the Act applies mainly to 
commodities. Presently, the futures trading is regulated in 105 
commodities by issue of notification under Section 15 of the Act.  At 
present, there are 22 recognized associations for futures trading 
including 19 specific commod ity (Regional) Exchanges. The 
Commission thus is a statutory authority entrusted with regulatory 
functions under the Act.  
 

  
12.3  The Commission consists of a Chairman and three 
members.  It has its headquarters at Mumbai and a Regional Office at 
Calcutta. Forward Markets Commission has 5 Divisions to carry out 
various tasks. These Divisions were formed on 1st August 2005 in 
order to streamline the work on a functional basis. 
 
NATIONAL MULTI – COMMODITY EXCHANGE  
 
12.4 The Committee observed that there were thre e national multiple 
commodities exchanges out of which two are situated in Mumbai and 
one at Ahmedabad.  When asked as to why all the multi - commodity 
exchanges are centralized only in the western part of the country and 
what were the difficulties faced in  setting up of multi - commodity 
exchange all over the country, the FMC in a written reply intimated that 
the three national exchanges were granted recognition after following 
an elaborate process of inviting applications through issue of a press 
note and s hort-listing them on the basis of the criteria prescribed in 
terms of the proposed organizational structure, management structure, 
trading, clearing and settlement practices etc. as the national 
exchanges provide for online trading with national reach, geo graphical 
location of the exchanges is of little significance as the trading 
terminals of the exchanges can be accessed from any part of the 
country.   
 
12.5 The Committee wanted to know if some application were in the 
process with FMC for recognition as nation al commodities exchanges, 
the Chairman FMC replied in the positive. 
 
12.6 The Committee pointed out that the National Board of Trade, 
Indore (NBOT) was declared the best commodity exchange during the 
National Conference of Commodity Exchanges held on 2 nd September, 
2003 on the basis of volume of trade. When asked whether the NBOT 
has been declared as a National Multi -commodity Exchange, the FMC 
stated that among the existing single commodity exchanges, NBOT 

  
had achieved the highest turnover. Even though NBO T was one of the 
applicants for the status of the National Exchange, it was not given the 
recognition as a Multi Commodity Exchange as it had failed to set up 
the same within the stipulated time from the date of in -principle 
approval of their application.  
 
12.7 The Chairman, FMC in reply to a related question stated 
during evidence that out of 16 requests only 4 were shortlisted in which 
NBOT was also there. But they themselves had to surrender the 
licence  and couldn’t develop their National Exchange sinc e they 
couldn’t get the software and develop the IT system. 
 
PRICE DISSEMINATION PROJECT 
 
12.8 The Committee was informed in a written reply that the 
government of India had launched the ‘price dissemination project’ 
during the XI five year plan to facilit ate the farmers to increase their 
bargaining capacity and to provide information of prices for their 
product in pre-sowing and pre-harvesting period.  
 
12.9 When asked about how far the ‘Price Dissemination Project’ 
is likely to be successful in checking t he prices of Essential 
Commodities, the FMC in a written reply informed that the 
dissemination of futures prices would enable farmers to understand the 
economic significance of the futures market and help them to make 
use of the price signals emanating on a real time basis from the futures 
market in their sowing and marketing decisions. It is also expected that 
the availability of futures prices at the mandis will enable small and 
marginal farmers to get better price realization for their produce from 
the t raders who normally offer very low price to farmers taking 
advantage of their ignorance about the future demand and supply 
situation and then financial compulsions.   
 

  
12.10 When the Committee desired to know whether the project 
was being implemented in al l the districts of the States/UTs, the FMC 
in their written replies informed that the task of placing the ticker 
boards in areas having farmers footfalls is stupendous and would be 
implemented with the support of various organizations (like APMCs 
mandis, r ural post offices, rural branches of the banks, etc.) having 
reach to the farmers. in the first phase starting this year, around 1000 
agmarknet APMCs (mandis) spread over 18 states which already have 
agmarknet’s computer hardware and internet connectivity have been 
identified for placement of price ticker boards.  it will be extended to all 
mandis in all states in the following years.  
 
12.11 When asked about the study to see the percentage of small 
and marginal farmers benefited from future/forward trading , the 
Chairman,FMC during the evidence stated that so far no such study 
has been conducted but they were trying to  bring more and more 
farmers to the future trading market.  
 
12.12 On being asked as to how the forward market commission 
ensures that the sm all/marginal farmers are benefited from the 
dissemination of prices at APMCs the FMC in their replies intimated 
that the commission has been organizing awareness programmes for 
mandi officials, traders and farmers so as to familiarize them with the 
futures market.   
 
AWARENESS PROGRAMME ABOUT PRICE FLUCTUATIONS 
 
12.13 According to the FMC, creation of awareness amongst the 
farmers and related bodies and organizations including the ones which 
could be potential hedgers / aggregators was one of the major 
activities of the Commission this year. 
 
12.14 When the Committee desired to know about the extensive 
training to farmers and their cooperatives regarding Agriculture Price 

  
Risk Management and to encourage them to participate in the future 
market, the FMC in t heir written replies stated that it was true that the 
benefits of futures market have not trickled down to the small and 
marginal farmers in a big way mainly due to their ignorance and lack of 
awareness and non-availability of appropriate infrastructure.  
 
12.15 The Committee wanted to know the steps taken to create 
awareness by the Government/Forward Market Commission amongst 
the farmers about the price fluctuations, cropping patterns and to avoid 
distress sale of the foodgrains.  The FMC in a written repl y stated that 
on its part, firstly the FMC has launched an awareness campaign to 
create awareness amongst farmers about the benefits of futures 
trading. In this campaign, the FMC is collaborating with all the 
Commodity Exchanges, Agricultural Universities,  Business Schools, 
Commodity Boards, Cooperative Organizations, NABARD, other 
institutes such as NIAM, CAB, NIBM, VAMNICOM, IGDIR, MANAGE 
and various farmers’ training centres. In the Financial year 2007 -08, 
FMC conducted 114 awareness programmes out of wh ich 75 were 
exclusively for farmers.  
 
MONITORING MECHANISM  
 
12.16 When the committee asked about the details of surprise 
checks and raids conducted by FMC at the recognized associations 
during the last three years, the FMC stated that till about 10 years  
back, there were hardly any major commodities under futures trading. 
Hence, the commission had very little regulatory work and limited 
enforcement activities 
 
12.17 When asked about the steps taken by the Forward Market 
Commission to make the process of p rice discovery of commodity 
transparent, the committee was informed that there are certain pre -
requisites for an efficient and transparent futures market.  The process 
of price discovery in commodity exchanges becomes robust and 

  
transparent when the tradin g acquires sufficient liquidity and depth. 
Participation by a large number of stake holders and sufficient hedge 
positions by physical market players, viz., producers, processors, 
exporters, importers, etc., ensures a balance between speculators and 
hedgers through competitive buy -sell positions (reflecting supply -
demand equations in the physical market). This ensures against price 
manipulation by one or a few players. a robust regulatory framework 
and sufficiently empowered and independent regulator are a sine qua 
non for a healthy market. The market should also be free from major 
Government interventions. Government has introduced a bill in the 
Parliament to amend the FC(R) act to strengthen the regulatory 
framework and confer autonomy on the regulator. Ex peditious 
enactment of these amendments is necessary. 
 
Trading of  Essential Commodities in the Futures Market 
12.18 The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2006 
was referred to the Committee for examination. The Committee 
examined the bill and presented the report to Parliament on 19 th 
December, 2006. The Committee strongly recommended that 
agricultural commodities especially foodgrains including coarse grains, 
pulses and sugar need not be permitted to be traded in the commodity 
market. The Hon’ble Finance Minister in his Budget Speech (2007 -08) 
announced the decision of the Government to ban forward trading of 
Wheat and Rice with effect from 27 th February, 2007. The Government 
also had banned forward trading of Tur and Urad on 2 nd February, 
2007. The Committee in their 19 th Report on Demands for Grants 
(2007-08) presented to Parliament on 27 th April, 2007 had also 
recommended that there was an urgent need to ban forward trading in 
the remaining essential commodities. 
  
12.19 The Committee wanted to know the position of  ban on 
agricultural and other essential commodities at present. The Chairman, 
FMC during evidence deposed that it was true that the ban on trading 
of certain commodities in the future market still continued. The 

  
Committee learnt fr om the press clippings dated 27 th November, 2008 
that the ban on trading of these commodities in the futures market will 
be lifted after November, 2008. The FMC in their post evidence replies 
dated 5 th December, 2008 in reply to a related question intimate d the 
Committee that Wheat, Rice, Tur and Urad had been de -listed since 
early 2007. 
12.20 The Committee at their sitting held on 8 th December, 2008 
took further evidence of the representatives of the Department of 
Consumer Affairs desired to know the lates t position in this regard.  
The Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs deposed that he will 
find after getting the details.  The Committee asked the Secretary, to 
furnish the details in this regard.  Nothing has been heard so far form 
the Department of Consumer Affairs. 

  
12.21 The Committee note that there were 3 National Multi 
Commodity Exchanges out of which 2 were situated in Mumbai 
and one at Ahmedabad. According to FMC, some more 
applications were in the process for recognition as National Multi 
Commodity Exchanges. The Committee desire that the National 
Multi Commodity Exchanges should be spread all over India and 
should not be limited to a particular area/zone and recommend 
that the recognition to other parties for National Multi Commodity 
Exchanges be accorded without any further loss of time. 

  
12.22 In this connection, the Committee also note that the 
National Board of Trade (NBOT), Indore was declared the best 
Commodity Exchange during the National Conference of 
Commodity Exchanges held on 2 nd September, 2003 on the basis 
of volume of trade. The NBOT has not yet been declared a 
National Multi Commodity Exchange. According to the Ministry, 
the NBOT had achieved the highest turnover amongst the existing 
single commodity exchanges. The Committee und erstood that 
NBOT has put in place fully automated online system long ago. 
Being a duly approved demutualised set up, NBOT deserve a fair 
and better treatment because it pioneered the concept of the most 
efficient, transparent trading, clearing, settlement  and delivery 
mechanism. The Committee strongly recommend that NBOT be 
recognized as a National Multi Commodity Exchange as per the 
old guidelines in the national interest and the paid up capital 
criteria of Rs. 100 crore as stipulated under New Guidelines  
should not be made applicable to the existing commodity 
exchanges who are otherwise satisfying the other guidelines 
stipulated in the guidelines.  

  
12.23 The Committee note that the Government of India 
launched the Price Dissemination Project during the Eleventh 
Five Year Plan in order to facilitate the farmers to increase the 
bargaining capacity and to provide information of prices for their 
product in pre -sowing and pre -harvesting period. The Committee 
was also informed that the dissemination of future prices would 
enable farmers to understand the economic significance of the 
futures market and help them to make use of price signals 
emanating on a real time basis. According to FMC, the task of 
placing the ticker board in areas having farmers’ footfalls i s 
stupendous and would be implemented with the support of 
various organizations having reach to the farmers. In the first 
phase, around 1,000 agmarknet APMCs spread over 18 States 
which already have agmarknets computer hardware and internet 
connectivity ha ve been identified for placement of Price Sticker 
Boards. It will be extended to all mandis in all States in the 
following years. The Committee recommend that the Price Sticker 
Boards which have been identified be commissioned without any 
further delay for the benefit of the farmers. FMC should also make 
concerted efforts to install the Price Sticker Boards to all the 
mandis in all the States of the country in the coming years. The 
Committee also desire that a study/survey be conducted to 
ascertain the percentage of small and marginal farmers who have 
been benefited from future/forward trading as according to FMC, 
no such study has yet been carried out by them. 

  
12.24 The Committee find that the creation of awareness 
among the farmers and related bodies and  organizations was one 
of the major activities of the commission. The Committee has 
been informed that the benefits of future markets have not tickled 
down to the small and marginal farmers in a big way mainly due 
to their ignorance and lack of awareness a nd non-availability of 
appropriate infrastructure. The Committee has also been 
informed that the FMC is collaborating with the commodity 
exchanges, agricultural universities etc. to launch awareness 
campaigns to create awareness amongst the farmers and in the 
financial year 2007 -08, FMC has conducted 114 awareness 
programmes out of which 75 were exclusively for farmers. While 
the Committee appreciate the steps taken by FMC to spread 
awareness among the farmers, it is not enough and a lot more is 
needed to b e done so that the benefits of future market could 
reach the level of small and marginal farmers in a big way. 

  
12.25 The Committee note that the Commission had very little 
regulatory work and limited enforcement machinery as there were 
hardly any major commodities under future trading till about 10 
year back. The Committee was informed that there were certain 
pre-requisites for an efficient and transparent future market. 
According to FMC, a bill has been introduced in Parliament to 
amend the Future Contr act Act to strengthen the regulatory 
framework and confer autonomy on the regulator. The Committee 
hope that the bill is passed expeditiously in the Parliament and 
the FMC is conferred with requisite autonomy so that the 
regulatory framework is strengthened. 
 

  
12.26  The Committee note that pursuant to the recommendations 
of the Committee, the Government imposed a ban on trading of 
agricultural/essential commodities in the futures market from 
February, 2007. The Chairman, FMC informed the Committee 
during evidence that the ban on trading of these commodities in 
the futures market was still in operation. The Committee was 
surprised to find in the press the very next day, that the ban on 
trading of these commodities would be lifted after November, 
2008. The C ommittee take a very serious view in this matter and 
recommend that the ban on trading of essential commodities 
should continue.   

  
 
CHAPTER-XIII 
 
RISE IN PRICE OF PETROLEUM AND PETROLEUM PRODUCTS 
 
 
Petroleum and Petroleum Products is one of the important  
component covered under Essential Commodities vide ‘The Essential 
Commodities (Amendment) Act, 2006.  Prices of Petroleum Products 
have been determined variedly by adopting different methods like 
import parity pricing, Administered Pricing Mechanism (APM).   
 
13.2 In September 1997, the Government, based on the 
recommendations of the Rangarajan Group, decided in principle to 
dismantle Administered Pricing Mechanism (APM) in a phased 
manner.  Subsequently, in November 1997, the Government 
announced a phased  programme for dismantling of APM. The 
Government initiated the phased programme for dismantling of APM 
from April, 1998.  Effective from 1.4.2002, the APM was dismantled 
except for pricing of subsidized products viz., PDS Kerosene and 
Domestic LPG. In po st-APM Regime since 1.4.2002, the Government 
decided that pricing of all petroleum products, except PDS Kerosene 
and Domestic LPG, would be market -determined. Domestic LPG and 
PDS kerosene would be subsidized for which necessary provision 
would be made in fiscal budget. 
 
 Production of Oil and Import -Export  
13.3 The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas is concerned with 
exploration and production of oil and natural gas (including import of 
Liquefied Natural Gas), refining, distribution and marketing, impor t, 
export and conservation of petroleum products.  As per Annual Report 
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas ,during 2007 -
08 crude oil production in the country is expected to be about 34.763 
million metric tonnes (MMT) and 31.67 billion cubic meters (BCM) of 

  
natural gas production as against the production of 33.99 MMT of 
crude oil and 31.74 BCM of natural gas in 2006-07.        
 
13.4 When the Committee asked about actual production of crude oil 
by the two major oil companies, ONGC and Oi l India Limited engaged 
in the exploration and production of oil and natural gas in the Country, 
the representatives of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas during 
evidence informed that the total production of ONGC and Oil India 
during 2005 -06 was 30.14 million metric tonnes and in 2006 -07, it 
increased to 31.513 metric tonnes and during 2007 -08, it was 31.362 
metric tonnes.   
 
13.5 The Additional Secretary to the Ministry further elucidated:-  
“The production of Oil India would be around 10 
percent of th at but in the macro sphere, we are 
importing something like 80 percent of our crude 
oil requirement.  It is 75 percent by the public 
sector and if we add the private sector, it comes to 
80 percent of our requirement”.     
 
13.6 When the Committee asked abo ut the export policy of petrol in 
the face of major domestic demand met from import, the representative 
of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas during evidence inter -alia 
stated that: – 
“…………..Today we have refinery capacity far in 
excess of our domes tic demand.  As against an 
approximate domestic demand of 120 million 
tonnes, we have a refinery capacity of 150 
million tonnes.  The idea is that you will import 
crude oil at a particular price and you will be 
exporting products after value addition.  Thi s is 
exactly what is being done by some of the 
refineries in the country. This not only provides 
valuable foreign exchange for us but also 
provides employment.  I think, it is very good for 
the economy of the Country….” 
  

  
13.7 The Committee enquired whether consultation with public sector 
oil companies were held regarding Import -Export Policy.  The 
representative of the Ministry during evidence stated:- 
“This is constantly under discussion with the oil 
marketing companies.  I must also say that the 
public s ector oil marketing companies are also 
exporting many of their products depending upon 
the geographic location.” 
  
13.8 On being asked by the Committee whether the Ministry grants 
permission to export the commodities whose prices are determined by 
the Government, the Ministry intimated that they do not permit export 
of LPG and Kerosene.  But all other products can be exported.   
 
Pricing of Petroleum Products  
13.9 The Committee observed that the prices of crude oil in the 
international market came down sub stantially from $ 147 per barrel to 
around $ 65 per barrel but in spite of this the prices of Petrol, Diesel 
and LPG have not come down in the domestic market.  The Committee 
referred to the announcement of the Minister of Petroleum in the 
Parliament that they will announce a policy in this regard in a week’s 
time. 
 
13.10    On the query raised by the Committee as to what is being 
done with regard to policy announcement by Minister of Petroleum in 
the Parliament Session so that the benefits of decreasing pr ices of 
crude oil in the international market could reach the domestic 
consumers.  The representatives of the Ministry during evidence inter -
alia clarified that:- 
“………..The important thing is that the rupee 
has substantially devalued.  As distinguished 
Members are aware, in the course of last few 
months, there been virtually a decrease in the 
value of rupee from Rs.40 per dollar to Rs.50 per 
dollar.  So, the gains that we had as a result of 
reduction in the prices of oil, have been eaten 
away by that”. 
 

  
13.11 The representative of the Ministry in his brief introductory 
remarks clarified that:-  
“ …….there has been no abnormal increase in the 
prices of petroleum products in the Country if we 
were to take six to seven years of framework…… 
the increase in price s of other products in the 
country, particularly the essential commodities, 
agricultural products and pulses which sometimes 
have increased by 50% in the course of just one 
year, the increase in the prices of petroleum 
products has not been substantial.  T hey are 
suffering large under recoveries on the sale of 
these four essential commodities.  The under -
recoveries on account of LPG per cylinder is of the 
order of Rs.330 per cylinder and in the case of 
kerosene, we are having a under-recovery or short 
pricing of about Rs.22 per litre.  In the case of 
diesel, we were having an under recovery of Rs.8 
to Rs.9.  However, these under -recoveries have 
decreased in the recent past in the case of petrol 
and diesel.  The jewels of the Indian Public Sector, 
IOCL, BPCL,  HPCL are suffering losses which 
comes to a total of Rs.14431 crores for the first 
half of the year.  However, three upstream oil 
companies viz. ONGC, the Oil India and GAIL 
contribute a part of the losses of the downstream 
oil marketing companies and the oil bond issued 
by the Government to compensate the losses.  A 
total of Rs.1,24,000 crores of under-recovery by oil 
marketing companies is estimated when the whole 
year is completed which would leave large unmet 
gaps in their balance sheets.  Thereby furni shing 
the major under recoveries as a major reasons for 
why prices not decreased despite the international 
prices of crude oil has come down to about 70 
dollars from 140-147 dollars previously.”   
 
   The under-recoveries of OMCs during 2004 -05 to 2008 -09 as 
furnished by the Ministry in the background note is as under:- 
(Rs. Crore) 
Under-
Recovery 
2004-05 
 
2005-06 2006-07 
 
2007-08 2008-09 
(estimate
d) 
PDS Kerosene    9,480 14,384 17,883 19,102 32,043 
Domestic LPG    8,362 10,246 10,701 15,523 23,953 
Petrol 150 2,723 2,027 7,332 6,106 
Diesel 2,154 12,647 18,776 35,166 62,675 
Total 20,146 40,000 49,387 77,123 124,777 

  
 
*Gross under -recoveries without considering refinery discount, oil 
bonds and upstream assistance.  
 
13.12 Subsequently the C ommittee have note that the government 
has reduced the prices of Petrol and Diesel by Rs. 5/ - litre and Rs. 2/ - 
litre respectively w.e.f. 6.12.2008.  However, the prices of LPG 
remained unchanged.  The prices of crude oil in international market 
have further come down to around $ 40 per barrel.  
Taxes and Duties:- 
13.13 In the background note furnished by the Ministry, the 
Committee found that State level taxes form a significant part of the 
retail selling price of petrol and diesel. The rates of taxation v ary widely 
from a minimum of 18% to a maximum of 33% in case of petrol and 
from a minimum of 8.80% to a maximum of 26% in case of diesel.  
Changes in customs duty rates 
 
Changes in Excise Duty Rates 
   
Product As on 
01/08/2004 
 
19/8/2004 
 
1/3/2005 
 
14/06/2006 
 
05/06/2008 
Crude 10 10 5 5 Nil 
Motor Spirit 20 15 10 7.50 2.50 
Diesel 20 15 10 7.50 2.50 
Kerosene 
(PDS) 
10 5 Nil Nil Nil 
LPG 10 5 Nil Nil Nil 
Product AS ON 
16/6/04 
AS ON 
19/08/04 
AS ON 
1/3/05 
As on 1/3/07 As on 1/3/08 As on 5/6/08 
 
Petrol -Advalorem 
Specific 
 
(Rs/Ltr) at Delhi 
 
26.00% 
Rs 7.50/Ltr 
 
 
11.97 
 
23.00% 
Rs 7.50/ltr 
 
 
11.90 
 
8.00% 
Rs. 13/ltr 
 
 
14.59 
 
6.00% 
Rs. 13/ltr 
 
 
14.66 
 
Nil 
Rs. 14.35/ltr 
 
 
14.78 
 
Nil 
Rs.13.35/ltr 
 
 
13.75 
 
HSD - 
Advalorem 
Specific 
(Rs/Ltr) at Delhi 
 
11.00% 
Rs 1.50/Ltr 
 
3.32 
 
8.00% 
Rs 1.50/ltr 
 
3.01 
 
8.00% 
Rs.3.25/Ltr 
 
4.80 
 
6.00% 
Rs 3.25/Ltr 
 
4.69 
 
Nil 
Rs 4.60/Ltr 
 
4.74 
 
Nil 
Rs 3.60/ltr 
 
3.71 
Kerosene 
(PDS) 
16.00% 12.00% NIL NIL NIL NIL 
LPG (Dom.) 8.00% 8.00% NIL NIL NIL NIL 

  
 NOTE: - With effect from 09.07.04 - An additional levy of Education 
Cess @ 2%      has been imposed. Revised to 3 % effective 
01.03.2007 
 
13.14 Since the sales tax on petroleum products varies from State 
to State, the Committee raised the question on uniformity of sales tax 
for which the Ministry during evidence informed the committee:-  
“In regard to sales tax issue raised by the 
Members, we are constantly writing to the State 
Governments to reduce the sales tax so that the 
price, which the retail consumer pays in the 
various States would be lowered or at least, be 
uniform. 
In the case of Kerosene and LPG, we have 
already done and it has been made declared 
good.  No State can charge more than four 
percent.  We are always trying for this in the case 
of petrol and diesel.” 
 
13.15 The CMD, HPCL further added during evidence:- 
 
“Today, the major incedence of taxes is by the 
States.  The sales tax or the VAT today is in the 
range of approximately above 20 per cent in 
almost all the States.  In some States, it is as high 
as 30 per cent.  Now, this is  an area, which is a 
matter of concern for us.  For a company like 
Hindustan Petroleum, where we have a refinery in 
Mumbai, we also have the additional  problem of 
having a three per cent octroi for the crude that is 
coming in.  So, we are getting loaded o n many 
sides on this.”  
 
 
Phasing Out of Subsidies on PDS Kerosene and domestic LPG- 
 
13.16      In the background note furnished by Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas, Committee found that the Government had decided 
that the subsidies on PDS Kerosene a nd Domestic LPG, in the Post -
APM era starting from 1.4.2002, would be on a specified flat rate basis 
for each Depot/Bottling Plant and would be met from the fiscal budget. 
After providing for the aforesaid subsidy, the retail prices would then 

  
vary as per changes in the international oil prices.  The subsidies were 
to be phased out in three to five years.  In October 2007, the 
Government reviewed the position of fiscal subsidies on LPG and SKO 
and extended the schemes till 31st  March 2010.   
       
13.17 In a written reply furnished by the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas, the Committee found the allocation of subsidy on PDS 
Kerosene and LPG (Domestic) from 2002 -03 to April - September, 
2008 as under:- 
 PDS Kerosene LPG (DOMESTIC) 
 Unit Subsidy (Rs./Litre) Unit Subsidy (Rs./Cyl.) 
 From Govt. 
Budget 
 By Oil 
Companies   
Total  From Govt. 
Budget 
By Oil 
Companies  
Total 
2002-03 2.45 1.69 4.14 67.75 62.27 130.02 
2003-04 1.65 3.12 4.77 45.18 89.54 134.72 
2004-05 0.82 7.96 8.78 22.58 124.89 147.47 
2005-06  0.82 12.10 12.92 22.58 152.46 175.04 
2006-07  0.82 15.17 15.99 22.58 156.08 178.66 
2007-08  0.82 16.23 17.05 22.58 214.05 236.63 
Apr-
Sep’08(P) 
0.82 31.88 32.70 22.58 306.38 328.96 
 
 
13.18 When the Committee asked as to why the subsidy has 
decreased f rom 2.45 paise to 82 paise in kerosene and from 67.75 
paise to 22.58 paise in LPG where latter’s rate are increasing, the 
Committee was informed during the evidence by the representative of 
the Ministry :- 
“……. The intention of the Government at that time 
was to come to market related prices and remove 
all subsidy element.  So it was decided that in a 
phased manner the prices will increase and 
subsidies will be decreased and everybody would 
pay market oriented prices.  But, unfortunately, 
with the steep inc rease in oil prices thereafter, the 
Government, taking into account the sentiments of 

  
the people of India, were not in a position to 
implement this.  So the subsidy element which is 
given through the Budget of the Government of 
India has remained stagnant.   As a matter of fact, 
it has decreased.  However, it is offset by the oil 
bond which is given through the Budget of India.  
We do not call it subsidy any more; we call it oil 
bond”.   
 
13.19 When the Committee asked about the issue of phasing out 
subsidy by 2010, the representatives of the Ministry intimated during 
the course of evidence that this is a decision which the entire economic 
sector has to take a call on.   
 
13.20 When the Committee asked as to whether any alternative 
has been made in this regar d, to the phasing out the subsidy, the 
Ministry informed that in all times to come, BPL families will surely get 
kerosene at the subsidized rate.    
 
Diversion and Adulteration of Kerosene  
 
13.21   It has been reported in the Annual Report that with a vie w 
to assessing the genuine demand of kerosene in different States/UTs, 
in December 2004, the Government commissioned a comprehensive 
study of the subject through the National Council for Applied Economic 
Research (NCAER) which estimated that siphoning off of kerosene for 
non-household purpose is 18.1%, diversion of kerosene from PDS to 
open market is 17.9% and diversion of kerosene to no card 
households is 2.6%. Total leakage is thus estimated at 38.6% of total 
sale of PDS kerosene, which is fairly a large percentage which needs 
to be taken into consideration.   
 
13.22 When the Committee, asked about the issue of the reduced 
weight of the gas in cylinders, the representatives of the Ministry during 
evidence stated:- 
“The oil marketing companies are constantl y 
conducting checks not only in their bottling plants, 

  
but every cylinder of gas is weighed.  We also 
cross check at the dealer points and all complaints 
are attended to.  All the oil companies have a toll 
free number and anyone can register a complaint 
on that.   
I do agree that inspite of that all this is 
happening.  There could be stray cases of 
underweight.  If at all we discover it, very stringent 
punishment is given to people who are involved in 
this.” 
  
13.23 The representative of the Ministry in rep ly to a related 
question deposed during evidence that the system was not 
immune to mal-practices.  
 
Awareness Campaign 
13.24 The Committee observed that there is rampant misuse of 
LPG in the country for other purposes and desired to know whether 
any awareness campaign is being carried out to check the misuse of 
LPG. 
        The representative of the Ministry during the evidence informed -  
“First of all, I would say that the entire question of 
diversion of LPG or misuse of LPG is rampant 
basically because of the same problem.  While the 
market price should be almost double of what it is 
today.  We are giving it at 50 percent of the prices.  
This is meant only for the domestic use.  All the 
hotels, marriage parties and other kind of 
industrialization users, h ave to buy LPG, which is 
of a different size paying a much higher price.  It is 
close to about Rs.1000 for 19 kg. cylinder.  People 
are tempted not do this.  They are allowed  
to divert.  You have correctly said that some year 
ago, there was plenty of LPG available because 
there was no problem at that time.  A few years 
ago, the prices were according to market 
determination.  People were paying the full price of 
LPG.  There was no need for diversion……. 
Today, when they are suffering such deep losses 
on it, there is really no motivation for the oil 
marketing companies to go on increasing the 
supplies because on each cylinder, they lose more 
and more money……… If we take a house hold of 
five people, almost 50 percent of the population of 

  
India is covered by LPG …….. Given this 
magnitude and the fact that one cylinder is given 
to a family every month, there is bound to be some 
diversion and some misuse.”  
 
13.25    The representatives further stated:- 
 “Oil marketing companies and the Government 
are very much awar e of it and then we are 
constantly inspecting the premises of the dealers 
and taking punitive action against dealers 
whenever this misuse is revealed to us.  We are 
going to launch a massive campaign against 
misuse and for conservation telling the people t he 
advantage of pooling in the car and driving the car 
between 45 km to 55 km.  There is an organization 
called the Petroleum Conservation Research 
Association (PCRA) and from next month we are 
going to launch a massive all India campaign on 
educating people on the need for conservation of 
petroleum products and stop the misuse of LPG 
cylinders.  In some parts of India there is bound to 
be diversion.  The fundamental reason for this is 
the differential pricing of LPG and so the 
temptation to use domestic LP G cylinders for 
kitchen in the hotels or for marriage functions is 
very high”.  
Monitoring Mechanism 
13.26 The Committee observed that the LPG Cylinders are not 
delivered in time to the consumer and are sold at higher price. 
13.27 When the Committee asked whether any guidelines are 
there in the Ministry to ensure that consumers get LPG gas in time and 
at reasonable prices and whether any Monitoring mechanism exists 
with the Ministry to check this.  The representative of the Ministry 
informed the Committee during evidence: - 
“The prices are fixed by the Ministry.  However, we 
do not have a monitoring system of going to the 
field.  We are very much dependent on the oil 
marketing companies to do this.  The Ministry 
does not directly do this.  However, whenever 
complaints come to us, we ensure that these are 
attended to. There are marketing discipline 
guidelines which are issued by the Ministry and all 
the oil marketing companies are bound to follow 
these guidelines.” 
 

  
13.28 The Committee note that the total pro duction of crude 
oil by two major oil companies i.e. by ONGC and Oil India Limited 
was 30.14 million metric tonnes during 2005 -06, 31.513 million 
metric tonnes during 2006 -07 and 31.362 million metric tonnes 
during 2007 -08.  The Committee was informed duri ng evidence 
that around 80 per cent of our requirement was met through 
imports.  The Committee further note that the Government has 
permitted export of all other petroleum products except LPG and 
Kerosene.  The Committee are surprised to note that on the o ne 
hand about 80 per cent of our petroleum requirement is met by 
imports and on the other hand permission is granted to some oil 
companies to export these products for profit depending upon 
geographic locations. The argument put forth by the Ministry that 
crude oil is imported at a particular price and is exported after 
value addition is not acceptable to the Committee. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the export of petroleum 
products be allowed only after the domestic requirements are 
met.  

  
13.29  The Committee note that the prices of crude oil in the 
International Market came down substantially from $147 per 
barrel to around less than $40 per barrel but the prices of 
petroleum products viz Diesel, Petrol, Kerosene and LPG had not 
been reduced and  the benefits of the decrease in prices of crude 
oil in International Market did not percolate down to the domestic 
consumers.  The Committee was informed that the under -
recoveries of the oil companies are estimated to be around Rs. 
1,24,000 crores on completion of the whole year.  The huge under-
recoveries of the oil companies was stated to be the main reason 
for not decreasing the prices in domestic market despite 
decrease in the price of crude oil in the International market. The 
substantial devaluation of Indian currency i.e. Rupee as 
compared to dollar was another reason attributed by the Ministry 
for not decreasing the prices of petroleum products in the 
domestic market.  However, the Government has recently reduced 
the prices of petrol and diesel in d omestic market by Rs. 5 per 
litre and Rs. 2 per litre respectively but the prices of LPG 
remained unchanged. The Committee feel that the minimal 
reduction in prices is not enough and more needs to be done 
keeping in view the fact that the prices of crude oil in International 
Market still has a reducing trend and recommend that the effect of 
reduction in the price of crude oil should percolate down to the 
consumers and consequently the prices of four major petroleum 
products viz. Petrol, Diesel, Kerosene and LPG be further reduced 

  
in proportion to the reduction in the price of crude oil in the 
International Market and the Public Sector Oil Marketing 
companies be compensated whenever there is  an increase in the 
price of crude oil so as to  offset the losses t o be suffered by the 
oil companies.  

  
13.30  The Committee further note that State Level Taxes 
form a substantial part of the retail selling price of Petrol and 
Diesel.  The rates of taxation vary widely from State to State from 
18% to 33% in case of Petr ol and from 8.8% to 26% in case of 
Diesel.  According to the Ministry they were constantly writing to 
the State Governments to reduce the sales tax so as to make it 
uniform throughout the country. No State Government can charge 
more than 4% as Tax on Keros ene and LPG. The Government is 
trying this in case of Petrol and Diesel. The Committee are not 
satisfied with the version of the Ministry that they are constantly 
writing to the States to reduce the Sales/VAT Tax and recommend 
that the Government should ta ke up the matter in right earnest at 
the higher levels in the State Governments and make the taxes 
uniform throughout the country as has been done in case of 
Kerosene and LPG.  

  
13.31  The Committee find that there is rampant misuse of 
LPG for other purpo ses.  According to the Ministry the oil 
marketing companies and the Government were very much aware 
of the problem and they were constantly inspecting the premises 
of the dealers and taking punitive action against dealers 
whenever the misuse was revealed t o them.  The Committee also 
note that the Ministry is going to launch a massive campaign 
against misuse.  The representative of the Ministry admitted 
during evidence that there was bound to be some misuse.  The 
Ministry attributed the differential pricing of LPG as the main 
reason for the misuse of LPG Cylinders and so the temptation to 
use domestic LPG cylinders in the hotels or for marriage 
functions was very high.  The Committee desire the Ministry to 
launch massive awareness campaign in the country to c heck the 
misuse of LPG cylinders for other purposes and take strong 
punitive action against the persons found involved in such 
activities.  

  
13.32  The Committee find that according to the 
comprehensive study conducted by National Council for Applied 
Economic Research (NCAER) the leakage in kerosene was about 
38.6% of total sale of PDS Kerosene.  The Committee also find 
that at times the cylinders of domestic LPG were delivered 
underweight.  According to the Ministry constant checks were 
conducted by Oil Marketing Companies in their bottling plants 
and the cylinders were weighed.  The representative of the 
Ministry was candid during evidence in admitting that in spite of 
all that it was happening.  He also admitted during evidence that 
the system was not immune to malpractices.  The Committee take 
a serious view of the situation prevailing and recommend that the 
Government take stringent measures to check the malpractices of 
diversion of kerosene and underweight of gas cylinders and make 
foolproof measures to make the system immune to such 
malpractices.  

  
13.33 The Committee was informed by the Ministry that the 
subsidies on kerosene and domestic LPG were to be phased out 
in three to five years time.  The Government reviewed the position 
of fiscal subsidies  on kerosene and LPG in October, 2007 and 
extended the scheme till 31  March, 2010.  The Committee find that 
the subsidy provided by the Government on kerosene and 
domestic LPG was  Rs. 2.45 per litre and Rs. 67.75 per cylinder 
respectively in the year 2002 -03 which was reduced to Rs. 0.82 
per litre and Rs. 22.58 per cylinder during 2007 -08.  According to 
the Ministry the intention of the Government at that time was to 
come to market related prices and remove all subsidy element.  
During evidence also the Mi nistry admitted that the subsidy 
element has decreased.  The Committee was assured that BPL 
families will continue to get kerosene at the subsidized rates.  The 
Committee are not convinced with the reasoning of the Ministry 
and recommend that the BPL famil ies who constitute about 26% 
of the population be provided domestic LPG also at the 
subsidized rates, the subsidies on LPG and kerosene be 
increased and the oil companies be compensated by way of oil        
bonds etc.  

  
13.34  Another malpractice found b y the Committee was 
that the LPG cylinders were not delivered on time and were sold 
at higher price.  According to the Ministry whenever complaints in 
this regard were received by them those were attended to.  The 
Committee was informed that there were mar keting discipline 
guidelines issued by the Ministry and all the oil marketing 
companies were bound to follow those guidelines. The Committee 
feel that merely issuance of guidelines will not sufficient as still 
such cases are rampant. The Committee are of t he view that the 
monitoring mechanism in this regard needs to be strengthened. 
The Committee, therefore, desire the Government to make 
concerted efforts in this direction so that all the oil marketing 
companies as well as the distributing agencies strictly  adhere to 
the guidelines and further the oil distribution agencies who are 
not delivering the LPG cylinders within the stipulated time or 
found selling at higher price are strictly punished. The Committee 
further desire that the oil companies should provi de LPG 
cylinders to the distributing agencies in proportion to the number 
of consumers registered with them to avoid blackmarkeing of 
LPG cylinders. The Committee would like to be informed of the 
steps taken in this direction. 
 
 
NEW DELHI    DEVENDER PRASAD YADAV 
22 December, 2008    Chairman 
1 Pausa, 1930(Saka)            Standing Committee on Food, 
                                          Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
 