 
 
 
11 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2005-06) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
 
 
The Essential Commodities (Amendment) Bill, 2005 
 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
  April, 2006/ Chaitra  1928 (Saka) 
 

   
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2005-06) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
 
 
 
The Essential Commodities (Amendment) Bill, 2005 
 
 
   Presented to Lok Sabha on  17. 5. 2006 
   Laid on Rajya Sabha on         17.5.2006 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  April, 2006/ Chaitra  1928 (Saka) 
 

 
CONTENTS 
 
 
(i) Composition of the Committee 
 
(ii) Introduction 
 
(iii) Report 
 
 
Chapter – I: Introductory 
 
Chapter – II: Report 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
(i) The Essential Commodities (Amendment ) Bill, 2006. 
 
(ii) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on   28.2.2006. 
 
(iii) Minutes of the sitting of  the Committee held on 20.04.2006. 
  

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2005-06 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Govinda Aroon Ahuja 
4. Shri Suresh Angadi 
5. Shri Ranen Barman 
6. Shri Alakesh Das 
7.       Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar 
8.       Shri Atma Singh Gill 
9.       Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
10.       Shri Jaiprakash 
11.       Shri Baliram Kashyap 
12.       Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
13.  Shri Parsuram Majhi 
14.       Shri Zora Singh Mann 
15.       Shri Harish Nagpal 
16.       Shri Kondapalli Paidithalli Naidu 
17.       Shri Harikewal Prasad 
18.       Shri Ajit Kumar Singh 
19.       Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
20. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
21. Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri T.S. Bajwa 
23.       Shri  Nabam Rebia 
24       Shri Thanga Tamil Selvan 
25 Vacant       
26 Vacant 
27 Vacant 
28 Vacant 
29 Vacant 
30 Vacant 
31 Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph   - Secretary 
2. Dr. (Smt.) Paramjit Kaur Sandhu - Additional Secretary 
3. Shri P.K. Bhandari   - Joint Secretary 
4 Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 

5 Shri B.S, Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
6. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution (2005-06) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Eleventh Report on The Essential Commodities 
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 relating to Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
 
2. The Essential Commodities (Amendment) Bill, 2005 was introduced in Rajya 
Sabha on 20
th December, 2005.  Hon’ble Speaker  referred the Bill to the Standing 
Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution under Rule 331E of 
the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha on 9
th January, 2006 
for examination and report within three months i.e. upto 8th April, 2006.  However, the 
Hon’ble Speaker had granted extension of time now to present the Report upto 8th 
July, 2006. The Committee invited views/suggestions of the State Governments/UTs 
as well as Voluntary Consumer Organizations. The representatives of the 
Department of Consumer Affairs deposed before the Committee on 28th February, 
2006. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report on the Bill at their 
sitting held on 20
th April, 2006. 
 
3. The Committee  express their thanks to the representatives of Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
for tendering evidence before the Committee and for furnishing the 
information/material the Committee desired in connection with the examination of 
the Bill. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi 
 
20 April,  2006   DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV 
            30 Chaitra,  1927 (Saka)              Chairman,  
      Standing Committee on Food, 
      Consumer Affairs and  
Public Distribution       
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
  A. Background 
  
1.1 The Essential Commodities Act, 1955 was enacted for the control of 
production, supply and distribution o f, and trade and commerce in certain 
commodities in the interest of the gener al public.  Section 3 of the said Act 
empowers the Central Government to control,  production, supply and distribution of 
Essential Commodities.  It also empowers the Central Government under Clause 
(b) of Section 5 of the said Act to delegat e the powers to make orders or issue 
notifications under Section 3 to a State Government or an Officer or Authority 
subordinate to a State Government.  Co nsequently, several control orders were 
issued under the said Act.  The powers under the said Act have been exercised by 
various Central Ministries, apart from the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & 
Public Distribution (Departm ent of Consumer Affairs) as also by the State 
Governments to whom some of the power s have been formally delegated.  In the 
exercise of these powers, various Ministries/Departments of Government of India as 
well as the State Governments have iss ued control orders from time to time 
regulating production, distribut ion, pricing and other tradi ng aspects in respect of 
the commodities declared as essential.  For instance, Colliery (Control) Order, 
Drugs (Price Control) Order, Steel (Contro l) Order, PDS (Control) Order, Newsprint 
(Control) Order were issued by Central Ministries, from  time to time, for the 
purpose. 
 
B. Commodities declared as essential  
          1.1 Essential Comm odities is a generic term and has not  been defined under 
           the Act.  Howeve r, Section 2 (a)       of the Act defines Essential Commodities as 
           the following classes of commodities”- 
 
(1) Cattle fodder, including oilc akes and other concentrates; 
(2) Coal including coke and other dertivatives; 
(3) Component parts and accessories of automobiles; 
(4) Cotton and woolen textiles; 
(5) Drugs; 
(6) Foodstuffs including edible oilseeds and oils; 
(7) Iron and steel, including manufac tured products of iron and steel; 
(8) Paper, including newspr int, paperboard and straw board; 
(9) Petroleum and petroleum products; 
(10) Raw cotton, whether ginned or un-ginned, and cotton seed; 
(11) Raw jute; 
 

1.2 In addition to the specific commodities listed under section 2(a), Government 
of India have from time to time declared various other commodities as essential in 
exercise of the powers under sub-clause (x i) of clause (a) under  the said section 
which provides for any other class of commodity coming within the legislative 
competence of the Parliament  by virtue of entry 33 in List III in the Seventh 
Schedule of the Constitution to be notified as an essential commodity. 
 
C. Review of the list of essential commodities 
 
1.4 The list of essential commodities has  been reviewed from time to time with 
reference to the production and supply of  these commodities and in the light of 
economic liberalization. The number of items declared as essential has come down 
to 15 at present from 70 in the year 1989.  A conference of Chief Ministers on “WTO 
and Agriculture” held on 21.5.2001 reviewed the provisi ons of the said Act in the 
context of removal of restrictions on movement and stocking of food and agricultural 
produce, wherein it was decided to form a Committee of Central Minister-in-charge 
of Agriculture, Commerce & Industry, Fi nance, Consumer Affair s, Food & Public 
Distribution, Rural Devel opment and Deputy Chairman (P lanning Commission) as 
also the Chief Ministers of Andhra Pra desh, Karnataka, Orissa, Assam, Uttar 
Pradesh, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, Haryana, West Bengal, Kerala and 
Maharashtra.  Review of the list of Essential Commodities and Control Orders to 
ensure free movement of agricultural produce was one of the terms of reference of 
the Committee. The Committee decided that t he restrictions on movement of all 
agricultural commodities should be removed and that the said Act may continue as 
an umbrella legislation for the Union Go vernment and the State Governments to 
use when needed but that a progressive dismantling of controls and restrictions was 
also required. 
 
D. Removal of unneccesary restrictions from the E.C. act, 1955 
 
1.5   As reflected in the recommendation of the Group of Ce ntral Ministers and 
State Chief Ministers, it is now univers ally accepted that all unnecessary and 
redundant restrictions which distort and im pede operation of market forces should 
be removed.  Such restrictions neither ben efit the producer nor the consumer.  In 
case of agricultural commodities, such restrictions/regulations have been adversely 
affecting the interests of t he farmers without any benefit fl owing to the consumers.  
Moreover, the goal of a common Indian market, particularly for agricultural 
commodities, and promotion of agro exports and agro processing in dustries will be 
difficult to achieve unless and until trade and commerce is freed from such 
unnecessary and discretionary restrictions.  In addition, regulations under the 
umbrella of the Essentia l Commodities Act which have no bearing on the 
essentiality of an item or  the objective of the sa id Act, require to be made 
transparent and objective through separate legi slation in case its continuance is 
considered necessary. After consultations wit h all Ministries concerned, the draft of 
Essential Commodities (Amendment) Bill was prepared. 
 

E. Main features of the Essenti al Commodities (amendment) Bill, 2005 
 
1.6 The Draft Bill proposes to delete all the items list ed in clause (a) of section 2 
of the said Act and simultaneously retain only those commodities recommended for 
continuance by the concerned Ministries nam ely (I) drugs; (ii) foodstuffs including 
edible oilseeds and oils; (iii) fertilizer; whet her inorganic, organic or mixed, (iv) 
petroleum and petroleum products; (v) hank ya rn made wholly from cotton; (vi) raw 
jute and jute textile; and (vii) seeds of food-crops and seeds of fruits and 
vegetables, seeds of cattle fodder, and jute seeds as essential commodities which 
may be specified in the Schedule to the Amended Act. It is also proposed to give 
powers to the Central Government to add, remove or modify any essential 
commodity in that Schedule.  However, it has been stated that the above power will 
be exercised by the Central Government in the public interest when there is a 
scarcity or non-availability of the commodi ty in a situation like war, natural 
calamities, disruption or thr eat of disruption of supply of such essential commodity 
which cannot be tackled through normal trade channels requiring Government’s 
intervention under the said Act. 
 
1.7 When enquired as to when the process of revision of List of Essential 
Commodities was initiated, the Ministry in a note furn ished to the Committee stated 
that the process to review the list of E ssential Commodities and Control Orders to 
ensure free movement of agricultural  products was started on 21.05.2001. 
However, The Essential Commodities (A mendment) Bill, 2005 was introduced in 
Parliament on 20.12.2005. The Bill has 04  Clauses and a Schedule. The Hon’ble 
Speaker, Lok Sabha referred the Bill to the Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution on 09.01.2006 for examination and report. 
 
1.8 Asked about the reason fo r delay in deciding the modalities of the Bill and 
the circumstances which compelled the Gove rnment to review the list of Essential 
Commodities and Control Orders, the Committee was informed that in pursuance to 
the consensus arrived at the meeting of  Standing Committee of Central Ministers 
and Chief Ministers, the Cent ral Government issued Notifications dated 15.02.2002 
and 16.06.2003 removing restrictions on lic ensing, stocking and movement in 
respect of specified foodstuffs such as rice/paddy, wheat, edible oilseeds and edible 
oils etc.  Similarly, 11 notified items have been deleted from the list of essential 
commodities vide another Notification dated  15.02.2002 and 3 more notified items 
have been deleted vide No tifications dated 31 st March, 2004 and 25.11.2004 in 
pursuance to the said decision of the Standing Committee.   
 
1.9 It was further informed to the Co mmittee that the Standing Committee of 
Secretaries constituted to assist Cabinet  Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) 
and Cabinet Committee on Economic Reforms ( CCER) also considered the 
proposal to put the Essentia l Commodities Act into su spended animation and to 
remove all restrictions on inter state movem ent of commodities.  But as the Ministry 
of Law opined that the Act can not be put  into suspended animation, the Committee 
decided that efforts should now be di rected towards (I) identifying more 

commodities to be deleted from the list of  essential commodities under the Act and 
(ii) reviewing the remaining controls and restrictions on their movement, stocking 
etc.  Accordingly, an exercise was carried out in c onsultation with concerned 
Ministries/Departments to delete such co mmodities which can be covered under 
separate Acts and not under the omnibus provisions of the EC Act.  On 
recommendations of the concerned Ministri es/Departments, deletion of such items 
from the list of essential commodities has been proposed in the Amendment Bill. 
Further the omnibus character of t he Act has been reviewed and it has been 
proposed to limit the discretion to declare any essential commodity under the Act. 
 
1.10 The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution on 28th February, 2006. 
 
1.11 Taking into considerat ion the public importance of the Bill, the Committee 
also sought the views/comments of the State Governments/ UT Administrations and 
the Voluntary Consumer Organisations on t he various clauses of the Bill. Most of 
the States have expressed their concurr ence over the passage of the Bill as the 
proposed modifications in the Bill are relevant and cover all aspects. The 
Committee has not received any views/co mments from the Vo luntary Consumer 
Organisations in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1.12 The Committee note that the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 
was enacted for the control of production, supply and distribution and 
trade and commerce in certain comm odities in the interest of the 
general public.  The Act empowers the Central Government to control 
production, supply and distribution of Essential Commodities.  In 
exercise of these powers, several control orders were issued from time 
to time. The list of essential commodi ties was reviewed from time to 
time in the light of economic lib eralization and also comfortable 
position of production and supply of these commodities. The number 
of items declared as essential got reduced from 70 in the year 1989 to 
15 at present. A Committee of Centra l Ministers and Chief Ministers of 
10 States constituted to review the list of Essential  Commodities and 
control orders recommended removal of  restrictions of movement on 
all agricultural commodities. The Committee also suggested that the 
Essential Commodities Act should cont inue as an umbrella legislation 
for the Centre and the States to u se when needed but also emphasized 
a progressive dismantling of controls and restrictions regime. In 
pursuance of the recommendations of the said Committee, the present 
Amendment Act has been drafted whic h inter alia deletes all the items 
listed in Clause (a) of Section 2 of the Act and simultaneously retain 
only those commodities as Essential Commodities specified in the 
Schedule to the amended act which have been recommended by the 
concerned Ministries. It also pr oposes to give powers to the Central 

Government to add, remove or modify  any Essential Commodity in that 
Schedule in the public interest.   
1.13 The Committee also have taken on record the various 
Memoranda / suggestions received from stakeholders. The Committee 
note that almost all the States / UTs have expressed their satisfaction 
over the proposed Amendment Bill.  The y concur with the views of the 
States / UTs and recommend that th e Bill be passed subject to the 
observations made by the Committee in subsequent chapters. 
1.14 At the same time, the Committee hope and trust that the 
Government will use the discreti on of adding or removing any 
commodity from the list of Essenti al Commodities judiciously keeping 
in view the interest of the general public and only in situations like war 
and natural calamity and when there is  scarcity or non-availability of 
that commodity which cannot be tackled through normal trade 
channels requiring government’s intervention.  The Committee desire 
that this provision should be inserted into the Act at a suitable place. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER - II 
   REPORT 
Clause 2 of the Bill -  (Definition of Essential Commodities) 
2.1  As per clause 2 (a) of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955  
                      “essential commodity” means any of the following classes of commodities:-- 
(i)     cattle fodder, including oilcakes and other concentrates; 
(ii)     coal, including coke and other derivatives; 
(iii) component parts and accessories of automobiles; 
(iv) cotton and woollen textiles; 
(iva) drugs. 
Explanation.—In this sub-clause, “drug” has the meaning assigned to it in clause (b) 
of  section 3 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940; 
(v) foodstuffs, including edible oilseeds and oils; 
(vi) iron and steel, including manufactured products of iron and steel; 
(vii) paper, including newsprint, paperboard and strawboard; 
(viii) petroleum and petroleum products; 
(ix) raw cotton, whether ginned or unginned, and cotton seed; 
(x) raw jute; 
(xi) any other class of commodity which the Central Government may, 
by notified order, declare to be an e ssential commodity for the purpose of 
this Act, being a commodity with respect to which Parliament has power 
to make law by virtue of Entry 33 in List III in the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution; 
 
2.2 The Government have proposed that in the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, clause (a) shall be 
omitted. 
  2.3 After section 2 of the principal Act, the following se ction shall be inserted,   
   namely:- 
 ‘2A. (I) For the purposes of this Act, “essential commodity” 
means a commodity specified in the Schedule. 
 (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), the Central 
Government may, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do in 
the public interest and for reasons to be specified in the 
notification published in the Offi cial Gazette, amend the Schedule 
so as to— 
 
(a) add a commodity to the said Schedule; 
(b) remove any commodity from the said Schedule. 
(3) Any notification issued under sub-secti on (2) may also direct that an entry 
shall be made against such commodity in the said Schedule dec laring that such 

commodity shall be deemed to be an ess ential commodity for such period not 
exceeding six months to be specified in the notification: 
Provided that the Central Government may, in the public interest and for 
reasons to be specified, by notification in the Official Gazette, extend such period 
beyond the said six months. 
 
(4) The Central Government may exercise  its powers under sub-section (2) in 
respect of the commodity to which Parliame nt has power to make laws by virtue of 
Entry 33 in List III in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. 
 
(5)     Every notification issued under s ub-section (2) shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is issued, before both Houses of Parliament’. 
 
2.3 The Committee pointed out that the Essential Commodity has not been 
defined either in Essential Commodities  Act, 1955 or in the amendments made 
thereunder from time to time and asked t he reasons for not defining “essential 
commodities” at all.  The Ministry in  their note furnished to the Committee has 
stated that “the commodities which were considered essential were directly brought 
in the Act and also the power has been given to declare any such item as essential 
depending on demand and supply situation and the prevailing economic needs.  
Perhaps with these in view no specific definition was attributed at the time of 
enactment of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and the Government might have 
desired to have omnibus powers to tackle any situation which may arise in future.” 
 
 2.4 In this regard the Secretary Department of Consumer Affairs further clarified 
during evidence :- 
“ I cannot give a definite answer why ‘essential commodities’ was not defined 
in the Act- I will also like to add here that before obtaining the approval of the 
Government to this, we also made some attempt whether we can define the 
essential commodities or not.  There were various difficulties because if you 
define it, then the power of  the Government to tackle an emergent situation 
would get limited and if it is in the Act, then t here is very little that the 
Government can do in tackling the emergency.  Therefore, in the amendment 
that has been proposed by  specifying in what manner and for what 
circumstances the provisions of this Act can be invoked, we are trying to limit 
the discretion under the Act.  Otherwise, we also tried and found a number of 
difficulties in defining the ‘essential commodities”. 
 
2.5 Asked as to why the Central Govt. intend to exercise the powers vested with 
the State Governments in t he era of decentraliz ation, the Ministry informed the 
Committee that the purpose of the amendm ent in the Essential Commodities Act, 
1955 is to enable the Central Governm ent to prune the list of essential 
commodities to the minimum by deleting all such commodities which have no 
more relevance in the context of pr esent improved demand and supply position 
and to facilitate free trade and commerce. However, the State Governments will 

continue to exercise powers delegated fo r implementation of control orders under 
the Essential Commodities Act, 1955.   
 
B.  Powers to control production, s upply, distribution, etc. of essential 
commodities. 
 
2.6 Section 3(2)(g) of t he Essential Commodities Act 1955 reads as under:- 
   “(g) for regulating or prohibiting any class of commercial or financial 
transactions relating to foodstuffs or co tton textiles which, in the opinion of 
the authority making the order, are, or , if unregulated, are likely to be 
detrimental to the public interest.” 
 
2.7  The Government has proposed that th e words “or cotton textiles” from   
     Section 3(2)(g) shall be omitted. 
 
C.     Power to try summarily 
2.8 Section 12 A(2)(a) of the Essent ial Commodities Act, 1955 states that 
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 
all offences relating to— 
 
(a) the contravention of an order under Section 3 with respect to--- 
(i) cotton or woollen textiles; or 
(ii) foodstuffs, including edible oilseeds and oils; or 
(iii) drugs; and 
   (b) * 
 Shall be tried in a summary way by  a Judicial Magistrate of the 
First Class specially empowered in  this behalf by the State 
Government or by a Metropolitan Magistrate and the provisions of 
sections 262 to 265 (both inclusive) of the said Code shall, as far as 
may be, apply to such trial. 
 
2.9 The Government have proposed that in Section 12A(2)(a)(i) i.e. “Cotton or 
woollen textiles; or” shall be omitted. The Committee has not received any views / 
comments from any State /UT or any Voluntary Organization on this matter. 
  
 D. Saving of orders issued under Section 3 
 
2.10 All notifications, orders,  directions issued or any appointment made, licence 
or permit granted under section 3 of the principal Act before the commencement of 
this Act and are in force, in respect of the essential commodities specified in the 
Schedule, shall continue to remain in force until and unless it is superseded by any 
notification, order, appointment made, licence or permit granted or directions issued 

and it shall be deemed to have been issued und er the corresponding provisions of 
this Act.  
 
 2.11 The Committee wanted to know the production, demand, availability and 
prices of items declared as essential commodity and included in the proposed 
schedule to the Bill and whether any of the items scarce or unavailable. The 
Committee was informed that the items, wh ich are proposed to be retained in the 
Schedule are not so proposed  on account of shortages or scarcity but due to 
reasons specified below:- 
  (i) Drugs: The item is being retained mainly because of need for 
controlling    prices of scheduled drugs; 
 
(ii) Fertilizer, whether inorga nic, organic or mixed :    The item is retained 
because the prices are notif ied/controlled by the Gove rnment and involves huge 
subsidy to meet the gap between the ac tual production/import price and the 
controlled price. 
 
(iii) Foodstuffs (including edible oilseeds and oils) :    The item is being 
retained to facilitate the public distribut ion system and for quality control of some 
of the food items.  The item would be reviewed after the Integrated Food Law, 
which has already been introduced in the Parliament, is enacted. 
 
(iv) Hank yarn wholly made from cotton :    The item is proposed to be 
retained to facilitate supply of hank yarn  to the handloom sector and to ensure 
proper labeling on the textile products to protect consumer interest. 
 
(v) Petroleum and Petroleum products :    The item is retained for the sake of 
quality control and protection of subsid ies on PDS kerosene and domestic LPG 
cooking gas.  However, the Ministry of  Petroleum & Natural Gas has initiated 
action to bring a separate legislation, a fter the enactment of which the item would 
be considered for deletion from the list of essential commodities. 
 
(vi) Raw Jute and Jute Textiles :     The item is retained for mandatory use of 
jute bags and price fixation to protect the jute workers and jute growers etc.  
However, the Ministry of Textile is consid ering alternative mechanism to take care 
of above aspects, after which, the item would be deleted. 
 
(vii) Seeds of food crops and seeds of fruits and vegetables etc. : The item 
is retained for licensing of dealers and for regulation of the qua lity of seeds and to 
ensure equitable distribution.  However, the Ministry of  Agriculture has introduced 
the Seeds Bill, 2004 in the Parliament in December, 2004 incorporating all the 
provisions covered under the Seeds C ontrol Order issued under EC Act.  
Therefore, the item is retained under the EC Act till t he Seed Bill, 2004 is enacted 
and implemented.   
 

2.12  When asked about the parameters/conditions whic h will be taken into 
consideration while decid ing scarcity of a commodity, the Committee was 
informed that the Central Go vernment will declare any co mmodity as essential in 
the public interest when there is scarcity or  non availability of the commodity in a 
situation like war, natural ca lamities, disruption or threat of disruption of supply of 
such essential commodity which can not be tackled through normal trade 
channels requiring Government’s interventi on under the EC Act.  Such action will 
be as a result of specific request from the State Government as also the 
recommendations of the concerned Central Ministry / Department administering 
such commodities. 
 
2.13  Asked whether the scarcity situation will not lead to hoarding and 
blackmarketing of commoditi es and what will be the trade channel to tackle the 
situation arising out of scarcity, the Commi ttee was informed that in such situation 
the Government would invoke the provisions  of the EC Act to tackle the price rise 
as also to ensure equitable distribution. 
 
2.14  On being asked whether there would not be rise in pric es of essential 
commodities after the passing of the Bill,  the Committee was informed that it is 
universally accepted that t he prices are the result of the demand and supply and 
competition in the market.  Our experi ence is that the prices can not be 
determined by regulation, wherever it  has been attempted in cluding under the 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955.  The Government have never been able to 
tackle price rise and ensure availability of any commodity even by fixing a price for 
that commodity.  On the contrary w henever any commodity was brought under 
price control that item was diverted in  the black market, and the common man did 
not get it at the regulated price.  After decontrolling of prices of various 
commodities, quality has improved and such  items have been available at very 
reasonable prices because industry and trade have responded to demand by 
better production and supply.  Th erefore, the price is better left to market forces 
rather that to artificial controls. 
 
2.15  The Committee apprehended that  the proposal for amendment will 
encourage privatization of agr iculture marketing sector and exploitation by the 
unscrupulous traders and asked the reaction of the Government thereon.  The 
Ministry in their note furnished to the Committee stated that trade and commerce 
are important facilitators and engines of a high growth economy.  In particular, 
smooth barrier free trade reduces transaction cost and benefits both the producer 
and the consumer.  This is particularly tr ue of agricultural commodities where the 
Indian farmers get only a small part of the price for the produce paid by the 
consumers with the lion’s share going to a series of intermedi aries.  It is relevant 
to note that the cost of intermediation in I ndia is possibly the highest in the world.  
This has resulted in the lack of investment in the basic infrastructure in this sector, 
necessary for efficient and modern managem ent of the supply chain linking the 
farmers with the ultimate consumers. Control and regulation of production, 
storage, transportation and distribution of various commodities under the 

Essential Commodities Act, 1955 has the opposite result by distorting market 
forces and the adverse impact of which ha s mainly been felt by Indian farmers 
and also the consumers.  The process of dismantling redundant and unnecessary 
regulatory frame work would achieve t he common Indian market and benefit both 
to the farmers and the consumers.  The intervention and expl oitation by the 
unscrupulous traders functioning as intermediaries between the farmers and the 
consumers would be done away with. 
 
2.16    The Committee have noted that bas ic object of this Bill is to remove 
restrictions on movement of all agric ultural commodities and progressively 
dismantle control and restrictions.  But restrictions are still being retained under 
Section 3(2)(3) and Section 2.   Explaining the reasons therefore, the Ministry 
stated that the provisions under Section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 
have been retained especia lly for PDS items, Kero sene retailing, petroleum 
product, fertilizers, drugs etc. and to meet the emergency situation like war, 
natural calamities etc. 
 
 
2.17 The Committee find that the word “Essential Commodity” is a generic 
term and thus had not been defined in  the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 
and the subsequent amendments made there under from time to time.  The 
Committee further note that the comm odities, which were considered 
essential, were directly brought in the Ac t and also the powers been given to 
Central Government to declare any such item as essential depending on 
demands and supply situation and the prevailing economic needs.  It is 
pertinent to note that declaring any scar ce commodity as an essential entails 
situation like hoarding and blackmarketi ng of such commodity and to ensure 
its easy availability to the common people.  The Committee, however, desire 
that the powers being conferred on th e Central Government vide Section 2 A 
(4) should not be used to interfere in the normal working of market forces to 
distort the prices etc., since the basi c object of the Bill is to remove 

restrictions on movement of all agricultural commodities and progressively 
dismantle control and restrictions. 
 
2.18 The Committee note that in accord ance with the powers vested under 
Section 2(a) (xi) of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, the Central 
Government has been adding/deleting any commodity to/from the list of 
essential commodities by Gazette Notifi cation keeping in view the demand 
and supply position of such co mmodities except in respect of 11 
commodities included under Section 2(a) (i) to (x) of the Act.  Although out of 
these 11 items, 7 items such as cattl e fodder, coal, component parts and 
accessories of automobiles, cotton and wo olen textiles, iron and steel, paper 
including newsprints, raw cotton etc. have already been agreed to for deletion 
by the concerned Ministries/Departments, these items could not be deleted so 
far by the Central Government, as it requires an amendment of the Act itself, 
necessitating approval of the Parliament.  Therefore, in order to remove this 
shortcoming, it has been proposed to delete all these items from main body 
of the Essential Commodities Act and to include only those items in the 
schedule, which are considered essential with the provisions authorizing the 
Central Government to add or remove any commodity from the said schedule 
in the public interest.  
2.19 The Committee note that by vi rtue of amendment, the essential 
commodity have been brought in the schedule annexed to the Amendment 
Bill.  The Committee have been informed that the list of essential commodity 
has been reviewed from time to time with reference to production and supply 
of these commodities and in the light of economic liberalization.  The list of 

essential commodities which contained 70 items in the year 1989 been 
brought down to 15 at present thr ough such periodical review.  The 
Committee further note that by virtue of  Section 2A, the Central Government 
have been empowered to add a commodity or remove any commodity from 
the schedule to the Bill.  Further, the Central Government have been 
empowered to declare a commodity es sential for a period not exceeding six 
months to be specified in the notifi cation and such notification would be 
required to be laid before both Houses of the Parliament.  The Committee find 
that at present seven categories of item s have been declared as an essential 
commodity and included in the schedule annexed to the Bill.  The Committee 
do not find any reason to in clude any of the items me ntioned there under as 
an essential since there is neither any scarcity nor any gap between 
production and supply of these commodities at the time Bill was introduced.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that the list annexed to the Bill may be re-
examined and only those commodities be retained in which case there is 
hoarding, blackmarketing and shortag es which cannot be tackled through 
normal trade channel.  The Committee feel  that retention of some categories 
of commodities in the Annexure, to ke ep a check on their quality, cannot 
achieve any purpose merely by declaring them ‘Essential’ and hence should 
be deleted from the Schedule. 
2.20 The Committee also note that ‘essen tial commodities’ mentioned in the 
Schedule to the Bill are not commoditi es but are different ‘Categories of 
Commodities’.  The Committee, therefore, desire that ‘the Schedule’ may be 
revised as per above suggestion of the Committee and the list be made 
specific. 
 
2.21 The Committee further note that proviso to Sub section (3) of Section 2 
A empowers the Govt. to extend the pe riod of ‘essential commodity’ beyond 
six months.  This provision appears to be vague as the Central Government 

may go on increasing the period any num ber of times.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that if there is a n eed to extend the period of any ‘essential 
commodity’ beyond a period of two years, then the Government should 
inform the Parliament, the various steps taken by them to restore the normal 
supply of that essential commodity  and to check its hoarding & 
blackmarketing.  Accordingly, Sub se ction 3 of Section 2A should be 
amended suitably. 
2.22 The Committee find that Government have been empowered to declare 
any commodity as essential by invoking provisions of the Essential 
Commodity Act, 1955 in the public inte rest when there is scarcity or non-
availability of the commodity in a si tuation like war, natural calamity, 
disruption or threat of disruption of  supply of such essential commodity 
which can not be tackled through normal trade channel.  The Committee have 
been informed by the Ministry that the action to declare a commodity, as an 
essential is to be based on the specific request from the State Governments 
and the recommendations of the con cerned Central Ministry/Department 
administrating such commodity.  However, this is not reflected in the Bill.  
The Committee desire that this should be provided for in the Act specifically. 
Further, the Committee feel that due to long time lag between the incidence of 
shortages and the action initiated to notify a commodity as an essential, 
hoarding and blackmarketing of that co mmodity cannot be ruled out.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that some foolproof mechanism may be 
devised to prevent the stockists and/or the manufacturers from taking undue 

advantages of  artificial shortages.  As the action to declare a commodity, as 
an essential is contingent upon request from State Government and also the 
recommendation of Central Ministry /Department administrating such 
commodity, the Committee hope and trust that there would be coordination 
between Centre and State Governments in the matter.  
   
 
   N E W  D E L H I ;      DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV, 
   20 April, 2006       Chairman, 
   30 Chaitra, 1927 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Food, 
       Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
   

MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 28TH FEBRUARY, 2006 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1630 hr s. in Committee Room  `E, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
4. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
5 Shri Parsuram Majhi 
6.        Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director  
  
Representatives of Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department 
of Consumer Affairs)  
 
1. Shri L. Mansingh -  Secretary  
2. Smt. Alka Sirohi -  A dditional Secretary    
3. Shri G.S. Negi -  Director 
4. Smt. Priya A. Si ngh - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Alok Chandra - Deputy Economic Adviser   
 
 
 
2. At the outset Hon’ble Chai rman welcomed the representatives of Department of Consumer 
Affairs and invited their attention towards the Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker. 
Thereafter the Committee was briefed by the representatives of the Department on “The 
Essential Commodities (Amendment) Bill, 2005. The following points were discussed in the sitting 
at length:- 
 

(i) Reasons for not defining the “Essential Commodities” in the Act. 
 
(ii) Removing the control on move ment of agriculture produce. 
 
(iii) Production, demand, availability and pric es of the items declared as essential 
commodities. 
 
(iv) Reasons for declaring the raw jute and jute textiles as essential commodities. 
 
(v) Reasons for continuous decline in the number of items declared as Essential 
Commodities over the years. 
 
(vi) Decentralization of powers with r egards to declaration of an item as an 
Essential Commodity. 
 
(vii) Need to protect the interest of fa rmers and consumers against the hoarding. 
 
3. At the end Hon’ble Ch airman thanked the representatives of the Department of Consumer 
Affairs for appearing before the Committee.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DIST RIBUTION HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 20 TH 
APRIL, 2006 
 
The Committee sat from 11:30 hrs. to 12:00 hrs .in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
1. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
2. Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gandadhar 
3. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
4. Shri Jaiprakash 
5. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
6. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
7. Shri Zora Singh Mann 
8. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
9. Shri Ajit Kumar Singh 
10. Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Shri T.S.Bajwa 
12. Shri Nabam Rebia 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr.(Smt. P.K. Sandhu) - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.K.Bhandari  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri B.S.Dahiya  - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagdish Prasad  - Assistant Director 
  
  2. At the outset Hon’ble Chai rman welcomed the Members to the sitting  of  the Committee.  
Thereafter, the Committee took up the Dr aft Report on the “Essential Commodities 
(Amendment) Bill, 2005” for consideration and adopted the same with some amendments / 
modifications.  The Members were given time to send their further suggestions, if any, in a 
week’s time. 
 3. The Committee then authoriz ed the Chairman to finalize the Report in the light of 
consequential changes arising out of the factual verification of the Repor t by the Department 
of Consumer Affairs and present the same to Parliament on their behalf. 
 

 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 