STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD,  
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND  
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION  
(2006-07) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, 
 FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION  
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
CONSUMER MOVEMENT IN THE COUNTRY 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
 
June, 2007/ Asadha, 1929 (Saka) 
 
20 

TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD,  
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND  
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION  
(2006-07) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, 
 FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION  
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
CONSUMER MOVEMENT IN THE COUNTRY 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on  ……… 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on     ………… 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
 
   June, 2007/ Asadha , 1929 (Saka) 
 
 

CONTENTS 
                                                                                                                             PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2006-07 (III) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2005-06 (V) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2004-05 (VI) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2003 (VII) 
 
INTRODUCTION (IX) 
 
 
 
 
REP0RT
 
 
 
CHAPTER I INTRODUCTORY 1 
 
CHAPTER II CONSUMER PTORECTION AND CONSUMER AWARENE SS –
THE OVERALL SCENARIO 
 
6 
CHAPTER III CONSUMER FORA 16 
 
CHAPTER IV CONSUMER WELFARE FUND 36 
 
CHAPTER V NATIONAL ACITON PLAN ON CONSUMER PROTECTION 
 
50 
CHAPTER VI WORKING GROUPS 52 
 
CHPATER VII NATIONAL CONSUMER HELPLINE 55 
 
CHAPTER VIII  CONSUMER GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL CELL (CGRC) 
 
58 
CHAPTER IX CONSUMER RELATED ACTIVITIES OF BIS 61 
 
CHAPTER X PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSUMER PROTECTI ON 
ACT 
 
66 
APPENDICES 
APPENDIX I STATEMENT SHOWING ST ATUS OF FUNCTIONAL/ NON-
FUNCTIONAL STATE COMMISIONS/ DISTRICT FOR A 
 
79 
 
APPENDIX II STATEMENT SHOWING  VACANCY POSITION IN THE STATE 
COMMISSIONS AND DISTRICT FORA IN VARIOUS STATES/UTS 
80 
APPENDIX III STATEMENT SHOWING TH E HONORARIUM/ REMUNE RATION 
BEING PAID TO PRESID ENTS AND MEMBERS OF STATE 
COMMISSIONS AND DISTRICT FORA 
 
81 
APPENDIX IV CASES FILED, DISPOSED OF AND PENDING IN THE NATIONAL 
COMMISSION AND STATE COMMISSIONS SINCE INCENPTION 
 
87 
APPENDIX V STATEMENT SHOWING TH E NUMNBER OF CASES F ILED, 
DISPOSED OFF AND PENDING IN THE DISTRICT FORA 
 
88 
 
 
 
(I) 

APPENDIX VI MINUTES OF EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDIN G COMMITTEE 
ON FOOD, CIVIL SUPPL IES AND PUBLIC DISTR IBUTION (2003) 
HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 13TH NOVEMEBR, 2003. 
89 
APPENDIX VII MINUTES OF THE FIFTH  SITTING OF THE STAN DING 
COMMITTEE ON FOOD, C ONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION (2004 -05) HELD ON WEDNESDA Y, THE 29 TH 
SEPTEMBER, 2004. 
91 
APPENDIX VIII MINUTES OF THE ELEVE NTH SIT TING OF THE STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON FOOD, C ONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUITON (2005-06) ON FRIDAY, THE 27TH MAY, 2005. 
93 
APPENDIX IX` MINUTES OF THE SEVEN TEENTH SITTING ON TH E STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FOOD, C ONSUMER AFFAIRS  AND  PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION (2006-07) ON THURSDAY, 31ST MAY, 2007 
95 
APPENDIX X SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 97 
 
 
 
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
 
(II) 
 

                                                                                                
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2006-2007. 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman      
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Govinda Aroon Ahuja  
3. Shri Alakesh Das 
4. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
5. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
6. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
7. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna  
8. Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak 
9. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
10. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
11. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
12. Shri Munshi Ram 
13. Shri Ghuran Ram 
14. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
15. Adv. P. Satheedevi 
16. Shri Chandra Bhan Singh 
17. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
18. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi * 
19. Vacant  
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri T.S. Bajwa 
23. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai  
24. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik  
25. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
______________________________________________________________________ 
*  Nominated to the Committee w.e.f  21June, 2007  
                                              (iii) 

 
 
26. Shri Rajniti Prasad  
27. Shri  Nabam Rebia  
28. Shri Matilal Sarkar 
29. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu 
30. Shri Thanga Tamil Selvan 
31. Shri Vijaykumar Rupani 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. (Smt.) Paramjit Kaur Sandhu - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.K.Misra    - Joint Secretary 
3 Smt. Sudesh Luthra              -  Director 
4 Shri Jagdish Prasad              - Deputy Secretary -II 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2005-06 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
` Lok  Sabha 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Govinda Aroon Ahuja 
4. Shri Suresh Angadi 
5. Shri Ranen Barman 
6. Shri Alakesh Das 
7. Shri Tukaram Gangadhar Gadakh 
8. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
9. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
10. Shri Jaiprakash 
11. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
12. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
13. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
14. Shri Zora Singh Mann 
15. Shri Harish Nagpal 
16. Shri Kondapalli Paidithalli Naidu 
17. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
18. Smt. Daggubati Purandeswari 
19. Shri Ajit Kumar Singh 
20. Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
21. Shri Ramakant Yadav  
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia  
23. Shri T.S. Bajwa  
24. Shri Palden Tsering Gyamtso  
25. Shri Narayan Singh Kesri  
26. Smt. Bimba Raikar  
27. Shri Nabam Rebia  
28. Shri Thanga Tamil Selvan  
29. Shri Vikram Verma  
30. Shri Vijay Singh Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph   - Secretary 
2. Dr. (Smt.) Paramjit Kaur Sandhu - Additional Secretary 
3. Shri P.K. Bhandari   - Joint Secretary 
4 Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
5 Shri B.S, Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
6. Shri Jagdish Prasad               - Assistant Director 
(v) 

 
COMPOSITION OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2004-05 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
                                                        Lok  Sabha 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Suresh Angadi 
4. Shri Ranen Barman 
5. Shri Alakesh Das 
6. Shri Tukaram Gadakh 
7. Shri Govinda  
8. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
9. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
10. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
11. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
12. Shri Zora Singh Mann 
13. Shri K. P. Naidu  
14. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
15. Smt. Daggubati Purandareswari 
16. Shri Ajit Kumar Singh 
17. Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
18. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
19. Shri Harish Nagpal  
20. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
21. Shri T.S. Bajwa 
22. Shri Palden Tsering Gyamtso 
23. Shri Narayan Singh Kesri 
24. Shri Lalitbhai Mehta 
25. Smt. Bimba Raikar 
26. Shri Thanga Tamil Selvan 
27. Shri Vikram Verma 
28. Shri Vijay Singh Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary   - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. (Smt.) Paramjit Kaur Sandhu  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.S. Kambo    - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director 
 
 
(vi) 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CIVIL SUPPLIES AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – (2003) 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
          Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Rajbhar Babban 
2. Shri Tara Chand Bhagora 
3. Shri Sujan Singh Bundela 
4. Shri Dalit Ezhilmalai 
5. Shri Namdeo Harbaji Diwathe 
6. Shri Rameshwar Dudi  
7. Shri Dip Gogoi 
8. Shri Abdul Hamid 
9. Shri Ramesh C. Jigajinagi 
10. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
11. Shri Bir Singh Mahato  
12. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal 
13. Shri Shyam Bihari Mishra 
14. Shri Sis Ram Ola 
15. Shri Sukdeo Paswan  
16. Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel 
17. Shri Ramsagar Rawat 
18. Shri Baju Ban Riyan 
19. Shri Vishnu Dev Sai 
20. Shri Ramchandra Veerappa 
21. Shri Rammurti Singh Verma 
22. Shri Man Singh Patel 
23. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
24. Shri Jaiprakash 
25. Shri Kalava Srinivasulu 
26. Shri Adhi Sankar 
27. Shri Alakesh Das 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
28. Smt. Bimba Raikar 
29. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
30. Shri Surendra Lath 
31. Shri S.K. Khabir Uddin Ahmad 
32. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy 
33. Shri Munavvar Hassan 
34. Shri C. Perumal 
(vii) 

 
 
35. Shri M.A. Kadar 
36. Shri Vijay Singh Yadav 
37. Shri Isam Singh 
38. Shri Anil Sharma 
39. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. (Smt.) Paramjit Kaur Sandhu - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Krishan Lal   - Director 
3. Shri R.S. Mishra   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(viii) 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution (2006 -07) having been authorized by the Committee to 
submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twentieth Report on “Consumer 
Movement in the country”. 
 
2. The subject was selected for examination by the Committee during the 
year 2003.  The Committee invited suggestions from Voluntary Consumer 
Organizations (VCOs) and District Fora all over the country.  Permission from 
Hon’ble S peaker was obtained for calling information from State 
Governments/UT Administrations.  Memoranda received from various 
organizations were examined and the Committee took oral evidence of non -
official representatives of Consumer Coordination Council (CCC),  Delhi and 
Consumer Unity and Trust Society (CUTS), Jaipur on 13 November 2003. 
 
3. The Committee took official evidence of the representatives of the Ministry 
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs) on 29 April, 2004 and 27 May, 2005.  
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Officers of the Ministry 
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs) for placing before them detailed written notes on the subject and for 
furnishing the information to the Committee, desired in connection with the 
examination of the subject.  The Committee also wish to express their thanks to 
representatives of Consumer Coordination Council (CCC) and Consumer Unity 
and Trust Society (CUTS) f or appearing and placing their considered views 
before the Committee and to various District Fora, NGOs, VCOs working in 
consumer interest for furnishing their comments & suggestions on the subject.  
The Committee also place on record their appreciation fo r the work done by the 
earlier Committees 2003, (2004-2005) and (2005-2006). 
 
5. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 31 May, 2007. 
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body 
of the Report.  
 
 
NEW DELHI       DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV 
28 June, 2007
        Chairman 
7 Asadha, 1929 (Saka)       Standing Committee on Food, Consumer 
                                                               Affairs and Public Distribution 
 
(ix) 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – I 
Introductory 
1.1 The consumer movement in India is as old as trade and commerce.  In 
Kautilya’s Arthshastra, there are references to the concept of protection of the 
consumers agains t exploitation by trade and industry, short weighment and 
measurements, adulteration and punishment for these offences.  However, there 
was no organized and systematic movement actually safeguarding the interests of 
the consumers.  Prior to independence, c onsumer interests were considered 
mainly under laws like the Indian Penal Code, Agricultural Production Grading and 
Marketing Act, 1937, Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, etc. Even though different 
parts of India had different levels, in general, the level of awareness was low. 
1.2 India being a vast country with a large population still living below poverty 
line, the level of consumer awareness continues to be low even today.  Because of 
the economic inequality, low level of literacy and ignorance, the consum ers are not 
able to assert and protect themselves and easily get exploited by the trade and 
industry and service providers.  The problem has become more acute with 
increase in consumerism and opening up of the economy. Protecting and 
promoting the welfare of consumers has, therefore, become one of the major 
concerns of the Government.  Policies have been designed and legislations 
enacted to protect the interests of the consumers and grant them the rights of 
choice, safety, information and redressal.  A sepa rate Department of Consumer 
Affairs was created in the Central Government in the year 1997 to act as the nodal 
Department to exclusively focus on protecting the rights of consumers including 
redressal of consumer grievances as well as to promote standards of goods and 

services, standards in weights and measures, regulation of packaged 
commodities, maintenance of essential commodities, etc.  The Committee have 
been informed that all States/Union Territory Administrations were requested to 
provide inter -alia separate Budget for Consumer Affairs in each State/UT, for 
protecting the interests of consumers.  As per information made available by the 
States/ Union Territory Administrations, so far 27 States/UTs have made separate 
Budget provisions for Consumer Prot ection programmes /activities. Further, only 
one State Government i.e. Government of West Bengal has created separate 
Department of Consumer Affairs. The Department has further informed that in as 
many as 23 States/Union Territories, the name of Department  includes words 
‘Consumer Affairs/Protection. 
1.3 Commenting upon study of consumer movement in other countries, the 
Department in a note stated that no comparative study has been made by the 
Government of India with regard to the consumer movement in the country vis-à-
vis the consumer movement in other countries of the world.  
1.4 When the Committee enquired about the steps taken by the Government 
to resolve the grievances of consumers expeditiously and at lower cost, the 
Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs stated during evidence: -  
 
“In 1997, India took the pioneering step in creating a separate Department 
of Consumer Affairs.  Before that, it had passed a separate Consumer 
Protection Act, under which at District, State and National levels, forums 
were established to resolve the consumer grievances speedily and 
cheaply.  In all these respects, a positive thing for which we can take 
reasonable degree of satisfaction is that among the developing countries, 
these are pioneering steps.  We are cited as a  model among the 
developing countries in this regard.  On the other side, as compared to the 
developed countries, there is a long way to go before we can reach the 
levels of even the lesser -developed countries.  We have to be conscious 
of that and take specific steps in that regard.” 
 
 

 
1.5 The Committee were apprised about the initiatives taken by the Central 
Government in persuading the State Governments to take proactive steps for 
protecting the interests of the consumers.  In this context, the Departmen t has 
requested States/UTs to prepare Action Plans for consumer awareness, 
redressal and enforcement of Consumer Protection Act, 1986 and allocate 
suitable Budget for the same. State Governments have been asked to make 
provisions in their State Annual Plan s for strengthening the consumer protection 
machinery and also to undertake measures for educating the consumers in their 
respective States in a sustained manner involving all concerned. 
 
1.6 The Committee note that the consumer movement in India is as old 
as trade and commerce. But there was no organized and systematic 
movement to safeguard the interests of the consumers. Prior to 
Independence, consumers’ interests were considered mainly under laws 
such as the Indian Penal Code, Agricultural Production, Gradin g and 
Marketing Act, 1937 and Drugs and Cosmetic Act, 1940, etc.  Poverty, 
illiteracy and lack of consciousness to assert one’s rights were some of the 
main reasons for low level of consumer awareness in the country.  As 
such, trade and industry and other service providers easily exploited the 
consumers. Policies were then designed and legislations enacted to 
protect the interests of the consumers.  The consumers were given the 
right of choice, safety, information and redressal mechanism.  A separate 
Department of Consumer Affairs was created in the Central Government in 
1997 to exclusively focus on protecting the rights of consumers.  

 
1.7 Setting up of a three -tier quasi -judicial mechanism to address the 
complaints of the consumers at National, State and D istrict level was 
another milestone in the history of consumer movement in India. The 
National Commission at the Central level and State Commissions and 
District fora in some of the States/Union Territories are doing 
commendable work. However, the working of State Commissions and 
District Fora in some of the States is not upto the mark.  To supplement the 
efforts being made by the State Governments for strengthening the 
consumer movement in various parts of the country, grants are being 
provided by the Unio n Government. Inspite of best of the efforts made by 
the Union Government and State Governments, a lot still needs to be done. 
It was acknowledged by the Secretary during the course of oral evidence 
that as compared to developing countries,  there is a lon g way to go before 
we can reach the level of even the lesser -developed countries in protecting 
the interests of consumers. 
1.8 The Committee have dealt in detail the various issues related to 
consumer movement in the report and various 
observations/recommendations have been made.  The Committee urge the 
Department to chalk out detailed strategy related to consumer awareness 
and consumer protection in consultation with the State 
Governments/NGOs/VCOs/ local bodies and all other stakeholders on the 
lines suggested by the Committee in the report.  
 
 

 
 
1.9 The Committee find from the information provided by the Department that, 
only one State viz West Bengal is having a separate Department of Consumer 
Affairs.  Besides, in 23 States/UTs, the nomenclature of the Department includes 
words like “Consumer Affairs”, “Consumer Protection” etc.  The Committee are 
concerned to note that low priority is accorded to the subject of Consumer 
Protection by various State Governments and it is virtually a neglected area.  The 
Committee are of the view that the nature and volume of work involved in 
consumer protection is such that it requires adequate attention and only then 
justice could be done to this matter of much public importance.  The Committee 
feel that the subject also requires constant and regular monitoring.   And because 
of its scope being so vast, a full -fledged Department headed by an officer of the 
level of Secretary needs to be in place in States for consumer protection.  The 
Committee also desire that for promoti ng the welfare of the consumers in the 
States, a separate Budget needs to be earmarked for the Consumer Affairs 
Department.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the matter of separate 
Department on Consumer Affairs/Protection, headed by officer of the  rank and 
pay of Secretary and separate budgetary provision, should be taken up in the 
right earnest and at the highest level with the State Governments. Some sort of 
in built incentives be also devised for the States/UTs who are doing well in the 
field of consumer awareness and consumer protection.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter.  

 
CHAPTER II 
CONSUMER PROTECTION AND CONSUMER AWARENESS  
-THE OVERALL SCENARIO 
 
A The amendments to the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 
2.1 Consequent upon the decision taken in the 50th National Development 
Council (NDC) meeting held on 21 December 2002, Consumer Protection was 
identified as a thrust area and the Department of Consumer Affairs has been 
assigned the task of evolving a ‘Nat ional Action Plan’ for consumer awareness 
and redressal and enforcement of Consumer Protection Act, 1986. 
 
2.2 The main objectives of  consumer protection are to: 
 
a) to create a suitable administrative and legal mechanism which is within the 
easy  reach of consumers; 
 
b) to involve and motivate various sections of society such as consumer 
organizations to participate in the programme; 
 
c) to assist, encourage and provide financial assistance to Governmental 
and non -Governmental organizations to take up various cons umer 
protection related activities; and  
 
d) to generate awareness amongst consumers about their rights and 
motivate them to defend them and not to compromise on quality and 
standards of goods and services. 
 
2.3 The most important milestone in the area of consumer 
protection/consumer movement in the country has been the enactment of 
Consumer Protection Act, 1986. The aforesaid Act was necessitated 
because the well organized sectors of manufacturers, traders and service 
providers armed with knowledge of the market and manipulative skills 
often attempt to exploit the consumers despite the existence of  
 
provisions in different laws protecting their interests. Moreover, various 
factors including increase in the population have resulted in enormous 
pendency and delay in disposal of cases in the Civil Courts.  Consumers 

cannot be asked to wait for years for settlement of even small claims.  
Hence, the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 was enacted to better protect 
the interests of the consumers.  It is one of the most progressive and 
comprehensive piece of social legislation covering all goods and services. 
The salient features of the Act are:  
(i) the Act provides for establishing a three -tier consumer dispute redressal 
machinery at the National, State and District level; 
 
(ii) it applies to all goods and services; 
 
(iii) it covers all sectors, whether private, public or cooperative including any 
person; 
 
(iv) the Act provides for relief of a specific nature and also for compensation 
 to the consumer as appropriate.  It is also punitive and preventive in 
nature; 
 
(v) the Act also provides for setting up of a Consumer Protection Council at 
the Central, State and District levels, which is an advisory body to promote 
and protect the rights of the consumers; 
 
(vi) the provisions of the Act  are in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force; 
 
 
2.4 As the Act was not adequate to protect the interests of consumers, 
it was amended in the year 1991 and again in 1993 to make it more 
effective a nd purposeful. The Government made comprehensive 
proposals to further amend the Act and brought the Consumer Protection 
(Amendment) Act, 2002 (62 of 2002).  The provisions of the said 
Amendment Act were enforced from 15 March 2003.  Countrywide 
advertisement was also brought out highlighting important provisions for 
the public knowledge.  State Governments were also requested to give 
wide publicity to the legislaton.  

 
2.5 The provisions of the Amendment Act were mainly aimed at facilitating 
quicker dispos al of complaints making Consumer Courts more capable, 
strengthening Consumer Courts, streamlining the procedures and widening the 
scope of the Act to make it more functional and effective and also to strengthen 
Consumer Movement at the grass root level.  A ccording to the Department, the 
Amendment in the Act is expected to greatly facilitate the working of the 
Consumer Dispute Redressal Agencies in the country and help in achieving 
speedy settlement of consumer disputes.     
2.6 On being asked by the Committee whether the Government is 
contemplating to further amend/update/revise the Consumer Protection 
Act and the Rules framed there under, the Department replied that with a 
view to ensuring that the Consumer Protection Act remains vibrant and 
dynamic and live to serve and protect the interests of consumers, a 
Working Group was constituted to suggest amendments to the Act.  The 
Working Group has submitted its report, which is being examined by the 
Government. While examining Department for Grants (2007-08), the 
Committee have been informed that the draft amendment proposals to the 
aforesaid Act have been prepared based on the recommendations of the 
Working Group.   
2.7 The Committee note that the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 seeks to 
protect the rights of cons umers by rendering quick and inexpensive 
redressal of the grievances of the consumers by establishing `Alternate 
Justice Delivery System’. The Committee further note that in a span of two 
decades since the enforcement of the provisions of the aforesaid Act , it 
has undergone amendments thrice and a Working Group has been 
constituted to propose further amendments. The Committee while 
examining Demands for Grants 2007 -08 have been informed that the draft 
amendment proposals have been prepared based on the reco mmendations 
of the Working Group. The Committee would like that the amendments 
should be finalized expeditiously and the draft legislation be introduced in 

Parliament. Besides, the Committee urge that while bringing the 
amendments, the various observations /suggestions made in the report 
should also be considered. 
 
B The outlay provided to the Department  of Consumer Affairs for consumer 
protection which includes consumer awareness  
 
2.8 The Department informed that during the Ninth Plan period, the consumer  
protection unit had a Budget provision of  Rs. 12.84 crore, out of which Rs. 10.36 
crore was earmarked for publicity programmes.  Further, during the Tenth Plan 
period, the consumer protection unit was initially provided with a meagre outlay 
of Rs. 15.50 crore.  While examining the Demands for Grants 2007 -08, the 
Committee have been informed that during the year 2004 -05 the allocation was 
provided to the tune of Rs. 8.59 crore at Revised Estimates stage.  During the 
year 2005 -06, the allocation was enhance d considerably and Rs. 71.14 crore 
were provided.  Further, during the year 2006 -07,   Rs. 86.42 crore have been 
provided.  During the year 2007 -08, the allocation of  Rs. 82.41 crore has been 
provided.   
2.9 As regards the strategy of the Department of Co nsumer Affairs for the 
Eleventh Plan, the Department has informed that a Working Group of Consumer 
Protection constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Consumer Affairs) 
has submitted its comprehensive report containing recommendations for the 
Eleventh Plan to the Planning Commission. Discussions on the Eleventh Plan 
are in progress and final outlay has not been indicated as yet. 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 
2.10 The Committee find that the consumer protection unit of the Department of 
Consumer Affairs had been allocated  a meagre allocation of Rs. 12.84 crore 
during the Ninth Plan.  During the Tenth Plan, initially the allocation was made for 
only Rs. 15.50 crore.  However, during the last two years of the Tenth Plan i.e. 
the year 2005 -06 and 2006 -07, the allocation for c onsumer protection was 
enhanced considerably. The Committee further find that a Working Group of 
Consumer Protection has submitted its comprehensive report containing 
recommendations for the Eleventh Plan to the Planning Commission.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the recommendations made 
by the Working Group.  Besides the Committee would like that Planning 
Commission/Ministry of Finance should be persuaded to provide adequate outlay 
during the Eleventh Plan for the consumer prote ction and awareness 
programmes so as to bring out sustained countrywide multimedia publicity 
programmes.   
 
(c) Consumer Awareness particularly in rural, difficult and far flung areas  
 
2.11 The success of the consumer movement in India would mainly 
depend upon the level of consumer awareness generated in the country to 
educate the consumers about their rights and responsibilities. Where the 
literacy rate is high and social awareness is greater, the consumers 
cannot be easily exploited. Within India, the level of consumer 
awareness/consumer movement varies from State to State depending 
upon the level of literacy and the social awareness of the people. It may 
be stated here that generally in the Southern States, Gujarat and Delhi, 
the consumer movement is fairly strong because of the higher level of 
literacy and social awareness as compared with other parts of the country. 
The Department of Consumer Affairs, being the nodal Department in the 
field of consumer protection, has the responsibility not only to administer 
the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 but also to strengthen the consumer 
movement in the country so as to protect the consumer’s interest. The 
Department of Consumer Affairs has been taking a number of steps to 
spread the consumer movement in the country by involving the State 
Governments, VCOs, consumer activists, etc.  

 When asked about the steps taken for generation of consumer 
awareness, the Committee have been informed that the Department is 
undertaking all the publicity work programmes through Government 
agencies namely DAVP, DD and AIR of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting since the beginning.  
 
2.12 The Department has further informed the Committee about the following 
important measures taken for creating consumer awareness:- 
(i) The Department is bringing out a quarterly journal entitled, “Upbhokta 
Jagaran” (Consumer Awakening), on consumer protection. This journal 
is distributed free of cost to all the VCOs, redressal agencies, State 
Governments, libraries, etc. for creating consumer awareness. Video 
and Radio programmes `Jago Grahak  Jago’ have been produced by the 
Department  on various consumer related issues;  
 
(ii) To educate the consumers about their rights and responsibilities, the 
Department has been releasing small advertisements repeatedly in 
leading dailies of Delhi and North Eastern States and also in States/UTs 
on rotational basis; 
 
(iii) The Department in consultation with Department of Post has started 
disseminating consumer awareness messages through Meghdoot Post 
cards to reach far-flung rural areas including North Eastern States;   
 
(iv) ‘World Consumer Rights Day’ is celebrated each year on 15 March the 
world over.  The Department observes the day by undertaking various 
outdoor publicity programmes including audio/video print publicity 
programmes, arranges seminars and requests all the State 
Governments, Ministries/Departments, VCOs, trade and industry 
associations, AIR, DD and various other institutions to do the same. 
Publicity through newspaper advertisement at All India level is also 
undertaken during the occasion;  
 
(v) On a proposal mooted by the Department 24 December has been 
declared as ‘National Consumer Day’ (since the year 2000) because 
that is the day on which the Consumer Protection Act 1986 had 
received the assent of the President;  
 
(vi) To encourage the VCOs, women and youth, the Department has 
instituted National Awards on Consumer Protection. The VCOs who 
have done outstanding work are given a prize money of Rs. 50,000, Rs. 
40,000 and Rs. 30,000 along with certificate of Merits;  
 
(vii) The Department had sponsored a project `National Consumer Help 
Line’, with Toll free facility 1800-11-4000 on 15 March, 2005 in 
consultation with Delhi University for giving proper guidance to 
consumers in solving their grievances.  The Department has also 

launched a website in consultation with an apex body of Voluntary 
Consumer Organizations entitled “core.nic.in”   
      (CORE- Consumer Online Resources and Empowerment) to provide 
more information on line to consumers in redressing their grievances. 
 
2.13 When enquired whether there is any proposal for roping in any celebrity 
on the lines of polio campaign to espouse the cause of consumer awareness to 
make it eye -catching, the Department replied that action has already been 
initiated to rope -in some celebrities to take up consumer awareness as social 
commitment towards the society.  There has been positive response from some 
quarters.  Further modalities are being worked out.  
2.14 When asked about the strategy adopted by the Government to generate 
the awareness amongst the consumers, the Secretary, Consumer Affairs during 
evidence elaborated as under:- 
 
”The  Consumer awareness is the basis of consumer protection. In recent 
times we have stepped up the media campaign for creat ing consumer 
awareness, making him aware of his right, how to take precautions and 
prevent cheating.  But there have been very justifiable complaints about 
coverage of rural areas  or of the consumers who are not literate or who 
are in difficult areas like  the North-Eastern region and what are  we doing 
for them.  With the help of the Committee, we have got the necessary 
back up support.  We are now taking special care to ensure that we are 
able to reach the people in the remotest areas and particularly the  north-
eastern region. We want to reach a stage where the consumer himself will 
say that his grievances are being attended to. That is what we are 
proposing to do.  The Consumer Forum should be the last resort rather 
than the first resort. We are trying to  help the consumer get resolution of 
his disputes by the company or the undertaking or by the authority 
concerned. For this purpose, we have launched two major projects.  One 
is, the consumer helpline. Right now, this is in two languages -English and 
Hindi.  But we are proposing to introduce in other regional languages. The 
second is the core project where all relevant information needed by a 
consumer regarding his rights, statutory provisions, case laws etc., would 
be available. This way also the consumer c an be helped in getting his 
complaints resolved without taking recourse to adjudication.  If everything 
fails, then he can go to court so that we reduce the burden on the 
consumer forum. We are trying to get the complaints resolved at the first 
stage itself.  This is the strategy we have adopted”.  
 

2.15 The Committee note that though the Government has started a 
vigorous consumer awareness campaign through print media, adequate 
publicity has not been given through electronic media. The Committee feel 
that to make the consumer awareness programme broad based and more 
mass oriented, wide publicity should be given through electronic media on 
the lines of Pulse Polio Campaign etc. by roping in well known celebrities 
to espouse the cause.  The Government should also reach the people 
through Gram Melas, etc.   The services of the NGOs need to be exploited 
through special programmes by making them partners in spreading the 
awareness and enhancing the effectiveness of the consumer protection 
measures. 
2.16 The Committee feel that the consumer awareness programme shall 
not yield the desired results, until and unless the focus of targets is 
villages, tribal and inaccessible far flung areas.  The Committee desire that 
aggressive campaigning about consumer protection nee ds to be stepped 
up in these vulnerable areas.  The literature brought out by the Department 
for example ‘Upbhokta Jagaran’, needs to be brought out in regional 
languages.  The video and radio Programmes for creating awareness 
should not only be              televised /broadcasted by public broadcast but 
also be shown in cable/private TV Channels.  The Committee desire that 
they may be apprised of the action taken by the Government in this regard.  
 
2.17 The Committee further feel that the Department has to  think of adopting 
entirely different techniques for consumer awareness in rural areas keeping in 
view the ground reality.   The illiterate and innocent rural poor consumers cannot 

take the advantage of sophisticated techniques of consumer helpline or onli ne 
mechanism as introduced by the Department for redressal of consumers’ 
grievances. That foremost condition of using these techniques is a minimum level 
of education and awareness.  There is an urgent need to make these people 
aware of their rights and th is can be achieved through simple techniques like 
street drama, musical drama, folk dances, nautanki, etc. in regional languages.  
Song and Drama Division and Field Publicity Units of the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting and Publicity Units of the State Governments should 
extensively be involved. Besides, as recommended in the earlier para of the 
report, the Committee emphasize that adequate outlay for consumer awareness 
should be provided so as to achieve the aforesaid objective. 
2.18  With the ena ctment of the Constitution 73rd Amendment Act, 1992 
elected Panchayati Raj Institutions exist in almost every State/UT. The 
Department should take the desired initiatives to involve Panchayati Raj 
Institutions in various programmes related to consumer awar eness. Besides, the 
publications of the Department specifically ‘Upbhokta Jagaran’ should be brought 
out in regional languages and distributed to the elected representatives of 
Panchayati Raj Institutions.  The Committee further feel that the best forum to  
educate the rural masses about their rights as consumers as well as the 
techniques to redress to their grievances is the meetings of Gram Sabha, which 
are attended by almost every villager.  The Committee note that 24 December 
has been declared as Nationa l Consumer Day since the year 2000.  The 
Department in consultation with the Union Ministry of Panchayati Raj should take 
the desired initiatives to have mandatory meetings of Gram Sabhas on this day 
where the villagers could properly be educated about their rights as consumers.   

2.19 The Committee note that the Department has instituted National 
Awards on Consumer Protection to encourage the VCOs , women and 
youth . The VCOs who have done outstanding work are given prize money 
of Rs. 50,000,                Rs. 40,000 and Rs. 30,000 alongwith certificates of 
Merit. The Committee would like to be apprised of the number of VCOs 
women and youth who have been given prize so far. Further, the 
Department should also inform the Committee about the number of VCOs, 
women and youth from rural areas who have been awarded prizes so as to 
know the impact of this scheme in rural areas. 

 
CHAPTER III 
CONSUMER FORA 
3.1 The Consumer Protection Act, 1986 seeks to better protect the rights of 
consumers by establishing an ‘Alternate Justice Delivery System’ to render quick 
and inexpensive redressal to the consumers complaints.  A three -tier quasi 
judicial redressal machinery at the National, State and District level has been set 
up to provide simple, inexpensive and time bound r edressal of consumer 
grievances against defective goods, deficient services, restrictive/unfair trade 
practices etc. adopted by any trader or person through summary trials.  Filing of 
a simple complaint on plain paper giving the details of the case with su pporting 
documents is enough for seeking relief/compensation and it is not obligatory to 
engage a lawyer.  In fact, any authorized agent can represent the complainant or 
the opposite party.  These redressal agencies are popularly known as consumer 
fora or consumer courts and they are not the replica of civil courts.  According to 
the objectives and purposes of the Consumer Protection Act, these quasi -judicial 
bodies are required to observe the principles of natural justice and follow 
summary trial expeditiously adjudicating the consumers’ complaints. 
(a) Powers of Consumer Fora 
3.2 The Consumer Fora, as per the powers vested under section 14 of the 
Act, can provide the following relief by directing the opposite party or parties to 
do one or more of the following:- 
(i) removal of defects from the goods; 
(ii) replacement of defective goods with goods of similar description 
free from any defects; 
(iii) refund the price/excess price paid; 
(iv) award compensation including punitive damages for loss or injury 
suffered by consumer due to the negligence of the opposite party; 

(v) removal of deficiency in services; 
(vi) discontinue unfair or restricted trade practice or not to repeat it; 
(vii) stop offering the hazardous goods for sale; 
(viii) withdraw hazardous goods from being offered for sale; 
(ix) to cease manufacture of hazardous goods and to desist from 
offering services which are hazardous in nature; 
(x) imposing penalty where large number of consumers have suffered 
 loss or injury even if they cannot be identified conveniently; 
(xi) order for corrective advertisement at the cost of the opposite party 
 to neutralize the effect of misleading advertisement; 
 (xii)  to issue interim order wherever deemed justified; and 
 (xiii) to provide adequate costs to affected parties. 
 
3.3 Under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (Section 9), the responsibility 
for setting up of the National Commission rests with the Central Government.  
The National Commission has a retired/sitting judge of the Supreme Court as its 
President. The number of Members has recently been enhanced to nine. One of 
the Members has to be a woman.  In the original jurisdiction, it can decide cases 
where the value of the goods or services and compensation claimed, if any, 
exceeds rupees one crore.  The Member s are appointed for a period of five 
years. They should possess a bachelors degree, should not be less than 35 
years of age and have an experience of 10 years in the field in which they come 
from. They are eligible for re -appointment for another five years  subject to 
maximum age of 70 years.   The President of Commission has also been 
empowered to constitute Bench with one or more Members.  The National 
Commission has established a second Bench with effect from 24 September 
2003.  The State Commissions comp rise three Members including a 
retired/sitting judge of High Court as its President.  One of its Members shall be a 
woman.  In the original jurisdiction, it can decide cases where the value of the 
goods or services and compensation, if any claimed, exceeds  Rs. 20 lakhs but 
does not exceed rupees one crore.  The President of Commission has also been 
empowered to constitute Bench with one or more Members.  The District Forum 

is to be set up in each District and consists of three Members  including a 
sitting/retired District Judge or a person qualified to be District Judge as its 
President.  One of its Members shall be a woman.  It can decide cases upto Rs. 
20 lakhs. 
Functional/Non-Functional State Commissions/District Fora 
 
3.4 The status of State Commissions/ District Fora in each State/UT has 
been given in the Appendix -I. It could be seen therefrom that all the State 
Commissions are functional. With regard to District Fora, out of  total 607 
District Fora, 585 District Fora are functional. Thus 22 District Fora are Non-
Functional.   
3.5 When the Committee asked about the strategy chalked by the 
Government to make the non -functional District Fora functional, the Department 
replied that the responsibility for setting up of Consumer Fora and their effective 
functioning, including their uninterrupted functioning, is on the State 
Governments/UT Administrations. With a view to ensure that all the Fora are 
functional on continuing basis, the senior most Member has been empowered 
under the Act to act as President in the  absence of the regular President.  In the 
absence of the President of the State Commission who is the Chairman of the 
Selection Committee, the State Governments have been empowered for 
nominating a sitting Judge of the High Court in consultation with Chie f Justice of 
the concerned High Court to act as Chairman for selection of President/Members 
of the Consumer Fora.  In reply to another question, the Department stated that 
State Governments have been instructed to take the following steps to ensure 
that Consumer Fora do not remain non-functional :-  

(i) To initiate action well in advance for filling up of future vacancies of    
Members/Presidents and to maintain a standing panel of members for 
immediate appointment. 
(ii) To consider reappointment of eligible Pr esidents and members having 
good track records. 
(iii)  Where District Fora are non -functional due to vacancies of 
Presidents/Members, States have been advised to club together 
neighboring District Fora till regular arrangements are made. 
(iv)  Where delay/pendency in settling cases occurs due to shortage or non-
availability of staff like stenographers, the States have been advised to 
engage the services of such staff on contractual basis. 
(v) To consider setting up of additional District Fora, wherever necessary.  
 
 
 
Vacancy position in the State Commissions and District Fora 
3.6 The vacancy position in the State Commissions and District Fora in 
various States/UTs is given in the Appendix-II.  The following is the over all 
position in this regard:- 
State Commissions 
 
District Fora 
Post No. of Vacancies Post No. of Vacancies 
President 02 President 49 
Member 09 Member 181 
 
3.7 As regards State wise position, the vacancies of President in State 
Commissions are in Arunachal Pradesh and Assam. The vacancies of Mem bers 
are in Assam, Gujarat, Haryana, Kerala, Manipur, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal. 
With regard to District Fora, the posts of President and Members are vacant in 
various States/UTs.  The worst is the position in Rajasthan where there are 31 
vacancies of Mem bers and 4 vacancies of Presidents followed by Tamil Nadu, 
where there are 21 vacancies of Members and 2 of Presidents.  In Bihar and 
Madhya Pradesh, 17 vacancies of Members exist in each State. In Arunachal 
Pradesh and Gujarat, 16 and 13 posts respectively are falling vacant.   

 
3.8 The Committee noted that posts of President and Members in District Fora 
in many States are lying vacant, which cause delay in disposal of cases. When 
the Committee asked about the steps taken by the Department to fill the vaca nt 
posts, the Committee have been informed that the Department and National 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission are monitoring and constantly 
impressing upon the States/UTs for timely filling up the vacant posts of 
Presidents/Members.  The Secretary, Co nsumer Affairs, during the evidence 
elaborated as under:-  
“The  main problem as to why the cases are not disposed  in time is 
that the vacancies in the District Fora and the State Commissions are 
not being filled up in time.  Vacancies exist because of wh ich the 
cases cannot be attended to and there is long pendency.  So, we 
have taken some steps including amendments to the Consumer 
Protection Act in 2002.  It has already come into effect in March, 
2003.  We are also repeatedly writing even at the Minister ’s level to 
the Chief  Ministers and at my level to the Chief Secretaries to take 
advance steps to fill up vacancies.  Vacancies except in some cases 
occur on due dates and there is no reason why advance steps 
cannot be taken to fill up the vacancies in ti me.  We are now 
regularly monitoring the vacancy position. ” 
 
Honorarium/remuneration being paid to Presidents and Members of State 
Commissions as well as District Fora. 
 
3.9  A statement showing the honorarium/remuneration being paid to 
Presidents and Members of State Commissions and Presidents and Members of 
District Fora is given at Annexure- III. 
3.10 It could be seen from the aforesaid appendix that there are large scale 
variations in the honorarium/remuneration being paid to Presidents and Members 
of State Commissions as well as District Fora. In most of the States, salary of 
High Court Judge is being provided to Presidents of State Commissions and 

salary of District Judge to the President of District Fora.  In the States where 
provision is not made of providing salary equivalent to High Court/District Judge, 
there is large -scale variation in the salary and allowances paid to Presidents of 
State Commissions and District Fora.  Besides in many States, the provision has 
been made for part time honorarium on daily basis to Presidents and Members of 
State Commissions as well as District Fora.  In some of the States, per day 
honorarium/remuneration paid is very less. For example in case of Meghalaya 
per day honorarium paid to the Members of State Commission a s well as District 
Fora is only Rs. 75 per day.  In Lakshadweep, Rs. 150 is provided as per day 
remuneration to Members of the State Commission and  Rs.100 to Members of 
District Fora. Another variation seen in the honorarium/remuneration structure is 
that in many States besides fixed honorarium/remuneration allowances and 
perks are also being provided.  In Chandigarh, besides Rs. 26,000 fixed amount, 
allowances and perks are also being provided.  In many States, besides the per 
day sitting honorarium, conv eyance allowance is also being provided.  For 
example in Goa, besides Rs. 200 per day sitting remuneration, Rs. 75 as 
conveyance allowance to a Member of District Fora is being provided.  In 
Madhya Pradesh also, besides Rs. 250 per day fixed remuneration, Rs. 50 as 
conveyance is being provided to Members of District Fora.    
3.11 When asked whether there is any proposal to bring uniformity in the 
salaries and honorarium being paid to Presidents and Members of Consumer 
Fora of different States, the Departmen t replied that it has been passing 
resolutions to bring uniformity in the salaries and honorariums to be paid to the 
Presidents and Members of the consumer Fora. Action in this regard is to be 
taken by the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations.  The 

Department has requested all the State Governments/Union Territory 
Administrations to implement the resolutions passed in this regard.  
  

 
Inadequate supporting staff in various District Fora 
 
3.12 The Committee have been informed that supporting sta ff for District Fora 
is normally borrowed from the local Food and Civil Supplies Department. When 
asked about the efforts made by the Central/State Governments to ensure 
adequate availability of full -fledged staff for the District Fora, the Department 
informed that the responsibility of providing staff exclusively rests with the State 
Governments in the Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs 
and there is no separate cadre of supporting staff for Consumer Fora in 
States/Union Territories. 
 
The status of cases filed in different Consumer Fora at National, State and 
District level   
 
 
3.13 In terms of the Consumer Protection Act, Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Agencies have been set up at the District level (607), State level (35) and 
National lev el to provide simple, inexpensive and time bound justice to the 
consumer complaints against defective goods, deficient services including the 
unfair/restrictive trade practices adopted by the traders or any person. 
3.14 The time limit for disposal of complaints / appeals was not laid down in the 
Act initially. In terms of sub section 3A inserted in section 13 of the Act with effect 
from  
15  March 2003, the District Fora were required to decide the complaints within a 
period of three months from the date of receipt of the notice by the opposite party 

where the complaint did not require analysis or testing of commodities and within 
five months if it required analysis or testing of commodities.  

 
3.15 The detailed information giving State -wise data of the cas es filed since 
inception and percentage of disposal with regard to National Commissions, State 
Commissions and District Fora in each of the State/UT is given in Appendix -IV and 
V.  The analysis of the data indicates as below.   
 Cases filed 
since inception 
Cases disposed off 
since inception 
Cases pending Percentage 
 of 
disposal 
 
National 
Commission 
40981 33319 7662 81.3 
State 
Commission 
361240 253456 107784 70.16 
District Fora 2147744 1924256 223488 89.59 
 
   
3.16 The State -wise analysis points out that  in Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
Haryana, Maharashtra, Manipur, Mizoram, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh, the 
percentage disposal of cases in State Commissions is less than 70 per cent.  The 
worst is the position in Daman & Diu where not even a single case has been 
reported and disposed off.  In Uttar Pradesh and Mizoram the percentage disposal 
is 29.13 and 33.70 per cent, respectively.  In progressive States like Maharashtra, 
the percentage disposal of cases is 56.19 per cent.  With regard to District Fora, in 
Daman  & Diu, not even a single case has been reported to be filed and disposed 
off. In Bihar, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Jammu and Kashmir, Mizoram, Tripura and 
Uttar Pradesh, the percentage disposal of cases is less than 80 per cent.  
3.17 The analysis of the da ta further reveal that in many States/UTs the number 
of cases filed is very low.  As regards State Commissions in as many as 7 States 
viz Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Arunachal Pradesh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, 
Daman and Diu, Lakshadweep, Manipur, Mizoram, Na galand and Sikkim, the 
number of cases filed is in double digits. With regard to District Fora, in 8 

States/UTs viz A&N Islands, Arunachal Pradesh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, 
Lakshadweep, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, the number of 
cases filed are in three digits.  The number of cases filed is nil in Daman and Diu. In 
Daman and Diu the number of cases filed since inception is nil in State Commission 
and District Fora. 
3.18 When the Committee enquired about the reasons for not meeting 
the deadline for disposal of cases within time prescribed for the purpose in 
National/State Commissions/District Fora, and the efforts made for early 
disposal of cases, the Department has stated that the delay in disposal of 
cases within prescribed time limit is mainly due to frequent adjournments, 
inadequate infrastructure, lack of manpower/ lack of finances and non 
filling of vacancies.  Some of the important steps taken by the Department 
for speedy disposal of cases are as under:- 
a) A project for computerization and computer networking of Consumer Fora 
throughout the country has been initiated as a turnkey project through NIC 
in 2004-05, It is expected to be completed by the end of 2006-07.  This will 
promote e-governance, transparency, efficiency and systematizing of 
working of consumer Fora and also to provide time bound delivery of 
justice to consumers. 
  
b) The following important provisions have been made in the Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986 through amendments to facilitate quicker disposal of 
cases:    
 
(i) provision for senior most member to preside over the Consumer Fora if 
the President is absent for any reason; 
 
(ii)  time frame has been prescribed for admission of complaints, issue of 
notice from the date of admission and complaints to be disposed off, 
as far as possib le, within 90 days (within 150 days, where it requires 
testing); 
 
(iii) appeals to be disposed off as far as possible within 90 days;  
 
(iv) where a complaint/appeal has not been disposed off within the time 
period, reasons for the same should be recorded;  
 
(v) ordinarily no adjournment is to be given.  Adjournments can be given 
only when it is justified and that too with cost. ; 
 
(vi) once a complaint is admitted it shall not be transferred to any other 
Court/Tribunal;  
 
(vii) provision for service of notices by courier, fax, speed post etc;  
 

(viii) services utilized for commercial purposes are excluded from the 
purview of Consumer Fora; 
 
(ix)  resignation of the President/Member to become effective only on 
acceptance, thereby ensuring that continuity of the functioning of 
 the court is not affected;  
 
(x) provision for continuing the proceeding from the stage  where the 
case was last heard by the previous Member instead of starting  de -
novo proceedings where applicable;  
 
(xi) sitting Judge of the High Court to preside the meetings of the Selection 
Committee for selection of Members of State Commissions as well as 
President and Members of District Fora, when President of the State 
Commission is absent for any reason; 
 
(xii)  provision for reappointment of Presidents and Members of 
 consumer Fora so as to utilize their expertise;  
 
(xiii) provision for holding of Circuit Benches by National/State Commission 
to provide justice at the door step;  
 
(xiv) provision for appointment of Additional Members in the National/State 
Commission to constitute Benches; 
 
(c) Further a number of amendment proposals are already under consideration, 
which will further facilitate quicker disposal of cases and ensure better 
observance of time norms.  
 
(d) The Consumer Protection Regulations, 2005 were framed by the National 
Commission with the approval of the Central Government to provide uniform 
procedures to regulate day to day functioning of the Consumer Fora. 
 
(e) The State Governments have been requested from time to time not to allow 
the Consumer Fora to remain non -functional and also to pr ovide adequate 
facilities. Besides this, the Central Government as well as the National 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission should regularly monitor the 
functioning of the Consumer Fora and suggest/take remedial measures for 
their effective functioning . 
 
Setting up of Lok Adalats to clear the backlog of cases 
 
 3.19 When enquired whether the Government intend to set up Lok Adalats type 
Fora to clear the backlog of pending cases, the Department replied that the 
Consumer Fora have been established under C onsumer Protection Act, 1986 
with the objective of providing simple, speedy and inexpensive justice to the 

consumers. The Lok Adalats are another alternative redressal mechanism 
available to the consumers. In the State of Punjab, an attempt has already bee n 
made to utilize this mechanism for expeditious settlement of cases pending in 
Consumer Courts. Lok Adalats were held for consumer cases in Jalandhar on 4 
April 2005 and in Ludhiana on 10 April 2005 wherein 60 -70 and 115 cases, 
respectively were settled.  
 
The Secretary, Consumer Affairs further clarified during evidence: -  
 
“We have set specific time limits for disposal of grievances.  But as 
the Committee is well aware, bulk of the cases are not getting 
resolved within the time limit specified in the Ac t.  It is taking much 
longer time, than specified in the Act.  Infrastructure is inadequate.  
The problem is that under our federal structure, the District Fora and 
State commissions are the responsibilities of the State 
Governments.  We have repeatedly an d regularly taken it up with the 
State Governments to provide minimum infrastructure.  Some States 
have taken steps but many States have not taken steps with the 
result that the District Fora and certain State Commissions have to 
function without adequate and minimum infrastructure. As far as Lok 
Adalats are concerned, what I would submit is that the Consumer 
Protection Act has set up a parallel system for resolving the 
consumer grievances speedily and at low cost.  The trials are to be 
on summary basis.  You do not have to pay high court fees.  You can 
apply on a plain paper.  So Lok Adalats are relevant mostly in cases 
where the litigation is pending in regular courts for a long time.  
Inspite of that, the pendency of the consumer grievances are also 
increasing.  Punjab Principal Secretary took a lot of interest in bulk 
disposal of consumer grievances.  He made a presentation on this 
and we told him to go ahead.  Now, we have just got its report and 
the results are positive.  We will certainly try to replic ate that in other 
areas also wherever possible”.   
 
 
 (f) Lack of Infrastructure 
3.20 As far as the Consumer Fora at the State levels are concerned, 
though the responsibility for establishment of these Fora as well as 
providing all necessary infrastructure  for their effective functioning rests 
with the State Governments, many of the States are not able to meet even 

the minimum infrastructural requirements of the Consumer Fora which 
affect the efficiency of the Fora.  Therefore, the Planning Commission had 
allocated Rs. 61.80 crore during 1995 -96 at the rate of                     Rs. 50 
lakh for each of 32 State Commissions and Rs. 10 lakh each for 458 District 
Fora as a one -time grant so as to supplement the efforts of the State 
Governments.  So far approxi mately 84 per cent of the grant has been 
utilized by the States/UTs.   Since 1995, 113 District Fora and three State 
Commissions have been added in newly created Districts/States.  States 
are repeatedly asking for additional funds to enable them to provide  proper 
infrastructure to all the Consumer Fora.    
3.21 In post evidence reply, the Department informed the Committee that 13 
States have been sanctioned additional grant of Rs. 10.20 crore during 2004 -
2005 as assistance for strengthening the infrastructu re of 53 District Fora and 3 
State Commissions, which have been set up after the initial grant given in 1995, 
53 District Fora, for which grant has been sanctioned during 2004 -2005, are in 
the States which have reported nearly 100 per cent utilisation upto  March, 2005. 
The detail of States which had been sanctioned grant during 2004 -2005 is given 
below:-  
Sl. 
No
 
Name of the State State 
Commission 
District 
Forums 
Amount 
Rupees in crores 
1. Jharkhand 1  0.75 
2. Chattisgarh 1  0.75 
3. Uttaranchal 1  0.75 
4. Andhra Pradesh  7 1.05 
5. Madhya Pradesh  7 1.05 
6. Mizoram  5 0.75 
7. Nagaland  1 0.15 
8. Orissa  18 2.70 
9. Rajasthan  3 0.45 
10. Maharashtra  3 0.45 
11. West Bengal  3 0.45 
12 Haryana  3 0.45 

13 Bihar  3 0.45 
 Total: 3 53 10.20 
 
(g)      Problems faced by Districts Fora  
 
3.22 The Committee had invited comments/ suggestions/as well as problems 
being faced by the District Fora in the implementation of the Consumer related 
Act. Several District Fora have furnished their comments which are summariz ed 
as under : - 
(i) Non-formation of Consumer Protection Councils at District Level. 
(ii) Ignorance /negligence of Members of the District Fora relating to laws 
dealing with complaints. 
(iii) Political interference in selection of Members of State Commissions 
and District Fora. 
(iv) Disposal rate of cases is very slow mainly due to frequent 
adjournments. 
(v) Location of District Consumer Dispute Redressal Forum (DCDRF) only 
in State Capitals.  Hence it is difficult for average consumer to have 
easy access to these Fora. 
(vi) Insistence by District Fora upon compromise between complainants 
and defendants.  
(vii) Non-provision of laboratories for analysis of sample at District level. 
(viii) Delay in posting of Members /President by State Governments. 
(ix) State Governments do not release funds for District Fora in time. 
(x) Many District Fora are still working in formalized legal set up and insist 
on usual methods of affidavits, courts fees, vakalatnamas etc. as 
opposed to informal flexible manner as mentioned in the Act. 
(xi) The District Fora have no executing age ncy for serving notices etc. 
under their control and has to depend on an external agency, which 
undermines the role and importance of District Fora. 
(xii) Most District Fora feel that sections 25 and 27 of the Consumer 
Protection Act were more consumer friendly earlier before the 
amendment of the Act. Under Section 25(3) the District Collector has 
been held responsible for recovery of amount as arrears of land 
revenue.   
(xiii) The District Collector is frequently on tours and is not easily accessible 
to litigant public or consumers. 
(xiv) Before the amended Act, every order of District Fora was to be 
enforced as if it was a decree made by a Court in a civil suit.  This 
gave ample powers to District Fora to enforce the order by attaching 
account of the person concerned, arrest ing him or keeping him behind 
bars.  Now this provision has been abolished and only interim order 
passed by District Fora can be enforced. Only provisions now exist for 
enforcement of orders of District Forum (under section 27), which is in 
the shape of pe nalties. Many District Fora feel that earlier provision 
was more quick and useful. Provision of penalty should be made the 

last resort and before that some provision be made to enforce final 
order of District Fora as was available in the Act before amendment. 
(xv) One of the handicaps of the Act is that the Forum cannot take initiative 
or take suo moto action against unscrupulous traders and service 
providers.  It can act only when a complaint is presented before it. 
 
3.23 The Committee note that a three tier qu asi judicial redressal mechanism 
has been established at National, State and District levels as per the provisions 
made under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 to resolve the consumer 
grievances speedily and cheaply. Whereas the responsibility of the Natio nal 
Commission rests with the Union Government, the responsibility of setting up as 
well as effective functioning of State Commissions and District Fora lies with the 
respective State Governments/Union Territory Administrations. The Union 
Government is further supplementing the efforts made by the State Governments 
by releasing one-time grants to District Fora for creating adequate infrastructure. 
Besides,  various amendments in the aforesaid Act have been made for the 
smooth functioning of District Fora. I n addition, the Department is taking 
proactive action to impress upon the State Governments to take desired action 
for the effective functioning of these Fora. Inspite of the best of the efforts made 
by the Union Government, as many as 22 District Fora hav e been reported as 
non-functional. The Committee further note that non -functional District Fora exist 
in various States viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Nagaland, Tamil Nadu, 
Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Chattisgarh, Kerala and Rajasthan. The various facto rs 
responsible for non-functional District Fora have been addressed in detail in the 
subsequent paras of the report. Here, the Committee may like to emphasize that 
the Department should find out State specific reasons for non -functional District 
Fora and p ursuade the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations to 
take corrective action in this regard.  Besides, the Committee recommend that 

the district forum should be constituted expeditiously in a newly created District.  
The Committee may also be kept apprised.  
3.24 The Committee further note that there are a large number of pending 
cases in the National Commission, State Commissions and District Fora. The 
average percentage of disposal of cases in the case of National Commission has 
been reported to be 81.3 per cent whereas percentage disposal of cases in State 
Commissions and District Fora is 70.16 and 89.59 per cent, respectively.  The 
Committee find from the information provided by the Department that the 
problem of infrastructure is more acute i n case of District Fora, thus making the 
District Fora non -functional.   However, looking into the overall percentage of 
disposal of cases, the Committee note that District Fora are doing comparatively 
well. The Committee would like the Department to analy ze the aforesaid data of 
disposal of cases carefully and find out the specific reasons for lesser disposal of 
cases in State Commissions. The Committee may also be informed in this 
regard.  
3.25 While noting the State -wise position of disposal of cases, th e Committee 
find that in some of the States, the position is not satisfactory. As regards the 
performance of State Commissions, worse is the position in Uttar Pradesh and 
Mizoram where the percentage disposal is only 29.13 and 33.70 per cent, 
respectively. In progressive State of Maharashtra, the percentage disposal of 
cases is just 56.19 per cent. As regards the position of District Fora in Bihar, 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Jammu and Kashmir, Mizoram, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, 
the percentage disposal of cases i s less than 80 per cent. The Secretary during 
the course of oral evidence has acknowledged that the time limit of disposal of 
cases prescribed under the Act i.e. within 90 to 150 days is seldom adhered to. 

The Secretary has also informed that in Punjab, a novel way of clearing the 
backlog of cases by holding the Lok Adalats has been adopted.  Further, the 
Committee while examining the Demands for Grants (2007 -08) (refer Para 4.22 
of Nineteenth Report) had also been informed that an amendment to the 
Consumer Protection Act to have Circuit Benches or Circuit Sharing Mechanism 
by District Fora is being worked out. In the system of Circuit Benches or Circuit 
Sharing, District Fora may hold their sittings at the Tehsil or Block Headquarters 
in case there are larg e number of cases. The Committee feel that the system of 
Lok Adalats adopted by the Punjab Government needs to be replicated in other 
States where there is bulk pendency of cases. Besides, there is an urgent need 
to take an early decision on the issue of C ircuit Benches or Circuit Sharing 
Mechanism by District Fora for speedier disposal of cases pending with 
respective District Forum. The Committee recommend to the Department to take 
the desired action in this regard. The Committee also recommend that the 
Department should review the position of pendency of cases on quarterly basis 
and issue necessary instructions to the respective State Governments for 
speedier disposal of cases. 
 
3.26 The Committee are concerned to note almost negligible number of 
cases fi led in the District Fora in some of the States/UTs. From the data 
made available by the Department, the Committee note that in Daman and 
Diu, not even a single case was filed in the State Commission and District 
Fora since inception. Besides, in various No rth-Eastern States and 
Lakshadweep, the number of cases filed are very marginal. The Committee 
feel that the lack of awareness about the rights as a consumer is the main 
reason for reporting of almost nil or marginal cases in the aforesaid 

States/UTs. The Committee recommend to evolve a strategy to have an 
aggressive consumer awareness campaign in these States in consultation 
with the respective State Governments/Union Territory Administrations.  
3.27 The Committee further note that consumers in remote and far-flung 
areas, consumers have to come to the District Headquarters for filing of 
cases. Similarly the State Commissions are located in the respective State 
capitals. The distance as well as the lack of connectivity deter the 
consumers to come to the Dist rict Headquarters/ State Capitals. In view of 
the aforesaid scenario, the Committee feel that there is an urgent need to 
work out some mechanism whereby the Consumer Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism is available at the doorstep of the consumers. By and large,  
holding of Lok Adalats and Circuit Benches at the Block Headquarters may 
provide solution to this problem. The Department should consider the 
aforesaid difficulties being faced by the consumers in far -flung /difficult 
areas and evolve some solution in thi s regard. The Committee may also be 
kept apprised. 
3.28 The Committee have been informed that another reason which has 
impeded the disposal of cases in time as well as non-functional status of some of 
the District Fora is failure to fill the vacancies in t he State Commissions and 
District Fora. From the data provided by the Department, the Committee note 
that District Fora are worst affected by the problem of vacancies. In various 
District Fora, 49 posts of President and 181 posts of Members are lying vacan t. 
The Committee also find that various provisions have been made in the 
Consumer Protection Act through amendments to resolve the problem of 
vacancies.         For example, the provision that the senior most Member may 

preside over the Consumer Fora, if t he President is absent for any reason and 
the provision of reappointment of President and Members of Consumer Fora are 
some of the amendments made in this regard. In addition, various instructions to 
State Governments to maintain a panel of Presidents and Members to fill 
vacancies arising in the District Fora are repeatedly being issued by the 
Department. Inspite of this, the problem of vacancies persists in State 
Commissions and District Fora.  The Committee therefore, strongly recommend 
that the vacancy p osition in all the  District Fora across the country should be 
reviewed regularly and all out efforts  be made to fill the vacancies at the earliest.   

 
3.29 In most of the States, salary of a High Court Judge is being provided 
to the President of a State Commission and salary of a District Judge to the 
Presidents of District Fora. In the States where aforesaid provision has not 
been made, the variation in the salary and allowances paid to President and 
Members of State Commissions and District Fora is qui te glaring.  The 
Committee further find that in many of the States/UTs, provision has been 
made to pay the remuneration to Members of State Commissions and 
District Fora on daily basis. Further, the honorarium paid to Members of 
State Commissions as well a s District Fora is very low in case of some of 
the States. For example, in Meghalaya, honorarium paid to Members of 
State Commissions as well as District Fora is as low as       Rs. 75 per day. 
In Lakshadweep, Rs. 150 is provided as per day honorarium to M embers of 
State Commissions and Rs. 100 to Members of District Fora.  On the other 
hand some of the States are paying very attractive honorarium/ 
remuneration to President and Members. For example, in Chandigarh, 
besides the fixed monthly amount of Rs. 26, 000, allowances and perks are 
also being provided. From the aforesaid scenario of disparity in the salary 
and honorarium structure of President and other Members of State 
Commissions and District Fora, the Committee find that perhaps the low 
salaries have dissuaded suitable candidates to take up assignments in 
State Commissions and District Fora. The low salary and honorarium 
structure has failed to attract the best available talent in the field. The 
Committee further note that the Department has been passi ng resolutions 
to bring about a uniformity in the salary and honorarium being paid to 
President and Members of different State Commissions. However, the State 

Governments and UT Administrations are not implementing the 
resolutions. The Committee strongly r ecommend that the matter may be 
taken up with all the State Governments and Union Territory 
Administrations at the highest level so that the problem of pending 
vacancies and inadequate remuneration could be resolved.  
3.30 Besides the problem of vacancies,  various Consumer Fora are also 
facing the shortage of adequate supporting staff. The Committee have been 
apprised that supporting staff for District Fora is normally borrowed from 
the local Food and Civil Supply Department of the State Government. The 
Committee note that the casual approach of the State Governments in this 
regard has led to the ineffective functioning of District Fora. The Committee 
recommend that there should be All India /State service which can cater to 
the need of supporting staff of d ifferent levels of Consumer Fora at 
National, State and District Level.    
3.31 The Committee note that most of the District Fora are suffering for want of 
adequate infrastructure and other basic amenities/necessities.  The Committee 
feel that this acts as  a deterrent in quick disposal of cases and thereby causes 
pendency of consumer cases.  In this context, the Committee desire that the 
grants to all District Fora be provided for improving infrastructure facilities at the 
earliest.  It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that many States do 
not take active interest in consumer related activities.  In order to inculcate the 
feeling of welfare of consumers, the Committee desire that a Model District Fora 
funded by the Central Government needs to b e set up in each State.  The 
experience gained from such Model District Fora should be replicated in other 
districts of the State. 

 
 
3.32 The Committee take note of various problems faced by District Fora in the 
implementation of the Consumer Protection Act.  Some of the problems faced by 
these District Fora include non -formation of District Consumer Protection 
Councils at District levels, ignorance of Members of District Fora about prevailing 
laws relating to complaints, political interference in selection of Members of State 
Commission, District Fora and Consumer Forum, frequent adjournments, 
absence of labs for analysis at District level and failure to release funds by State 
Governments.    The insistence by District Fora on compromise between the 
complainant and defendant, is another factor, which impedes the implementation 
of the Consumer Protection Act leading to delay in delivering justice to the 
consumers.  The Committee are of the view that the problems highlighted by 
various District Fora as given i n detail in the preceeding para number 3.22 of the 
report are genuine and merit due consideration by the Government.  The 
Committee desire that result oriented action be taken by the Centre/State 
Governments in this regard.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken by the Government in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER IV 
 
CONSUMER WELFARE FUND 
 
4.1 In 1991 the Central Government amended the Central Excise and Salt 
Act, 1944 to create the Consumer Welfare Fund. The fund has been set up by 
the Department of Revenue in 1992 and is being operated by the Department of 
Consumer Affairs. The money which is not refundable to the manufacturers, is 
credited to the Consumer Welfare Fund. Regarding expanding the sources of 
CWF, the Department replied that it has been proposed that the fee to be paid by 
consumers while filing a case in Consumer Forum etc. is deposited in the 
Consumer Welfare Fund of the respective State/Central Government. The main 
objective of the fund is to provide financial assistance to  VCOs, NGOs, State 
Governments etc. for promoting and protecting the welfare of the consumers, 
generating consumer awareness and strengthening consumer movement in the 
country, particularly in rural areas.  Consumer Welfare Fund is playing a 
significant role in the consumer movement of the country.  
 
4.2 While examining Demands for Grants 2007-08, the following data of funds 
allocated and utilized was given:- 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Funds allocated Funds utilized Balance 
2005-06 31.50 8.56 22.40 
2006-07 17.35 6.69 10.66 
2007-08 20.60   
 
4.3 In reply to a question, the Department informed the Committee that there 
is no proposal to bring the CWF under the ambit of Department of Consumer 
Affairs from Department of Revenue. When asked whether the objective of 
setting up CWF has been fulfilled, the Department stated that financial 

assistance of more than Rs. 10 crore has been given to the State 
Governments/VCOs/NGOs and other agencies for undertaking various consumer 
protection and consumer welfare activities unde r different schemes. In order to 
promote the consumer movement throughout the country, the Department has 
decided to decentralize and transfer the Consumer Awareness and Consumer 
Club schemes to the State Governments /Union Territory Administrations with 
effect from 1 April, 2004.  Consequently, it has been decided to facilitate the 
States/UTs to set up their own Consumer Welfare Funds by making a one -time 
contribution of an amount proportionate to the number of districts, by the Centre 
(Department of Consu mer Affairs) and the State Governments in the ratio of 
50:50 (Centre : State).  In case of special category States, the ratio will be                  
90:10 (Centre : State).  So far, 19 States and UTs have been sanctioned grant 
from Central CWF for the purpose.   
4.4 The position of seed money given to various States is given below: 
State Consumer Welfare Fund -Seed Money given  
Other States: 
(Rs. in lakhs) 
S.No. State  
(No. of Districts)  
State Share Central Share Central share 
released on 
Framing of 
guidelines for 
State CWF 
1 Andhra Pradesh (23)  131.00 25.00 7-06-05 Submitted 
2 Goa (2)    5.00 4.50 (-0.50) Sanction dtd. 
29.3.06* 
Not Submitted 
 
 
3 Haryana (19) 25.00 25.00 16-2-06 Submitted 
4 Gujarat (25) 25.00 22.50 (-2.50) 06-4-05 -do- 
5 Maharashtra (35) 50.00 46.50 (-3.50) 15-7-05 -do- 
6 Karnataka (27) 50.00 47.00 (-3.00) 15-7-05 Not Submitted 
7 Orissa (30) 50.00 47.00 (-3.00) 21-4-05 Submitted 
8 Punjab (17) 10.00 10.00 14-7-05 Not Submitted 
9 Uttar Pradesh (80)  50.00 50.00 31-10-05 Not Submitted 
10 Rajasthan (32) 27.00 27.00 5-5/18-11-05 Not Submitted 
11 West Bengal (18) 25.00 25.00 10-05-05 -do- 
12 Chhattisgarh (16) 25.00 25.00 Sanction dtd 
 27-09-06* 
-do- 
13 Tamil Nadu (29)  50.00 50.00 Sanction dtd 
13-10-06 
-do- 

 
Special Category States:- 
(Rs. in Lakhs) 
S. No. State  
(No. of Districts).  
State share Central share Central 
share 
released 
on 
Framing of 
guidelines for 
State CWF 
1 Jammu & Kashmir (14) 3.00 27.00 1-9-05 Not Submitted 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 
(15) 
6.20 27.00 Sanction 
dtd  
28.3.06* 
Submitted 
3 Mizorum (8) 3.00 27.00 Sanction 
dtd. 
29.3.06* 
Submitted 
4 Sikkim (4) 2.50 05.00 30-8-2005 Submitted 
5 Uttaranchal (13) 1.50 12.00 (-1.50) Sanciton 
dtd 
29.3.06* 
Not-submitted 
6 Tripura (4) 1.00 5.00+4.00 15-7/       
1-9-05 
Not submitted 
 
4.5 When asked about the details of States which are yet to set up State level 
Consumer Welfare Fund, the Department stated that the States and UTs named 
below are yet to apply / receive assistance in the form of seed money for the 
State level Consumer Welfare Fund:-  
 
Sl.No. State / UT Amount eligible (Rs. In 
lakhs) 
1 Bihar 50.00 
2 Delhi 10.00 
3 Jharkhand 25.00 
4 Kerala 10.00 
5 Madhya Pradesh 50.00 
6 Chandigarh   5.00 
7 Dadra & Nager Haveli    5.00 
8 Daman & Diu   5.00 
9 Pondicherry   5.00 
10 Himachal Pradesh 10.00 
11 Assam 50.00 
12 Manipur 10.00 
13 Meghalaya 10.00 
14 Nagaland 10 .00 
15 Andaman & Nicobar    5.00 
16 Lakshadweep     5.00 
 
   

The above-mentioned States/UTs could not avail of the assistance/Central 
share of seed money because they have  not yet credited their State’s share in a 
permanent, non-lapsable, Non-Plan account.  Some States and UTs are in the 
process of completing the modalities to set up the permanent fund by identifying 
the other sources of funds that will accrue into the fund once it is established. 
4.6 The Department has further stated that the organizations receiving 
grants from the Consumer Welfare Fund are required to follow the 
Consumer Welfare Fund Rules, 1992 and the guidelines for sanction of 
grant from the Consumer Welfare Fund.  
4.7 When the Committee asked about the procedure and criteria for funding of 
NGOs and VCOs engaged in Consumer Welfare, the Department replied that 
financial assistance from CWF is given on the basis of applications received from 
organizations eligible as per the Consumer Welfare Fund as well as on the basis 
of the recommendations of the concerned State Government/District 
Magistrate/District Collector.   
4.8 While examining the Demands for Grants (2007 -08) the Department 
informed that Utilizat ion Certificates amounting to Rs. 46,03,525 are pending 
from VCOs/NGOs.  When asked about the monitoring mechanism to ensure that 
funds earmarked for CWF are spent for purpose intended for, the Department 
stated that the organizations who have been provide d financial assistance are 
required to utilize the grant on the various items for which it has been sanctioned, 
within twelve months of its release. After the completion of the project, the 
organizations are required to furnish the utilization certificates  and other 
documents as per the terms and conditions of the sanction order. The 
organizations which have been sanctioned grants are required to settle the same 
by submission of utilization certificate, progress report, audited statement of 
accounts etc. an d the concerned District Magistrate is informed regarding 

sanction of financial assistance to NGOs/VCOs. In addition, evaluation studies 
are carried out from time to time. No separate cell has been established in the 
Department of Consumer Affairs to monit or the performance and functioning of 
NGOs benefited by CWF.   
4.9 The Ministry further informed that in many cases the documents submitted 
by the organizations are incomplete due to which the grants cannot be settled. 
The organizations are issued remin ders to furnish complete papers. No further 
grants are given to those organizations from whom utilization papers have not 
been received. The State Governments are also being requested not to sanction 
grants to the organizations in whose cases the grants have not been settled. 
(a) Major Schemes operated under CWF. 
(i) Consumer Clubs 
 
4.10 A Consumer Club is set up in Middle /High/Higher Secondary 
School /College affiliated to a Government recognized Board. A grant of 
Rs. 10,000 per Consumer Club in the schools/colleges is admissible under 
this Scheme. The scheme for setting up Consumer Clubs in 
schools/colleges has been launched with a view to impact consumer 
education to the school children in an informal manner by involving them 
in various consumer welfare and consumer protection activities and 
instilling in them the spirit of protection of consumer rights.  
4.11 On being asked by the Committee, whether Consumer Clubs have 
been set up in schools/colleges in all the States, the Department replied 
that the scheme has been decentralized and the amount of grant to each 
State /UT has been worked out in proportion to the number of districts in 
the State/UT. Consumer Clubs have so far been set up  in the States of 
Andhra Pradesh, Tripura, West Bengal, Maharashtra and NCT of Delhi. 
(ii) Central Consumer Protection Council (CCPC) 
4.12 With an objective to promote and protect the rights of the 
consumers, an apex body known as Central Consumer Protection Council 
is functioning at the Centre.  The Chairman of the Council is the Minister 
for Consumer Affairs.   The Council has representatives from the Ministry 
of Consumer Affairs of all the State Governments/UTs, Ministers of the 
Central Government autonomous bodies, VCOs, consumer activists, 
representatives of the women, farmers, trade and industry and also 
persons capable of representing consumer interest.  Similar Council also 
functions in each State to promote and protect the rights of the 
consumers. A provision was made in the Consumer Protection 

(Amendment) Act, 2002 which mandates the States to establish District 
Consumer Redressal Councils at the district level to strengthen consumer 
movement at the grass root level. 
4.13 When the Committee enquired whether all States and Districts have set 
up Consumer Protection Councils, the Department stated that as per information 
available, all the States have set up their State Consumer Protection Councils. 
The provision of setting up of the District Consumer Protection Councils have 
come into force w.e.f. 15 March 2003.  
4.14 Asked whether the meetings of Central and State Consumer Protection 
Councils are being held as per norms and if not, the reasons thereof, the 
Department stated that the Act provides for the Central Consumer Protection 
Council (CCPC) to meet at least once a year and State/District Consumer 
Protection Councils are to meet at least twice a year.  However, these Councils 
are free to meet more frequently than provided in the Act. In so far as Central 
Protection Council is concerned, it is meeting by and large as per norms 
prescribed in the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. The meetings of the Consumer 
Protection Councils are convened at appropriate intervals keeping in view the 
business at hand of the Government.  The composition of the CCPC has recently 
been revised and accordingly the new CCPC is in the process of being 
reconstituted.  After the CCPC is reconstituted, the meeting of the CCPC would 
be convened. No specific reasons for not holding the meetings of State/District 
Councils have been indicated by the States/UTs.  The States/UTs are being 
persuaded to ensure holding of the meetings regularly. 
4.15 To a query about holding the meeting if 2/3rd members of the council so 
desired, the Department stated that there appears no necessity of making it 
mandatory for holdi ng the meetings of the Council when 2/3rd members desire 
so.  This was one of the recommendations of the Working Group.  It may be 

appreciated that such provisions are likely to be misused by the non -
Governmental organizations.  
4.16 When the Committee enq uired about the recommendations made by 
CCPC and follow up action taken thereon, the Department stated that the 
recommendations of the Councils are not binding on the Government. However, 
the suggestions of the Council are taken up with the concerned agenc ies for 
appropriate action. Some of the important suggestions received from the Central 
Consumer Protection Council are as under: 
(i) Constitution of Working Group for amendment of the Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986 resulted in the Amendment Act, 2002 . 
 
(ii) Declaration of 15th March as World Consumer Rights Day.  
 
(iii) Setting up of National Awards for consumer organisations for doing 
exemplary work in the field of consumer protection.  
 
(iv)  Initiating the concept of `Citizen Charters’ on the lines of U.K. model.  
 
(v) Consumer Welfare Fund to be with the Department of Consumer 
Affairs.  
 
(vi) Establishment of separate Directorate of Consumer Affairs under the 
Ministry of Food and Consumer Affairs. 
 
(vii) Adopting declaration of ‘maximum retail price inclusive of all taxes” on 
the packaged commodities as a only option, deleting the other three 
options of declarations.  
 
(viii) Bringing of more appliances under the BIS certification.  
 
(ix) Grant of financial assistance to consumer organizations by the Central 
and the State Governments.  
 
(x) Activation of the State Consumer Protection Councils 
 
(xi) Getting printed publicity in all the regional languages and distributing 
them free of cost. 
 
4.17 When the Committee inquired whether there is a proposal to 
establish a separate Directorate of Consumer Affairs and to bring the 
CWF with Department of Consumer Affairs as recommended by the 
CCPC, the Department  informed that there is no proposal to establish a 

separate Directorate of Consumer Affairs under the Ministry and neither 
there is any proposal to bring CWF under the ambit of Department of 
Consumer Affairs, as suggested by CCPC. 
(v) Citizens’ Charter 
 
4.18 The concept of Citizens Charter, as recommended by CCPC was initiated 
on the pattern of U.K. in the year 1994. To provide a clean, effective and 
responsive administration at all levels with an   emphasis on   transparency  and 
accountability, the  Government introduced Citizen Charters in a phased  manner 
in the Ministries/ Departments where a large public interface is involved. The 
Charter incorporates essenti ally a Citizen’s entitlement  to public services, wide 
publicity  of standards of performance, quality of services, access to information, 
simplified procedures of complaints,  time -bound redressal of grievances and 
provision  for independent scrutiny of performance. 

 
4.19 Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances has set up a 
Core Group to formulate and approve the Citizens’ Charter of various 
Ministries/Departments. As per the information made available by the 
Department of AR&PG, 91 Cen tral Citizens’ Charters approved by the Core 
Group so far are under implementation by different State Governments/UTs. The 
responsibility for operationalisation/implementation of the Citizens’ Charter rests 
with the concerned Ministries/Departments/ State Governments. 
 
4.20 Besides, the Committee were informed that the Department of Consumer 
Affairs has prepared its own Citizens’ Charter which has been placed on the 
website of the Department. In addition, BIS and FMC, which are 
autonomous/attached offices u nder the Ministry of Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution have also prepared their Citizens’ Charter and placed on their 
websites, which are accessible to all.  
 
4.21 The Committee note that the Consumer Welfare Fund was created in 
1991 by amending the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944. The main objective of 
the fund is to provide financial assistance to VCOs/NGOs and State 
Governments for strengthening Consumer Movement in the country. The 
aforesaid fund was set up by the Department of Revenue in  1992. Subsequently, 
a separate Department of Consumer Affairs was created in the Central 
Government in the year 1997 to act as the nodal Department to exclusively deal 
with the issues related to consumer welfare and awareness. The Committee 
have been info rmed that no proposal has been mooted to bring the Consumer 
Welfare Fund under the ambit of the Department of Consumer Affairs, although 

the fund is being operated by the Department of Consumer Affairs.  The 
Committee fail to understand the rationale of placing the Consumer Welfare Fund 
under Department of Revenue when the operational responsibility rests with the 
Department of Consumer Affairs. The Committee are further concerned to note 
that no initiative in this regard has been taken by the Department of  Consumer 
Affairs so far. The Committee feel that the exclusive responsibility of Consumer 
Welfare Fund should be given to the Department of Consumer Affairs. The 
Committee urge that the desired action in this regard should be taken by the 
Government and the Committee be apprised accordingly. 
4.22 The Committee further note that the Department has decided to 
decentralize and transfer the Consumer Awareness and Consumer Club 
Schemes of the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations with effect 
from 1 April, 2004. To supplement the efforts made by the States/UTs in this 
regard, the Government has decided to make a one -time contribution of an 
amount proportionate to the number of districts by the Centre and the State 
Governments in the ratio of 50:50 (Ce ntre:State). In case of special category 
States, the aforesaid ratio is 90:10 (Centre:State). The Committee have further 
been informed that so far 19 States and UTs have been sanctioned grants from 
Centre Consumer Welfare Fund for the purpose. Further, 16 States are yet to 
apply/receive assistance for the State/Local Consumer Welfare Fund. The 
Department has informed that the aforesaid States/UTs could not avail the 
assistance/Central share of seed money because they have not yet credited the 
State share in permanent non-lapsable, non-plan account. The Committee would 
like the Department to pursue further with the aforesaid States so that the 

Consumer Welfare Fund is set up expeditiously to promote the Consumer 
Movement throughout the country.  
 
4.23 The Com mittee note from the information made available by the 
Department that out of 19 States which have been sanctioned grant from 
Central Consumer Welfare Fund, 11 States/UTs have so far not submitted 
the guidelines for State Consumer Welfare Fund. The Committ ee also note 
that the organizations receiving grant from the Consumer Welfare Fund are 
required to follow the Consumer Welfare Fund Rules, 1992 and the 
guidelines for sanction of grants from the Consumer Welfare Fund. The 
Committee fail to understand non -submission of status of framing of 
guidelines for State Consumer Welfare Fund by most of the State 
Governments. The Committee are of the view that there is an urgent need 
to have strict monitoring of the implementation of various activities for 
which fundin g is being granted out of the Consumer Welfare Fund. The 
Committee would like the Department to get the information from the 
aforesaid State Governments and submit to the Committee. Further, the 
States which have not so far framed the guidelines should be asked to do 
this expeditiously. 
4.24 The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants (2007 -08) 
had expressed serious concern over non -utilization of funds earmarked for 
the schemes/ projects out of Consumer Welfare Fund (refer Para 4.54 of 
Nineteenth Report). The Committee had noted that only one -fourth of the 
amount provided under Consumer Welfare Fund was being used by the 
State Governments. The Committee had also expressed serious concern 

over non-submission of Utilization Certificates by various NGOs/VCOs. The 
Committee are of the firm opinion that an effective monitoring is required 
to ensure that only credible NGOs/VCOs are provided funding out of the 
Consumer Welfare Fund. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
number of NGOs/VCOs who hav e been provided assistance from the 
Consumer Welfare Fund so far, along with the number of NGOs/VCOs who 
have been blacklisted. The Committee would like to reiterate their earlier 
recommendation to put the name of the blacklisted NGOs on the website of 
the Department so as to ensure that no Government funding is made to 
these blacklisted NGOs. 
4.25 The Committee further note that ‘Consumer Clubs’ is one of the schemes 
operated under Consumer Welfare Fund (CWF). Under the aforesaid scheme, a 
consumer club is  to be set up in middle, higher and higher -secondary 
school/college affiliated to a Government Recognized Board and a grant of       
Rs. 10,000 per Consumer Club in the schools/colleges is admissible under this 
scheme. The Committee note that Consumer Club s could be set up only in the 
States of Andhra Pradesh, Tripura, West Bengal, Maharashtra and NCT of Delhi. 
The Committee note that for effective Consumer Movement in the country, 
children need to be involved and Consumer Clubs are the best way for instill ing 
in children the spirit of protection of consumer rights. The Committee would, 
therefore, like the Department to pursue further with the remaining States/UTs to 
ensure that Consumer Clubs are set up in each of the schools/colleges. 
4.26 The Committee note that Central Consumer Protection Councils were set 
up at Centre and State levels to promote and protect the rights of the 
Consumers. Consumer Protection Act mandates the States to establish District 

Consumer Redressal Councils at the District Level to s trengthen consumer 
movement at the grass -root level.   The Committee note that the performance of 
Central, State and District Consumer Protection Councils (DCPCs) is far from 
satisfactory.  The Committee feel that these agencies need to be made more 
accountable, responsible and effective so as to ensure justice at the doorsteps of 
consumers.  The Committee note that these Councils have been entrusted with 
the responsibility of raising issues concerning welfare of consumers and also 
give recommendations to t his effect.  The Committee note with concern that the 
sittings of Consumer Protection Councils are not held regularly.  At times, 
meetings are not held at all.  The Committee feel that there is a need to place a 
mechanism by which sitting of the Council be  convened, if 2/3rd Members of the 
Council so desire.  The Committee also feel that though the recommendations of 
the Councils are not binding on the Government still, due consideration needs to 
be given to the recommendations of these Councils.  The Commi ttee note that 
District Consumer Protection Councils are headed by District Magistrates who 
are unable to devote much time due to their preoccupation in other pressing 
matters.  As such, District Magistrates are not able to do justice to these bodies. 
The Committee desire that Government should find ways and means and ensure 
that officials, who can devote time and energy, head these bodies and able to do 
justice to the work assigned.   
4.27 The Committee note that the concept of Citizens’ Charter was introd uced 
in the year 1994 to provide a clean, effective and responsive administration at all 
levels with an emphasis on transparency and accountability.  The Government 
introduced Citizens’ Charter in a phased manner in the Ministries/Departments 
where a large  public interface is involved. As on date only 91 Central Citizens’ 

Charters have been approved and are under implementation by different 
States/UTs. The Committee have also been informed that the Department of 
Consumer Affairs has prepared its own Citizens’ Charter. Besides, BIS and FMC 
have also prepared their Citizens’ Charter which is available on the website of 
the Department.The Committee desire that action on fast track basis needs to be 
initiated to cover the remaining agencies/authorities who have not yet formulated 
Citizens’ Charter.  As the Charter incorporates citizens entitlement to public 
services, quality of service, access to information and time bound redressal of 
grievances, etc the Committee desire that wide publicity be given to the Citiz ens’ 
Charter so that people can take advantage of their entitlements etc. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
4.28 The Committee find that the main objective of the Consumer Welfare Fund 
was to generate consumer aware ness and strengthen Consumer Movement 
through various programmes funded out of Consumer Welfare Fund,  particularly 
in rural areas. The Committee would like to be informed about the number of 
schools/colleges in rural areas who have been provided assistanc e under the 
scheme Consumer Club. The Committee emphasize to monitor the various 
activities/projects funded out of the ‘Consumer Welfare Fund’ separately for rural 
areas so as to know about the fulfillment the objectives of creating the aforesaid 
Fund. 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER V 
 
NATIONAL ACTION PLAN ON CONSUMER PROTECTION 
 
 
5.1 Consequent upon the decision taken in the 50th National Development 
Council (NDC) meeting held on 21 December 2002, Consumer Protection was 
identified as a thrust area, and the Department of Co nsumer Affairs has been 
assigned evolving a National Action Plan for Consumer Awareness and 
Redressal and enforcement of Consumer Protection Act, 1986’. The State 
Governments have also been provided with a copy of the National Action Plan to 
enable them to  evolve their own State Action Plan to strengthen the consumer 
movement in the country. The National Action Plan proposes undertaking of 
consumer awareness programmes by educating more than 100 crore of people 
of various categories on various subject matte rs of consumer interest. A media 
Plan has also been prepared in consultation with the DAVP.   
5.2 The Department has further informed that the National Action Plan 
proposes to evolve a National Policy on consumer protection so that priority 
concerns of con sumers are addressed systematically by all stakeholders and 
other Ministries/ Departments of Central and State Governments. 
5.3 The Committee note that a National Action Plan which proposes to 
educate more than 100 crore of people of various categories on various subject 
matters of consumer interest has been prepared by the Department.  Besides, a 
media Plan has also been prepared in consultation with the DAVP. The State 
Governments have also been asked to evolve their own State Action Plans to 
strengthen the consumer movement in the country.  The Committee emphasize 
on the implementation of the targets fixed under the National Plan. Besides, 

State Governments may also be pursued further for the finalisation of State Plans 
expeditiously.   
5.4 The Committee further note that the Action Plan proposes to evolve a 
National Policy on consumer protection. The Committee recommend that the 
policy should be framed expeditiously so that it can provide necessary direction 
and guidelines to various Ministries of the Uni on as well as the State 
Governments in setting priorities for consumer awareness and consumer 
protection and also to make them more responsive to the causes of consumers.  
 
  

 
CHAPTER VI 
WORKING GROUPS 
 
6.1 The Committee have been informed that as per the  decision taken at the 
23rd meeting of the CCPC held on 16 July 2003, six Working Groups have been 
set up by the Department to consider ways and means for protecting interests of 
the consumers.  Names of the Working Groups alongwith their present status are 
given below:- 
 
S.No Name of the Working 
Group 
                     Status  
1. Food Safety Recommendations contained in the report of the 
Working Group have been forwarded to the MHFW 
and MFPI for consideration.  
Response from MHFW received. 
2. Misleading 
Advertisements  
The report of the Working Group is under 
finalization.  
3. DRUGS, 
Pharmaceuticals and 
Medical Devices/ 
Equipments 
Recommendations contained in the report of the 
Working Group have been forwarded to the 
concerned Ministry/Departments, for consideration. 
4. Consumer Health & 
Safety concerning  
Tobacco & Tobacco 
Products. 
Recommendations contained in the report of the 
Working Group have been forwarded to the 
concerned Ministries/Departments, for consideration.  
5. Counterfeit, Fake, 
Spurious, Contraband 
Products  
The report of the Working Group is under 
finalization. 
  
6. To formulate the 
following New Acts / 
make suggestions for 
improvement in the 
existing Acts relating to 
the interests of 
Consumers. 
The Committee while examining the Demands for 
Grants (2007-2008) has been informed that the draft 
amendment proposals have been prepared based 
on the recommendations of the Working Group.  
 
6.2 When the Committee enquired about the follow up action on the 
recommendations of a five Working Gr oups concerning consumer interests, the 
Department stated that the recommendations of the respective Working Groups 

have been circulated amongst the concerned 
Ministries/Departments,States/Agencies for their consideration. The Ministry of 
Information and B roadcasting is in the process of reviewing its policy and 
advertising codes for which they have constituted a Committee. The Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting has yet to finalize its decisions in this regard.  The 
Working Group on Misleading Advertisements will finalise its Report after looking 
at the decisions taken by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. The 
action taken reports in respect of the recommendations made by the Working 
Group on Food Safety, Working Group on Counterfeit, Fake, Spurious and 
Contraband products, Working Group on Consumer Health and Safety 
concerning Tobacco and Tobacco Products, Working Group on Drugs, 
Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices/Equipments are awaited from many of the 
agencies. On being asked whether thes e recommendations have been accepted 
and the changes brought in various statues, the Committee have been informed 
that recommendations made by the respective Working Groups are not binding 
on the Government and it is for the concerned agencies to consider these 
recommendations on merits.   
 
6.3 The Committee note that a number of Working Groups have been set up 
by the Government to consider ways and means of protecting the interests of 
consumers. Such Working Groups include, ‘Food Safety’, ‘Misleading 
Advertisement’, ‘Drugs, Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices/Equipments’, 
‘Consumer Health and Safety concerning Tobacco & Tobacco Products’, 
‘Counterfeit, Fake, Spurious and Contraband products’. A Working Group has 
also been set up for suggesting improvement i n the existing Acts relating to the 
interests of consumers.  The Committee understand that Reports of some of the 

Working Groups have been submitted and others are still under the consideration 
of the Government.  The Committee would like to be apprised of  the 
recommendations made by each of the Working Group set up for the purpose 
and the follow up action taken by the Government.  The Committee would like 
that the Department should regularly follow up the implementation of these 
recommendations with the concerned Ministries.  The Committee would also like 
to be informed of the steps taken by the Government in amending the relevant 
statutes, on the lines suggested by the Working Group for the purpose. 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER VII 
NATIONAL CONSUMER HELPLINE 
7.1 The Depar tment has sponsored a project on 15 March 2005 namely 
“National Consumer Help Line” with toll free facility 1800 -11-4000 in consultation 
with Delhi University for giving proper guidance to consumers in solving their 
grievances and to  provide information, advice and guidance to consumers about 
grievances against services and products. This help is accessible between 9.30 
a.m. and 5.30 p.m. from Monday to Saturday, from a landline (MTNL or BSNL) 
anywhere in India.  The services are available in English and Hindi at present. 
 
7.2 The National Consumer Helpline project was sanctioned by the 
Department at a total project cost of Rs.3,12,89,420 National Consumer Helpline 
is managed by the Department of Commerce, Delhi School of Economics, 
University of Delhi.  It was launched on 15 March 2005 on the occasion of World 
Consumer Rights Day. The National Consumer Helpline advises consumers to 
deal with problems related to defective products, deficiency in services and unfair 
trade practices.  The Helpline follows a three-tier approach, as given below:- 
(i) At the first instance, a consumer will be given information on his rights 
in a particular consumer problem and whom he/she should approach in 
the company concerned; 
 
(ii) In case the problem remains unresolved, he/sh e would be directed to 
industry level bodies or Chambers of Commerce and Industry, 
Regulator (as they exist in sectors like Insurance and Banking) or the 
Government officials in charge of the relevant industrial sector; 
 
(iii)  As a last resort, the consum er will be advised to take his case to the 
Consumer Courts under the Consumer Protection Act. 
 
   

 
7.3 When enquired about the achievement of this helpline in promoting 
consumers welfare in the country, the Department  in the written note furnished 
to the Committee stated that in its first year the total number of calls received 
were 62,409 (March 05 to March 06). Between April to September, 2006, 
National Consumer Helpline received 29,206 number of calls with an average of 
more than 2,500 calls per month.  National Consumer Helpline has received 
feedback from many consumers who have been able to solve their problems 
based on guidance provided by National Consumer Helpline.   
7.4 The Department has further informed that National Consumer Helpline 
has started an online redressal system with proactive companies.  This involves 
online transmission of data pertaining to complaints which pour in at NCH to the 
companies concerned in order to facilitate redressals, outside the Consumer 
Fora. This is being done with companies who have adopted a proactive approach 
to complaint redressal and NCH sends the requisite details by email to the 
designated authority of the company who revert by sending feedback to both the 
consumer and NCH.  
7.5 So far, Standard Chartered Bank , HDFC Bank, HSBC Bank, Citi Bank, 
ING Vysya Bank, ABN Amro Bank, PNB, Canara Bank and Banking 
Ombudsman, New Delhi, LG, Samsung and MTNL have joined the voluntary 
system.  

 
7.6 The Committee note that the Consumer Helpline was launched on             
15 March, 2005 on the occasion of World Consumer Rights Day for providing 
guidance, information and advice to consumers for redressal of their grievances 
against various services and products. According to the Ministry, the National 
Consumer Helpline advises consumers to deal with problems related to defective 
products, deficiency in services and unfair trade practices etc. The Committee, 
while welcoming the introduction of Consumer Helpline for the benefit of 
consumers, desire that the consumers be made aware  of this service in a big 
way through electronic and print media. They would like to be informed of the 
steps taken in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER VIII 
CONSUMER GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL CELL (CGRC) 
8.1 The Department has been receiving complaints coverin g a wide range of 
subjects against manufacturers of goods such as TV, Refrigerator, Motorcycle, 
Washing Machine, Cars etc. and also against Service Providers like Telecom, 
Banks, Electricity, Water Supply, Tourist companies and shortfall in 
supplies/expectations of the consumers for redressal. Up to 31 October 2006, 
6179 complaints were received by the Consumer Grievances Redressal Cell 
(CGRC) from all over the country. All the complaints received by CGRC are 
immediately forwarded to the Consumer Coordinati on Council for appropriate 
advice/guidance to the complainant or to the concerned manufacturers, 
companies etc for redressal of the grievances of the consumers.  As such, no 
complaints are pending at present in the Department for disposal. The 
Department s et up the Consumer Grievance Redressal Cell (CGRC) on 13 
February 2002 to redress the grievances of public, specially in the following 
categories. 
(i) Sale of defective goods or deficient services and charging of higher 
prices etc. 
 
(ii) General grievances  including those received from the Cabinet 
Secretariat and the PMO related to Consumer matters 
 
(iii) Attending to the consumer complaints appearing in the columns of 
the newspapers to the extent possible. 
 
8.2 When asked about the legal status of Redressa l Cell and whether it is 
competent to take suo motto action where it finds that the interests of consumers 
have been or being compromised, the Committee have been informed that the 
Cell does not have statutory powers.  The consumers have the option to go t o 

the Consumer Forum to get redressal of their grievances as per law. The 
Consumer Grievances Redressal Cell has been established by the Department 
of Consumer Affairs on           13 February 2002 to assist the consumers in 
seeking redressal of their grievances. 
8.3 To a query as to how does the mechanism of this Redressal Cell is 
different from various authorities set up under the Consumer Protection Act, 
1986, the Department informed that the Consumer Grievances Redressal Cell 
and the Consumer Coordinati on Council are taking up the complaints of 
consumers to the various authorities concerned including Manufacturers/Dealers, 
etc. The Core Centre also tries to resolve the complaints through mediation. The 
various authorities set up under the Consumer Protec tion Act have statutory 
powers. 
8.4 Asked whether Government have reviewed the working of this Cell and 
the steps Government propose to take to promote and popularize this 
mechanism of redressal of consumers’ complaints, the Committee were informed 
that the working of CGRC Cell is reviewed by the Government from time to time.  
The services of the Core Centre, National Consumer Help Line and VOICE are 
being utilized by the Government to promote and popularize a mechanism of 
redressal of consumers’ complaints .  The Government has been issuing 
advertisements in the leading newspapers and T.V. for creating greater 
awareness of consumers’ rights. 
8.5 The Committee note that Consumer Grievance Redressal Cell (CGRC) 
was set up by the Department during 2002 to redre ss the grievances of 
consumers relating to sale of defective goods, deficient services, overpricing, etc. 
During the five years of its operation the Cell has received 6179 complaints from 

all over the country.  All the complaints are forwarded to Consumer Coordination 
Council for appropriate advice/guidance to the complainant or to the concerned 
manufacturers, companies, etc for redressal of consumers complaints.  The 
Committee observe that the number of complaints received is too little 
specifically when t he Cell operates at the National level and receive complaints 
from all over the country.  The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to 
make the people aware of the working of the aforesaid Cell so that more and 
more consumers get redressal of their c omplaints through the Cell.  The 
Department should take all the desired action in this regard.   
8.6 The Committee further note that the working of the Cell is being reviewed 
by the Government from time to time.  In this regard, the Committee would like to  
be informed about the mechanism of getting feedback from consumers to know 
about the satisfaction level of the consumers. 
8.7 The Committee also note that the Consumer Grievance Redressal Cell 
also takes suo moto action by attending to complaints appearin g in the columns 
of the newspapers.  The Committee while appreciating the aforesaid mechanism 
of redressal of complaints of consumers would like to be informed about the 
number of complaints attended by the Cell as appeared in the various columns of 
newspapers so as to know the effectiveness of the aforesaid mechanism of 
redressal of consumer grievances.  Besides various grievances received from 
the Cabinet Secretariat and PMO related to consumer matters are also attended 
to.  The Committee would like to be  informed about the nature of issues received 
through Cabinet Secretariat and PMO.   
8.8 The Committee also find that Consumer Grievance Redressal Cell has 
been set up at the National level and is addressing to complaints of consumers 

received from all ove r the country.  The Committee feel that similar Consumer 
Grievance Redressal Cell need to be set up in various States.  The Committee 
would like that the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations should be 
persuaded to set up such Cells in each of the State/UT. 

 
 
CHAPTER IX 
 
CONSUMER RELATED ACTIVITIES OF BIS 
 
9.1 To meet the growing expectations of consumers in the country, BIS has 
established a separate Department with a specific mandate for providing 
consumer protection and welfare and dealing w ith public grievances. This 
Department maintains liaison with Central Consumer Protection Council, and 
consumer associations, and co -ordinates with the Ministry of Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution on consumer issues. It is guided in its activities by a 
Consumer Policy Advisory Committee which advises BIS on all policy matters 
relating to efficient discharge of the functions and for making standardization and 
certification activities user -friendly. A well defined procedure has been 
established for ha ndling complaints. The complaints registered are monitored 
regularly.  
 
9.2 BIS organizes a large number of awareness programmes for office 
bearers of Consumer Organizations and for consumers all over the country. 
Mass media like TV, radio, other electroni c media, newspapers, hoardings etc. 
are used to create awareness among consumers regarding standards, quality 
and ISI mark. 
9.3 On the path of `total customer satisfaction’, BIS had set up a single -
window Information and facilitation Cell at its headquarters i n New Delhi which 
became operational since 1997 with the sole aim of providing variety of 
information /assistance to Indian industries, particularly in Small Scale Sector. 
 
 

 
9.4 When the Committee enquired whether proactive steps like laying down 
specifications and making BIS standards compulsory would eliminate fake, 
spurious and contraband products, the Department stated as under: - 
   
“At present, 110 items are under mandatory certification. BIS has 
published 9,540 number of product specifications which spe cify the 
requirements of specific products taking into account the concerns of all 
stakeholders like consumers, manufacturers, research organizations, 
regulatory bodies etc. which are part of the technical committee deciding 
on such specifications.  The im plementation of such specifications is 
voluntary in nature.  Following  aspects affecting the public  interests,   
decide whether the product should be brought under mandatory 
certification :- 
 
(i) Consumer Health 
(ii) Safety, Security 
(iii) Environment, Infrastructure, 
(iv) Protection of the local population against spurious foreign 
made goods and  
(v) Items of mass consumption”  
 
9.5 The Department has further informed that BIS has taken pro -active steps 
to bring 71 more items under mandatory certification and the proposal is un der 
consideration. 
9.6 When the Committee enquired whether the Government should devise a 
mechanism to get a product tested in their own labs on account of prohibitive 
cost where a consumer does not exercise the option, the Department stated that 
the provision in the Consumer Protection Act requiring a consumer to pay for the 
test/analysis of the goods where defects in the goods have been alleged in the 
complaint has been kept to avoid filing of vexatious and frivolous complaints. The 
Government do not have laboratories where such tests can be performed free of 
cost. It may, however be stated here that when a complainant succeeds in the 

case, he is liable to get back the testing fee, etc. paid besides other cost as may 
be decided by the Consumer Forum. 
Hall Marking of Gold Jewellery 
9.7 BIS has been nominated as the sole agency in India for hallmarking of 
Gold Jewellery. The Hallmarking Scheme was formally launched by BIS in April 
2000 on voluntary basis. Jewellers desirous of operating the BIS Hallmarking 
Scheme for gold Jewellery have to apply to  BIS and get BIS Certification under 
the Product Certification Scheme. A BIS certified jeweller will have the license to 
get this Jewellery assayed and hallmarked by any BIS recognized Assaying and 
Hallmarking Centr e. The recognition of Assaying and Hallmarking Centres is 
done by BIS after ensuring that the Assaying and Hallmarking Centre are 
following BIS criteria for hallmarking, international norms for sampling, assaying 
and hallmarking and also have adequate test ing facilities, trained and competent 
manpower. The norms for recognition of these centers have been aligned with 
those in other parts of the world, in order to ensure the acceptability of the 
jewellery with ‘Indian Hallmark’ world over 50 hallmarking cent res for gold have 
been recognized by BIS in the country. The Department has further stated that it 
is proposed to make gold hallmarking mandatory in India by the year 2008 in 
order to protect the Indian consumers from being exploited year after year 
through the sale of gold ornaments of carat lower than paid for by the consumer.  
In the year 2005-2007 a pilot project on the scheme has been launched at a cost 
of Rs. 5.75 crore. Under this project, some incentives/assistance/training will be 
provided for sett ing up of 71 hallmarking centers. This would ensure that 
adequate infrastructure is in place for assaying gold ornaments by the time 
hallmarking becomes mandatory. 

 
 
9.8 The Committee are concerned to note that only few items are 
covered in mandatory certification by BIS.  Further, BIS has published 9540 
number of product specifications which specify the requirements of 
specific products taking into account the concerns of all stakeholders like 
consumers, manufacturers, research organizations, regulatory b odies, etc. 
which are part of the technical committee deciding on such specifications.  
The Committee note that factors such as Consumer Health, Safety, 
Security, Environment, Infrastructure, Protection of local population 
against spurious foreign made goo ds and items of mass consumption are 
taken into consideration while deciding whether to include a product under 
mandatory certification or otherwise.  The Committee have further been 
informed that as against 9540 product certifications, only 110 have been 
covered and 71 more items are proposed to be covered under mandatory 
certification.   The Committee are not satisfied with the pace with which the 
items are classified under mandatory certification.  The Committee desire 
that more items should be brought under mandatory certification especially 
in regard to consumer health, safety, security and items of mass 
consumption.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken 
by the Government in this regard.                  
9.9 The Committee note that Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery Scheme was 
launched by BIS in April, 2000 on voluntary basis and 45 hallmarking 
centres for gold jewellery have been recognized by BIS in the country.  The 
Government have now launched a Pilot Project at a cost of Rs. 5.75 crore to 
give       incentives/assistance/training to Hallmarking Centres. The 

Committee have been informed that there is a proposal to make gold 
hallmarking mandatory by 2008. The Committee feel that making 
hallmarking mandatory will further protect consum ers from being exploited 
through sale of gold ornaments of lower carratage than what they have 
paid for. For this, adequate infrastructure in the form of Assaying and 
Hallmarking Centers are required on a large scale. The Committee desire 
that work on the pilot project launched for providing incentives / assistance 
/ training for setting up additional Hallmarking Centers be expedited so that 
adequate infrastructure for assaying and hallmarking gold jewellery is 
available when the scheme is made mandatory.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER X 
 
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT. 
10.1 The Committee observed that Indian economy is witnessing tremendous/ 
exponential growth in the Capital and Commodity Markets.  Cases are not rare, 
where the consumers have  been cheated and there has not been any effective 
mechanism to redress their grievances. When the Committee wanted to know 
whether the consumers who have invested or propose to invest in any financial 
instrument would come within the definition/purview of  a consumer, the Ministry 
in a written reply stated that as the law stands today, prospective investors e.g. 
applicants for shares etc. are not covered within the definition of consumer as 
provided in the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. However, after the t ransactions 
are over and the shares etc.  are allotted in the name of the investor, one 
becomes a consumer.  Thereafter such person can move the Consumer Forum 
with regard to any dispute/grievance.  A proposal to bring persons such as 
prospective investors  within the definition of consumer is under consideration.  
This was one of the recommendations of the Working Group. 
10.2 When the Committee enquired whether there is a need to withdraw levy of 
fee prescribed before a complaint is filed under the Consumer Protection Act, the 
Department replied that the experience of the Department of Consumer Affairs 
has been that the system of payment of fees for filing complaints in Consumer 
Forums has been working well and hence there appears no necessity of 
withdrawing the levy of  fee for  filing  complaints.  The  law  already  exempts 
poorest of the poor viz. Antyodya Anna Yojana Card holders from the 
requirement of payment of fee for filing complaints upto Rs.1 lakh. 

 
 
10.3 When the Committee enquired whether refusa l to issue bills/cash 
memo/receipt etc. by the seller or service provider is actionable under the 
present Act, the Ministry in their reply stated that refusal or failure to issue 
bills/cash memo/receipt etc. is proposed to be covered as one of the unfair t rade 
practices under the Consumer Protection Act to protect the interest of 
consumers.  
10.4 The Committee have noted that a number of manufacturers and traders 
resort to different types of games and schemes for promoting sale of their 
products. In many cases, the consumers are cheated as there is no remedy to a 
consumer to claim compensation in the event of cheating. There is no regulating 
mechanism for such games and shows. When the Committee enquired whether 
the Government have thought of any action for including regulating mechanism 
against manufacturers and traders resorting to different types of games and 
schemes for promoting sale of their products and thereby cheating the consumer, 
the Department has stated that there is a proposal to amend Section 2 (1)(r)(3) of 
the Consumer Protection Act to effectively protect the interest of consumers from 
such practices of the trade and industry.  
10.5 At present, services rendered on consideration are included within the 
purview of the present Act. There have bee n deficiencies on the part of 
Municipalities in providing services, which are mandatory in nature, such as, 
garbage clearance, health and medical service, drinking water, drainage 
including strong water drainage, street light etc.  On being asked by the 
Committee whether the Government propose to include mandatory Municipal 

Services within the ambit of this Act, the Department replied that no such 
proposal is under consideration. Though a recommendation was made by the 
Working Group to the above effect.  On  consultation with the Central 
Ministries/Departments, State Governments and National Consumer Disputes 
Redressal Commission (NCDRC), the matter was reconsidered. Since it has lot 
of administrative and financial implications and the service providers from the 
State Governments as well as many of the Central Ministries/ Departments 
strongly expressed their inability to provide expected standards due to various 
resource/capacity constraints they face and it was felt that this is not the 
appropriate stage to m ake such a provision and it was decided to defer the 
proposal.  
10.6 The Committee have observed that the booming economy of the country 
witnessed an upsurge in the prices of housing.  Taking undue advantage of 
demand supply equilibrium, the various Housin g Authorities in Government and 
private sector are attracting promising investors/consumers.  Recently, DDA, 
GDA, Greater Noida and HUDA announced their housing schemes for different 
categories of consumers.  Surprisingly, brochure containing information a bout 
the scheme were priced between Rs. 160 to 1000. The Committee feel that this 
is a monopolistic trend especially in housing sector and amounts to cheating of 
consumers.  The Committee have noticed similar trend in admission to 
professional colleges suc h as Engineering, Medical, Pharmacy, Architect etc. 
where not only the prospectus are highly priced but the counseling conducted for 
induction into such courses are also exorbitant and varies from Rs. 1000 to Rs. 
5000 in some of the cases.  When enquired w hether any action is proposed to 
be taken against these Government and private agencies who are cheating 

consumers in the name of shortage of housing and education in the country and 
pricing their brochures and prospectus exorbitantly, the Department state d that 
in the current liberalized regime, it is the market forces which should determine 
the price at which a good or a service is made available to a potential consumer.   
10.7 In the era of E -transaction, there has been aggressive marketing and 
sales of product and services via telephonic, internet and other modes of 
transaction.  In these cases the consumer does not have any opportunity of 
examining the products or service prior to purchase.  Fleecing or looting of 
consumer cannot be ruled out in such tr ansactions. There is a need to provide 
some period say 30 days within which the service provider may withdraw the 
goods or services and refund the consideration, if paid within the stipulated 
period.  This will provide an opportunity for consumer to return  the product or 
seek withdrawal of service and consideration will be paid without having to file a 
complaint in the Consumer Forum. When the Committee asked whether there is 
any proposal to protect the interests of the consumer in case he wants to return a 
product or seek withdrawal of service without having to file a complaint in the 
Consumer Forum, the Department in reply stated that there is a proposal to 
introduce a provision to tackle these kinds of transactions. 
10.8 The Committee have been informed t hat payment towards analysis/test of 
any goods, acts as deterrent in asserting one’s rights under Consumer Protection 
Act, 1986.  Cases/instances cannot be ruled out where a consumer does not 
exercise the option of getting a product tested on account of pr ohibitive cost. On 
being asked by the Committee whether there is a proposal to remove the 
provision of payment towards analysis/test of any goods and whether the 
Government proposes to devise a mechanism to get lab test undertaken in its 

own labs, the Government in their reply stated that the provision in the Consumer 
Protection Act requiring a consumer to pay for the test/analysis of the goods 
where defect in the goods have been alleged in the complaint has been kept to 
avoid filing of vexatious and frivol ous complaints. The Government do not have 
laboratories where such tests can be performed free of cost. It may, however, be 
stated here that when a complainant succeeds in the case, he is liable to get 
back the testing fee etc. paid besides other cost as m ay be decided by the 
Consumer Forum. 
10.9 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that there are situations 
where the consumers have no choice but to accept unilateral one -sided terms of 
contracts (Corporation, Firms, courier service, financial institutions and DSA) 
while purchasing goods or availing services .  These unilateral provisions also 
generally disclaim and deny any responsibility for serious defects, deficiencies 
and delays (for example; goods once sold will not be taken back and somet imes 
restrict the liability for loss of goods, articles etc. to a paltry sum of Rs. 100 to 
1000 only, irrespective of the value of the goods lost or misplaced or its potential 
to cause loss).  Similarly, certain manufacturers and service providers also 
restrict their liability to a short period of time, (for instance, in warranty cards) 
even though the durable life of the goods sold or the service performed are 
designed for a much longer time.  All these instances undoubtedly point towards 
exploitation of c onsumers.  There is no remedy available under the present 
Consumer Laws.  
10.10 When the Committee enquired whether the Government propose to 
amend the Consumer Laws in this regard, the Department stated that any 
contract or any condition of contract betwe en two parties of unequal bargaining 

capacities, if they are one sided, unilateral or unfair to the weaker party, such 
contracts/ or conditions of contracts are unconstitutional, illegal and 
unenforceable. This is the ruling of the Supreme Court in the cas e of LIC vs. 
CERC (AIR 1995 SC 1811). Hence, there is a proposal to cover all these unfair 
terms of contracts as per the law laid down by the Apex Court, in the form of 
unfair trade practices in the definition itself.  
10.11 The Committee have also been in formed that many telemarketing 
companies, credit card companies etc. share the data of a consumer without his 
knowledge and pass it on to other agencies.  This needs to be capped and 
disclosure of information given in confidence by the consumer needs to be  
included as deficiency of service. 
10.12 Regarding other initiatives taken by the Department in the field of 
Consumer Affairs, the Committee have been informed that a National Consumer 
Product Safety Commission is proposed to be set up by the Department w hich is 
still in the proposal stage.  The broader objective of this scheme is to put in place 
a Commission/Authority through an Act of Parliament for ensuring safe goods 
and services in the market to the consumers on the pattern approved by some 
developed countries of the world. The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on 
Consumer Product Safety was signed between the Department of Consumer 
Affairs and the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission in January, 
2006.  The details of activities to be under taken under this MoU have yet to be 
finalized between the two sides.  The Department of Consumer Affairs is 
contemplating the setting up of an Authority, which would inter alia perform the 
role similar to United States Consumer Product Safety Commission. 
 

10.13 The Committee find that as the law stands today, a prospective 
investor i.e. applicants for shares, etc. is not covered within the definition of 
consumer as provided for in the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. However, 
after the transactions are over and the shares etc. are allotted in the name of 
investor, one becomes a consumer.  Thereafter such person can move the 
Consumer Forum with regard to any dispute/grievance. It has further been 
brought to the notice of the Committee that this was the recommen dation of 
one of the Working Groups and a proposal to bring persons such as 
prospective investor within the definition of consumer is under 
consideration of the Government. The Committee are of the view that cases 
are not rare where a prospective investor has been cheated and there has 
not been any effective mechanism to redress his grievances.  The 
Committee hope that in the interest of the consumers at large, the 
Government would make efforts to bring such people within the definition of 
consumer without any further loss of time.  
 
10.14 The Committee note that the Consumer Protection Act has been 
enacted for providing simple, quick and inexpensive justice to all 
consumers.  The Committee are aware that exemption has been given to 
“Antyodya Anna Yojana” be neficiaries from payment of fee for filing of 
complaints upto Rs. 1 lakh.  The Committee feel that as consumer 
protection is at a nascent stage and also as the fee charges are not enough 
to deter frivolous litigants, there is no need to levy fee for filing  of 
complaints by consumers. 
 

10.15 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that in many instances, 
the seller or service provider either refuses or do not issue bills, cash memo, 
receipt etc. to the consumer on purchase.  As a result, no action able claim can 
be filed under Consumer Protection Act.  The Committee have been informed 
that the refusal or failure to issue bills/cash memo/receipt etc. is proposed to be 
covered as one of the unfair trade practices under the Consumer Protection Act.  
The Committee desire that the Act be amended to take care of above infirmities. 
 
10.16 The Committee find that manufacturers and traders resort to different 
types of schemes to promote sale of their products.  Sometimes there is 
compromise on the quality of the products to compensate the cost of providing 
attractive schemes. The consumers are thus cheated, as they do not get the 
value of the money spent to purchase the product.  The Committee find that at 
present there is no regulating mechanism in this regard. The Committee note that 
the Department propose to amend Section 2(I)(r)(3) of the Consumer Protection 
Act to effectively protect the interests of consumers from such practices of trade 
and industry.  The Committee would like to emphasize to finalize the  aforesaid 
proposal expeditiously so as to protect the interests of consumers. 
10.17 The Committee note that services rendered on consideration are 
included within the purview of the present Consumer Protection Act. In the 
opinion of the Committee, one of the major problem areas has been 
deficiencies on the part of Municipalities in providing services which are 
mandatory in nature.  These services include health, medical service, 
garbage disposal, drinking water, drainage, etc.  The Committee have been 
informed that one of the Working Groups set up in connection with 
protection of consumer interest had recommended to bring all mandatory 

Municipal services within the ambit of this Act.  However, the proposal, 
after due consideration and consultation, was fina lly deferred as the 
service providers from State Governments as well as many Central 
Ministries/Departments expressed their inability to provide expected 
standards due to various resources and capacity constraints.  The 
Committee are pained to note that the Government preferred administration 
and financial constraints over the interests of consumers and deferred the 
proposal, on the pretext that this is not the appropriate stage for such a 
provision.  The Committee feel that the reasons stated above for def erring 
the proposal are merely delaying tactics on the part of both Central and 
State Governments who are shirking their responsibility towards citizens 
and consumers and denying them a right to good living. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the  
recommendation of the Working Group to 
include all mandatory Municipal services within the ambit of this Act be 
implemented in letter and spirit so as to ensure best services to the 
consumers. 
10.18 The Committee have taken note of the upsurge in the prices i n 
housing sector consequent upon booming economy.  Taking undue 
advantage of imbalance in demand supply equilibrium, various housing 
authorities in Government and private sectors are inducing consumers.  
For instance, recently DDA, GDA, Greater Noida and H UDA announced 
their housing schemes for different categories of consumers.  Surprisingly, 
the brochure containing information about the various schemes of these 
authorities were priced between Rs. 160 to Rs. 1000.  There has been 
similar experience noticed  in the admission to professional colleges for 

courses such as engineering, architect, medical, pharmacy and other 
professional courses where not only the prospectus are highly priced but 
also the counseling conducted for these courses are also at exorbita nt 
rates and varies from Rs. 1,000 to Rs. 5,000 in some of the cases.  The 
Committee do not subscribe to the view of the Government that in the 
current liberalized regime, it is the market forces which should determine 
the price at which a good or a servic e is made available to a potential 
consumer.  The Government have further stated that the housing 
board/promoter of housing societies are at liberty in fixing the prices for 
different categories of consumers.  Government’s role would limit to 
ensuring fair competition and in removing factors that impede the play of 
market forces.  The Committee are of the view that in a welfare State, 
Government should ensure that all sections of the society are treated alike 
and there is no monopolistic tendency by which a  citizen is exploited.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the monopolistic tendency on the part of 
housing boards which take undue advantage of shortage of housing and 
exploit the gullible consumers needs to be checked. The Committee desire 
that besides ensuring fair competition, the Government should intervene in 
the matter and not let Housing Boards/Promoters of Housing Societies get 
away with this easily.  An affordable token money not exceeding Rs. 100 
can be charged in above cases to ensure maximum  participation.  The 
Committee also want that the matter regarding price of prospectus and 
counselling should be taken up at the highest level with the Department of 
Higher Education and Department of Urban Development.  The Committee 
should be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 

 
10.19 In the era of e -transaction, there has been aggressive marketing and sale 
of products and services by internet, e -mail, telephonically and other means of 
transactions.  In these cases, the consumer does not have any opportunity of 
examining the products or services prior to the purchase.  Fleecing or looting of 
consumers cannot be ruled out in such transactions.  At times, no opportunity or 
time limit is provided to a consumer within which he may withdraw goods or 
services and get the refund of money already paid.  The Committee feel that 
there is a need to provide an opportunity to a consumer to return the product or 
seek withdrawal of service and get back the money paid without having to file 
complaint in the Consume r Fora.  The Committee have been informed that 
Government propose to provide a suitable provision in the Consumer Protection 
Act, 1986 to tackle such kinds of transactions.  The Committee desire that the 
Act be amended to take care of these eventualities.  
10.20 It has been observed that charges levied for analysis of any sample/test of 
any goods, acts as a deterrent in asserting one’s right under the Consumer 
Protection Act.  The Committee note that this provision has been incorporated in 
the Act to avoid filing of frivolous complaints by miscreants.  Yet, instances 
cannot be ruled out where a consumer does not exercise the option of getting a 
product tested on account of prohibitive cost.  The Committee note that in case a 
complainant succeeds in the case,  he is liable to get back the testing fee paid 
besides other cost as decided by the Consumer Forum. However, this 
mechanism of levying fee, deters many genuine consumers from actually getting 
the samples/goods tested on their own.  The Committee desire tha t in the event 
of dispute being less than Rs. 50,000 or less, the Government should get test 
undertaken in their own labs and without charging any fee thereon.  For this, the 

Government should set up adequate laboratories where such tests can be 
performed free of cost.  
 
10.21 The Committee have observed that at times the consumers do not 
have any choice but to accept unilateral one -sided terms of contract while 
purchasing gadgets like Washing Machine, Fax, Telephone instrument, 
Fridge etc.  These unilatera l provisions also generally disclaim and deny 
any responsibility for serious defects, deficiencies and delays.  Similarly, 
certain manufacturers and service providers also restrict their liability to a 
shorter period of time even though the durable life of  the goods sold or the 
service performed are designed for a much longer time.  The Committee 
note that all these instances, undoubtedly point towards exploitation of 
consumers and there is hardly any redressal mechanism available under 
Consumer Protection Laws.  The Committee have been informed that as 
per a recent ruling of the Supreme Court, any contract or any condition of 
contract between two parties of unequal bargaining capacities, if they are 
one sided, unilateral or unfair to the weaker party, such contracts or 
conditions of contracts are unconstitutional, illegal and unenforceable.  
The Committee have been further informed that there is a proposal to cover 
all these unfair terms of contract as per the law laid down by the Apex 
Court, in the form of unfair trade practices in the definition itself.  The 
Committee hope and trust that the Government would review the definition 
of unfair trade practices in the light of the above and the Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986 amended suitably.         
10.22 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that certain 
telemarketing companies, credit cards, insurance, banks and financial 

institutions, mobile companies etc. share the personal data profile of a 
consumer without one’s knowledge and at times on conside ration to other 
agencies.  As the unsolicited telephone calls invade the privacy of an 
individual, a demand has been raised from many quarters to include the 
disclosure of information given in confidence by a consumer as 
deficiencies in service.  Taking in to consideration the inconvenience 
caused to a consumer, the Government is considering a proposal to 
explicitly cover such practices as a form of deficiency in service.  The 
Committee recommend that the Consumer Protection Act be amended in 
the light of above. 

 
10.23 The Committee note that Government propose to set up a Authority 
on the lines of USA’s Consumer Product Safety Commission in order to 
protect the interests of consumers from various problems including the 
menace of counterfeit, fake, spurious and contraband products.  The 
Committee hope and trust that such an independent authority would be set 
up at the earliest in the interest of the consumers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW Delhi      
 Devendra Prasad Yadav 
28 June, 2007        Chairman 
7 Asadha, 1929 (Saka)     Standing Committee on Food, Consumer 
                                                                     Affairs and Public Distribution
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Appendix I  
INFORMATION REGARDING FUNCTIONAL/NON-FUNCTIONAL 
(STATE COMMISSION/DISTRICT FORUMS) 
 
(Updated on 26/03/2007) 
Sl. 
No. 
States Whether SC 
Functional 
or Non-
functional 
No. of 
District For 
a 
Functional Non-
functional 
As on 
1. Andhra Pradesh Yes 29 29 0 31.12.2006 
2. A & N Islands Yes 1 1 0 31.3.2006 
3. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Yes 16 13 3 31.12.2006 
4. Assam Yes 23 20 3 30.6.2006 
5. Bihar Yes 38 35 3 30.9.2006 
6. Chandigarh Yes 2 2 0 31.12.2006 
7. Chattisgarh Yes 16 15 1 31.12.2006 
8. D & N Haveli Yes 1 1 0 31.12.2006 
9. Daman & Diu Yes 2 2 0 31.12.2006 
10. Delhi Yes 10 10 0 31.12.2006 
11. Goa Yes 2 2 0 31.12.2006 
12. Gujrat Yes 26 24 2 30.6.2006 
13. Haryana Yes 19 19 0 31.01.2007 
14. Himachal 
Pradesh 
Yes 12 12 0 31.12.2006 
15. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Yes 2 2 0 30.6.2006 
16. Jharkhand Yes 22 22 0 31.12.2005 
17. Karnataka Yes 30 30 0 31.12.2006 
18. Kerala Yes 14 13 1 30.6.2006 
19. Lakshadweep Yes 1 1 0 31.12.2006 
20. Madhya Pradesh Yes 45 45 0 30.9.2006 
21. Maharashtra Yes 38 38 0 31.12.2006 
22. Manipur Yes 8 8 0 30.6.2000 
23. Meghalaya Yes 7 7 0 30.6.2005 
24. Mizoram Yes 8 8 0 31.12.2006 
25. Nagaland Yes 11 8 3 30.6.2006 
26. Orissa Yes 31 31 0 31.12.2006 
27. Pondicherry Yes 1 1 0 31.12.2006 
28. Punjab Yes 17 17 0 31.12.2006 
29. Rajasthan Yes 33 32 1 31.12.2006 
30. Sikkim Yes 4 4 0 31.12.2006 
31. Tamilnadu Yes 30 27 3 31.12.2006 
32. Tripura Yes 4 4 0 31.12.2006 
33. Uttar Pradesh Yes 70 68 2 31.12.2006 
34. Uttaranchal Yes 13 13 0 31.01.2007 
35. West Benal Yes 21 21 0  
 Total  607 585 22  
 
 
 
 
 

 
Appendix-II 
 
INFORMATION REGARDING VACANCY POSITION IN THE STATE 
COMMISSIONS AND DISTRICT FORA 
 
(Updated on 26/03/2007)  
State Commission District Forum Sl. 
No. States 
President Member President Member 
As on 
1 Andhra Pradesh 0 0 4 5 31.12.2006 
2 A & N Islands 0 0 0 0 31.3.2006 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 1 0 0 16 31.01.2007 
4 Assam 1 1 2 4 30.6.2006 
5 Bihar 0 0 3 17 30.9.2006 
6 Chandigarh 0 0 0 0 28.02.2007 
7 Chattisgarh 0 0 4 5 31.12.2006 
8 D & N Haveli 0 0 0 1 31.01.2007 
9 Daman &Diu 0 0 0 0 31.12.2006 
10 Delhi 0 0 1 2 28.02.2007 
11 Goa 0 0 0 0 31.12.2006 
12 Gujrat 0 1 5 13 31.12.2006 
13 Haryana 0 2 2 6 28.02.2007 
14 Himachal Pradesh 0 0 0 6 31.12.2006 
15 Jammu & Kashmir  0 0 0 0 31.10.2006 
16 Jharkhand 0 0 3 2 31.10.2006 
17 Karnataka 0 0 4 1 31.01.2007 
18 Kerala 0 1 6 3 30.6.2006 
19 Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 31.01.2007 
20 Madhya Pradesh 0 0 0 17 31.01.2007 
21 Maharashtra 0 0 1 3 31.12.2006 
22 Manipur 0 2 0 0 30.6.2006 
23 Meghalaya 0 0 0 0 30.6.2005 
24 Mizoram 0 0 1 7 31.12.2006 
25 Nagaland 0 0 0 0 30.6.2006 
26 Orissa 0 0 2 2 31.01.2007 
27 Pondicherry 0 0 0 1 31.12.2006 
28 Punjab 0 0 0 1 28.02.2007 
29 Rajasthan 0 0 4 31 28.02.2007 
30 Sikkim 0 0 0 2 31.12.2006 
31 Tamilnadu 0 1 2 21 31.12.2006 
32 Tripura 0 0 0 0 31.12.2006 
33 Uttar Pradesh 0 0 2 9 31.01.2007 
34 Uttarakhand 0 0 1 0 28.02.2007 
35 West Bengal 0 1 2 6 31.12.2006 
  TOTAL 2 9 49 181   

Appendix – III 
 
STATEMENT SHOWING THE HONORARIUM/REMUNERATION BEING PAID TO 
HON’BLE PRESIDENTS & MEMBERS OF STATE COMMISSIONS AND 
PRESIDENTS & MEMEBRS OF DISTRICT FORUMS 
  
 
STATE  COMMISSIONS DISTRICT  FORA Sl.N
o. 
NAME OF THE 
STATES Hon’ble 
Presidents 
Members Presidents Members 
      
1. Andhra Pradesh Salary of High 
Court Judge. 
 
 
Rs.10000/- p.m.  salary of 
District Judge - 
Pension 
 
 
Rs.7000/- p.m.  
      
2. Arunachal  
Pradesh 
Rs.500/- per 
Day sitting 
Rs.400/- per 
day’s sitting 
Rs.400/- per 
day’s sitting 
Rs.300/-per 
day’s sitting 
      
3. A & N Islands Part-time – 
Rs.1000/- Per 
day sitting. 
 
 
Part time – 
Rs.400/- per day 
sitting 
Part time – 
Rs.500/- per 
day sitting. 
Part time – 
Rs.250/- per 
day 
      
4. Assam Whole Time – 
High Court 
Judge. 
 
Part-time – 
Rs.200/- Per 
day  
 
Part time – 
Rs.250/- per 
sitting. 
Whole time – 
salary of 
District Judge 
 
 
Part time – 
Rs.250/- per 
sitting. 
      
5. Bihar Whole Time – 
High Court 
Judge. 
+ Allowances 
less Pension  
+ Staff Car 
Whole Time – 
Rs.3,000/- p.m. 
 
 
Whole time 
Last Pay – 
Pension of 
District Judge. 
 
 
Whole time – 
Rs.2,000/- p.m. 
 
 
6. Chandigarh Rs.26,000/- + 
allowance & 
perks less 
Pension 
 
Rs.10,000/- p.m.
 
(consolidated) + 
Conveyance 
Rs.150/- per day 
sitting 
Last pay 
drawn as 
District Judge 
minus Pension 
Rs.3500/- p.m. 
for personal 
car 
Rs.9,000/- p.m. 
(consolidated) 
+ Rs.150/ - per 
day sitting 
 
      
7. Chattisgarh High Court 
Judge salary – 
Pension 
Hon. Rs.500/- 
per day  
Conv. Rs.100/- 
per day  
District Judge 
salary 
Hon. Rs.250/- 
per day 
Conv. Rs.50/- 
per day 

8. Daman & Diu and  
D & N Haveli  
Whole Time – 
High Court 
Judge. 
 
Part-time – 
Rs.400/- Per 
day  
Whole Time – 
Rs.3,000/- p.m. 
 
Part time – 
Rs.300/- per day  
Whole time – 
salary of 
District Judge 
 
Part time – 
Rs.300/- per 
day  
Whole time – 
Rs.2,000/- p.m. 
 
Part time – 
Rs.200/- per 
day 
      
9. Delhi Whole Time – 
High Court 
Judge. 
(Rs.26,000/- 
fixed) 
 
Rs.10,000/- p.m. 
Honorarium + 
Conveyance 
Rs.5000/ per 
month. 
salary of 
District Judge  
(Rs.18400-
22400) 
 
Rs.9,000/- p.m. 
(Honorarium). 
+ Rs.5000/ per 
month. 
      
10. Goa  Honorarium – 
Rs.400/- Per 
day 
 
To and fro air 
ticket  
Rs.300/- per day 
sitting.          
               +  
Rs.75/- 
conveyance 
allowance 
Rs.300/- per 
day sitting.  + 
Rs.75/- 
conveyance 
allowance 
Rs.200/- per 
day sitting + 
Rs.75/- 
conveyance 
allowance 
(maximum 
Rs.2000/-p.m.) 
11. Gujarat Whole Time – 
High Court 
Judge. 
 
 
Whole Time – 
Rs.6,500/- p.m. 
 
Part time – 
Rs.400/- per day 
sitting 
Whole time – 
salary of 
District Judge 
 
 
Whole time – 
Rs.3,000/- p.m. 
 
Part time – 
Rs.150/- per 
day sitting. 
      
12. Haryana Whole Time – 
High Court 
Judge. 
 
 
 Rs.500/- per 
day for the 
sitting. 
Whole time – 
salary of 
District Judge 
Scale 
Rs.18750-
22850 
 
 
Rs.300/- per 
day for the 
sitting. 
      
 
 13. 
Himachal Pradesh Last pay drawn 
as High Court 
Judge minus 
Pension. 
Rs.600/- per day 
sitting 
Pay scale of 
District & 
Session 
Judge. 
 
Rs.500/- per 
day sitting 
      
14. Jammu & Kashmir Rs.26,000/- Rs.6,000/- Salary Rs.4,000/- 
      
15. Jharkhand High Court 
Judge less 
Pension -  
Rs.44,760/- - 
8362 p.m,. 
Rs.10,000/- p.m. 
+ 
Rs.400/- 
conveyance 
Salary of 
District Judge 
less Pension. 
Rs.7,500/- p.m. 
+ Rs.400/- 
Conveyance  
     
 
 
16. Karnataka Last pay drawn Honorarium Last Pay Rs.5500/- + 

as High Court 
Judge + other 
allowances & 
perks. 
Rs.8,500/- p.m. 
+ Rs.1500/- 
conveyance 
allowance  
 
drawn as a 
District Judge 
+ Rs.400/-  
conveyance. 
 
Rs.500/- p.m. 
Conveyance. 
 
      
17. Kerala Rs.41,820/- p.m. 
(High Court 
Judge) 
 
Whole Time – 
Rs.10,000/- p.m. 
+ Rs.1500/- per 
month 
conveyance 
allowance 
 
 
Whole time – 
salary of 
District Judge 
(please see 
the statement) 
 
 
Part time – 
Rs.400/- per 
day  
Whole time – If 
retd. DJ, Pay-
Pension- 
Rs.6500/-. 
 
      
18. Lakshadweep Rs.500/- Per 
day or 
Rs.2000/- p.m. 
whichever is 
more 
 
Rs.150/- per day  Rs.300/- per 
sitting subject 
to a minimum 
of Rs.1000/- 
p.m.  
Whole time– 
Rs.100/- per 
day 
       
19. Madhya Pradesh High Court 
Judge salary – 
Rs.26,000/- + 
allowance. 
 
Rs.500/- per day 
sitting + 
Rs.100/- 
Conveyance 
allowance 
salary of 
District Judge 
– Rs.15100-
400-18200 
 
Rs.250/- per 
day sitting + 
Rs.50/- 
conveyance 
allowance 
      
 
 
 
20. Maharashtra As High Court 
Judge (Retd.) 
 
 Honorarium – 
Rs.500/- per day 
+ Conveyance 
Rs.75/- per day 
or Rs.10000/- 
on full time 
basis. 
Gross salary 
Rs.18,400/- 
p.m. 
 (As District 
Judge) 
 
Whole time – 
Gross salary - 
Rs.8000/- p.m. 
Or 
Part time – 
Rs.400/- per 
day 
      
21. Manipur Rs.1000/- per 
sitting as 
prescribed by 
the State Govt 
from time to 
time.  
Rs.4,000/- 
p.m. as 
prescribed by 
the State Govt.
 
 
Rs.4,000/- 
p.m. as 
prescribed by 
the State 
Govt.  
Rs.2500/- 
p.m. as 
prescribed by 
the State 
Govt.  
 
22. Meghalaya Whole Time – if 
sitting high court 
Judge – High 
Court Judge.  If 
retd. – 
Rs.5,000/- p.m. 
Part-time – 
Rs.200/- Per 
 
Part time – 
Rs.75/- per day  
Whole time – 
Rs.2000/- 
other than 
drawn from 
other service. 
Part time – 
Rs.150/- per 
day  
 
Part time – 
Rs.75/- per day 
 
 
 
 
 

day   
 
 
 
23. Mizoram Whole Time – 
High Court 
Judge. 
 
Part-time – 
Honorarium @ 
Rs.350/- Per 
day  
Whole Time – 
Rs.7500/- p.m. 
 
Part time – 
Honorarium @ 
Rs.300/- per day  
Whole time – 
salary of 
Mizoram 
Judicial 
Service in 
Grade –I 
(Junior). 
 
Part time – 
Rs.300/- per 
sitting a day. 
Whole time –
Honorarium @ 
Rs.7,000/- p.m. 
 
Part time – 
Rs.250/- per 
sitting a day. 
      
24. Nagaland Rs.750/- per 
sitting. 
Rs.500/- per 
sitting. 
District Judge 
Pay, if 
appointed on 
whole time 
basis OR 
Rs.150 per 
sitting. 
Rs. 2000/- per 
month and 
Rs.100/- per 
day on part 
time basis 
      
 
25. Orissa Salary of sitting 
Judge High 
Court Judge 
less Pension. 
 
Rs.5,000/- p.m. 
+ Rs.1500/- 
Conveyance 
allowances 
Re-imbursement 
of Telephone 
charges @ 
Rs.200/- p.m.  
Consolidated 
pay of 
Rs.5,000/- 
p.m. 
 
Consolidated 
pay of 
Rs.3,000/- p.m. 
 
      
26. Pondicherry Honorarium @ 
Rs.5000/- + 
Rs.500/-  Per 
day sitting 
allowance. 
Honorarium @ 
Rs.1500/- + 
Rs.200/- per day 
sitting 
allowance. 
Scale of pay of 
Rs.16750-400-
19150-450-
20500 
 
Rs.3500/- p.m. 
      
27. Punjab Whole Time – 
High Court 
Judge. 
 
 
Honorarium @ 
Rs.7,500/- p.m. 
 
 
Whole time – 
salary of 
District Judge 
i.e. Rs.16750-
20500 + 
Conveyance – 
Rs.3500/- p.m. 
Whole time – 
Rs.6,000/- p.m. 
 
Part time – 
Rs.300/- per 
day sitting.  
      

28. Rajasthan Salary of High 
Court Judge 
less Pension, if 
retired 
Whole Time – 
Rs.5,000/- p.m. 
 
Part time – 
Rs.300/- per day 
 
Whole time – 
salary of 
District Judge 
less Pension, if 
retired. 
 
 
Whole time – 
Rs.3,500/- p.m. 
Part time – 
Rs.200/- per 
day sitting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 29. Sikkim President is the 
sitting Judge of 
the High Court 
of Sikkim. 
 
 
Rs.500/- per day 
sitting. 
Rs.150/- per 
day sitting in 
addition to 
regular pay as 
District Judge, 
since they are 
sitting District 
Judge. 
Rs.300/- per 
day sitting. 
      
 
 
30. Tamilnadu High Court 
Judge 
+ all allowances 
– Pension 
 
Rs.4200/- + 
Rs.1500/- 
Conveyance 
Allowance p.m. 
 
 
Whole time – 
salary of 
District Judge 
+ other 
allowances - 
Pension 
 
 
Independent 
District Forum 
– Honorarium  
Rs.*4200/- 
p.m. + 
Conveyance 
Allowance 
Rs.450/-pm 
 
Combined 
District Forum 
– Honorarium 
Rs.2800/- p.m. 
+ Conveyance 
Allowance 
Rs.300/- p.m. 
      
31. Tripura Whole Time – 
High Court 
Judge. 
Rs.20,670/- + 
Rs.6000/- 
conveyance 
 
 
Rs.150/- per 
sitting  
 
No conveyance 
Rs.150/- per 
sitting  
(Distt Judges 
are holding the 
post) 
Rs.100/- per 
sitting 
 
 

32. Uttar Pradesh Last Pay drawn 
less Pension 
+HRA @ 
Rs.10000/- + 
CCA + 
S.A.+D.A. 
 
 
Honorarium 
Rs.8340/- + 
HRA @ 
Rs.1500/- + 
Conveyance @ 
Rs.1250/- p.m. 
 
 
Whole time – 
last pay drawn 
less Pension + 
DA+HRA @ 
Rs.800/- p.m. 
+ Conveyance 
– Rs.1000/- 
p.m. 
 
Part time – 
Honorarium 
Rs.200/- per 
sitting  + HRA 
@ Rs.800/- 
p.m. + 
Conveyance 
Rs.1000/- p.m. 
Whole time – 
Rs.5560/- p.m. 
+ HRA @ 
Rs.600/- pm + 
Conveyance 
Rs.1000/- p.m. 
Part time – 
Rs.150/- per 
sitting + HRA@ 
Rs.600/- pm + 
Conveyance 
Rs.1000/- p.m. 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33. Uttaranchal Salary of High 
Court Judge 
less Pension 
+ Rs.7500/- 
HRA 
Rs.6000/- p.m. 
+ HRA 
@ Rs.7500/- 
p.m. + Staff Car 
Salary of 
District Judge 
for full time 
appointment 
 
Rs.200/- per 
sitting for part 
time 
appointment. 
Rs.4000/- p.m. 
+ 
Rs.600/- HRA 
 
Rs.150/- per 
sitting – for 
part-time 
appointment + 
rs.600 HRA 
      
34. West Bengal Last pay drawn 
– Pension. 
+ Rs.19,000/- 
car allowance 
Rs.12,000/- p.m. 
 
Rs.15000/- 
p.m. 
 
Rs.8,000/- p.m. 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Appendix-IV 
 
Cases filed , disposed of and pending in the National Commission 
and State Commissions since inception: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of State Cases 
filed since 
inception 
Cases 
disposed 
of since 
inception 
Cases 
Pending  
% of 
Disposal 
As On 
 National 
Commission 
40981 33319 7662 81.3 31.01.2006 
1 Andhra Pradesh 18056 15370 2686 85.12 31.01.2006 
2 A & N Islands 57 55 2 96.49 30.06.2004 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 35 22 13 62.86 31.12.2005 
4 Assam 1846 990 856 53.636 31.12.2004 
5 Bihar 11013 6870 4143 62.38 31.10.2005 
6 Chandigarh 51802 5111 69 98.67 31.01.2006 
7 Chattisgarh 2842 2392 450 84.17 31.12.2005 
8 D & N Haveli 11 11 0 100.00 31.12.2004 
9 Daman & Diu 0 0 0 0.00 - 
10 Delhi 24292 21227 3065 87.38 28.02.2006 
11 Goa 1671 1513 158 90.54 31.01.2006 
12 Gujarat 22810 19340 3470 84.79 31.01.2006 
13 Haryana 28599 16174 12425 56.55 31.01.2006 
14 Himachal Pradesh 4528 3842 686 84.85 31.12.2005 
15 Jammu & Kashmir 4823 4310 513 89.36 31.12.2005 
16 Jharkhand 2358 2120 238 89.91 31.12.2005 
17 Karnataka 18477 16647 1830 90.10 31.01.2006 
18 Kerala 19817 15716 4101 79.31 31.10.2006 
19 Lakshadweep 12 12 0 100.00 31.01.2006 
20 Madhya Pradesh 22145 19967 2178 90.16 31.12.2005 
21 Maharashtra 32740 18398 14342 56.19 31.12.2005 
22 Manipur 47 20 27 42.55 30.06.2003 
23 Meghalaya 145 125 20 86.21 30.06.2005 
24 Mizoram 92 31 61 33.70 30.09.2005 
25 Nagaland 71 59 12 83.10 30.06.2005 
26 Orissa 14445 7551 6894 52.27 31.01.2006 
27 Pondicherry 751 727 24 96.80 31.12.2005 
28 Punjab 15160 11673 4487 72.23 31.12.2005 
29 Rajasthan 31856 22201 9655 69.69 31.12.2005 
30 Sikkim 27 26 1 96.30 31.12.2005 
31 Tamilnadu 17620 15927 1693 90.39 31.10.2005 
32 Tripura 883 798 85 90.37 31.12.2005 
33 Uttar Pradesh 44701 13020 31681 29.13 31.12.2005 
34 Uttaranchal 2355 1971 384 83.69 31.12.2005 
35 West Bengal 10775 9240 1535 85.75 31.01.2006 
 

 
Appendix-V 
 
 Cases filed, disposed of and pending in the District Forums since 
inception: 
  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of State Cases 
filed since 
inception 
Cases 
disposed 
of since 
inception 
Cases 
Pending  
% of 
Disposal 
As On 
1 Andhra Pradesh 154684 148831 5853 96.22 31.01.2006 
2 A & N Islands 311 294 17 94.53 30.06.2004 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 260 229 31 88.08 31.12.2005 
4 Assam 10004 9096 908 90.92 31.12.2004 
5 Bihar 60122 46394 13728 77.17 31.10.2005 
6 Chandigarh 29170 28268 902 96.91 31.01.2006 
7 Chattisgarh 21636 19376 2260 89.55 31.12.2005 
8 D & N Haveli 70 54 16 77.14 31.12.2004 
9 Daman & Diu 0 0 0 0.00 0 
10 Delhi 155030 144366 10664 93.12 31.12.2005 
11 Goa 5076 4067 1009 80.12 31.01.2006 
12 Gujarat 102068 84708 17360 82.99 31.01.2006 
13 Haryana 143729 124936 18793 86.92 31.01.2006 
14 Himachal Pradesh 41622 38756 2866 93.11 31.12.2005 
15 Jammu & Kashmir 10436 8247 2189 79.02 31.03.1999 
16 Jharkhand 24183 21577 2606 89.22 31.12.2005 
17 Karnataka 89513 86456 3057 96.58 31.01.2006 
18 Kerala 143336 136414 6922 95.17 31.10.2005 
19 Lakshadweep 52 49 3 94.23 31.01.2006 
20 Madhya Pradesh 98153 92494 5659 94.23 31.12.2005 
21 Maharashtra 167362 149038 18324 893.05 31.12.2005 
22 Manipur 916 881 35 96.18 30.06.2003 
23 Meghalaya 359 339 20 94.43 30.06.2005 
24 Mizoram 1863 1623 240 87.12 30.06.2004 
25 Nagaland 246 205 41 83.33 30.06.2005 
26 Orissa 62271 58308 39636 93.64 30.11.2005 
27 Pondicherry 2353 2289 64 97.28 31.12.2006 
28 Punjab 91760 85767 5993 93.47 31.12.2005 
29 Rajasthan 190534 179620 10914 94.27 31.12.2005 
30 Sikkim 175 169 6 96.57 31.12.2005 
31 Tamilnadu 87286 84038 3248 96.28 31.10.2005 
32 Tripura 304 238 66 78.29 30.09.2005 
33 Uttar Pradesh 371533 291376 80157 78.43 31.12.2005 
34 Uttaranchal 24967 22559 2408 90.36 31.12.2005 
35 West Bengal 56360 53194 3166 94.38 31.01.2006 
 TOTAL 2147744 1924256 223488 89.59  
 
 

 
Appendix-VI  
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CIVIL SUPPLIES AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2003) HELD ON 
THURSDAY, THE                    13TH NOVEMEBR, 2003. 
 
The Committee sat from 11:30 hrs. to 12:30 hrs. in Commi ttee Room No. 319, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman     
  
Members  
Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty  
3. Shri  Dalit Ezhilmalai  
4. Shri Bir Singh Mahato  
5. Shri Sanat Kumar Mandal  
6. Shri  Shyam Bihari Mishra  
7. Shri Sukdeo Paswan 
8. Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel  
9. Shri Baju Ban Riyan 
10. Shri Rammurti Singh Verma  
11.  Shri Kishan Lal Diler  
12. Shri Jaiprakash 
13. Shri Adhi Sankar 
 RAJYA SABHA 
14. Shri Bimba Raikar 
15. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
16. Shri S. K. Khabir Uddin Ahmad  
17. Shri C. Perumal 
18. Shri Vijay Singh Yadav  
19. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
SECRETARIAT  
  
  1. Dr. (Smt.) P. K. Sandhu                    -   Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri Krishan Lal                         - Director 
  3. Shri R. S. Mishra              - Deputy Secretary 
  4. Shri Jagdish Prasad              - Assistant Director  
 
 
 
 
 

 
Representatives of the Consumer Coordination Council (CCC) 
 
1. Shri Bejon Mishra Vice-Chairman 
2. Shri S. Krishanan Director 
 
 
Representatives of the Consumer Unity and Trust Society (CUTS) 
 
1. Shri Pradeep S. Mehta Secretary General 
 
 
 
 At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of 
Consumer Coordination Council and Consumer Unity and Trust Society.  The 
Committee then heard their views on the subject “Consumer Movement in the 
Country”. The representatives  resolved the queries raised by Hon’ble Chairman 
and the Members of the Committee. 
 The verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 The meeting then adjourned. 
 

         
Appendix-VII 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFARIS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2004 -05) HELD 
ON WEDNESDAY, THE 29TH SEPTEMEBR, 2004. 
 
The Committee sat from 15:00 hrs. to 16:40 hrs. in Committee Room No. 
53,  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman     
  
MEMBERS  
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
4. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
5. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
6. Smt. Daggubati Purandareswari 
7. Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
RAJYA SABHA 
8. Shri T. S. Bajwa 
9. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
10. Shri Lalitbhai Mehta 
11. Smt. Bimba Raikar 
12. Shri Thanga Tamil Selvan 
13. Shri Vikram Verma 
14. Shri Vijay Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT  
  
  1. Shri R.S. Kambo                         - Deputy Secretary 
 2. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director 
 
  

 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
 
  1. Shri L. Mansingh                       - Secretary 
 2. Shri D. N. Padhi          - AS&FA 
 3. Shri D. K. Mukhopadhyay                   - Economic Advisor  
 4. Shri S. K. Jana                                    - Chief Controller of Accounts  
 5. Shri Nirmal Singh                                - Director General (BIS)  
 6. Shri N. C. Chatterjee                           - Director General (NTH)  
 7. Smt. Jayashree Gupta                        - Joint Secretary (CA)  
 8. Shri P. Venkatesan                             - Director (CPU) 
 9. Shri Raghubir Singh                           - Joint Registrar, NCDRC  
 10. Shri T. N. Sansi                                  - Registrar, NCDRC  
 
 
2. At the Outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other 
officials of the Department of Consumer Affairs and apprised them of Direction 
58 of the Directions by the Speaker Lok Sabha.  The representatives of the 
Ministry then gave a presentation on the  subject ‘Consumer Movement in the 
Country’. The following points emerged out during the deliberation of the 
Committee:-  
(i) Consumer Awareness Schemes run by the Department. 
(ii) Functioning of Consumer Protection Councils at States and 
District levels. 
(iii) Functional and Non-functional Consumer Forums. 
(iv) Role of Lok Adalat for redressal of Consumer grievances. 
(v) Implementation of Consumer related legislations.  
 
3. A Verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Appendix-VIII 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFARIS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2005 -06) HELD 
ON FRIDAY, THE 27TH MAY, 2005. 
 
The Committee sat from 11:30 hrs. to 13:30 hrs. in Committee Room 'D’  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman     
  
Members  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Suresh Angadi 
4. Shri Tukaram Gadakh 
5. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
6. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
7. Shri Jaiprakash 
8. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
9. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
10. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
11. Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
13. Shri T. S. Bajwa 
14. Shri Palden Tsering Gyamtso 
15. Smt. Bimba Raikar 
16. Shri Vikram Verma 
17. Shri Vijay Singh Yadav 
18. Shri Nabam Rebia 
SECRETARIAT  
  
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary                             - Secretary 
2. Shri R.S. Kambo                         - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya    - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director 
 

 
 
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
1. Shri L. Mansingh, Secretary 
2. Smt. Satwant Reddy, Additional Secretary 
3. Smt. Jaya Shree Gupta, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri A. C. Pandey, Additional Director General (BIS) 
 
2. At the Outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representative s of 
Department of Consumer Affairs to the sitting of the Committee held to take 
evidence of the Ministry on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) on the subject “Consumer Movement in the 
Country” and apprised them  of the provision of  Direction 58 of the Direction by 
the Speaker. 
3. The Committee then sought clarifications from the Secretary, Department 
of Consumer Affairs on the subject.  The representatives replied to the queries 
raised by the Members. 
4. The following points emerged during the deliberation of the Committee:- 
i. Non-functional District Fora in the country 
ii. Vacancy position in the District Fora 
iii. Position of District Consumer Protection Councils in the States 
iv. Pendancy of cases in District Fora 
v. Publicity measures for Consumer Awareness in the Country 
vi.       Role of Lok Adalat like bodies for facilitating early disposal of 
cases. 
 
5. The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before them and 
placing their views before the Committee. 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
Appendix-IX 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2006- 2007) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE   HELD ON 
THURSDAY, 31 MAY, 2007 
 
The Committee sat from 1130 hours to 1230 hours in Committee 
Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav     -      Chairman 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri  Alakesh Das 
3. Shri  Atma Singh Gill 
4. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
5. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
6. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
7. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
8. Shri Munshi Ram 
9. Shri Ghuran Ram 
10. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
11. Adv.  (Smt.) P. Satheedevi 
12. Shri Chandra Bhan Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
13. Shri  T.S. Bajwa 
14. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
15. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
16. Shri Nabam Rebia 
17. Shri Matilal Sarkar 
18. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu 
19. Shri Thanga Tamil Selvan 
20. Shri Vijaykumar Rupani 
 
Secretariat 
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K.Sandhu  -          Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra    - Director 

3.         Shri Jagdish Prasad                     -          Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
At the outset, Hon'ble Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of 
the Committee and invited their suggestions on the draft report on the subject 
‘Consumer Movement in the Country’ as circulated by the Secretariat vide letter 
dated 29 May, 2007. 
 
2. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the draft report on 
‘Consumer Movement in the Country’ and adopted the said draft report with slight 
modifications.  
 
3.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the aforesaid 
report on the basis of factual verification from the concerned Ministry/Department 
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
4. During the sitting, the Members desired that the Committee may visit 
some of the places to have first hand knowled ge of the subjects selected by the 
Committee for detailed examination. The Committee thereafter proposed to 
undertake on -the-spot-study visit to Coimbatore, Ooty, Mysore and Bangalore 
during the months of June/July 2007. 
 
5.  The Committee thereafter decid ed that the next sitting may be convened 
on Tuesday, 12th June, 2007 to take oral evidence of experts/ associations etc. 
on the subject - Sugar - production, consumption, availability, import/export and 
pricing.   
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
/-----------------------/ 
 
 

 
 
Appendix-X 
 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS 
 
Sl. No. Para No. Recommendations/ Observations 
1 2 3 
1 1.6 The Committee note that the consumer movement in India is as 
old as trade and commerce. But there was no organized and 
systematic movement to safeguard the interests of the 
consumers. Prior to Independence, consumers’ interests were 
considered mainly under laws such as the Indian Penal Code, 
Agricultural Production, Grading and Marketing Act, 1937 and 
Drugs and Cosmetic Act, 1940, etc.  Poverty, illiteracy and lack 
of consciousness to assert one’s rights were some of the main 
reasons for low level of consumer awareness in the country.  
As such, trade and industry and other service providers easily 
exploited the consumers. Pol icies were then designed and 
legislations enacted to protect the interests of the consumers.  
The consumers were given the right of choice, safety, 
information and redressal mechanism.  A separate Department 
of Consumer Affairs was created in the Central G overnment in 
1997 to exclusively focus on protecting the rights of consumers.  
2. 1.7 Setting up of a three -tier quasi-judicial mechanism to address 
the complaints of the consumers at National, State and District 
level was another milestone in the history  of consumer 
movement in India. The National Commission at the Central 
level and State Commissions and District fora in some of the 
States/Union Territories are doing commendable work. 
However, the working of State Commissions and District Fora 
in some of the States is not upto the mark.  To supplement the 
efforts being made by the State Governments for strengthening 
the consumer movement in various parts of the country, grants 
are being provided by the Union Government. Inspite of best of 
the efforts made by the Union Government and State 
Governments, a lot still needs to be done. It was acknowledged 
by the Secretary during the course of oral evidence that as 
compared to developing countries,  there is a long way to go 
before we can reach the level of even the lesser -developed 
countries in protecting the interests of consumers.  
 
3. 1.8 The Committee have dealt in detail the various issues related to 
consumer movement in the report and various 
observations/recommendations have been made.  The 
Committee urge the Department to chalk out detailed strategy 
related to consumer awareness and consumer protection in 
consultation with the State Governments/NGOs/VCOs/ local 
bodies and all other stakeholders on the lines suggested by the 
Committee in the report.  

 
 
1 2 3 
4. 1.9 The Committee find from the information provided by the 
Department that, only one State viz West Bengal is having a 
separate Department of Consumer Affairs.  Besides, in 23 
States/UTs, the nomenclature of the Department includes 
words like “Consumer Affairs”, “Consumer Protection” etc.  The 
Committee are concerned to note that low priority is accorded 
to the subject of Consumer Protection by various State 
Governments and it is virtually a neglected area.  The 
Committee are of the view that the n ature and volume of work 
involved in consumer protection is such that it requires 
adequate attention and only then justice could be done to this 
matter of much public importance.  The Committee feel that the 
subject also requires constant and regular monit oring.   And 
because of its scope being so vast, a full -fledged Department 
headed by an officer of the level of Secretary needs to be in 
place in States for consumer protection.  The Committee also 
desire that for promoting the welfare of the consumers in the 
States, a separate Budget needs to be earmarked for the 
Consumer Affairs Department.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the matter of separate Department on 
Consumer Affairs/Protection, headed by officer of the rank and 
pay of Secretary and sepa rate budgetary provision, should be 
taken up in the right earnest and at the highest level with the 
State Governments. Some sort of in built incentives be also 
devised for the States/UTs who are doing well in the field of 
consumer awareness and consumer pr otection.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the 
matter. 
5. 2.7 The Committee note that the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 
seeks to protect the rights of consumers by rendering quick and 
inexpensive redressal of the grievances of the consumers by 
establishing `Alternate Justice Delivery System’. The 
Committee further note that in a span of two decades since the 
enforcement of the provisions of the aforesaid Act, it has 
undergone amendments thrice and a Working Group has been 
constituted to propose further amendments. The Committee 
while examining Demands for Grants 2007 -08 have been 
informed that the draft amendment proposals have been 
prepared based on the recommendations of the Working 
Group. The Committee would like that the a mendments should 
be finalized expeditiously and the draft legislation be introduced 
in Parliament. Besides, the Committee urge that while bringing 
the amendments, the various observations/suggestions made 
in the report should also be considered.  

6. 2.10 The Committee find that the consumer protection unit of the 
Department of Consumer Affairs had been allocated a meagre 
allocation of Rs. 12.84 crore during the Ninth Plan.  During the 
Tenth Plan, initially the allocation was made for only Rs. 15.50 
crore.  However, during the last two years of the Tenth Plan i.e. 
the year 2005-06 and 2006-07, the allocation for consumer 
protection was enhanced considerably. The Committee further 
find that a Working Group of Consumer Protection has 
submitted its comprehensive report containing 
recommendations for the Eleventh Plan to the Planning 
Commission.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
details of the recommendations made by the Working Group.  
Besides the Committee would like that Planning 
Commission/Ministry of Finance should be persuaded to 
provide adequate outlay during the Eleventh Plan for the 
consumer protection and awareness programmes so as to 
bring out sustained countrywide multimedia publicity 
programmes.   
 
7. 2.15 The Committee note that though the Government has started a 
vigorous consumer awareness campaign through print media, 
adequate publicity has not been given through electronic 
media. The Committee feel that to make the consumer 
awareness programme broad based and more mass oriented, 
wide publicity should be given through electronic media on the 
lines of Pulse Polio Campaign etc. by roping in well known 
celebrities to espouse the cause.  The Government should also 
reach the people through Gram Melas, etc.   The services of 
the NGOs need to be exploited through special programmes by 
making them partners in spreading the awareness and 
enhancing the effectiveness of the consumer protection 
measures. 
 
8. 2.16 The Committee feel that the consumer awareness programme 
shall not yield the desired  results, until and unless the focus of 
targets is villages, tribal and inaccessible for flung areas.  The 
Committee desire that aggressive campaigning about 
consumer protection needs to be stepped up in these 
vulnerable areas.  The literature brought out by the Department 
for example ‘Upbhokta Jagaran’, needs to be brought out in 
regional languages.  The video and radio Programmes for 
creating awareness should not only be televised /broadcasted 
by public broadcast but also be shown in cable/private TV 
Channels.  The Committee desire that they may be apprised of 
the action taken by the Government in this regard. 
 
9. 2.17 The Committee further feel that the Department has to think of 
adopting entirely techniques for consumer awareness in rural 
areas keeping in view the ground reality.   The illiterate and 
innocent rural poor consumers cannot take the advantage of 

sophisticated techniques of consumer helpline or online 
mechanism as introduced by the Department for redressal of 
consumers’ grievances. That foremost condition of using these 
techniques is a minimum level of education and awareness.  
There is an urgent need to make these people aware of their 
rights and this can be achieved through simple techniques like 
street drama, musical drama, folk dances, nau tanki, etc. in 
regional languages.  Song and Drama Division and Field 
Publicity Units of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
and Publicity Units of the State Governments should 
extensively be involved. Besides, as recommended in the 
earlier para o f the report, the Committee emphasize that 
adequate outlay for consumer awareness should be provided 
so as to achieve the aforesaid objective. 
 
10. 2.18 With the enactment of the Constitution 73rd Amendment Act, 
1992 elected Panchayati Raj Institutions ex ist in almost every 
State/UT. The Department should take the desired initiatives to 
involve Panchayati Raj Institutions in various programmes 
related to consumer awareness. Besides, the publications of 
the Department specifically ‘Upbhokta Jagaran’ should be 
brought out in regional languages and distributed to the elected 
representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions.  The Committee 
further feel that the best forum to educate the rural masses 
about their rights as consumers as well as the techniques to 
redress to their grievances is the meetings of Gram Sabha, 
which are attended by almost every villager.  The Committee 
note that 24 December has been declared as National 
Consumer Day since the year 2000.  The Department in 
consultation with the Union Ministr y of Panchayati Raj should 
take the desired initiatives to have mandatory meetings of 
Gram Sabhas on this day where the villagers could properly be 
educated about their rights as consumers.   
 
11. 2.19 The Committee note that the Department has instituted  
National Awards on Consumer Protection to encourage the 
VCOs , women and youth . The VCOs who have done 
outstanding work are given prize money of Rs. 50,000, Rs. 
40,000 and Rs. 30,000 alongwith certificates of Merit. The 
Committee would like to be apprise d of the number of VCOs 
women and youth who have been given prize so far. Further, 
the Department should also inform the Committee about the 
number of VCOs, women and youth from rural areas who have 
been awarded prizes so as to know the impact of this sche me 
in rural areas 
 
12. 3.23 The Committee note that a three tier quasi judicial redressal 
mechanism has been established at National, State and District 
levels as per the provisions made under the Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986 to resolve the consumer grievances 

speedily and cheaply. Whereas the responsibility of the 
National Commission rests with the Union Government, the 
responsibility of setting up as well as effective functioning of 
State Commissions and District Fora lies with the respective 
State Governments/Union Territory Administrations. The Union 
Government is further supplementing the efforts made by the 
State Governments by releasing one-time grants to District 
Fora for creating adequate infrastructure. Besides,  various 
amendments in the aforesaid Act have been made for the 
smooth functioning of District Fora. In addition, the Department 
is taking proactive action to impress upon the State 
Governments to take desired action for the effective functioning 
of these Fora. Inspite of the best of the efforts made by the 
Union Government, as many as 22 District Fora have been 
reported as non-functional. The Committee further note that 
non-functional District Fora exist in various States viz. 
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Nagaland, Tamil Nadu, 
Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Chattisgarh, Kerala and Rajasthan. The 
various factors responsible for non-functional District Fora have 
been addressed in detail in the subsequent paras of the report. 
Here, the Committee may like to emphasize that the 
Department should find out State specific reasons for non-
functional District Fora and pursuade the State 
Governments/Union Territory Administrations to take corrective 
action in this regard.  Besides, the Committee recommend that 
the district forum should be constituted expeditiously in a newly 
created District.  The Committee may also be kept apprised. 
13. 3.24 The Committee further note that there are a large number of 
pending cases in the National Commission, State Commissions 
and District Fora. The average percentage of disposal of cases 
in the case of National Commission has been reported to be 
81.3 per cent whereas percentage disposal of cases in State 
Commissions and District Fora is 70.16 and 89.59 per cent, 
respectively.  The Committee find from the information provided 
by the Department that the problem of infrastructure is more 
acute in case of District Fora, thus making the District Fora 
non-functional.   However, looking into the overall percentage 
of disposal of cases, the Committee note that District Fora are 
doing comparatively well. The Committee would like the 
Department to analyze the aforesaid data of disposal of cases 
carefully and find out the specific reasons for lesser disposal of 
cases in State Commissions. The Committee may also be 
informed in this regard.  
 
14. 3.25 While noting the State-wise position of disposal of cases, the 
Committee find that in some of the States, the position is not 
satisfactory. As regards the performance of State 
Commissions, worse is the position in Uttar Pradesh and 
Mizoram where the percentage disposal is only 29.13 and 
33.70 per cent, respectively. In progressive State of 

Maharashtra, the percentage disposal of cases is just 56.19 per 
cent. As regards the position of District Fora in Bihar, Dadra 
and Nagar Haveli, Jammu and Kashmir, Mizoram, Tripura, 
Uttar Pradesh, the percentage disposal of cases is less than 80 
per cent. The Secretary during the course of oral evidence has 
acknowledged that the time limit of disposal of cases 
prescribed under the Act i.e. within 90 to 150 days is seldom 
adhered to. The Secretary has also informed that in Punjab, a 
novel way of clearing the backlog of cases by holding the Lok 
Adalats has been adopted.  Further, the Committee while 
examining the Demands for Grants (2007-08) (refer Para 4.22 
of Nineteenth Report) had also been informed that an 
amendment to the Consumer Protection Act to have Circuit 
Benches or Circuit Sharing Mechanism by District Fora is being 
worked out. In the system of Circuit Benches or Circuit Sharing, 
District Fora may hold their sittings at the Tehsil or Block 
Headquarters in case there are large number of cases. The 
Committee feel that the system of Lok Adalats adopted by the 
Punjab Government needs to be replicated in other States 
where there is bulk pendency of cases. Besides, there is an 
urgent need to take an early decision on the issue of Circuit 
Benches or Circuit Sharing Mechanism by District Fora for 
speedier disposal of cases pending with respective District 
Forum. The Committee recommend to the Department to take 
the desired action in this regard. The Committee also 
recommend that the Department should review the position of 
pendency of cases on quarterly basis and issue necessary 
instructions to the respective State Governments for speedier 
disposal of cases. 
 
15. 3.26 The Committee are concerned to note almost negligible 
number of cases filed in the District Fora in some of the 
States/UTs. From the data made available by the Department, 
the Committee note that in Daman and Diu, not even a single 
case was filed in the State Commission and District Fora since 
inception. Besides, in various North -Eastern States and 
Lakshadweep, the number of cases filed are very marginal. The 
Committee feel that the lack of awareness about the rights as a 
consumer is the main rea son for reporting of almost nil or 
marginal cases in the aforesaid States/UTs. The Committee 
recommend to evolve a strategy to have an aggressive 
consumer awareness campaign in these States in consultation 
with the respective State Governments/Union Territ ory 
Administrations. 
 
16. 3.27 The Committee further note that consumers in remote and far -
flung areas, consumers have to come to the District 
Headquarters for filing of cases. Similarly the State 
Commissions are located in the respective State capitals. The 
distance as well as the lack of connectivity deter the consumers 

to come to the District Headquarters/ State Capitals. In view of 
the aforesaid scenario, the Committee feel that there is an 
urgent need to work out some mechanism whereby the 
Consumer Grievance Redressal Mechanism is available at the 
doorstep of the consumers. By and large, holding of Lok 
Adalats and Circuit Benches at the Block Headquarters may 
provide solution to this problem. The Department should 
consider the aforesaid difficulties being faced by the consumers 
in far -flung /difficult areas and evolve some solution in this 
regard. The Committee may also be kept apprised. 
 
17. 3.28 The Committee have been informed that another reason which 
has impeded the disposal of cases in time as we ll as non -
functional status of some of the District Fora is failure to fill the 
vacancies in the State Commissions and District Fora. From 
the data provided by the Department, the Committee note that 
District Fora are worst affected by the problem of vacan cies. In 
various District Fora, 49 posts of President and 181 posts of 
Members are lying vacant. The Committee also find that 
various provisions have been made in the Consumer Protection 
Act through amendments to resolve the problem of vacancies.         
For example, the provision that the senior most Member may 
preside over the Consumer Fora, if the President is absent for 
any reason and the provision of reappointment of President and 
Members of Consumer Fora are some of the amendments 
made in this regard.  In addition, various instructions to State 
Governments to maintain a panel of Presidents and Members 
to fill vacancies arising in the District Fora are repeatedly being 
issued by the Department. Inspite of this, the problem of 
vacancies persists in State Commissions and District Fora.  
The Committee therefore, strongly recommend that the 
vacancy position in all the  District Fora across the country 
should be reviewed regularly and all out efforts  be made to fill 
the vacancies at the earliest. 
 
18. 3.29 In most of the States, salary of a High Court Judge is being 
provided to the President of a State Commission and salary of 
a District Judge to the Presidents of District Fora. In the States 
where aforesaid provision has not been made, the variation in 
the salary and allowances paid to President and Members of 
State Commissions and District Fora is quite glaring.  The 
Committee further find that in many of the States/UTs, provision 
has been made to pay the remuneration to Members of State 
Commissions and Dist rict Fora on daily basis. Further, the 
honorarium paid to Members of State Commissions as well as 
District Fora is very low in case of some of the States. For 
example, in Meghalaya, honorarium paid to Members of State 
Commissions as well as District Fora i s as low as       Rs. 75 
per day. In Lakshadweep, Rs. 150 is provided as per day 
honorarium to Members of State Commissions and Rs. 100 to 

Members of District Fora.  On the other hand some of the 
States are paying very attractive honorarium/ remuneration t o 
President and Members. For example, in Chandigarh, besides 
the fixed monthly amount of Rs. 26,000, allowances and perks 
are also being provided. From the aforesaid scenario of 
disparity in the salary and honorarium structure of President 
and other Member s of State Commissions and District Fora, 
the Committee find that perhaps the low salaries have 
dissuaded suitable candidates to take up assignments in State 
Commissions and District Fora. The low salary and honorarium 
structure has failed to attract the b est available talent in the 
field. The Committee further note that the Department has been 
passing resolutions to bring about a uniformity in the salary and 
honorarium being paid to President and Members of different 
State Commissions. However, the State G overnments and UT 
Administrations are not implementing the resolutions. The 
Committee strongly recommend that the matter may be taken 
up with all the State Governments and Union Territory 
Administrations at the highest level so that the problem of 
pending vacancies and inadequate remuneration could be 
resolved. 
 
19. 3.30 Besides the problem of vacancies, various Consumer Fora are 
also facing the shortage of adequate supporting staff. The 
Committee have been apprised that supporting staff for District 
Fora is normally borrowed from the local Food and Civil Supply 
Department of the State Government. The Committee note that 
the casual approach of the State Governments in this regard 
has led to the ineffective functioning of District Fora. The 
Committee recomme nd that there should be All India /State 
service which can cater to the need of supporting staff of 
different levels of Consumer Fora at National, State and District 
Level.    
 
20. 3.31 The Committee note that most of the District Fora are suffering 
for w ant of adequate infrastructure and other basic 
amenities/necessities.  The Committee feel that this acts as a 
deterrent in quick disposal of cases and thereby causes 
pendency of consumer cases.  In this context, the Committee 
desire that the grants to all District Fora be provided for 
improving infrastructure facilities at the earliest.  It has been 
brought to the notice of the Committee that many States do not 
take active interest in consumer related activities.  In order to 
inculcate the feeling of welfar e of consumers, the Committee 
desire that a Model District Fora funded by the Central 
Government needs to be set up in each State.  The experience 
gained from such Model District Fora should be replicated in 
other districts of the State. 
 
21. 3.32 The Committee take note of various problems faced by District 

Fora in the implementation of the Consumer Protection Act.  
Some of the problems faced by these District Fora include non -
formation of District Consumer Protection Councils at District 
levels, ignorance of Members of District Fora about prevailing 
laws relating to complaints, political interference in selection of 
Members of State Commissions, District Fora, frequent 
adjournments, absence of labs for analysis at District level and 
failure to release funds by State Governments.    The insistence 
by District Fora on compromise between the complainant and 
defendant, is another factor, which impedes the implementation 
of the Consumer Protection Act leading to delay in delivering 
justice to the consumers.  Th e Committee are of the view that 
the problems highlighted by various District Fora as given in 
detail in the preceeding para number 3.22 of the report are 
genuine and merit due consideration by the Government.  The 
Committee desire that result oriented act ion be taken by the 
Centre/State Governments in this regard.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken by the 
Government in this regard. 
 
22. 4.21 The Committee note that the Consumer Welfare Fund was 
created in 1991 by amending the Cen tral Excise and Salt Act, 
1944. The main objective of the fund is to provide financial 
assistance to VCOs/NGOs and State Governments for 
strengthening Consumer Movement in the country. The 
aforesaid fund was set up by the Department of Revenue in 
1992. Sub sequently, a separate Department of Consumer 
Affairs was created in the Central Government in the year 1997 
to act as the nodal Department to exclusively deal with the 
issues related to consumer welfare and awareness. The 
Committee have been informed that no proposal has been 
mooted to bring the Consumer Welfare Fund under the ambit of 
the Department of Consumer Affairs, although the fund is being 
operated by the Department of Consumer Affairs.  The 
Committee fail to understand the rationale of placing the 
Consumer Welfare Fund under Department of Revenue when 
the operational responsibility rests with the Department of 
Consumer Affairs. The Committee are further concerned to 
note that no initiative in this regard has been taken by the 
Department of Consumer Affairs so far. The Committee feel 
that the exclusive responsibility of Consumer Welfare Fund 
should be given to the Department of Consumer Affairs. The 
Committee urge that the desired action in this regard should be 
taken by the Government and the Committ ee be apprised 
accordingly. 
 
23. 4.22 The Committee further note that the Department has 
decided to decentralize and transfer the Consumer 
Awareness and Consumer Club Schemes of the State 
Governments/Union Territory Administrations with effect 

from 1 April, 2004. To supplement the efforts made by 
the States/UTs in this regard, the Government has 
decided to make a one-time contribution of an amount 
proportionate to the number of districts by the Centre 
and the State Governments in the ratio of 50:50 
(Centre:State). In case of special category States, the 
aforesaid ratio is 90:10 (Centre:State). The Committee 
have further been informed that so far 19 States and 
UTs have been sanctioned grants from Centre 
Consumer Welfare Fund for the purpose. Further, 16 
States are yet to apply/receive assistance for the 
State/Local Consumer Welfare Fund. The Department 
has informed that the aforesaid States/UTs could not 
avail the assistance/Central share of seed money 
because they have not yet credited the State share in 
permanent non-lapsable, non-plan account. The 
Committee would like the Department to pursue further 
with the aforesaid States so that the Consumer Welfare 
Fund is set up expeditiously to promote the Consumer 
Movement throughout the country.  
 
 
 
24. 4.23 The Committee note from the information made available by 
the Department that out of 19 States which have been 
sanctioned grant from Central Consumer Welfare Fund, 11 
States/UTs have so far not submitted the guidelines for State 
Consumer Welfare Fund. The Comm ittee also note that the 
organizations receiving grant from the Consumer Welfare Fund 
are required to follow the Consumer Welfare Fund Rules, 1992 
and the guidelines for sanction of grants from the Consumer 
Welfare Fund. The Committee fail to understand no n-
submission of status of framing of guidelines for State 
Consumer Welfare Fund by most of the State Governments. 
The Committee are of the view that there is an urgent need to 
have strict monitoring of the implementation of various activities 
for which funding is being granted out of the Consumer Welfare 
Fund. The Committee would like the Department to get the 
information from the aforesaid State Governments and submit 
to the Committee. Further, the States which have not so far 
framed the guidelines should be asked to do this expeditiously. 
 
25. 4.24 The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants 
(2007-08) had expressed serious concern over non -utilization 
of funds earmarked for the schemes/ projects out of Consumer 
Welfare Fund (refer Para 4.54 of Ni neteenth Report). The 
Committee had noted that only one -fourth of the amount 
provided under Consumer Welfare Fund was being used by the 
State Governments. The Committee had also expressed 
serious concern over non -submission of Utilization Certificates 

by various NGOs/VCOs. The Committee are of the firm opinion 
that an effective monitoring is required to ensure that only 
credible NGOs/VCOs are provided funding out of the 
Consumer Welfare Fund. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the number of NGOs/VCO s who have been 
provided assistance from the Consumer Welfare Fund so far, 
along with the number of NGOs/VCOs who have been 
blacklisted. The Committee would like to reiterate their earlier 
recommendation to put the name of the blacklisted NGOs on 
the websi te of the Department so as to ensure that no 
Government funding is made to these blacklisted NGOs. 
 
26. 4.25 The Committee further note that ‘Consumer Clubs’ is one of the 
schemes operated under Consumer Welfare Fund (CWF). 
Under the aforesaid scheme, a consumer club is to be set up in 
middle, higher and higher-secondary school/college affiliated to 
a Government Recognized Board and a grant of       Rs. 10,000 
per Consumer Club in the schools/colleges is admissible under 
this scheme. The Committee note tha t Consumer Clubs could 
be set up only in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Tripura, West 
Bengal, Maharashtra and NCT of Delhi. The Committee note 
that for effective Consumer Movement in the country, children 
need to be involved and Consumer Clubs are the best way for 
instilling in children the spirit of protection of consumer rights. 
The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to pursue 
further with the remaining States/UTs to ensure that Consumer 
Clubs are set up in each of the schools/colleges. 
 
27. 4.26 The Committee note that Central Consumer Protection 
Councils were set up at Centre and State levels to promote and 
protect the rights of the Consumers. Consumer Protection Act 
mandates the States to establish District Consumer Redressal 
Councils at th e District Level to strengthen consumer 
movement at the grass -root level.   The Committee note that 
the performance of Central, State and District Consumer 
Protection Councils (DCPCs) is far from satisfactory.  The 
Committee feel that these agencies need t o be made more 
accountable, responsible and effective so as to ensure justice 
at the doorsteps of consumers.  The Committee note that these 
Councils have been entrusted with the responsibility of raising 
issues concerning welfare of consumers and also give  
recommendations to this effect.  The Committee note with 
concern that the sittings of Consumer Protection Councils are 
not held regularly.  At times, meetings are not held at all.  The 
Committee feel that there is a need to place a mechanism by 
which sitting of the Council be convened, if 2/3rd Members of 
the Council so desire.  The Committee also feel that though the 
recommendations of the Councils are not binding on the 
Government still, due consideration needs to be given to the 
recommendations of these Councils.  The Committee note that 

District Consumer Protection Councils are headed by District 
Magistrates who are unable to devote much time due to their 
preoccupation in other pressing matters.  As such, District 
Magistrates are not able to do justice to these bodies. The 
Committee desire that Government should find ways and 
means and ensure that officials, who can devote time and 
energy, head these bodies and able to do justice to the work 
assigned. 
 
28. 4.27 The Committee note that the concept of Cit izens’ Charter was 
introduced in the year 1994 to provide a clean, effective and 
responsive administration at all levels with an emphasis on 
transparency and accountability.  The Government introduced 
Citizens’ Charter in a phased manner in the 
Ministries/Departments where a large public interface is 
involved. As on date only 91 Central Citizens’ Charters have 
been approved and are under implementation by different 
States/UTs. The Committee have also been informed that the 
Department of Consumer Affairs has prepared its own Citizens’ 
Charter. Besides, BIS and FMC have also prepared their 
Citizens’ Charter which is available on the website of the 
Department.The Committee desire that action on fast track 
basis needs to be initiated to cover the remaining 
agencies/authorities who have not yet formulated Citizens’ 
Charter.  As the Charter incorporates citizens entitlement to 
public services, quality of service, access to information and 
time bound redressal of grievances, etc the Committee desire 
that wide public ity be given to the Citizens’ Charter so that 
people can take advantage of their entitlements etc. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the 
matter. 
 
29. 4.28 The Committee find that the main objective of the Consumer 
Welfare Fund  was to generate consumer awareness and 
strengthen Consumer Movement through various programmes 
funded out of Consumer Welfare Fund,  particularly in rural 
areas. The Committee would like to be informed about the 
number of schools/colleges in rural areas w ho have been 
provided assistance under the scheme Consumer Club. The 
Committee emphasize to monitor the various activities/projects 
funded out of the ‘Consumer Welfare Fund’ separately for rural 
areas so as to know about the fulfillment the objectives of 
creating the aforesaid Fund. 
 
30. 5.3 The Committee note that a National Action Plan which 
proposes to educate more than 100 crore of people of various 
categories on various subject matters of consumer interest has 
been prepared by the Department.  Besides , a media Plan has 
also been prepared in consultation with the DAVP. The State 
Governments have also been asked to evolve their own State 

Action Plans to strengthen the consumer movement in the 
country.  The Committee emphasize on the implementation of 
the targets fixed under the National Plan. Besides, State 
Governments may also be pursued further for the finalisation of 
State Plans expeditiously. 
 
31. 5.4 The Committee further note that the Action Plan proposes to 
evolve a National Policy on consumer pro tection. The 
Committee recommend that the policy should be framed 
expeditiously so that it can provide necessary direction and 
guidelines to various Ministries of the Union as well as the 
State Governments in setting priorities for consumer awareness 
and c onsumer protection and also to make them more 
responsive to the causes of consumers. 
 
32. 6.3 The Committee note that a number of Working Groups have 
been set up by the Government to consider ways and means of 
protecting the interests of consumers. Such W orking Groups 
include, ‘Food Safety’, ‘Misleading Advertisement’, ‘Drugs, 
Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices/Equipments’, ‘Consumer 
Health and Safety concerning Tobacco & Tobacco Products’, 
‘Counterfeit, Fake, Spurious and Contraband products’. A 
Working Group has also been set up for suggesting 
improvement in the existing Acts relating to the interests of 
consumers.  The Committee understand that Reports of some 
of the Working Groups have been submitted and others are still 
under the consideration of the Government.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the recommendations made by 
each of the Working Group set up for the purpose and the 
follow up action taken by the Government.  The Committee 
would like that the Department should regularly follow up the 
implementation of these recommendations with the concerned 
Ministries.  The Committee would also like to be informed of the 
steps taken by the Government in amending the relevant 
statutes, on the lines suggested by the Working Group for the 
purpose. 
 
33. 7.6 The Committee note that the Consumer Helpline was launched 
on 15 March, 2005 on the occasion of World Consumer Rights 
Day for providing guidance, information and advice to 
consumers for redressal of their grievances against various 
services and pro ducts. According to the Ministry, the National 
Consumer Helpline advises consumers to deal with problems 
related to defective products, deficiency in services and unfair 
trade practices etc. The Committee, while welcoming the 
introduction of Consumer Helpline for the benefit of consumers, 
desire that the consumers be made aware of this service in a 
big way through electronic and print media. They would like to 
be informed of the steps taken in this regard. 
 

34. 8.5 The Committee note that Consumer Grievance 
Redressal Cell (CGRC) was set up by the Department 
during 2002 to redress the grievances of consumers 
relating to sale of defective goods, deficient services, 
overpricing, etc. During the five years of its operation the 
Cell has received 6179 complaints from all over the 
country.  All the complaints are forwarded to Consumer 
Coordination Council for appropriate advice/guidance to 
the complainant or to the concerned manufacturers, 
companies, etc for redressal of consumers complaints.  
The Committee observe that the number of complaints 
received is too little specifically when the Cell operates 
at the National level and receive complaints from all over 
the country.  The Committee feel that there is an urgent 
need to make the people aware of the working of the 
aforesaid Cell so that more and more consumers get 
redressal of their complaints through the Cell.  The 
Department should take all the desired action in this 
regard.   
 
35. 8.6 The Committee further note that the working of the Cell is being 
reviewed by the Government from time to time.  In this regard, 
the Committee would like to be informed about the mechanism 
of getting feedback from consumers to know about the 
satisfaction level of the consumers. 
 
36. 8.7 The Committee also note that the Consumer Grievance 
Redressal Cell also takes suo moto action by attending 
to complaints appearing in the columns of the 
newspapers.  The Committee while appreciating the 
aforesaid mechanism of redressal of complaints of 
consumers would like to be informed about the number 
of complaints attended by the Cell as appeared in the 
various columns of newspapers so as to know the 
effectiveness of the aforesaid mechanism of redressal of 
consumer grievances.  Besides various grievances 
received from the Cabinet Secretariat and PMO related 
to consumer matters are also attended to.  The 
Committee would like to be informed about the nature of 
issues received through Cabinet Secretariat and PMO.   
 
37. 8.8 The Committee also find that Consumer Grievance 
Redressal Cell has been set up at the National level and 
is addressing to complaints of consumers received from 
all over the country.  The Committee feel that similar 
Consumer Grievance Redressal Cell need to be set up 
in various States.  The Committee would like that the 
State Governments/Union Territory Administrations 
should be persuaded to set up such Cells in each of the 
State/UT.  

 
 
38. 9.8 The Committee are concerned to note that only few items are 
covered in mandatory certification by BIS.  Further, BIS has 
published 9540 number of product specifications which specify 
the requirements of specific products taking into account the 
concerns of all stakeholders like consumers, manufacturers, 
research organizations, regulatory bodies, etc. which are part of 
the technical committee deciding on such specifications.  The 
Committee note that factors such as Consumer Health, Safety, 
Security, Environment, Infrastructure, Protection of local 
population against spurious foreign made goods and items of 
mass consumption are taken into consid eration while deciding 
whether to include a product under mandatory certification or 
otherwise.  The Committee have further been informed that as 
against 9540 product certifications, only 110 have been 
covered and 71 more items are proposed to be covered u nder 
mandatory certification.   The Committee are not satisfied with 
the pace with which the items are classified under mandatory 
certification.  The Committee desire that more items should be 
brought under mandatory certification especially in regard to 
consumer health, safety, security and items of mass 
consumption.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken by the Government in this regard. 
 

 
39. 9.9 The Committee note that Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery 
Scheme was launched by BIS in A pril, 2000 on voluntary basis 
and 45 hallmarking centres for gold jewellery have been 
recognized by BIS in the country.  The Government have now 
launched a Pilot Project at a cost of Rs. 5.75 crore to give       
incentives/assistance/training to Hallmarkin g Centres. The 
Committee have been informed that there is a proposal to 
make gold hallmarking mandatory by 2008. The Committee feel 
that making hallmarking mandatory will further protect 
consumers from being exploited through sale of gold 
ornaments of lower carratage than what they have paid for. For 
this, adequate infrastructure in the form of Assaying and 
Hallmarking Centers are required on a large scale. The 
Committee desire that work on the pilot project launched for 
providing incentives / assistance / training for setting up 
additional Hallmarking Centers be expedited so that adequate 
infrastructure for assaying and hallmarking gold jewellery is 
available when the scheme is made mandatory. 
 
40. 10.13 The Committee find that as the law stands today, a p rospective 
investor i.e. applicants for shares, etc. is not covered within the 
definition of consumer as provided for in the Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986. However, after the transactions are over 
and the shares etc. are allotted in the name of investor, o ne 
becomes a consumer.  Thereafter such person can move the 
Consumer Forum with regard to any dispute/grievance. It has 
further been brought to the notice of the Committee that this was 
the recommendation of one of the Working Groups and a 
proposal to brin g persons such as prospective investor within 
the definition of consumer is under consideration of the 
Government. The Committee are of the view that cases are not 
rare where a prospective investor has been cheated and there 
has not been any effective mech anism to redress his 
grievances.  The Committee hope that in the interest of the 
consumers at large, the Government would make efforts to bring 
such people within the definition of consumer without any further 
loss of time.  
 
41. 10.14 The Committee note that the Consumer Protection Act has 
been enacted for providing simple, quick and inexpensive 
justice to all consumers.  The Committee are aware that 
exemption has been given to “Antyodya Anna Yojana” 
beneficiaries from payment of fee for filing of complai nts upto 
Rs. 1 lakh.  The Committee feel that as consumer protection is 
at a nascent stage and also as the fee charges are not enough 
to deter frivolous litigants, there is no need to levy fee for filing 
of complaints by consumers. 
 
42. 10.15 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that in many 

instances, the seller or service provider either refuses or do not 
issue bills, cash memo, receipt etc. to the consumer on 
purchase.  As a result, no actionable claim can be filed under 
Consumer Protection Act.  The Committee have been informed 
that the refusal or failure to issue bills/cash memo/receipt etc. is 
proposed to be covered as one of the unfair trade practices 
under the Consumer Protection Act.  The Committee desire 
that the Act be amended to take care of above infirmities. 
 
43. 10.16 The Committee find that manufacturers and traders resort to 
different types of schemes to promote sale of their products.  
Sometimes there is compromise on the quality of the products 
to compensate the cost of prov iding attractive schemes. The 
consumers are thus cheated as they do not get the value of the 
money spent to purchase the product.  The Committee find that 
at present there is no regulating mechanism in this regard. The 
Committee note that the Department propose to amend Section 
2(I)(r)(3) of the Consumer Protection Act to effectively protect 
the interests of consumers from such practices of trade and 
industry.  The Committee would like to emphasize to finalize 
the aforesaid proposal expeditiously so as to p rotect the 
interests of consumers. 
 
44. 10.17 The Committee note that services rendered on consideration 
are included within the purview of the present Consumer 
Protection Act. In the opinion of the Committee, one of the 
major problem areas has been defic iencies on the part of 
Municipalities in providing services which are mandatory in 
nature.  These services include health, medical service, 
garbage disposal, drinking water, drainage, etc.  The 
Committee have been informed that one of the Working Groups 
set up in connection with protection of consumer interest had 
recommended to bring all mandatory Municipal services within 
the ambit of this Act.  However, the proposal, after due 
consideration and consultation, was finally deferred as the 
service providers from State Governments as well as many 
Central Ministries/Departments expressed their inability to 
provide expected standards due to various resources and 
capacity constraints.  The Committee are pained to note that 
the Government preferred administration and financial 
constraints over the interests of consumers and deferred the 
proposal, on the pretext that this is not the appropriate stage for 
such a provision.  The Committee feel that the reasons stated 
above for deferring the proposal are merely delayin g tactics on 
the part of both Central and State Governments who are 
shirking their responsibility towards citizens and consumers 
and denying them a right to good living. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the recommendation of the Working 
Group to in clude all mandatory Municipal services within the 
ambit of this Act be implemented in letter and spirit so as to 

ensure best services to the consumers. 
 
45. 10.18 The Committee have taken note of the upsurge in the prices in 
housing sector consequent upon  booming economy.  Taking 
undue advantage of imbalance in demand supply equilibrium, 
various housing authorities in Government and private sectors 
are inducing consumers.  For instance, recently DDA, GDA, 
Greater Noida and HUDA announced their housing sche mes 
for different categories of consumers.  Surprisingly, the 
brochure containing information about the various schemes of 
these authorities were priced between Rs. 160 to Rs. 1000.  
There has been similar experience noticed in the admission to 
professional colleges for courses such as engineering, 
architect, medical, pharmacy and other professional courses 
where not only the prospectus are highly priced but also the 
counseling conducted for these courses are also at exorbitant 
rates and varies from Rs. 1,0 00 to Rs. 5,000 in some of the 
cases.  The Committee do not subscribe to the view of the 
Government that in the current liberalized regime, it is the 
market forces which should determine the price at which a 
good or a service is made available to a potenti al consumer.  
The Government have further stated that the housing 
board/promoter of housing societies are at liberty in fixing the 
prices for different categories of consumers.  Government’s 
role would limit to ensuring fair competition and in removing 
factors that impede the play of market forces.  The Committee 
are of the view that in a welfare State, Government should 
ensure that all sections of the society are treated alike and 
there is no monopolistic tendency by which a citizen is 
exploited.  The Comm ittee, therefore, desire that the 
monopolistic tendency on the part of housing boards which 
take undue advantage of shortage of housing and exploit the 
gullible consumers needs to be checked. The Committee 
desire that besides ensuring fair competition, the  Government 
should intervene in the matter and not let Housing 
Boards/Promoters of Housing Societies get away with this 
easily.  An affordable token money not exceeding Rs. 100 can 
be charged in above cases to ensure maximum participation.  
The Committee a lso want that the matter regarding price of 
prospectus and counselling should be taken up at the highest 
level with the Department of Higher Education and Department 
of Urban Development.  The Committee should be apprised of 
the action taken in the matter. 
 

 
46. 10.19 In the era of e -transaction, there has been aggressive 
marketing and sale of products and services by internet, e -
mail, telephonically and other means of transactions.  In these 
cases, the consumer does not have any opportunity of 
examining the products or services prior to the purchase.  
Fleecing or looting of consumers cannot be ruled out in such 
transactions.  At times, no opportunity or time limit is provided 
to a consumer within which he may withdraw goods or services 
and get the refund of money already paid.  The Committee feel 
that there is a need to provide an opportunity to a consumer to 
return the product or seek withdrawal of service and get back 
the money paid without having to file complaint in the 
Consumer Fora.  The Committee ha ve been informed that 
Government propose to provide a suitable provision in the 
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 to tackle such kinds of 
transactions.  The Committee desire that the Act be amended 
to take care of these eventualities.  
 
47. 10.20 It has been observed that charges levied for analysis of any 
sample/test of any goods, acts as a deterrent in asserting one’s 
right under the Consumer Protection Act.  The Committee note 
that this provision has been incorporated in the Act to avoid 
filing of frivolous  complaints by miscreants.  Yet, instances 
cannot be ruled out where a consumer does not exercise the 
option of getting a product tested on account of prohibitive 
cost.  The Committee note that in case a complainant 
succeeds in the case, he is liable to ge t back the testing fee 
paid besides other cost as decided by the Consumer Forum. 
However, this mechanism of levying fee, deters many genuine 
consumers from actually getting the samples/goods tested on 
their own.  The Committee desire that in the event of d ispute 
being less than Rs. 50,000 or less, the Government should get 
test undertaken in their own labs and without charging any fee 
thereon.  For this, the Government should set up adequate 
laboratories where such tests can be performed free of cost. 
 
48. 10.21 The Committee have observed that at times the consumers do 
not have any choice but to accept unilateral one -sided terms of 
contract while purchasing gadgets like Washing Machine, Fax, 
Telephone instrument, Fridge etc.  These unilateral provisions 
also generally disclaim and deny any responsibility for serious 
defects, deficiencies and delays.  Similarly, certain 
manufacturers and service providers also restrict their liability 
to a shorter period of time even though the durable life of the 
goods sold or the service performed are designed for a much 
longer time.  The Committee note that all these instances, 
undoubtedly point towards exploitation of consumers and there 
is hardly any redressal mechanism available under Consumer 
Protection Laws.  The Comm ittee have been informed that as 

per a recent ruling of the Supreme Court, any contract or any 
condition of contract between two parties of unequal bargaining 
capacities, if they are one sided, unilateral or unfair to the 
weaker party, such contracts or co nditions of contracts are 
unconstitutional, illegal and unenforceable.  The Committee 
have been further informed that there is a proposal to cover all 
these unfair terms of contract as per the law laid down by the 
Apex Court, in the form of unfair trade practices in the definition 
itself.  The Committee hope and trust that the Government 
would review the definition of unfair trade practices in the light 
of the above and the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 amended 
suitably.         
 
49. 10.22 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that certain 
telemarketing companies, credit cards, insurance, banks and 
financial institutions, mobile companies etc. share the personal 
data profile of a consumer without one’s knowledge and at 
times on consideration to  other agencies.  As the unsolicited 
telephone calls invade the privacy of an individual, a demand 
has been raised from many quarters to include the disclosure 
of information given in confidence by a consumer as 
deficiencies in service.  Taking into consid eration the 
inconvenience caused to a consumer, the Government is 
considering a proposal to explicitly cover such practices as a 
form of deficiency in service.  The Committee recommend that 
the Consumer Protection Act be amended in the light of above. 
 
50. 10.23 The Committee note that Government propose to set up a 
Authority on the lines of USA’s Consumer Product Safety 
Commission in order to protect the interests of consumers from 
various problems including the menace of counterfeit, fake, 
spurious and contraband products.  The Committee hope and 
trust that such an independent authority would be set up at the 
earliest in the interest of the consumers. 
 
   
 