 STANDING   COMMITTEE  ON 
 FOOD, CONSUMER  AFFAIRS 
 AND  PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
      (2007-2008) 
 
  FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, 
FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
                   contained     in   the   Nineteenth   Report  of  the Committee on Demands  
for   Grants  (2007- 2008)  of   the   Ministry  of    Consumer     Affairs, 
Food   and  Public  Distribution  (Department  of  Consumer  Affairs)] 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2007  /Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) 
22 

TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
 CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND 
 PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2007-2008) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS,  
                 FOOD AND  PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION   
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations  
                   contained   in   the   Nineteenth  Report  of  the Committee  on  Demands 
for  Grants  (2007- 2008)  of   the   Ministry  of    Consumer     Affairs, 
Food   and  Public  Distribution  (Department  of  Consumer  Affairs)] 
 
 
 
      Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.3.2008 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14.3.2008 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2007  /Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) 
 

 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGES 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………… 
 
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government………………….. 
 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies…………………….. 
 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee ……………………………………. 
 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are  
still awaited……………………………………………… 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Committee held on 14.12.2007. 
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government of the     
recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report of                           
the Committee. 
 
III. List of BIS recognized Hallmarking Centres for Gold /Silver. 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOO D, CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2007-2008. 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman      
 
MEMBERS 
 
        Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Govinda Aroon Ahuja 
3. Shri Suresh Angadi 
4. Shri Alakesh Das 
5. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
6. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
7. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
8. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
9. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna  
10. Shri Wangyuh W. Konyak 
11. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
12. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
13. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
14. Shri Ghuran Ram 
15. Shri Munshi Ram 
16. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
17. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
18. Adv. (Smt.) P. Satheedevi 
19. Shri Chandra Bhan Singh 
20. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri T.S. Bajwa 
23. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
24. Shri Ajay Maroo  
25. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik   
26. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
27. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
28. Shri Nabam Rebia  
29. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu  
30. Shri Matilal Sarkar  
31. Shri Thanga Tamil Selvan 

SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. (Smt.) Paramjit Kaur Sandhu - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.K.Misra    - Joint Secretary 
3 Smt. Sudesh Luthra              - Director 
4 Shri Jagdish Prasad              - Deputy Secretary -II 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution (2007 -08) having been authorized by the Committee to 
submit the Report on their behalf, present the Twenty -second Report on action 
taken by the Government on the recom mendations contained in the Nineteenth 
Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2007 -
08) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department 
of Consumer Affairs). 
2. The Nineteenth Report was presented  to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 27 April, 2007.  The Government have furnished replies indicating 
action taken on the recommendations contained in the Report on 26 July, 2007.  
The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on    
14 December, 2007. 
3.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on recommendations 
contained in the Report is given in Appendix–II. 
 
 
NEW DELHI          DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV 
31 December, 2007           Chairman 
10 Pausa, 1929 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Food,  
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants 
(2007-2008) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs). 
 
 
1.2 The report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 27 April, 2007. The action taken notes of the Government to all the 29 
recommendations contained in the report have been received on 26 July 2007 
and categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Serial Nos.  – 1, 2,3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 13, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 28 and 
29. 
 
(Paragraph Nos.  – 3.12,3.13, 3.14, 3.15, 4.5, 4.15, 4.16, 4.17, 4.37, 
                               5.6, 6.16, 6.17, 7.14, 8.4, 8.5, 8.12, 9.5 and 9.6). 
 
(Chapter –II Total 18) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/ Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 
-Nil- 
 
(Chapter –III, Total Nil) 
 
(iii)Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which replies of the   
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
 
      Serial Nos.  –10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 27. 
  
      (Paragraph Nos.  –   4.24, 4.28, 4.36, 4.43, 4.45, 4.46, 4.54,       
                                      and 8.13). 
 
(Chapter –IV Total 8) 
 

(iv)Recommendations in respect of which the final replies of     
     the Government are still awaited: 
 
     Serial Nos.  – 9, 18 and 22. 
  
      (Paragraph Nos.  –  4.22, 4.55 and 7.13). 
 
(Chapter –V Total 3) 
 
1.3 The Committ ee desire that final replies in respect of the 
Observations/ Recommendations for which only interim replies have been 
received from the Government be furnished to the Committee within three 
months of the presentation of the Report. 
  
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of those recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
(A) Ensuring the role of the Department of Consumer Affairs in the 
implementation of Schemes meant for Consumer Awarenes s and 
adequate allocation for the Scheme 
  
Recommendations (Sl. Nos. 4, 5 and 6- Para Nos. 3.15, 4.5 and  4.15) 
 
1.5 The Committee had recommended as below: 
 
“The Committee note that Planning Commission has been 
allocating funds directly to the States for some of the Central 
consumer related schemes without consulting the Department of 
Consumer Affairs. The Department of Consumer Affairs is neither 
aware of the particulars of the specific schemes of States/UTs nor 
about the allocation being made for the sch emes by Planning 
Commission. It is only monitoring a scheme namely Special 
Scheme on Assistance to State Governments/UTs, a sub -scheme 
under the Central Plan. The Committee are not happy with the 
system prevailing in the Planning Commission where the 
allocations are being made to various States without involvement of 
the nodal Union Department of Consumer Affairs. Under these 
circumstances, the Department of Consumer Affairs is helpless to 
demand action taken reports/utilization certificates or to evaluate 
the schemes. In the opinion of the Committee, there are 
possibilities for over lapping of funds. Moreover, there is no 
monitoring mechanism to ensure that the benefits of the schemes 
reach to rural, remote and backward areas. The Committee, 
therefore, reco mmend that the Department of Consumer Affairs 
should be provided some sort of role so as to have proper 
coordination and have an idea of the ground position of consumer 
awareness in various States.” 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.15) 
 
“The Committee note with  concern that the Planning Commission 
has reduced budget allocation for consumer awareness to Rs. 67 
crore during 2007 -08 as compared to Rs. 69.84 and 69.40 crore 
allocated each during 2005 -06 and 2006-07 which in the opinion of 
the Committee is inadequate  to meet the requirement of the 
scheme meant for the entire country. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department of Consumer Affairs should 
pursue the matter with Ministry of Finance to give due weightage to 
the Consumer Awareness related schem es and enhance the funds 
at RE Stage.” 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.5) 
 

 
“The Committee have persistently been insisting on the issue of 
providing adequate emphasis on consumer awareness in rural 
areas in their respective reports. In this regard, the Committ ee note 
that various initiatives have been taken by the Department by way 
of using various mechanisms keeping in view the condition of rural 
areas. In this regard, consumer awareness is being provided 
through nataks in local languages, folk forms/songs, Vi llage Haats/ 
Mandis etc. In North -Eastern Region, Song and Drama Division 
and Field Publicity Units of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting and Publicity Units of the State Governments are 
further proposed to be more extensively involved. In additi on, Rs. 2 
crore have been provided for printing Meghdoot Post Cards 
containing consumer related information in regional languages and 
sell the same from Post Offices located in remote rural areas. While 
noting the initiatives taken by the Department, the C ommittee feel 
that the resources provided to the Department are major concern. 
In view of the reduction in outlay by approximately Rs. 2 crore 
during the year 2007 -08 as compared to previous year, the 
Department has admitted that the various schemes would be 
adversely affected. As recommended in earlier paragraph, the 
Committee emphasize providing adequate outlay so that more 
emphasis can be provided to consumer awareness in rural areas.” 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.15) 
 
 
1.6 The Ministry in the action taken replies have stated as under:- 
 
 “The views of the Standing committee have been conveyed to Planning 
Commission and to the Ministry of Finance.”   
 
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 3.16 and 4.5) 
 
 
“The views of the Standing committee would be kept in mi nd and 
Department will continue to emphasize the importance of consumer 
awareness programmes particularly in the rural areas to the Planning 
Commission as well as Ministry of Finance.” 
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 4.15) 
 
 
 
 

1.7 Pursuant to the recomme ndation of the Committee to provide 
adequate allocation for the schemes meant for consumer awareness, the 
Department has taken up the issue with Planning Commission and Ministry 
of Finance and conveyed the concerns of the Committee in this regard. The 
Committee would like the Department to pursue further with the Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance so that adequate allocation for 
consumer awareness is provided during the year 2007-08.  
 As regards the recommendation of the Committee to ensure some 
sort of the role of the Department of Consumer Affairs in the schemes of 
consumer awareness for which Planning Commission is directly allocating 
outlay to the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations, the 
Committee reiterate their concern. It is di fficult to know the impact of the 
schemes in such a system. Besides it may result in overlapping of funds 
for some of the projects. The Committee urge the Department to take up 
the matter at the highest level and inform the Committee accordingly.  
  
 

 
(B)  Review of the performance of District Fora and State Commissions 
 
Recommendation (Sl. Nos. 10, 11 and 12- Para Nos. 4.24, 4.28 and 4.36) 
 
1.8       The Committee had recommended as below: 
 
“The Committee are concerned to note that despite their repeated 
recommendations in the previous reports to make non -functional District 
Fora functional, still there are 22 Non -functional District Fora in the 
country. Out of these Non -functional District Fora, three each are in the 
five States, viz, Arunachal Pradesh, A ssam, Bihar, Nagaland and Tamil 
Nadu. Two each in Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh and one each in 
Chattisgarh, Kerala and Rajasthan. The reasons for non -functionality of 
the District Fora are stated to be delay in filling of vacancies of President 
and Members of  the District Fora. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that all difficulties should be discussed with the various State 
Governments and all the 22 non -functional District Foras should be made 
functional in the current financial year.” 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.24) 
 
 “The Committee are deeply concerned to note that two posts of President 
and nine posts of Members are vacant in the State Commissions. 
Similarly, 49 posts of President and 181 posts of Members are vacant in 
different District Fora. In some of the States, the vacancy position of the 
Members is worst viz Arunachal Pradesh (16), Bihar (17), Gujarat (13), 
Madhya Pradesh (17), Rajasthan (31) and Tamil Nadu (21). The 
Committee have been informed that another reason, which has impeded 
the disposal of cases in time, is failure to fill the vacancies in the District 
Fora and State Commissions in time. In this regard, the States/UTs have 
been advised by the Department to maintain a panel of 
Presidents/Members to avoid delay in filling the vacant posts. The  
Committee note with concern that despite instructions, all States are not 
maintaining a ready panel of President and Members to fill vacancies 
arising in the District Fora. The Committee feel that this causes hindrance 
in the smooth disposal of cases. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
vacancy position in all the District Fora across the country should be 
reviewed regularly and all out efforts be made to fill the vacancies at the 
earliest.” 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.28) 
 

“The Committee are not sat isfied with the large number of cases pending 
in the State Commissions as well as District Fora. In some of the States 
like Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Haryana, Maharashtra and Uttaranchal, a 
large number of cases are pending with State Commissions of the 
respective States. Similarly, the position of cases pending with District 
Fora of Andhra Pradesh, Punjab and Uttaranchal is far from satisfactory. 
The main reasons for poor disposal of cases in the States as indicated by 
the Department are (i) appeals and revis ion petitions; (ii) non -filling of 
posts of President and Members on time; (iii) non -creation of additional 
Benches and; (iv) inadequate staff etc. For quick disposal of cases, the 
Department has requested 15 State Governments to establish 46 
additional Be nches to handle the work but such Benches have not yet 
been set up in most of the States. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
all out efforts should be made to dispose off the cases within prescribed 
period by setting up additional Benches in the States where pending 
number of cases is too high. The Committee also desire that a suitable 
strategy be chalked out in consultation with State Governments to reduce 
the pending cases to the barest minimum. To achieve this, the Committee 
recommend that the Governm ent should review periodically the situation 
in each quarter and issue suitable instructions for the disposal of the 
cases.” 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.36) 
 
1.9 The Ministry in the action taken replies have furnished a common reply to 
the aforesaid recomme ndations of the Committee which has been 
reproduced as   under:- 
 
“The Central Government has been regularly taking up the matter 
with the States/UTs even at highest level, requesting them to 
expedite corrective measures. Besides the performance of all 
Consumer Fora is also analyzed regularly Statewise through their 
periodical monthly & quarterly reports and remedial actions are 
suggested accordingly. However, on receipt of the 
observations/recommendations of the Standing Committee, the 
matter has again bee n taken up with the concerned States/UTs 
vide Secretary, Consumer Affairs’ letter D.O. No. 5(2)/2007 -CPU 
dated 28.5.2007. The Central Government has been all along 
making sincere efforts to ensure that all Consumer Fora remain 
functional all the time.” 
 
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 4.24, 4.28 and 4.36) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1.10 The Committee in the earlier recommendations had reviewed the 
performance of District Fora and State Commissions and recommended as 
under: 
 
(i) action should be taken to make 22 non -functional District Fora as 
functional in the current year after taking the desired action in 
consultation with various State Governments; 
 
(ii) vacancy position in District Fora across the country should be 
reviewed regularly and all out efforts made to fill the vacancies at 
the earliest; and 
 
(iii) the position of pending cases should be reviewed periodically in 
each quarter and necessary instructions issued for the disposal 
of cases in various State Commissions and District Fora. 
 
In response to all the aforesaid recommendation s, the 
Department has written a D.O. letter to all the States/UTs. The 
Committee feel that merely corresponding with the State 
Governments/UTs would not serve the purpose. The various problems 
being faced by the District Fora and State Commissions need to be 
reviewed in consultation with various State Governments/UTs. The 
Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation would like the 
Department to take all the actions as recommended in the earlier 
recommendations and inform the Committee about the concrete 
measures taken in this regard. 
 

(C) Lack of Infrastructure in State Commissions and District Fora 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14- Para No. 4.43) 
 
1.11 The Committee had recommended as below: 
 
“The Committee note that lack of infrastructure is the ma jor issue which 
need to be addressed to make the State Commissions and District Fora 
effective. In this regard certain outlay is being provided under the scheme 
‘Integrated Project on Consumer Protection’. Besides the Department is 
pursuing with the State Governments to provide adequate Budgetary 
support for the consumer protection in respective programmes/ activities 
in their State Budgets. The Committee recommend that adequate outlay 
should be provided under the aforesaid scheme so that the maximum help 
could be provided to the State Commissions and District Fora to address 
the problem of inadequate infrastructure. Besides the Committee would 
also like the Department to pursue further with the State Governments to 
make provision of outlay for consumer protection in their State Budgets.” 
 
1.12 The Ministry has stated as under:- 
 
“Assistance under the scheme of Integrated Project on Consumer 
Protection is being extended to States/UTs so as to provide a minimum 
level of facilities at each Consumer forum requir ed for its effective 
functioning. For release of assistance, benchmarks have been formulated 
by the Department of Consumer Affairs which provide Rs. 90.lakhs for the 
State Commission, which includes Rs. 75 lakhs as assistance for Building 
and Rs. 15 lakhs for various items under non - building assets. Similarly, a 
provision of Rs. 36 lakhs has been made for extending assistance to 
District Forum, which includes Rs. 30 lakhs for building and Rs. 6 lakhs for 
various items under non -building assets. Till date a n amount of               
Rs. 4549:63 lakhs has been released under this scheme                        
(Rs. 4032.13 lakhs during 2006 -07 and Rs.  517.50 lakhs during 2007 -08) 
to strengthen the infrastructure of 15 State Commissions, 7 Circuit 
Benches of St ate Commissions and 374 District Fora spread over 16 
States.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1.13 The Committee in the earlier recommendations had stressed to 
provide adequate outlay under the scheme ‘Integrated Project on 
Consumer Protection’ meant to help the State Governments  in providing 
adequate infrastructure for State Commissions and District Fora. Instead of 
taking the concrete measures in this regard, the Department has indicated 
the detailed mechanism of providing allocation to various State 
Governments for the purpose,  which is already known to the Committee. 
The Committee are not satisfied with the way the Department has 
addressed the recommendation. Lack of infrastructure is the perennial 
problem being faced by various State Commissions and District Fora and 
need to b e addressed urgently so as to ensure effective functioning of 
these Fora.  In view of this, the Committee would like the Department to 
take up the issue with the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance.  
 
The Committee in the earlier recommendation had als o desired that 
the Department should pursue with the State Governments to make 
provision of outlay for consumer protection in their State Budgets. The 
Department has not addressed to the aforesaid part of the recommendation 
in the action taken reply. The C ommittee would like the categorical 
response of the Government in this regard.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
(D)  Construction of NCDRC Building 
 
Recommendations (Sl. Nos. 15 and 16- Para Nos. 4.45 & 4.46) 
 
1.14  The Committee had recommended as below:- 
 
“The Committee note that de cision has been taken to provide a decent 
space to National Consumer Dispute Redressal Commission and as such 
specific allocation is being earmarked since the year 2004 -05 Rs. 5 crore 
were allocated during 2004 -05. However the amount could not be utilized 
and was diverted to revenue head at the Supplementary Grants stage. 
Subsequently during the year 2006 -07, the outlay of Rs. 3.15 crore was 
earmarked and remained unutilized. Now again during the year 2007 -08 
Rs. 4.5 crore has been allocated for the constru ction of Upbhokta 
Bhawan, a building to accommodate National Consumer Dispute 
Redressal Commission (NCDRC). The Committed note that in pursuance 
of the recommendations of the Standing Committee the matter is being 
taken up by the Department of Consumer Aff airs with the Ministry of 
Urban Development at the highest level.” 
 Recommendation (Para No. 4.45)  
 
“Ministry of Urban Development too has taken up the matter with 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) for early clearance of construction 
of the building. Whereas the lay out plan has been approved by Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi (MCD), the clearance of plans/drawing of the 
proposed building is still pending with the Municipal Corporation of Delhi 
(MCD). While noting the aforesaid position, the Committee em phasize to 
pursue the matter further with the Ministry of Urban Development so that 
the work on the construction of the Upbhokta Bhawan Building starts 
during the year 2007-08 and the allocation made is meaningfully utilized.” 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.46)  
 
 
1.15  The Ministry in the action taken replies has furnished a common reply to 
the aforesaid recommendations of the Committee which has been stated as 
under:- 
 
“The Department of Consumer Affairs has been taking up the matter 
regarding early construction of building for NCDRC with the Ministry of 
Urban Development at the highest level from time to time. It may be added 
here that after getting the recommendations of the Standing Committee, 
the matter was again taken up with the Ministry of Urban Development  at 
Secretary level on 28.5.2007 followed by one more letter dated 8.6.2007 

for early clearance for construction drawings of the building so that the 
funds allocated for the purpose in the current financial year are utilized in 
this financial year itself a nd the work of construction of the building 
completed as per schedule. Inviting attention to concern of the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee, the Ministry of Urban Development 
has also taken up the matter on 15.6.2007 with Municipal Corporation of 
Delhi fo r early clearance of construction drawings of the building. This 
Department would also continue to follow up with the Ministry of Urban 
Development in the matter.” 
 (Reply to Recommendation Para Nos. 4.45 and 4.46) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1.16 The Committ ee have persistently been recommending for early 
completion of Upbhokta Bhawan building planned to accommodate 
National Consumer Dispute Redressal Commission (NCDRC) in the 
respective reports. Inspite of that, the project is being delayed due to non 
clearances by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi. Even after the passage of 
more than six months when the Committee reiterated their concern while 
examining DFG 2007 -08, no progress seems to have been made. 
Substantial allocation for the project is being made si nce 2004 -05 which 
ultimately remained unutilized due to the procedural clearances. During the 
year 2007 -08, Rs. 4.5 crore have been allocated which may again remain 
unutilized keeping in view the status of the project report as furnished by 
the Department.   
   
The Committee deplore the way the allocations are being made 
without any planning which remain unutilized and are surrendered 
ultimately. Such a state of affair results in depriving other crucial projects 
from the resources.  The Committee feel that lack of coordination between 
various agencies is the main reason for delay in various clearances for the 
project. The Committee would like the Department to discuss the issue with 
the Ministry of Urban Development and MCD around the table so that 
various c learances are obtained and the project starts, resulting in 
meaningful utilization of the allocation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
(E) Consumer Welfare Fund-Non-utilization of funds by  NGOs/VCOs 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17-  Para No. 4.54) 
 
1.17 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
 
 “The Committee note with concern that the Ministry has not been able to 
utilize the entire fund earmarked under the scheme ‘Consumer Welfare 
Fund’. Every year a huge amount is provided but only one fourth of the 
fund is being utilized b y the Government. Most of States have not 
submitted the information regarding framing of guidelines for State 
Welfare Fund. Further utilization certificates in respect of Rs. 46,26,025 for 
the funds released to NGOs/VCOs since 1994-95 have not been received. 
The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants of the previous 
year (refer para 3.40 of 13 report) had recommended to get the matter 
examined in consultation with the Central Vigilance Committee (CVC) so 
as to fix the accountability of such NGOs/V COs . In pursuance of the 
aforesaid recommendation of the Committee the Department had sought 
the advice of CVC and CVC had advised to conduct a preliminary enquiry 
to assess the violation and misuse of Government fund by NGOs and to 
lodge a complaint with  CBI. As regards the latest position in this regard 
the Department has taken up the matter with the concerned States and 
Union Territory Administrations . The name of NGOs have also been put 
on the website of the Department. The Committee strongly recommen d to 
the Department to pursue further with the State Governments/ Union 
Territory Administrations and to ensure that the preliminary enquiry is 
conducted at the earliest against the aforesaid NGOs/VCOs. As 
recommended earlier by the Committee aforesaid NGO s/VCOs should be 
black listed so as to debar them from any Government funding.” 
 
1.18 The Ministry in the action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“The directions/advice of the parliamentary Standing Committee has been 
accepted and the matter is being pur sued vigorously with the State 
Governments/Union Territory Administrations to obtain and send the 
Utilisation Certificates and settlement documents of the defaulting 
voluntary organizations or take appropriate action against them.  Many 
Utilisation Certifi cates, other documents have since been received.  
However, efforts are on to update /settle as many cases as possible in 
association with the State Governments/UnionTerritory Administrations.” 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
1.19 The Committee while examining the Demands for Gran ts for the year 
2005-06 had raised the issue of non -submission of Utilization Certificates 
amounting to Rs. 46,26,025 allocated out of Consumer Welfare Fund to 
NGOs/VCOs. The Committee had also recommended to get the matter 
examined in consultation with Ce ntral Vigilance Commission (CVC). Even 
when CVC had advised to conduct a preliminary enquiry and the 
Committee have persistently been emphasizing on completion of the 
preliminary enquiry expeditiously, sufficient action has not been taken by 
the Department . Almost more that three years have passed since the 
Utilization Certificates are pending from NGOs/VCOs and more than two 
years have passed since the Committee had been raising the issue 
persistently in their reports, the Department is yet to complete the  
preliminary enquiry in this regard as suggested by CVC.  
 
 The Committee deplore the way the enquiry is being delayed. The 
Committee feel that action taken against the NGOs/VCOs for 
misappropriation of fund may act as a deterrent for other NGOs/VCOs. In 
view of this the Committee would like the Department to take the urgent 
action to complete the preliminary enquiry and lodge the complaint with 
CBI without any further delay. The Committee may be kept apprised 
accordingly.   
 
 
 
 
 
 

(F) Misuse of ISI Mark. 
 
Recommendations (Sl. Nos. 24 and 25 - Para Nos. 8.4 and 8.5) 
 
1.20 The Committee had recommended as below: 
 
 “The Committee note that BIS came into existence on 1 April, 1987 with a 
broadened scope and more powers taking over the staff, assets, liabilities  
and functions of ISI. The Committee also note that the BIS Certification 
Marks Scheme is primarily voluntary in nature. However, keeping in view 
the health and safety of the consumers, 109 products have been brought 
under mandatory certification of BIS th rough various Quality Control 
Orders/Acts. In this regard, during the period 1 April, 2005 to 29 March, 
2007, 446 raids were conducted by BIS to check the misuse of ISI Mark 
and 407 cases have been taken up for prosecution during the same period 
which includes the prosecution of defaulters during the raids conducted in 
previous years. As regards the details of market samples tested by BIS 
during the year 2006 -07, 9748 market samples were tested against which 
2160 samples failed.” 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8.4) 
 
“The Committee further note that in case of failure of samples, action as per 
BIS guidelines is taken which include notice for taking necessary corrective 
action under intimation to BIS for verification during its subsequent visit and 
issuance of ‘Sto p Marking’ instructions. In this regard, the Committee would 
like to be informed about the number of such notices issued for ‘Stop 
Marking’ instructions. Further, the Committee find that the number of 446 
raids conducted all over the country during the two  years is too little keeping 
in view the large size of the country. To ensure the quality of products, 
stringent measures should be taken by undertaking more raids and taking 
strict action against the defaulters. The Committee would like the 
Department to take all the steps and intimate the Committee accordingly.” 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8.5) 
 
1.21  The Ministry in the action taken replies have stated as under: 
 
“This is only an observation by the Committee. Incidentally, the number of 
products under mandatory certification has been brought down to 68.”  
 
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 8.4) 
 
 
 
 

“Consequent upon failure of samples, action as per BIS guidelines is 
initiated which also includes issuance of ‘Stop Marking’ instructions.  In 
this regard, it is inf ormed that a total of 1316 stop marking instructions 
were issued during the period 2006 -07. These instructions were passed 
due to failure of samples collected from factory and market; unsatisfactory 
surveillance inspections, etc.   
It may be mentioned that  BIS has already taken necessary steps 
for strengthening the enforcement activity in the year 2006 onwards by 
appointing two outsourced agencies for 8 major locations at National 
Capital Region (NCR), Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, Hyderabad, 
Ahmedabad, Bangalore and Jaipur as a pilot project for first time in BIS.  
These agencies were appointed to help BIS in providing information about 
the manufacturers who are misusing ISI Mark without obtaining the licence 
from BIS.  Now a decision has already been taken to appoint outside 
agencies in all the States to assist BIS in gathering information about the 
offenders.  The action for appointment of such agencies is being initiated. 
In order to overcome the constraints in carrying out enforcement as 
well as legal activi ties against the offenders under the BIS Act, the 
following actions have also been initiated: 
  
i)   As per Section 11(1) of BIS Act, the action can be taken 
against any  person who has used the ISI Mark on the product without 
obtaining a licence. However this section does not provide any action 
against the dealers who are storing/selling spuriously ISI Marked products.  
An amendment to this effect is being proposed to bring confiscation of 
spurious goods sold by dealers under the ambit of this Section of t he BIS 
Act. 
  
ii)  Even when the enforcement actions are completed and the 
complaint is filed before the Hon’ble Court, long time taken in delivering 
judgement reduces the deterrent effect of the law.  An amendment is also 
being proposed in Section 33 of t he BIS Act for compounding the offence 
committed by the offender.  Along with this an amendment is being 
proposed for increasing the fine from Rupees Fifty thousand to Five Lakhs 
with a minimum fine of Rupees Fifty thousand. 
 
(Reply to Recommendation Para No. 8.5) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1.22  The Committee find from the replies furnished by the Department 
that certain initiatives are being taken for strengthening the enforcement 
activity.  Certain outside agencies are being appointed to assist BIS in 
gathering information about the offenders who are misusing the ISI mark.  
Besides, certain amendments to the BIS Act are being proposed to 
overcome the constraints in carrying out enforcement as well as legal 
activities against the offenders.  While noting the initiatives take n by the 
Department in this regard, the Committee strongly recommend to expedite 
the proposed amendments to the BIS Act and bring the legislation to the 
Parliament expeditiously.   
 The Committee further note from the reply furnished by the 
Department that the number of products under mandatory certification has 
been brought down from 109 as reported while examining Demands for 
Grants 2007-08 to 68.  The Committee presented the Twentieth Report on 
the subject `Consumer Movement in the country’ to Parliament  on 16 
August, 2007. While examining the aforesaid subject, the Committee had 
been informed that as against 9540 product certification, 110 were covered 
under mandatory certification.  Besides, the Committee had been informed 
that 71 more items were propos ed to be covered under mandatory 
certification.  The action taken reply furnished in response to the aforesaid 
recommendation contradicts the stand taken by the Department during the 
course of examination of the aforesaid subject.  Instead of adding more 
items under mandatory certification as informed to the Committee, the 
number of items is actually being reduced. The Committee would like the 
explanation of the Department in this regard.  Further the Committee would 
like that more and more food products, m edicines, infrastructure material 
should be brought under the category of mandatory certification. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
(G) Hallmarking of Gold Jewellary 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 27 - Para No. 8.13) 
 
1.23 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
 
“The Committee further n ote that at present, there are 45 hallmarking 
centers spreading in 10 States which are not sufficient to cater to all 
jewellers in the country. The Committee are concerned to note that all 
these Hallmarking Centres are centralized in the urban cities only and not 
a single Hallmarking Centre has been set up in rural areas where chances 
of cheating are more. The Committee, therefore, recommend that BIS 
should make efforts to provide facility of assaying and hallmarking of gold 
and silver jewellery in remote a nd backward areas so that the interest of 
consumers are protected by way of ensuring value of money.” 
 
1.24 The Ministry in the action taken reply has stated as under:- 
   
“As on 30 April 2007, 47 hallmarking centers spread in 10 States have 
been recognized by BIS. It may be mentioned that the centres are being 
mainly set up by private entrepreneurs at locations based on commercial 
viability (list enclosed at Appendix -III). It may be observed from the list out 
of 47 centres, except one centre in public sec tor, set up by MMTC at New 
Delhi, all others have been set up by private entrepreneurs/ organizations. 
The role of BIS is the consideration of the application of a centre for 
recognition as per terms and conditions, after being set up. BIS processes 
all such applications expeditiously.   
 
Under the 11 th Plan, a Government scheme for giving financial 
incentive to entrepreneurs/organizations for setting up of gold 
assaying/hallmarking centres is being implemented by BIS. This financial 
incentive is 15 per cent of the cost of machinery and equipment subject to 
a maximum of Rs. 15 lakhs per centre. However for North Eastern and 
special category states, it is 30 per cent of the cost of machinery and 
equipment subject to a maximum of Rs. 30 lakhs. Under the scheme , 
potential applicants have been requested to submit expression of interest 
for setting up of centres at locations other than where centres already 
exist or are coming up under the scheme. This is expected to help in 
ensuring the spread of centres to other locations where none exists.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1.25   Despite the recommendations of the Committee to provide 
hallmarking and assaying facility of gold and silver jewellary in remote 
and backward areas of the country to protect the interest of rural 
consumers, not a  single such Centre has been set up in rural areas. 
Not only that, 47 hallmarking centres setup in 10 States are unevenly 
distributed. The Committee, therefore, desire that at the time of 
scrutiny of applications for setting up potential centres, BIS shoul d 
ensure that remote and backward areas of the country are also 
covered.   
   The Committee further note from the reply that the 
Government is contemplating to bring the hallmarking of gold 
jewellery under mandatory certification w.e.f. 1 January, 2008.  T he 
Committee fail to understand how the Government would ensure the 
mandatory certification of gold jewellery w.e.f. 1 January, 2008 in the 
aforesaid scenario of hallmarking centres in the country, particularly 
in rural areas.  The Committee would like the  Department to take the 
desired action to provide at least one hallmarking centre in each 
district in the country so as to facilitate implementation of mandatory 
certification by the stipulated time frame.   
   The Committee further find from the reply tha t all the centres 
except one have been set up by private entrepreneurs/organizations.  
Only one centre has been set up by MMTC at New Delhi.  The 
Department has launched a scheme for giving financial incentive to 

entrepreneurs/organizations for setting up gold hallmarking centres 
during the Eleventh Plan.  The financial assistance is 15 per cent of the 
cost of machinery and equipment subject to a maximum of Rs. 15 lakh 
per centre in all the States, excepting North Eastern and special 
category States.  In th e case of North Eastern and special category 
States the said incentive is 30 per cent subject to a maximum of         
Rs. 30 lakh.  The Committee note from the position indicated by the 
Department that not even a single hallmarking Centre could be set up 
in rural areas.  The Committee feel that some more incentives on the 
lines of North Eastern States and special category States need to be 
given for rural areas to attract the private sector in setting up the 
centres.  Besides the viability of setting up of hallmarking centres by 
MMTC may also be explored by the Government.  The Committee 
should be kept informed about the initiatives taken by the Department 
on the suggested lines.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para 3.12) 
 
2.1  The Committee note that the Planning Commission has recognized 
consumer protection as a thrust area and has been allocating enhanced outlay 
during each year since 2005 -06 and the outlay which was Rs.  18.25 crore in 
2004-05 was raised to Rs. 107.94 crore in 2005 -06. The allocation was further 
increased to Rs. 163 crore in 2006 -07 and for the current financial year, it has 
been raised to Rs. 213 crore. The Committee are however not satisfied with the 
reduction of outlay by the Ministry of Finance at Revised Estimates Stage. For 
example, in 2005-06, BE of Rs. 107.94 crore was reduced to Rs. 90 crore at RE 
Stage. Similarly, in 2006 -07, BE was Rs. 163 crore which was cut to Rs. 150 
crore at RE Stage. The Co mmittee are of the view that the curtailment of 
allocation at RE stage has serious impact on the implementation of the 
schemes/programmes thereby depriving a large number of consumers from the 
benefits of the schemes/programmes. While recommending for disc ontinuing the 
practice of cut at RE Stage under different schemes, the Committee feel that the 
Department has to ensure meaningful utilization of outlay to convince Planning 
Commission/Ministry of Finance not to curtail the allocation under the respective 
scheme/head. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.2 The curtailment of allocation of Plan Funds in R.E. is on account of the 
fact that Ministry of Finance fixes the ceiling for R.E. on the basis of actual 
expenditure up to the month of September of the year.  The Depar tment had 
initiated new schemes for which the budget allocation was made for the first time 
in the financial year 2006 -07.  Obtaining of in -principle approvals of the Planning 
Commission and holding of SFC/EFC and other procedural requirements have 
delayed incurring of expenditure in the first half of the financial year.  The 
concerned Divisions/agencies have again been impressed upon to incur 
expenditure on various schemes evenly by preparing MEP for each scheme. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Para 3.13) 
 
2.3  The Committee find that the pace of expenditure incurred by the 
Department of Consumer Affairs has decreased during 200 6-07 as compared to 
the financial year 2005 -06. During 2005 -06, the level of utilization of fund was 
94.28 per cent which has decreased to 85.51 per cent during 2006 -07. The plea 
of the Ministry that they could not utilize the entire fund due to non -finalization of 
tenders by DGS&D and non -construction of building of NCDRC are not 
acceptable to the Committee. In the opinion of the Committee, the Ministry 
should make sincere efforts to get the clearance of tenders by DGS&D and PWD 
for construction of NCDRC b uilding. The Committee hope and trust that all the 
procedural formalities would be completed by the Ministry and sincere efforts 
made to ensure cent per cent utilization of the outlay earmarked during 2006-07. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.4 Although provision f or the NCDRC Building was made on the assumption 
that  the CPWD (Ministry of Urban Development) would be  utilizing  the funds  
during the financial year 2006 -07,  but the execution of work could not be 
commenced as the building, being  an  Integrated Proj ect, required various 
clearances. The non -completion of  the procedural requirements by Ministry of 
Urban Development resulted in non-utilization of funds during 2006-07. 
 
In regard to purchases through DGS&D it is submitted that the orders for 
procurement of machinery was placed with DGS&D in August 2006.  As the 
supplying firm was a foreign agency, DGS&D had to make inquiry through 
appropriate channel about the bonafides of the agency.  As such the DGS&D 
could finalize the tender in later part of the fina ncial year & acceptance was 
conveyed to the foreign agency on 30th  March, 2007.  Hence the funds could not 
be utilized due to delay in the finalization of tenders by DGS&D. 
 
  It is, however ensured that every effort will be made to complete the 
process f or procurement of instruments through DGS & D within the same 
financial year so as to avoid savings/surrender of funds in future. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Para 3.14) 
 
2.5 The Committee note that the Department has been allocated Rs. 213 
crore for the financial year 2007-08 which is 31 per cent higher if compared to RE 
of 2006 -07. Out of this, Rs. 29 crore would be utili zed for seven new plan 
schemes during 2007 -08. The Committee have been informed that they have 
signed a MOU with the Planning Commission to merge these schemes but these 
schemes would be continued separately for their better monitoring. The 
Committee find that allocation under every scheme is being made under a 
separate head as reflected in the Outcome Budget. The Committee fail to 
understand continuing implementing various schemes separately when the 
Department has signed MOU with the Planning Commission t o merge these 
schemes. The Committee would like the clarification from the Ministry in this 
regard. The Committee feel that the different schemes having common 
objectives need to be merged to have some tangible impact. The Committee 
would like that the sch emes having common objectives out of these proposed 
new seven schemes with the meagre allocation of Rs. 29 crore should be 
merged. The shortcomings in the implementation of the various schemes can be 
addressed by restructuring the weak areas/component of a scheme/programme.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.6 In the MOU signed by the Department with the Planning Commission an 
amount of Rs.213 crores has been allocated for 2007 -08 for eight major Plan 
Schemes.  The Planning Commission had itself given the names of v arious sub-
schemes to be included in these 8 schemes.  The Planning Commission had not 
given the break-up of the amounts to be spent under each sub -scheme and this 
was done by the Department keeping in view the requirement under the sub -
schemes and for effective monitoring of the expenditure during the year.  Though 
the new schemes viz., Consumer Education & Training, HRD/Capacity Building 
(Rs. 12 crores), State Consumer Helpline (Rs. 5 crores) and National System for 
Standardisation, Data Base, Assessment and Quality Campaign (Rs. 12 crores) 
have been allocated meagre amounts they have to be reflected separately 
because they do not have common objectives.  However, wherever possible the 
recommendation of the Standing Committee to merge schemes having common  
objectives would be followed.  
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
 
 
 

 
Recommendation (Para 3.15) 
 
2.7  The Committee note that Planning Commission has been allocating funds 
directly to the States for some of the Central consumer related schemes without 
consulting the Department of Consumer Affairs. The Department of Consumer 
Affairs is neither aware of the particulars of the specific schemes of States /UTs 
nor about the allocation being made for the schemes by Planning Commission. It 
is only monitoring a scheme namely Special Scheme on Assistance to State 
Governments/UTs, a sub -scheme under the Central Plan. The Committee are 
not happy with the system p revailing in the Planning Commission where the 
allocations are being made to various States without involvement of the nodal 
Union Department of Consumer Affairs. Under these circumstances, the 
Department of Consumer Affairs is helpless to demand action ta ken 
reports/utilization certificates or to evaluate the schemes. In the opinion of the 
Committee, there are possibilities for over lapping of funds. Moreover, there is no 
monitoring mechanism to ensure that the benefits of the schemes reach to rural, 
remote and backward areas. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department of Consumer Affairs should be provided some sort of role so as to 
have proper coordination and have an idea of the ground position of consumer 
awareness in various States. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.8 The views of the Standing committee have been conveyed to Planning 
Commission and to the Ministry of Finance. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see paragraph No. 1.7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para 4.5) 
 
2.9  The Committee note with concern that the Planning Commission has 
reduced budget allocation for consumer awareness to Rs. 67 crore during 2007 -
08 as compared to Rs. 69.84 and 69.40 crore allocated each during 2005 -06 and 
2006-07 which in the opinion of the Committee is inadequate to meet the 
requirement of the scheme meant for the entire country. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Department of Consumer Affairs should persue 
the matter with Ministry of Finance to give due weightage to the Consumer 
Awareness related schemes and enhance the funds at RE Stage.  
 

REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.10 The views of the Standing comm ittee have been conveyed to Planning 
Commission and to the Ministry of Finance. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see paragraph No. 1.7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para 4.15) 
 
2.11  The Committee have persistently been insisting on the issue of providing 
adequate emphasis on consumer awareness in rural areas in their respective 
reports. In this regar d, the Committee note that various initiatives have been 
taken by the Department by way of using various mechanisms keeping in view 
the condition of rural areas. In this regard, consumer awareness is being 
provided through nataks in local languages, folk f orms/songs, Village Haats/ 
Mandis etc. In North -Eastern Region, Song and Drama Division and Field 
Publicity Units of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Publicity Units 
of the State Governments are further proposed to be more extensively invol ved. 
In addition, Rs. 2 crore have been provided for printing Meghdoot Post Cards 
containing consumer related information in regional languages and sell the same 
from Post Offices located in remote rural areas. While noting the initiatives taken 
by the Dep artment, the Committee feel that the resources provided to the 
Department are major concern. In view of the reduction in outlay by 
approximately Rs. 2 crore during the year 2007 -08 as compared to previous 
year, the Department has admitted that the various schemes would be adversely 
effected. As recommended in earlier paragraph, the Committee emphasize 
providing adequate outlay so that more emphasis can be provided to consumer 
awareness in rural areas. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.12 The views of  the Standing c ommittee would be kept in mind  and 
Department will  continue to emphasise the  importance of  Consumer 
awareness programmes particularly in the rural areas to  the Planning 
Commission  as well as  Ministry of Finance. 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
 

 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see paragraph No. 1.7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para 4.16) 
 
2.13 The Committee further note that  to know the exact position of initiatives 
taken by the Department in respect of rural areas, the expenditure made within 
the outlay provided for consumer awareness should be reflected separately in 
the Outcome Budget. The Committee, therefore, recommend t o comply with the 
aforesaid recommendation in the next Outcome Budget. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.14 There is no separate provision under various schemes earmarked for 
Consumer Awareness in  Rural Areas. However recommendations of the 
Committee have been not ed for future compliance & the scheme wise initiatives 
being taken in the rural areas will be projected in the next Outcome Budget.   
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
 
Recommendation (Para 4.17) 
 
2.15  The Committee have analyzed the working of the State Commission and 
District Fora in the subsequent chapter of the report and find that in many 
States/UTs almost Nil applications were filed up during t he last three years. The 
Committee feel that such a state of affairs is due to the lack of awareness 
amongst the persons with regard to their right as citizens particularly in the rural 
and backward areas of the country. The Department should take all the 
necessary steps to increase awareness in the said areas. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.16 With regard to the observations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee 
in this para, it is submitted that the number of cases filed & disposed of during 
last 3 years could  not be submitted to Parliamentary Standing Committee as the 
details were not available with National Commission at that time in respect of 
State Commissions of Andaman & Nicobar Island, Jammu & Kashmir, Sikkim 
and Manipur as well as District Fora of Andam an & Nicobar Islands, Assam, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Manipur and Mizoram. Therefore, it will be incorrect to 
conclude that no cases have been filed in all such Fora during the last three 
years. The figures relating to cases filed & disposed off in State Commissio ns of 

A&N Islands, Jammu &  Kashmir, Sikkim and Manipur which have since been 
furnished by National Commission are as under:- 
 
State 2004 2005 2006 
 Filed Disposed Filed Disposed Filed Disposed 
A & N Islands 2 1 9 1 5 10 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
195 266 202 43 162 34 
Manipur* 0 0 0 0 1 0 
Mizoram 4 0 11 28 6 19 
Sikkim 1 2 0 0 3 1 
 
  The figures relating to cases filed & disposed off in District Fora of A&N 
Islands, Assam, Jammu & Kashmir, Manipur and Mizoram have also been now 
furnished by National Commission and are as under:- 
 
State 2004 2005 2006 
 Filed Disposed Filed Disposed Filed Disposed 
A & N Islands 44 24 50 50 55 46 
Assam 512 323 647 255 620 151 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
813 2496 743 1006 1046 872 
Manipur* 0 0 0 0 12 23 
Mizoram 147 78 40 58 28 28 
Sikkim 3 1 3 0 6 5 
 
* : Manipur State Commission and District Fora did not function during the year 
2003, 2004, 2005 and upto 26 th of September, 2006 due to non appointment 
of the Presidents and Members of the State Commission, Manipur and 
District Fora. 
 
In so far as the number of cases filed in Andhra Pradesh State 
Commission during last 3 years is concerned, the same is not in single digit & as 
per the figures furnished by National Commission, the same are as under:- 
State 2004 2005 2006 
 Filed Disposed  Filed Disposed  Filed Disposed  
Andhra Pradesh 1728 1022 2176 995 1785 464 
 
In so far as creating consumer awareness particularly in rural & backward 
areas of the country is concerned, the important steps that have been 
undertaken by the Department of Consumer Affairs are as under:- 
 
(1) Around 1900 cultural programmes organized through the Song and Drama  
Division of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting; 
(2) Activities undertaken by the State Governments through Panchyayats to 
educate  consumer related messages/information at grass root level; 

(3) Telecast of Video/ audio spots from Doordarshan/All India Radio/ regional  
channels in local languages; 
(4) Distribution of publicity material in the form of folders/posters/ booklets on  
relevant consumer issues by the State Governments in the rural areas; 
(5) Dissemination of information trough Meghdoot Post Cards in association 
with the  Department of Post; and  
(6) Organizing of specific campaign through musical events as well 
print/electronic  media in North Eastern region. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs    
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
 
Recommendation (Para 4.37) 
 
2.17  The Committee further note with concern that in many St ates/UTs, the 
number of cases filed in State Commissions and District Fora is almost Nil. For 
example, in Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Jammu and Kashmir, Sikkim and 
Manipur, not even a single case was filed in respective State Commissions 
during the last t hree years. In addition, the number of cases filed in other six 
States/UTs viz. Andhra Pradesh, Dadar and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, 
Lakshadweep, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland, are in single digit. Similarly, 
as regards the position of District Fora in many States viz. Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands, Assam, Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur and Mizoram, the number of 
cases filed are zero during the last three years. The Committee conclude from 
the aforesaid information that the State and District Fora are not wor king properly 
in various States particularly in the North-Eastern Region, Lakshadweep and hilly 
States of Jammu and Kashmir. The Committee feel that non filing of almost Nil 
cases in the State Commissions and District Fora in the aforesaid States is due 
to lack of awareness amongst consumer about their rights particularly in rural 
areas. The Committee recommend to the Department to take all the action to 
know the specific reasons of almost non -functional State Commissions and 
District Fora in the aforesaid States/UTs and the Committee be apprised of the 
position. As recommended earlier all the necessary action should be taken to 
create awareness in consumers particularly in rural and backward areas of the 
country. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.18 With regard to th e observations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee 
in this para, it is submitted that the number of cases filed & disposed of during 
last 3 years could not be submitted to Parliamentary Standing Committee. As the 
details were not available with Nationa l Commission at that time in respect of 
State Commissions of Andaman & Nicobar Island, Jammu & Kashmir, Sikkim 
and Manipur as well as District Fora of Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Assam, 

Jammu & Kashmir, Manipur and Mizoram. Therefore, it will be incorrect t o 
conclude that no cases have been filed in all such Fora during the last three 
years. The figures relating to cases filed & disposed off in State Commissions of 
A&N Islands, Jammu &  Kashmir, Sikkim and Manipur which have since been 
furnished by National Commission are as under:- 
 
 
 
State 2004 2005 2006 
 Filed Disposed Filed Disposed Filed Disposed 
A & N Islands 2 1 9 1 5 10 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
195 266 202 43 162 34 
Manipur* 0 0 0 0 1 0 
Mizoram 4 0 11 28 6 19 
Sikkim 1 2 0 0 3 1 
 
The figures relating to cases filed & disposed off in District Fora of A&N 
Islands, Assam, Jammu & Kashmir, Manipur and Mizoram have also been now 
furnished by National Commission and are as under:- 
 
State 2004 2005 2006 
 Filed Disposed Filed Disposed Filed Disposed 
A & N Islands 44 24 50 50 55 46 
Assam 512 323 647 255 620 151 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
813 2496 743 1006 1046 872 
Manipur* 0 0 0 0 12 23 
Mizoram 147 78 40 58 28 28 
Sikkim 3 1 3 0 6 5 
 
* : Manipur State Commission and District Fora did not function during the year 
2003, 2004, 2005 and upto 26 th of September, 2006 due to non appointment 
of the Presidents and Members of the State Commission, Manipur and 
District Fora. 
 
In so far as the number of cases filed in Andhra Pradesh State 
Commission during last 3 years is concerned , the same is not in single digit & as 
per the figures furnished by National Commission, the same are as under:- 
 
State 2004 2005 2006 
 Filed Disposed  Filed Disposed  Filed Disposed  
Andhra Pradesh 1728 1022 2176 995 1785 464 
 

In so far as creating con sumer awareness particularly in rural & backward 
areas of the country is concerned, the important steps that have been 
undertaken by the Department of Consumer Affairs are as under:- 
 
(1) Around 1900 cultural programmes organized through the Song and Drama   
Division of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting; 
(2) Activities undertaken by the State Governments through Panchyayats to 
educate   consumer related messages/information at grass root level; 
 
(3) Telecast of Video/ audio spots from Doordarshan /All India Radio/ regional   
channels  in local languages; 
(4)  Distribution of publicity material in the form of folders/posters/ booklets on  
relevant consumer issues by the State Governments in the rural areas; 
(5) Dissemination of information trough Me ghdoot Post Cards in association 
with the  Department of Post; and  
(6) Organizing of specific campaign through musical events as well 
print/electronic  media in North Eastern region.  
   
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
 
Recommendation (Para 5.6) 
 
2.19  The Committee note that Rs. 5 crore was earmarked during 2006 -07 for 
making payment of salary to skeleton staff and terminal benefits to the outgoing  
employees of the Super Bazaar. Out of this, Rs. 2.25 crore has been utilized and 
the balance amount of Rs. 2.75 crore has been surrendered as the employees 
have refused to take this money as they were expecting the revival of Super 
Bazaar by an order of S upreme Court. Now, the Supreme Court after consulting 
the Central Registrar of Cooperative Societies have decided to accept the 
proposal of M/s Indian Potash Limited and Indian Labour Cooperative Societies 
with the condition to match the bid of Reliance Industry Ltd for Rs. 288 crore. The 
Committee desire that the guidelines framed by Hon’ble Supreme Court for 
revival of Super Bazaar should be strongly adhered to. It should be ensured that 
there is financial accountability on the part of future management a nd employees 
of Super Bazaar, the services of the employees who are not getting terminal 
benefits should be regularized from the date of closing of the Super Bazaar. 
Besides, the Government should strengthen its monitoring mechanism over the 
functioning of  the Super Bazaar so that the consumers may get the essential 
commodities at reasonable prices. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.20 The Liquidator, Super Bazaar has reported that the amount of Rs. 5 crores 
allocated in the Budget for the year 2007 -08 will be utilized for payment of salary 
to skeleton staff and terminal benefits to the outgoing employees subject to the 
final outcome of the pending Special Leave Petition in the Supreme Court 
relating to revival of the Super Bazar. On 12.7.2007, the Supreme Court  
observed that consortium of M/s Indian Potash Limited and Indian Labour 
Cooperative society has fallen, and therefore it has become necessary to invite 
fresh bids. The Supreme Court further directed that Official Liquidator/Central 
Registrar of Cooperative Societies shall now take steps to invite fresh bids within 
four weeks from 12.07.2007. The Committee appointed by Supreme Court is at 
liberty to submit a report to this Court, if so advised, with regard to the new bids 
which are invited. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
Recommendation (Para 6.16) 
 
2.21  The Committee find that Price Monitoring Cell (PMC) set up for monitoring 
the availability of es sential commodities has not been able to check the rise in 
prices and due to that, during last one year, the prices of wheat, pulses and 
edible oils have risen manifold. In order to control the prices of foodgrains, the 
Government have issued a new Control  Order on 29 August, 2006 to authorize 
the State Governments to fix the stock limit in case of wheat and pulses and 
empower them to initiate action against the hoarding of these commodities. The 
Order was initially applicable for six months. However, the v alidity of the order 
has now been extended for a further period of six months from 1 March, 2007.  
 
  The Department has further informed that as per the Standing Order, all 
the State Governments/UT Administrations have to submit monthly reports to the 
Department of Consumer Affairs indicating the action taken under the provisions 
of Essential Commodities Act, 1995 as also Prevention of Black Marketing and 
Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980. The State 
Governments and UT Administratio ns are not regularly furnishing the monthly 
reports inspite of reminders being sent to them from time to time. Inspite of taking 
all the efforts, some State Governments viz. Bihar, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, 
Tripura, Daman and Diu are not at all sending any Act ion Taken Reports. The 
Committee take serious note of the State Governments not furnishing the 
monthly reports. The Committee would like that the Department should take the 
issue at the highest level in various State Governments and take the desired 
initiatives in this regard. The Committee should also be kept apprised. 

 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.22 The Price Monitoring Cell (PMC) in the Department of Consumer Affairs is 
entrusted, inter-alia, with the task of monitoring of the prices and availability 
position of 14 essential commodities in the country. PMC is not mandated to 
control the prices. However, the monitoring of prices on a daily basis and the 
notes prepared by PMC for review of prices at various levels of the Government 
has resulted in taking various measures for checking the rise in prices. 
 
  The rise in prices in respect of wheat, pulses and edible oils during the 
year 2006-07 and 2007-08 was owing to inadequate supplies relative to demand 
and hardening of international prices of these commodities. 
 
 The serious concern of the august Committee has been conveyed to the 
Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs by the Secretary, Deptt. of Consumer Affairs 
vide his d.o. No.10(3)/2007 -ECR&E dated 14 th June, 2007 (copy at Annexure).  
The State Governments/UTs  have been requested to ensure that the monthly 
action taken reports are sent to the Deptt. of Consumer Affairs invariably by 10 th 
of the following month. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated 26th July, 2007 
 
Recommendation (Para 6.17) 
 
2.23 The Committee note that Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and Prevention 
of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 
1980 empowers the State Governments/ UTs to take action against the 
unscrupulous persons indulging in hoarding and black marketing of essential 
commodities. During 2006, 1,35,025 raids were conducted all over the country. 
5,421 persons were arrested, 3,244 persons were prosecuted and 498 pers ons 
were convicted. The Committee are not happy with the low conviction rate which 
comes to just 10 per cent of the persons arrested and about 6 per cent of the 
persons prosecuted. The status Reports under these Acts are not reported by 
nine States which i ndicates the poor monitoring of the schemes by the Central 
Government. Besides, only four States namely, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Orissa and 
Maharashtra have made detentions under the Prevention of Blackmarketing and 
Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commod ities Act, 1980. The Committee 
view the situation seriously and recommend that the Government should 
persuade with the States/UTs to strengthen their enforcement machinery. They 
also desire that the other States should be directed to make detention orders 
under these Acts. 
 
 

 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.24 The unhappiness expressed by the august Committee on (a) non 
reporting of action taken under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 by the 9 
States; (b) low conviction rate vis -à-vis the persons arrested and pro secuted 
under the said Act; and (c) no action of detention being taken by the majority of 
the State Governments/UTs under the Prevention of Blackmarketing and 
Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980, has been 
conveyed to the Chief Secret aries of all the States/UTs through the same d.o. of 
Secretary (CA) referred to in reply to para 6.16 (Sl.No. 20).  All the States/UTs 
have been requested to strengthen their enforcement machinery to prevent 
malpractices in essential commodities and take n ecessary action against the 
unscrupulous persons indulging in hoarding and blackmarketing of essential 
commodities under the provision of the Prevention of Blackmarketing and 
Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
Recommendation (Para 7.14) 
 
2.25 The Committee note that the Government has appointed a Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Prof. Abhij it Sen to go into various aspects of forward 
trading in essential commodities that impact the consumers. All the concerns 
expressed by the Standing Committee in the Seventeenth Report should be 
brought into the knowledge of Prof. Abhijit Sen Committee. The  Committee 
should be kept apprised about the follow up action in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.26 The contents of the Seventeenth Report of the Standing Committee have 
been brought to the notice of the Prof. Abhijet Sen Committee. The Report of the 
Committee is awaited. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
Recommendation (Para 8.4) 
 
2.27  The Committee note that BIS came into existence on 1 April,  1987 with a 
broadened scope and more powers taking over the staff, assets, liabilities and 
functions of ISI. The Committee also note that the BIS Certification Marks 
Scheme is primarily voluntary in nature. However, keeping in view the health and 

safety o f the consumers, 109 products have been brought under mandatory 
certification of BIS through various Quality Control Orders/Acts. In this regard, 
during the period 1 April, 2005 to 29 March, 2007, 446 raids were conducted by 
BIS to check the misuse of ISI Mark and 407 cases have been taken up for 
prosecution during the same period which includes the prosecution of defaulters 
during the raids conducted in previous years. As regards the details of market 
samples tested by BIS during the year 2006 -07, 9748 mar ket samples were 
tested against which 2160 samples failed.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.28 This is only an observation by the Committee. Incidentally, the number of 
products under mandatory certification has been brought down to 68.  
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see paragraph No. 1.22 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para 8.5) 
 
2.29  The Committee furth er note that in case of failure of samples, action as 
per BIS guidelines are taken which include notice for taking necessary corrective 
action under intimation to BIS for verification during its subsequent visit and 
issuance of ‘Stop Marking’ instructions.  In this regard, the Committee would like 
to be informed about the number of such notices issued for ‘Stop Marking’ 
instructions. Further, the Committee find that the number of 446 raids conducted 
all over the country during the two years is too little kee ping in view the large size 
of the country. To ensure the quality of products, stringent measures should be 
taken by undertaking more raids and taking strict action against the defaulters. 
The Committee would like the Department to take all the steps and i ntimate the 
Committee accordingly. 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.30 Consequent upon failure of samples, action as per BIS guidelines are 
initiated which also include issuance of ‘Stop Marking’ instructions.  In this 
regard, it is informed that a total of 1316 stop marking instructions were issued 
during the period 2006 -07. These instructions were passed due to failure of 
samples collected from factory and market; unsatisfactory surveillance 
inspections, etc.   

  
  It may be mentioned that BIS has already taken necessary steps for 
strengthening the enforcement activity in the year 2006 onwards by appointing 
two outsourced agencies for 8 major locations at National Capital Region (NCR), 
Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, Bangalore and Jaipur as a 
pilot project for first time in BIS.  These agencies were appointed to help BIS in 
providing information about the manufacturers who are misusing ISI Mark without 
obtaining the licence from BIS.  Now a decision has already been taken to 
appoint outside agencie s in all the States to assist BIS in gathering information 
about the offenders.  The action for appointment of such agencies is being 
initiated. 
  
  In order to overcome the constraints in carrying out enforcement as well 
as legal activities against the of fenders under the BIS Act, the following actions 
have also been initiated:- 
  
i)   As per Section 11(1) of BIS Act, the action can be taken against 
any  person who has used the ISI Mark on the product without obtaining a 
licence. However this section does not provide any action against the 
dealers who are storing/selling spuriously ISI Marked products.  An 
amendment to this effect is being proposed to bring confiscation of 
spurious goods sold by dealers under the ambit of this Section of the BIS 
Act. 
  
ii)  Even when the enforcement actions are completed and the 
complaint is filed before the Hon’ble Court, long time taken in delivering 
judgement reduces the deterrent effect of the law.  An amendment is also 
being proposed in Section 33 of the BIS Act for com pounding the offence 
committed by the offender.  Along with this an amendment is being 
proposed for increasing the fine  from Rupees Fifty thousand to Five Lacs 
with a  minimum fine of Rupees Fifty thousand. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see paragraph No. 1.22 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para 8.12) 
 
2.31  The Committee note that the Hallmarking S cheme which is on a voluntary 
basis was launched by BIS in April 2000 and later revised in January, 2006. A 
BIS Certificate Jeweller gets his jewellery assayed and hallmarked by any BIS 
recognized Assaying and Hallmarking Centre. The Committee have been 

informed that BIS has conducted 156 jewellers awareness programmes during 
the last three years covering 18 States. Till now, 3437 jewellers have opted for 
gold and 241 jewellers for silver have opted for hallmarking scheme. The 
Committee further note that th e Government is contemplating to bring the 
hallmarking of gold jewellery under mandatory certification w.e.f. 1 January, 
2008. The Committee feel that simultaneous with making the hallmarking of gold 
jewellery mandatory, the BIS should arrange more awarene ss programmes to 
educate the people about the benefits of God/Silver Hallmarking. The Committee 
also recommend that a suitable provision should be made in the BIS Act for 
making the hallmarking mandatory. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.32 As on 30 April 2007, 36 46 jewellers for gold and 255 jewellers for silver 
have opted for Hallmarking scheme. BIS has planned to conduct 58 jeweler 
awareness programmes during 2007 -08 through its Regional/Branch offices all 
across the country.  
 
  An amendment to BIS Act, 1986 ha s also been proposed to address 
hallmarking scheme. Further, Draft, Bureau of Indian Standards (Hallmarking of 
Precious Metal Articles) Regulations, 2007 under the BIS Act have also been 
formulated after taking comments/ views of various stakeholders and a re under 
process in BIS. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated 26th July, 2007 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para 9.5) 
 
2.33  The Committee note that an outlay of Rs. 25.00 crore ha s been provided 
for NTH during the year 2007 -08 as compared to the allocation of Rs. 6.50 crore 
during previous year. Thus, the allocation for NTH has been increased almost 
three and a half times. The Committee also find that National Test House is a 
premier scientific institution of the country and has played a pivotal role in the 
development of indigenous industries and serves as a vital link between 
industrial research and manufacture of finished products under rigid quality 
control. As regards the prior ities during Eleventh Plan, IIM, Kolkata has been 
entrusted a study on viability of NTH in the coming year and submitted its 
preliminary report. As per the findings of the preliminary report, the revenues to 
be generated by NTH from its various activities are expected to rise from Rs. 
5.28 crore in 2006 -07 to Rs. 11.50 crore in 2010 -11. The preliminary report has 
also suggested that NTH will be generating increasingly high revenue from 50 
per cent to 80 per cent of its non -plan expenditure from 2006 -07 to 2 010-11 in 

order to make it self -sufficient to fully meet its non -plan expenditure during 
Eleventh Plan Period. 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.34 The funds worth Rs. 25.00 crore, allocated to NTH by the Department 
during 2007-08, will be utilized under the following heads: 
 
 Land  and  Building : 20.19 crore, Machinery & Equipment: 3.16 crore. 
 Inf & Technology: 0.45 crore, Recurring: 1.20 crore. 
 
 Funds worth Rs. 20.19 crore under the head “Land & Building” will be 
mostly utilized for new construction, running and maintenance of various civil and 
electrical installations in different laboratories in NTH regions.  The schemes will 
include i) Completion of the Acoustics Lab. at NTH(ER), Kolkata, ii) extension of 
NTH(NWR), Jaipur building vertically by one more floo r, iii) Construction of New 
Lab. Building at NTH(NER), Guwahati after demolishing the existing premises of 
semi-permanent sheds, iv) Construction of Phase -II Building at NTH(WR), 
Mumbai, v) Construction of Phase -II Building at NTH(SR), Chennai, vi) 
Construction of additional covered space for creation of Centre of Excellence in 
NTH(NR), Ghaziabad, vii) Establishment of full -fledged Test and Calibration 
Training Centre at NTH(ER), Alipore, Kolkata, and viii) establishment of two 
Satellite Centres at Ranchi, Jharkhand and Jullandhar, Punjab.  As advised by 
Head Quarter, NTH, the different regions of NTH are in the process of liaisoning 
with respective CPWD authorities for getting the schematic drawings of the 
proposed construction works approved by Head Quarters. 
 
 The process for utilizing an amount of Rs. 3.16 crore under the head 
“Machinery & Equipment” is going on for procurement of high -value equipments 
in order to create new facilities and augmenting the existing facilities of the 
laboratories in all the regional centres.  The funds worth Rs. 0.45 Crore would be 
spent on Management Information System (MIS) Network initially at 
NTH(SR),Chennai to facilitate faster, transparent and customer -friendly services 
of NTH.  The amount of Rs. 1.20 crore would be uti lized for plan support 
expenditure, expected to be incurred for development of scientific and 
technological activities of NTH, which will cover the participation of scientists in 
national and international seminars, presentation of papers, training, worksh ops, 
interaction with BIS and other reputed scientific, technological and academic 
institutions and other infrastructure development as well as the development of 
Human Resources for updating the knowledge of the scientists to cope up with 
the trends of modernization with other similar establishments during the said Plan 
period. 
 
 During 2006 -07, NTH has generated revenue worth Rs. 5.27 crore, 
thereby achieving 98.81% of the target, fixed by IIM Kolkata and the ratio of 

revenue to Non -Plan expenditure has b ecome 44.74%. IIM Kolkata has 
submitted the Final Report on the main study on “Relevance and role of NTH in 
the perspective of changed scenario” on 27 th March, 2007.  The Report relating 
to fixing of productivity norms of NTH scientists is likely to be rec eived from IIM, 
Kolkata in October, 2007. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated 26th July, 2007 
 
Recommendation (Para 9.6) 
 
2.35 The Committee further note that besides c ommercial activities, NTH is 
discharging its services in certain non -commercial activities. In addition to this, 
NTH performs certain activities as a part of social welfare service by undertaking 
sensitive tests in quality of portable water, spices, alcoho l, spirits submitted by 
Government Agencies. Keeping in view the aforesaid information provided by the 
Department with regard to the working of NTH, the Committee strongly 
recommend to provide all the help by way of budgetary assistance to National 
Test Ho use so that this premier scientific institution can perform its manifold 
activities efficiently. The detailed findings of the study being made by IIM, Kolkata 
may also be submitted for information of the Committee when the study is 
completed. Besides, the efforts to be made to make NTH self -sufficient and on 
the track of profit making institution should further be continued. 
 
 
 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.36 The Final report on the Main Study of NTH on “Relevance and role of NTH 
in the perspective of changed s cenario” has been received.  NTH, besides the 
existing role in testing and calibration services, is taking efforts to expand its 
activities as reference institution in the areas of operation in national interest.  
NTH is in the process of undertaking test on Packaged Drinking Water (PDW) by 
utilizing the newly installed Gas Chromatography with Mass Spectrophotometer 
(GCMS) at Kolkata and subsequently at its Regional branch Laboratories at 
Ghaziabad and Jaipur.  The final report along with the Productivity N orms of the 
scientists of NTH, is likely    to be submitted by IIM Kolkata in October, 2007. The 
efforts will be made to follow the road map for attaining the self -sufficiency of 
NTH from the period 2006 -07 to 2010 -11, as resolved in the 11 th Executive 
Committee (EC) Meeting of NTH.  As already indicated in reply to paragraph 9.5, 
NTH has achieved 98.81% of the target during 2006 -07.  NTH will gradually drift 
from routine testing and calibration services to high value services, as 
recommended by I.I.M., Kol kata, viz, “Creation of Centres of Excellence”, 

“Software Product Testing”, “Inspection Services” etc., during the self -sufficiency 
period and it is expected that it would be able to generate Rs. 11.50 crore at the 
end of 2010-11.      
 
 The Study of NTH b y IIM, Kolkata consists of two parts:  (i) Main Study  
and (ii) Study on Productivity Norms of NTH Scientists.  IIM, Kolkata in its Main 
Study Report has drawn the following conclusions about the viability of NTH with 
reference to Non Plan expenditure:- 
 
(i) The non -commercial activities undertaken by NTH scientists do not 
constitute more than 10% of their time. 
 
(ii) NTH is a scientific organization with leading role not only in testing and 
evaluation services but it also serves as a reference institution in its 
areas of operation in national interest. 
 
(iii) NTH has proposed to earn upto 56% of Non Plan expenditures till the 
year 2010-11.  But there is scope for further improvement. 
 
(iv) NTH will not be able to earn revenues to pay for all the Non Plan 
expenditures till the end of the current 5 year plan period and be self 
sufficient. 
 
(v) NTH will have to  set increasingly higher revenue targets so that it 
becomes fully self sufficient on Non -Plan expenditures during the 12 th  
Five year plan period.    Therefore, to enable NTH t o achieve self -
sufficiency on Non -Plan expenditure, the following year -wise revenue 
targets  are suggested during the 11 th Five Year Plan (2006 -07 to 
2011-12):- 
 
Year 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
Revenue 
Target as % 
of Non Plan 
Expenditures 
 
50% 
 
65% 
 
70% 
 
75% 
 
80% 
 
  IIM, Kolkata has made a number of significant and relevant 
observations / suggestions for streamlining the functioning of NTH as 
also for making it customer oriented and boosting its market image as 
a testing organization with the  ultimate goal of achieving complete self 
sufficiency in respect of Non Plan expenditure during XII Plan period. 
The broad findings of IIM, Kolkata in its Main Study Report on NTH are 
annexed. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 

 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation (Para 4.24) 
 
4.3  The Committee are concerned to note that despite their repeated 
recommendations in the previous reports t o make non -functional District Fora 
functional, still there are 22 Non -functional District Fora in the country. Out of 
these Non -functional District Fora, three each are in the five States, viz, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Nagaland and Tamil Nadu. Two  each in 
Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh and one each in Chattisgarh, Kerala and Rajasthan. 
The reasons for non -functionality of the District Fora are stated to be delay in 
filling of vacancies of President and Members of the District Fora. The 
Committee, theref ore, recommend that all difficulties should be discussed with 
the various State Governments and all the 22 non -functional District Foras 
should be made functional in the current financial year. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
4.4 The Central Government has been regu larly taking up the matter with the 
States/UTs even at highest level, requesting them to expedite corrective 
measures. Besides, the performance of all Consumer Fora are also analyzed 
regularly Statewise through their periodical monthly & quarterly reports and 
remedial actions are suggested accordingly. However, on receipt of the 
observations/recommendations of the Standing Committee, the matter has again 
been taken up with the concerned states/UTs vide Secretary, Consumer Affairs’ 
letter D.O. No. 5(2)/2007 -CPU dated 28.5.2007. The Central Government has 
been all along making sincere efforts to ensure that all Consumer Fora remain 
functional all the time. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see paragraph No. 1.10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para 4.28) 
 
4.5  The Committee are deeply concerned to note that two posts of President 
and nine posts of Members ar e vacant in the State Commissions. Similarly, 49 

posts of President and 181 posts of Members are vacant in different District Fora. 
In some of the States, the vacancy position of the Members is worst viz 
Arunachal Pradesh (16), Bihar (17), Gujarat (13), Ma dhya Pradesh (17), 
Rajasthan (31) and Tamil Nadu (21). The Committee have been informed that 
another reason, which has impeded the disposal of cases in time, is failure to fill 
the vacancies in the District Fora and State Commissions in time. In this regar d, 
the States/UTs have been advised by the Department to maintain a panel of 
Presidents/Members to avoid delay in filling the vacant posts. The Committee 
note with concern that despite instructions, all States are not maintaining a ready 
panel of President and Members to fill vacancies arising in the District Fora. The 
Committee feel that this causes hindrance in the smooth disposal of cases. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the vacancy position in all the District Fora 
across the country should be reviewed regularly and all out efforts be made to fill 
the vacancies at the earliest. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 4.6 The Central Government has been regularly taking up the matter with the 
states/UTs even at highest level, requesting them to expedite corrective 
measures. Besides, the performance of all Consumer Fora are also analyzed 
regularly Statewise through their periodical monthly & quarterly reports and 
remedial actions are suggested accordingly. However, on receipt of these 
observations/recommendations of the Standing Committee, the matter has again 
been taken up with the concerned states/UTs alongwith other ones vide 
Secretary, Consumer Affairs letter D.O. No. 5(2)/2007 -CPU dated 28.5.2007.  
The Central Government has been all along making sincere efforts t o ensure that 
all vacancies of Presidents/Members in Consumer Fora are filled up at the 
earliest. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see paragraph No. 1.10of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para 4.36) 
 
4.7  The Committee are not satisfied with the large number of cases pending in 
the State Commissions as well as District Fora. In some of the States like Andhra 
Pradesh, Assam, Haryana, Maharashtra and Uttaranchal, a large number of 
cases are pending with State Commissions of the respective States. Similarly, 
the position of cases pending with District Fora of Andhra Pradesh, Punjab and 
Uttaranchal is far from satisfactory. The main reasons for poor disposal of cases 
in the States as indicated by the Department are (i) appeals and revision 

petitions; (ii) non -filling of posts of President and Members on time; (iii) non -
creation of additional Benches and; (iv) in adequate staff etc. For quick disposal 
of cases, the Department has requested 15 State Governments to establish 46 
additional Benches to handle the work but such Benches have not yet been set 
up in most of the States. The Committee, therefore, desire that all out efforts 
should be made to dispose of the cases within prescribed period by setting up 
additional Benches in the States where pending number of cases are too high. 
The Committee also desire that a suitable strategy be chalked out in consultation 
with State Governments to reduce the pending cases to the barest minimum. To 
achieve this, the Committee recommend that the Government should review 
periodically the situation in each quarter and issue suitable instructions for the 
disposal of the cases. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 4.8 The Central Government has been regularly taking up the matter with the 
states/UT even at highest level, requesting them to expedite corrective 
measures. Besides, the performance of all Consumer Fora are also analyzed 
regularly state wise through their periodical monthly & quarterly reports and 
remedial actions are suggested accordingly. However, on receipt of the 
observations/recommendations of the Standing Committee, the matter has again 
been taken up with the concerned states/UTs vi de Secretary, Consumer Affairs 
letter D.O. No. 5(2)/2007 -CPU dated 28.5.2007.  The Central Government has 
been all along making sincere efforts to ensure that the cases filed are disposed 
off within the prescribed time. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see paragraph No. 1.10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para 4.43) 
 
4.9  The Committee note that lack of infrastructure is the major issue which 
need to be addressed to make the State Commissions and District Fora effective. 
In this regard certain outlay is being provided under the scheme ‘Integrated 
Project on Consumer Protection’. Besides the Department is pursuing with the 
State Governments to provide adequate Budgetary support for the consumer 
protection in respective programmes/ activities in their State Budgets. The 
Committee recommend that adequate outlay should be provided under the 
aforesaid scheme  so that the maximum help could be provided to the State 
Commissions and District Fora to address the problem of inadequate 

infrastructure. Besides the Committee would also like the Department to pursue 
further with the State Governments to make provision of outlay for consumer 
protection in their State Budgets. 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 4.10 Assistance under the scheme of Integrated Project on Consumer 
Protection is being extended to States/UTs so as to provide a minimum level of 
facilities at each Consumer forum required for its effective functioning. For 
release of assistance, benchmarks have been formulated by the Department of 
Consumer Affairs which provide Rs. 90.00 lacs for the State Commission, which 
includes Rs. 75.0 lacs as assistance for Building an d Rs. 15.00 lacs for various 
items under non - building assets. Similarly, a provision of Rs. 36.00 lacs has 
been made for extending assistance to District Forum, which includes Rs. 30.00 
lacs for building and Rs. 6.00 lacs for various items under non -building assets. 
Till date an amount of Rs. 4549:63 lacs has been released under this scheme 
(Rs. 4032.13 lacs during 2006 -07 & Rs.  517.50 lacs during 2007 -08) to 
strengthen the infrastructure of 15 State Commissions, 7 Circuit Benches of 
State Commissions and 374 District Fora spread over 16 States. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see paragraph No. 1.13of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para 4.45) 
 
4.11  The Committee note that decision has been taken to provide a decent 
space to National Consumer Dispute Redressal Commission and as such 
specific allocation is being earmarked since the year 2004 -05 Rs. 5 cro re were 
allocated during 2004 -05. However the amount could not be utilized and was 
diverted to revenue head at the Supplementary Grants stage. Subsequently 
during the year 2006 -07 the outlay of Rs. 3.15 crore was earmarked and 
remained unutilized. Now agai n during the year 2007 -08 Rs. 4.5 crore has been 
allocated for the construction of Upbhokta Bhawan, a building to accommodate 
National Consumer Dispute Redressal Commission (NCDRC). The Committed 
note that in pursuance of the recommendations of the Standin g Committee the 
matter is being taken up by the Department of Consumer Affairs with the Ministry 
of Urban Development at the highest level. 
 
 

 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
4.12 The Department of Consumer Affairs has been taking up the matter 
regarding early const ruction of building for NCDRC with the Ministry of Urban 
Development at the highest level from time to time. It may be added here that 
after getting the recommendations of the Standing Committee, the matter was 
again taken up with the Ministry of Urban Dev elopment at Secretary level on 
28.5.2007 followed by one more letter dated 8.6.2007 for early clearance for 
construction drawings of the building so that the funds allocated for the purpose 
in the current financial year are utilized in this financial year itself and the work of 
construction of the building completed as per schedule. Inviting attention to 
concern of the Parliamentary Standing Committee, the Ministry of Urban 
Development has also taken up the matter on 15.6.2007 with Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi for early clearance of construction drawings of the building. 
This Department would also continue to follow up with the Ministry of Urban 
Development in the matter. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see paragraph No. 1.16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para 4.46) 
 
4.13  Ministry of Urban Development too has taken up the matter with Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi (MCD) for early clearance of construction of the building. 
Whereas the lay out plan has been approved by Municipal Corporation of Delhi 
(MCD), the clearance of plans/drawing of the proposed building is still pending 
with the Municipal Corp oration of Delhi (MCD). While noting the aforesaid 
position, the Committee emphasize to pursue the matter further with the Ministry 
of Urban Development so that the work on the construction of the Upbhokta 
Bhawan Building starts during the year 2007 -08 and  the allocation made is 
meaningfully utilized. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 4.14 The Department of Consumer Affairs has been taking up the matter 
regarding early construction of building for NCDRC with the Ministry of Urban 
Development at the highest level from time to time. It may be added here that 
after getting the recommendations of the Standing Committee, the matter was 

again taken up with the Ministry of Urban Development at Secretary level on 
28.5.2007 followed by one more letter dated 8.6.2007 for early c learance for 
construction drawings of the building so that the funds allocated for the purpose 
in the current financial year are utilized in this financial year itself and the work of 
construction of the building completed as per schedule. Inviting attenti on to 
concern of the Parliamentary Standing committee, the Ministry of Urban 
Development has also taken up the matter on 15.6.2007 with Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi for early clearance of construction drawings of the building. 
This Department would also continue to follow up with the Ministry of Urban 
Development in the matter. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see paragraph No. 1.16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para 4.54) 
 
4.15  The Committee note with concern that the Ministry has not been able to 
utilize the entire fund earmarked under the scheme ‘Consumer Welfare Fund’. 
Every year a huge amount  is provided but only one fourth of the fund is being 
utilized by the Government. Most of States have not submitted the information 
regarding framing of guidelines for State Welfare Fund. Further utilization 
certificates in respect of Rs. 46,26,025 for the  funds released to NGOs/VCOs 
since 1994 -95 have not been received. The Committee while examining the 
Demands for Grants of the previous year (refer para 3.40 of 13 report) had 
recommended to get the matter examined in consultation with the Central 
Vigilance Committee (CVC) so as to fix the accountability of such NGOs/VCOs . 
In pursuance of the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee the Department 
had sought the advice of CVC and CVC had advised to conduct a preliminary 
enquiry to assess the violation and  misuse of Government fund by NGOs and to 
lodge a complaint with CBI. As regards the latest position in this regard the 
Department has taken up the matter with the concerned States and Union 
Territory Administrations . The name of NGOs have also been put o n the website 
of the Department. The Committee strongly recommend to the Department to 
pursue further with the State Governments/ Union Territory Administrations and 
to ensure that the preliminary enquiry is conducted at the earliest against the 
aforesaid NGOs/VCOs. As recommended earlier by the Committee aforesaid 
NGOs/VCOs should be black listed so as to debar them from any Government 
funding. 
 

 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 4.16 The directions/advice of the parliamentary Standing Committee has been 
accepted and  the matter is being pursued vigorously with the State Govts./UT 
Administrations to obtain and send the UCs and settlement documents of the 
defaulting voluntary organizations or take appropriate action against them.  Many 
UCs, other documents have since be en received.  However, efforts are on to 
update /settle as many cases as possible in association with the State Govts/UT 
Administrations. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see paragraph No. 1.19 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para 8.13) 
 
4.19  The Committee further note that at present, there are 45 hallmarking 
centers spreading in 10 States which are not sufficient to cater to all jewellers in 
the country. The Committee are concerned to note that all these Hallmarking 
Centres are centralized in the urban cities only and not a single Hallmarking 
Centre has been set up in rural areas where chances of che ating are more. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that BIS should make efforts to provide facility 
of assaying and hallmarking of gold and silver jewellery in remote and backward 
areas so that the interest of consumers are protected by way of ensuring va lue of 
money.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 4.20 As on 30 April 2007, 47 hallmarking centers spread in 10 States have 
been recognized by BIS. It may be mentioned that the centres are being mainly 
set up by private entrepreneurs at locations based on commercial v iability (list 
enclosed).It may be observed from the list out of 47 centres, except one centre in 
public sector, set up by MMTC at New Delhi, all others have been set up by 
private entrepreneurs/ organizations. The role of BIS is the consideration of the 
application of a centre for recognition as per terms and conditions, after being set 
up. BIS processes all such applications expeditiously.   
 
  Under the 11 th Plan, a Govt. scheme for giving financial incentive to 
entrepreneurs/organizations for setting up of gold assaying/hallmarking centres is 

being implemented by BIS. This financial incentive is 15% of the cost of 
machinery and equipment subject to a maximum of Rs. 15 lakhs per centre. 
However for North Eastern and special category states, it is 30% of t he cost of 
machinery and equipment subject to a maximum of Rs. 30 lakhs. Under the 
scheme, potential applicants have been requested to submit expression of 
interest for setting up of centres at locations other than where centres already 
exist or are coming  up under the scheme. This is expected to help in ensuring 
the spread of centres to other locations where none exists. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see paragraph No. 1.25 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Para 4.22) 
 
5.1  The Committee appreciate that the Department is working on the issue of 
having Circuit Benches or Circuit hearing Mechanism by the District Fora for 
speedier disposal of cases pending with respective District Fora. In this regard, 
an amendment to th e Consumer Protection Act is being worked out. The 
Committee also note that the system of Circuit Benches at National Commission 
Level has worked well. In the system of Circuit Benches or Circuit hearing, 
District Forums may go to the Tehsil or Block Headq uarters in case there are a 
large number of cases. The Committee would like that an early decision in this 
regard should be taken so as to have some sort of mechanism for redressal of 
grievances of consumers at Tehsil or Block Level. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 5.2 The Observations of the committee have been noted and would be taken 
into consideration suitably while finalizing the proposals for amendment to the 
Consumer Protection Act, 1986. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
 
Recommendation (Para 4.55) 
 
5.3  The Committee note that the Consumer Welfare Fund was set up by 
amending the Central Excise & Salt Act. The main objectives of the fund are to 
provide financial assistance to VCOs, NGOs, State Government etc. for 
promoting and protecting the welfare of consumers, to generate consumer 
awareness and strengthening consumer movement in the country particularly in 
rural areas. The ratio of seed money was also  increased from 10:90 to 50:50 
(Centre/State) with a view to set up such funds in the States and UTs at the 
earliest. The special category States were to be provided the assistance in the 
ratio of 90:10. The Committee note that 19 States have set up the St ate Welfare 
Fund and the remaining States are yet to initiate any action for setting up of State 
Welfare Fund. The Committee desire that the defaulting States may be 

impressed upon to set up such State Welfare Fund at the earliest and the 
Committee be apprised thereof. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 5.4 The directions/advice of the parliamentary Standing Committee have been 
noted and accepted.  All defaulting State Govts. /UT Administrations are being 
reminded periodically to furnish the requisite documents such as  opening of a 
separate account for the State CWF and furnishing its details alongwith proof of 
deposit of the state share of the seed money as also a copy of the notified 
guidelines of the State CWF to facilitate release of the Centre’s Share of the 
seed money,  In view of the inadequate  response from the defaulting States/UT,  
the matter is now being taken up directly with the Principal Secretary/Secretary  
Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs Department in the States/UTs to avail 
of the benefit within a specific time  frame. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated 26th July, 2007 
 
Recommendation (Para 7.13) 
 
5.5  The Standing Committee had examined the Forward Contrac ts 
(Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2006 and presented the Seventeenth report to 
Parliament on 19
th 
December, 2006. The Committee after detailed deliberations 
had strongly recommended that agricultural commodities especially foodgrains 
including coarse grains,  pulses and sugar need not be permitted to be traded in 
the commodity market including forward/future trade derivatives and options. 
Pursuant to the recommendation of the Committee, forward trading of wheat and 
rice was banned w.e.f. 27 February, 2007. Hon ’ble Finance Minister in his 
Speech on Budget (2007 -08) has announced the aforesaid decision of the 
Government pursuant to the recommendation of the Standing Committee. Earlier 
also, the forward trading of Tur and Urad was banned on 2
nd 
February, 2007. The 
Committee feel that the aforesaid decisions speaks volumes of the fact that the 
concept of future /forward trading in essential commodities needs to be reviewed 
by the Government. The objectives of the forward trading are to help the farmers 
by Price Disc overy and Price Risk Management. However, small farmers who 
have very less agricultural land are not able to take the benefit of forward trading 
as they do not have the capacity to hold their stocks over a long period of time. 
They have to sell their produ ce to meet the daily requirements. Besides these 
farmers are not technically equipped to trade in the complicated commodity 
exchanges. The revelation of NSSO Survey according to which nearly 71 per 
cent of the country’s farmers had not even heard of the Mi nimum Support Price 
(MSP) and 81 per cent were effectively unaware of how to use the MSP further 
substantiates the aforesaid observation in this regard. The Committee fail to 
understand how the farmers who are not aware of the Minimum Support Price 

even can avail the benefit of future marketing by trading in highly sophisticated 
commodity exchanges. In view of this scenario, there is an urgent need to ban 
forward trading in the remaining essential commodities as recommended by the 
Committee. 
 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
5.6 It is true that it is difficult for small farmers to directly participate in the 
commodity futures markets. Even in the developed countries, the direct 
participation of the farmers in such markets is insignificant. However, the farmers 
can derive benefits of futures markets by using price signals emanating from the 
Commodity Exchanges in their acreage and marketing decisions. The farmers 
can thus derive benefits from the price discovery function of the futures markets. 
  
  In the context of disc ussion regarding whether and to what extent futures 
trading has contributed to price rise in agricultural commodities in recent times, 
the Government has set up an Expert Committee on 2.3.2007 under the 
Chairmanship of Professor Abhijit Sen, Member, Planni ng Commission to study, 
inter alia, the extent of impact, if any, of futures trading on wholesale and retail 
prices of agricultural commodities. A decision on forward trading in agricultural 
commodities would be taken after the Report of the Committee is e xamined by 
the Government. 
 
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M.No. G-11027/8/2007-P&C Dated  26th July, 2007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                   DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV 
31 December, 2007           Chairman 
10 Pausa, 1929 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Food,  
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 

APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINETEENTH REPORT OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total  Number of Recommendations     29 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have been  
accepted by the Government: 
Recommendation Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5,6, 7, 8, 13, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24,          
                                     25, 26, 28 and 29 
Total          18 
 
Percentage          62  
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government: 
Recommendation Nos.     –Nil- 
 
Total          0 
 
Percentage         0 
      
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of  
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
Recommendation  Nos. 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18 
  
Total          8 
  
Percentage                                                                            28 
 
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect of which the  
replies of the Government are still awaited. 
Recommendation No. 9, 18 and 22 
  
Total           3 
  
Percentage         10 
 
 