 
29 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION   
(2008-09) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
The Legal Metrology Bill, 2008 
 
 
 
TWENTY- NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka) 
 
 
 

  TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2008-2009) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
  
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND  
PUBLIC DISTIRBUTION  
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
The Legal Metrology Bill, 2008 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on …………………………. 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ……………………………… 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka) 
 
 
 
    

CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………. 
 
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………. 
  
 
  
 
CHAPTER  I Introductory……………………………………………………   
 
CHAPTER II 
 
 Report  :- 
a – Definition of Government Approved Test Centres  
b-  Appointment and powers of Director, Controlller and Legal    
     Metrology officers 
c- Verification and stamping of Weights & Measures 
    Instruments   
d- Power to make rules 
e- Offences by the Companies 
f-  Cognizance of offences 
 
  
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I. Recommendations of the Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution as contained in the 
Tenth Report acceptable to the Department of Consumer Affairs 
alongwith the response of the Department thereof. 
 
II. Recommendations of the Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and P ublic Distribution as contained in the 
Tenth Report not acceptable to the Department of Consumer 
Affairs alongwith the response of the Department thereof. 
 
III. The Legal Metrology Bill, 2008. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
I Minutes of the Tenth sitting of the Committee held on  
27.11.2008…………………………………………………………. 
 
  
II Minutes of the Fifteenth sitting of the Committee held on 
13.2.2009…………………………………………………………. 
 
 
III Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Committee held on 
17.2.2009…………………………………………………………. 
 
IV Minutes of the Seven teenth sitting of the Committee held on 
19.2.2009…………………………………………………………. 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2008-2009. 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman  
    
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Govinda Aroon Ahuja 
3. Shri Suresh Angadi 
4. Shri Alakesh Das 
5. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
6. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
7. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
8. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
9. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna  
10. Shri Wangyuh W. Konyak 
11. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
12. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik 
13. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
14. Shri Munshi Ram 
15. Shri Ghuran Ram 
16. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
17. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
18. Adv. (Smt.) P. Satheedevi 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant  
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
23. Shri Mangala Kisan 
24. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik   
25. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
26. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
27. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
28. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu  
29. Shri Matilal Sarkar 
30. Shri Veer Singh* 
31. Vacant 
 
_____________________________________________________________  
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f.  27  January, 2009. 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh   -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma  -  Director 
3. Shri B. S. Dahiya   -  Deputy Secretary-I 
4. Shri Jagdish Prasad   -  Deputy Secretary-II 
5. Shri Rakesh Bhardwaj  -  Executive Officer 
 
(ii)

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standi ng Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution (2008 -2009) having been authorized by the Committee 
to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty -ninth Report on The 
Legal Metrology Bill, 2008 of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs,  Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
 
2. The Legal Metrology Bill, 2008 was introduced in Rajya Sabha on 24 
October, 2008. Hon’ble Speaker referred the Bill to the Standing Committee on 
Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution  under Rule 331E of the Rules 
of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha on 5 November, 2008. For 
wider consultations on the Bill the Committee invited officials of Indian Institute 
of Legal Metrology, Ranchi one of the premier institutions in the c ountry on 
legal metrology. The Committee also held discussions on the Bill with the 
representatives of State Governments of Rajasthan, Gujarat, Maharashtra and 
Andhra Pradesh during their study visit to these States during 
January/February, 2009.  Thereaft er, the Committee took evidence of 
representative of Department of Consumer Affairs held on 17.02.2009.  The  
draft report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 19 February, 2009.  
 
3.    The Committee wish to express their t hanks to the representatives of 
Indian Institute of Legal Metrology, Ranchi for tendering evidence before the 
Committee and also for furnishing their views/suggestions to the Committee. 
 
4.    The Committee also express their thanks to the officials of Min istry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs) for tendering evidence before the Committee and also for furnishing to 
the Committee their detailed information/material desired in connection with the 
examination of the Bill. 
  
5.      For facility of reference and convenience, observations/recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI ;                        DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV 
19 February, 2009                     Chairman, 
Magha,1930 (Saka)                     Standing Committee on Food,  
                                                               Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 
 
 
 
(iii) 

CHAPTER-I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
 
 In India, uniform standa rds of weights and measures based on 
the metric system, were established in the year 1956, which were 
revised in the year 1976 with a view to give effect to the international 
system of units.  For this, the Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 
1976 was e nacted to establish standards of weights and measures to 
regulate inter -state trade or commerce in weights and measures and 
other goods which are sold by weight, measure or number.  In the 
year, 1985, the Standards of Weights and Measures (Enforcement) 
Act, 1985 was enacted for enforcement by the State Governments                                    
of the standards of weights and measures established by or under the 
Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976. 
1.2 The Ministry of Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs), having noted that there has been 
technological advancement in Legal Metrology in measuring 
instruments, necessitating a review of the Acts to make them simple, 
eliminate obsolete regulations, ensure acc ountability, bring 
transparency and to empower consumers for protecting their rights,  
proposed two amendment Bills viz., (i) the Standards of Weights and 
Measures (Amendment) Bill, 2005 and (ii) the Standards of Weights 
and Measures (Enforcement) Amendmen t Bill, 2005 to amend the 
existing Acts viz, (i) Standards of Weights and Measures, 1976 and (ii) 
the Standards of Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985 
which were introduced in Rajya Sabha on 10.03.2005. Hon’ble 
Speaker referred the above said two Bills to the Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution (2005 -06) for examination 
and report. A large number of amendments were proposed in these 
two Bills. Out of the total of 160 Sections in both the Acts, 87 Sections 
were proposed to be  amended. Further, 21 Sections were to be 
omitted and 13 new Sections were to be inserted.  
 

1.3 The Bills were made available on the web -site of Lok Sabha 
http://www.parliamentofindia.nic.in on Internet  and also telecast on 
television for general public. Also, the comments/suggestions on the 
said Bills were invited from the public at large. The Committee received 
a large number of representations/memoranda from 
experts/NGOs/State Governments containing t heir 
suggestions/opposition to the proposed amendments. Based on the 
suggestions contained in these memoranda and evidence of the 
representatives of the Department of Consumer Affairs (Nodal 
Department), Ministry of Law and Justice, various NGOs, experts a nd 
State Governments, the Parliamentary Standing Committee (2005 -06) 
submitted its Tenth report to both the Houses of Parliament on 23 rd 
December, 2005 containing its observations/recommendations on both 
the bills simultaneously. A copy of the report was s ent to the 
Department of Consumer Affairs for Action Taken Replies on the 
Committee’s recommendations. 
1.4 The Department of Consumer Affairs set up a committee in 
January, 2006 to examine the Tenth report of the Parliamentary 
Committee with Additional Sec retary as Chairperson and Principal 
Secretaries, Department of Food and Civil Supplies of Government of 
Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Punjab as members. The 
recommendations of the Parliamentary Committee were also circulated 
to all States/UTs and discussed in the Conference of State Secretaries 
in-charge of Consumer Affairs held on 28 th April, 2006. The 
Department of Consumer Affairs have stated that the said meeting 
unanimously approved the draft integrated Bill on Legal Metrology 
prepared by the Committee. 
1.5 Asked as to why only the State Governments of Andhra 
Pradesh, Gujarat and Punjab were included in the Committee set up to 
examine the recommendations of the Standing Committee and what 
were the views of other State Governments/UTs in this regard, the 
Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs stated during evidence:- 
‘The Chairman was the Additional Secretary, Department 
of Consumer Affairs. The Members were representatives 

of the Ministry of Law because this is a legal issue; 
Principal Secretary, Food and C ivil Supplies, Andhra; 
Principal Secretary, Food and Civil Supplies, Gujarat; 
Principal Secretary, Food and Civil Supplies, Punjab; 
Controller, Legal Metrology, National Capital Territory of 
Delhi; Controller, Legal Metrology, Government of 
Madhya Pradesh,  Bhopal; and Controller, Legal 
Metrology, Government of Orissa. After this, Committee 
drafted framework of a Bill, it was discussed in that 
Committee of the State Governments where Secretaries 
were there. And they endorsed the Bill.’ 
 
1.6 The representativ es of Indian Institute of Legal Metrology, 
Ranchi highlighted the provisions of Legal Metrology Bill, 2008 as 
under:- 
‘The previous Act is known as the Standards of Weights 
and Measures, 1976, and there is also the Enforcement 
Act, 1985. We can say that in  the existing Act, the total 
number of sections is 85 plus 75 which comes to 160. 
But in the proposed amendment Bill, the total number of 
sections is 56. So, while we are going to definitely reduce 
the number of sections, some provisions are going to be 
left out in the proposed amendment Bill. For example, I 
want to highlight about the amendment Bill. Similarly, 
other sections are not going to be covered in the 
proposed amendment Bill, 2008. The definitions are 
given in the proposed amendment Bill about leg al 
metrology are given by scientists. In our comments, we 
have given the definition of legal metrology. 
Approximately that definition is considered in this 
proposed amendment Bill, 2008. I think it is all right as 
regards the definition of legal metrology.’ 
 
1.7 Out of the 24 recommendations made by the Parliamentary 
Committee, 19 recommendations were accepted by the Department 
and changes incorporated accordingly in the new Bill. The major 
recommendation of the Committee for amalgamation of the two Acts 
into a single legislation has been accepted by the Department. A gist of 
recommendations of the Parliamentary Committee acceptable to the 
Department alongwith the response of the Department of Consumer 
Affairs is given in Appendix I. Recommendations of the C ommittee not 
acceptable to the Department of Consumer Affairs alongwith the 
response of the Department are shown in Appendix II.  

1.8 The Legal Metrology Bill, 2008 (Appendix III) was introduced in 
Rajya Sabha on 24 th October, 2008 and  referred to the Par liamentary 
Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution by Hon’ble Speaker under Rule 331E of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha on 5 th November, 
2008 for examination and report to the Parliament.  
1.9 According to the Department, The Legal Metrology Bill, 2008 is 
a single integrated legislation on weights and measures. When 
enacted, it will replace the existing two legislations on weights and 
measures, namely, “The Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 
1976” and “The Standards of Weights and Measures (Enforcement) 
Act, 1985”. The Legal Metrology Bill, 2008, combining the provisions of 
the existing two Acts, has been largely framed on the 
recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution, as contained in their Tenth 
Report.  
1.10 The Committee have been further informed that The Legal 
Metrology Bill, 2008 aims to simplify the weights and measures laws. It 
has only 56 sections in place of 160 sections together in the existing 
two Acts. The Legal Metrology Bill, 2008 intends to maintain the 
uniformity in the implementation of weights and measures laws in the 
country, as the rule making power in respect of enforcement rules on 
weights and measures laws , which has  been with the States hitherto 
will lie with the Central Government[Clause 52] 
1.11 As informed by the Department of Consumer Affairs, the Bill 
provides for notification of  “Government approved test centre” for 
verification of certain prescribed weighing and  measuring instruments 
[ clause 24(2)].  The existing legal provision require verification of 
weighing and measuring instruments to be done by the State 
enforcement authorities only. This will enable optimum utilization of the 
existing testing faciliti es in non -Governmental sector in the country. 
The State authorities will continue to regulate weighing and measuring 
instruments , which they have been doing at present. At the same time 

more and more sophisticated newer type weighing and measuring 
instruments, hitherto not regulated by the enforcement authorities , like 
electricity meters, pollution control checking instruments, speed 
measuring instruments etc., can be regulated through these 
‘Government approved test centre’.  
1.12 Further, the Bill propo ses to do away with regulation of weights 
and measures used in industrial production, as it involves no 
transaction and is only for inhouse use of the industries. The Bill also 
provides for nomination by a company anyone of its Director to be 
responsible for implementation of the provisions of the Act and rules. 
This is similar to existing provision in the Prevention of Food 
Adulteration Act. At present all Directors of the Company are liable for 
violation and all of them are required to appear in person be fore the 
court/ adjudicating authorities [clause 49]. 
1.13 The Bill totally does away with regulation of weights and 
measures and pre -packed commodities, meant for export, as they are 
to comply with the laws of importing country.  
 
1.14 The Bill provides for pr escribing qualification for  ‘legal 
metrology officers’, namely Controller, Joint, Deputy and Assistant 
Controller in the State organization for proper implementation of 
weights and measure laws. The existing Rules provide for scientific 
and technical qualification only for inspector of weights and measures [ 
clause 14(2)]. 
 
1.15 The Bill also provides for :- 
(i) revision of maximum fee prescribed for various services 
provided under the Act so as to make the rates 
commensurate with the services; and  
(ii) updating  penalties for various offences under the Act.  
 
1.16 The highlights of the Legal Metrology Bill, 2008 as enumerated 
in the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill are as under:- 
(a) regulation of weight or measure used in transaction or for 
protection; 

(b) approval of model of weight or measure; 
(c) verification of prescribed weight or measure by 
Government approved Test Centre; 
 
(d) prescribing qualification of legal metrology officers 
appointed by the Central Government or State 
Government; 
 
(e) exempting regulation of weigh t or measure or other 
goods meant for export; 
 
(f) levy of fee for various services; 
(g) nomination of a Director by a company who will be 
responsible for complying with the provisions of the 
enactment; 
 
(h) penalty for offences and compounding of offences; 
(i) appeal against decision of various authorities; and 
(j) empowering the Central Government to make rules for 
enforcing the provisions of the enactment. 
 
1.17 Since the Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution (2005 -06) had dealt with the earlier two Bi lls, threadbare 
after wide consultations before presentation of their Report to the 
Parliament and the present Bill namely, “The Legal Metrology Bill, 
2008” is largely based on the recommendations of the Committee, the 
Committee did not deem it fit to agai n hear the views of experts/NGOs 
etc. They, however, shared the views of Chief Secretaries of some of 
the State Governments viz State Governments of Rajasthan, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh about the various provisions of the 
Bill during their st udy visit held in January -February, 2009. They also 
took evidence of the representatives of the Indian Institute of Legal 
Metrology, Ranchi and the Department of Consumer Affairs on the said 
Bill.  

 
1.18 The Committee note that ‘The Legal Metrology Bill, 2008’ as 
introduced in Rajya Sabha on 24 th October, 2008 aims to simplify 
the weights and measures laws. The Bill seeks to establish and 
enforce standards of weights and measures, regulate trade and 
commerce in weights, measures and other goods which are s old 
or distributed by weights, measures or number or for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Bill has been 
referred to the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution for examination and report by Hon’ble 
Speaker under Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedures and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha. The Committee note that the Bill 
propose to replace the two Acts viz. (i) The Standards of Weights 
and Measures Act, 1976 and (ii) The Standards of Weights and 
Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985. Earlier, way back in 2005, two 
Bills namely (i) The Standards of Weights and Measures 
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 and (ii) The Standards of Weights and 
Measures (Enforcement) Amendment Bill, 2005 were introduced 
in Rajya Sabha on 10 th March, 2005 and referred to the Standing 
Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution for 
examination and report. The Committee examined both the Bills 
simultaneously and presented a consolidated report on             
23rd December, 2005. The Comm ittee find that out of 24 
recommendations made by the Committee, 19 recommendations 
were accepted by the Government and changes incorporated 

accordingly in the new Bill. The Committee are concerned to note 
that some of the important recommendations made by  them have 
not been accepted by the Government which relate to verification 
of weights and measures instruments by Special Verification 
Agents, period of re -verification of weights and measures, 
qualification of enforcement authorities of States and powers  to 
make rules relating to weights and measures. The Committee had 
made specific recommendations in their earlier report that the 
concept of Special Verification Agency (SVA) for verification of 
sophisticated weights and measures instruments may not be 
introduced. The Committee are disturbed to note that the 
Government have merely changed the nomenclature of SVA to 
Government Approved Test Centre (GATC). The Committee will 
discuss this issue as well as other issues in the relevant chapter 
of the report.  
 The Legal Metrology Bill, 2008 has been examined in detail 
by the Committee. The Committee deliberated each and every 
provision after detailed discussions/consultations with the Chief 
Secretaries of State Governments of Rajasthan, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh during their study visit to these 
States, took evidence of Director, IILM, Ranchi as well as the 
Nodal Department viz. the Department of Consumer Affairs at its 
various sittings and arrived at conclusions which have been 
given in the subseque nt chapter of the report.The 
recommendations of the Committee have been given 

issue/clause-wise. The clauses which have not been commented 
upon in the report are found to be in order.  
The Committee urge that while bringing amendments as 
suggested by them,  the Department should ensure that all the 
consequential amendments are appropriately made in the Legal 
Metrology Bill, 2008 and the revised bill brought forward urgently 
for efficient regulation of trade and commerce in weights and 
measures keeping in vie w the larger interests of the consumer of 
the country.  
 

CHAPER II 
REPORT 
 
A. DEFINITION OF GOVERNMENT APPROVED TEST CENTRE 
(GATC) 
 
 
In the Legal Metrology Bill, 2008 the term Government 
Approved Test Centre has not been defined anywhere whereas the 
term Special Verification Agent was defined in Clause 46A of the 
Standards of Weights and Measures (Amendment) Bill, 2005 which 
means a person to whom a license is issued whose name is included 
in the register of Special Verification Agent under Section 46 D. 
  
2.2 The Government of Rajasthan in this regard have suggested 
that the concept of GATC is an arguable point and if at all a decision is 
taken to continue with the concept then only it should be defined in 
detailed way which covers the scope of activity of  such centres also.  
The definition of “Legal Metrology” as defined in the Bill is meaningful 
only when the concept of introduction of “Government Approved Test 
Centre” is dropped in view of the phrase “which have the object of 
ensuring public guarantee fr om the point of view of security and 
accuracy of weighments and measurements” appearing in the 
definition.   Ensuring public guarantee is of prime importance to 
government whereas a private venture of Approved Test Centre is 
primarily guided by profit and loss considerations.  
 
2.3 The Government of Gujarat suggested that the definition of 
GATC should include the following (i) ‘The GATC should be an 
organization/agency which should have latest world class technology 
with adequate skilled manpower; and (ii) it should have adequately 
developed laboratory infrastructure with Research and Development 
facility.   
However, the State Government should have a clear role in the 
identification and approval of proposed GATCs.’  

 
2.4 The Government of Maharashtra have s uggested that the 
definition of GATC should be as follows:- 
‘The verifying and stamping authority which has been 
approved by the Central Government or State 
Government exclusively for the verification and stamping 
of weights and measures of the commercial standards, 
which conform to the standards laid down in the Act and 
the Rules’. 
 
2.5 According to the State government of Andhra Pradesh the 
meaning of “Govt. Approved Test Centre” should be a Test Centre for 
verification/calibration of the weights and measures as approved by the 
State Government.  
 
2.6 Asked whether the same definition of SVA would be applicable 
in the case of Government Approved Test Centre, the Ministry in a 
note furnished to the Committee stated that the term Government 
Approved Test Cen tre as mentioned in the bill in Clause 24(2) is self 
explanatory to mean such centres approved by Central/State 
Government to undertake verification of prescribed weight or measure.  
2.7 During evidence the Secretary, Department of consumer Affairs 
further elucidated the term “Government Approved Test Centre” as 
under:- 
‘I would like to add only one thing here in the replies 
which have been given that these Government approved 
centers, they have not been defined exclusively because 
it could happen that they  are not necessarily private 
agencies. This is the first point which I would like to 
clarify. So, if there is some apprehension in the minds of 
the State Governments that these will be private 
agencies, it does not mean that they would only be 
private agencies.’ 

 
 
2.8 The Committee note that the term Special Verification 
Agent was defined in Clause 46A of the Standards of Weights and 
Measures (Amendment) Bill, 2005 which meant a person to whom 
a license is issued, whose name is included in the register of 
Special Verification Agent under Section 46 D whereas the term 
Government Approved Test Centre (GATC) has not been defined 
anywhere in ‘The Legal Metrology Bill, 2008’. The argument of the 
Ministry that the term GATC as mentioned in the Bill in Clause 
24(2) is self -explanatory to mean such centers approved by the 
Central/State Government to undertake verification of prescribed 
weight or measure is not acceptable to the Committee. The 
Committee is also not convinced with the argument of the 
Secretary, Depart ment of Consumer Affairs that the GATC have 
not been defined exclusively because it could happen that they 
are not necessarily private agencies. The Committee are of the 
opinion that when the word legal metrology had been defined in 
the previous amendment Bill, the word GATC should also be 
defined in this bill. The Committee, therefore, feel that probably 
the Bill tries to give the definition as ‘The verifying and stamping 
authority which has been approved by the Central Government or 
State Government exclusively for the verification and stamping of 
weights and measures of the commercial standards, which 
conform to the standards laid down in the Act and the Rules’ 
should be incorporated in the Legal Metrology Bill, 2008.  

(B) APPOINTMENT AND POWERS OF DIRECT OR, 
 CONTROLLER AND LEGAL METROLOGY OFFICERS  
 
2.9 Clause 13 of the Legal Metrology Bill, 2008 provides that the 
Central Government may, by notification, appoint a Director of Legal 
metrology, Additional Director, Joint Director, Deputy Director, 
Assistant Director and other employees for exercising the powers and 
discharging the duties conferred on them by or under this Act in 
relation to inter-State trade and Commerce.   
 
(2) The qualifications of the Director and legal metrology officers 
appointed under sub-section(1) shall be such as my be prescribed.   
 
(3) The Director and every legal metrology officer appointed under 
sub-section (1) shall exercise such powers and discharge such 
functions in respect of such local limits as the Central Government 
may, by notification, specify.   
 
(4) Every legal  metrology officer appointed under sub -section (1) 
shall exercise  powers and discharge duties under the general 
superintendence, direction and control of the Director. 
 
(5) The Director, the Controller and every  legal metrology officer 
authorized to perform any duty by or under this Act shall be deemed to 
be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian 
Penal Code. 
 
(6) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Director and legal metrology officer authorize to perform any duty 
by or under this Act in respect of anything which is in good faith done 
or intended to be done under this Act or any rule or order made 
thereunder. 
 
(7) The Central Government may, with the consen t of the Sate 
Government and subject to such conditions, limitations and restrictions 
as it may specify in this behalf, delegate such of the powers of the 
Director under this Act as it may think fit to the Controller of legal 
metrology in the Stat and such  Controller may, if he is of opinion that it 
is necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do delegate such 
of the powers that it is necessary or may  think fit to any legal 
metrology officer and where nay such delegation of powers is made by 
such controller, the person to whom such powers are delegated shall 
exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect 
as if they had been conferred on him directly by this Act and not by 
way of delegation. 
 

(8) Where any delegation of powers is made under sub-section (60, 
the powers so delegated shall be exercised under the general 
superintendence, direction and guidance of the Director. 
 
2.10 The Indian Institute of Legal Metrology desired that the word 
“Director” appeared in Sub. Clause (5) an d (6) of Clause 13 shall be 
deleted.  Asked as to why the Indian Institute of Legal Metrology want 
to exclude the Director from the purview of Public Servant within the 
meaning of Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, the representative of 
Indian Institute of Legal Metrology stated during evidence 
 
“Based on the meaning of public servant is already defined in 
the section 21, sub section 7 of the Indian Penal Code 1860, a 
person who is bringing an offender to the eyes of a court of law, 
will come under the de finition of a public servant.  On the basis 
of that, Director and Controller should also come under the 
definition of public servant.  This definition is not my definition.  
It is there in section 21 of the IPC, 1860 .  So, that definition is 
clear.  On the basis of that, Director and Controller should come 
under the purview of public servant.” 
 
2.11 When asked whether the above proposal is acceptable to the 
Government, the Ministry in a note furnished to the Committee stated 
that the “reasons for deletion of the word `Director’ should have been 
spelt out by IILM, Ranchi. Notwithstanding, since Director is 
empowered under the existing Act/proposed new Bill to discharge 
functions imposed by or under the Act, it is necessary to include 
Director in sub clause 5 and 6 of Clause 13 of the Bill.” 

 
2.12 Clause 13 of the Legal Metrology Bill, 2008 deals with 
appointment and powers of Director, Controller and Legal 
Metrology Officers.  According to Sub Clause 5 of Clause 13,  
Director, Controller and other Legal Metrology Officers authorized 
to perform any duty under this Act shall be deemed to be  public 
servant within the  meaning of Section 21 of Indian Penal Code.  
Similarly Sub-Clause 6 provides that no suit, prosecution or other 
legal proceedings shall lie again st the Director and Legal 
Metrology Officer authorized to perform any duty under this Act.  
The Committee feel that the provisions made under Sub -Clause 6 
have already been covered in Sub -Clause 5 of Clause 13 of the 
Bill.  The Committee recommend that Sub -Clause 6 may be 
removed from Clause 13 of the Bill. 
 
 

(C) VERIFICATION AND STAMPING OF WEIGHTS AND        
 MEASURES INSTRUMENTS  
 
2.13 Clause 24 of the Legal Metrology Bill, 2008 provides as under:- 
‘(1) Every person having any weight or measure in his 
possession, custody or control in circumstances 
indicating that such weight or measure is being, or is 
intended or is likely to be, used by him in any transaction 
or for protection, shall, before putting such weight or 
measure into such use, have such weigh t or measure 
verified at such place and during such hours as the 
Controller may, by general or special order, specify in this 
behalf, on payment of such fees as may be prescribed. 
 
(2) The Central Government may prescribe the kinds of 
weights and measures for which the verification is to be 
done through the Government approved Test Centre. 
 
(3) The Government approved Test Centre shall be 
notified by the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, in such manner, on 
such terms and condit ions and on payment of such fee 
as may be prescribed. 
 
(4) The Government approved Test Centre shall collect 
such fee on such terms and conditions for the verification 
of weights and measures specified under sub -section (2) 
as may be prescribed.’ 
 
2.14 Earlier, in the Standard of Weights and Measures (Amendment) 
Bill, 2005 a new Chapter was inserted to provide for creation of Special 
Verification Agents (SVA). It was meant that the SVA will take up 
periodical verification of sophisticated weighing or measur ing 
instruments like flow metres, energy metres etc. which are at present 
not verified by State enforcement authorities due to lack of 
infrastructure, expertise etc Special Verification Agents will augment 
the facilities already existing with States by mak ing use of testing 
facilities in the non -Governmental Sector in the country. The Ministry 
had also proposed consequential changes in the Act vide clause 46 -B 
to 46-G.  
2.15 The Committee invited the comments of the States/UTs as well 
the experts and other interested groups and took their evidence. The 

concept of the Special Verification Agents was not acceptable to 
anyone who furnished their views/comments to the Committee. In their 
view the amendment would lead to nexus between the traders and 
SVA and the ultimate sufferer would be the consumer, as it would 
prevent checking of any Weights & Measures stamped by SVA. 
Further, SVA would get free hand, which was likely to result in 
malpractices. The Committee was of the opinion that the responsibility 
to protec t the interest of the consumers was that of the State 
Governments and the amendment would weaken the State 
Enforcement machinery which would adversely affect the protection of 
consumers. The Committee were not convinced with the arguments of 
the Ministry t hat they had made this provision as the State 
Enforcement machinery did not have the adequate infrastructure or 
other facilities to check the instruments. The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that the concept of the Special Verification Agents need 
not be introduced. 
2.16 The above mentioned recommendation of the Committee was 
not accepted by the Government. Instead the nomenclature of Special 
Verification Agency has been changed to Government Approved Test 
Centre in the new integrated Bill. The Committee have been apprised 
that it is only to verify weight or measure as may be prescribed in the 
rules. The regulation of weight or measure being regulated by the 
State at present will continue to be regulated by them only. It is in the 
interest of consumer and has to be retained.  
2.17 During briefing on The Legal Metrology Bill, 2008, the Secretary, 
Department of Consumer Affairs justified the concept of Government 
Approved Test Centre as follows:- 
 
‘In the earlier Amendment Bill, the verification was 
proposed to be given to third party agency and it was 
called the special verification agency. That somehow 
seemed to convey a wrong impression that we are 
appointing some agents for carrying out the verification 
and that entirely, it will go to private hands and so  the 
State Government will be made redundant. So, a lot of 
misinformation was getting around about the 

enforcement authority. So we changed the name that it is 
a Government approved test centre and that the test 
centre will be approved either by the Centra l Government 
or the State Government and what should be their role, it 
will  be put in the rules. The approval is given only for 
manufacturing firms or utility agencies which provide 
service, water service, electricity service and it is given to 
only those  agencies. First, it is not given to each and 
everybody. It is given to only qualified persons and it will 
be approved by the Government. Once the Government 
approves these agencies, the Government should also 
keep a close watch over all these agencies. So , the 
Government enforcement agencies at the State level 
should also upgrade their equipment. Therefore, in 
course of time they have to raise their bar and their 
expertise.’ 
 
2.18 The Committee on its study visit heard the views of the State 
Governments of  Rajasthan, Gujarat, Maharashtra and Andhra 
Pradesh. The Government of Rajasthan furnished their views as 
follows:- 
 
‘As per Section 24 of the Standards of Weights and 
Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985, the verification and 
stamping of weights and measures were within the 
powers and jurisdiction of the Controller i.e. the State 
Government and this proposed section 24(2) takes away 
part of such powers from the State Government and vest 
them in the Central Government 
The kinds of weights and measures to be ver ified 
by the proposed Government Approved Test Centres 
have not been detailed out. Therefore, it might lead to 
ambiguity in the powers of the legal metrology 
enforcement authorities of the State, Central Government 
and the Government Approved Test Centres. 
In the earlier amendment Bills, 2005 disapproved 
by the Parliamentary Committee, there was provision of 
Special Verification Agency (SVA). Rajasthan had earlier 
contended that SVA should not be given power of 
verification and their role may be limited to the work of 
the maintenance and repairing only. The verified 
equipments should bear the seal of the State 
Government so that the common man is assured of its 
credibility.’ 
 
  

 
2.19 Similarly, the Government of Gujarat stated:- 
 
‘As understood, the Government approved test centre will 
operate in newer areas not covered by the present State 
Enforcement infrastructure, which is welcome. But at the 
same time, the State Government should also be 
enabled under clause 52(2)(r) to prescribe any new items 
to be verified by GATC under Clause 24(2).’ 
 
2.20 The Government of Maharashtra were of the opinion that- 
 
‘State Government is opposed to the concept of Special 
Verification Agents. The proposed GATC in the new Bill 
will be an addition to the existing and establis hed 
laboratories in the States. This will create duplication and 
confusion.’ 
2.2 The Government of Andhra Pradesh in their memorandum 
furnished to the Committee stated that- 
 
‘At present, the Central Government does not have staff 
to look after these funct ions. It requires staff for 
supervision of functioning of Special Verification 
Agencies. In other words, it is nothing but creation of 
another agency to over see the functioning of the Special 
Verification Agencies. It is an additional burden on the 
exchequer. The concept of Special Verification Agencies 
has been introduced in the name of adopting 
international Standards and to absorb technology.’ 
 
2.22 When asked whether the verification and stamping of weights 
and measures by the GATC is justified when a full-fledged 
Government organization on weights and measures is already 
functioning in each of the States, the Government of Rajasthan stated 
as under:- 
‘No sir, instead of going in for verification and stamping of 
weights and measures by the Government Ap proved 
Test Centres, State Government organization of weights 
and measures should be further strengthened, 
appropriately trained and equipped by way of Central 
Grants and programmes. If done so, the existing legal 
metrology machinery of the State can deliv er in a better 
and more credible way than any other private agency 
whose primary motive would be to make his venture 
economically viable. Government machinery can always 
be accountable for its action.’ 

 
2.23 In this context, the Government of Maharashtra s tated as 
follows:- 
 
‘The State Government is of the view that the verification 
and stamping of weights and measures by another 
agency, when a dedicated organization has been working 
since long with distinction, to verify and stamp weights 
and measures in the State, is not required.’ 
 
2.24 The Andhra Pradesh Government stated :- 
 
‘The Department is not in favour of handing over the 
verification and stamping of weights and measures to 
Government Approved Test Centre. Since the verification 
and stamping is a s tatutory requirement, it should be 
done under the control of Government machinery to 
maintain the accuracy in protecting the interests of the 
consumer. Hence, the Government Approved Test 
Centres are not advisable.’ 
 
2.25 The Government of Gujarat stated:- 
 
‘This concept of GATC is most useful in newer areas not 
covered by the present State Enforcement Agency. 
Moreover, it can also supplement the capacities of State 
Government wherever the capacity of the State 
Government is insufficient or inadequate in te rms of 
technology or expertise. In this context, it is also 
proposed to vest the powers to make rules with the State 
Government under Clause 52(2)(r) to prescribe any new 
item to be verified by GATC under Clause 24(2). In other 
words, Gujarat favours the c ontinued existence of the 
present Government system in traditional areas and in 
addition GATCs would function mainly in new emerging 
areas. The State Government also believes that it would 
be more practical to have a role also in supervising the 
operations of such GATCs.’ 
 
2.26 In this regard, the representative of the Indian Institute of Legal 
Metrology, Ranchi stated during evidence:- 
   
‘In that case, problem will definitely come. The State 
Government officials and Government Approved Test 
Centre Officials, both will not come at the same platform. 
Definitely some problem will come at that time. The scale 
of pay is going to be decided by the Government. In that 
case, at the time of verification of weight and measures, 
to get some more, some deviation from the original path 

may take place from the GATC. This is not possible in 
the case of enforcement officials while discharging their 
duties. Discrepancy will come and definitely conflict will 
arise at that time.’ 
2.27 When enquired as to why the Government ha ve changed the 
nomenclature of SVA to GATC when the purpose of both the agencies 
are same and why the Government is interested in getting the 
verification of weights and measures by a private agency, Department 
of Consumer Affairs stated that the term SVA was conveying an 
impression of appointment of individual agents by the Government in a 
narrow sense, whereas GATC are notified bodies by the Government. 
GATC can be either an educational institution/private or public entity.  
 
2.28 Asked whether the Centra l Government have adequate 
infrastructure to look after and supervise the functioning of GATC, the 
Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs stated :- 
‘In the coming years, we will ensure that we provide 
necessary infrastructure to the States so that they 
upgrade their skills and we will  be very careful that the 
Government approved test centres do not abuse or 
misuse whatever appeal is given to them and they use 
the approval in an appropriate way.’ 
 
2.29 To a query about the difficulties likely to be faced  by the 
Government if the verification of sophisticated weights and measures 
is done under the control of Government machinery, the Committee 
was informed that instead of the Government undertaking all the 
verification work itself, it is better if the Gove rnment gets the 
verification done under its supervision/control through GATC.  
 
2.30 When pointed out that instead of putting Government Approved 
Test Centres, the Government should pressurize the State 
Governments to strengthen their infrastructure. The Secretary stated :- 
 
‘Sir, we are not pressurizing the State Governments at 
all. I am on a completely different issue that is the issue 
of consumer redressal. It is not the issue for the 
Committee but that is entirely a State Subject. The 

Government cannot do anything in that. There is the 
State Consumer Redressal District Fora. There is wide 
variation; nothing we can do about it. But I am only 
mentioning to you that the States in their own respective 
territory are sovereign. We have no intention, nor the 
capacity to encroach upon that territory. It is only an 
enabling provision for the States. In case some State 
feels that we would like to do so, they can approve the 
Centres.’ 
   
2.31 The Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs further 
explained during evidence as under:- 
 
‘On the first point that the GATC should not be given 
power of verification and mandated to maintenance, 
today there is a separate maintenance entity – section 
19(i) of today’s Act and clause 23 of the Bill. So, 
maintenance is quite a sep arate thing from checking the 
accuracy of the weights and measures. These two roles 
are different. So, the work of GATC is only testing. It is 
quite possible that they may do repairing also. But these 
roles are different. I have already accepted that point  that 
we are not going to supervise. It is the State Government 
which is supervising. So, there is no additional burden.’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

2.32 The Committee note that Clause 24 of the Legal Metrology 
Bill, 2008 provides for verification and stamping of sophistica ted 
newer type of weighing and measuring instruments like electricity 
meter, pollution control checking instruments, speed measuring 
instruments etc. by the Government Approved Test Centre 
(GATC). The Committee further note that earlier in the proposed 
Standards of Weights and Measures (Amendment) Bill, 2005, a 
chapter was inserted for verification of sophisticated weights and 
measures by the Special Verification Agent (SVA). The concept of 
SVA was not accepted to the State Governments and experts and 
others who submitted their comments to the Committee, due to 
various reasons. The Committee had, therefore, disapproved the 
concept of SVA and recommended that all the clauses related to 
the SVA in the Bill should be deleted. The Committee are 
perturbed to note that the said recommendation of the Committee 
was not acceptable to the Government. Instead the Government 
have changed the nomenclature of SVA to GATC which in the 
opinion of the Committee is nothing but old wine in new bottle. 
During detailed examination of the Legal Metrology Bill, 2008, the 
Committee heard the views of some of the State Governments viz. 
Rajasthan, Gujarat, Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh on the 
issue of verification and stamping of weights and measures by 
GATC. According to these State Governments, the verification 
and stamping of weights and measures by GATC is not justified 
in view of the fact that a full -fledged Government organization on 

weights and measures is already functioning in each of the 
States. The Indian Institute of Legal Metrology (IILM), Ranchi, one 
of the premier institutions on weights and measures is also of the 
view that discrepancy will come and conflict will arise between 
GATC and enforcement officials while discharging their duties. 
The Committee are not convinced with the arguments put forth by 
the Department of Consumer Affairs that the term ‘SVA’ was 
conveying an impression of appointment of individual agents by 
the Government in a narrow sense whereas the GATC are notified 
bodies by the Government. In the opinio n of the Committee, the 
verification and stamping is a statutory requirement and it should 
be done under the control of Government agency to maintain the 
accuracy for protecting the interest of the consumers. The 
Ministry have also admitted that at present  they do not have 
adequate infrastructure to look after and supervise the 
functioning of GATC. The Committee feel that instead of going in 
for verification and stamping of weights and measures by GATC, 
the State Government organizations of weights and meas ures 
should be further strengthened, appropriately trained and 
equipped by way of central grant and programmes. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the concept of 
‘Government Approved Test Centre’ should be done away with 
from Clause 24 and the  ‘Stat e Governments’ should be 
authorized to perform the duties of verification and stamping of 
weights and measures instruments.  

 
(D) POWER TO MAKE RULES (CLAUSE 52) 
 
 
2.33 Section 72(1) of the Standards of Weights and Measures 
(Enforcement) Act, 1985 provided  that the State Government may, by 
notification and after consultation with the Central Government, make 
rules to carry out the provisions of the rules. 
 
 2.34 It had been further clarified in sub -section (5) of Section 72 of 
the Act, 1985 that every rule made under this Section shall, as soon as 
may be, after it is made, be laid before each House of the State 
Legislature where there are two Houses, and where there is one 
House of the State Legislature, before that House. 
 
2.35 The Government vide Clause 40  of the proposed Standards of 
Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Amendment Bill, 2005 had 
proposed that in section 72 of the principal Act,-  
 
(a) in sub -section (1) for the words “The State Government 
may, by notification and after consultation with the 
Central Government the words, “The Central 
Government’’ be added. 
  
2.36 The Government had also proposed to amend sub -section (5) 
as follows:- 
 
(5) ‘Every rule made by the Central Government under this 
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, bef ore 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or 
in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successiv e 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modification form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so however th at any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under the rule or annulment shall be.’ 
 

2.37 The Committee had examined the above amendment and taken 
the views of various States/UTs and other exp erts. The Committee 
was unable to accept the arguments put forth by the Ministry that the 
enforcement activities in the States are guided by the enforcement 
rules and non-uniformity in enforcement law creates havoc, confusion, 
lack of transparency and lead ing to high -handedness. The Committee 
therefore, recommended that the rule making powers should remain 
with the State Governments and the proposed amendment may be 
deleted. 
 
2.38 The said recommendation of the Committee was not accepted 
by the Government on the ground that if the rule making power is given 
to the States, it will defeat the very purpose of amendment to 
Constitution. The rule making power should be vested with a single 
authority for ensuring uniformity.  
 
2.39 The Government have repeated the  same provision in Clause 
52 of The Legal Metrology Bill, 2008 as under:- 
 
‘52(1) The Central Government may by notification, make 
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.’  
 
2.40 The Committee on its on -the-spot study visit heard the views of 
the State Government of Rajasthan, Gujarat, Maharashtra and Andhra 
Pradesh. The comments/suggestions put forth by the Government of 
Rajasthan are as under:- 
 
‘Clause 52(i) can be reworded in the following manner: 
‘The State Government may and after the 
consultation with the Central Government, make 
rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill.’ 
 
This will ensure uniformity as well as provide 
States an opportunity to take into consideration 
the conditions prevailing in the particular state.’ 
 
  

 
2.41 The Gujarat Government stated as under:- 
 
‘The State Government should be empowered to make 
the Rules for ensuring the proper implementation of the 
proposed legislation. The Central Government should 
prepare and circulate model rules to the States, to 
maintain so me uniformity, who may then add 
to/adapt/alter the rules as per local requirements and this 
can be in consultation with the Central Government.(This 
suggestion is in line with existing section 72(1) of The 
Standards of Weights and Measures (Enf.) Act, 1985  and 
hence should be acceptable).’ 
 
  
2.42 The Andhra Pradesh Government was of the following view:- 
 
‘Rule making powers may be left with the State 
Government, as the local conditions vary from the State 
to State.’ 
 
2.43 The Government of Maharashtra in this context stated :- 
 
‘The Central Government should formulate Model Rules, 
within the framework of which State Governments should 
have freedom to formulate their own rules which will help 
in meeting the State -specific requirements. However, if a 
State Go vernment needs to frame rules beyond the 
scope of Model Rules, prior consultation and approval of 
the Central Government may be required.’ 
 
 
2.44 When asked as to why the Central Government want that the 
rule making powers should remain with Central Govern ment, the 
Department of Consumer Affairs in a note furnished to the Committee 
stated that for the whole country to look like a single market, one single 
rule by Centre is ideal. Even under the existing provision of the Act, the 
States have to get the appro val of Central Government., to amend the 
Rules. But once the approval is accorded by Centre for such an 
amendment and circulated to all States and UTs, the States have the 
power to delay the amendment. This defeats the purpose of uniformity. 
The local requ irement can always be accommodated by the Central 
Government in the Rules. 

2.45 During evidence, the Secretary, Department of Consumer 
Affairs further explained:- 
‘Once we say that this change is to be made, then, it 
needs to be made across the country. Th e only problem 
there is when the change will be made by the respective 
State Government is not clear. Therefore, some States 
may take six months; some States may take two years. 
Some States have even taken 10 years. So, to remove 
that, the idea was to have  uniformity. Why is uniformity 
required? It is because that any manufacturer would 
need to give his or her measuring instrument across the 
country. So, that person should know what is the 
framework across the country.’ 

2.46 The Committee note that Clause 52 of the Legal Metrology 
Bill, 2008 provides that the Central Government may by 
notification make rules for carrying out the provisions of the Act. 
The Committee regret to note that the recommendation of the 
Standing Committee (2005 -06) contained in para 3.62 of their 
Tenth Report that the power to make rules should remain in the 
hands of State Government is not accepted by the Government 
on the grounds that it will defeat the very purpose of amendment 
to Constitution. The Committee fail to understand as t o why the 
Central Government wants that the rule making power should 
remain with them when none of the State Governments are in 
favour of this proposal. The Committee do not agree with the plea 
of the Government that for the whole country to look like a si ngle 
market, one single rule by Centre is ideal. The Committee are of 
the opinion that the local condition may differ from State to State 
and it may not be possible to bring uniformity in all States/UTs. 
The Committee feel that the Central Government shoul d prepare 
and circulate ‘Model Rules’ to the States who may alter/add the 
rules as per their local requirements in consultation with the 
Central Government. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and desire that the rule making po wers 
should remain with the State Governments and the amendment 
proposed in Clause 52 of the Bill be revised accordingly.  
 
 
 
 

(E) OFFENCES BY THE COMPANIES (CLAUSE 49) 
  
2.47 Section 62 of the Standards of Weights and Measures 
(Enforcement) Act, 1985 deal s with the Offences by the Company as 
under:-  
 
1. If the person committing an offence under this Act is a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was 
committed; was in charge of, and was responsible to, the 
Company for the conduct of the busine ss of the company, as 
well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly: 
 
 Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall 
render any person liable to punishment if he proves that the 
offence was committed without his knowledge, or that he had 
exercised all due diligence to prevent  the commissions of such 
offence. 
 
2. Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), 
where any offence under this Act has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on 
the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of 
the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer 
shall also be deemed to be guilty of that o ffence and shall be 
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.   
 
Explanation: For the purpose of this section:- 
 
a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a 
firm or other association of individuals; and  
b) “director”, in relation to a fi rm, means a partner in the 
firm.    
 
2.48 The Government have proposed to amend section 62 of the 
Enforcement Act, 1985 vide Clause 49 of the Legal Metrology Bill, 
2008 as under:- 
‘(a) (i) the person, if any, who has been nominated under 
sub-section ( 2) to  be in charge of, and responsible to, the 
company for the conduct of the business of the company 
(hereinafter in this section referred to as a person responsible); 
or (ii) where no person has been nominated, every person who 
at the time the offence was com mitted was in charge of, and 
was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business 
of the company; and ( b) the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 

and punished accordingly: Provided tha t nothing contained in 
this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence 
was committed without his knowledge and that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.’ 
 
2.49 Any company may, by order in writing, authorize any of its 
directors to exercise all such powers and take all such steps as may be 
necessary or expedient to prevent the commission by the company of 
any offence under this Act and may give not ice to the Director or the 
concerned Controller or any legal metrology officer authorized in this 
behalf by such Controller (hereinafter in this section referred to as the 
authorized officer) in such form and in such manner as may be 
prescribed, that it ha s nominated such director as the person 
responsible, along with the written consent of such director for being so 
nominated. 
 
Explanation - Where a company has different establishment or 
branches or different units in any establishment or branch, different  
persons may be nominated under this sub -section in relation to 
different establishments or branches or units and the person 
nominated in relation to any establishment, branch or unit shall be 
deemed to be the person responsible in respect of such establis hment, 
branch or unit.  
 
2.50 The Committee wanted to know that in case a company is found 
violating the provisions of legal metrology, who should be held 
responsible, whether the company or some particular person, the State 
Government of Rajasthan stated as follows:- 
  
‘In case a company is found violating the provisions of 
legal metrology and the company had nominated a 
person responsible to the company for the conduct of 
business, then both the nominated person and the 
company should be held responsible.  In the case of 
second or subsequent offence by this company, again 
both the nominated person (even if there is a new 
nominee) and the company should be responsible’. 
 
  

 
2.51 The Government of Gujarat replied as under:- 
 
‘The nominated person should be held responsible as the 
executor for the offence but simultaneously equal liability 
should be kept on the company also.’ 
 
2.52 The Maharashtra Government stated as under:- 
 
‘The State is of the opinion that in the case of a company 
violating the provisions of Legal Metrology, the Board of 
Directors should be held responsible for violations. This 
is in the line of provision of existing Act and Rules which 
has been used effectively in the State.’ 
 
2,53 The Andhra Pradesh Government stated as follows:- 
 
‘Entire management of the company should be held for 
violation of the provisions of Legal Metrology. This will act 
as a deterrence.’ 
 
2.54 When asked whether the Government have consulted all the 
stockholders before making provisions regarding offences by the 
company in the Legal Metrology Bill, 2008, Department of Consumer 
Affairs stated that all major trade and industry associations including 
FICCI, ASSOCHAM and CII, are part of expert committee and 
subsequent committee constituted by the Department, to recommen d 
amendment proposal to the Acts right from 1998 have been consulted. 
Even under PFA Act, where the violation is much more serious than 
weights and measures, either one of the Directors or manager is only 
made responsible.  
 
2.55 During evidence, the Commi ttee wanted to know whether the 
suggestions made by the Government of Maharashtra is acceptable to 
the Government, the Secretary stated:- 
 
‘I do not frankly feel, as has been suggested by the 
Government of Maharashtra, that the entire company or 
the Directors should be held liable. The company can sue 
or it can be sued. In fact, Directors so nominated are 
more than adequate. There may be a case only to make 
a Manager liable. This is as far as offence by the 
companies is concerned.’ 

 
2.56 The Committee note that Clause 49 of the Legal Metrology 
Bill, 2008 provides that ‘in case of an offence under the Act by a 
company (a) (i) in case of a person who has been nominated by 
the company as incharge and responsible to the company for the 
conduct of business of the  company and authorized for this by 
the company by order in writing, he would be a person, or (ii) in 
case no such nomination has been made, every person who at 
the time, the offence was committed was incharge or was 
responsible, and (b) the company shall be deemed to be guilty of 
the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against’.  This 
amendment to the parent Act is not acceptable to any of the State 
Governments. The Committee are also not convinced with the 
argument put forth by the Secretary, Depa rtment of Consumer 
Affairs that the ‘entire company or Directors should not be held 
liable’. The Committee feel that there may be chances of misuse 
of provisions by the companies because in cases of second or 
subsequent offences, the company may change the  nominated 
person by nominating a new person and thus avoid penalty of 
imprisonment. The Committee desire that for the words ‘a person’ 
as appeared in Clause 49 (1)(a) in the Bill, the words ‘Board of 
Directors’ ominated by the company should be inserted.  
 
 
  
 
 

 
 
(F) COGNIZANCE OF OFFENCE 
2.57 Under Section 72 of the Standards of Weights and Measures 
Act, 1976 and Section 63 of the Standards of Weights and Measures 
(Enforcement) Act, 1985, provisions for cognizance of offence had 
been clearly laid down. 
2.58 Section 72 of the Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976 
states that notwithstanding anything contained in the code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)- 
 
*[(a) no court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable 
under this Act except upon a complaint, in writing, made by- 
(i) the Director; 
(ii) any other authorized officer; 
(iii) any person aggrieved; or 
(iv) a recognized consumer association whether the 
person aggrieved is a member of such association 
or not.  
 
Explanation- For the purposes of this clause “rec ognized 
consumer association” means a voluntary consumer 
association registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 
of 1956) or under any other law for the time being inforce;] 
 
(b) no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a 
Judicial Magistra te of the first class shall try any offence 
under this Act; 
 
(c) an offence punishable under Section 50, Section 52, Section 
53, Section 56, Section 58, Section 60, Section 61, Section 
63, Section 64, Section 65, or Section 66 may be tried 
summarily by a Magistrate and no sentence of imprisonment 
for a term exceeding one year shall be passed in the case of 
any conviction for an offence which is summarily tried under 
this section. 
 
2.59 Similarly, Section 63 of the Standards of Weights and Measures 
(Enforcement) Act, 1985 provides that notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973- 
 
[(a) no court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable 
under this Act except upon a complaint, in writing, made by- 
(i) the Controller; 

(ii) any other of ficer authorized in this behalf by the 
Controller by general or special order; 
(iii) any person aggrieved; or  
(iv) a recognized consumer association whether the 
person aggrieved is a member of such association or 
not.  
 
Explanation- for the purposes of this clause ‘ recognized 
consumer association’ means a voluntary consumer association 
registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or under 
any other law for the time being in force;] 
   
(b) no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial 
magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable 
under this Act.  
 
2.60 The Government of Rajasthan have suggested that in the new 
Bill, there is no such mention of the procedures of the/cognizance of 
offence.   The level of the presiding offic er of the judicial courts which 
shall try the offence punishable under the Act, needs to be provided in 
the Bill.  
 
2.61 Asked whether the Government agree with the aforesaid 
suggestion of the Rajasthan Government, the Department of 
Consumer Affairs stated that at the time of vetting the Bill, it was felt by 
Ministry of Law that since the existing provisions of the Act empowers 
every affected person to file case in a court of law, there is no 
necessity to mention individual complainants as such.  Secondly i t was 
also felt necessary not to restrict filing of case only in Chief 
Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of first Class only.  It 
should be widened so that one can file case even before a court of Sub 
Judicial Magistrate also, depending upon its competence. 
 
2.62 In this regard, the Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs 
further supplemented during evidence:- 
‘It is true that under the existing Act, we had mentioned that 
these people take cognizance of offences. Under Section 63, 
the Control ler can go to the court, any other officer appointed 
can go to the court, the consumer association can go to the 
court, but no court except the one headed by a Metropolitan 
Magistrate can try the case. When we tried to club and make 

the changes, the Law Mi nistry said that it is not desirable 
because if you say that any person can go to the court, 
obviously there is no need to have a particular person 
designated who alone can go to the court. Why it was put there, 
it is a different issue. In the modern type of jurisprudence such a 
thing is not there and which court will take cognizance also need 
not be mentioned. Recently, in the Gram Nyayalaya Bill also, it 
is there. Even there, there was no specific mention of any court 
which will take cognizance. As per th e advice of the Law 
Ministry, we have removed it though it was there in the earlier 
Act.’ 
 
 

 
2.63 The Committee are concerned to note that there is no 
mention in the Legal Metrology Bill, 2008 about the procedures of 
the cognizance of offences whereas und er Section 72 of the 
Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976 and Section 63 of 
the Standards of Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985, 
a provision for cognizance of offence was clearly laid down. The 
Committee are not inclined to accept the argu ment of the 
Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs that in the modern 
type of jurisprudence, such a thing is not there and which court 
will take cognizance also need not be mentioned. The Committee 
recommend that a clause in the Bill may be clearly laid  down on 
the line of Section 72 of the Standards of Weights and Measures 
Act, 1976 and Section 63 of the Standards of Weights and 
Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985 may be clearly laid down.  
 
 
NEW DELHI           DEVENDER PRASAD YADAV 
19 February, 2009                                 Chairman 
 Magha, 1930(Saka)                    Standing Committee on Food, 
                                          Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
 

ANNEXURE I 
 
 
Recommendations of the Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution as contained in the 
Tenth report Acceptable to the Department of Consumer 
Affairs along with the response of the Department thereof. 
 
 
Para  
No. 
Gist of observation/ 
recommendation 
Response of the Department  of 
Consumer Affairs 
1.9 Over riding provision not 
maintained throughout the 
Acts 
i) The definition of 
“commodities in packaged 
form” should have been 
omitted and definition of 
“pre-pack commodities” 
should have been inserted. 
ii)   To maintain overriding 
provision of the W&M Act. 
iii)    Jurisdiction of IPC 
dealing with Weights & 
Measures have been ousted 
but jurisdiction of Code of 
Criminal Procedure has not 
been ousted.   
Necessary changes have been 
done to maintain overriding 
provision of the Act. 
i) The definiti on of 
“commodities in packaged 
form” deleted and in its place 
the definition of “pre -packaged 
commodities” substituted. 
ii)   The phrase “Except where 
such offence is not punishable 
under any other law relating to 
Weights & Measures for the 
time being in f orce” has been 
removed to maintain the 
overriding provision of the Act. 
iii)     The provision of Code of 
Criminal Procedure dealing with 
Weights & Measures has been 
ousted. 
1.10 Following discrepancies have 
been noticed: 
i) The phrase “if in custody 
i)The phrase has been omitted.  
The suggestion is agreed to and 
needful done. 

shall be discharge forthwith” 
has not been omitted. 
ii) Sub-section (3), (4) and (5) 
under Section 74 of the 
Standards of W&M Act, 1976 
could have been inserted in 
Section 62 of the Standards of 
W&M (Enforcement) Act, 
1985 also. 
iii)  The power of search of 
persons has not been 
conferred. 
iv)   Director (LM) and his 
subordinates has not been 
empowered to summon the 
registers and records has not 
been provided.  
ii)The phrase has been o mitted.  
The suggestion is agreed to and 
needful done. 
iii)  The powers of search of 
persons has been conferred. 
Needful done to provide powers 
of search of persons to the 
enforcement authorities. 
iv) Needful done to empower 
Director (LM) and his 
subordinates to summon the 
registers and records has not 
been provided. 
1.11 Discrepancies have been 
noticed in the mode of trial 
for the parallel offences as 
well as classification of 
offences as compoundable 
and non-compoundable. 
 
The discrepancies have been 
removed in the new integrated 
Bill on the subject. 
1.12 
& 
1.13 
Over lapping of the similar 
offences in the same act with 
different punishments.  In 
some cases penalty has been 
prescribed in some section 
and in other cases penalty has 
been prescribed in diffe rent 
sections.  
 
The discrepancies have been 
removed in the new integrated 
Bill on the subject. 

1.14 Discrepancies noticed in the 
powers of officers of Legal 
Metrology to compound an 
offence.  
The discrepancies have been 
removed in the new integrated 
Bill on the subject. 
1.15 Non-compoundable offences 
are sent for trial to the courts 
and there is no question of 
offenders of non -
compoundable offences 
coming to the Controller or 
the State Government in 
appeal.  The Section under 
which these compoundable 
offences and the penalty 
thereto needs to be modified. 
 
The discrepancies have been 
removed in the new integrated 
Bill on the subject. 
1.16 Large number of amendments 
in these Bills is nothing short 
of revision of these two Acts.  
The amendment proposed are 
highly confusing and at times 
some of them contradict each 
other. 
 
Discrepancies noted by the 
Committee have been removed 
in the integrated new Bill. 
1.17 The Government should 
amalgamate both the Acts in 
the single piece of legislation. 
 
A single piece o f legislation has 
been prepared in the place of the 
existing two legislations 
1.18 The Standards of Weights and 
Measures Act, 1976 and the 
Standards of Weights and 
Measures (Enforcement) Act, 
1985 are basically regulatory 
The discrepancies have been 
removed in the new integrated 
Bill on the subject. 

in nature and therefore neither 
the officers of Legal 
Metrology nor those of the 
State Governments have been 
conferred the powers of arrest 
under these Acts.  
Accordingly the phrase and 
the offender, if in custody 
shall be discharged forthwith 
give rise to doubts about the 
existence of po wers of arrest 
the said phrase should be 
deleted. 
 
1.19 Overriding not maintained 
throughout the Acts. 
The discrepancies have been 
removed in the new integrated 
Bill on the subject. 
1.20 There is anomaly in the 
matter of preferring an appeal 
by the accused persists even 
after the proposed 
amendments.  While 
amalgamating these Acts into 
a single piece of legislation, 
the anomalies, the 
discrepancies and deficiencies 
be rectified.  
 
The discrepancies have been 
removed in the new integrated 
Bill on the subject. 
1.21 The arrangements of various 
clauses and the language used 
in both the Acts are too 
complex and is not easily 
understandable.  The 
As desired by the Committee, 
the language of the integrated 
new Bill has been made as 
simple as possible. 

Committee desired that while 
recasting the Acts, the 
Government should attempt 
to make the language of the 
Acts as simple as possible. 
 
2.29 Deletion of Section 23 of the 
Standards of We ights and 
Measures Act, 1976 
permitting use of non -metric 
units along with metric units 
would take our country 50 
years back.  Government 
should not delete the Section. 
 
As decided by the Committee, 
the provision of Section 23 is 
retained in the new Bill.  
2.38 The Committee do not 
approve the proposal of the 
Government to do away with 
publication of certificate of 
approval of model in the 
official Gazette and 
recommend that the practice 
may continue. 
 
The relevant Section is retained 
in the new Bill provi ding for 
publication of certificate of 
approval of model in the official 
Gazette. 
 

ANNEXURE II 
 
Recommendations of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer 
Affairs and Public Distribution as contained in the Tenth report Not 
Acceptable to the Department of Consumer Affairs along with the 
response of the Department thereof. 
 
Para 
No. 
Gist of observation/ 
recommendation 
Response of the Deptt. of 
Consumer Affairs 
2.7 The “explanation” may be added 
to the definition of manufacturer 
should cover the individua ls or 
firms or HUF who do not claim 
the end product but sell the end 
product. 
The definition of manufacturer 
in respect of “pre -packed 
commodity” is not provided in 
the new Bill but will be 
provided in the rules made 
thereunder and will take care to 
cover person who do not 
manufacture the commodity but 
who prints his name as 
manufacturer. 
2.19 The Government have proposed 
that ‘period of re-verification’ of 
the weights and measures would 
be prescribed by the Central 
Government.  The Committee 
recommends th at Central 
Government should not 
encroach upon the rule making 
power of State Government. 
Leaving the rule making power 
to the States may defeat the very 
purpose of constitution 
amendment relating to weights 
& measures.  It is felt that rule 
making power s hould be vested 
with the single authority.  
However, in the process of 
making rule vide consultation 
will be held in the States. 
 
 

 
2.54, 
2.55, 
3.39, 
3.40 
& 
3.52 
The concept of Special 
Verification Agency for 
verification of Weights and 
Measures Instrume nt need not 
be introduced at all.  Instead the 
Union Government should 
upgrade and strengthen the 
existing facilities available with 
the State Governments. 
Nomanclature of Special 
Verification Agency has been 
changed to Government 
approved test centre in t he new 
integrated Bill.  It is only to 
verify weight or measure as may 
be prescribed in the rules.  The 
regulation of weight or measure 
being regulated by the State at 
present will continue to be 
regulated by them only.  It is in 
the interest of  consumer and has 
to be retained. 
3.23 i)  The Central Government 
propose to prescribe the 
qualification for the enforcement 
authorities of States. 
ii)  The orders of Director shall 
be binding on the controllers of 
the States Legal Metrology 
Department . The Commit tee 
recommend that the proposal of 
the above amendments be 
dropped. 
i)  Qualification of enforcement 
officials is a basic requirement 
for proper enforcement of the 
law relating to Legal Metrology. 
 
ii) Instead of Director (LM) the  
Central Government shall  issue 
directions to the State 
Controllers. 
3.62 The rule making powers should 
remain with the State 
Government . 
If the Rule making power is 
given to States, it will defeat the 
very purpose of amendment to 
the constitution .The rule 
making power should b e vested 
with single authority for 
ensuring uniformity 
 
 

MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 27TH NOVEMBER, 2008 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in  Committee 
Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Alakesh Das 
3.       Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
4. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
5. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
6. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
7. Shri Fransisco Cosme Sardinha  
8. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
10. Shri Mangala Kisan 
11. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Veena Sharma  - Director    
2. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Deputy Secretary -I 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad  - Deputy Secretary – II 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF M INISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, 
FOOD AND PUBLIC DIST RIBUTION (DEPARTMENT  OF 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
1. Shri Yashwant Bhave, Secretary 
2. Shri Rakesh Kacker, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri R. Mathurbootham, Director (Legal Metrology) 
 
At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives 
of Department of Consumer Affairs to the sitting of the Committee 

convened to have briefing on ‘The Legal Metrology Bill, 2008’ which 
has been referred by Hon’ble Speaker to th e Committee for 
examination and report within three months. Thereafter, the Secretary, 
Department of Consumer Affairs gave an overview of the historical 
evaluation of the Bill alongwith the aims and objectives of the proposed 
Bill. He stated that as recomm ended by the Committee in their Tenth 
Report which was presented to Parliament on  23 December, 2005, the 
earlier two bills namely, (i) ‘The Standards of Weights and Measures 
Amendment Bill, 2005’ and (ii) ‘The Standards of Weights and 
Measures (Enforcement) Amendment Bill, 2005’ have been withdrawn 
and merged into a single bill namely ‘The Legal Metrology Bill, 2008’. 
He added that most of the recommendations contained in the Tenth 
Report of the Committee have been accepted and incorporated in the 
proposed Bill.  An interaction session, then took place.  
The following important points emerged during the interaction 
period: - 
(i) Rationale behind changing the nomenclature of ‘The 
Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976 and The 
Standards of Weights and Measur es Enforcement Act, 
1985’ to ‘The Legal Metrology Bill, 2008’; 
(ii) The fate of the earlier two Bills i.e. (i) The Standards of 
Weights and Measures (Amendment) Bill, 2005 and (ii) 
The Standards of Weights and Measures (Enforcement) 
Amendment Bill, 2005; 
(iii) Reasons for only three States been given representation 
on the Committee set up by the Department to examine 
the Tenth Report of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee; 
 

(iv) Consultations with the other States before finalizing the 
proposed Bill; 
(v) Need to simplify the laws relating to the weights and 
measures so that the common man can understand the 
provisions of the bill.  
(vi) The inclusion of the recommendations of the Committee 
contained in 10 th Report which have been accepted by 
the Government in the new bill; 
(vii) Reasons for not accepting the rest of the 
recommendations of the Committee; 
(viii) Difference between the “Special Verification Agent” 
proposed in the earlier Bills to verify the Weights and 
Measure and “Government Approved Test Centre” which 
has been proposed in the new integrated bill; 
(ix) Need for pursuing the State Governments to strengthen 
their infrastructure instead of putting Government 
approved test Centre; 
(x) Role of the State Governments vis -à-vis Government 
approved Test Centres; 
(xi) Justification for having the rule mak ing powers with the 
Central Government;  
(xii) Difficulties likely to be faced by the enforcement agency 
in the implementations and penal provisions made in the 
proposed Bill; 
The representatives of the Department of Consumer Affairs 
replied to the queries raised by the Members. 
 
The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before 
them and sharing their free and frank views with the Committee.  
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept on record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF  THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FOOD, C ONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 13TH FEBRUARY, 2008 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee 
Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
Present 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Alakesh Das 
3.       Smt. (Adv.) P. Satheedevi 
4. Shri Fransisco Cosme Sardinha  
 
 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
5. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
6. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
7. Shri Matilal Sarkar 
8. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
9. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Veena Sharma  - Director    
2. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Deputy Secretary -I 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad  - Deputy Secretary – II 
 
Representatives of Indian Institute of Legal Metrology, Ranchi.  
 
1. Shri N.C. Biswas, Director 
2. Shri Rajeshwar Kumar, Professor 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives 
of Indian Institute of Legal Metrology (IILM), Ranchi  to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to take evidence on ‘The Legal Metrology Bill, 

2008’.  Thereafter, the representatives of IILM, Ranchi expressed their 
overall views on the aforesaid Bill.  
3. The following important points emerged during the interaction: - 
(i) By merging the two Acts, the total number of sections 
have been reduced to 56, so some pro visions have been 
left out; 
 
(ii) Government Approved Test Centres (GATC) should have 
been defined in the definition clause of the Bill; 
 
(iii) Director, Indian Institute of Legal Metrology, Ranchi and 
Director Legal Metrology should not come under the 
purview of public servant; 
 
(iv) The management and control of the Institute (IILM, 
Ranchi) teaching staff and other employees, the course 
and curricula for training should vest in the Central 
Government; 
 
(v) For proper implementation of the provisions of th e legal 
metrology, training infrastructure should be developed 
and for proper effective enforcement it should be 
decentralised. 
 
(vi) The ability of IILM, Ranchi to prevent fraudulent use of 
weight s and measures; and 
 
(vii) Power of Union Government to ma ke rules for the whole 
country to maintain uniformity. 
 
The representatives of the IILM, Ranchi replied to other 
queries raised by the Members. 
 
The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing 
before them and sharing their free and frank views with t he 
Committee.  
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept on record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
___________ 

MINUTES OF THE SIXTE ENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FOOD, C ONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 17TH FEBRUARY, 2008 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1540 hrs. in Committee 
Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
Present 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Avihash Rai Khanna 
3.       Shri Harikewal Prasad 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
4. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
5. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
6. Shri Mangala Kisan 
7. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
8. Shri Matilal Sarkar 
9. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K. Singh   - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Veena Sharma  - Director    
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Deputy Secretary -I 
4. Shri Jagdish Prasad  - Deputy Secretary – II 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)  
 
1. Shri Yashwant Bhave, Secretary  (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) 
2. Shri R. Mathurbootham, Director, Legal Metrology 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives 
of Department of Consumer Affairs to the sitting of the Committee and 
drew their attention to the Direction 55(1) of the Directions of the 
Speaker. The reafter, the Committee took evidence of the 

representatives of Department of Consumer Affairs on ‘The Legal 
Metrology Bill, 2008’.  The Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs 
expressed overall views of the Government on the Bill.  
3. The following important points emerged during the interaction:  
 
(i) Need to define Government Approved Test Centres 
(GATCs) in the Bill; 
 
(ii) Need to put the verification and stamping of all 
sophisticated weights and measures under the control 
and supervision of the State Governments; 
 
(iii) Need to have Rule making powers with the State 
Governments and the Central Government to frame 
Model Rules and circulate to the States; 
 
(iv) Need to fix accountability of the Board of Directors in 
case of an offence committed by the company; and 
 
(v) Need to ins ert a clause regarding cognizance of the 
offence in the Bill.  
 
The representatives of the Department of Consumer Affairs 
replied to the queries raised by the Members. 
 
The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before 
them and sharing their free and frank views with the Committee.  
    A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept on record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
___________

 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION   
HELD ON THURSDAY THE 19TH FEBRUARY, 2009. 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee  
Room No. 139,  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav - Chairman 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
3. Shri Alakesh Das 
4. Shri Fransisco Cosme sardinha 
5. Smt. (Adv.) P. Satheedevi 
 
 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
6. Shri  Matilal Sarkar 
7. Shri  Shantaram Laxman Naik 
8. Shri  Rajniti Prasad 
9. Shri Mangala Kisan 
 
    SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri A. K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
 3. Shri B. S. Dahiya  - Deputy Secretary-I 
 4. Shri Jagdish Prasad  - Deputy Secretary-II 
 
 
At the outset Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the 
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration 
the dr aft report on ‘The Legal Metrology Bill, 2008’ of the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) and adopted the same with minor amendment.  
 
 

2. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the aforesa id 
report and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament in the 
current Session of Parliament.   
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 