 
4 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2004-2005) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBTUOIN) 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the  First Report of the Committee  on Demands for Grants  (2004-
2005) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution)}  
 
 
 
 FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2005  /Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka) 

FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2004-05) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the  First Report of the Committee  on Demands for Grants  (2004-
2005) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution)}  
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  27.4.2005 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on    27. 4. 2005  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2005/Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka) 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
           
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Chapter I Report 
 
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
 accepted by the Government 
 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
 the Government’s replies 
 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
 replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee  
 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
 which final replies of the Government are  
still awaited 
 
ANNEXURE 
Letter dated 5th October, 2005 addressed to Food  
Secretaries of Sugarcane Growing Status to enforce  
Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1996  
 
APPENDICES 
(I)  Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Committee held  
on 8th April,  2005  
 
(II) Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government  
on the recommendations contained in the First 
Report of the Committee  

  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2004-05 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Suresh Angadi 
4. Shri Ranen Barman 
5. Shri Alakesh Dass 
6. Shri Tukaram Gadakh 
7. Shri Atma Singh Gill 
8. Shri Govinda 
9. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
10. Shri Jaiprakash* 
11 Shri Baliram Kashyap 
12. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
13. Shri Parsuram Majhi 
14. Shri Zora Singh Mann 
15. Shri K.P. Naidu 
16. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
17. Smt. Daggubati Purandareswari 
18. Shri Ajit Kumar Singh 
19 Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
20. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
21. Shri Harish Nagpal 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia** 
23. Shri T.S. Bajwa 
24. Shri Palden Tsering Gyamtso  
25. Shri Narayan Singh Kesri 
26. Shri Lalitbhai Mehta 
27. Smt. Bimba Raikar 
28. Shri  Nabam Rebia  
29. Shri Thanga Tamil Selvan 
30. Shri Vikram Verma 
31. Shri Vijay Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.D.T. Acha ry   -  Secretary 
2. Dr. (Smt.) Paramjit Kaur Sandhu  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
5. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director 
6. Ms. Juby Mehra    -  Committee Officer 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 19 th April, 2005 vide Bulletin Part II (Lok Sabha) No. 
 1116 dated  19th April, 2005. 
** Nominated to the Committee w.e.f 24 th April, 2005 vide Bulletin Part II  (Rajya Sabha) No. 
42642 dated 25th April 2005. 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Commi ttee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution ( 2004-2005) having been authoriz ed by the Committee to 
submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fourth Report on Action Taken by 
the Government on the recommendations/ observations contained in the First  
Report of the Committee (Fourteenth  Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2004-
2005) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
 
2. The First  Report was presented to  Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
25th  August, 2004.  The Government hav e furnished their replies indicating 
Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Report on 8 th December, 
2004. The Draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
sitting held on 8th April, 2005. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by  the Government on Recommendations 
contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.   
 
 
New Delhi         DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV 
21st   April, 2005___           Chairman 
1 Vaisakha 1927 (Saka)    Standing Committee on Food, Consumer 
Affairs and Public Distribution 

 
 
Chapter – I 
 
Report 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution deals with the Ac tion Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations containe d in the First Report (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) on  “Demands for Grants (2004-2005 )” pertaining to the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Dist ribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution). 
 
1.2 The Report was presented to Lok S abha and laid on t he Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 25th August, 2004. It contains 25 recommendations/observations. 
 
1.3 Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 25 observations/recommendations 
 contained in the Report have been received and categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/observati ons which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
Recommendations Nos. 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 14, 20, 22, 23 and 24 
     (Chapter –II, Total 10) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observati ons which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Recommendations Nos. 3  and 16 
     (Chapter – III, Total 2) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendations  Nos. 4, 6, 12, 13, 15, 18, 21 and 25 
     (Chapter – IV, Total 8) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in  respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited. 
Recommendation No. 5, 10, 11, 17 and 19 
     (Chapter – V Total 5) 
 
1.4 The Committee desire that the fi nal replies in respect of the  
Observations/Recommendations for wh ich only interim replies have been 
received from the Government  be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 
 
1.5 The Committee strongly emphasize th at utmost importance should be 
given to the implementation of Observat ions/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government.  In cases where it is not possible for the Government to implement 
the recommendations in letter and spirit  for any reason, th e matter should be 
reported to the Committee in time with reasons for non-implementation. 
 

1.6 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations. 
  
A. Decentralised Procurement   
 
(Recommendation  No. 2 Paragraph No. 2.69) 
 
1.7 Expressing their concern over pr ocurement operations restricted to few 
States, the Committee recommended that  the Government should encourage 
the decentralized procurement operation,  by launching awareness campaign in 
Print and Audio-visual Medi a, Village Fairs, Panchayat s, Agricultural Extension 
Services/Krishi Vigyan Kendras so that the benefit of decentralised procurement 
is reaped by the farmers.  The Committee also desired that the infrastructure 
facilities should be impr oved and adequate number of  mobile and temporary 
procurement centres be set up in non-tr aditional States.  The Committee also 
recommended that need-based credit be made available to these States and 
adequate technical staff posted and meas uring and other equipments required 
for the procurement be put up in place before the oper ation of the system.  
Further, the Committee recommended that to promote decentralized 
procurement, an incentive scheme, for the benefit of non-traditi onal States be 
thought of.    
 
1.8 In their Action Taken Note, the Mini stry inter-alia stated that the Central 
Government is encouraging State Gove rnments to undertake procurement of 
foodgrains under Decentraliz ed Procurement System.  In  the meetings of Food 
Secretaries held on 21 st July, 2004 and 18 th August, 2004, the Department has 
impressed upon the State Governments to  gradually increase their share in 
procurement of foodgrains and also ensure  adequate infrastructural facilities at 
procurement centres and storage points.  At  present 9 States viz. West Bengal, 
Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisg arh, Tamil Nadu, Uttaranchal, A&N 
Islands, Orissa and Gujarat are procur ing foodgrains under the Decentralized 
Procurement System.  FCI and the State Governments have been requested to 
launch awareness campaign, in  print and audiovisual medi a so that the benefits 
reach the farmers.  They have also been requested to    set up adequate number 
of mobile and temporary procurement c entres, wherever necessary, to check 
distress sale by farmers.  The Cent ral Government has been recommending to 
the RBI to sanction adequate cash credit li mit to the FCI/State  Governments for 
undertaking procurement of foodgrains, as  and when request to this effect is 
made by FCI/State Governments. 
 
 

1.9 The Committee find that  FCI & State Governments have been requested 
to launch awareness campai gn in print and audio-visu al media  so that the 
benefit of decentralized procurement can be  reaped by the Farmers.  They have 
also been requested to se t up adequate number of  mobile and temporary 
procurement centers wherever necessar y.  The State Governments have also 
been urged to improve infr astructure facilities at pr ocurement centres in non-
traditional States.  In this context, the Committee would li ke that Central 
Government should monito r the position closely and  ensure that awareness 
campaign  for promoting decentralise d procurement be  stepped up, and 
infrastructure facilities including te mporary/mobile pr ocurement centres 
improved.   The Committee w ould like to be  apprised  of Action Taken by the 
State Governments and FCI in the matter.  The Committee find that the advise of 
the  Committee to introduce an incentive scheme for the benefit of non-traditional 
States, has  not been reacted to by the Government.   The Committee take a 
serious view of it and des ire that each and every suggestion of the Committee 
should be dealt with all seriousness th at it deserves and comments offered on 
each and every suggestion/advise of the Committee.   The Committee desire  
that views of Government in the matte r  be furnished to the Committee at the 
earliest.  
 
B. Coverage under TPDS    
 
(Recommendation  No. 4 Paragraph No. 2.71) 
 
1.10 The Committee took note of the fact that the States hav e identified 8.17 
crore as BPL families under Targeted Pu blic Distribution System whereas the 
coverage was extended to 6.5 crore famili es of Below Povert y Line including 2 
crore for Antyodaya Anna Yojana only, leav ing a large section of vulnerable 
section of the society from  the purview of poverty a lleviation programme.  As a 
result, the States are under compulsion to  reduce the scale of issue to the BPL 
beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the coverage of the 
Targeted Public Distribution System  should be extended beyond 6.5 crore 
families living below poverty line. 
 
1.11 The Government in the Action Taken Reply has stated that the number of 
BPL households for each State/UT has  been determined on the basis of the 
state-wise poverty estimates of the Planning Commission for the year 1993-94 
and the population projections  of the Registrar General as on 1.3.2000.  As per 
these estimates the number of BPL famili es is 6.52 crores (average size of a 
family being 5.5).  Hence while the cove rage of households is 6.52 crores, the 
total coverage of persons is of the order  of 35.86 crores.  The Government of 
India makes allocation of foodgrains on this basis.  Hence it is not true to 
presume that the TPDS covers only 6. 52 crore BPL people.   Though as per the 
latest available estimates of the Plan ning Commission for the year 1999-2000, 
the percentage of BPL population has come  down to 26%  from 37% in 1993-94, 
but the Government continues to foll ow the old estimates of 1993-1994 for 
allocation of foodgrains so that more  number of households are covered under 
the BPL.  The higher number of BPL familie s in certain States is perhaps due to 
the improper identification and issue of BPL ration cards to ineligible families or 

existence of bogus Ration Cards.  T he State Governments have been requested 
time and again to review the identificati on of families to bri ng the number to the 
realistic levels.   
 
1.12 The reply of the Government that hi gher number of BPL families in certain 
States is due to improper i dentification and issue of BPL ration cards to ineligible 
families or existence of bogus ration ca rds is not acceptable to the Committee.  
This is in contradiction with the statement given by  Secretary, Department of 
Food and Public Distribution during ev idence wherein he had agreed that the 
number of poor families are in fact more  than 6.5 crore.  The Committee feel that 
figure given by the Government  is far from reality.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that coverage of TPDS should be 
extended beyond 6.5 crore fami lies so that all the poor people can come within 
the purview of TPDS and States are not fo rced to reduce the scale of issue to 
BPL beneficiaries. 
 
C. Barring “creamy-layer” of  APL from TPDS    
 
(Recommendation  No. 6 Paragraph No. 2.73) 
 
1.13 Expressing their concern over misutilization of food subsidies, the 
Committee suggested that the APL popul ation should be stratified in two 
categories, either on the basis of in come or expenditure, and the so called 
“creamy-layer” should be barred from the benefit of TPDS.  This will help not only 
in reducing the food subsidy but will also help in checking diversion of foodgrains.   
 
1.14 The Ministry in  Action Taken Repl y stated that the TP DS was introduced 
in 1997 with a view to tar get the under privileged sections  of society that is the 
Below Poverty Line families and providing them foodgrains at subsidized rates. 
The idea of the Targeted Public Distri bution System is ta rgeting the poor.  
Another role of TPDS is stabilization of prices across the country even in remote 
areas, providing food security and  choice  of foodgrains to the consumers. The 
low off-take under the APL is  mainly due to the little difference in the price of 
foodgrains at the Fair Pric e Shops and the market price and easy availability in 
the open market.  The suggestions of the Co mmittee to stratify the APL families 
into two categories on the basis of income/expenditur e may not be helpful and  
practically feasible. The APL families making use of TPDS would continue to 
make use of it till the price and quality of foodgrains are co mparable with the 
foodgrains in the open market.  As regards subsidy, it is  given on the offtake of 
foodgrains.  Less offtake would entail less subsidy.  Though chances of diversion 
of foodgrains under APL category are mi nimum, it can be checked with the 
sincere use of the PDS (Control) Order, 2001 by the State Governments.     

1.15 The reply of the Government that it is neither helpf ul nor practically 
feasible to stratify the Above Poverty Li ne (APL) families into  two categories on 
the income/expenditure, as  recommended by the Commi ttee is not acceptable.  
On one hand, the Government  laments  that the main purpose of TPDS is to 
target Below Poverty Line (BPL ) families and  on the other  hand it refuses to bar 
the “creamy layer” of APL families from TPDS.  The Committee do not approve of 
the action of the Government  in continuing to extend th e benefit of TPDS to this 
section,  when they can easily afford   foodgrains from the market.  The 
Committee are of the view that precious food subsidy should  be spent on those 
who  can ill afford the foodgrains and acco rdingly there is a need to fine tune the 
beneficiaries.  The Committee have ob served that the percentage of APL 
subsidy to the total subsid y is on the rise.  For inst ance, the APL subsidy have 
risen to 6.58% in year 20 03-04, from a level of 2.78%  in the year 2001-02.  
Similarly, the APL subsidy has risen to Rs. 1655.18 crore fr om Rs. 458.96 crore 
during the same period.     The Committee, theref ore, recommend that APL 
population be barred from the purview of  TPDS so far as foodgrains is 
concerned.  The APL popu lation, may, however, cont inue to draw other PDS 
items as per their entitlement. 
 
D. Area Officers Scheme     
 
(Recommendation No. 7 Paragraph No. 2.74) 
 
1.16 Reviewing the implement ation of PDS, the Committ ee noted that series of 
measures taken, such as issue of the Pu blic Distribution System (Control) Order, 
2001 associating Panchayati Ra j Institutions (PRIs), constitution of Vigilance 
Committees and appointing Area Officers to monitor the scheme did not yield the 
tangible results.  The Area Officers’ Sc heme failed to take  off as the Area 
Officers seldom visit their allocated St ates even at least once in a quarter as 
required. In some of the States not even a single visit was conducted during the 
last three years.   The Committee re commended that enforcement machineries 
be stepped up, criminal liab ility clause under PDS(Contro l) Order, 2001  invoked 
and Area Officers visits made compulsory  for the effective implementation of 
PDS.  
 
1.17 The Ministry in Action Taken R eply stated that they have noted the 
observations/recommendations of the Co mmittee, relating to Area Officer’s 
Scheme.  As desired by the Standing Committee, Officers of the level of  
Director/Deputy Secretary  have been designated as area officers of different 
States and instructions have been issued to t hem to visit their allocated State/UT  
compulsorily at least once in six mont hs.  Guidelines c ontaining duties and 
responsibilities of the area officers have also been given to them.  The 
Government of India has already form ulated and issued a Public Distribution 
System (Control) Order, 2001 which is app licable to States/UTs Clause 9 of the 
PDS (Control) Order, 2001   specifically pr ovides that if any person contravenes 
any provision of the PDS (Control) Order , 2001 under clauses 3, 4, 6 and 7, he 
shall be liable for punishment under Sectio n 7 of the Essential Commodities Act, 
1955.  The enforcement of the Provisio ns of the Essential Commodities Act, 
1955 is with the State Government and UT Administration. The results of 

enforcement of  the Essent ial Commodities Act, 1955 in respect of  Essential 
Commodities including PDS items in t he States/UTs during the period 1-1-2003 
to 31-3-2004 are as under:  
i. Number of raid s conducted  - 10,1953 
ii.  Number of persons arrested  - 3,326 
iii.  Number of pers ons prosecuted - 6,892 
iv.  Number of persons convicted - 6,201 
v.  Value of goods confiscated - Rs. 2027.81 lakhs  
 
1.18 The Department has further  stated that in addition  to the above, the State 
Governments/UT Administrations have also been empowered to detain persons 
under the Prevention of Blackmarke ting and Maintenance of Supplies of 
Essential Commodities Act, 1980 whose acti vities are found to be prejudicial to 
the maintenance of supply of commodities  to the community. As per reports 
received from the State Governments,  115 persons were ordered for detention 
under the Act for Blackmarketing of Ess ential Commodities including PDS items 
during the period from 1.1.2003 to 31.3.2004.   TPDS is the joint responsibility of 
the Centre and State Governments. The Central Government constantly monitors 
the implementation of the TP DS.   As soon as any complaint related to TPDS is 
received in the Ministry from the general pub lic, the same is sent to the 
concerned State/UT Government for taking corrective/remedial measures on the 
issue.  This Department has   drawn the attenti on of all the States and UTs    to 
this and has requested to take urgent and  speedy corrective measures and to 
activate the enforcement agencies so as to  see that the TPDS is run smoothly in 
the States/UTs.   
 
1.19 The Committee find that the Offi cers at the level of Director/Deputy 
Secretary have been designat ed as Area Officers fo r different States and 
instructions issued to them to visit the allocated State/UT compulsorily at least 
once in six months.  The Committee are of the view that this plan of the 
Government may not yield th e desired result.  Taking in to consideration, a vast 
network of Fair Price Shops in each State, it  will be difficult for an officer to 
monitor the working of Publ ic Distribution System and that too once in six 
months, to the satisfaction of the cons umers.  In this context, the Committee 
recommend that the Depar tment should engage the services of retired 
Defence/Civil Servants, Chartered Ac countants, Management  Consultants, 
Social Activists and NGOs wi th un-blemished records, in the task of monitoring 
the Public Distribution S ystem in a State.  This will ensure not only close 
monitoring of the  System but will also relieve the Department’s officers from 
such gigantic task.   The Committee would also like to  recommend that FPS in a 
State should not be run by  an individual but by Panchayats, Mahila Samitis, 
Cooperative Institutions or any like bodi es, agencies/authority,  on the lines of 
practices in vogue in the States of Kerala and Tamil Nadu.  
 

E. Welfare Schemes     
 
(Recommendation  No. 9 Paragraph No. 2.76) 
 
1.20 Taking a serious note of the mism atch between alloca tion and offtake of 
foodgrains for various Welfare Schemes such as Mid-Day Meal Scheme, 
Sampoorna Gramin Rozgar Yojana and te ndency of the Central Government to 
shift the onus on State Governments for this lapse, the Committee had 
recommended that the Government should  take the average annual offtake in 
the past, say, last 3 or 5 years to form t he basis of allocation for the next year so 
that foodgrains are allocated on the basis of requirement.  The Committee had 
also recommended that ther e should be some mechanism with the Central 
Government so that the State Governm ents can be made accountable and they 
are not able to escape from their responsibility of making operational 
arrangements for distribution of foodgrains on a regular basis. 
 
1.21 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has agreed that it is not only the 
responsibility of the State Government/Union Territories to lift the allocated food 
grains, it is a coordinated effort to be made by Department of Food & Public 
Distribution, the nodal ministries of each schemes, Food Corporation of India and 
the State Govt. to ensure lifting the f ood grain in time in proportion to the 
allocation made to each State Government/Union Territory.  But sometimes lifting 
the food grains is effected due to non-avai lability of transport, rains, floods, non-
availability/lesser number of railway ra cks and different priority accorded by each 
State amongst different Welfare Schemes.  Lifting is also affected because of 
non-viability of Fair Price Shops (FPS) a nd availability of cheaper rates of food 
grains during harvesting seasons.  Further, as regards taking average annual off-
take of last three or five years for the bas is of allocation for the next year, all the 
Nodal Ministries of each Welfare Scheme /FCI/State Government/UT  are  being 
apprised of  these comments to adopt this procedure.  A Nodal Officer of the rank 
of Additional Chief Secretar y in each State has been appointed  to prioritize/fix  
the need of the State under each scheme so that the off-take will be in keeping 
with the allocation. 
 
1.22 The Ministry of Human Resource Development which is the Central nodal 
Ministry for Mid-Day Meal Scheme, in their Action Taken Re ply have stated that 
allocation of foodgrains is made on the bas is of enrolment data received from 
States/UTs. As per information given by Food Corporation of India, actual off-
take of foodgrains during 2003-04 by States/UTs was 79% of the quantity 
allocated, which is, on the whole, not uns atisfactory.  Upto 2004-05, allocation of 
foodgrains was being done on the assumption of 100% attendance of enrolled 
children. From 2005-06, this is being fi ne-tuned so as to allocate foodgrains on 
the basis of average attendance rate of children as estimated/projected by 
States/UTs concerned.  This would make for more realistic allocation, and will 
further improve offtake as percentage of allocation. 
 

1.23 The Ministry of Rural Development wh ich is the Central nodal Ministry for 
SGRY Scheme, in their Action Taken Reply have stated that under SGRY 
Scheme every worker engaged in work un der the SGRY is provided a minimum 
of 5 Kg of foodgrains per man-day as part of wages, while the balance of wages 
(Not less than 25% ) is paid in cash.  For this, 50 lakh tonnes of foodgrains 
amounting to about Rs. 5, 700 crore (at economic cost) is being provided every 
year free of cost to the State Governm ents and Union Territory  Administrations. 
The payment of foodgrains is made by the Ministry of Rural Development to the 
Food Corporation of India (FCI) directly on receipt of bills in respect of foodgrains 
lifted by the implementing agencies under SGRY.  
 
1.24 According to the Ministry of Ru ral Development, one of the reasons for 
lifting less quantity of foodgrains was n on-availability of foodgrains at FCI 
godowns in some States.  The Ministry  of Rural Developm ent has been getting 
communications from various States  regarding inadequate av ailability of 
foodgrains and these are being taken up with FCI and Ministry of Food  from time 
to time.  As regard mechanism of account ability, the SGRY Guidelines provides 
that if the Implement ing Agencies fail to lift 75% of authorised foodgrains and to 
utilize more than 50% of the available foodgrains, subsequent installment of 
funds and foodgrains are to be withheld. Thus, for poor lifting the States/UTs 
loose their due share of Central Grants under SGRY. 
 
1.25 The Committee feel that the Govern ment has taken  the steps in the right 
direction by appointing a noda l officer to prioritize/fix the need of the State under 
each Scheme.  This will surely help in matching offtake with allocation.  Moreover 
some changes are being m ade by the Ministry of HRD in the Mid-Day-Meal 
Scheme.  This will also ma ke for more realis tic allocation.  Ho wever, to ensure 
that the targeted beneficiaries avail  the benefit of Welfare Schemes, the 
Committee recommend that SGRY Guidel ines which provide that if the 
Implementing Agencies fail to  lift 75% of authorized food grains and  utilise more 
than 50% of the availabl e foodgrains, subsequent installment of funds and 
foodgrains are to be with held, should be made applic able uniformly for all the 
Welfare Schemes and the Gu idelines, for the purpose  revised. The Committee 
are of the view that such an action shall improve the off-take position of 
foodgrains under various Welfare Schemes.  
 
F. Outstanding dues of FCI 
 
(Recommendation  No. 12 Paragraph No. 3.32) 
 
1.26 The Committee were concerned to note that there was continuous rise in 
the outstanding dues of F ood Corporation of India (F CI) against other Central 
Ministries for the various Welfare Schem es undertaken by them which rose from 
Rs. 1000 crore in 2001 to more than Rs. 4000 crore in the year 2004.  The 
Committee was shocked  to find that thes e pending dues were mainly relating to 
non-payment of bills in respect of foodgrains issued under various welfare 
schemes such as Sampoorna Gramin Ro zgar Yojana (SGRY), Mid-day Meal 
Scheme, implemented by the concerned Cent ral Ministries.  Being not satisfied 
with the situation, the Committee strongly recommended that the pending dues 

should be cleared expeditiously and some time-limit should be fixed within which 
the Central Ministries be asked to make payments, in future, failing which some 
penal interest be levied. 
 
1.27 The Ministry  in the Action Taken Reply stated that the issue of settlement 
of outstanding dues of FCI against other Central Ministries for the welfare 
schemes in respect of foodgrains suppl ied under various welfare schemes such 
as Sampoorna Gramin Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) and Mid Day Meal Scheme 
(MDM) etc. has been taken up at the hig hest level with the concerned Ministries 
including the Ministry of Finance to expedite the matter. 
 
1.28 In this regard, the Ministry of Rural Development in the Action Taken 
Reply stated that Rs. 600 crore under the SGRY, including the Special 
Component (Rs. 300 crore for each)  have been provided in BE - 2004-2005 
towards the payments to the FCI. This amount has already been exhausted and 
this Ministry has committed liabilities of Rs. 5111 crore under the SGRY and Rs. 
6900 crore under the Special Component for which a formal request has already 
been made.  The pending dues of the FCI with the Ministry of Rural Development 
are not due to delay in processing the bills but for want of adequate funds. The 
Ministry of Rural Development has been requesting the Planning Commission 
and the  Ministry of Finance persistently  for allocation of adequate funds for 
payment to the FCI for the foodgrains lifted under the SGRY.  However, the 
SGRY Guidelines do not permit for payment of any penal interest to the FCI in 
respect of their outstanding bills.    
 
1.29 The Ministry of Human Res ource Development (Department of 
Elementary Education and Literacy) has replied that arrears payable to Food 
Corporation of India (FCI) for foodgrains under the Mi d-Day Meal Scheme is of 
the order of Rs. 600 crore.  Progress of payment to  FCI depends to a large 
extent on timely action by States/UTs in as much as payment to FCI is made 
after off-take figures are received from  States and are reconciled with FCI’s 
supply figures.  At present, Department is yet to receive offtake figures 
amounting to about Rs. 595 crore from States, notably Bihar (Rs. 332 crore), 
Assam (Rs. 64 crore), Jharkhand (Rs. 36 crore) and Uttaranchal (Rs. 24.50 
crore). These States have been repeatedly requested to furnish off-take figures 
so that FCI’s claims are settled at the earliest.  Subject to the defaulting States 
now responding promptly, t he Department expects to liquidate arrears to the 
extent of about Rs. 500 crore during 2004 -2005, and the rema ining amount in 
2005-06. 

 
1.30 The Committee are shocked to note t hat the failure on the part of Central 
Ministries, who are implementing various Welfare Sche mes in liquidating their 
outstanding dues against FCI, has resulted in rise in interest liability on FCI.  The 
Committee are of the view that FCI under  no circumstance should be allowed to 
be penalized for the laxi ty on the part of St ate Government/Planning 
Commission/Ministry of Finance.  The Committee are concerned to find that 
Ministry of Rural Development have pointe d out that they we re unable to make 
timely payment to FCI for want of adequate funds with  them.  Similarly, the 
Ministry of Human Resource Development were unable to pr ocess the bills of 
State Government on account of food grains received under Mid-Day-Meal 
Scheme as final off-take figures from St ates like Bihar (Rs. 330 crore), Assam 
(Rs. 64 crore), Jharkhand (Rs. 36 crore)  and Uttaranchal (Rs. 24.50 crore) were 
awaited and yet to be re conciled.  The Committee ta ke a strong note of the 
inability of Central Ministries  in making timely payment to FCI.  Reiterating their 
earlier recommendation, the Committee recommend that pending dues of FCI 
should be cleared expeditiously and some ti me limit should be fixed within which 
the Central Ministry be asked to make payment failing which some    penal  
interest or any other suit able action  may  be init iated against them.  The 
Committee  also  recommend   that in the event of  delayed payment by the 
Central Ministries, the interest accrued should not be loaded  on Food Subsidy 
Bill of the FCI. 
 
G. Establishment cost of FCI     
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13 Paragraph No. 3.33) 
 
1.31 Deeply concerned over the fact that  a large part of the food subsidy goes 
towards meeting the Establishment Cost  of FCI and dramatic rise in Food 
Subsidy Bill of the Government,  whic h is increasing year after year, the 
Committee recommended that the FCI should take drastic measures to bring 
down its Establishment Cost.  The Commi ttee also desired that FCI should find 
ways and means to mobilize  resources through diversif ication and finance their 
administrative expenses on their own without seeking any budgetary support 
from the Government for the purpose. 
 
1.32 The Ministry in the Action Taken Reply stated that  FCI has taken the 
 following steps to reduce the administrative overheads: 
 
a. The resultant entry level vacancies due to retirement of officials etc. 
are not being filled up, except in unavoidable cases; 
 
b. FCI has not been resorting to any further recruitment for the last 
few years in order to downsize its manpower; 
 
c. The expenditure on over-time allowance (OTA), travelling 
allowance (TA) and other administrative expenses are being closely 
monitored to keep it minimum; 
 

d. With a view to rationali ze the manpower and reduce the 
establishment cost, a Voluntar y Retirement Scheme (VRS) has 
been introduced in the FCI for its permanent employees and 
surplus labour.   
 
1.33 Further, FCI has prepared a “Vision 2020 Document” and drawn up its 
Mission Statement together with an Action Plan.  FCI in tends to identify over a 
period of time suitable commercial activi ties within and outside the country, in 
addition to fulfillment of the present  mandate of holding buffer, providing 
foodgrains at subsidized rates, and holding the price li ne.  It would examine the 
possibilities of branching out into divers ified areas, activities and commodities.  
FCI could examine opportuniti es like dealing in value added products like atta, 
maida, suzi; diversify into transactions in quality foodgrains like basmati rice, 
durum wheat, oil seeds, etc.; creati on of new storage capacity through 
outsourcing, modernization of  handling operations, outs ourcing activities like 
maintenance, training, security operations, exploration of Consultancy and 
research activities, operating through subsidiary companies, identifying 
independent profit ce nters, exploring direct expo rt of foodgrains, accessing new 
markets like forward trading, etc.  The resources for the commercial ventures 
could be raised from the market/financial inst itutions on the basis of their viability 
and marketability.  Besides, FCI, in the m eanwhile, has taken the initiative to 
reduce the cost of capital by proposing to issue bonds for an amount of Rs. 5000 
crores during the current financial year , backed by Government Guarantee. The 
Working Group, constituted by the RBI, has recommended the modalities and the 
proposal is currently under examination.   
 
1.34 The Committee are not satisfied wi th the steps taken by the Government 
to reduce administrative overhead expenditure especia lly when such  costs are 
loaded on food subsidy bill. The Committ ee desire that Establishment/Staff Cost 
should not be clubbed with  food subsidy but shown separately.  The Committee 
are of the view that food subsidy need to be fine tuned and focused for the 
benefit of the vulner able section of the society and  not fretted away on meeting 
the costs of  Establishment/Staff etc. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the administrative costs need to be fu rther pruned.  In th is context, the 
Committee recommend that on the lines of Central Warehousing Corporation, the 
activities like Security and House Keeping need to be outsourced.  Moreover, 
instead of purchasing, vehicles these should  be hired.  Taking  into consideration 
that the average manpower engaged in godowns owned by FCI is  proportionally 
higher, as compared to godowns man aged by CWC, the Committee are of the 
view that there is a scope for further  reducing the establishment cost.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that FCI should review its manpower engaged  in its 
godowns and try to bring it down.  The Committee are concerned to note  that 
there is mal-distribution of  manpower in FCI.  Wher eas the concentration of 
manpower is higher in H eadquarter, Regional and Z onal Offices  where only 
administrative work is undertaken, the field/District offices are deprived of 
adequate manpower.  The Committee would like that transfe r policy of FCI 
should be reviewed so that adequate manpow er is provided at field levels and 
only skeleton staff manage Headquarter/Zonal Offices and Regional Offices.   
 

H. Under-utilisation of FCI’s godowns capacity      
 
(Recommendation  No. 15 Paragraph No. 3.35)  
 
1.35 Expressing their concern over under-utilization of capacity of FCI’s 
foodgrains, the Committee recommended that  the FCI should go in for de-hiring 
of hired godowns.  The Committee also desir ed that in de-hiring process, priority 
should be to de-hire the private godown, followed by godowns of other Public 
Agencies.  Secondly, it should re-examine its planning process so that there is 
sufficient availability of owned godowns  and the dependence on  the hired ones 
can be minimised.1.36 In the Action Taken Note, the Ministry stated that it is 
true that utilisation of hired godowns capacity is more as compared to FCI's 
owned godowns capacity because FCI's own godowns are having higher storage 
capacity as these are created generally for buffer stocking so the percentage 
utilisation of FCI godowns is on lower side except in the proc urement season.  
However, the godowns taken on hire are generally to meet the TPDS 
requirement only and these godowns are of a smaller storage capacity. 
Therefore, their percentage ut ilisation is always on the higher side than those of 
FCI's godowns.  It may be further added that  with the arrival of the stock the 
capacity utilisation increases whereas it decreases with the issue/off-take of 
stocks under TPDS.  This does not mean t hat storage space is not required at 
that centre because to maintain the TP DS the requirement of the godowns is a 
primary factor.  As regards, de-hiring of godowns is concerned, it is stated that 
the capacity to the tune of 69.40 lakh  MT hired from CWC/SWC on 7 year 
guarantee basis can not be de-hired before co mpletion of the terms of 7 year as 
per agreement.  However, during calendar  year 2003, FCI has de-hired the idle 
capacity to the tune of 69.99 lakh MT from 1/2003 to 12/2003 and further 2.64 
lakh MT also de-hired from 1/2004 to  6/2004.  Thus from 1/2003 to 6/2004 72.63 
lakh MT of storage capacity of the Private Parties/Agencies has been dehired. 
 
1.37 The Committee are at a loss to un derstand the rationale of hiring of 
godowns by FCI when only 37 per cent of its owned capacity is put to use.  The 
Committee are of the view that godowns of FCI were constructed on merits, other 
than techno-economic viability and demonstr ates lack of planning and vision on 
the part of the organization.  Hiring of godowns from  Private/State agencies, 
when (FCI’s) owned capacity utilization is less than  40% indicates criminal 
wastage of public mone y and this trend needs to be put to  rest for once and all.    
The Committee recommend that FCI should  undertake hiring of godowns only 
when the capacity utilizatio n of their owned godowns is  more than 75% or break 
even point at each  godowns level and not aggregat e, except in North-Eastern 
States and hilly tracks of Jammu & Kashmi r, Himachal Pradesh and Uttranchal.  
The Committee are further perturbed to no te that the capacity to the tune of 
69.40 lakh MT hired from CWC/SWC cannot be dehired  before completion of the 
term of the 7 years guarant ee.  The Committee fail to understand the justification 
of 7 years guarantee Schem e, when the godowns of FCI remain vacant for a 
considerable long period.  The Committee are of  the view that such type of  
unproductive and unim aginative expenditure swells the food subsidy bill of the 
Government and needs to be brought down drastically.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that in  order to save precious money which is spent on 

food subsidy,  the 7 years guarantee pr ogramme needs to be reviewed so that 
the public money is put to best use.   It is in this contex t, the Committee desire 
that if there is an in-bui lt exit clause in the 7 y ears guarantee agr eement under 
which, either party can terminate the agreement after due notice, the same 
should be invoked and in case of non- existence of such a clause, the  
responsibility  be fixed.  
 
I. Proxy Labour       
 
(Recommendation  No. 18 Paragraph No. 3.38)  
 
1.38 Expressing their concern over spat e of proxy labour in FCI, the Committee 
recommended that measures like: (i) re quiring each and every worker to put 
one’s signature or thumb impression as  a token of attendance; (ii) introduction of 
mechanical gate entry devises, punching card system with thumb impression; (iii) 
payment  of wages to all workers thr ough cheque as per the provision of Income 
Tax Act; and (iv) signing of Daily work output slip by each labour at the end of the 
day and countersigned by Mandal/Sardar/Shed Incharge would go a long way in 
curbing this malpractice.  The Commi ttee, taking into consideration the 
dimension of loss incurred to the FCI, due to proxy labour, recommended that all 
cases of proxy labour especially in Ha ryana, Maharashtra and West Bengal be 
investigated by CBI or CVC or any ot her higher investigating agency and the 
Committee apprised of the outcome. 
 
1.39 In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry has stated that the FCI has 
informed them that as per the existing  system in vogue, the steps taken for 
marking attendance for Departmental/Direct Payment System wo rkers of the FCI 
are as follows:- 
 
i) The workers enter the depot sh owing Identity Cards at the gate 
(wherever feasible). 
 
ii) Then, the workers go to the labour section wi th their Identity Cards 
and  staff of the labour section  mark their attendance in the 
Attendance Card  and Register on the basis of the Identity Cards. 
 
iii) Then, the workers ar e provided work slips and directed to report at 
their respective place of work 
 
iv) On reaching the work place, the Shed Incharge on verification of 
the Identity Card, puts his signa ture on the Attendance Card and 
marks ‘Present’/ ‘Absent’ in the Booking-cum-Out put Slip. 

 
v) On conclusion of the day, the Shed Incharge after writing Work 
Slips showing output of the whole day signs the Booking Slip and 
after final verification of the Attendance Card, Booking-cum-Output 
Slips are returned to the workers which are at the same time signed 
by the Shed Incharge and, therea fter, by the Assistant Manager 
(Depot). 
 
1.40 In addition to the inherent system of attendance of workers in the FCI 
depots, the then Senior Regional M anager, FCI, West Bengal (Shri Suraj 
Prakash), introduced the system of putti ng signature/Right Thumb Impression/ 
Left Thumb Impression in the Attendance Register, separately kept for the 
workers in the depot premises prior to star ting of work, on arrival and also at the 
time of departure, after finishing the work for the day.  This new system was 
resented by the Food Corporation of India Workers Uni on and the Regional 
Labour Commissioner (C), Kolkata   also in sisted for maintenance  of status-quo 
and held the view that this system may be  evaluated after compliance of  Section 
9A of the Industrial Disputes Act.  T he FCI has reported that the then Senior 
Regional Manager had to be transferred from  West Bengal to Jharkhand in order 
to  diffuse the labour unrest and disruption of foodgrains supplies for the Public 
Distribution System. 
 
1.41 The Department of Food and  Public Distribution has further stated that the 
earning of the Departmental and Direct Payment System labourers is linked with 
their productivity as they are Piece Rated Workers.  After completion of the norm 
prescribed for a shift of seven hours, they are eligible to get incentive wages for 
the number of bags handled beyond the da tum as per the rates prescribed on 
slab basis.  These incentives are prevalent in the FCI since 1973.  It is further 
stated by the FCI that the work force of labour has only marginally increased 
since 1980s/1990s although the volume  of loading, unloading, movement 
operations etc. of the FCI has multiplied more than four times.  It is only the 
incentive scheme that has enabled t he FCI to ensure smooth handling of 
foodgrains.  The un-equitabl e distribution of work may be the reason for high 
earning of the labourers, which is being checked by pr oper supervision.  The FCI 
HQrs has issued strict instructions, from time to time, to regulate the attendance 
of food handling labour with  valid Identity Cards in the FCI depots.  The latest 
instructions in this regard were issued on 16.09.2003 by the FCI HQrs.  
 
1.42 It has been further stated by the Department that the matter was also 
discussed in the meeting of the Standing Committee of Parliament on Consumer 
Affairs, Food & Public Dist ribution on 11.08.2004.  The 
observations/recommendations of the Committ ee as contained in   para  3.38 of 
Chapter 3 of the First Report of the Committee were forwarded, on 01.09.2004, 
to the FCI for urgent necessary action and for intimating the Action Taken Report 
to this Department.  The FCI has informed that investigation of  proxy labour in 
respect of West Bengal Region of the FCI has been entrusted to the Executive 
Director (Vigilance) of the FCI.  The inve stigation will also be conducted by the 
FCI in respect of Maharashtra and Haryana Regions of the FCI.    On 
examination of the inform ation received from the FC I  and the Report of the 

Standing Committee referred to in para 5 above, it has been decided that the 
existing system of marking of attendanc e of workers in the FCI Depots and 
payment of wages to them needs to be re viewed.   The FCI has, therefore, been 
asked to place these matters before t he Board of Directors of the FCI for 
consideration in the next meeting of the Board of Dire ctors.  Further the matter 
has been re-examined and the Central Vigilance Commission has been 
requested to conduct an enquiry regarding the proxy labour system in the Food 
Corporation of India. 
 
1.43 The Committee find that as per the existing practice in vogue,   a worker is 
not entitled to put one’s si gnature or thumb impression   on Attendance Card and 
instead other functionary verifi es the identity of a person  by marking ‘present’ or 
‘absent’ in the official record.  The Co mmittee are at a loss to understand the 
resentment by the workers’ Union over the introduction of new Attendance Rule 
under which signature/right thumb impressi on/left thumb impression is put in the 
Gangwise Attendance Regist er separately kept for workers in the Depot 
premises,  prior to starting of work,  on a rrival and also at the time of departure.  
The Committee do not share the content ion of Regional Labo ur Commissioner 
that the introduction of ne w system will disturb the indus trial harmony in the FCI 
Godowns.  The Committee have  their own reservation over  the failure of FCI in 
introducing this fool proof syst em to weed out the system of proxy labour in FCI.   
The Committee find that Government have  merely advised FCI to consider and 
review of existing system of marking of  attendance of workers in the FCI Depot 
and payment of wages, at their next me eting of Board of Directors.  In the 
opinion of the Committee, this demonstrates  lack of will and seriousness on the 
part of Government in putti ng an end to corruption in FCI.  The Committee fail to 
understand what prevents Government to issue policy directive to FCI, for 
bringing about reform in  the Organisation.   Re iterating their earlier 
recommendations, the Committee desire  that  the suggestions made by them to 
weed out Proxy Labo ur  be made operational in al l the godowns of FCI without 
fail immediately as it is causing drainage of public funds.   
 
1.44 The Committee have taken note of  incentive schemes prevalent for 
Departmental and Direct payment system to labourers in FC I.  The Committee 
have come across instances where a la bour is being paid Rs.40,000 to 50,000 
per month but no justificatio n is given.  The Committee are of the view that the 
norms  prescribed for a shi ft of seven hours, after which a worker is eligible for 
incentive wages,  for the number of bags handled, as per the rates prescribed on 
slab basis is too liberal and prone to mani pulation.  The c ontention of the 
Government that the incentive scheme has enabled  FCI to ensure smooth 
handling of foodgrains is ha rdly convincing and demonstrates lack of supervision 
on the part of management.  The Committe e are of the view that but for the 
incentive scheme,  the work ers handling foodgrains hardly work.  The shortage 
of labour should be made g ood by fresh induction or  contract labour system 
which is cheaper.  The Committee reco mmend that a work study be conducted 
and the  norms prescribed  be  reviewed and revised,  in  order to ensure that  a  
worker is gainfully employ ed and handles a minimum nu mber of bags during a 
shift.  This will ensure that  a  worker undertakes  a re asonable amount of work 
during the shift duty and only thereafter gets eligible wages and incentives.    

 
1.45 The Committee have further noted t hat the proxy labour  system in FCI is 
being enquired into by CBI.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
progress report of the CBI and follow up action taken thereon.   
 
J. Diversification of CWC in Freigh t Container Business         
 
(Recommendation  No. 21 Paragraph No. 4.22)  
 
1.46 The Committee found that the Cont ainer Corporation of India, a PSU 
under the ambit of Ministry of Railways enjoys monopoly, in the transportation of 
import/export containers through railways.   The Committee were of the view that 
CWC  should also be allowed to di versify and operate in Freight Container 
business and the Ministry of Railwa ys should permit CWC to operate Inland 
Container Depot as per their own po licy.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
should take up the matter of permitting CWC in Freight Cont ainer business in 
consultation with Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance/CCEA, at the earliest. 
 
1.47 In  the Action Taken reply, the D epartment of Food and Public Distribution 
stated that  a meeting has been held on 18.08.2004 in  the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution with t he officers of the Railway Board in the 
matter of granting of permission to the Central Warehousing Corporation by the 
Ministry of Railways to operate Container Freight business on the lines of 
CONCOR. The matter is being pursued by this Ministry. 
 
1.48 The Planning Commission has replied that  in principle it finds merit in the 
recommendation of the Committee in break ing monopolistic sce nario of freight 
container business and allowing the Cent ral Warehousing Corporation to operate 
freight container business.  However, the issue needs to be sorted out by the 
Inter-Ministerial consultations. 
 
1.49 The Ministry of Railways in the Ac tion Taken Reply has stated that at the 
instance of the Ministry of Commerce, the subject of grant of permission to 
organization other than CONCOR for rail  based container wa s examined in this 
Ministry in 1994. The Ministry of Ra ilways decided in 1994 to permit agencies 
other than CONCOR also to undertake oper ation of container trains.  As per 
policy any party can approach Railways for permission to move container trains 
on any route. Till 2001 nobody approached Railways fo r operation of containers 
trains.  On 14.6.2001 Central Warehous ing Corporation (CWC) had requested 
the Ministry of Railways to allow them to operate container trai ns between Loni in 
Delhi area and JNPT in Mumbai area.  Railway Board on 22.7.2001 issued Rail 
Transport Clearance (RTC) for rail siding fa cilities for Container Freight Station 
Dronagiri Node near JNPT.  The RTC was granted for a period of six months 
from date of issue of the letter.  The party was to c onfirm to the Railway the time 
frame within which the traffic would ma terialize.  On 30.9.2002 CWC applied for 
permission to set up CONCOR type operation for the container trains in terms of 
the extant guidelines of Indian Ra ilways Board appointed a Committee to 
examine the volumes of container traffi c to be moved to JNPT and other ports, 

CONCOR’s plan and if it is  essential to supplement CONCOR’s effort by other 
players. 
 
1.50 The Ministry of Railways further  stated that It was observed by the 
Committee  set up by Railway Board that CONCOR is also able to meet nearly 
the entire transport needs of containerized traffic on Delhi-Mum bai route and is 
making investment to augment the infrastr ucture and handling facilities in the 
hinterland of Northern Region. The Committee therefore opined that it would not 
be desirable to agree to the proposal of CWC to operate container trains 
between Loni (Delhi area) and JNPT (Mumbai area).  T hus the proposal of CWC 
was rejected on technical ground.  
 
1.51 The  Committee are not satisfied with the casual and evasive reply 
furnished by the Ministry of Railways.  The Committee do not find any merit in the 
rejection of the request of CWC for permitting them to operate containerized train 
between LONI  and JNPT on the grounds that CONCOR is ab le to meet  the 
entire transport needs of container tr affic of Delhi-Mumb ai route and they 
(CONCOR) are also making investment  to augment the infrastructure and 
handling facilities in the hinterland of Northern Region.  The Committee are of the 
view that the Ministry of Railways have failed to enlist the par ticipation of other 
players in supplementing CONCOR e fforts to increase the volume of 
containerized traffic.  Th e Committee are in agreemen t with the contention of 
Planning Commission that t here is a need to break mo nopolistic scenario of the 
Ministry of Railways in Fr eight Container Business.  Taking into consideration 
that the Guidelines of the Ministry of Railways permit the entry of other players in 
setting up of Rail Link Island Contai ner Depot, the Committee reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and desire that CWC be allowed to di versify and operate 
Containerized Freight Business.  Accordin gly, the Ministry of Railway should 
reconsider their earlier decision and permit CWC to operate Containerized traffic. 
 
K. Cane Arrears        
 
(Recommendation  No. 24 Paragraph No. 5.20)  
 
1.52 Taking serious note of rise in cane arrears due to Cane growers, the 
Committee recommended that Government should take appropriate action under 
Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966 under which Central/State Government Officers 
are authorized to recover the arrears of cane prices remaining unpaid after 14 
days supplies of cane by the growers, together with intere st @ 15% p.a. as 
arrears of land revenue. 
 
1.53 In the Action Taken Note, the Mini stry in their reply stated that the 
sugarcane growing States have been asked to strictly enforce the provisions of 
the Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966 subject to  any directive given by Courts of 
Law.  A copy of the letter addressed to the States is enclosed (Annexure). 
 
1.54 The Committee have taken note of letter addressed to the States by the 
Department for enforcing the provision of Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966 under 
which the State Government/Central Gove rnment are authorized  to recover the 

arrears of cane price remaining unpaid after 14 days of su pply of cane by 
growers together with the interest at the rate of 15% per annum recovered as 
arrears of land revenue.  The Co mmittee would like to  be apprised of 
implementation of the order by various sugarcane growing States.   
 
L. SAP of Sugarcane       
 
(Recommendation  No. 25 Paragraph No. 5.21)  
 
1.55 The Committee  failed to understand the rationale of declaring State 
Advised Price (SAP) by some  of the States when it is  not statutorily binding on 
the sugar factories to pay according to i t.  The  Committee felt that this puts an 
additional burden on the sugar factories which are alre ady in precarious financial 
position and do not have ad equate funds for payment of cane price arrears. The 
Committee, therefore, recommended that  the Central Government should 
continue to declare SMP after due consul tation with State Governments without 
any stipulation and State Governments should be discouraged to declare a 
separate SAP. 
 
1.56 In the Action Taken Note, the Ministry  stated that  with  regard to SAP not 
being statutorily binding on sugar factories,   it may be mentioned that  the Hon'ble 
Supreme Court in its Order  dated 5 th May, 2004  has held that States which have 
enacted legislations regarding regulati on of supply and purchase of sugarcane 
have the right to fix prices for sugarc ane purchased by sugar mills which can be 
higher than the SMP determined by the Central Government.  However, the 
Central Government in its packages of  assistance to State Governments for 
clearing cane price arrears has stipulated  inter alia the condition that the State 
Governments would refrain from declaring SAP in future. 
 
1.57 The Committee are no t in agreement with the contention of the 
Government that Central Go vernment in its package of  assistance  to State 
Governments for clearing  cane arrears has stipulated inter alia the condition that 
the State Government would refrain fr om declaring SAP in future.  The 
Committee are of the view that when Supreme Court in its order dated 5 th May, 
2004 has held that  the States whic h have enacted legislation regarding 
regulation of supply and pur chase of sugarcane,  have th e right to fix prices of 
sugarcane purchased by sugar mills which can be higher than the SMP 
determined by the Centra l Government,  the Centra l Government  has no 
justification in putting any condition or rider for availing the package of 
assistance.   Such a condition, shall not  only amount to di sregarding the orders 
of Supreme Court but also  amounts to  encroachmen t upon State’s right by 
Union Government. The Committee, therefore, recommend that State 
Government may continue to declare SAP and ensure that the cane price arrears 
are cleared expeditiously.   
 

CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation  No. 1 Paragraph No. 1.11)  
 
The Committee are deeply concerned to  note the uneven utilisation of 
budgetary allocation under pl an and non-plan during t he year 2003-2004.  For 
instance, the actual plan expenditure for the first quarter was 10% which rose to 
50% in the last quarter.  Simila r unhealthy and uneven expenditure trends are 
visible for non-plan sectors also for the different quarters.  The Committee in their 
earlier report had repeatedly been im pressing upon the need to spread 
expenditure evenly during the year but it seems that the recommendations of the 
Committee have not been taken seriously at all.  The Committee are deeply 
anguished that even the financial rules of th e Government which clearly stipulate 
spreading of expend iture evenly for the four quar ters and bars the rushing of 
utilisation in the last quarter have been ignored.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Govern ment should ensure spreading of 
expenditure evenly in all the four quarters of the year without any exception. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department has adopted Cash Flow Management System w.e.f. 
01.04.2003.  To ensure spreading of exp enditure as evenly and as meaningfully 
as feasible in all the four quarters of the year, periodical review of trends of 
expenditure is conducted on a quarte rly basis by AS&FA and the Grant 
Controlling Authorities are instructed to ensure even expenditure in all the four 
quarters of the year.  Duri ng 2003-04, such meetings to  monitor the expenditure 
trends were held at the level of  AS&FA on 8.4.2003, 10.6.2003,12.9.03 and 
24.12.2003.  Necessary instructions were  simultaneously issued to Divisional 
Heads of spending units concerned (copies of O.Ms No. G 21014/1/2003-
04/Budget dated 10.4.2003, 17.9.2003,  15.10.2003, 5.1.2004, 29.1.2004, 
1.3.2004 and 3.3.2004 are enclosed). 
 
 Despite these efforts, Plan expenditu re in different Quarters of the 
financial year varied, mainly as the very  nature of the Plan schemes in operation 
involves a great deal of coordination with State Govern ments.  However, 96% of 
the total Plan allocation could be put to use during 2003-0-4, due to close 
following and monitoring. 
 
 It is also relevant to add that Budget Estimates for 2003-04 were reduced 
by Rs. 2.23 crore and Rs. 2646.19 crore under Plan and Non-Plan respectively at 
Revised Estimates stage due to financial po sition of the Govern ment which were 
communicated to the Department by Depar tment of Expenditure on 31.12.2003.  
as such, expenditure for the last quarter with reference to revised provisions 
comes to 12.00%. 
 

 The above cited examples are some of the efforts regularly put in by the 
Department towards spreadi ng expenditure as evenly  as possible during the 
year, and meeting projected expenditure in each quarter. 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) O.M. No. G 
20017/2/2004-AC Dated 8th December, 2004 
 
 
(Recommendation  No. 2 Paragraph No. 2.69)  
 
The committee finds that as Government’s Food Policy resolve to protect 
the farmers from distress sale of foodgrai ns by ensuring remunerative price and 
at the same time ensure food security for the masses, decentralized procurement 
operation of wheat a nd paddy is undertaken in non-tr aditional States.  Hitherto 
the procurement operations were confi ned to few States for want of adequate 
infrastructure and marketable surplus and ther eby leading to regional disparities.  
In the opinion of the Committee the dec entralized procurement will not only 
encourage local procurement and thereby benefit farmers, but also effect 
substantial savings in form of reducti on in the outgo of f ood subsidy and also 
enhance efficiency of Public Distribution System.  Secondly, as decentralized 
procurement has not taken off as expect ed, the local private traders have taken 
undue advantages.  In this context, the Committee recommend that Government 
should encourage the decentralized proc urement operation, by launching 
awareness campaign, in Print and Audio-visual Media, Village Fairs, Panchayats, 
Agricultural Extension Services/Krishi Vigyan Kendras so that the benefit of 
decentralised procurement is reaped by t he farmers.  At the same time, 
infrastructure facilities should be im proved and adequate numbe r of mobile and 
temporary procurement centers set up in non-traditional St ates.  In this context, 
the Committee recommend that need-based credit be made available to these 
States.  Further adequate technical staff posted and measuring and other 
equipments required for the procurement be put up in place before the operation 
of the system.  The Committee also recommend that to promote decentralized 
procurement, an incentive scheme, for the benefit of non-traditional States be 
thought of.    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Central Government is encouragi ng State Governments to undertake 
procurement of foodgrains under Decent ralized Procurement System.  In the 
meetings of Food Secretaries held on 21 st July, 2004 and 18 th August, 2004, the 
Department has impressed upon the St ate Governments to gradually increase 
their share in procurement of foodgrains and also ensure adequate infrastructural 
facilities at procurement centres and stor age points.  At present 9 States viz. 
West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pr adesh, Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu, 
Uttaranchal A&N Islands, Orissa and Gujarat are procuring foodgrains under the 
decentralized Procurement System.  FCI and the State Governments have been 
requested to launch awareness campaign, in  print and audiovisual media so that 
the benefits reach the farmers.  They ha ve also been requested to    set up 

adequate number of mobile a nd temporary procurement centres, wherever 
necessary, to check distress sale by farmers.  
 
2. The Central Government has been recommending to the RBI to sanction 
adequate cash credit limit to the FC I/State Governments for undertaking 
procurement of foodgrains, as and when request to this effect is made by 
FCI/State Governments. 
 
3. A Committee under the Chairmanship of  Additional Secretary & Financial 
Adviser of the Department with Food Se cretaries of UP, MP and Chhattisgarh 
was constituted to examine the reques ts received from various States 
undertaking decentralised procurement schem e for full reimbursement of costs  
and based on the recommendations of the Committee action has been taken. 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) O.M. No. G 
20017/2/2004-AC Dated 8
th December, 2004 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.9 of the Chapter I of the Report.) 
 
(Recommendation  No. 7 Paragraph No. 2.74)  
 
 
The Committee find that the Public Dist ribution System has failed to meet 
the expectations of the masses. There are complaints of identification of 
beneficiaries, ration cards, scale and iss ue price, quality etc.   To plug the 
loopholes, in the implementation of the scheme, a series of measures have been 
taken, such as issue of the Public Distribution System (Control) Order, 2001 
associating Panchayati Raj Institutions  (PRIs), constitution of Vigilance 
Committees and appointing Area Officers, to monitor the scheme, but the 
tangible results achieved are far from satisfactory. For instance, State/UTs 
Administration have not invoked criminal liability under the PDS (Control) Order, 
2001, issued under Essential Commodities Act, 1955. Similarly, Area Officers’ 
Scheme has failed to take off as the Area  Officers seldom vi sit their allocated 
States even at lest once in a quarter as required. In some of the States not even 
a single visit was conducted during the last three year s. The contention of the 
Government that visits could not be materialised by th e Officers due to 
exigencies of work, intervening Parlia ment Session, election and transfer of 
Officers, is hardly convincing.  The Committee are of the view that enforcement 
machineries, have to be stepped  up, criminal liability clause under PDS(Control) 
Order, 2001,  invoked and Area Officers vi sits made      compulsory, for the 
effective implementation of PDS. The Committee urge that in the interest of the 
poorest of the poor, the State Governments and Central Government ought to 
leave no stone unturned, in the effective implementation of th is scheme.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the State/Central 
Government in the matter. 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department has noted the observa tions / recommendations of the 
Committee, relating to Area Officer’s Scheme.  As desired by the Standing 
Committee.  Officers of the level of Director / Deputy Secretary  have been 
designated as area officers of different States and instructi ons have been issued 
to them to visit their allocated State/UT  compulsorily at least once in six months.  
Guidelines containing duties and responsib ilities of the area officers have also 
been given to them. 
 
 The Government of India has alr eady formulated and issued a Public 
Distribution System (Control) Order, 2001 which is applicable to States/UTs. 
Clause 9 of the PDS (Control) Order, 2001 spec ifically    provides that if any 
person contravenes any provisions of the PDS (Control) Order, 2001 under 
clauses 3, 4, 6 and 7, he shall be liable  for punishment under Section 7 of the 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955.  The enf orcement of the Pr ovisions of the 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955 is with the State Government and UT 
Administration. The results of enforcem ent of  the Essential Commodities Act, 
1955 in respect of  Essential Commodities including PDS items in the States/UTs 
during the period 1-1-2003 to 31-3-2004 are as under  
 
i.   Number of raids conducted  - 101953 
ii.  Number of persons arrested  -  3326 
iii. Number of persons prosecuted - 6892 
iv. Number of persons convicted - 6201 
 v. Value of goods confiscated - Rs.2027.81 lakhs  
 
 In addition to the above, the State Go vernments / UT Administrations have 
also been empowered to detain persons under the Prevention of Blackmarketing 
and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980 whose activities 
are found to be prejudicial to the maint enance of supply of commodities to the 
community. As per reports received from  the State Governments, 115 persons 
were ordered for detention under the Act for Blackmarketing of Essential 
Commodities including PDS items during the period from 1-1-2003 to 31-3-2004.  
 
 TPDS is the joint responsibility of the Centre and State Governments. The 
Central Government constantly monitors the implementation of the TPDS.   As 
soon as any complaint related to TPDS is received in the Ministry from the general 
public, the same is sent to the concer ned State/UT Government for taking 
corrective / remedial measures on the issue.    
5. This Department has   drawn the attent ion of all the States and UTs    to 
this and has requested to take urgent and speedy correctiv e measures and to 
activate the enforcement agencies so as to  see that the TPDS is run smoothly in 
the States / UTs.   
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) O.M. No. G 
20017/2/2004-AC Dated 8
th December, 2004 

 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
(Please see Para No.1.19 of the Chapter I of the Report). 
 
 
(Recommendation  No. 8 Paragraph No. 2.75)  
 
 
The Committee would like to draw the attention of the Government on the 
shortcomings in the working of PDS, reported by the Task Force Teams on their 
visits to some States.  Ensuring proper functioning of  the Public Distribution 
System is the responsibility of the Go vernment.  Hence the Committee suggest 
that the Government should consider the reports of the Task Force Teams 
seriously and frame necessary guidelines , to ensure effective functioning of 
Public Distribution System.  The Government should also impress upon the State 
Governments/UTs to strengthen the enforcement agencies/Vigilance Committees 
in order to check various irregularitie s which often take place at different 
centres/depots. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department has noted the obser vations/recommendations of the 
Committee. 
 
To ensure effective functioning of the PDS and also to impress upon the 
State Government/UTs to strengthen the enforcement agencies/vigilance 
Committee in order to check various irregu larities which at times take place at 
different centres/depots, the Government of India has already issued a Public 
Distribution System (Control)  Order, 2001 which is applicab le to States/UTs.  All 
States/UTs have again been requested to ensure effective implementation of the 
TPDS in their State/UT. 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) O.M. No. G 
20017/2/2004-AC Dated 8th December, 2004 
 

 
(Recommendation  No. 9 Paragraph No. 2.76)  
 
 
The Committee note that the offtake of foodgrains, allocated under various 
schemes of the Government (Mid-Day-Meal, Sampoorna Gramin Rozgar Yojana, 
Wheat Based Nutrition Programme, Annapurna et c.) is far from satisfactory.  In 
the case of some schemes such as Wheat Based Nutrition Programme and 
scheme for the welfare of SC/ST/OBCs, the offtake is not even 50%.  According 
to the Government, it is the responsibilit y of the State Governments/UTs to uplift 
the allocated foodgrains.  The Committee are, however, not satisfied with this 
reply since it is the Central Governm ent which is responsible for making 
arrangements to store the allocated foodg rains and is accountable for storage 
losses. In addition it has to pay rent  on hired godowns also.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should take the average annual 
oftake in the past, say, last 3 or 5 years to form the basis of allocation for the next 
year, so that the foodgrains are allocated on the basis of requirement.  Moreover 
there should be some mechanism with the Central Government so that the State 
Governments can be made accountable a nd they are not able to escape from 
their responsibility of making operati onal arrangements for distribution of 
foodgrains on a regular basis.  In t he absence of such an arrangement the 
various welfare schemes introduced by t he Government remain just a futile 
exercise on the paper only, signifying no gains to those sections who are 
supposed to benefited. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is agreed that it is not only the re sponsibility of the State Govt./ Union 
Territories to lift the allocated food grains, it is a coordi nated effort to be made by 
Deptt. of Food & Public Dist ribution, the nodal ministries of each schemes, Food 
Corporation of India and the State Govt. to ensure lifting  the food grain in time in 
proportion to the allocation made to eac h State Govt. / Union Territory.  But 
sometimes lifting the food grains is effected due to non- availability of transport, 
rains, floods, non-availability / lesser number of railway racks and different 
priority accorded by each State amongst different Welfare Schemes.  Lifting is 
also affected because of non-viability of Fair Price Shops (FPS) and availability 
of cheaper rates of food grains during harvesting seasons. 

 
Following are the allocation, off-take of both rice and wheat from 2001-02 to 
2004-05 up to September, 2004 (6 months) for all 35 States/Union Territories:- 
 
Figure in 000 tonnes 
Sl.
No. 
Scheme Total 
allocation 
(Rice+ wheat) 
Off-take  % of Off-
take upto 
Sept.04 
(6 
months) 
% of off-
take 
 
 
2001-02 
% of off-
take 
 
 
2002-03 
% of off-
take 
 
 
2003-04 
       Remarks 
1. Mid-day meal 2768.47 938.68 33.90 72.51 75.07 77.20 Scheme is 
administered, 
monitored and 
implemented by M/o 
Human Resources 
but food grain is 
distributed at BPL 
Central Issue Price on 
their demand. 
2. Wheat based 
nutrition prog. 
  443.84 128.11 28.86 52.94 59.49 64.49 -do- 
 
3. Annapurana 
scheme 
  166.61   48.98 29.36 57.40 147.43 
(incl. 
Backlog) 
88.61 Scheme is 
administered, 
monitored by M/o 
Rural   Development 
but food grain is 
distributed at BPL 
Central Issue Price by 
D/o F&PD on their 
demand. 
4. Sampoorna 
Gramin Rojgar 
Yojna(SGRY) 
3759.15 2703.58 71.91 49.82 95.49 107.77 
(incl. 
Backlog) 
Administered, 
monitored by M/o 
Rural   Development 
Department of F&PD 
allocates food grains 
at Economic Cost on 
their demand. 
5. Special SGRY 1016.62 994.95 97.86 71.32 82.68 97.83  -do- 
6. SC/ST/OBCs 
Hostel/ 
Welfare 
Institutions 
  737.06 159.19 21.00 42.34 12.96 25.86 Administered, 
monitored and 
implemented by M/o 
Social Justice & 
Empowerment. Food 
grains allocated by 
Deptt. of F&PD at 
BPL Central Issue 
Price. 
 
 
 
In case of SGRY and SSGRY the foodgrains  is allocated at Economic 
Cost and is distributed free of cost in different States/Union Territories.  Thus, the 
percentage of take-off is more than ot her schemes for which the allocation is 
made at BPL rates and difference between Economic Cost and BPL rates is 
subsidized by the Governm ent & State Governments have to bear transportation 
which results in reduced off-take. In order  to increase off-take under SC/ST/OBC 
Hostel / Welfare Institutions, State Govt s. are authorized to make allocation of 
food-grains to these Institut ions without making a reference  to  the Deptt. of  
Food & Public  Distribution and  also  advis ed  to  meet  the requirement of food 
grains of SC/ST/OBC Hostel / Welfare Institutions, out of 5% additional BPL 
allocation made to the conc erned States and approach  this Department only if 
the States’ requirement is not covered in this allocation. 

As regards taking average annual off-take of last three or five years for the 
basis of allocation for the next year, all the Nodal Ministries of each Welfare 
Scheme /FCI/State Govt/UT  are  bei ng apprised of  thes e comments to adopt 
this procedure.  A Nodal Officer of the rank of Additional Chief Secretary in each 
State has been appointed  to prioritize / fix  the need of the State under each 
scheme so that the off-take will be in keeping with the allocation. 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) O.M. No. G 
20017/2/2004-AC Dated 8
th December, 2004 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.25 of the Chapter I of the Report). 
 
Reply of the Ministry of Human Resource Development 
 
Allocation of foodgrains is made on the basis of enrollment data received 
from States/UTs.  As per information gi ven by FCI, actual offtake of foodgrains 
during 2003-04 by States/UTs was 79% of the quantity allocated, which is, on the 
whole, not un-satisfactory. Upto 2004-05,  allocation of foodgrains was being 
done on the assumption of 100% attendance of enrolled children.  From 2005-06, 
this is being fine-tuned so as to allo cate foodgrains on the basis of average 
attendance rate of children as estimated/projected by States/UTs concerned.  
This would make for more realistic alloca tion, and will further improve offtake as 
percentage of allocations. 
 
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT (DEPARTMENT OF 
ELEMENTARY EDUCATION AND LITERACY) O.M. No. 5-21/2004-MDM dt. 
15.12.2004 
 
Reply of the Ministry of Rural Development 
 
 

Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) is one of the many 
schemes with a component of foodgrains.  It was launched on 25 th September, 
2001 by merging the on-going schemes of  Jawahar Gram ‘S amridhi Yojana 
(JGSY) and Employment Assurance Schem e (EAS).  Both these schemes were 
implemented separately till 31 st March, 2002.  However, it became fully 
operational from 1st April, 2002.  Every worker engaged in work under the SGRY 
is provided a minimum of 5 kg. of foodgr ains per manday as part of wages, while 
the balance of wages (not less than 25%) is paid in cash.  For this, 50 lakh 
tonnes of foodgrains amount ing to about Rs, 5m700 cror e (at economic cost) is 
being provided every year, free of cos t, to the State Governments and Union 
Territory Administrations.  The payment of  foodgrains is made by the Ministry of 
Rural Development to the FCI directly on receipt of bills in respect of foodgrains 
lifted by the implementing agencies under SGRY. 
The foodgrains authorized and  lifted under SGRY during t he last three years are 
given as under:- 
(Foodgrains in lakh tonnes) 
Year Opening 
balance 
Authorize
d 
Total 
(2+3) 
Lifted % of lifting 
against 
authorisation 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
2001-02 - 34.51 34.51 18.06 52.22 
2002-03 16.45 45.26 61.71 37.55 60.85 
2003-04 24.16 49.97 74.13 45.07 
(provisional) 
60.80 
 
The above table shows that except in t he initial year (2001- 02) of implementing 
of SGRY, about 60% of aut horized foodgrains was lifted by the Implementing 
Agencies under the SGRY during the subs equent two years.  However, one of 
the reasons for lifting less quantity of foodgrains was non-availability of 
foodgrains at FCI godowns in some St ates.  This Minist ry has been getting 
communications from various States  regarding inadequate av ailability of 
foodgrains and these are being taken up with FCI and the Ministry of Food from 
time to time. 
Special Component of t he SGRY was launched on 1.4.2004.  Special 
Component is demand driven and allocation of foodgrains to the States is made 
on the basis of the requirement to deal with the calamities such as drought, 
earthquake, cyclone, flood etc.  Allocati on is made by a High Level Committee 
headed by Home Minister.  The foodgrains authorized and lifted under the 
Special Component during the last two years are given as under:- 
(Foodgrains in lakh tonnes) 
Year Authorize
d 
Lifted % of lifting 
against 
authorisation 
1 2 3 4 
2002-03 63.40 59.34 93.60 
2003-04 65.83 57.11 
(provisional) 
86.75 

 
 
 
 
As regard mechanism for accountability, th e SGRY Guidelines provide that if the 
Implementing Agencies fail to lift 75% of authorized foodgrains and to utilise 
more than 50% of the available foodgrains , subsequent instalment of funds and 
foodgrains are to be withheld.  Thus, for poor lifting the States/UTs loose their 
due share of Central grants under SGRY. 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPME NT (DEPARTMENT OF RURAL 
DEVELOPMENT) O.M. No. V-24011/25/2004-SGRY-I dated 4.10.2004 
 
(Recommendation  No. 14 Paragraph No. 3.34)  
 
The Committee note that out of the total storage of 272.37 lakh tonnes 
available with FCI as on 31.3.2004, the capacity available in the North East 
Region is only 7.6 lakh tonnes.  North Eastern Stat es are the most 
disadvantaged States in terms of lack of infrastructure, communication and 
rail/road networks.  Maintaining adequat e foodgrain stocks is thus a great 
challenge.  The induction of stocks in t he North Eastern States is a perpetual 
problem which gets acute during the monsoon season.  Besides natural 
calamities and vagaries of nature and law and order problems, the Railways 
capacity to carry required number of ra kes on daily basis for North Eastern 
States also aggravates the pr oblem.  It is, therefore, pr e-requisite that sufficient 
storage capacity is created in this region,  so that the people living there are able 
to reap the benefits of Public Distributio n System. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that FCI should step up the construction of godowns in North 
Eastern Region on a priority basis. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The total covered capacity (Owned/Hired) available with FCI as on 
30.6.2004 in N.E. Zone is 3.75 lakh M.T. with 40% utilisation.  Special attention 
has been given by Governm ent of India to set up more godowns in the North 
East Region.  The Planning Commission/Ministry of  CAF&PD while making 
allocation of budget for construction of godowns/Railway siding by FCI during 
10th Five Year Plan (2002-07)  have clearly indicated that 10% of the allocated 
budget will be earmarked for NE Region including Sikkim.2. At present the 
construction of storage at the following centres are in progress in North East 
Region:- 
Name of the Centre Present status 
Agartala/Tripura(Ph.II) 2500 MT completed. 
Jiribam/Manipur 2500 MT Work at Truss Level, 
Compound wall  
completed 
Dimapur/Nagaland 
(Ph.II) 
Godown has reached upto truss 
level and fabrication of trusses 
is in progress 

 
. In addition  to above FCI has alr eady approved construction of 5000 MT  
each godowns at Kolasib (Mizoram) and U daipur (Tripura) and the State Govts. 
have been requested to allocate suit able lands. Also, the proposals for 
construction of godowns at the following centres in Assam have been approved:-  
 
Azara (Kamrup Distt)   25000 MT (Without Railway siding)
 Dikom(Dibrugarh Distt)  25000 MT (With Rly siding)
 Hailakandh (Hailakandi Distt) 5000 MT  
 
The respective State Govts. have been asked to acquire land at the 
identified centres so as to facilitate cr eation of additional c apacity there.  The 
Ministry has taken up the matter with respective Stat e Government to expedite 
the identification/acquisit ion of land for construc tion of storage godowns at 
Udaipur (Tripura), Dibrugarh, Hailak andi, Azra/Guwahati (Assam).  Detailed 
estimates are under preparation in respect of construction of godowns in Lunglai 
and Lungthalia in Mizoram. As regards , construction of godowns in Bualpui 
(Mizoram), the State Govern ment has agreed in principle to hand over the land 
and follow up action is being taken.  
  
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) O.M. No. G 
20017/2/2004-AC Dated 8th December, 2004 
 
 
(Recommendation  No. 20 Paragraph No. 4.21)  
 
 
The Committee are concerned to not e the declining tr end of capacity 
utilisation of CWC godowns, over the years.  For instance, against the norm of 
60% occupancy level, the utilisation of owned/covered godowns, dropped from a 
level of 48%, in the year 2001-2002 to 38.37% in the year 2003-2004.  However, 
the utilisation capacity of hired/covered godowns, during the same period, did not 
show sharp, decline as witnessed in owned/covered godowns.  The hired 
utilisation, declined to 16%, from a leve l of 23%, during this period.  The 
Committee are of the view that norm for occupancy level of 60% is too liberal.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that norms be revised upwards, to a level 
of 80-85%.  At the same time, the hir ed godowns should be de-hired so as to 
improve occupancy utilisation of owned godowns.  While de-hiring, priority should 
be given first to de-hire the godowns of  private parties and then of other 
agencies.  The Committee also find that th ere is continous dec line in the profits 
of Central Warehousing Corporation over  the years.  Drough t, during the last 
three years, has been cited as one of the main reasons for dwindling profits. This 
has also resulted in decline in the capacity utilisat ion of CWC godowns.  The 
Committee recommend that besides dive rsification, CWC should find ways and 
means for improving their profitability.  
 

Reply of the Government  
 
Normally, the norms for any Organisation are to be fixed based on the 
factors which are within the control of the Organization.  The warehousing 
occupancy depends inter alia upon the avail ability of storage capacity, volume of 
foodgrains available for storage, production of foodgrains, etc.  hence the targets 
for utilisation may have to be fixed, keepi ng in view the factors for utilisation of 
capacity available. 
 
 The CWC has already init iated action of de-hiri ng of godowns keeping in 
view the availability of foodgrains fo r storage, and has de-hired 3.75 lacs MT 
storage capacity during the period 2001-02 to July 2004. 
 
 The Department of Food and Public Distribution has also reviewed the 
storage capacity in view of  its requirement, and has ta ken a decision during a 
review meeting that all the private godow ns where the occupancy is less than 
25% should be de-hired. 
 
 The CWC has taken a number of steps, as mentioned below, for 
improving their profitability:- 
 
(i) The fertiliser trade has been given a very competitive tariff which 
shall motivate them to use the warehouses of CWC. 
 
(ii) The sugar trade has been given di scounts in the tariffs which would 
result in the occupancy pattern going up and income improving. 
 
(iii) The general management warehousing of sugar is being 
undertaken in a big way and tripartite agreements have been 
signed with STC, MMTC and NAFED and various other agencies 
who are motivated to util ise the warehouses under the 
management of CWC. 
 
(iv) The Container Freight Station at  Bhadohi and Jammu have started.  
The Kandla Port CFS has been notifi ed for utilization by the Kandla 
Port Trust.  Extra thrust has been  given to increase the volumes of 
handling of containers at major ports  viz. Jawahar Lal Nehru Port 
Trust. 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) O.M. No. G 
20017/2/2004-AC Dated 8
th December, 2004 
 

 
(Recommendation  No. 22 Paragraph No. 5.18)  
 
Recommendation No. 5.18 
 
  The Committee note  that  a Sta nding Committee on Sugar Development 
Fund (SDF) chaired by the Secretary of the Department  looks into the 
performance of Schemes implemented with  SDF assistance.   The Committee 
note that  huge sums  to the tune of Rs. 105.64 crore,  Rs.93.94 crore and Rs. 
89.40 crore for modernization and rehabilitation  of sick sugar mills,  maintenance 
of buffer stock of sugar subsidy and bagasse based co-generation power 
projects, respectively have been surrendered in (2003-2004) under Sugar 
Development Fund.  The Committee fi nd that the surrender ing of resources 
under SDF is a recurring phenomenon in the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution. The Committee do not appr ove of this. The Committee recommend 
that the Government should take proac tive steps to step up utilization under 
SDF.  In this context, the Committee recommend that the Standing Committee on 
SDF should meet once in every quarter of the year to review the situation arising 
out of under  utilization of  funds allocated under each Head of SDF. A quarterly 
target for utilization of funds should also be fixed. The Committee also desire that 
the Government should make sincere effo rts for judicious utilization of funds 
within the financial year so that the  amount surrendered is reduced to minimum.  
 
Reply of the Governments 
 
The SDF Rule, 1983 provides that the Standing Committee may hold 
meetings as often as may be deemed nece ssary by it but shall meet at least 
once in each quarter of a year; provi ded that in a quarter during which no 
application, or any other matter referable to it has been received by the 
Committee, it shall not be necessary to hold a meeting in that quarter. 
 
 As recommended by the Committee, Government will take proactive steps 
to improve the utilisation under SDF.  The utilisation of funds under the heads 
under SDF will be taken up at the quarte rly meetings of the Standing Committee 
on SDF (It was taken up in the meeti ng held on 25.08.2004).  The Department 
has also fixed quarterly targets and sincere efforts are being made for judicious 
utilisation of funds and for reducing t he amounts that remain undisbursed for 
want of completion of pre-disbursem ent requirements by loanees and hence are 
surrendered.  
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) O.M. No. G 
20017/2/2004-AC Dated 8
th December, 2004 
 

 
 
(Recommendation  No. 23 Paragraph No. 5.19)  
 
Recommendation No. 5.19 
 
 
The Committee note that an amount of Rs. 300 crore was allocated in BE 
& RE (2003-2004) for subsidy for maint enance of buffer stock of sugar and an 
amount of Rs. 206 crore util ized due to lower number of claims received in the 
Department.  This year (2004-2005), an amount of Rs.400 crore has been 
earmarked under  this head. The Committee note that final settlement of buffer 
subsidy claims for the period 18.12.2002 to  17.12.2003 are yet to be completed.  
The Committee feel that one of the reasons for non-receipt of complete claims by 
the sugar factories is cumbersome proc edure and paper work in respect of these 
claims.  The Committee feel that though the Government shoul d ensure that no 
false claims are accepted and money dis bursed, still the paper work should be 
kept to a bare minimum so as to facilitate a large number of sugar mills to avail of 
the buffer subsidy claims.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As on 31-10-2004, the advance buffer subsidy had been paid to 356 sugar 
factories amounting to Rs 220 crores out of 362 sugar factories, who had 
submitted their buffer subsidy claims and the final buffer subsidy claims for the 
period 18-12-2002 to 17-12-2003 had already  been settled in respect of 172 
sugar factories amounting to Rs 38. 52 crores and 60 other cases are under 
process. Keeping the financial implication involved in the claims relating to buffer 
subsidy, bare minimum documents have now been prescribed in consultation 
with Integrated Finance Division to ensure that genuine cases alone get 
sanctioned. 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) O.M. No. G 
20017/2/2004-AC Dated 8th December, 2004 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 24 Paragraph No. 5.20)  
 
 
The Committee find that arrears to the tune of Rs. 1169. 78 crore for the 
sugar season 2000-01 is st ill outstanding.  The arrears of the sugar season 
2001-02, 2002-03 and 2003-04 have also not been liquidated.   The Committee 
desire that Government should take  appropriate action under Sugarcane 
(Control) Order, 1966 under which Centra l/State Government Officers are 
authorized to recover the arrears of c ane prices remaining unpaid after 14 days 
supplies of cane by the grower s, together with interest @ 15% p.a. as arrears of 
land revenue. 
 

The Committee further note that t he Central Government had approved 
one time assistance for an amount of Rs . 678.00 crore to the States of U.P., 
Uttaranchal, Haryana, Punjab and Bihar to clear the cane price arrears to private 
sugar factories.  The Committee find that  only the States of  Uttaranchal and 
Bihar availed of this assistance and were provided with Rs. 45.54 crores and Rs. 
19 crores respectively.  The Committ ee have been informed that the said 
scheme was for the year 2002-03 and has since lapsed.  The Committee feel 
that adequate opportunity was not given to the State Governments for availing of 
this assistance.  Taking into considerat ion, the large scale sickness witnessed in 
the sugar industry,  the Committee feel that the scheme of one time assistance 
should be revived afresh. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The sugarcane growing States have been  asked to strictly enforce the 
provisions of the Sugarcane (Control) Or der, 1966 subject to any directive given 
by Courts of Law.  A copy of the lette r addressed to the States is given in 
Annexure. 
 
The Ministry of Agriculture was informed of the recommendations of the 
Committee and requested that ta king into consideration the large scale sickness 
witnessed in the sugar industry, the sch eme of one time assistance should be 
revived afresh.  Ministry of Agricultur e has replied that since the package was a 
one time assistance to clear the sugarc ane arrears for 2002-03 sugar season in 
SAP States,  no provision of fund has been made in the budget of the Department 
of Agriculture & Cooperation for the year 2004-05.   Revival of the scheme of one 
time financial assistance may not serve the purpose as the St ate Governments of 
Punjab,  Haryana and U.P are not agreeing to the terms and conditions of the 
package. 
  
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) O.M. No. G 
20017/2/2004-AC Dated 8
th December, 2004 
 
Comments of the Committee 

 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
  
(Recommendation No. 3 Paragraph No. 2.70)  
 
The Committee are deeply concerned to  note the rise in procurement 
incidental charges and dist ribution cost over the years.  For instance, the 
procurement incidental charges, whic h were Rs. 134.68/qn. rose to Rs. 
156.30/qn., during the period from 2001-2004, for wheat and Rs. 66.61/qn. to Rs. 
74.90/qn. during the same period, for ri ce.  Similar uptrends have been noticed 
for distribution cost also.  As a resul t, the economic cost of wheat and rice and 
also subsidy has risen to a large extent.  The Committee recommends that ways 
and means should be found out to reduce procurement incidental charges and 
distribution cost.  The reduction in dist ribution cost can be effected by planning 
economy in the movement of distribution of foodgrains from procurement centres 
to consumption/distribution centre s and also by promoting decentralized 
procurement.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Procurement incidentals comprise of statutory charges, cost of gunnies, 
labour & transport charges, st orage charges, administrativ e costs, etc. Some of 
these charges including stat utory charges, are fixed in relation to the Minimum 
Support Price of the foodgrains which has increased over the y ears resulting in 
increase of these charges. Further, due to  increase in cost of raw material and 
overall inflation, transportation char ges, labour charges and storage charges 
have also increased over time. With the introduction of 50 kg. packing, the gunny 
costs and handling charges have also gone up. In addition, the salary of staff and 
other overheads, etc. reflected in the adm inistrative cost  have also increased 
over the years.  
 
 Similarly, distribution cost whic h comprises freight, handling charges, 
storage charges, interest, transit & storage shortages  & administrative 
overheads have increased mainly due to increase in labour, transportation, 
storage rates, etc.  
 
 A number of steps have  been taken for containi ng/ reducing expenditure 
on items included in procurem ent incidentals and distribution cost. These include 
reduction of rate of interest on the borrowing of funds by the FCI to finance its 
operations, introduction of voluntary retirement scheme in the FCI for employees 
and labour, to cut down the establishment cost and other controllable expenses 
of the FCI, encouragement of decentra lized procurement to cut down on 
transportation costs, etc.   
 

States are being encouraged to adopt  decentralized procurement for 
reducing distribution cost. Recently based on the discussions with the various 
State Governments a Committee was c onstituted under the Chairmanship of 
Additional Secretary & Financial Ad viser of the Department with Food 
Secretaries of UP, West Bengal and Chha ttisgarh as members to examine the 
issues raised by the States. Based on the recommendations of the above 
Committee, following additional component s of costs have been decided to be 
allowed as incidentals:- 
  
(i) Transportation cost from the pr ocurement centre to the storage 
point and from the storage point to the milling point. 
(ii) Commission to societies at 1% of MSP. 
(iii) Payment of cost towards transpor tation of gunnies from railheads to 
procurement centres. 
(iv) Enhancement of milling rate of  parboiled rice from Rs. 15 per 
quintal to Rs. 20 per quintal.   
 
 To keep the procurement  costs low, it has been decided to freeze the levy 
rice prices for the current Kharif Marketing Season 2004-05 at the last year level.  
 
 The Department is also making suit able recommendations to the RBI to 
sanction adequate Cash-Credit Limit to States for handling the procurement 
operations. 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD  AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) O.M. No. G 
20017/2/2004-AC Dated 8
th December, 2004 
 

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
(Recommendation  No. 4 Paragraph No. 2.71)  
 
 
The Committee find that the Public Distribution System (PDS) is a major instrument of 
Government’s economic policy for ensuring avai lability of foodgrains to the poor at an 
affordable price as well as for ensuring food security for the poor.  Public Distribution System 
is an important constituent of the strategy for poverty eradication and is intended to serve as 
a safety net for around 33 crore poors who ar e nutritionally at risk.  The Committee are 
concerned to not that the benefit of the Targeted Public Distribut ion System is extended to 
6.5 crore beneficiaries of Below Poverty Line families including 2 crore for Andtyodaya Anna 
Yojana only, leaving a large secti on of vulnerable section of the society, from the purview of 
poverty alleviation programme.  Surprisingly, the States have identif ied 8.17 crore as BPL 
families.  As a result, the States are under compulsion to reduce the scale of issue to the 
BPL beneficiaries.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the coverage of the Targeted 
Public Distribution System should be exte nded beyond 6.5 crore families living below 
poverty line. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The number of BPL households for each St ate/UT has been determined on the basis 
of the state-wise poverty estimates of the Planning Commission fo r the year 1993-94 and 
the population projections of t he Registrar General as on 1.3.2000.  As per these estimates 
the number of BPL families is 6. 52 crores (average size of a fa mily being 5.5).  Hence while 
the coverage of households is 6.52 crores, the to tal coverage of persons is of the order of 
35.86 crores.  The Government of India makes allocation of foodgrains on this basis.  Hence 
it is not true to presume that the TPDS covers only 6.52 crore BPL people.    
 
 Though as per the latest available estimate s of the Planning Commission for the year 
1999-2000, the percentage of BPL population has come down to 26%  from 37% in 1993-
94, but the Government continues to follow the old estimates of 1993-1994 for allocation of 
foodgrains so that more number of households  are covered under t he BPL.  The higher 
number of BPL families in certain States is perhaps due to the improper identification and 
issue of BPL ration cards to ineligible families or existence of bogus Ration Cards.  The 
State Governments have been requested time and again to review the identification of 
families to bring the number to the realistic levels.   
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) O.M. No. G 
20017/2/2004-AC Dated 8th December, 2004 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 

(Recommendation  No. 6 Paragraph No. 2.73)  
 
 
The Committee note that there exis ts a big gap in the allotment and 
offtake of foodgrains, under Targeted Public  Distribution System (TPDS).  Out of 
the total allotment of 746.84 lakh tones in the 2002-2003; only  201.3 lakh tones 
was uplifted, again in the year 2003-2004 out of 715.64 lakh tones of foodgrains 
that had been allocated, offtake was only 227.92 lakh tones.  According to the 
Ministry this gap is mainly due to ve ry less offtake under Above Poverty Line 
(APL) category,  which was only 8. 4% in 2002-2003 and 9. 4% in 2003-2004 as 
compared to 59.3% by BPL people in  2002-2003 and 65.4% in 2003-2004.  This 
situation is grave as in the absence of offtake of foodgrains being almost equal to 
that in the market, it is marked for open sale, thus defeating the very purpose of 
food subsidy.  The Committee, therefore, suggest that the APL population should 
be stratified in two categories, either on the basis of income or expenditure, and 
the so called “creamy-layer” should be ba rred from the benefit of this scheme.  
This will help not only in reducing the f ood subsidy but will also help in checking 
diversion of foodgrains.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
The TPDS was introduced in 1997 with a view to target the under 
privileged sections of so ciety that is the Below Poverty Line families and 
providing them foodgrains at subsidized rates. The idea of the Targetted Public 
Distribution System is targeting the poor.  Another role of TPDS is stabilization of 
prices across the country even in remote areas, providing food security and  
choice of foodgrains to the consumers. The low off-take under the APL is mainly 
due to the little difference in the price of  foodgrains at the Fair Price Shops and 
the market price and easy availability in the open market.  The suggestions of the 
Committee to stratify the APL families into two categories on the basis of 
income/expenditure may not be helpful and  practically feasible. The APL families 
making use of TPDS would continue to make  use of it till t he price and quality of 
foodgrains are comparable with the foodgrains in the open market. 
 
 As regards subsidy it is given on the offtake of foodgrains.  Less offtake 
would entail less subsidy.  Though chances of diversion of foodgrains under APL 
category are minimum it can be checke d with the sincere use of the PDS 
(Control) Order, 2001 by the State Governments.     
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION)O.M. No. G 
20017/2/2004-AC Dated 8
th December, 2004 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Recommendation  No. 12 Paragraph No. 3.32)  
 

 
The Committee are concerned to note that  there is continuous rise in the 
outstanding dues of Food Co rporation of India (FCI ) against other Central 
Ministries for the various Welfare Sc hemes undertaken by them.  It has risen 
from Rs. 1000 crore in 2001 to more than Rs. 4000 crore in the year 2004.  It is 
astonishing to find that these pending dues are mainly relating to non-payment of 
bills in respect of foodgrains issued under various welfare schemes such as 
Sampoorna Gramin Rozgar Yojana, Mid- day Meal Scheme, implemented by the 
concerned Central Ministries.  The Co mmittee strongly recommends that the 
pending dues should be cleared expeditiously and some time-limit should be 
fixed within which the Central Ministries  be asked to make payments, in future, 
failing which some penal interest be levied. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The issue of settlement of outstanding dues of FCI against other Central 
Ministries for the welfare schemes in  respect of foodgrains supplied under 
various welfare schemes such as Sampoorna Gramin Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) 
and Mid Day Meal Scheme (MDM) etc. ha s been taken up at the highest level 
with the concerned ministries including t he Ministry of Finance to expedite the 
matter. 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) O.M. No. G 
20017/2/2004-AC Dated 8
th December, 2004 
 

 
 
Reply of the Ministry of Human Resource Development 
 
 
 According to information availabl e with the Department of Elementary 
Education & Literacy, amount of arrears payable to Food Corporation of India 
(FCI) for foodgrains under the Mid-Day Me al Scheme is of the order of Rs. 600 
Crore. Progress of payment to FCI depends to  a large extent on timely action by 
States/UTs in as much as payment to FCI is made after off-take figures are 
received from States and are reconciled wi th FCI’s supply figures. At present, 
Department is yet to receive of off-take figures amounting to about Rs. 595 Crore 
from States, notably Bihar (Rs. 332 Cr ore), Assam (Rs. 64 Crore), Jharkhand 
(Rs. 36 Crore) and Uttaranchal (Rs. 24. 50 Crore).  These States have been 
repeatedly requested to furnish off-take figur es so that FCI’s claims are settled at 
the earliest. 
 Subject to the defaulting States   now responding promptly, the 
Department expects to liquidate arrears to the extent of about Rs.500 Crore 
during 2004-05, and the remaining about in 2005-06. 
Reply of the Ministry of Rural Development  
 
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT (D EPARTMENT OF 
ELEMENTARY EDUCATION AND LITERACY). O.M. No. 5-21/2004-MDM Dated 
15.12.2005. 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry of Rural Development 
   
During 2003-04 the Budget allocation for foodgrains component under  the 
SGRY was Rs. 736.25 crore. Keeping in view the lifting and utilization of 
foodgrains during the year,  additional  supplementary grant of Rs. 380.00 crore 
have been provided tomake payment to th e FCI against the foodgrains lifted 
under the normal SGRY. Besides, in addition of Budget allocation of rs. 38.75 
crores, additional supplement ary grant of Rs. 4850 crore have also been 
provided for making payment to FCI under the Special Component of SGRY. 
 
During the current year, Rs. 600 crore under the SGRY, including the 
special component (Rs. 300 crore for eac h) have been provided in BE-2004-05 
towards the payment to the FCI.  This amount has already  been exhausted and 
this Ministry has committed liabilities of rs.5111 crore under the SGRY and Rs. 
6000 crore under the Special Component for which a formal request has already 
been made. 
 
The pending dues of the FCI with the Ministry of Rural Development are 
not due to delay in processing the bills but for want of adequate funds.  This 
Ministry has been requesting the Planni ng Commission and the Ministry of 
Finance persistently for allocation of adequate funds for payment to the FCI for 
the foodgrains lifted under t he SGRY. However, the SG RY Guidelines do not 

permit for payment any penal interest to the FCI in respect of their outstanding 
bill. 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT (DEPARTMENT OF RURAL 
DEVELOPMENT) O.M No. V-24011/25/2004-SGRY-I dated 4.10.2004. 
 
 
 
 (Recommendation No. 13 Paragraph No. 3.33)  
 
 
 
The Committee are deeply concerned to no te that a large part of the food 
subsidy goes towards meeting the Establis hment Cost of FCI, wh ich is increasing 
year after year.  For instance, out of the total food subsidy of Rs. 24,176 crores 
released in the year 2002-03,  Rs. 1254.57 crores was to service Establishment 
Cost alone.  Also in the year 2003-04, out  of Rs. 25,769 crores subsidy released, 
Rs. 1287.35 crores contributed for Establishment Cost alone.  Taking into 
consideration, the ever ballooning food subsidy bill over the years, the Committee 
recommend that the FCI should take drastic measures to bring down the 
Establishment Cost.  This wi ll help in reducing the burden of food subsidy.  At the 
same time, FCI should find ways and means to mobilize resources through 
diversification and finance their adminis trative expenses on their own without 
seeking any budgetary support from the Government for the purpose. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
FCI has taken the following steps to reduce the administrative overheads: 
b) The resultant entry level vacancies due to retirement of officials etc. are 
not being filled up, except in unavoidable cases; 
c) FCI has not been resorting to any furt her recruitment for the last few years 
in order to downsize its manpower; 
d) The expenditure on over-time allow ance (OTA), travelling allowance (TA) 
and other administrative expenses are being closely monitored to keep it 
minimum; 
e) With a view to rationalize the manpower and reduce the establishment 
cost, a Voluntary Retirement Schem e (VRS) has been introduced in the 
FCI for its permanent employees and surplus labour.   
 
 FCI has prepared a “Vision 2020 Document” and drawn up its Mission 
Statement together with an Action Plan.  FCI intends to identify over a period of 
time suitable commercial activities within  and outside the country, in addition to 
fulfillment of the present  mandate of holding buffer,  providing foodgrains at 
subsidized rates, and holding the price line.  It would examine the possibilities of 
branching out into diversified areas, ac tivities and commodities.  FCI could 
examine opportunities like de aling in value added products like atta, maida, suzi; 
diversify into transactions in quality foodgr ains like basmati ri ce, durum wheat, oil 
seeds, etc.; creation of new storage c apacity through outsourcing, modernization 
of handling operations, outsourcing activities  like maintenance, training, security 

operations, exploration of Consultancy and research activities, operating through 
subsidiary companies, identifying independent profit centers, exploring direct 
export of foodgrains, accessing new ma rkets like forward trading, etc.  The 
resources for the commercial ventures could be raised from the market / financial 
institutions on the basis of their viability and marketability.  
 FCI, in the meanwhile, has taken the init iative to reduce the cost of capital 
by proposing to issue bonds for an amount of Rs. 5000 crores during the current 
financial year, backed by Government  Guarantee.  The Working Group, 
constituted by the RBI, has recommended the modalities and the proposal is 
currently under examination.   
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) O.M. No. G 
20017/2/2004-AC Dated 8th December, 2004 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see part No. 1.34 of the Chapter I of the Report). 
 
 
  
(Recommendation  No. 15 Paragraph No. 3.35)  
 
 
 
The Committee are surprised to notice t hat the utilisation of hired storage 
capacity is more as compared to the ow ned by FCI.  For the year 2003-2004, 
while there was 65% utilisation of hired capacity, only 37% of the owned capacity 
could be utilised. Further a large amount wa s spent on the payment of rent for 
hired capacity, which was Rs. 354 crore in the year 2003-2004.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that firstly, the FCI should go in for de-hiring of hired 
godowns.  In de-hiring process , priority sh ould be to de-hire the private godown, 
followed by godowns of other Public Agenc ies.  Secondly, it should re-examine 
its planning process so that  there is sufficient availability of owned godowns and 
the dependence on the hired ones can be minimised. 
            
                             Reply of the Government 
 
It is true that utilisation of hired godowns capacity is more as compared to 
FCI's owned godowns capacity because FC I's own godowns are having higher 
storage capacity as these are created generally for buffer stocking so the 
percentage utilisation of FCI godowns is on lower side ex cept in the procurement 
season.2. However, the godowns taken on hire are generally to meet the 
TPDS requirement only and these godowns are of a smaller storage capacity. 
Therefore, their percentage ut ilisation is always on the higher side than those of 
FCI's godowns.  It may be further added that  with the arrival of the stock the 
capacity utilisation increases whereas it decreases with the issue/off-take of 
stocks under TPDS.  This does not mean t hat storage space is not required at 
that centre because to maintain the TP DS the requirement of the godowns is a 

primary factor.3. As regar ds, de-hiring of godowns is concerned, it is stated 
that the capacity to the t une of 69.40 lakh MT hir ed from CWC/SWC on 7 year 
guarantee basis can not be dehired before completion of  the terms of 7 year as 
per agreement.  However, during calender year 2003, FCI has dehired the idle 
capacity to the tune of 69.99 lakh MT from 1/2003 to 12/2003 and further 2.64 
lakh MT also dehired from  1/2004 to 6/2004.  Thus from 1/2003 to 6/2004 72.63 
lakh MT of storage capacity of the Private Parties/Agencies has been dehired. 
 
Further, in view of the sufficient storage capacity available with the FCI, 
the construction of new st orage godowns  is restricted  only to Jammu & Kashmir 
and North Eastern States.  
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS,  FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
O.M. No. G 20017/2/2004-AC 
Dated 8th December, 2004 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.37 of the Report). 

  
(Recommendation  No. 18 Paragraph No. 3.38)  
 
 
 
The Committee are concerned to note the syst em of proxy labour prevalent in  
FCI, inspite of foolproof arrangements r eported to be in place to check this 
menace.  Such malpractices, not only drain the public exchequer, but also 
sullies, the image and reputation of a Central Public Undertaking.  The 
Committee have been informed that at times a regular labour is marked present 
in the register of FCI while he in fact indulges in other activities outside.  The 
Committee are of the view that proxy la bour is prevalent due to default in 
attendance system.  For instance, a labour is marked present by “P” or absent by 
putting a “dot” in the Attendance Register .  Further, the labours and farmers are 
deprived of cheque payment facilities.  The contention of the FCI  that proxy 
labour is inevitable during heavy procurem ent season, is hardly convincing, as 
the proxy labour reports  have emanated not only from t he procurement centers, 
but also from foodgrains godowns from non-traditional pr ocurement States.  The 
Committee are surprised to note the stat ement of MD, FCI during evidence that 
there is scope to reduce the number of complaints but the system of proxy labour 
cannot be eliminated totally.  The Committee are not in agr eement with the 
contention of the Government that there is no extra burden on the national 
exchequer as a result of substi tution of regular worker with  that  of proxy labour.  
The Committee are of the view  that it  depends upon the number of substitutes 
who work as proxy, enabling the regular worker to draw fictitious, fraudulent 
excessive wages, OTA and other incentives disproportionately, the loss to the 
exchequer.  The Committee are  at a loss to understand t he manner in which the 
entitlement of a proxy lab our is determined specially  when genuine worker has 
not worked. 
  
 In regard to incidence  of proxy labour  which was reported in the State of 
West Bengal, it was brought to the notic e of the Committee that the concerned 
officials of FCI West Bengal, who tried to exercise strict supervision and control 
was alleged to have been over ruled by Executive Director(P)  Headquarter and 
abruptly transferred at short notice for exposing this racket.  The Committee take 
serious note of malpractices of  proxy labour and recommend that measures like: 
i) requiring each and every worker to put  one’s signature or thumb impression as  
a token of attendance; ii) introduction of mechanical gate entry devises, punching 
card system with thumb impression; iii) pa yment  of wages to all workers through 
cheque as per the provision of Income Tax Act; and iv ) signing of Daily work 
output slip by each labour at the end of the day and countersigned by 
Mandal/Sardar/Shed Incharge would go a long way in curbing this malpractices. 
 
 The Committee, taking into considerat ion the dimension of loss incurred to 
the FCI, due to proxy labour, recomme nd  that all cases of proxy labour 
especially in Haryana, Maharashtra and West Bengal be invest igated by CBI or 
CVC or any other higher investigating agency and the Committee apprised of the 
outcome. 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The FCI has informed that as per t he existing system in vogue, the steps 
taken for marking attendance for Departm ental/Direct Payment System workers 
of the FCI are as follows :- 
 
vi) The workers enter the depot sh owing Identity Cards at the gate 
(wherever feasible). 
 
vii) Then, the workers go  to the labour section with their Identity Cards 
and  staff of the labour section  mark their attendance in the 
Attendance Card  and Register on the basis of the Identity Cards. 
 
viii) Then, the workers are provided work slips and directed to report at 
their respective place of work 
 
ix) On reaching the work place, the Shed Incharge on verification of 
the Identity Card, puts his signa ture on the Attendance Card and 
marks ‘Present’/ ‘Absent’ in the Booking-cum-Out put Slip. 
 
x) On conclusion of the day, the Shed Incharge after writing Work 
Slips showing output of the whole day signs the Booking Slip and 
after final verification of the Attendance Card, Booking-cum-Output 
Slips are returned to the workers which are at the same time signed 
by the Shed Incharge and, therea fter, by the Assistant Manager 
(Depot). 
 
 In addition to the inherent system of attendance of workers in the FCI 
depots, the then Senior Regional M anager, FCI, West Bengal (Shri Suraj 
Prakash), introduced the system of putti ng signature/Right Thumb Impression/ 
Left Thumb Impression in the Attendance Register, separately kept for the 
workers in the depot premises prior to star ting of work, on arrival and also at the 
time of departure, after finishing the work for the day.  This new system was 
resented by the Food Corporation of India Workers Uni on and the Regional 
Labour Commissioner (C), Kolkata   also in sisted for maintenance  of status-quo 
and held the view that this system may be  evaluated after compliance of  Section 
9A of the Industrial Disputes Act.  T he FCI has reported that the then Senior 
Regional Manager had to be transferred from  West Bengal to Jharkhand in order 
to  diffuse the labour unrest and disruptio n of foodgrain supplies for the Public 
Distribution System. 
  
 The earning of the Departmental and Direct Payment System labourers is 
linked with their productivity as they are Piece Rated Workers.  After completion 
of the norm prescribed for a shift of seven hours, they are eligible to get incentive 
wages for the number of bags handled beyond the datum as per the rates 
prescribed on slab basis.  These incentiv es are prevalent in the FCI since 1973.  
It is further stated by the FCI that the work force of labour has only marginally 
increased since 1980s/1990s although t he volume of loading, unloading, 

movement operations etc. of the FCI has mu ltiplied more than four times.  It is 
only the incentive scheme that has enabled the FCI to ensure smooth handling of 
foodgrains.  The un-equitabl e distribution of work may be the reason for high 
earning of the labourers, which is being checked by proper supervision. 
 
 The FCI HQrs has issued strict instruct ions, from time to  time, to regulate 
the attendance of food handling labour with  valid Identity Cards in the FCI 
depots.  The latest instructions in this  regard were issued on 16.09.2003 by the 
FCI HQrs.  
 
 The matter was also discussed in the meeting of  the Standing Committee 
of Parliament on Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution on 11.08.2004.  
The observations/recommendations of the Committee as contained in   para  
3.38 of Chapter 3 of the First Repor t of the Committee were forwarded, on 
01.09.2004, to the FCI for urgent necessary action and for intimating the Action 
Taken Report to this Department.  The FCI has informed that investigation of 
proxy labour in respect of West Bengal Region of the FCI has been entrusted to 
the Executive Director (Vigilance) of t he FCI.  The investigat ion will also be 
conducted by the FCI in respect of Maharashtra and Haryana Regions of the 
FCI.   
 
 On examination of the information received from the FCI  and the Report 
of the Standing Committee referred to in para 5 above, it has been decided that 
the existing system of marking of att endance of workers in the FCI Depots and 
payment of wages to them needs to be re viewed.   The FCI has, therefore, been 
asked to place these matters before t he Board of Directors of the FCI for 
consideration in the next meeting of the Board of Directors.  
 
 Further the matter has been re-exa mined and the Central Vigilance 
Commission has been requested to conduc t an enquiry regarding the proxy 
labour system in the Food Corporation of India. 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS,  FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
O.M. No. G 20017/2/2004-AC 
Dated 8th December, 2004 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.43 of the Chapter I of the Report). 
 
 
 
(Recommendation  No. 21 Paragraph No. 4.22)  
 
 
 
The Committee appreciate the ambitious plan of action initiated by CWC, to 
diversify their business.  Container Frei ght Station, Railsiding Warehouses, Cold 

Storage, development of Land Custom Stations etc. are some of the diversified 
activities planned by CWC.  The Committee find that the Container Corporation 
of India, a PSU under  the ambit of Ministry of Ra ilways enjoys monopoly, in the 
transportation of import/export container s through railways. The Committee find 
that CWC took up the matter of their entry into the field of container freight, with 
Ministry of Railways, as the CWC had expertise in container Freight 
Station/Inland Clearance Depots Operations  at Inland Station.   However, the 
proposal did not find favour with the Minist ry of Railways.  Surprisingly, Ministry 
of Railway’s guidelines permits setting up of Rail link inland Container Depot to 
parties other than the Container Corporation of India.  Further, the Ministry of 
Commerce is advocating opening of contai ner Freights business for other places 
also.  The Committee finds merit in the c ontention of Ministry of Commerce,  in 
breaking monopolistic scenario of Freight  Container Busine ss.  The Committee 
are of the view that CWC be allowed to diversify and operate in Freight Container 
business and the Ministry of Railwa ys should permit CWC to operate Inland 
Container Depot as per their own poli cy.  The Committee also recommend that 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, food and Public Distribution should take up the 
matter of permitting CWC in this business with Planning Commi ssion/Ministry of 
Finance/CCEA, at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A meeting has been held on 18.08.2004 in  the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution with t he officers of the Railway Board in the 
matter of granting of permission to the Central Warehousing Corporation by the 
Ministry of Railways to operate Container Freight business on the lines of 
CONCOR. The matter is being pursued by this Ministry. 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS,  FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
O.M. No. G 20017/2/2004-AC 
Dated 8th December, 2004 
 
Reply of the Ministry of Railways. 
 
At the instance of the Ministry of Commerce, the subject of grant of 
permission to organization other than CONCOR for rail based container was 
examined in this Ministry in 1994. The Ministry of Railways decided in 1994 to 
permit agencies other than CONCOR also  to undertake operation of container 
trains.  As per policy any party can approach Railways for permission to move 
container trains on any route. Till 2001 nobody approached Railways for 
operation of containers trains.  On 14.6.2001 Central Warehousing Corporation 
(CWC) had requested the Ministry of Railways to allow them to operate container 
trains between Loni in Delh i area and JNPT in Mumbai area.  Railway Board on 
22.7.2001 issued Rail Transport Clearance (R TC) for rail siding facilities for 
Container Freight Station Dronagiri Node near JNPT.  The RTC was granted for 
a period of six months from date of issue of the letter.  The party was to confirm 
to the Railway the time frame within wh ich the traffic would materialize.  On 
30.9.2002 CWC applied for permission to se t up CONCOR type operation for the 

container trains in terms of the extant guidelines  of Indian Railways Board 
appointed a Committee to examine the volume s of container traffic to be moved 
to JNPT and other ports, CONCOR’s plan and if it is essential to supplement 
CONCOR’s effort by other players. 
 
 It was observed by this Committee t hat CONCOR is also  able to meet 
nearly the entire transport needs of contai nerized traffic on Delhi-Mumbai route 
and is making investment to augment the in frastructure and handling facilities in 
the hinterland of Northern Region. The Co mmittee therefore opined that it would 
not be desirable to agree to the proposal  of CWC to operate container trains 
between Loni (Delhi area) and JNPT (Mumbai area).  T hus the proposal of CWC 
was rejected on technical ground.  
  
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS O.M NO. 2005/BC-II/XIV/600/2 dated 11.02.2005 
 
 
    Reply of the Planning Commission 
 
 
The Planning Commission, in principle,  finds merit in the recommendation 
of the Committee in breaking monopolistic scenario of freight container business 
and allowing the CWC to operate freight container business.  However, the issue 
needs to be sorted out by Inter-Ministerial consultations. 
Planning Commission OM No. 20(8)/DP/PC/2004 dated 19.11.2004 
 
(Recommendation  No. 25 Paragraph No. 5.21)  
 
 
The Committee  fail to understand the ra tionale of declaring State Advised 
Price (SAP) by some of the States when it is not statut orily binding on the sugar 
factories to pay according to it.  The  Committee feel that this puts an additional 
burden on the sugar factories which are al ready in precarious financial position 
and do not have adequate funds for paym ent of cane price arrears. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that t he Central Government  should continue 
to declare SMP after due consultation with State Governments without any 
stipulation and State Gove rnments should be discouraged to declare a separate 
SAP. 
   
Reply of the Government 
 
The SMP of sugarcane is fixed on the basis of the recommendations of the 
Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) and after consultations with 
the State Governments and such other organisations/authorities as may be  
considered appropriate by the Central Government. 

 
In regard to SAP not being statutorily bindi ng on sugar factories,  it may be 
mentioned that  the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its Order  dated 5 th May, 2004  has 
held that States which have enacted legi slations regarding re gulation of supply 
and purchase of sugarcane have the right to fix prices for sugarcane purchased 
by sugar mills which can be higher t han the SMP determined  by the Central 
Government.  However, the Central Govern ment in its packages of assistance to 
State Governments for clearing cane price arrears have stipulated  inter alia the 
condition that the State Governments would refrain from declaring SAP in future. 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS,  FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
O.M. No. G 20017/2/2004-AC 
Dated 8th December, 2004 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.57 of the Chapter I of the Report) 
 

 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPCCT OF WHICH 
FIANL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED. 
 
 
(Recommendation  No. 5 Paragraph No. 2.72)  
 
 
The Committee note that under the Tar geted Public Distribution System, 
the responsibility for identification of t he BPL families and issuing them ration 
cards rests with the State Governments/UT Admn. concerned.  But the 
States/UTs of Goa, H.P., Manipur, W.B,A&N Islands, Chandigarh, D&NH and 
Lakshadweep have yet to complete identi fication of the BPL families.  The 
Committee feel that inordinate delay in identification of BPL families in the above 
mentioned States would deprive the vulnerable section of the society, the benefit 
of Public Distribution System.  Considering the fact that this will dilute the whole 
programme of providing foodgrains to the poor families, the committee 
recommend that identification of BPL fa milies should be completed within 6 
months in the defaulting States. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department has noted the obs ervation/recommendation of the 
committee. 
 The concerned States/UTs have been requested to identify BPL/AAY 
families at the earliest without delay. 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS,  FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
O.M. No. G 20017/2/2004-AC 
Dated 8th December, 2004 
 
 
(Recommendation  No. 10 Paragraph No. 2.77)  
 
 
The Committee note that the prec ious food subsidy is expended on 
domestic sale and export of foodgrains an d contributed as much as Rs. 4105.73 
crore for these, as against total food s ubsidy of Rs. 25160 crore, in the year 
2003-2004.  It has been brought to the notic e of the Committee that stock of 
wheat and rice from Central Pool were so ld by FCI to selected exporters at a 
highly subsidised rate with a view to benefit them during the months from April, 
2003 to May, 2004.  It has also been stat ed that Export of wheat and rice was 
prohibited in August, 2003, but the or der of prohibition was subsequently 
withdrawn.  The Committee have taken note of open sale (domestics) and export 
of wheat and rice during the period from 2002-2003, 2003-2004 to 2004-2005.  
The Committee find that the open sale of wheat which was 53.52 lakh tonnes 

during the year 2002-2003 dropped to 9. 26 lakh tonnes to 0.13 lakh tonnes 
during the years 2003-2004 and 2004-2005 respectively.  Similarly, the open sale 
of rice which was 38.72 lakh tonnes  during the year 2002-2003 declined to 4.04 
lakh tonnes and 0.03 lakh tonnes  during the years 2003-2004 and 2004-2005 
respectively.  Drastic rise in the export of wheat was also witnessed during this 
period.  The Committee are given to unders tand that certain irregularities in the 
name of Open Market Sale and export of  foodgrains have taken place.  It has 
been alleged that not only the demand of domestic market was ignored but 
export subsidy too was misused.  Simila rly other irregularities have also taken 
place such as operatinalising export sale s, release of stocks of foodgrains in 
favour of few and release of bank guarant ee despite non-performance.  Taking a 
serious view of such abnormalities, t he Committee recommend that an inquiry by 
CBI or any other higher investigati ng agency be instituted into the above 
transactions and the Committee apprised of the outcome. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per the recommendations of the Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer AFFAIRS,  FOOD AND PUBLIC  Distribution (2004) i.e. conducting an 
inquiry by CBI or any higher investigative agencies into allegations of 
irregularities in the export of foodgrains form the Central Pool, Central Vigilance 
Commission (CVC) has been requested that it may get an inquiry conducted in a 
manner found suitable and Lok Sabha Secretariat has been informed of it.  
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS,  FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
O.M. No. G 20017/2/2004-AC 
Dated 8th December, 2004 
 
 
(Recommendation  No. 11 Paragraph No. 2.78)  
 
 
The Committee have taken note of st ringent procedure followed by FCI, 
before foodgrains stored in their godowns  are decided as damaged.  It has been 
brought to the notice of the Committee, t hat  disposal of issuable stock of 
rice/wheat as damaged stocks, has been reported in various procurement 
centers, especially in West Bengal.  The Committee take serious note of it and 
recommend that the matter be enquired in to and the Committee apprised of the 
outcome thereof. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It has been the endeavour of the Govern ment/FCI to ensure that the 
stocks of foodgrains stored for the Centra l Pool in the godow ns all over the 
country is maintained properly. To th is end, the stocks of foodgrains are 
inspected by the technical officers of t he quality control on a  regular basis.  Any 
stock or its part, if suspected to have deteriorated in quality, is examined and the 
stock, if found not conforming to the specifications prescribed for the stocks fit for 

human consumption under the PFA, is  categorized as damaged stock under a 
well defined procedure and segregated from the sound stocks. 
 
 Complaints received regarding ca tegorization and disposal etc. of 
damaged foodgrains are attended by  the FCI promptly.  A few complaints in the 
matter have been received in respect of the stocks of rice stored in West Bengal.  
These complaints were looked into imme diately and the position thereof is as 
under: 
 
(i) 2364 MT of rice with  FCI at Coochbehar  
 
 This stock of damaged rice was alleged to have been not categorized 
properly and sold  to an agency which a ccording to the prescribed procedure for 
sale of damaged foodgains was not entitled for such purchase. 
 The above stock of rice pertaining to the Kharif Marketing Season 2000-01 
was dispatched ex-Punjab in January 20 01.  This stock was found to be 
damaged by the Vigilance squad of the FCI( Hqrs.,) as per their analysis reports 
dated 21st March and 22 nd March, 2001.  The CBI which is investigating into the 
matter issued its no objection for the disposal of above stock of rice in question in 
the end of May, 2004 and as informed by  the FCI, the stock has been sold to 
West Bengal Fishermen’s Cooperativ e Federation Ltd.(BENFISH) on an 
assurance of the Government of West Bengal that the dam aged fodgrains lifted 
from the FCI would be used as fish  feed by societies of Fisherman and 
Fisherman Groups under the direct supervision of BENFISH. 
 
(ii) 4371 MT of URS rice at CSD, FCI, Dabgram (Siliguri)  
 
 This stock of rice initially procured in Punjab under the relaxed 
specifications during KMS 1998-99 and su bsequently dispatched to Bengal was 
alleged to have been categor ized  improperly, as damaged and the  officers of 
the FCI were allegedly involved in disposing of it at cheap rates. 
 
 The FCI on a similar complaint rece ived earlier had deputed its Vigilance 
squad of the Headquarters to investigate.  In this investigatio n, the uric acid 
content of the 4371 MT of URS  was found in  excess of the limit  specified in the 
PFA and the stock was hence not fit fo r human consumption.  The stock was 
allotted to the NCCF as feed categor y-I stock.  A private party who was 
interested in getting the supply of the above stock at higher rates approached the 
Calcutta High Court and the matter is still subjudice. 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS,  FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
O.M. No. G 20017/2/2004-AC 
Dated 8th December, 2004 
 
 
 
 
 

 
(Recommendation  No. 17 Paragraph No. 3.37)  
 
The Committee note that different labour  systems exist in different zones 
of Food Corporation of I ndia.  These are Regular Department Labour, Contract 
System, Society System and Direct Piecem eal System.  The Committee find that 
a Committee has been constituted to stud y and rationalize th e different labour 
systems in vogue.  The Committee desire that  the findings of this Committee be 
completed within a period of six mont hs.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the outcome of the report in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Meetings of the Sub-Committee, constituted by the Board of Directors of 
the FCI relating to the long term labour  policy of the FCI were held on 19.12.2003 
and 18.06.2004. In the last meeting, the Sub-Committee made recommendation 
relating to reference pending before the National Indust rial Tribunal, Mumbai in 
respect of ‘Equal pay for Equal work’  for  workers working in Direct Payment 
System, No Work No Pay System and Workers Management Committee System 
at par with Departmental Labour.   The in terim order of the National Industrial 
Tribunal, Mumbai relating to payment of  Rs.50/- per day per worker on day of 
working was discussed and as per t he recommendation of the Sub-Committee, 
the interim order has been challenged in th e High Court of Mumbai, by the Food 
Corporation of India. 
 Rationalization of Labour S ystem in the Food Corporation of India is linked  
with the outcome of the said Industr ial Dispute  pending before the National 
Industrial Tribunal, Mumbai.  In case, the aforesaid Industrial Dispute is decided 
in  favour of the workmen, then there will be only two systems of labour in the 
FCI i.e. Departmental and Contract Labour System.  All the other systems of 
labour i.e. Direct Payment System, No Work No Pay System and Workers 
Management Committee System will merge in the Departmental Labour System.  
If the case is decided in favour of the FCI then the existing different labour 
systems will have legal sanctity. 
 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance 
and action will be taken for rationalization of the labour systems in the Food 
Corporation of India depots within the prescribed time limit. 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS,  FOOD AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
O.M. No. G 20017/2/2004-AC 
Dated 8th December, 2004 
 

 
(Recommendation  No. 19 Paragraph No. 4.20)  
 
The Committee note that in order to encourage the farming community 
and to motivate them to avail public warehousing facilities, a rebate of 30% is 
extended to farmers by Central Warehous ing Corporation (CWC)  The farmers 
pay 30% less tariff than the base rate of foodgrains tariff as made applicable by 
CWC for the General Public. As a result, the farmers, for storage of foodgrains 
bags of 100 Kg., are charged @ Rs. 3.75 per bag per month including insurance 
of the stocks, which after allowing 30% rebate calculates to  @ Rs.2.62 per bag 
100 Kg./month at a standard rated war ehouse of the CWC. Further, the 
Committee find that one of the objectives of  the CWC is to assist farmers in 
getting loans from banks against the pledge  of Warehouse Receipts. It has been 
brought to the notice of the Committee that banks have failed to hounour the 
Warehouse Receipt, on the ground that the receipt has not been recognized as a 
Negotiable Instrument. The Committee do not approve of this and recommend 
that Government should amend the rele vant statue, so that the warehouse 
receipt can be pledged and the farmers are able to obtain subsidized institutional 
credit on pledge of the Warehouse Receipt. 
Reply of the Committee 
 
 Action to make the warehouse receipt a negotiable instrument so that 
farmers may be able to obtain loans from banks against the receipt is being 
taken by the Department of Food and Public Distribution. A draft legislation on 
Negotiable Warehouse Receipt Act has been prepared which is being finalized in 
consultation with all the stake holders. 

MINISTRY OF  CONSUMER AFFAIRS, Food AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) O.M. No. G 
20017/2/2004-AC Dated 8th December, 2004 
 
New Delhi         DEVENDRA PRASAD YADAV 
21st   April, 2005___                  Chairman 
1 Vaisakha 1927 (Saka)    Standing Committee on Food, Consumer 
Affairs and Public Distribution 

 

IMMEDIATE  
TIME BOUND 
F. No. 15 (2)./2004-SP 
Government of India 
Ministry of consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
 
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi 
Dated the 5th October, 2004 
 
To 
 The Food Secretaries of Sugarcane Growing States. 
 
Subject: Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Food, Consum er Affairs, Food and  Public 
Distribution. 
Sir, 
 
 I am directed to say that the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution in its First Report on Demands for Grants 
(2004-05) has recommended as follows:- The Committee finds that huge cane 
price arrears for sugar season 2001-02 AR E still outstanding. The arrears of the 
sugar season 2001-02, 2002-03 and 2003-04 have also not been liquidated.  The 
Committee has desired that appropriate action under Sugarcane (Control) Order, 
1966 under which Central Government/State Government officers are authorised 
to recover the arrears of cane price remaining unpaid after 14 days of supplies of 
cane by growers together with the interest  at the rate of 15% per annum should 
be recovered as arrears of land rev enue. It is requested that the above 
provisions of Sugarcane (Control) Order , 1966 may be implemented strictly to 
comply with the recommendations of the Standing Committee. 
 
 However, in case of SMP for sugar  season 2002-2003, the order notifying 
the SMP of sugarcane at Rs. 69.50 per quint al came in for legal challenge in 
various High Courts. You are requested to  obtain a copy of the judgment from 
the Central Government Standing Counsel in your State and ensure that the 
Orders of the respective High Courts are st rictly implemented. In this connection, 
this Department’s letter NO. 3-8/2003-SLD dated 19 th August, 2004 may be 
referred (Copy enclosed). 
 
 You are also requested to inform this  Department in detail the year wise 
cane price arrears from the Sugar season 2000-2001 onwards.  Since the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee is to be kept apprised of the position, an 
immediate reply is requested. 
 
         Y o u r s  f a i t h f u l l y ,  
 
 
         (P.Uma Shankaer) 

    Joint Secretary to the Government of India 

 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENT H SITTING OF THE ST ANIDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON FRIDAY, 
THE 8TH APRIL, 2005. 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 to 1800  hours. in Committee Room ‘53’, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
 
Present 
 
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
     LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.P. Abdullakutty 
3. Shri Alakesh Dass 
4. Shri Atma Singh Gill  
5. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
6. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
7. Shri Hari Kewal Prasad 
8. Smt. Daggubati Purandareswari 
9. Shri Chandrabhan Singh 
10. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri T.S. Bajwa 
12. Shri Palden Tsering Gyamtso  
13. Shri Lalitbhai Mehta 
14. Smt. Bimba Raikar 
15. Shri Thanga Tamil Selvan 
16 Shri Vikram Verma  
17. Shri Vijay Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. (Smt.) Paramjit K aur Sandhu - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagdish Prasad   - Assistant Director  
 

 
2.  xxx    xxx     xxx 
3. The Committee, then, took up following two draft Reports for 
consideration:  
(i) Draft Fourth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in thei r First Report on Demands for 
Grants (2004-2005) relating to Minist ry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution).   
 
(ii)  xxx    xxx    xxx 
 
4. The Committee adopted the draft Repor t at (i) above with minor changes.  
The Committee, then, authorised the C hairman to make consequential changes 
in the Report and present/lay the same in  both the Houses of parliament in the 
ongoing Budget Session. 
 
5. xxx     xxx    xxx 
 
6. xxx     xxx    xxx 
7. A copy of the verbatim proceedings  of the sitting of  the Committee have 
been kept on records. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
XXX  Not related to this Report.

 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the First Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer 
Affairs and  Public Distribution (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
(i) Total  Number of Recommendations     25 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
Recommendations Nos. 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 14, 20, 22, 23 and 24 
T o t a l           1 0  
Percentage          40  
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Recommendations Nos. 3  and 16 
T o t a l           2  
Percentage          18  
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observa tions in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee: 
Recommendations  Nos. 4, 6, 12, 13, 15, 18, 21 and 25 
T o t a l           8  
Percentage          36  
 
(v) Recommendations/observati ons in respect of which  
final replies of the Government are still awaited. 
Recommendation No. 5, 10, 11, 17 and 19 
T o t a l           5  
Percentage          20  
 
 