 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION   
(2009-2010) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 [Action Taken by the Government on the obse rvations/recommendations 
contained in the Third Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants      
(2009-10) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  
                                    (Department of Consumer Affairs)] 
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2010/ Sravana, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
7 

 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
  
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND  
PUBLIC DISTIRBUTION  
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 [Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Third Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants      
(2009-10) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public  Distribution  
                                    (Department of Consumer Affairs)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.08.2010 
      Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.08.2010 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2010/Sravana , 1932 (Saka) 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………. 
 
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………. 
…………(ii) 
 
………(iv) 
 
CHAPTER  I Report ……………………………………………………………… ………… 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government ……………………………………………… 
 
……… 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies…….. 
 
……… 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Observations /Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
committee…………………………………………………………. 
 
 
……… 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
Observations /Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited. …………………… 
 
……… 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I Minutes of the Twenty Second sitting of the Committee held 
on 9th August, 2010 
 
…………. 
 
II Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Third Report of the 
Committee……………………………………………………... 
 
 
…………. 
 
                                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2009-10. 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar  - Chairman      
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
4. Shri Tara Chand Bhagora 
5. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
6. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
7. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
8. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
9. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
10. Shri Lalchand Kataria 
11. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee* 
12. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
13. Shri Sohan Potai 
14. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
15. Shri Dinubhai Solanki 
16. Shri Laxman Tudu 
17. Shri D. Venugopal  
18. Shri Madhusudan Yadav 
19. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
23. Shri P. Kannan 
24. Shri Lalhming Liana 
25. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
26. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
27. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
28. Dr. T.N. Seema 
29. Shri Veer Singh 
30. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
31. Vacant                     
      * Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 04.08.2010 
  
 (ii) 

 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri P.K. Mishra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad  - Additional Director 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (iii) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution (2009 -2010) having been authorized by the Committee to submit 
the Report on their behalf, present this Seventh Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations /recommendations contained in the Third Report of 
the Committee (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009 -2010) of the Ministry 
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
 
2. The Third Report was presented t o Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
25th December, 2009. The Government furnished their replies indicating action taken 
on the observations /recommendations contained in the Report on 19th March, 2010. 
 
3.  Report was considered and adopted by the Commi ttee at their sitting held  
on 9th August, 2010. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;                                 VILAS MUTTEMWAR 
  9th August, 2010                            Chairman, 
18 Sravana 1932 (Saka)                              Standing Committee on Food,  
                                                                     Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 

 
    CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Commit tee on 
„Demands for Grants (2009-10)‟ relating to the Department of Consumer Affairs. 
1.2 The Third report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2009. The action taken replies  of the 
Government on all the 15  observations/recommendations contained in the report 
have been received on 19th March 2010 and categorized as follows:- 
 
 (i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Serial Nos.  2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14 and 15 . 
 
(Paragraph Nos.3.12, 4.13, 4.14, 4.15, 4.21, 4.22, 4.30,  5.4, 6.11, 7.12, 7.13 , 8.10 
and 8.11  ) 
 
(Chapter –II Total 13) 
 
(ii) Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 
Serial Nos.          –Nil- 
 
(Paragraph Nos.)   –Nil- 
 
(Chapter –III Total 0) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the   
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
       
       Serial Nos. 1 and 11  
  
      (Paragraph Nos. 3.11 and 6.12)      
 
(Chapter –IV Total 2) 

 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final replies of 
the Government are still awaited: 
      Serial Nos.             –Nil-  
      (Paragraph Nos.)   –Nil-    (Chapter –V Total 0) 
1.3 In their Third report, th e Committee had recommended for full utilization of 
allocated funds during the financial year;  to monitor expenditure according to FRBM 
Act and guidelines of Planning Commission ; to utilize the funds equa lly in all 
quarters of the year;  to review the vacancy position in District Fora regularly and  
timely filling up of vacancies;  to ensure that the funds allocated for a particular 
scheme like „Integrated Project on Consumer Protection‟ are utilized in the finan cial 
year itself and also to overcome shortcomings noticed by evaluation agency ; to 
strengthen monitoring over Consumer Welfare Fund; timely submission of Utilization 
Certificate by the implementing agency for optimal utilization of funds;  to provide the 
facility of As saying and Hallmarking of Gold and Silver Jewellery in remote and 
backward areas to protect the consumers interest; to re-introduce Forward Contracts 
(Regulation) Amendment Bill in the Parliament and to ascertain the imp act of 
Future/Forward trading on small and marginal farmers;  to expedite filling up of the 
vacant post s in FMC, to chalk out strategy with other concern ed departments in 
order to control prices and improve production of commodities and to impress upon 
State Governments/UTs to strengthen their enforcement machinery to prevent black-
marketing of essential commodities. 
 
1.4 The Committee strongly emphasize that utmost importance be accorded 
to the implementation of recommendations accepted by the Government.   In 
case where it is not po ssible for the Government to implement the 
recommendations in letter and spirit for any reasons, the matter be reported to 
the Committee in time with reasons for non -implementation. The Committee 
desire that action taken notes on the Observations/Recommend ations 
contained in Chapter -I of this Report be furnished to the Committee at the 
earliest and in any case not letter than three months of the presentation of the 
Report. 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations which need reiteration or merit comments.  
 
A. Need to strengthen monitoring mechanism and full utilization of funds  
on the schemes/programmes  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 3.11) 
1.6       The Committee in Para No.3.11 of their earlier rep ort had recommended as 
below:- 
 “The Committee are not satisfied with the overall performance of the 
Department of Consumer Affairs in so far as expenditure incurred during 
2008-09 is concerned. The Committee note that out of a total allocation of 
Rs.413.65 crore during 2008 -09, the Department could utilize only Rs.341.11 

 
crore i.e. Rs.151.71 crore for its plan schemes and Rs.189.40 crore for non -
plan schemes. The Committee are also surprised to note that the expenditure 
on some of the important schemes viz. National Test House (NTH), Bureau of 
Indian Standards(BIS), Forward Market Commission(FMC) and 
project/scheme for North -Eastern Region was almost negligible.  Out of total 
allocation of Rs.74.51 crore for these Schemes/Programmes, the expenditure 
was only Rs.5.37 crore during the financial year, indicating a poor planning by 
the Department. The reasons put forth by the Ministry that the BE was 
reduced at RE stage due to delay in evaluation and approval of the schemes 
by SFC/EFC is not convincing to the Co mmittee. In the opinion of the 
Committee, the Department has not been able to improve its monitoring 
mechanism over schemes and make co -ordination between the evaluation 
agencies. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Department should make sincere efforts for getting clearance of the schemes 
without delay so that funds allocated are fully utilized during the financial year. 
The Committee also recommend that the Department should make sincere 
efforts to utilize the entire funds allocated for  the Schemes/Programmes for 
the North -Eastern region so as to avoid its transfer to non -lapsable funds 
created for NE States. Steps taken in this regard should be communicated to 
the Committee within three months.” 
 
1.7 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 “A statement indicating year -wise Plan allocation/allocation for North 
Eastern Region and expenditure for North Eastern Region is given below: 
 
Statement indicating year-wise allocation/expenditure 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Total  Plan Allocation  Allocation for NE Expenditure 
for NE 
 BE RE BE RE  
2006-07 163.00 150.00 16.75 15.01 17.95 
2007-08 213.00 150.00 21.60 13.38 10.18 
2008-09 209.00 160.00 20.90 16.00 11.97 
 The Plan allocation is distributed for the following major Plan Schemes of the 
Department. 
(a) Consumer Awareness 
(b) Consumer Protection  
(c) State Consumer Helpline 
(d) Strengthening of Forward Market Commission 
(e) Weights and Measures 
(f) National Test House 
(g) Bureau of Indian Standards including Gold Hallmarking 
 

 
 A few Plan schemes being implemented in this Department do not have 
scope for expenditure in the north eastern region, such as: 
 
(i) Construction of National Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commision (NCDRC) Building, a sub -scheme of Consumer 
Protection. 
(ii) Strengthening of Forward Market Co mmission as there is no 
commodity future exchange in NE Region. 
 
The schemes of Consumer Awareness and Consumer Protection are 
implemented all over the country including the North Eastern State. 
 
Under the „CONFONET‟ scheme, a sub -scheme of Consumer Protection, the 
National Information Centre  (NIC) is providing computer hardware and software to 
all the seven States in the North East and Sikkim.  Similarly, under the scheme of 
strengthening of Consumer Fora the funds are provided to the States, on the basis 
of infrastructure requirements and land, provided by the State Government for the 
Consumer Fora.   
 
National Test House(NTH) has a regional test centre/Laboratory at Guwahati.  
Funds are provided to NTH, Guwahati (Assam). 
 
In the North Eastern region the t rade participation is not significant, hence no 
expenditure was incurred in North Eastern States by FMC. 
 
There is one Regional Reference Standards Laboratory(RRSL) in Guwahati. 
Funds meant for the North East are provided to this laboratory.   Funds are al so 
provided for strengthening of State infrastructure on the basis of the State 
Laboratories under Weights and Measures Scheme. 
 
  Thus every effort is made to ensure that the minimum expenditure prescribed 
for the North Easter Region is achieved.” 
 
 
 

 
1.8 While observing that the expenditure incurred on some of the 
important schemes viz. National Test House (NTH), Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS), Forward Markets Commission (FMC) and 
projects/schemes for the North-Eastern region was almost negligible 
during 2008 -09, the Committee had recommended the Department to 
make sincere efforts for getting clearance of the schemes without delay 
so as to utilize the entire funds during the financial year . The Committee 
had also recommended  to utilize the entire funds a llocated for 
schemes/programmes for the North Eastern region. However, in their 
action taken reply, the Ministry have  remained silent in respect of the 
steps taken in regard to  timely utilization of the allocated funds on  its 
important schemes and  also to improve its overall performance. The 
Committee deplore this attitude of the Department and desire that all the 
concerns of the Committee be taken into consideration while providing 
the information. The Committee also regret to note that the Department 
could utilize only Rs. 11.97 crore out of a total RE of Rs. 16.00 crore 
during 2008 -09 for schemes of the North-Eastern region which , in the 
opinion of the Committee , is nothing but denial of benefits of the 
scheme to the people of the region. The Committee wh ile reiterating 
their earlier recommendation desire that the Department should make 
sincere efforts to expedite timely clearance of the schemes so that 
entire allocated funds are utilized on the important 

 
schemes/programmes of the Department as also for the North-Eastern 
region during the financial year itself. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
B. Need to fill up the vacant posts in State Commissions and District Fora  
 
  Recommendation (Sl.No. 5, Para No. 4.15) 
 
1.9  The Committee in their earlier report had recommended as below:- 
 
 
 “From the information furnished  by the Department, the Committee 
find that three  posts of President, and 21 posts of Members are vacant in the 
State Commissions.  Besides, 92  posts of President, and 201 posts of 
Members are lying vacant in Dist rict Fora of various States/Union Territories.  
In the opinion of the committee the large number of vacancies in the State 
Commissions and District Fora may be due to inadequate salary and 
allowances as well as less honorarium being paid to the President a nd 
Members of the State Commission and District Fora.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the matter may be taken up with all the State 
Governments and Union territory Administrators to ascertain the reasons for 
existence of vacancies in the State Co mmissions and the District Fora and to 
impress upon them to pay adequate salary and honorarium to attract the best 
available talent.” 
 
1.10 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
 
“The matter has been taken up at the level of Hon‟ ble Minister for 
CA,F&PD with the respective Chief Ministers and Lt. Governors of 
States/UTs. The responsibility of filling up of vacancies of President/Members 
in the State Commissions and District Fora lies with the respective States/ 
UTs. The Department  does impress upon the States/UTs to ensure timely 
filling up of vacancies so that Consumer Fora are not rendered non -
functional. The reasons for vacancies differ from State to State or from 
location to location. Hence, the Department of Consumer Affairs w ill call for 
report from the States/UTs, by making necessary modification in  the 
periodical returns that the States/UTs send to this Department, seeking 
reasons for vacancies and action taken to fill up vacant posts. On the issue of 
payment of adequate sa lary and allowances to the President/Members of the 
State Commissions and District Fora, the Central Govt. had also set up a 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. P.D. Shenoy, Member, NCDRC, 
which had given various recommendations, including payment of a dequate 
salary/honorarium etc. to the Presidents/Members of State 
Commissions/District Fora and the same were sent to all the States/UTs for 
necessary action. These issues were discussed in a Video Conference 
Meeting with all the States & UTs. These are al so proposed to be discussed 
in the forthcoming Conference with States/UTs being organised by the 
National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission.” 
 

 
 
 
1.11 Keeping in view that a large number of posts of President and 
Members were lying vacant in State Comm issions and District Fora of 
various States/UTs, the Committee had recommended the Department 
to ascertain the reasons for existence of vacancies in the State 
Commissions and District Fora of various States/UTs. The Committee 
note the steps taken by the Department in this regard.  The Committee 
hope that while ascertaining the reasons for existence of vacancies in 
the State Commissions and District Fora in various States/UTs, the 
Department would impress upon the States/UTs to take immediate steps 
for filling up of vacant posts of President and Members urgently so that 
the Consumer Fora are not rendered non-functional.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
C. Need for early setting up of State Consumer Welfare Fund in remaining 
States 
 
(Sl.No. 8, Para No. 4.30) 
 
1.12    The Committee in their earlier report had recommended as below:- 
 
 
 “The Committee note that the Consumer Welfare Fund was created 
with the objective of providing financial assistance to promote and protect the 
interest of the consumers, create awareness and strengthen con sumer 
movement in the country. The fund which was set up by the Department of 
Revenue is operated by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution. Any agency/organization engaged in consumer welfare activities 
and registered under the Companies Act, 1956 is eligible for seeking financial 
assistance from the fund. The Committee are unhappy to note that the 
allocation of funds for the purpose has been considerably decreasing during 
the past three years. The BE which was Rs. 33 crore in 2006 -07 has been 
reduced to Rs. 13.90 crore in 2009 -10. The Committee regret that even the 
reduced funds could not be fully utilized during the past three years which is 
evident from the fact that out of Rs. 83.58 crore allocated from 2006 -07 to 
2009-10, the Mi nistry could utilize only Rs. 25.31 crore. The Committee are 
not convinced with the arguments of the Government that the funds were not 
fully utilized due to non -submission to utilization certificates from the 
VCOs/NGOs even after the expiry of stipulated time as it merely reflects the 
lack of proper monitoring over the scheme. The Committee note that under 
the scheme, central share of one time seed money is released to States after 
they credit their share of 50% to a separate non -plan, non-lapsable account. 
The Committee are disturbed to note that 14 States are yet to create their 
State Consumer Welfare Fund and credit their share. The Committee feel that 
generating consumer awareness and strengthen consumer movement, 
particularly in the rural and remote ar eas, is a critical issue. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should persuade the remaining 
States/UTs to provide their matching share and make necessary provision in 
their Budgets. Besides, the Department should strengthen its monitori ng over 
the scheme, so that the funds are fully utilized in the financial year itself.” 
 
1.13 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
 “There has been less expenditure during 2006 -07 and 2007 -08 as the 
guidelines for releasing gran t in aid were under detailed revision. The new 
guidelines which are more transparent and in detail, were issued only in 
November, 2007. 
 

 
During 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 there has been less expenditure due to the 
fact that many current projects could not be rele ased full installments due to delay in 
settlement of outstanding Audit paras. 
 
  The Standing Committee on CFW in its meeting held on 13.11.09 has 
decided that Consumer Welfare Fund at State Level should be further strengthened 
in order to help the States to finance local level programmes. It has therefore been 
decided to propose to the States/UTs that States who were willing to set up a corpus 
fund of Rs. 10 crore will be given 75% of that amount from the Central Consumer 
Welfare Fund. Thus a State which w ants to establish a corpus of Rs. 10 crore will 
have to first contribute Rs. 2.5 crore and thereafter Rs. 7.5 crore will be given by the 
Central Consumer Welfare Fund. This will lead to higher expenditure from 
Consumer Welfare Fund. The detailed guidelines  issued and posted in the website 
are also likely to help the NGOs and other institutions to prepare viable and 
innovative projects which could be approved for releasing grant in aid.  
 
  States that have not set up States Consumer Welfare Fund by creditin g their 
share in the account and have not availed the central share so far are being 
reminded regularly. Recently a DO reminder has been sent from Secretary (CA) to 
Chief Secretaries of these States/UTs.”   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1.14 The Committee are not satisfied with the action taken                                                                                                                                                        
by the Government regarding setting up of Consumer Welfare Funds in 
the States. The Committee in its original report had observed that  14 
States had not  created their State Consumer Welf are Fund and had, 
therefore, recommended that the Department should persuade  these 
States/UTs to provide their matching share. The Committ ee also had 
desired the Department to strengthen its monitoring over the scheme so 
that the entire fund s were utilized in the financial year itself. From the 
action taken reply, the Committee note that as decided by the Standing 
Committee on CFW, the State s who are willing to set up corpus fund of 
Rs. 10 crore will be given 75% of that amount from the Central 
Consumer Welfare Fund. The Committee while appreciating the 
initiative, desire that the Department should take up the matter at the 
highest level with  the State Governments to persuade them to provide 
their matching share so as to make use of the higher percentage of 
Central Share in order to promote and protect the interest of the 
consumers.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
D. Need for timely submission of Utilization Certificates from the 
implementing agency 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 10, Para No. 6.11) 
 
1.15 The Committee in their earlier report had recommended as below:- 
 
 “The Committee are not satisfied as far as the financial performance of 
the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) i s concerned due to the fact that 
Planning Commission have been allocating huge funds every year but not 
even one percent of the funds was utilized by BIS. For example, during 2007 -
08, the BE was Rs. 10.80 crore and RE was Rs. 9.14 crore whereas the 
actual expenditure was only Rs. 0.50 crore. Similarly, during 2008 -09, the BE 
was Rs. 18.69 crore which was lowered down to Rs. 0.63 crore at RE stage 
and the actual expenditure was Rs. 0.66 crore. The Committee regret that for 
all the schemes, the reasons for un der spending given by the Department is 
non-submission of the utilization certificates from the implementing agencies 
which in the opinion of the Committee indicates lack of proper planning and 
very poor monitoring over the schemes. In the instant case, th e utilization 
certificates are to be received from BIS, the executive agency and not from 
the States. The Committee feel that Standardization and Quality Control is a 
very crucial element for proper functioning of BIS Act.  However, this requires 
timely receipt of satisfactory Utilization Certificate from implementing agency 
so that the actual requirement for Standardization and Quality Control could 
be worked out and right estimates could be made accordingly. The 
Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Department should take 
pre-emptive steps to further the implementation of the schemes by directing  
the BIS,  to timely  submit Utilization Certificates so that funds could be 
utilized fully without any hindrance.” 
 
1.16 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
 “Less expenditure during the previous years was due to the fact that 
the schemes were new and a number of preliminary activities were to be 
carried out by BIS before their commencement.  Based on the response of 
the requirements of funds, the budget allocations for the years 2007 -08 and 
2008-09 were reduced at RE stage.  The pace of expenditure during the year 
2009-10 has improved.  Against the Revised Estimates of Rs.6.59 crore, 
Rs.4.38 crore has already been utilized and  the remaining amount is also 
likely to be largely utilized by the end of the financial year. 
  
 The suggestion/recommendation of the Committee to take pre -emptive 
steps to further the implementation of the schemes has been noted.  BIS has 
been directed to submit Utilization Certificates in time so that the funds could 
be utilized fully without any hindrance.” 

 
 
1.17 The Committee had  recommended the Government to take  pre-
emptive steps to further the implementation of the schemes and direct 
BIS to  timely su bmit the utilization certificates so that funds could be 
utilized fully without any hindrance. The Committee are dismayed to find   
that instead of indicating any steps taken in this direction , the 
Department have simply stated to have  noted the recommendation of 
the Committee  which, in the opinion of the Committee , is lack of 
seriousness on the part of the Government to take concrete action on 
their recommendation. While reiterating their recommendation , the 
Committee would like  the Department to make vigorous efforts to take 
up the matter with BIS for expeditious submission of utilization 
certificates so that the allocated funds could be utilized fully without 
any hindrance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
E. Expeditious setting up of Assaying &Hallmarking Centres in remaining 
States/UTs including NE States 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 11, Para No. 6.12) 
 
1.18 The Committee in their earlier report had recommended as below:- 
 
 “The Committee note that the scheme of Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery 
was launched by BIS in April 2000 to provide t hird party assurance to 
consumers of the purity of gold jewellery or its fineness. Under the scheme, a 
jeweller has to obtain Hallmark License from BIS to get his jewellery 
hallmarked.  For this, the Government has set up Assaying and Hallmark 
Centres thro ughout the country. The Committee are unhappy to note that 
there was a declining trend in terms of physical achievements made during 
2007-08 and 2008-09 against the target fixed. So far, 147 hallmarking centres 
have been set up in 17 States/UTs whereas the  consumers of remaining 18 
States/UTs, especially in the States of Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Goa 
and North -eastern are deprived of the benefit of hallmarking scheme. 
Besides, there is one hallmarking centre each in Haryana and Punjab 
whereas 19 such centres have been set up in NCT, Delhi. The Committee do 
not appreciate the contention of the Department that the quantum of jewellery 
being produced/consumed in the other States/UTs is not sufficient, so setting 
up the Assaying and Hallmakring Centres in su ch centres may not be viable. 
In the opinion of the Committee, the Government should conduct a study to 
know the quantum of jewellery being produced/consumed in the remaining  
States/UTs and to ascertain the viability of setting up of Assaying and 
Hallmarking Centres. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the BIS 
should make sincere efforts to provide facility of Assaying and Hallmarking of 
Gold and Silver Jewellery in remote and backward areas so that the interests 
of consumers are protected by way of ensuring value of money.” 
 
1.19  The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
 
 “The Government or BIS has not set up any Assaying and Hallmarking 
Centre of their own.  Setting up of such Centres is a commercial activity 
where entreprene urs set up these Centres at locations of their choice, 
keeping the commercial viability in view.  Government Scheme is intended to 
give encouragement for setting up of such Centres by extending financial 
assistance to entrepreneurs with preference being gi ven for setting up of the 
Centres where no such Centre exists.  The quantum of Government 
assistance is 30% of the cost of machinery and equipment, subject to 
maximum of Rs.30 lakh for setting up of the Centres in North Eastern Region, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Uttrakhand and 15% of the cost of 
machinery and equipment subject to maximum of Rs.15 lakh in other areas.  
So far the assistance has been extended only up to two Centres at important 

 
locations and four centres at the four metros/their sa tellite towns and major 
production/consumption Centres on need basis.   The Scheme has been 
liberalized recently to increase the quantum of assistance to 30% of the cost 
of machinery and equipment subject to a maximum of Rs.30 lakh for setting 
up of the Ce ntres in rural areas in the country.  Since no Assaying & 
Hallmarking Centre has so far come up in North Eastern States, Himachal 
Pradesh, Uttrakhand and J&K even with enhanced Central assistance, the 
scheme has been modified to consider requests for opening up of the Centres 
in these areas even without Expression of Interest.  BIS has also invited fresh 
applications from various locations including North -Eastern Region, Himachal 
Pradesh, J&K and Uttrakhand and rural areas where no Centre exist, for 
setting up of Centres with Central assistance.  BIS has also been organizing 
publicity campaigns on a regular basis to encourage setting up of more such 
Centres.   
 
 As regards the observations of the Committee that only one 
Hallmarking Centre each is in existenc e in Haryana and Punjab whereas 19 
such Centres are available in the NCT and not even one Centre is in 
existence in North Eastern Region, it is stated that it is due to proximity of the 
said States to NCT from where the jewellers can get their jewellery 
hallmarked and transported easily to their destinations that more Centres 
have not come up there.  Similarly, jewellers from North Eastern States prefer 
to get their jewellery hallmarked from Kolkata which is well connected with 
these States.   
 
 The Hallmarking Scheme, since its inception in 2000, has progressed 
considerably.  The number of jewellers who have taken the license has gone 
up to 7701 as on 31 st December, 2009 from 186 on 31 st March, 2001.  The 
total number of hallmarked jewellery articles has go ne up to 721.47 lakh on 
31st December, 2009 from 0.94 lakh on 31 st March, 2001 and the number of 
articles hallmarked on annual basis has gone up to 199 lakh from 0.94 lakh 
during the same period. 
 
 To make the scheme of Central assistance more effective, t he 
Government has commissioned an evaluation study of the same.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1.20 The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the 
Government regarding setting up of Assaying and Hallmarking Centres , 
especially in the North -eastern region and the  remote and hilly areas. 
Having observed that consumers of 18 States/UTs are still deprived of 
the benefit s of hallmarking scheme, the Committee had desired the 
Government to conduct a study to ascertain the viability of setting up of 
Assaying and Hallmarking Centres in these areas. From the action taken 
reply, the Committee find that the Government has commissioned an 
evaluation study in this regard . The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the outcome of the study and the consequential steps taken 
for setting up of Assaying and Hallmarking Centres in the remaining 18 
States/UTs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
F. Expeditious introduction of Forward Contracts(Regulation) Amendment Bill  
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 12, Para No. 7.12) 
 
1.21 The Committee in their earlier report had recommended as below:- 
 
 “The Committee note with concern that though the Planning 
Commission has been allocating huge funds every year to Forward Market 
Commission (FMC) for regulating the Future/Forward trading in the country, 
but FMC have not been able to util ize even fifty percent of the allocated 
funds. For instance, during     2007 -08, the BE for the year 2007 -08 was Rs. 
19.50 crore which was cut down to Rs. 9.75 crore whereas the expenditure 
was only Rs. 2.46 crore. Similarly, during 2008 -09, the BE was Rs.  20.70 
crore which was drastically reduced to Rs. 3.60 crore at RE and the 
expenditure was Rs. 3.31 crore. The plea of the Government that the funds 
could not be utilized due to non -passage of Forward Contracts (Regulation) 
Amendment Bill as operationalisa tion of most of the schemes under 
strengthening of FMC are linked with the said Bill is not acceptable to the 
Committee. In the opinion of the Committee, the FMC should improve its 
performance with the existing resources and management at their end, 
without waiting for the passage of Forward Contracts (Regulation) 
Amendment Bill. The Committee are aware of the fact that the Forward 
Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha in 2008 
to convert the Ordinance into the Act. However, it go t lapsed due to 
dissolution of the 14th Lok Sabha. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Government should re -introduce the Forward Contracts (Regulation) 
Amendment Bill in Parliament in order to strengthen the regulatory framework 
and confer autonomy on the regulators. The Committee also recommend that 
findings of the study conducted by the Government to ascertain the impact of 
the Future/Forward trading on small and marginal farmers be implemented in 
letter and spirit.” 
 
1.22 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
  
“The FMC is making all out efforts to ensure timely completion of all 
the activities entrusted to it despite the severe manpower constraints faced by 
it. Amendments to the FC(R) Act 1952 to strengthen the regulat ory 
capabilities of FMC and enabling development of the commodities futures 
market on the desired lines is currently under the consideration of the 
Government. The expenditure for 2009 -10 as on date is Rs. 2.92 crore and it 
is expected that the entire RE of Rs. 9.00 crore would be spent. 
 
The proposal for conducting a study to ascertain the extent to which 
small and marginal farmers have benefited from futures trading is under the 
consideration of this Ministry.” 

 
1.23 The Committee , while observing that th e Forward Contracts 
(Regulation) Amendment Bill lapsed due to dissolution of the 14 th Lok 
Sabha, had recommended for re-introduction of the Bill in Parliament as 
well as for conducting a study to ascertain the impact of future/forward 
trading on small and marginal farmers. The Committee regret to note 
that the Bill to amend the FC(R)Act 1952 to strengthen the regulatory 
capabilities of FMC is still under consideration of the Ministry. Further, 
the proposal for conducting a study to ascertain the extent to w hich 
small and marginal farm ers have benefitted from future  trading is also 
pending consideration of the Ministry. The Committee  deplore the 
lackadaisical approach of the Government and  desire that the 
Department should make concerted efforts for an early introduction of 
the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill in the Parliament in 
order to strengthen the regulatory framework of the Commis sion. 
Besides, the Government should also conduct a study to ascertain the 
impact of Future/Forward trading on small and marginal farmers without 
further delay.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
G. Need to monitor the prices of Essential Commodities 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 8.10) 
 
1.24 The Committee in their earlier report had recommended as below:- 
 
 
 “The Committee express their concern over the rising trend in prices of 
almost all the essential commodities, particularly the foodgrains during the 
last one year. The Committee observe from the trend in prices of foodgrains 
that the prices, especially pulses and sugar, raised f rom 50% to 100% during 
the last year. The Department of Consumer Affairs is entrusted inter-alia with 
the task of monitoring of the prices and availability of essential commodities in 
the country. The Price Monitoring Cell in the Department of Consumer Aff airs 
prepares a daily report on the retail prices and circulate the same to PMO, 
Cabinet Secretariat, Ministry of Finance and other concerned Ministries and 
suggest measures for stabilizing the prices. The reasons for increase in the 
prices,  especially the foodgrains,  are (i) Growing demand due to increase in 
population and income (ii) Change in consumption pattern (iii) Diversion of 
foodgrains for fuel (iv) Hike in Minimum Support Price (v) Adverse weather 
and climate change (vi) Increase in crude oil pr ices (vii) Increase in freight 
rates and (viii) Delayed monsoon. The Committee are astonished to observe 
that when the reasons for hike in prices are well known to the Government,  
why it could not take advance action to control and stabilize the retail prices in 
the country. In order to control the prices of essential commodities, especially 
the foodgrains, the Government have taken a number of fiscal, administrative 
and monetary measures such as reduction on import duty to zero on rice, 
wheat, pulses and edible oil and  imposing  ban on their export, enhancement 
in MSP, maintaining the CIP (Central Issue Price) of wheat and rice for BPL 
and AAY, suspension of future trading in rice, wheat, urad and tur, reduction 
in prices of petrol and diesel, import of pulses and edible oils for distribution to 
poor families at subsidized rate, extension of validity of Central Notification 
and improved the production and productivity of foodgrains through National 
Food Security Mission (NFSM) and Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yo jana (RKVY). 
The Committee observe that despite the aforesaid measures taken by the 
Government, the prices of the essential commodities did not show any 
decreasing trend. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to control 
the prices of essential co mmodities especially the foodgrains so that poor 
persons are able to take their two square meals within their limited income. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that Government should, in 
consultation with the other concerned Departments, traders and FMC chalk 
out a strategy so that prices do not go beyond control. The Government 
should also make planned and concerted efforts to increase production, 
particularly of sugar and pulses.” 
 

 
 
1.25 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
  
 
  “Government is taking long term and short term measures to improve 
the availability of pulses. The Ministry of Agriculture is concerned with 
improving the productivity and production in the long term in the agricultural 
sector. The Government has taken medium term initiatives such as 
Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize(ISOPOM), 
National Food Security Mission (NFSM) and  Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojna 
(RKVY) to  improve production and productivity in agriculture. The 
Government has take n several other initiatives such as improving the 
availability through import of pulses, sugar, edible oil etc to bridge the 
demand and supply gap. The Government has recently taken various 
decisions to improve the availability of essential commodities like wheat, rice, 
sugar, edible oils and pulses. These measures are expected to soften the 
pressure on prices.  Recent trends also indicate a reduction in prices of most 
essential commodities.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1.26 The Committee , while observing that despite a number of fiscal, 
administrative and monetary measures taken by the Government, the 
prices of the essential commodities did not show any decreasing trend , 
had recommended the Government to chalk out a strategy  in 
consultation with other concerne d Departments to control the price s of 
Essential Commodities. The Committee are not fully convinced with the  
action taken reply of the Government as they find that despite the long -
term, short-term and medium -term initiatives taken by the Government,  
the prices of certain essential  commodities are still on ri sing trend. The 
Committee feel that stabilizing the prices of essential commodities in 
consultation with other related Department s is the need of the hour and 
is quite essential to protect the interests  of the Consumers , especially 
the poor, in the country. While reiterating their earlier recommendation, 
the Committee desire that the Government should make planned and 
concerted efforts to control the prices of essential commodities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMNEDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 3.12) 
 
2.1 The Committee is deeply concerned to note the uneven utilization of 
budgetary allocation under the plan and non -plan schemes during 20 08-09.  
For instance, out of a total expenditure of Rs.151.71 crore during 2008 -09 of 
the plan funds, the actual expenditure was Rs.5.63 crore, Rs.22.78 crore and 
Rs.11.77 crore during the 1 st , 2 nd and 3 rd quarter of the year, respectively 
which is much l ess than the expenditure incurred in the last and the fourth 
quarter of the financial year. The position of expenditure is worst in case of 
non-plan funds where out of Rs.189.40 crore, only Rs.25.35 crore was utilized 
in the first three quarters of the yea r. The Committee in their earlier Reports 
had been impressing upon the need to spread the expenditure evenly during 
the year but it seems that the recommendations of the Committee have not 
been taken seriously. The reasons put forth by the Department of Co nsumer 
Affairs that they could not utilize the funds evenly due to non receipt of 
proposals from implementing agencies, i.e. States/UTs and non -submission of 
utilization certificates on time is not acceptable to the Committee due to the 
fact that the Department has the autonomy to utilize the funds as per their own 
monthly Expenditure Plan. In the opinion of the Committee, the Ministry 
should make advance exercise to get the proposals and utilization certificates 
from the implementing agencies and finalize the modalities of the schemes so 
that the approval by EFC does not get delayed. The Committee strongly feel 
that there is a need to discourage the tendency to clear huge bill for 
reimbursement by the implementing agencies in the fag end of financial year 
as in such cases, the clearance of the bills without proper scrutiny can not be 
ruled out. The Committee hope that the Department will use its 
autonomy/prerogative to monitor expenditure according to the FRBM Act and 
guidelines of Planning Commission to uti lize the funds equally in all quarters 
of the year.    
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 2.2 As per the instruction of Ministry of Finance expenditure up to 33% of the total 
Plan allocation can be incurred in the last quarter in January -March of the financial 
year.  Further restriction is that expenditure not exceeding 15% of the Plan allocation 
can be incurred in the month of March.  These instruction s of Ministry of Finance 
sufficiently deter the Departments to incur excessive expenditure towards the end of 
the financial year.  However the observations of the Committee to evenly spread 
expenditure during the year have been noted. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
H-11012/17/2009-P&C, Dated 16/03/2010 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 4.13) 

 
2.3 The Committee note that a three tier quasi judicial redressal mechanism 
has been set up at the National, State and District levels as per the provisions 
made under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 to resolve the consumer 
grievances speedily. Whereas the responsibility of the National Commission 
rest with the Union Government, the responsibility of setting up and effective 
functioning of the State Commission and District Fora lies with respective 
State Governments/Union ter ritory Administrations. The Committee further 
note that there are a large number of pending cases in the National 
Commission, State Commissions  and District Fora.  The disposal of cases by 
the National Commission is reported to be 85.75%,  whereas disposa l of cases 
in the State Commissions and District Fora are 76.74% and 90.85%,  
respectively.  The position of State Commissions is worst in some States, i.e.  
Assam, Haryana, Maharashtra, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh where 54.81%, 
61.43%, 62.65%, 60.53% and 40. 79% of cases have been disposed of by the 
respective State Commissions of these States .  The Committee note that the 
information of cases filed and disposed of in respect of the North Eastern 
States for the last 3 years i.e. 2006, 2007 and 2008 is  not av ailable with the 
Department .  Further, the cases pending in District Fora are very high in some 
of the States i.e. Uttar Pradesh (80964), Gujarat(22013), Haryana(19403), 
Maharashtra(16615) and Rajasthan(16539).  Although the shortcomings 
observed in the f unctioning of State Commissions and District Fora including 
the low rate of disposal of cases within the prescribed time limit and non 
furnishing of information/reports are being taken up regularly by the 
Department of Consumer Affairs with the concerned S tate Governments/UTs, 
yet the Committee feel that these efforts are not sufficient to give any fruitful 
result.  The Committee therefore, strongly recommend that all the States 
should be persuaded to furnish the details of cases filed and disposed of 
within the prescribed time frame, so that the National Commission may 
analyse the reasons for non -disposal of cases by the State Commissions and 
District Fora and suggest measures for early disposal of cases in the District 
Fora. 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
2.4 The matter has been taken up at the level of Hon‟ble Minister for CA,F&PD 
with the respective Chief Ministers and Lt. Governors of States/UTs. The National 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission is empowered under the Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986 to exercise adm inistrative control over the State Commissions 
and through the State Commissions over the District Fora with regard to calling for 
reports on filing and disposal of cases, monitoring the same and giving instructions 
in general to ensure that the objectives  of the Act are best served. This issue was 
discussed in a Video Conference Meeting with all the States & UTs. It is also 
proposed to be discussed in the forthcoming Conference with States/UTs being 
organised by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission.   
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
H-11012/17/2009-P&C, Dated 16/03/2010 

 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 4.14) 
 
2.5 The Committee find that inspite of the efforts made by the government , 
as many as 39 District Fora out of 621 have been reported as non -functional in 
the States of Arunanchal Pradesh(3), Bihar(8), Himachal Pradesh(1), 
Jharkhand(1), Madhya Pradesh(1), Pondicherry(1), Punjab(1), Rajasthan(4), 
Tamil Nadu(15), Uttranchal(3) and  West Bengal(1).  The Committee note that 
although specific reasons for non functionality of individual District Fora in 
each State is not available with the Department, generally the non functionality 
is due to existence of vacancies of President/Members.  The Committee are 
surprised that the Department has been forwarding a huge amount through its 
budget grants for strengthening of infrastructure of the District Fora without 
keeping a  watch on the reasons for their being non -functional.  Taking a 
serious note of the situation, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
vacancy position in all the District Fora across the country should be reviewed 
regularly and all efforts made for timely filling up of vacancies so as to make 
the District Fora fully functional.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.6 The matter has been taken up at the level of Hon‟ble Minister for CA,F&PD 
with the respective Chief Ministers and Lt. Governors of States/UTs. Under the new 
plan scheme, “Strengthening Consumer Fora”, it has been made mandat ory that the 
State/UT Government certifies that the posts of President/Member have been 
created, before any further funds are released to them. However, it might not be 
possible to ensure that release of funds be linked to posts of President/Members in 
Consumer Fora being filled up as the posts of President/Members are tenure posts 
and vacancies keep arising at some Consumer Forum or the other during the year. 
To ensure timely filling up of vacancies, the Department is also proposing 
amendment in the Consum er Protection Act, 1986, which would make it incumbent 
on States/UTs to fill up posts on time. This issue was discussed in a Video 
Conference Meeting with all the States & UTs. It is also proposed to be discussed in 
the forthcoming Conference with States/U Ts being organised by the National 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission.  
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
H-11012/17/2009-P&C, Dated 16/03/2010 

 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 4.15) 
 
2.7 From the information furnished by the Department, the Committee find 
that three posts of President, and 21 posts of Members are vacant in the State 
Commissions.  Besides, 92 posts of President, and 201 posts of Members are 
lying vacant in District Fora of va rious States/Union Territories.  In the opinion 
of the committee the large number of vacancies in the State Commissions and 
District Fora may be due to inadequate salary and allowances as well as less 
honorarium being paid to the President and Members of the State Commission 
and District Fora.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the matter may 
be taken up with all the State Governments and Union territory Administrators 
to ascertain the reasons for existence of vacancies in the State Commissions 
and t he District Fora and to impress upon them to pay adequate salary and 
honorarium to attract the best available talent. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.8 The matter has been taken up at the level of Hon‟ble Minister for CA,F&PD 
with the respective Chief Ministers an d Lt. Governors of States/UTs. The 
responsibility of filling up of vacancies of President/Members in the State 
Commissions and District Fora lies with the respective States/ UTs. The Department 
does impress upon the States/UTs to ensure timely filling up o f vacancies so that 
Consumer Fora are not rendered non -functional. The reasons for vacancies differ 
from State to State or from location to location. Hence, the Department of Consumer 
Affairs will call for report from the States/UTs, by making necessary mo dification in  
the periodical returns that the States/UTs send to this Department, seeking reasons 
for vacancies and action taken to fill up vacant posts. On the issue of payment of 
adequate salary and allowances to the President/Members of the State 
Commissions and District Fora, the Central Govt. had also set up a Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Dr. P.D. Shenoy, Member, NCDRC, which had given 
various recommendations, including payment of adequate salary/honorarium etc. to 
the Presidents/Members of State Commissions/District Fora and the same were sent 
to all the States/UTs for necessary action. These issues were discussed in a Video 
Conference Meeting with all the States & UTs. These are also proposed to be 
discussed in the forthcoming Conference with States/UTs being organised by the 
National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
H-11012/17/2009-P&C, Dated 16/03/2010 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No.1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 4.21) 
 
2.9 The Committee note that to supplement the efforts of States/UTs, the 
Government have launched an ‘Integrated Project on Consumer Protection 
Scheme’ and released huge funds  for strengthening the infrastructure of 
Consumer Fora. The Committee are dismayed to note that Rs. 73.82 crore was 
released to 27 States for construction of building of 506 Consumer Fora, but 
so far 12 States have not submitted the utilization certificate s in respect of 
funds released to them and have not availed further assistance under the 
scheme. It is a matter of great concern that 6 States, namely, Rajasthan, 
Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur and Meghalaya to 
whom 75% of the funds wer e released, have not submitted the utilization 
certificates. The Committee view the situation seriously and strongly 
recommend that the Government should take up the matter with the defaulting 
States/UTs at the highest level to find out the circumstances u nder which the 
funds were not utilized.  It should be ensured that the funds allocated for a 
particular scheme are utilized in the financial year itself.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.10 The matter has been taken up at the level of Hon‟ble Minister for CA,F&PD 
with the respective Chief Ministers and Lt. Governors of States/UTs. In the 
meanwhile, Manipur & Meghalaya have submitted their Utilization Certificates (UCs) 
indicating full utilization of the first instalment released under the scheme of 
„Integrated Project on Consumer Protection‟.  Also,  the States of Himachal Pradesh, 
Haryana, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan have furnished Utilisation Certificates 
indicating that they have utilized between 40% to less than 75% of the funds 
released as first instalment und er the scheme of „Integrated Project on Consumer 
Protection‟.  This issue was discussed in a Video Conference Meeting with all the 
States & UTs. It is also proposed to be discussed in the forthcoming Conference 
with States/UTs being organised by the Nation al Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commission. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
H-11012/17/2009-P&C, Dated 16/03/2010 

 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 4.22) 
 
2.11 The Committee regret to note that t he study conducted by an agency to 
evaluate the Integrated Project on Consumer Protection Scheme have pointed 
out serious shortcomings in the implementation  such as (a) non-availability of 
Government land for construction of building for Consumer Fora (b)  higher 
cost of construction, especially in remote and hilly areas (c) inadequate staff 
(d) non-transfer of money to respective District Fora in time (e) non -availability 
of funds for generating awareness (f) difficulties being faced by the States/UTs 
in providing land free of cost or bear the cost of land from their own budgetary 
resources. The Committee wonder how the Government will achieve its target 
and do justice to the consumers till the aforesaid shortcomings are existing. 
The Committee are aware that the Government have modified the guidelines of 
the scheme. Under the new guidelines the Consumer Fora are divided into 
four categories so that  funds are released to them for building assets on a 
graded system rather than release of grants for building on a fixed norm as 
was the earlier practice followed under the scheme. The Committee 
recommend that the Government make vigorous efforts to pursue the matter 
with State Governments/UTs to resolve the issues/shortcomings noticed by 
the evaluation agency and  make sincere efforts for the implementation of the 
recommendation/suggestion.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.12 The new plan scheme, „Strengthening Consumer Fora‟, has taken into 
consideration the findings in the evaluation report and accordingly sought to addr ess 
the shortcomings and difficulties reported in the implementation of the earlier 
scheme of „Integrated Project on Consumer Protection‟. The parameters for 
releasing assistance for building purposes under the new scheme have been 
formulated by factoring in the variable cost factor due to Consumer Forum being 
situated in a remote/hilly area or metropolitan area, escalation of cost of materials 
and labour since the earlier scheme etc. As rightly noted by the Standing 
Committee, under the new scheme, Consumer Fora have been categorized into four 
categories depending upon their location and accordingly different cost ceilings have 
been fixed to ensure that the building projects do not get held up for want of funds.  
To ensure timely and smooth implementation o f the new scheme, the matter has 
been taken up at the level of Hon‟ble Minister for CA,F&PD with the respective Chief 
Ministers and Lt. Governors of States/UTs. This issue was discussed in a Video 
Conference Meeting with all the States & UTs. It is also pr oposed to be discussed in 
the forthcoming Conference with States/UTs being organised by the National 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
H-11012/17/2009-P&C, Dated 16/03/2010 

 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 4.30) 
 
2.13  The Committee note that the Consumer Welfare Fund was created with 
the objective of providing financial assistance to promote and protect the 
interest of the consumers, create awareness and st rengthen consumer 
movement in the country. The fund which was set up by the Department of 
Revenue is operated by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution. Any agency/organization engaged in consumer welfare activities 
and registered under the Companies Act, 1956 is eligible for seeking financial 
assistance from the fund. The Committee are unhappy to note that the 
allocation of funds for the purpose has been considerably decreasing during 
the past three years. The BE which was Rs. 33 cr ore in 2006 -07 has been 
reduced to Rs. 13.90 crore in 2009 -10. The Committee regret that even the 
reduced funds could not be fully utilized during the past three years which is 
evident from the fact that out of Rs. 83.58 crore allocated from 2006 -07 to 
2009-10, the Ministry could utilize only Rs. 25.31 crore. The Committee are not 
convinced with the arguments of the Government that the funds were not fully 
utilized due to non -submission to utilization certificates from the VCOs/NGOs 
even after the expiry of  stipulated time as it merely reflects the lack of proper 
monitoring over the scheme. The Committee note that under the scheme, 
central share of one time seed money is released to States after they credit 
their share of 50% to a separate non -plan, non -lapsable account. The 
Committee are disturbed to note that 14 States are yet to create their State 
Consumer Welfare Fund and credit their share. The Committee feel that 
generating consumer awareness and strengthen consumer movement, 
particularly in the rural a nd remote areas, is a critical issue. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should persuade the remaining 
States/UTs to provide their matching share and make necessary provision in 
their Budgets. Besides, the Department should strengthen its monitoring over 
the scheme, so that the funds are fully utilized in the financial year itself.   
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.14      There has been less expenditure during 2006 -07 and 2007 -08 as the 
guidelines for releasing grant in aid were under detailed revision. The new guidelines 
which are more transparent and in detail, were issued only in November, 2007. 
 
During 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 there has been less expenditure due to the 
fact that many current projects could not be released full installments due t o delay in 
settlement of outstanding Audit paras. 
 
  The Standing Committee on CFW in its meeting held on 13.11.09 has 
decided that Consumer Welfare Fund at State Level should be further strengthened 
in order to help the States to finance local level progr ammes. It has therefore been 
decided to propose to the States/UTs that States who were willing to set up a corpus 
fund of Rs. 10 crore  will be given 75% of that amount from the Central Consumer 

 
Welfare Fund. Thus a State which wants to esta blish a corpus o f Rs. 10 crore  will 
have to first contribute Rs. 2.5 crore and thereafter Rs. 7.5 crore  will be given by the 
Central Consumer Welfare Fund. This wil l lead to higher expenditure fro m 
Consumer Welfare Fund. The detailed guidelines issued and posted in the we bsite 
are also likely to help the NGOs and other institutions to prepare viable and 
innovative projects which could be approved for releasing grant in aid.  
 
  States that have not set up States Consumer Welfare Fund by crediting th eir 
share in the account  and have  not availed the central share so far are being 
reminded regularly. Recently a DO reminder has been sent from Secretary (CA) to 
Chief Secretaries of these States/UTs.   
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
H-11012/17/2009-P&C, Dated 16/03/2010 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No.1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 5.4) 
 
2.15   The Committee are happy to note that the Special Leave Petition filed by 
Employees Union, namely Super Bazaar Karamchari Dalit Sangh has been 
disposed off by Hon’ble Supreme Court on 26.02.2009 with the direction to 
take steps for revival of Super Bazaar. The Committee find that the 
representatives of employees union and other respondents’ parties have 
raised no objection with regard to views expressed by the Evaluation 
Committee constituted by the Supreme Court over revival of Super Bazaar. As 
the issue of revival of Super Bazaar has been badly delayed, the Committee 
recommend that the Department should take the initiative to clear the dues 
and liabilities of all the creditors and claimants at the earliest and to take steps 
for early revival of Super Bazaar to protect the interest of workers.  The 
Committee also desire that befo re handing over the management of Super 
Bazaar to a Group or Society, it must be ensured that it has adequate 
infrastructure, experience and financial capacity to run the business.   
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.16 The Supreme Court in its order dated 26.2.200 9 directed Central Registrar of 
Cooperative Societies and Official Liquidator to take steps for revival of Super Bazar. 
As regards the payment of dues and liabilities, the successful bidder has accepted 
the liabilities of Super Bazar before the Supreme Cou rt and same will be paid in due 
course. The Administrators Super Bazar has been appointed under section 123 of 
Multi-State Cooperative Societies Act, 2002(MSCS Act, 2002). The Administrators 
Super Bazar has informed that the offer of employment to the empl oyees of Super 
Bazar has been given and about 965 employees have joined their duties. In addition, 
renovation work of some shops, completion of fire fighting measures in Connaught 
Place Building are under process and to be completed before operations‟ begi n. An 
amount of Rs. 2.01 crores has been paid to the NDMC by the Super Bazar towards 
arrears of rent/license fees. As far as handing over the management of Super Bazar 
to a Group o r Society is concerned, it is informed that on the recommendations of 
the Ev aluation Committee constituted by the Supreme Court, the bidder i.e. M/s 
Writers and Publishers Ltd., was selected as an agency for revival of Super Bazar. 
The management of Super Bazar will be constituted by the Administrators with the 
shareholders of the  society including the representatives of the M/s Writers and 
Publishers Ltd., as per the provisions of the MSCS Act, 2002  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
H-11012/17/2009-P&C, Dated 16/03/2010 

 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 6.11) 
 
2.17 The Committee are not satisfied as far as the financial performance of 
the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) is concerned due to the fact that 
Planning Commission have been allocating huge funds every year but not 
even one percent of the funds was utilized by BIS. For example, during 2007 -
08, the BE was Rs. 10.80 crore and RE was Rs. 9.14 crore whereas the actual 
expenditure was only Rs. 0.50 crore. Similarly, during 2008 -09, the BE was Rs. 
18.69 crore which was  lowered down to Rs. 0.63 crore at RE stage and the 
actual expenditure was Rs. 0.66 crore. The Committee regret that for all the 
schemes, the reasons for under spending given by the Department is non -
submission of the utilization certificates from the impl ementing agencies 
which in the opinion of the Committee indicates lack of proper planning and 
very poor monitoring over the schemes. In the instant case, the utilization 
certificates are to be received from BIS, the executive agency and not from the 
States. The Committee feel that Standardization and Quality Control is a very 
crucial element for proper functioning of BIS Act.  However, this requires 
timely receipt of satisfactory Utilization Certificate from implementing agency 
so that the actual requiremen t for Standardization and Quality Control could 
be worked out and right estimates could be made accordingly. The Committee 
would, therefore, recommend that the Department should take pre -emptive 
steps to further the implementation of the schemes by directi ng  the BIS,  to 
timely  submit Utilization Certificates so that funds could be utilized fully 
without any hindrance.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.18 Less expenditure during the previous year s was due to the fact that the 
schemes were new and a number of preli minary activities were to be carried out by 
BIS before their commencement.  Based on the response of the requirements of 
funds, the budget allocations for the years 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 were reduced at 
RE stage.  The pace of expenditure during the year 2009 -10 has improved.  Against 
the Revised Estimates of Rs.6.59 crore, Rs.4.38 crore has already been utilized and 
the remaining amount is also likely to be largely utilized by the end of the financial 
year. 
  
 The suggestion/recommendation of the Committee to  take pre-emptive steps 
to further the implementation of the schemes has been noted.  BIS has been 
directed to submit Utilization Certificates in time so that the funds could be utilized 
fully without any hindrance. 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
H-11012/17/2009-P&C, Dated 16/03/2010 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No.1.17 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 7.12) 
 
2.19 The Committee note with concern that though the Planning Commission 
has been allocating huge funds every year to Forward Market Commission 
(FMC) for regulating the Future/Forward trading in the country, but FMC have 
not been able to utilize even fifty percent of the allocated funds. For instan ce, 
during     2007 -08, the BE for the year 2007 -08 was Rs. 19.50 crore which was 
cut down to Rs. 9.75 crore whereas the expenditure was only Rs. 2.46 crore. 
Similarly, during 2008 -09, the BE was Rs. 20.70 crore which was drastically 
reduced to Rs. 3.60 cr ore at RE and the expenditure was Rs. 3.31 crore. The 
plea of the Government that the funds could not be utilized due to non -
passage of Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill as 
operationalisation of most of the schemes under strengthening of FMC ar e 
linked with the said Bill is not acceptable to the Committee. In the opinion of 
the Committee, the FMC should improve its performance with the existing 
resources and management at their end, without waiting for the passage of 
Forward Contracts (Regulatio n) Amendment Bill. The Committee are aware of 
the fact that the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill was 
introduced in Lok Sabha in 2008 to convert the Ordinance into the Act. 
However, it got lapsed due to dissolution of the 14 th Lok Sabha. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should re -introduce 
the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill in Parliament in order to 
strengthen the regulatory framework and confer autonomy on the regulators. 
The Committee also recommend that f indings of the study conducted by the 
Government to ascertain the impact of the Future/Forward trading on small 
and marginal farmers be implemented in letter and spirit.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.20 The FMC is making all out efforts to ensure timely complet ion of all the 
activities entrusted to it despite the severe manpower constraints faced by it. 
Amendments to the FC(R) Act 1952 to strengthen the regulatory capabilities of FMC 
and enabling development of the commodities futures market on the desired lines  is 
currently under the consideration of the Government. The expenditure for 2009 -10 
as on date is Rs. 2.92 crore and it is expected that the entire RE of Rs. 9.00 crore 
would be spent 
 
The proposal for conducting a study to ascertain the extent to which s mall 
and marginal farmers have benefited from futures trading is under the consideration 
of this Ministry.  
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
H-11012/17/2009-P&C, Dated 16/03/2010 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.23 of Chapter I of the Report)

 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 7.13) 
 
2.21 The Committee note that the sanctioned strength of FMC is 136 out of 
which only 83 are in position while 53 posts are lying vacant. The Committee 
note with surprise that even 22 posts in Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ are lying vacant in 
FMC which in the opinion of the Committee is nothing but deplorable. The plea 
of the Government that posts of senior cadre could not be filled due to non -
availability of suitable  candidates is not convincing to the Committee. In the 
opinion of the Committee, there is no dearth of educated candidates with 
technical qualification who are in search of employment. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that Government should take urgent necessary 
action to fill up all the vacant posts of FMC without waiting for the passage of 
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill so that the regulatory work is 
not suffered for want of suitable candidates.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
2.22 The C omments of the Committee are noted for compliance. In this 
connection, it is clarified that the Forward Markets Commission is making every 
effort to ensure that all the posts are filled up on time. The Commission has initiated 
action on filling up the 14 p osts of Directors and Deputy Directors (for Finance, IT, 
Legal and Economics). Interviews for the same were held on 30 th and 31 st 
December, 2009.  Selection has been completed for these posts An advertisement 
has been sent to DAVP on 29 th December, 2009 fo r filling up the post of 
Stenographer Group I & III. The post of Office Superintendent was advertised in 
Employment News on 25th July,  2009 but no application is received so far. The post 
of Hindi Translator was also circulated to various government depar tments more 
than two times, but due to merger of the pre -revised scale of Rs. 5000-8000, Rs. 
5500-9000, and Rs. 6500-10500 as per the 6th CPC, resulting no financial benefits in 
the above said posts, no response was received. Regarding the other vacant pos ts 
of group B & C the regular incumbents are on deputation/ad hoc and , therefore, the 
said posts have to be kept vacant and cannot be filled up.  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
H-11012/17/2009-P&C, Dated 16/03/2010 
  

 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 8.10) 
 
2.23 The Committee express their concern over the rising trend in prices of 
almost all the essential commodities, particularly the foodgrains during the 
last one year. The Committee observe from the trend in prices of foodgrains 
that the prices, especially pulses and sugar, raised from 50% to 100% during 
the last year. The Department of Consumer Affairs is entrusted inter-alia with 
the task of monitoring of the prices and availability of esse ntial commodities 
in the country. The Price Monitoring Cell in the Department of Consumer 
Affairs prepares a daily report on the retail prices and circulate the same to 
PMO, Cabinet Secretariat, Ministry of Finance and other concerned Ministries 
and suggest measures for stabilizing the prices. The reasons for increase in 
the prices,  especially the foodgrains,  are (i) Growing demand due to increase 
in population and income (ii) Change in consumption pattern (iii) Diversion of 
foodgrains for fuel (iv) Hike in Minimum Support Price (v) Adverse weather 
and climate change (vi) Increase in crude oil prices (vii) Increase in freight 
rates and (viii) Delayed monsoon. The Committee are astonished to observe 
that when the reasons for hike in prices are well known to  the Government,  
why it could not take advance action to control and stabilize the retail prices in 
the country. In order to control the prices of essential commodities, especially 
the foodgrains, the Government have taken a number of fiscal, administrati ve 
and monetary measures such as reduction on import duty to zero on rice, 
wheat, pulses and edible oil and  imposing  ban on their export, enhancement 
in MSP, maintaining the CIP (Central Issue Price) of wheat and rice for BPL 
and AAY, suspension of futur e trading in rice, wheat, urad and tur, reduction 
in prices of petrol and diesel, import of pulses and edible oils for distribution 
to poor families at subsidized rate, extension of validity of Central Notification 
and improved the production and productiv ity of foodgrains through National 
Food Security Mission (NFSM) and Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY). The 
Committee observe that despite the aforesaid measures taken by the 
Government, the prices of the essential commodities did not show any 
decreasing trend. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to control 
the prices of essential commodities especially the foodgrains so that poor 
persons are able to take their two square meals within their limited income. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend t hat Government should, in 
consultation with the other concerned Departments, traders and FMC chalk 
out a strategy so that prices do not go beyond control. The Government 
should also make planned and concerted efforts to increase production, 
particularly of sugar and pulses.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.24 Government is taking long term and short term measures to improve the 
availability of pulses. The Ministry of Agriculture is concerned with improving the 
productivity and production in the long term in the ag ricultural sector. The 
Government has taken medium term initiatives such as Integrated Scheme of 

 
Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize(ISOPOM), National Food Security Mission 
(NFSM) and  Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojna (RKVY) to  improve production and 
productivity in agriculture. The Government has taken several other initiatives such 
as improving the availability through import of pulses, sugar, edible oil etc to bridge 
the demand and supply gap. The Government has recently taken various decisions 
to improve t he availability of essential commodities like wheat, rice, sugar, edible 
oils and pulses. These measures are expected to soften the pressure on prices.  
Recent trends also indicate a reduction in prices of most essential commodities. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
H-11012/17/2009-P&C, Dated 16/03/2010 
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No.1.26 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 8.11) 
 
2.25 The Committee not e that the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and 
Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential 
Commodities Act, 1980 empowers the State Governments/UTs to take action 
against the unscrupulous persons indulging in hoarding and blackmar keting 
of essential commodities. The Committee find that number of persons 
arrested, prosecuted and convicted are much less as compared to the number 
of raids conducted by the enforcement machinery of the States/UTs during 
2008-09 and 2009 -10 (upto 31.08.0 9). In some of the States/UTs, namely 
Jharkhand, Nagaland, Lakshadweep, Bihar, Manipur, Sikkim, A&N Islands, the 
position is worst where not a single raid was conducted during 2008 -09 and 
2009-10. Consequently, the number of persons prosecuted and arrested  were 
also Nil. The Committee note with serious concern that during 2008 -09, the 
number of raids conducted were 2,68,775 whereas the number of persons 
arrested, prosecuted and convicted during the year were only 8001 (2.97%), 
6425(2.39%) and 790(0.29%),  r espectively. The number of unscrupulous 
persons detained under the Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of 
Supply of Essential Commodities Act, 1980 is far from satisfactory.  During 
2008-09, 162 cases and during   2009 -10, 92 cases (upto 31.03.200 9) of 
detention have been reported from 5 States namely, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, 
Orissa, Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra. The Committee wonder as to why 
not a single raid was conducted by the enforcement machinery of States/UTs 
which furnished ‘NIL’ Reports. I n the opinion of the Committee, there is a lack 
of  coordination between  implementing agencies  and poor monitoring of the 
Department of Consumer Affairs over the functioning of the States/UTs. The 
Committee view the situation seriously and recommend that  the Government 
should impress upon the State Governments/UTs to strengthen their 
enforcement machinery and conduct raids regularly so that the persons 
indulged in hoarding and blackmarketing are punished as per the law of the 
land. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.26 The enforcement of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 lies with the State 
Governments/Union Territories.  The State Governments/UT Administrations have 
been delegated powers to take necessary action under the provisions of both “The 
Essential Commodi ties Act, 1955 and “The Prevention of Blackmarketing and 
Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act , 1980”, to prevent mal -
practices in essential commodities.  However, for strengthening  the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 and to curb price ris e, hoarding and speculation some stern 
action has been initiated by Department of Consumer Affairs.       Directions have 
been given to States/UTs from time to time to take necessary actions under both the 
Acts to prevent hoarding and smuggling.     
 

 
2.  Secretary (CA) has written on 5.1.2010 to the Chief Secretaries of all 
States/UTs, requesting them to organize special drives against hoarding and to send 
a factual report to this Department within 15 days containing inter -alia, the action 
taken and cases b ooked under the Essential Commodities Act so as to enable this 
Department to send a consolidated report to the Committee. In the meanwhile, the 
latest information available on Action  Taken under the Essential Commodities Act, 
1955 and the  number of deten tions under the Prevention of Blackmarketing and 
Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act , 1980  as on 31.12.2009  
are enclosed (Annexure-I & II). 
 
3.  The State Governments have been advised to take action under  the 
provisions of Essential C ommodities Act, 1955 on several occasions from time to 
time.  Action taken in the recent past is indicated below: 
 
(i)   The recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs & Public Distribution Committee contained in its  27 th  
Report  on Price Rise of Essential Commodities - Causes  and  Effects  
with  special  emphasis  on  import  of  wheat  and enforcement of 
Prevention of Black Marketing and Maintenance of  Supply of Essential 
Commodities Act, 1980 have  also been communic ated to the State 
Governments/UTs vide Secretary (Consumer Affairs)‟s d.o. letter 
No.2/7/2007-ECR&E dated 09.02.2009 for  taking immediate action to 
supply the information of detention cases with the prescribed time limit as 
per the Act.   
(ii)         Subsequently the observations of the 28 th  Report of the Standing 
Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs & Public Distribution on  Demand 
for Grants(2008-2009)  with the   r ecommendation that Central 
Government should impress upon the State Government/UTs to 
strengthen their enforcement machinery and take all necessary measures 
to prevent hoarding and black marketing  have been communicated  to the 
Chief Secretaries of a ll the States/UTs vide Secretary (CA)‟s d.o.  letter 
dated 15.05.2009 wherein immediate action on the  recommendations of 
the Standing Committee had been requested.  
 (iii)          A Chief Secretaries conference had been held on 08.08.2009 wherein , 
inter-alia the  need to implement the stock control orders had been 
emphasized by  Secretary (CA).  S ecretary (CA) had written to all the 
Chief Secretaries vide letter dated 03.08.2009  reiterating the need to fix 
stock limits where Central Government had issued orders and also to 
enforce them strictly.  
(iv)  Hon‟ble Minister had also convened  a meeting with States/UTs Food 
Ministers on 19.8.2009 . Subsequently , the Hon‟ble Minister has also 
written to  all the Chief Ministers vide his letter dated 23.09.2009. Later in 
continuation to his letter dated 23.09.2009 he  has again written a letter 
dated 12.12. 2009 to all the Chief Ministers reiterating  that State 
Governments have major role in checking prices of  essential commodities 
by curbing malpractices through a set of administrative and regulatory 

 
measures. Hon‟ble Minister has suggested that it is nece ssary to put in 
place and strengthening an  appropriate mechanism for regular intensive 
monitoring of the prices of the commodities in order to promptly detect any 
short terms fluctuations and take  necessary corrective actions, if 
necessary, through direc t market intervention for adequate supplies of 
essential commodities to the consumers at affordable price.  Hon‟ble 
Minister has also reiterated the measures taken by the Central 
Government to augment  availability of essential  commoditi es, particularly 
pulses, including, a scheme of subsidized supply of pulses for distribution 
through PDS  as has also been emphasized earlier in meetings.  A 
scheme for publicity campaign for popularizing yellow peas dal has been 
finalized under which the States/UTs will be  eligible for a maximum grant 
of Rs.20/10/5 lakh, depending upon the number of districts in the 
State/UTs.   
(v)         States/UTs have been requested vide Hon‟ble Minis ter‟s above letter  to 
help in  controlling prices by taking advantage of above mention ed new 
schemes and for ensuring adequate supplies of essential commodities to 
the consumer by strictly enforcing the provisions of Essential Commodities 
Act, 1955 and PBM Act, 1980 against unscrupulous elements including   
malpractices.  Video Conferencing were also held with Food Secretaries 
of all State Governments/UT Administrations on 06.11.2009 and 
13.11.2009. 
(vi) In order to find out whether   the penal provisions contained in the EC Act 
and the PBMMSEC Act, 1980 could be made more stringent and the 
reasons for low prosecutions/convictions vis-à-vis number of arrests made 
for violation of the provisions of the EC Act, a d.o. letter dated 30.12.2009 
from Additional Secretary (CA) has been addressed to all Food 
Secretaries calling for this information.  The Department had also held a 
video conference with Food Secretaries of all State Governments/UTs in  
the last week of January, 2010, where these issues were discussed. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
H-11012/17/2009-P&C, Dated 16/03/2010 
  

 
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 

 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE. 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 3.11) 
 
4.1 The Committee are not satisfied with the overall performance of the 
Department of Consumer Affairs in so far as expenditure incurred during 2008-
09 is concerned. The Committee note that out of a total allocation of Rs.413.65 
crore during 2008 -09, the Department could utilize only Rs.341.11 crore i.e. 
Rs.151.71 crore for its plan schemes and Rs.189.40 crore for non -plan 
schemes. The Committee are also  surprised to note that the expenditure on 
some of the important schemes viz. National Test House (NTH), Bureau of 
Indian Standards(BIS), Forward Market Commission(FMC) and project/scheme 
for North -Eastern Region was almost negligible.  Out of total alloca tion of 
Rs.74.51 crore for these Schemes/Programmes, the expenditure was only 
Rs.5.37 crore during the financial year, indicating a poor planning by the 
Department. The reasons put forth by the Ministry that the BE was reduced at 
RE stage due to delay in e valuation and approval of the schemes by SFC/EFC 
is not convincing to the Committee. In the opinion of the Committee, the 
Department has not been able to improve its monitoring mechanism over 
schemes and make co -ordination between the evaluation agencies. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department should make 
sincere efforts for getting clearance of the schemes without delay so that 
funds allocated are fully utilized during the financial year. The Committee also 
recommend that the Depa rtment should make sincere efforts to utilize the 
entire funds allocated for the Schemes/Programmes for the North -Eastern 
region so as to avoid its transfer to non -lapsable funds created for NE States. 
Steps taken in this regard should be communicated to t he Committee within 
three months. 
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
4.2 A statement indicating year -wise Plan allocation/allocation for North Eastern 
Region and expenditure for North Eastern Region is given below: 
 
Statement indicating year-wise allocation/expenditure 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Total  Plan Allocation  Allocation for NE Expenditure 
for NE 
 BE RE BE RE  
2006-07 163.00 150.00 16.75 15.01 17.95 
2007-08 213.00 150.00 21.60 13.38 10.18 
2008-09 209.00 160.00 20.90 16.00 11.97 

 
The Plan allocation is distributed f or the following major Plan Schemes of the 
Department. 
a) Consumer Awareness 
b) Consumer Protection  
c) State Consumer Helpline 
d) Strengthening of Forward Market Commission 
e) Weights and Measures 
f) National Test House 
g) Bureau of Indian Standards including Gold Hallmarking 
A few Plan schemes being implemented in this Department do not have scope 
for expenditure in the north eastern region, such as: 
 
I. Construction of National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commision 
(NCDRC) Building, a sub-scheme of Consumer Protection. 
II. Strengthening of Forward Market Commission as there is no 
commodity future exchange in NE Region. 
 
The schemes of Consumer Awareness and Consumer Protection are 
implemented all over the country including the North Eastern State. 
 
Under the „CONFONET‟ scheme, a sub -scheme of Consumer Protection, the 
National Information Centre  (NIC) is providing computer hardware and software to 
all the seven States in the North East and Sikkim.  Similarly, under the scheme of 
strengthening of Consumer Fora the funds are provided to  the States, on the basis 
of infrastructure requirements and land, provided by the State Government for the 
Consumer Fora.   
 
National Test House  (NTH) has a regional test centre/Laboratory at 
Guwahati.  Funds are provided to NTH, Guwahati (Assam). 
 
In the North Eastern region the trade participation is not significant, hence no 
expenditure was incurred in North Eastern States by FMC. 
 
There is one Regional Reference Standards Laboratory(RRSL) in Guwahati. 
Funds meant for the North East are provided to this  laboratory.   Funds are also 
provided for strengthening of State infrastructure on the basis of the State 
Laboratories under Weights and Measures Scheme. 
 
  Thus every effort is made to ensure that the minimum expenditure prescribed 
for the North Easter Region is achieved. 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
H-11012/17/2009-P&C, Dated 16/03/2010 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No.1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 6.12) 
 
4.3   The Committee note that the scheme of Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery 
was launched by BIS in April 2000 to provide third party assurance to 
consumers of the purity of gold jewellery or its fineness. Under the scheme, a 
jeweller has to o btain Hallmark License from BIS to get his jewellery 
hallmarked.  For this, the Government has set up Assaying and Hallmark 
Centres throughout the country. The Committee are unhappy to note that 
there was a declining trend in terms of physical achievements  made during 
2007-08 and 2008 -09 against the target fixed. So far, 147 hallmarking centres 
have been set up in 17 States/UTs whereas the consumers of remaining 18 
States/UTs, especially in the States of Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Goa and 
North-eastern a re deprived of the benefit of hallmarking scheme. Besides, 
there is one hallmarking centre each in Haryana and Punjab whereas 19 such 
centres have been set up in NCT, Delhi. The Committee do not appreciate the 
contention of the Department that the quantum of jewellery being 
produced/consumed in the other States/UTs is not sufficient, so setting up the 
Assaying and Hallmakring Centres in such centres may not be viable. In the 
opinion of the Committee, the Government should conduct a study to know 
the quantum  of jewellery being produced/consumed in the remaining  
States/UTs and to ascertain the viability of setting up of Assaying and 
Hallmarking Centres. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the BIS 
should make sincere efforts to provide facility of Assayin g and Hallmarking of 
Gold and Silver Jewellery in remote and backward areas so that the interests 
of consumers are protected by way of ensuring value of money.  
 
REPLY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
4.4 The Government or BIS has not set up any Assaying and Hallmarking Cen tre 
of their own.  Setting up of such Centres is a commercial activity where 
entrepreneurs set up these Centres at locations of their choice, keeping the 
commercial viability in view.  Government Scheme is intended to give 
encouragement for setting up of s uch Centres by extending financial assistance to 
entrepreneurs with preference being given for setting up of the Centres where no 
such Centre exists.  The quantum of Government assistance is 30% of the cost of 
machinery and equipment, subject to maximum of  Rs.30 lakh for setting up of the 
Centres in North Eastern Region, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and 
Uttrakhand and 15% of the cost of machinery and equipment subject to maximum of 
Rs.15 lakh in other areas.  So far the assistance has been extended onl y up to two 
Centres at important locations and four centres at the four metros/their satellite 
towns and major production/consumption Centres on need basis.   The Scheme has 
been liberalized recently to increase the quantum of assistance to 30% of the cost  of 
machinery and equipment subject to a maximum of Rs.30 lakh for setting up of the 
Centres in rural areas in the country.  Since no Assaying & Hallmarking Centre has 
so far come up in North Eastern States, Himachal Pradesh, Uttrakhand and J&K 

 
even with e nhanced Central assistance, the scheme has been modified to consider 
requests for opening up of the Centres in these areas even without Expression of 
Interest.  BIS has also invited fresh applications from various locations including 
North-Eastern Region, Himachal Pradesh, J&K and Uttrakhand and rural areas 
where no Centre exist, for setting up of Centres with Central assistance.  BIS has 
also been organizing publicity campaigns on a regular basis to encourage setting up 
of more such Centres.   
 
 As regards  the observations of the Committee that only one Hallmarking 
Centre each is in existence in Haryana and Punjab whereas 19 such Centres are 
available in the NCT and not even one Centre is in existence in North Eastern 
Region, it is stated that it is due to proximity of the said States to NCT from where 
the jewellers can get their jewellery hallmarked and transported easily to their 
destinations that more Centres have not come up there.  Similarly, jewellers from  
North Eastern States prefer to get their jewellery hallmarked from Kolkata which is 
well connected with these States.   
 
 The Hallmarking Scheme, since its inception in 2000, has progressed 
considerably.  The number of jewellers who have taken the license has gone up to 
7701 as on 31st December, 2009 from 186 on 31st March, 2001.  The total number of 
hallmarked jewellery articles has gone up to 721.47 lakh on 31 st December, 2009 
from 0.94 lakh on 31 st March, 2001 and the number of articles hallmarked on annual 
basis has gone up to 199 lakh from 0.94 lakh during the same period. 
 
 To make the scheme of Central assistance more effective, the Government 
has commissioned an evaluation study of the same. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
H-11012/17/2009-P&C, Dated 16/03/2010 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para No.1.20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;                           VILAS MUTTEMWAR 
   _9thAugust,2010           Chairman, 
18 Sravana,1932(Saka)                       Standing Committee on Food,  
                                                               Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 

 
CONFIDENTIAL 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION HELD ON MONDAY, 9TH AUGUST, 2010 
The Committ ee sat from 1500 hrs to 1555 hrs in Committee Room „B‟, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 Present 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar - Chairman 
  
Members 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt.Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
4. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
5. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
6. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
7. Shri Sohan Potai 
8. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
 
   
 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
9. Shri Lalhming Liana 
10. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
11. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
12. Shri Veer Singh  
13. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
 Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri P.K.Misra  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad  - Additional Director 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting 
of the Committee convened for c onsideration and adoption of two draft action 
taken reports pertaining to (i) the Department of Food and Public Distribution 
and (ii) the Department of Consumer Affairs respectively. 
 
3. The Committee first took up for consideration the draft report on action 
taken by the Government on t he observations/recommendations contained in 
the Second Report (15 th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for 
Grants (2009-10) relating to the Department of Food and Public Distribution 
and adopted the same with slight amendments.  
 
4.     The Committee then took up for consideration the draft report on 
action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Third Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands 
for Grants (2009 -10) relating to the Department of Consumer Aff airs and 
adopted the same without any amendment.  
 
5.  The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the aforesaid 
Reports and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament during the 
current Session of Parliament. 
 
  
  The Committee then adjourned. 
/……………./ 
 
 
  

 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD REPORT 
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations     15 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have been  
accepted by the Government: 
Recommendation Nos. 3.12, 4.13, 4.14, 4.15, 4.21, 4.22, 4.30,  
5.4, 6.11, 7.12, 7.13, 8.10 and 8.11. 
Total          13 
 
Percentage          86.67  
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government: 
Recommendation Nos.  
    –Nil- 
 
Total          Nil 
 
Percentage         0 
      
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of  
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
Recommendation  Nos. 3.11 and 6.12 
Total          2 
  
Percentage                                                                            13.33 
 
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect of which the  
replies of the Government are still awaited. 
Recommendation No.  
–Nil-  
Total           Nil 
   
Percentage         0 