 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION   
(2010-2011) 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken  by the  Government   on the   observations/recommendations  
contained   in  the  Fourth    Report  (15th Lok Sabha)  of the   Committee  on  
Demands  for Grants  (2010-11)  of  the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution)] 
 
 
 
 
    ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
March, 2011/Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) 
11 

  ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2010-2011) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
  
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND  
PUBLIC DISTIRBUTION  
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken  by the  Government   on the   observations/recommendations  
contained   in  the  Fourth    Report  (15th Lok Sabha)  of the   Committee  on  
Demands  for Grants  (2010-11)  of  the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution)] 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.03.2011 
       Laid in Rajya Sabha on  10.03.2011 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2011/Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………. 
 
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………. 
…………(ii) 
 
               iii 
 
CHAPTER  I Report ……………………………………………………………… 1 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government ……………………………………………… 
 
26 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies…….. 
 
52 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Observations /Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
committee…………………………………………………………. 
 
 
58 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
Observations /Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited. …………………… 
 
61 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
 
I 
(i) Mi nutes of the Third sitting of the Committee held on       
27th December, 2010 
              64 
 
 
II 
(ii) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the 
Committee……………………………………………………... 
 
 
               66 
 
                                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2009-10. 
 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar  - Chairman      
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
4. Shri Tara Chand Bhagora 
5. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
6. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
7. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
8. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
9. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
10. Shri Lalchand Kataria 
11. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
12. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
13. Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
14. Shri Sohan Potai 
15. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
16. Shri Dinubhai Solanki 
17. Shri Laxman Tudu 
18. Shri D. Venugopal  
19. Shri Adagooru H. Vishwanath 
20. Shri Madhusudan Yadav 
21. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
23. Shri P. Kannan 
24. Shri Lalhming Liana 
25. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
26. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
27. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
28. Shri Sanjay Raut 
29. Dr. T.N. Seema 
30. Shri Veer Singh 
31. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
 
 
 (ii) 

            
 
 
 Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P.K. Mishra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution (2009 -2010) having been authorized by the Committee to 
submit the Report on the ir behalf, present this Eleventh Report on Action Taken 
by the Government on the observations /recommendations contained in the 
Fourth Report of the Committee (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants   
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
 
2. The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 23 rd April, 2010. The Government furnished their replies indicating action 
taken on the observations / recommendations contained in the Report on         
20th July, 2010. 
 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on  27th December, 2010. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix-II. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick 
type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;                                VILAS MUTTEMWAR 
  25th February, 2011            Chairman, 
6 Phalguna,1932 (Saka)                         Standing Committee on Food,  
                                                         Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

   CHAPTER -I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on  Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (15 th  Lok 
Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (201 0-2011) pertaining to the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution). 
1.2 The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 23 rd April, 2010. It contained 29 ob servations/ 
recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 29 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report have been received and 
these have been categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations /recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government : 
 
Serial Nos.- 1, 2, 3, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 ,17,18, 24, 25, 26, 27, 
28, 29 
(Paragraph Nos. –2.6, 2.7, 3.12, 3.37, 3.56, 3.61, 3.67, 3.78, 4.5, 
4.9, 4.15, 4.16, 4.25, 6.14, 6.18, 6.27, 7.16, 7.23, 7.27) 
      (Chapter –II , Total  19 ) 
 
(ii) Observations /recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government 
 
Serial Nos. 19, 20, 21, 23 
(Paragraph Nos-5.10, 5.18, 5.19, 6.7) 
      
      (Chapter –III , Total 4 ) 

 
 
 
 
(iii) Observations /recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
 
Serial Nos. 4, 6, 9  
(Paragraph Nos. 3.27, 3.36, 3.50)  
 
      (Chapter – IV, Total 3)   
 
(iv) Observations /recommendations in respect of which the interim 
replies of the Government have been received. 
   Serial No. 5, 8, 22 
   (Paragraph No. 3.28, 3.46, 5.23) 
 
 (Chapter – V, Total 3) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations for which only interim replies have been 
received from the Government as reproduced in Chapter V as well as 
replies to the observations/recommendations contained in Chapter I of this 
report, be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 
1.4 The Committee strongly emphasize that utmost importance should 
be given to the implementation of Observations/Recommendations 
accepted by the Government. In case where it is not possible for the 
Government to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any 
reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee in time with 
reasons for non-implementation. 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations. 

 
 
 
A. Need for adoption of Decentralized Procurement Scheme (DCP) by 
all the States. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3  Paragraph 3.12) 
 
1.6 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
           
‘The Committee note that the Decentralized Procurement Scheme (DCP) was 
introduced in 1997-98 for effecting savings, enhancing  efficiency of procurement 
and encouraging local procurement for the benefit of farmers.  The Committee 
find that even after a gap of more than 13 years, the DCP scheme has been 
undertaken only by 6 States for Wheat and 10 States for Rice, respectively. Th e 
Committee feel that the Government has not been able to convince the 
remaining States about the advantages of the DCP Scheme. The Committee 
also note that the States that have adopted the DCP Scheme are also facing 
various problems such as delay in final izing the procurement incidentals, grant of 
cash credit by the RBI and valuation of stock.  The Committee would urge the 
Department to make sincere efforts to resolve the problems being faced by the 
DCP States and also persuade the remaining States/UTs to adopt the DCP 
Scheme in the interest of the farmers and the poor people so that the objectives 
of the scheme are achieved.’    
 
 
 1.7 The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as under:- 
 
‘11 State Governments/UTs are currently undertaking pro curement of wheat and 
rice under the decentralized Procurement scheme. Government of West Bengal 
has started procurement of wheat since RMS 2010 -11 and accordingly has 
signed an MOU with Govt. of India. The Government of Maharashtra had shown 
its willingness to adopt decentralized Procurement for Wheat since RMS  2008 -
09    and Government of Madhya Pradesh had shown its willingness to adopt 
decentralized Procurement for  Rice since KMS 2007 -08 .  However, the 
Memorandum of Understanding is yet to be signed by them to undertake the 
decentralized Procurement. 
 
During the meetings held with Food Secretaries, the following advantages 
of the DCP scheme are being highlighted in order to motivate the remaining 
States to adopt this scheme: 
 
(i)     It extends the benefits of MSP operations to farmers of the State. 

(ii)   It enhances the efficiency of procurement and PDS and enables 
procurement of foodgrains more suited to local taste.  
(iii)    It reduces transportation costs of FCI and also reduces pressure on 
Railways. 
Due to the encouragement extended by the Central Government, most of 
the States with marketable surplus of rice and wheat have already joined the 
Decentralized Procurement (DCP) scheme, or their State agencies are also 
procuring rice or wheat on behalf of FCI. 
 However, many States   have not yet adopted DCP Scheme   on account 
of difficulties in tying up storage, required manpower and   apprehension of 
delayed release of subsidy. 
Problems faced by DCP States and steps taken to resolve these problems 
are as under:- 
State Government /Agencies are required to submit their 
provisional subsidy claims. On receipt of claims from State 
Government,   95% of the admissible claim is released on 
provisional basis, subject to availability of the funds and the 
remaining 5% is released after finalization of accounts based on 
audited accounts, annual reports for each year, etc. State 
Governments of Gujarat, Orissa and Uttarakhand have not 
submitted any claims including audited accounts for finalization. 
Many State Gove rnments are not submitting their claims or 
submitting their claims after a gap of many years. In absence of 
claim from State Governments Department cannot release funds 
for procurement of foodgrains to DCP States and States in turn are 
facing problems due to lack of funds.  
The Government of India extends the single default guarantee to FCI for 
availing cash credit from consortium of banks as per the norms fixed by the RBI 
since it is a Central Government agency. Similar guarantee is not extended to 
agencies of State Government/UT Administrations as their finances are 
controlled by their respective State Government/UT Administrations. 
RBI has authorized valuation of stocks for FCI at the average acquisition 
cost throughout the year. However, in case of stock s procured by the States, 
valuation of stocks is done at acquisition cost during   three month peak 
procurement season (April - June for Rabi and October - December for Kharif) 
and thereafter, at the Central Issue Prices (CIPs). Since cash credit is allowe d 
upto the value of stocks only and CIPs are much lower than the acquisition cost, 

States are not able to fully utilize the cash credit limit sanctioned to them.  RBI, 
as an interim measure has agreed for valuation of stocks held by the State at 
average acquisition cost during the three peak procurement months and at the 
mean of acquisition cost and CIP for the remaining nine months.  
The matter has been taken up with RBI for valuation of stocks held by the 
State agencies at par with FCI but RBI has informed that since Govt. of India has 
given guarantee to FCI, the food credit account of FCI is not treated as a non -
performing asset even when it may become irregular and that State 
Governments could be considered at par with FCI only when their food credit 
accounts are also backed by a Central Government guarantee. Government of 
India cannot give similar guarantee to State Government since their finances are 
controlled by their respective State  Government/UT Administrations.’ 
 
 

1.8  The Committee are constrai ned to note that so far only 11 States 
have joined the Decentralized Procurement Scheme (DCP) after 13 years 
since the scheme was introduced in the year 1997 -98.  The Committee also 
regret to note that though the Government of Maharashtra and Madhya 
Pradesh have shown their willingness to adopt DCP since the RMS 2008 -09 
and KMS 2007 -08 respectively, yet the people of the two States are 
deprived from the benefits of the scheme as the MOUs between the Central 
Government and the two State Governments have not been signed so far.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that Government should take 
necessary steps and expedite the signing the MOU by the Government of 
Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh for undertaking the DCP scheme without 
further delay. The Committee fu rther recommend that the Department 
should take concrete steps to try and convince the remaining States/UTs to 
adopt the DCP scheme in the interest of the farmers and the poor people of 
the county.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

B. Need to rationalize huge Food Subsidy Bill  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4  Paragraph 3.27) 
 
1.9 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
           
‘The Committee note that food subsidy is provided to FCI for reimbursement of 
the difference between economic cost of foodgrains and their issue price.  The 
Committee note with concern that despite several measures taken by the 
Government to contain the amount of Food Subsidy, there has been huge 
increase in the allocation of Food Subsidy during the last three years. The Food 
Subsidy released to FCI and S tates in 2008-09 was Rs. 43,668 crore, which was 
increased to   Rs. 54,539 crore in 2009 -10. The Department of Food and Public 
Distribution has projected Rs. 72,235 crore for the financial year 2010 -11 which 
as indicated by the Secretary during evidence is  short by Rs. 14,952 crore to 
meet the requirement of Food Subsidy during 2010 -11.  The Committee are 
convinced with the arguments of the Department of Food and Public Distribution 
that less amount of subsidy will affect the functioning of FCI in getting t he credit 
from Financial Institutions.  The inadequate allocation of food subsidy also has a 
cascading effect as interest on cash credit increases, thereby increasing the 
subsidy further.   The decentralised procurement operation of the States will also 
be seriously affected due to cash crunch on account of inadequate subsidy.  The 
Committee while appreciating the difficulties of the Department, recommend that 
subsidy given to FCI should be realistic and based on the actual cost.  The 
Ministry of Finance ma y accordingly allocate sufficient funds as per the 
requirements under food subsidy.   
  
The Committee also recommend that the proposal to reduce the gap 
between Central Issue Price for APL households and open market prices may be 
considered so as to check the growing food subsidy budget.’    
 
1.10 The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as under:- 
 
‘The Department of Food & Public Distribution projected demand of Rs.72,235 
crore for the financial year 2009 -10,against which only an amount of 
Rs.58242.45 crore was  allocated by the Ministry of Finance and there was a 
shortfall of Rs.13992.53 crore in 2009 -10.  The estimated requirement of food 
subsidy during 2010 -11 taking into account the  shortfall in funds allocation last 
year is at Rs.83927.62 crore.  However, the food subsidy allocated by Ministry of 
Finance for 2010 -11 (BE) for food subsidy is only Rs.55211 crore.  Therefore, 
there is a shortfall of Rs.28716.62 crore. 
 

 The Department of Food & Public Distribution has been 
continuously purs uing the proposal for increase of Central Issue Prices 
(CIPs) for Above Poverty Line (APL) families to reduce the increasing food 
subsidy budget.’ 
 

1.11 The Committee in their original report had observed that inadequate 
allocation of food subsidy would a ffect the proper functioning of the FCI 
and it would also have cascading effect as interest on cash credit 
increases. The Committee had, therefore, recommended that the subsidy 
given to FCI should be realistic and based on actual cost. However, the 
Committee note from the action taken reply that against the projected 
requirement of food subsidy during the year 2010 -11 of Rs. 83,927.62 crore, 
the Ministry of Finance has allocated only Rs. 52,211 crore, thereby leaving 
a shortfall of Rs. 28,716.62 crore. The Committee are of the firm opinion 
that there is a need for realistic allocation of funds in order to ensure the 
effective and efficient functioning of the FCI and the PDS in the country. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that while making 
sustained efforts to contain the food subsidy budget, the Department 
should also make concerted efforts to persuade the Ministry of 
Finance/Planning Commission to allocate adequate food subsidy by giving 
convincing explaination about the requirement of funds wit h proper 
justification. The concern of the Committee in this regard should be 
communicated to Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance for their 
consideration. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the 
matter. 
 
 
 

C. Need for strengthening of PDS in the country.  
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Paragraph 3.36) 
 
1.12 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
           
‘The Committee note that strengthening of PDS is a new scheme under the 11 th 
Plan having four components i.e. training, evaluatio n, curbing leakages/diversion 
of foodgrains and generating awareness amongst the TPDS beneficiaries. The 
PDS, which is one of the most important schemes of the Government to provide 
subsidized foodgrains to the poor people is jointly implemented by the Cen tral 
and State/UT Governments. The Committee observe that there is no satisfactory 
improvement in PDS in many States despite the fact that the Government has 
taken several measures to strengthen the PDS such as undertaking regular 
review meetings with the State Governments to ensure effective implementation 
of PDS, directing the State/UT Governments to implement measures such as 
strengthening monitoring and vigilance, increasing transparency in functioning of 
TPDS, use of ICT tools for computerization of TP DS operations and improving 
efficiency of FPS operations by way of doorstep delivery of foodgrains, etc. The 
Committee hope that the Department would make concerted efforts to closely 
monitor implementation of the aforementioned measures by the States/UTs so 
that the AAY and BPL families do get their due share of foodgrains on a regular 
basis.’  
    
 
1.13 The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as under:- 
 
‘The State/UT Governments are being requested for implementation of the 
orders/instructions issued to them from time to time for smooth functioning of 
TPDS. On certain schemes/plans, the information relating to their implementation 
is called on monthly/quarterly basis from the State/UT Governments and is being 
utilized for further monitoring and review.’ 
 

1.14 The Committee are unhappy with the casual approach of the 
Ministry towards the important recommendation of the Committee 
regarding strengthening of PDS. The Department in its action taken 
reply have simply stated that States/UT Governm ents are being 
requested for implementation of the orders/instructions issued to them 
for smooth functioning of TPDS and that on certain schemes, 
information is called on monthly/quarterly basis. The Committee are not 
satisfied with the reply of the Depart ment as they feel that the PDS 
being one of the most important schemes of the Government to provide 
subsidized foodgrains to the poor people of the country, there is a need 
to strengthen the scheme in terms of monitoring and vigilance, 
increased transparen cy in the functioning by use of latest information 
technology, carrying of surprise visits and inspections and penalizing 
the officials, the fair price shop owners or agents found guilty of any 
wrong doing. The Committee, therefore, while reiterating their  
recommendation desire the Ministry to closely monitor the scheme by 
proper implementing the aforementioned measures in order to 
strengthen the PDS in the country.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

D. Need for implementation of Revised Citizen Charter by all States/ 
UTs. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7,  Paragraph 3.37) 
 
1.15 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
           
‘The Committee further note that the revised Citizen Charter issued by the 
Department in July, 2007 for adoption by the State Governments which contains, 
inter-alia, basic information of interest to consumers and essential information 
such as entitlement of BPL families, information regarding fair price shops, 
inspection and checking etc. has been implemented by 23 States/UTs so far. The 
Committee are of the view t hat, the implementation of the revised Citizen’s 
Charter by the remaining States/UTs is imperative in order to improve the 
functioning of PDS in the country. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Department to find out the reasons for non -implementation of the Charter by the 
remaining States/UTs, and impress upon them to adopt the revised Citizens’ 
Charter for streamlining the functioning of TPDS operation to ensure food 
security to weaker sections of the society.’ 
 
1.16 The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as under:- 
 
‘The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and the State/UT 
governments which have not informed about adoption/implementation of the 
Revised Citizen’s Charter are being requested to indicate the reasons for non -
implementation and to urge them to adopt the Revised Citizen’s Charter at the 
earliest.’ 
 
 
 

1.17 The Committee had recommended in their original report that the 
revised Citizen Charter which had been implemented by 23 States/UTs 
needed to be implemented by the re maining States/UTs in order to 
improve the functioning of the PDS in the country and had urged the 
Department to impress upon those States/UTs to adopt the charter for 
streamlining the functioning of the TPDS operation to ensure food 
security to the poor. The Department in their action taken reply have 
merely stated that the remaining States/UTs were being requested to 
indicate the reasons for non -implementation of the charter without 
indicating any concrete steps taken to convince the remaining 
States/UTs about the need to adopt the revised Citizens Charter. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Department should find out the 
reasons for non -implementation of the revised Citizens Charter by the 
remaining States/UTs and take urgent necessary steps to address the 
issues to facilitate early adoption of the revised charter by all the 
States/UTs in the country.  
 
 
 

E. Elimination of bogus ration cards.   
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9, Paragraph 3.50) 
 
1.18 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
           
‘The Committee observe that necessary provisions have been made in the PDS 
(Control) Order 2001 for issue of ration cards to eligible AAY, BPL and APL 
families in the country.  Elimination of bogus ration cards as well as bogus units 
in them is a continuous exercise by the State Governments so that diversion of 
essential commodities could be checked.  By issuing special instructions to the 
State Governments for taking penal action against the staff for issuance of 
bogus/ineligible ration ca rds, 21 State Governments have deleted 171.91 lakh 
bogus/ineligible ration cards between July, 2006 and 31.01.2010.  The 
Committee appreciate that all the State/UT Governments have been further 
directed to take up a special campaign from October, 2009 to D ecember, 2009 
for verification of all AAY and BPL ration card holders so as to detect and 
eliminate bogus/ineligible ration cards.  Despite all these steps taken by the 
Government, it is noticed that while on the one hand a large number of 
bogus/ineligible ration card holders continue to exist, on the other hand a large 
number of genuinely eligible poor remain deprived of the cards.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that far more stringent measures may be taken by 
the Central Government as well as all State/UT Governments to remedy the 
anomaly in this regard.’ 
 
.’ 
 
1.19 The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as under:- 
 
‘The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and the concerns of the 
Standing Committee for taking more s tringent measures to remedy the anomaly 
will be communicated to all States/UT Governments.’ 
 
 
 

1.20 The Committee had strongly recommended that far more 
stringent measures be taken to remedy the anomaly of the existence of 
large number of bogus/ineligible  ration card holders on the one hand 
and deprivation of ration cards to a large number of genuinely poor 
people in the country on the other hand. The Ministry in their action 
taken reply have simply stated that the concern of the Committee has 
been communicated to the States/UT Governments. The Committee are 
not satisfied by the reply of the Government and are of the view that 
mere communication will not serve the purpose. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Central Government should follow up the 
matter and continuously monitor the action taken by the States/UTs in 
this regard from time to time so that the genuinely poor people are not 
deprived of the ration card and get the benefits of the PDS.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
F. Need to curb leakages/diversion of foodgrains meant for TPDS. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10, Paragraph 3.56) 
 
1.21 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
           
‘The Committee note that innovative/new technologies such as GPS, RFID, Bar -
coded coupons, stamping of PDS foodgrains, e tc. are being taken up by the 
Government to curb leakage/diversion of foodgrains meant for TPDS on pilot 
basis.  The Committee have been informed that a financial assistance of Rs. 
44.76 lakhs was given to the State Governments of Tamil Nadu, Chhatisgarh and 
Delhi for installation of GPS devices on the vehicles carrying TPDS foodgrains 
and that while the Government of Tamil Nadu has so far implemented the 
installation of GPS devices in two districts and the State Government of 
Chhatisgarh and Delhi have not  implemented the scheme so far.   The 
Committee have been further informed that, as a result of the implementation of 
GPS device in Tamil Nadu, not a single case of diversion was reported as the 
system has created moral fear among those involved in transpo rtation and also 
enabled the civil supplies department/vigilance agencies to track movement of 
vehicles carrying PDS items. The Committee note with concern that as per the 
findings of the National Council for Applied Economics Research (NCAER), the 
level of diversion of foodgrains in the States of Assam and Mizoram have been 
as high as 100% in case of Wheat allocated for APL families and 83.28% and 
81.12%, respectively in case of Rice allocated for BPL families.  In other words, 
the foodgrains meant for APL  families have not reached them at all in these two 
States.  The level of diversion of foodgrains in other States like Bihar and 
Chhatisgarh are also fairly high.   The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that all necessary steps should be taken to im plement the installation of GPS 
devices not only in the three pilot States but in all the States/UTs of the country 
on top priority.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard.’ 
 
1.22 The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as under:- 
 
‘Government of NCT of Delhi and the State Government of Chhattisgarh were 
sanctioned and released a sum of Rs.4.13 lakh and Rs.29.61 lakh respectively in 
March, 2008.  
 
2. The reports about implementation of the scheme are await ed from these 
two State Governments.  The Utilization Certificate received from the State of 
Chhattisgarh has been examined and certain clarifications have been sought 
from the State Government.  Utilization Certificate (UC) from the Government of 
NCT of Delhi is still awaited.   

 
3. Government of Tamil Nadu was sanctioned an amount of Rs.11.02 lakh in 
March, 2008. Government of Tamil Nadu have already implemented the 
installation of GPS devices in two districts. 
 
4. The scheme will be further evaluated on receipt of implementation reports 
from the Government of NCT of Delhi and the State Government of 
Chhattisgarh.’ 
 

1.23 While noting that one of the steps taken by the Department to 
prevent leakages/diversion of foodgrains, was installation of Global 
Positioning System (GPS) in vehicles carrying subsidized foodgrains on 
pilot basis in three States, namely, Government of NCT of Delhi, State 
Government of Chattisgarh and Tamil Nadu, the Committee had desired to 
implement the GPS installations in all the State s of the country. The 
Committee are unhappy to note the stereotyped reply of the Department 
that till now implementation/performance report from only the State of 
Tamil Nadu has been received and implementation/performance report 
from the remaining two Sta tes is still awaited and the scheme will be 
further evaluated on receipt of implementation report from these two 
States. Action taken reply of the Government is silent on the steps being 
taken to get the reports from these two States, implying lack of 
seriousness on the part of the Government and a casual approach to the 
recommendation of the Committee. The Committee, therefore, reiterate its 
earlier recommendation and desire that the Government should take up the 
matter with these two States for obtaining the performance report and 
getting the scheme evaluated expeditiously.   

 
G. Need for expeditious implementation of Scheme of Computerization 
of TPDS operations. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11,  Para No. 3.61) 
 
The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
1.24 ‘The Committee note that Computerisation of PDS operations will be 
implemented in two stages.  While all the TPDS related transactions from the 
Central Ministry to the Tehsil/Block levels comprising of first four tiers will be 
covered in stage one, the stage two will cover TPDS operations at Fair Price 
Shops and digitization of ration cards.  The Committee have been informed that 
National Institute of Smart Governance (NISG) has been appointed as Scheme 
Consultants and Administrative approval of Rs. 53.5  crore for the scheme has 
been issued.  After finalisation of State level Detailed Project Reports (DPRs), 
first installment of Rs. 14.77 crore to Andhra Pradesh, Rs. 4.405 crore to Assam, 
Rs. 3.485 crore to Chhatisgarh and Rs. 4.085 crore to Delhi has bee n released 
and selection of Implementing Agencies in these 4 pilot States is under process.  
The Committee are of the view that Computerisation of PDS operations is very 
essential to improve its overall efficiency and functioning.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that all necessary steps be taken to expedite the 
implementation of the scheme not only in the 4 pilot States but also to cover and 
complete  Computerisation of the PDS operations in all the other States in a time 
bound manner.’   
 
Reply of Government 
 
1.25 ‘The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.  The necessary 
steps for expeditious implementation of the pilot scheme on computerization of 
TPDS operations are being taken.  The empanelment of implementing agencies 
has been co mpleted and the Request for Proposals shall be released in due 
course.  This department will get the pilot implementation of the scheme in the 
four States evaluated through an independent agency for feedback on fulfilling of 
the objectives and for feasibility of replicability in other States/UTs.’ 
 
 

1.26 The Committee had recommended for speedy implementation of the 
computerization of PDS operations not only on pilot basis in four States 
but in all the States/UTs of the country. From the action taken reply , the 
Committee note that the Department will get the pilot implementation of the 
scheme in four States i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chattisgarh and Delhi 
evaluated through an independent agency for feedback for feasibility of 
replicability in other States.  The Committee urge the Department to get 
expeditious evaluation of implementation of the scheme and to ensure that 
the scheme is implemented in other States at the earliest so as to improve 
the functioning of Public Distribution System in the country.  

H. Need for new staffing pattern based on workload norms 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Paragraph 4.16) 
 
1.27 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
           
‘The Committee note that Godowns/Silos/Depots staff constitute  60% of the total 
staff strength  of the FCI,  which is sanctioned on the basis of infrastructure 
created, rather than workload norms.  The Committee also note that as per 
C&AG observation, due to lower utilization of storage capacity, the wages paid to 
the employees who were not performi ng any productive functions can be termed 
as unproductive.  The Committee further note that the non -occupancy of the 
godowns has resulted in losses to the Corporation to the tune of Rs.810 crore 
(Rs.267.87 crore/per annum) on the salaries and wages in the last three years as 
these were not occupied.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
the Department should exercise utmost care in rationalizing placement of 
godowns staff, which should be on the basis of work load norms rather than 
infrastructure created, to prevent undue burden on food subsidy bill, by avoiding  
infructuous expenditure.  The Committee hope that the new staffing norms based 
on the work load will be implemented expeditiously.’ 
 
1.28 The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as under:- 
 
‘The Government has approved the proposal regarding organizational 
restructuring of FCI with specific reference to man power management and cadre 
management. The restructuring exercise has been carried out with volume of 
operations as one of the primary criteria. In the process of implementation of new 
staffing norms, the Board of Directors of FCI has approved the revised 
sanctioned strength for Cat. III employees.’ 
 
 
 

1.29 The Committee note that consequent upon the recommendation 
made in their earlier report, for new staffing pattern/norms based on 
workload, the Board of Directors of FCI has approved the revised 
sanctioned strength of Category – III employees. However, the action taken 
reply is silent on the issue of current status of implementation of new 
staffing pattern/norms in Category – IV employees. Action taken reply has 
also not stated the status of implementation of new staffing pattern to 
employees other than Category –III employees. The Committee are of the 
view that proper posting of staff of all categories of employess on the basis 
of workload is vital for the efficient functioning of any organization, apart 
from avoiding infructuous expenditure and preventing undue burden on 
food subsidy amount. The Committee, therefore, w ould like to be apprised 
of the action taken by the Government in this regard, within a period of 3 
months time.  
  

I. Need to strengthen enforcement machinery  
Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Paragraph 6.14) 
 
1.30 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
           
‘The Committee observed that the mismatch between domestic production and 
demand for sugar is primarily responsible for rise in price of sugar. However, in 
mid December, 2009 and first week of January, 2010 the rise in price of sugar 
was mainly due to increase in international prices of raw and white/ refined 
sugar, rumours of very low domestic production of sugar in the current sugar 
season and restriction on movement and transportation  of imported raw sugar in 
the State of U.P. The Committee f ind that though the Government have taken 
various measures in order to arrest the rising trend of sugar price, like import of 
raw sugar at zero duty, imposing stock holding and turnover limits of sugar 
dealers, imposing stockholding limit on large consumer s of sugar, who are using 
sugar more than the availability, suspension of future trading, conversion of 
monthly allocation of non-levy sugar for sale by sugar mills in the open market to 
weekly targets for sale to ensure even flow of sugar into open market  etc., which 
has shown some positive result, thereby bringing down the price of sugar slightly, 
yet the sugar price is considerably high in the open market. The Committee feel 
that one of the major reasons for rise in price of sugar is blackmarketing and 
hoarding of sugar by traders who create artificial scarcity in the market. The  
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that Department should persuade the 
State Government / UTs to strengthen their enforcement machinery and conduct 
regular raids to catch hold the hoarders and blackmarketers who create artificial 
scarcity leading to price rise of sugar in the market.’   
 
 
1.31 The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as under:- 
 
‘The Central Government has imposed stockholding and turnover lim its  on 
dealers of sugar vide the notification dated 12.03.2009 initially for a period of four 
months, which was subsequently extended for another six months and khandsari 
sugar was also brought under these limits, vide the notification dated 16.07.2009. 
The Central Government has again extended such limits vide notification dated 
11.01.2010 till 30.09.2010. Further, stockholding limit has also imposed on bulk 
consumers of sugar. There was a spurt in prices of sugar in the open market 
from mid –December, 2008 which reached its zenith in the first week of January, 
2010. The Central Government immediately responded and took strict measures 
like weekly system of sale/dispatch of non -levy quota of sugar from sugar mills, 
reduction in stockholding limit on bulk c onsumers of sugar etc.  With these 
measures, downward trend in sugar prices started and they have since cooled 
down as indicated below – 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Standing Committee in i ts 2 nd report has also recommended 
that ‘ ……the Government should strengthen its enforcement 
machinery to conduct raids on the godowns of traders and take 
stringent action against them in order to check hoarding and 
blackmarketing of sugar…..’  The said rec ommendation of the 
Committee has already been forwarded to the State Governments/ UT 
Administrations.’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date Ex-mill prices of S-30 grade of 
sugar. (in Rs. Per quintal) 
Retail price in Delhi 
(in Rs. per kg.)  
 Maharashtra U.P. Delhi 
15.01.2010 3650-3670 3890-3940 47.00 
01.02.2010 3825-3845 4090-4240 43.00 
15.02.2010 3390-3440 3650-3690 43.00 
02.03.2010 3050-3150 3440-3470 41.00 
15.03.2010 3030-3060 3190-3240 37.00 
25.03.2010 2800-2850 3065-3090 35.00 
29.03.2010 2875-2925 2990-3040 35.00 
01.04.2010 2700-2750 2990-3010 34.00 
07.04.2010 2725-2795 2930-3010 34.00 
15.04.2010 2620-2660 2870-2945 34.00 
26.04.2010 2480-2520 2790-2815 33.00 
27.04.2010 2560-2600 2790-2815 33.00 

1.32 The Committee deplore the casual approach of the Ministry towards 
their important recommendation as they find the reply evasive to the exte nt 
that neither it has been made clear as to what specific steps are being 
taken to strengthen their enforcement machinery nor any commitment to 
check hoarding and blackmarketing of foodgrains is made. The Committee 
note with great concern that the Departm ent did not take the matter 
seriously and issued general directions to the States/UTs by merely 
forwarding the recommendation of the Committee to prevent hoarding and 
blackmarketing. They, however, failed to persuade the State 
Governments/UTs to report the  detail of cases to the Central Government 
within a prescribed time limit. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and strongly recommend that the Department 
should take concerted measures to strengthen their enforcement 
machinery at the highest level, conduct regular raids to catch hold of the 
hoarders and blackmarketers and take stringent punitive action against 
them as per the law. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken in this regard within three months.  
 
 

 
CHAPTER II 
  
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.1, Para No. 2.6) 
 
2.1 The Committee note that the Budget Estimate of the Department of Food 
and Public Distribution for the year 2009 -10 was  Rs. 95.00 crore for its Plan 
Schemes which was reduced to Rs. 70.00 crore at RE stage and the actual 
expenditure incurred upto 31.3.2010 was Rs. 69.07 crore.   In the case of Non -
plan Schemes, the allocation was increased from BE of Rs. 54,679.27 crore to  
Rs. 58,323.08 crore at RE stage and the actual expenditure was Rs. 60,751.93 
crore.  The Committee are pleased to observe that the Department has been 
able to achieve its financial targets as per their revised estimates in both Plan 
and Non -Plan Schemes. The Committee hope that the Department would 
continue with the same trend and meet the financial targets during the coming 
years also.  
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
2.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and the 
Department would strive to meet the financial targets in the coming years also. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.2, Para No. 2.7) 
 
2.3 The Committee further note that the Department has proposed allocation 
of Rs. 142.63 crore for the year 2010 -11 for its Plan Scheme, but the Ministry of 
Finance has allocated Rs. 100.00 crore only, keeping in view the fact that the 
Department could not utilize the entire BE of Rs. 95.00 crore during the previous 
year. The reasons for less expenditure of funds cited by the Department such as 
late submission of DPR by NISG, late administrative approval for implementation 
of the schemes etc. are more or less simila r to the reasoning given last year and 
as such the Committee are not convinced. The Committee are of the view that 
this reducing and increasing trend in the budgetary allocation of the Department 
only reflects lack of proper planning and complacency at the  initial stages that 
ultimately leads to failure to accomplish the projected schemes/programmes. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should make proper 
planning and propose realistic allocation of funds from the initial stages itself so  
that the schemes/projects of the other Ministries/Departments do not suffer for 
want of adequate funds.  

 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
2.4 The Department could not utilize the entire BE of Rs.95 crore during the 
previous year 2008 -09 as the EFC approva l for the major plan  scheme 
“Computerization of PDS Operations” could not be obtained in 2008 -09 and 
therefore the BE of Rs.95 crore was pruned to Rs.65 crores for that year.  After a 
series of discussions, final version of DPR was accepted in March, 2009  and 
EFC approval for piloting of the Scheme in 4 states could be obtained on 
02.06.2009.  Administrative approval for implementation of the scheme in pilot 
state was issued on 26.08.2009.  Similarly, for the year 2009 -10, BE was 
reduced from Rs.95 crore t o Rs.70 crore at RE stage.  After submission of 
(State) approved DPRs and signing of MOUs with pilot states, 1 st instalment of 
Rs.14.4775 crore was released to Governments of pilot states viz. Delhi (Rs.2.80 
crore), Andhra Pradesh (Rs.4.405 crore), Chhatti sgarh (Rs.4.085) and Assam 
(Rs.3.485 crore).  The expenditure during 2009 -10 was Rs.16.2953 crore (say 
Rs.16.30 crore) against RE of Rs.16.545 crore and BE of Rs.45 crore for the 
scheme, while it was Rs.1.62 crore against RE of Rs.11 crore and BE of Rs.45 
crore in 2008 -09.  Hence the pace of expenditure has picked up under the 
scheme in the year 2009 -10.  However, the Department will ensure that the 
projected schemes/programmes are accomplished in time and the funds 
earmarked for them are fully utilized in future.  As already noted by the 
Committee in Point No.2.6, the overall plan expenditure in 2009-10 was Rs.69.07 
crore (provisional) which is 98.7 % of RE of Rs.70 crore. 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.3, Para No. 3.12) 
 
2.5 The Committee note that the Decentralized Procurement Scheme (DCP) 
was introduced in 1997 -98 for effecting savings, enhancing efficiency of 
procurement and encouraging local procurement for the benefit of farmers.  The 
Committee find that even after a gap of more than 13 years, the DCP scheme 
has been undertaken only by 6 States for Wheat and 10 States for Rice, 
respectively. The Committee feel tha t the Government has not been able to 
convince the remaining States about the advantages of the DCP Scheme. The 
Committee also note that the States that have adopted the DCP Scheme are 
also facing various problems such as delay in finalizing the procuremen t 
incidentals, grant of cash credit by the RBI and valuation of stock.  The 
Committee would urge the Department to make sincere efforts to resolve the 
problems being faced by the DCP States and also persuade the remaining 

States/UTs to adopt the DCP Scheme  in the interest of the farmers and the poor 
people so that the objectives of the scheme are achieved. 
  
Action Taken by the Government: 
             
2.6 11 State Governments/UTs are currently undertaking procurement of 
wheat and rice under the decentraliz ed Procurement scheme. Government of 
West Bengal has started procurement of wheat since RMS 2010 -11 and 
accordingly has signed an MOU with Govt. of India. The Government of 
Maharashtra had shown its willingness to adopt decentralized Procurement for 
Wheat since RMS  2008 -09    and Government of Madhya Pradesh had shown 
its willingness to adopt decentralized Procurement for  Rice since KMS 2007 -08 .  
However, the Memorandum of Understanding is yet to be signed by them to 
undertake the decentralized Procurement. 
 
During the meetings held with Food Secretaries, the following advantages 
of the DCP scheme are being highlighted in order to motivate the remaining 
States to adopt this scheme: 
 
(i)     It extends the benefits of MSP operations to farmers of the State. 
(ii)   It enhances the efficiency of procurement and PDS and enables 
procurement of foodgrains more suited to local taste.  
(iii)    It reduces transportation costs of FCI and also reduces pressure on 
Railways. 
Due to the encouragement extended by the Ce ntral Government, most of 
the States with marketable surplus of rice and wheat have already joined the 
Decentralized Procurement (DCP) scheme, or their State agencies are also 
procuring rice or wheat on behalf of FCI. 
 However, many States   have not yet a dopted DCP Scheme   on account 
of difficulties in tying up storage, required manpower and   apprehension of 
delayed release of subsidy. 
Problems faced by DCP States and steps taken to resolve these problems 
are as under:- 
State Government /Agencies are req uired to submit their provisional 
subsidy claims. On receipt of claims from State Government,   95% of the 
admissible claim is released on provisional basis, subject to availability of 
the funds and the remaining 5% is released after finalization of accoun ts 
based on audited accounts, annual reports for each year, etc. State 
Governments of Gujarat, Orissa and Uttarakhand have not submitted any 

claims including audited accounts for finalization. Many State 
Governments are not submitting their claims or submi tting their claims 
after a gap of many years. In absence of claim from State Governments 
Department cannot release funds for procurement of foodgrains to DCP 
States and States in turn are facing problems due to lack of funds.  
 
The Government of India exte nds the single default guarantee to FCI for 
availing cash credit from consortium of banks as per the norms fixed by the RBI 
since it is a Central Government agency. Similar guarantee is not extended to 
agencies of State Government/UT Administrations as the ir finances are 
controlled by their respective State Government/UT Administrations. 
RBI has authorized valuation of stocks for FCI at the average acquisition 
cost throughout the year. However, in case of stocks procured by the States, 
valuation of stocks i s done at acquisition cost during   three month peak 
procurement season (April - June for Rabi and October - December for Kharif) 
and thereafter, at the Central Issue Prices (CIPs). Since cash credit is allowed 
upto the value of stocks only and CIPs are mu ch lower than the acquisition cost, 
States are not able to fully utilize the cash credit limit sanctioned to them.  RBI, 
as an interim measure has agreed for valuation of stocks held by the State at 
average acquisition cost during the three peak procuremen t months and at the 
mean of acquisition cost and CIP for the remaining nine months.  
The matter has been taken up with RBI for valuation of stocks held by the 
State agencies at par with FCI but RBI has informed that since Govt. of India has 
given guarantee to FCI, the food credit account of FCI is not treated as a non -
performing asset even when it may become irregular and that State 
Governments could be considered at par with FCI only when their food credit 
accounts are also backed by a Central Government g uarantee. Government of 
India cannot give similar guarantee to State Government since their finances are 
controlled by their respective State  Government/UT Administrations. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 

Recommendation (Serial No.7, Para No. 3.37) 
2.7 The Committee further note that the revised Citizen Charter iss ued by the 
Department in July, 2007 for adoption by the State Governments which contains, 
inter-alia, basic information of interest to consumers and essential information 
such as entitlement of BPL families, information regarding fair price shops, 
inspection and checking etc. has been implemented by 23 States/UTs so far. The 
Committee are of the view that, the implementation of the revised Citizen’s 
Charter by the remaining States/UTs is imperative in order to improve the 
functioning of PDS in the country. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Department to find out the reasons for non -implementation of the Charter by the 
remaining States/UTs, and impress upon them to adopt the revised Citizens’ 
Charter for streamlining the functioning of TPDS operation to ensu re food 
security to weaker sections of the society.  
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
2.8 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and the State/UT 
governments which have not informed about adoption/implementation of the 
Revised Citizen’s Charte r are being requested to indicate the reasons for non -
implementation and to urge them to adopt the Revised Citizen’s Charter at the 
earliest. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.17 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.10 Para No. 3.56) 
  
2.9 The Committee note that innovative/new technologies such as GPS, 
RFID, Bar-coded coupons, s tamping of PDS foodgrains, etc. are being taken up 
by the Government to curb leakage/diversion of foodgrains meant for TPDS on 
pilot basis.  The Committee have been informed that a financial assistance of Rs. 
44.76 lakhs was given to the State Governments of Tamil Nadu, Chhatisgarh and 
Delhi for installation of GPS devices on the vehicles carrying TPDS foodgrains 
and that while the Government of Tamil Nadu has so far implemented the 
installation of GPS devices in two districts and the State Government of 
Chhatisgarh and Delhi have not implemented the scheme so far.   The 
Committee have been further informed that, as a result of the implementation of 
GPS device in Tamil Nadu, not a single case of diversion was reported as the 

system has created moral fear amo ng those involved in transportation and also 
enabled the civil supplies department/vigilance agencies to track movement of 
vehicles carrying PDS items. The Committee note with concern that as per the 
findings of the National Council for Applied Economics R esearch (NCAER), the 
level of diversion of foodgrains in the States of Assam and Mizoram have been 
as high as 100% in case of Wheat allocated for APL families and 83.28% and 
81.12%, respectively in case of Rice allocated for BPL families.  In other words, 
the foodgrains meant for APL families have not reached them at all in these two 
States.  The level of diversion of foodgrains in other States like Bihar and 
Chhatisgarh are also fairly high.   The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that all necessary  steps should be taken to implement the installation of GPS 
devices not only in the three pilot States but in all the States/UTs of the country 
on top priority.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard.  
 
 
Action Taken by the Government: 
 
2.10 Government of NCT of Delhi and the State Government of Chhattisgarh 
were sanctioned and released a sum of Rs.4.13 lakh and Rs.29.61 lakh 
respectively in March, 2008.  
 
2. The reports about implementation of the scheme are awaited fro m these 
two State Governments.  The Utilization Certificate received from the State of 
Chhattisgarh has been examined and certain clarifications have been sought 
from the State Government.  Utilization Certificate (UC) from the Government of 
NCT of Delhi is still awaited.   
 
3. Government of Tamil Nadu was sanctioned an amount of Rs.11.02 lakh in 
March, 2008. Government of Tamil Nadu have already implemented the 
installation of GPS devices in two districts. 
 
4. The scheme will be further evaluated on receip t of implementation reports 
from the Government of NCT of Delhi and the State Government of Chhattisgarh. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G -20017/2/2010-AC dated 20 th July 
2010 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.23 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 

Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No 3.61) 
  
2.11 The Committee note that Computerisation of PDS operations will be 
implemented in two stages.  While all the TPDS related tran sactions from the 
Central Ministry to the Tehsil/Block levels comprising of first four tiers will be 
covered in stage one, the stage two will cover TPDS operations at Fair Price 
Shops and digitization of ration cards.  The Committee have been informed that  
National Institute of Smart Governance (NISG) has been appointed as Scheme 
Consultants and Administrative approval of Rs. 53.5 crore for the scheme has 
been issued.  After finalisation of State level Detailed Project Reports (DPRs), 
first installment of Rs. 14.77 crore to Andhra Pradesh, Rs. 4.405 crore to Assam, 
Rs. 3.485 crore to Chhatisgarh and Rs. 4.085 crore to Delhi has been released 
and selection of Implementing Agencies in these 4 pilot States is under process.  
The Committee are of the view that C omputerisation of PDS operations is very 
essential to improve its overall efficiency and functioning.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that all necessary steps be taken to expedite the 
implementation of the scheme not only in the 4 pilot State s but also to cover and 
complete  Computerisation of the PDS operations in all the other States in a time 
bound manner.   
 
Action Taken by the Government: 
 
2.12 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.  The necessary 
steps for expeditious implem entation of the pilot scheme on computerization of 
TPDS operations are being taken.  The empanelment of implementing agencies 
has been completed and the Request for Proposals shall be released in due 
course.  This department will get the pilot implementati on of the scheme in the 
four States evaluated through an independent agency for feedback on fulfilling of 
the objectives and for feasibility of replicability in other States/UTs. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
   
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.26 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.12, Para No. 3.67) 
   
2.13 The Committee note that the Village Grain Bank (VGB) Scheme started by 
the Ministry of Tribal Affairs in 11 States during the year 1996 -97 with the main 
objective to provide safeguard against starvation deaths during the period of 
natural calamity and during lean season, was entrusted to the Department of  
Food and Public Distribution for implementation since 2005 -06.  The Committee 
are unhappy to note that though funds have been sanctioned for establishing 

18,692 VGBs in 20 States/UTs, only 11,245 VGBs have been established so far.   
The Committee further note that the evaluation reports of World Food 
Programme in two States have indicated some shortcomings and some positive 
outcome as well.  The Committee urge the Department to expeditiously complete 
examination of the draft evaluation report and take nece ssary action on the 
suggestions for improvement in the functioning of the VGBs. The Committee also 
recommend that the reasons as to why only 11,245 VGBs have so far been 
established against the funds released for establishment of 18,692 VGBs may be 
found out and necessary steps taken to establish the VGBs in all the States/UTs 
of the country. 
 
 Action Taken by the Government: 
 
2.14 The concept of Village Grain Bank Scheme is new to the States.  They 
need to identify the villages, the implementing agency suc h as NGOs and SHGs, 
required storage space, etc. due to which there have been delays in setting up of 
the VGBs in some States.  States such as Uttarakhand and Madhya Pradesh, 
etc. have taken the help of World Food Programme in the implementation of the 
scheme.  The State Governments which have not established VGBs are being 
reminded regularly. 
 
The findings of the evaluation report of World Food Programme have been 
sent to Orissa and Chhattisgarh and they have been asked to report on the 
remedial ad correct ive steps taken on the shortcomings found in the 
implementation of the scheme.  Replies from them are awaited.  The Department 
is examining the recommendations of the independent agency in respect of 16 
States and review the overall implementation of the s cheme by the States for 
appropriate corrective action and make changes if necessary. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.13,  Para No. 3.78) 
 
2.15 The Committee have been informed that the Government is committed to 
the enactment of the National Food Security Act.  The Department of Food and 
Public Distribution has circulated the concept note on the proposed legislation to 
all States/UTs and has held meetings with representatives of States/UTs, Central 
Ministries, Planning Commission and other Stake -holders.  The proposed Act 
envisages entitling every BPL family to 25 kg. of wheat or rice per month at 
highly subsidized prices. A draft Bill is under preparation in consultation with the 
Ministry of Law and Justice at the instance of the Empowered Group of Ministers 
(EGoM) constituted for the purpose. As per the advise of the EGoM, the Planning 
Commission on the basis of appropr iate Census data of the Registrar General of 

India, will notify the poverty estimates. The Planning Commission has not yet 
conveyed its final decision on the poverty estimates. The Committee further note 
that most of the State/UT Governments have indicated  their acceptance of the 
need for Food Security Law. Considering the vast population of poor people in 
the country, the Committee are convinced that the Government’s commitment to 
enact the Food Security Law is an essential step in the right direction.  Th e 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department of Food and 
Public Distribution should take up the matter with all concerned on top priority to 
complete all necessary formalities for an early introduction of the National Food 
Security Bill in Parliament.  
 
 
 Action Taken by the Government: 
 
2.16 The Department of Food and Public Distribution (DFPD) has circulated a 
Concept Note on the proposed Food Security Law to all States/ Union Territories 
and concerned  Central  Ministries on 05.06.2009 and  10.06.2009 and examined 
the responses received.  The Department has also held consultations with the 
State Food Secretaries, representatives of various Central Ministries, Planning 
Commission, experts and other stake holders. 
 
To examine various issue s relating to the proposed legislation, an 
Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) has been constituted, which has held 
several meetings to discuss and firm up the provisions of the proposed law. 
 
While the Ministry of Rural Development is in the process of fi nalising  the 
guidelines for identification by the States of the poor in rural areas, the Planning 
Commission has been given the responsibility of finalizing the guidelines for 
similar identification of the urban poor.  The EGoM has also asked Planning 
Commission to consult all concerned Ministries and revert with specific 
recommendations regarding the proposed legislation. 
  
Thereafter, the draft National Food Security Bill would be prepared in 
consultation with the Ministry of Law and Justice and, after due approvals, placed 
on the website of the DFPD for public scrutiny and comments. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14,  Para No. 4.5) 
 
2.17 The Committee note with concern that a large amount of dues are still 
outstanding against the Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of Human 

Resource Development on account of foodgrains provided to them by FCI for 
various welfare schemes on payment basis. The Committee have been informed 
that upto March, 2010, outstanding amount against the Ministry of Rural 
Development and Ministry of Human Resource Development is Rs. 2890.82 
crore and Rs. 265.42 crore, respectively. The Minis try of Human Resource 
Development has paid Rs. 300 crore as revolving fund against bills in the 
pipeline. The Committee are not satisfied with the reasoning of the Department 
for delay in liquidating the dues stating that liquidation of outstanding dues 
depends on allocation of funds to these Ministries by the Ministry of Finance. The 
Committee feel that inability to liquidate the outstanding dues of FCI over the 
years indicates financial indiscipline and it would adversely affect the functioning 
of FCI. Th e Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that Department should 
make serious efforts towards settlement of the outstanding dues and take up the 
matter with concerned Ministries at the highest level so that the burden on Food 
Subsidy Bill is reduced.  
 
 
Action Taken by the Government: 
 
2.18 To liquidate the outstanding dues of  FCI, the matter has been taken up 
regularly by this Department at different levels including at Minister’s level with 
Ministry of Finance and concerned Ministries i.e. Ministry of R ural Development 
and Ministry of Human Resource Development. FCI is also pursuing the matter 
regularly with MoRD and MoHRD to recover the dues pending against these 
Ministries on account of supply of foodgrains for their respective schemes. 
 
 
Ministry of C onsumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15,  Para No. 4.9) 
 
2.19 The Committee note that the establishment cost of FCI which is 
reimbursed by the Government alongwith the expenditure incurred on 
procurement, transport and storage of food grains in the form of food subsidy, is 
constantly showing an upward trend, indicating that large amount of food subsidy 
goes towards meeting the expenses on establishment cost.  In the opinion of the 
Committee, it is nothing but depriving the ultimate beneficiary, i.e. the poor 
people of their legitimate benefits. The Committee also do not completely agree 
with the reasoning that increase in establishment c ost was due to the Sixth Pay 
Commission Arrears with retrospective effect from 01.01.2006.  The Committee 
feel that even after taking into account the payment of salary arrears and other 
benefits accrued from the Sixth Pay Commission, the establishment cos t is still 
very high. The Committee, therefore, recommend that ways and means should 

be devised to contain the establishment cost so as to ensure that the benefit of 
food subsidy reaches the ultimate beneficiary.  
 
 
Action Taken by the Government: 
 
2.20 FCI is the implementation arm for the Foodgrains Policy of the Govt. of 
India.  For this purpose it needs to have appropriate infrastructure and man -
power.  However, these costs form only a small part of the total food subsidy.  
Such infrastructure is necess ary for the effective functioning of any organization 
and cannot be dispensed with.  In order to carry out the mandate given to the 
Corporation, such expenditure has to be incurred.  As these costs are directly 
linked to the execution of the mandate given to the FCI, loading of the same over 
food subsidy is fully justified.  However, such establishment costs are separately 
identified and shown in the Annual Report and Performance Budget of the 
Corporation. 
 
It is also pertinent to mention that in addition t o FCI, the State 
Governments are also undertaking foodgrains procurement and distribution for 
the Central Pool and the respective States are allowed to include the related 
establishment and administrative charges in their claims of subsidy. On 
normative ba sis, they are allowed administrative charges @ 2.5% of MSP for 
procurement and @ 1.5% of MSP for distribution. They are also allowed to claim 
higher administrative charges duly supported by Audited Accounts. While the 
State agencies confine their operation s to within the State, FCI is also expected 
to operate inter -State and transfer foodgrains from the surplus States to the 
deficit States. The administrative cost of FCI for the year 2008 -09(Prov) works 
out to 2.12% of economic cost in case of wheat and 1.7 0% of economic cost in 
case of rice.  
 
During 2004-05 to 2008 -09, the MSP of Wheat increased from Rs.630 to 
Rs.1000 i.e. 59% and the MSP of Paddy (Gr.A) increased from Rs.590 to Rs.880 
i.e. 49%. As the administrative charges allowed to the State Agencies 
undertaking procurement operations are linked to MSP the same increased by an 
average 54% between 2004 -05 to 2008 -09. During the same period the 
establishment cost of FCI increased from Rs.1618 Crore to Rs.2011 Crore i.e. 
24%. Further, during the same perio d, the Consumer Price Index for Urban Non -
Manual Employee (CPI -UNME) increased from 441 to 577 i.e. an increase of 
31%.  
  

The establishment cost primarily consist of staff cost. Thus, when 
compared to the consumer price index, the establishment cost of FC I is reflecting 
a downward trend during the five years from 2004-05 to 2008-09. 
 
The Staff Sanctioned Strength of the Corporation has been drastically 
reduced from 55053 to 36318 excluding Hindi and Watch & Ward staff. 
 
The Food Corporation of India has al ready implemented instructions on 
economy measures and rationalization of expenditure vide OM No. 
7(1)/E.Coord/2009 dated 7 th Sept. 2009. The Corporation would monitor to see 
that the economy instructions are implemented so as to ensure that the 
establishment cost is controlled. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution O.M. No.G -20017/2/2010-AC dated 20 th July 
2010 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16,  Para No. 4.15) 
 
2.21 The Committee are disturbed to not e that as on 31.01.2010, the utilization 
of CAP (owned) capacity was only 36% but utilization of CAP (hired) capacity 
was 59%. The Committee are unable to accept the plea of FCI that there are 
certain  practical/operational constraints for 100% utilization  of owned capacity. 
The Committee further note that as per C&AG observation in Performance Audit 
on the  subject “Functioning of FCI as per  FC Act and its impact on food 
subsidy”,  the godowns are hired in places where the owned capacity was 
available resulting in incurring of unfruitful expenditure of Rs.1324 crore (Approx.) 
paid as rent for the past three years.  Besides, Non -utilisation of hired capacity 
has resulted in payment of Rs.503  crore rent which can be termed as 
unproductive.  Thus, underutili zation of owned godowns capacity and hiring of 
godowns  in places where underutilized capacity is available has resulted in 
unexpected expenditure of Rs. 1313 crore for the three years.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that FCI should utilize their owned capacity to the 
maximum before hiring any storage capacity in order to save precious funds 
spent on hiring the storage space.   
 
Reply of Government 
 
2.22 As on 01.06.2010, FCI is having a total storage capacity of 304.37 Lakh 
MT with a stock level of 275.88 Lakh MT and a capacity utilization of 91%. Out of 
the total storage capacity available with FCI, 10.68% is Covered and Plinth 
(CAP) and the rest is covered. Further, 48.85% of the total storage capacity 
available with FCI is hired from CWC/S WCs/Govt. Agencies/Pvt. Parties and the 
balance is owned. 

 
The utilization of available storage capacity with FCI as on 01.06.2010 is 
91% against an optimal utilization of 75% as per Bureau of Industrial Cost and 
Pricing (BICP) norms.  The capacity utilization at such a high level does not leave 
much scope for maneuverability and the moving of stocks from procuring regions 
to consuming regions has become very difficult.  Following table shows the 
percentage utilization of storage capacity available with FCI as on 01.06.2010. 
 
(Figures in Lakh MT) 
 Owned Hired Total 
 Covered CAP Covered CAP  
Capacity 129.69 26.01 142.16 6.51 304.37 
Stock 114.76 15.83 138.07 7.22 275.88 
% 
utilization 88% 61% 97% 111% 91% 
 
The recommendation of the Committee regarding maxi mum utilization of 
owned capacity before hiring any storage capacity is being pursued vigorously. 
However, there are certain impediments to 100% owned capacity utilization. The 
same is not possible on practical/operational grounds as some space is always 
required for treatment of stocks by way of aeration/fumigation and part stacks as 
a result of loading/unloading operations. For the purpose of computation and 
preparing a check on storage loss, stack is taken as a unit and until and unless a 
stack is comple tely used, no further receipt in the stack is resorted to which 
results in part stacks thereby reducing the capacity utilization of the godown.  
Further, in case of rice, as per the instructions, the mill wise separate identity of 
stock is required to be maintained, resulting in lower utilisation.  
 
Thus there are certain practical/operational constraints (stated above) for 
less than 100% utilization of capacity.  This is supported by scientific studies.  
 
As far as higher percentage utilization (59%) of hi red CAP capacity as 
compared to owned CAP capacity (36%) as on 31.01.2010 is concerned, it is 
submitted that the capacity is hired at a particular place only when owned 
capacity is not available to the extent required and hiring is absolutely necessary 
which is the reason for it to be utilized more . Most of the CAP capacities are 
hired on actual utilization basis thereby resulting in higher percentage utilization. 
Moreover, CAP capacity is generally not used till covered capacity is available at 
a particular place and even when it is used, only wheat/paddy is stored in CAP. 
Therefore, owned CAP capacity is used only at the places where covered 
capacity is not available and therefore its utilization is comparatively low. From 

the table given below it is clea r that in absolute terms, the utilization of owned 
CAP capacity is almost four times i.e. 8.86 Lakh MT against only 2.41 Lakh MT 
of hired CAP capacity.  
 
(Figures in Lakh MT) 
 
Further it is clarified that all the hired CAP capacity of 4.07 Lakh MT as on 
31.01.2010 exists only in North Zone which comprises of the major wheat 
procuring States of Punjab and Haryana.  In no other part of the country, CAP 
capacity has been hired. 
 
Regarding observations of C&AG on hiring of capacity at places where 
FCI owned capacity existed, it is submitted that the optimal utilization of capacity 
must be considered as 75% and not 100% for a particular godown. Apart from 
this, the operational viability of using owned capacity must also be taken into 
account on case by case basis and only then the excess rent paid, if any, can be 
arrived at. Moreover,  most of the capacities taken by FCI are on GHB 
(Guarantee Hiring Basis)  basis where the rate of rent to be paid is much less as 
compared to the rate of rent on commercial/actual utilization basis. However, FCI 
is dealing with seasonal commodities and the  utilization of capacity varies from 
time to time in a year. But to reduce the overall rental expenditure and also not to 
run out of capacity at the time of procurement during a year, capacities are taken 
on GHB basis. So, while calculating extra rent payable against under utilization of 
capacity, it must be evaluated against the alternate available of hiring on 
requirement basis on a higher rate of rent and not on the rate payable for GHB. 
 
In procurement areas, godown capacities are created keeping in min d the 
procurement levels and procurement period which is often confined to a very 
short span of time. For example, in wheat, the procurement is done within a short 
period of one month whereas rice is received within a period of 3 -4 months. 
Moreover procurement over the year is not uniform, at times the yearly variations 
are very huge and often the procurement in a record year takes even much more 
than a year to move to the consuming areas. The godown capacities in the 
procurement states are put to maximum use during procurement period and after 
 Covered CAP Total 
 Owned Hired Owned Hired Owned Hired 
Capacity 129.69 124.08 24.84 4.07 154.53 128.15 
Stock 97.07 98.81 8.86 2.41 105.93 101.22 
% utilization 75 80 36 59 69 79 

this they are gradually emptied as capacity utilization during the month of 
January to March is generally lower as space is required to be created for 
accommodating the stocks of the ensuing crop year. Further, capacities are to be 
arranged in a fashion so that they can take care of the peak procurement level. In 
consuming areas the stocks are kept for four months requirement for Public 
Distribution System (PDS) and Other Welfare Schemes (OWS). As the 
replenishment of the stocks cannot be exactly as per the offtake, some capacity 
remains underutilized. Further, separate stacks are to be kept for wheat and rice 
and as per FIFO principle, stack wise issues are to be made till a stack is used to 
ensure quality control and fixing of responsibility for storage losses.  
 
The capacity utilization is maximum in the month of June which is evident 
from the position as under for the last three years.  
        Figures in Lakh MTs; as on 30th June 
  COVERED CAP  
GRAND 
TOTAL 
 
OWNED 
 
HIRED 
 
TOTAL 
 
OWNED 
 
HIRED 
 
TOTAL 
30.6.07 CAPACITY 129.43 92.91 222.34 22.67 2.53 25.2 247.54 
STOCKS 77.73 70.88 148.61 3.17 2.54 5.71 154.32 
UTILIZATI
ON 
60% 76% 67% 14% 100% 23% 62% 
30.6.08 
 
CAPACITY 129.63 97.49 227.12 22.97 0.86 23.83 250.95 
STOCKS 93.12 86.01 179.13 6.55 0.87 7.42 186.55 
UTILIZATI
ON 
72% 88% 79% 29% 101% 31% 74% 
30.6.09 CAPACITY 129.67 117.15 246.86 23.07 5.70 28.77 275.59 
STOCKS 112.17 114.28 226.45 10.56 5.65 16.21 242.66 
UTILIZATI
ON 
87% 98% 92% 47% 99% 56% 88% 
 
 
From the given table it is clear that the average capacity utilization based 
on the utilization for the month of June for the last three years has been optimal 
i.e. 75% (average of 62%, 74% and 88%). Except for June, 2007, when the stock 
level in the country was unusually low, the capacity utilization has been optimal 
for the last three years and in the case of covered it was even more than the 
optimal. 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17,  Para No. 4.16) 
 
2.23 The Committee note that Godowns/Silos/Depots staff constitute  60% of 
the total staff strength of the FCI,  which is sanctioned on the basis of 

infrastructure crea ted, rather than workload norms.  The Committee also note 
that as per C&AG observation, due to lower utilization of storage capacity, the 
wages paid to the employees who were not performing any productive functions 
can be termed as unproductive.  The Commi ttee further note that the non -
occupancy of the godowns has resulted in losses to the Corporation to the tune 
of Rs.810 crore (Rs.267.87 crore/per annum) on the salaries and wages in the 
last three years as these were not occupied.  The Committee, therefor e, strongly 
recommend that the Department should exercise utmost care in rationalizing 
placement of godowns staff, which should be on the basis of work load norms 
rather than infrastructure created, to prevent undue burden on food subsidy bill, 
by avoiding  infructuous expenditure.  The Committee hope that the new staffing 
norms based on the work load will be implemented expeditiously. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
2.24 The Government has approved the proposal regarding organizational 
restructuring of FCI with specific reference to man power management and cadre 
management. The restructuring exercise has been carried out with volume of 
operations as one of the primary criteria. In the process of implementation of new 
staffing norms, the Board of Directors of FCI has  approved the revised 
sanctioned strength for Cat. III employees. 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.29 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Para No. 4.25) 
 
2.25 The Committee are unhappy to note that FCI could not achieve the 
physical and financial targets set for construction of godowns during 2009 -10 in 
respect of NE Stat es as well as other than NE States.  In States other than NE, 
the set physical target was 1042000 MTs but its achievement was NIL. In the 
same way, the Corporation failed to achieve the financial target of Rs.17.675 
crore, as achievement during the period was only 2.44 crore.  As informed by the 
Secretary during evidence, the problem in construction of godowns by FCI has 
been due to non -availability of space, where they wanted. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Department of Food and Pub lic 
Distribution should take up the matter urgently with States/UTs at highest level 
for identifying and providing suitable land for construction of godowns and 
ensuring that funds earmarked for the purpose do not remain unutilized. 
   

The Committee are pained to note that during 2009 -10, no physical target 
for constructions of godowns in NE region has been set.   So far as financial 
targets are concerned   that have also not been achieved.  Financial target set 
during 2009-10 for NE region was 6.75 crore b ut its achievement was only 2.30 
crore.  The Committee observe that North Eastern States are the most 
disadvantaged States in terms of lack of infrastructure, communication and 
rail/road network.  Inadequacy of storage space in North Eastern States and J&K  
poses a serious threat to running of an efficient Public Distribution System.   The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should make sincere 
efforts by including the NE States in the prospective plan and make all out efforts 
for achi evement of physical as well as financial targets in these States.  The 
construction of godowns in other than NE region should also be speeded up so 
that the people of NE as well other than NE States are not deprived of the 
benefits of Public Distribution System.  
 
Reply of Government 
 
2.26 During the year 2009 -2010 (RE)  Rs.29.485 crore was allocated  under 
the Plan Scheme for construction of storage godowns inclusive of Rs.24.425 
crores to FCI  (Rs. 17.675 crores for the areas other than NE and Rs. 6.75 crores 
for NE areas including Sikkim). Physical target of 10,420 MT (9,170 MT at 
Dungripally/Orissa and 1,250 MT at Lakshadweep) was fixed.   
 
The Government has released a total of Rs. 24.43 crores  to FCI  as 
equity (Rs. 17.68 crores for the areas other th an NE and Rs.6.75 crores for NE 
areas including Sikkim) for construction of storage godowns.  The Government 
has also released a total of Rs.5.06 crore as Grants in Aid to State Governments 
of NE Region including Sikkim and Jammu & Kashmir for construction  of storage 
godowns.  
 
At the end of financial year 2009-10 the achievement was Rs.24.49 crores 
for FCI (Rs. 17.74 crores for the works other than NE works and Rs.6.75 crores 
for NE areas including Sikkim).  Further, Rs.5.06 crore was released as Grants in  
Aid to the State Governments of North East Region including Sikkim and J&K. 
 
Thus, it can be seen that there was no shortfall in the financial 
achievements as against the revised targets.  Further, a capacity of 9,170 MT at 
Dungrapally/Orissa region was a lso created during 2009 -2010. At 
Lakshadweep/UT capacity of 1250 MT could not be realised since the State 
Government of Karnataka had banned the lifting of sand from Mangalore Port to 
Andrott Island.  The matter was taken up with the Chief Secretary, Karna taka by 
the C&MD, FCI as well as by this Department. The State Government allowed 
FCI to transport sand from Mangalore Port to Andrott Island only during 
November 2009.  As such the physical targets could not be achieved in 2009-10.. 
  

However, the recomme ndations of the Committee have been noted and 
the action will be taken accordingly. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Para No. 6.14) 
 
2.27 The Committee observed that the mismatch between domestic production 
and demand for sugar is primarily responsible for rise in price of sugar. However, 
in mid December, 2009 and first week of January, 2010 the rise in price of su gar 
was mainly due to increase in international prices of raw and white/ refined 
sugar, ramous of very low domestic production of sugar in the current sugar 
season and restriction on movement and transportation  of imported raw sugar in 
the State of U.P. T he Committee find that though the Government have taken 
various measures in order to arrest the rising trend of sugar price, like import of 
raw sugar at zero duty, imposing stock holding and turnover limits of sugar 
dealers, imposing stockholding limit on large consumers of sugar, who are using 
sugar more than the availability, suspension of future trading, conversion of 
monthly allocation of non-levy sugar for sale by sugar mills in the open market to 
weekly targets for sale to ensure even flow of sugar in to open market etc., which 
has shown some positive result, thereby bringing down the price of sugar slightly, 
yet the sugar price is considerably high in the open market. The Committee feel 
that one of the major reasons for rise in price of sugar is blackm arketing and 
hoarding of sugar by traders who create artificial scarcity in the market. The  
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that Department should persuade the 
State Government / UTs to strengthen their enforcement machinery and conduct 
regular raids to catch hold the hoarders and blackmarketers who create artificial 
scarcity leading to price rise of sugar in the market.   
 
Reply of Government 
 
2.28 The Central Government has imposed stockholding and turnover limits  on 
dealers of sugar vide the notification dated 12.03.2009 initially for a period of four 
months, which was subsequently extended for another six months and khandsari 
sugar was also brought under these limits, vide the notification dated 16.07.2009. 
The Central Government has again ext ended such limits vide notification dated 
11.01.2010 till 30.09.2010. Further, stockholding limit has also imposed on bulk 
consumers of sugar. There was a spurt in prices of sugar in the open market 
from mid –December, 2008 which reached its zenith in the first week of January, 
2010. The Central Government immediately responded and took strict measures 
like weekly system of sale/dispatch of non -levy quota of sugar from sugar mills, 
reduction in stockholding limit on bulk consumers of sugar etc.  With these 

measures, downward trend in sugar prices started and they have since cooled 
down as indicated below – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T 
 
 
 
The Standing Committee in its 2 nd report has also recommende d 
that ‘ ……the Government should strengthen its enforcement 
machinery to conduct raids on the godowns of traders and take 
stringent action against them in order to check hoarding and 
blackmarketing of sugar…..’  The said recommendation of the 
Committee has already been forwarded to the State Governments/ UT 
Administrations.  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.32 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 25, Para No. 6.18) 
 
2.29 The Committee are shocked to note that cane price arrears are constantly 
on the rise and the outstanding cane price arrears is as high as Rs. 2748.08 
crore as on 3 1.12.09. The Committee are pained to note that although payment 
of sugarcane arrear is required to be made within 14 days of the supply of 
sugarcane by the farmers, it is, however, rarely done. Cane price arrears 
Date Ex-mill prices of S-30 grade 
of sugar. (in Rs. Per 
quintal) 
Retail price in 
Delhi (in Rs. per 
kg.)  
 Maharashtra U.P. Delhi 
15.01.2010 3650-3670 3890-3940 47.00 
01.02.2010 3825-3845 4090-4240 43.00 
15.02.2010 3390-3440 3650-3690 43.00 
02.03.2010 3050-3150 3440-3470 41.00 
15.03.2010 3030-3060 3190-3240 37.00 
25.03.2010 2800-2850 3065-3090 35.00 
29.03.2010 2875-2925 2990-3040 35.00 
01.04.2010 2700-2750 2990-3010 34.00 
07.04.2010 2725-2795 2930-3010 34.00 
15.04.2010 2620-2660 2870-2945 34.00 
26.04.2010 2480-2520 2790-2815 33.00 
27.04.2010 2560-2600 2790-2815 33.00 

pertaining to sugar season (2007 -08) and ea rlier are still outstanding. The 
Committee feel that non payment of cane price arrears in time can be a deterrent 
and might refrain the farmers from growing sugarcane. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that to motivate farmers to continue with sugarcane 
cultivation, the Government should make sincere efforts to liquidate the various 
grants/aids given to sugar mills with interest. The Committee further note that the 
Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966 empowers the State Government to recover 
cane price arrears from defaulting sugar mills as land revenue arrears and desire 
that strict action should be taken against defaulting sugar mills under the 
provisions of the order. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the 
details of sugar mills which are still to liquidate their outstanding arrears against 
the farmers alongwith reasons for not paying the outstanding arrears.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.30     In order to motivate farmers to continue with  sugarcane cultivation the 
Central Government has taken certain steps which are given in Annexure - I.  
 
The State Governments have already been  empowered to recover cane 
dues from the defaulting sugar mills as land revenue arrears under Sugarcane 
(Control) Order, 1966, and they are being advised to take strict action against the 
defaulting sugar mills under the provisions of the said Order as desired by the 
Committee.  
 
As regards details of the sugar mills which are still to liquidate their 
outstanding arrears against the farmers and the reasons for not  paying the 
outstanding cane price arrears by them, the State Governments are being 
requested to furnish the requisite details.  
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 26, Para No. 6.27) 
 
2.31 The Committee note that under the Sugar Development Fund Act, Sugar 
Development Fund is utilized by the Government of India for rehabilitation and 
modernization of sugar mills and deve lopment of sugarcane areas, carrying out 
R&D projects and production of anhydrous alcohol or ethanol from alcohol or 
molasses and cane development. The Government have disbursed Rs. 2903.43 
crore to 95 sugar mills during the last three years. The Committee  are, however, 
constrained to note that SDF has not been disbursed to any Sick Sugar Mill due 
to non -completion of application forms which indicates that the Government is 
not serious towards the revival of sick sugar mills and to encourage them to join 
the mainstream in production of sugar in the country. The Committee, therefore, 

recommend that the Government should relax the eligibility criteria for sanction of 
loan to sugar mills from SDF so that these sugar mills are not deprived of the 
benefits of the Sugar Development Fund.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.32 The committee has expressed their concern over non -disbursement of 
loans to sick sugar mills due to non completion of application forms, indicating 
that the Government is not serious towards t he revival of sick sugar mills.  In this 
regard it may be stated that no sugar mill has been denied the benefit due to non 
completion of application form.  The fact is that no sick sugar factory has so far 
applied for the SDF loan as per provisions of SDF Rules.  As per the provisions 
of SDF Rules, a sick undertaking is required to get a revival package approved 
by the BIFR in the case of private and public sector sugar factories and by the 
Committee on Rehabilitation (COR) in the case of Co -operative sugar mills, with 
a component of SDF loan in the package.  Loan is available from SDF both for 
cane development and rehabilitation/modernisation.  The eligibility criteria for 
such loan to a  potentially viable sick unit is quite favorable to the sugar factorie s 
in so far as loan up to 60% of the project cost (as against 40% in normal cases) 
can be given from SDF for rehabilitation/modernisation projects and the 
moratorium period for repayment can be decided by the Central Government on 
case to case basis (again st a fixed moratorium period of 8 years in normal 
cases).  Similarly for cane development loan, the 10% contribution required to 
met by the sugar factory can be met by the concerned State Government also.  
The condition of approved revival package by BIFR/ COR cannot be dispensed 
with in view of the fundamentals of financial propriety in the use of public funds. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 27,  Para No. 7.16) 
 
2.33 The Committee note with concern that despite various measures 
undertaken by the Government to increase the production of oilseeds, it has 
shown a declining trend.  Though the Government of India has 
modified/restructured Centrally Sponsored Integrated Scheme of oilseeds, 
pulses, oil, palm and maize (ISOPOM) during the XI plan period  to increase 
production of oilseeds, the results are not very effective.  As informed by the 
Ministry, the production of oilsee ds in the country  in 2007 -08 was 297.56 lakh 
tonnes which was an all time record but it declined to 281.57 lakh tonnes in 
2008-09. Consequently, net availability of edible oil from all domestic sources 
has also shown a declining trend.  In 2008 -09, the pr oduction of oilseeds 
declined mainly in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and West Bengal 

for which the main reasons attributed were unfavourable conditions and weather 
aberrations in these States besides infestation of insect pest in soyabean in 
Maharashtra during the Kharif season 2008 and unfavourable conditions in 
winter season impacting production of mustard in West Bengal. The increase in 
non-agricultural demands for land and water as a result of the higher overall GDP 
growth and urbanization, etc. has also proved to be detrimental to the production 
of oilseeds resulting in shortages.  Accordingly, the consumption being increased 
due to increase in population, and improvement in the standards of living of 
people and consequent increase in deman d of edible oils, the country had to 
import about 101 lakh tones of edible oil during 2009 -10.  Taking into 
consideration the overall demand and supply position of oilseeds and edible oils, 
the Committee feel that the efforts made by the Department to incr ease 
production are not sufficient and there is, therefore, an urgent need to pay more 
attention to R&D. The R&D initiatives need to be demonstrated to farmers 
practically from labs. to their fields for the development of improved, new and 
high-yielding varieties of oilseeds. The Committee also desire that incentives to 
farmers-fiscal and otherwise, low and cheap credit and other inputs should be 
extended to motivate them to increase production of oilseeds.  Production of 
traditional oilseed crops also need s to be encouraged.  Further, to reduce the 
dependency on imported edible oil, the use of non -traditional secondary source 
of edible oils should also be encouraged.  The Committee also feel that in order 
to augment the production of edible oils, there is a n imperative need to improve 
technology for extraction of edible oils.  The Committee, therefore, desire the 
Government to take immediate steps to arrest the decline in growth rate of 
oilseeds as also to enable agriculture to be viable and profitable avoca tion to the 
farming community at large. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken 
in this direction.  The Government should ensure that the funds allocated for 
R&D projects are fully utilized by the DVVO&F.  The Agriculture Ministry should 
also be a dvised to undertake latest research, adopt new technology and 
measures to raise oilseed production.  The Committee recommend the 
Department to take initiatives on above mentioned lines in consultation with the 
ministries involved in the task such as Ministry of Agriculture etc. 
 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.34 The subject matter primarily relates to latest research, new technology 
and measures to raise oilseed production which lies within the purview of Ministry 
of Agriculture. The matter has been taken up with that Ministry. As per comments 
received from Ministry of Agriculture, nearly 75% of the oilseeds area is under 
rainfed conditions.  Therefore, there is bound to have fluctuations of oilseeds 
production, since oilseed crops are very sensitive to both amount and distribution 
of rainfall and other climatic changes.  The data from large number of Frontline 
demonstrations conducted on oilseed crops over the last 2 decades has clearly 
established the potential of improved technologies developed through  research 

programmes.  These demonstrations indicate that with the adoption of improved 
technology, the oilseeds production can be increased by about 40 -70% as yield 
gap of improved technology over the Farmers’ practice varied from 36% in 
rapeseed-mustard to 125% in sunflower. 
 
Some of the major constrains in oilseed production are as follows: 
 
1. Non availability of quality seed of improved hybrids/varieties. 
 
2. Non-promotion of nationally released varieties/hybrids, as each 
state tries to promote the varieties/hybrids released by them. 
 
3. Inspite of production of large quantity of breeder seed, the same is 
not getting converted to foundation and certified seeds because of weak 
seed chain. 
 
4. The farmers are not getting motivated to grow oilseed crops 
because of low remunerative price, since price of oilseeds is going down 
as compared to other competing crops.  
 
 The  following  programmes have been undertaken to increase the 
oilseeds production: 
 
a. Development of CMS hybrids in safflower and sunflower h ybrids for 
spring and rabi-summer. 
 
b. Use of genetic engineering tools to incorporate the genes for 
resistance to major diseases/insect pests into cultivated genotypes 
is in progress. 
 
c. Integrated nutrient management practices for higher input use 
efficiency and reduced cost of cultivation. 
 
d. Development of IPM packages to control diseases and insect pests 
and to reduce cost of production. 
 
e. Besides, a large number of FLD programmes have been planned to 
be conducted in the farmers fields to demonstra te the benefit of 
latest technologies. 
 

f. Development of Partnership with Private sectors to strengthen the 
breeding and yield improvement. 
 
The R&D Projects on edible oils undertaken by Department are in the field 
of improvement in processing technology in production of edible oils, use of 
secondary sources of oilseeds/edible oils, refining and storage studies etc.. The 
Department have utilized 121% budgetary allocation in R&D Projects during 
2009-10.   
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affa irs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 28,  Para No. 7.23) 
 
2.35 The Committee are deeply concerned to note the declining production of 
oil which is attributed to lower produ ction of oilseeds.  The Committee note that 
the R&D schemes which aim to coordinate and concentrate research efforts for 
development of technology for increased production of oils from oil bearing 
material and also optimum utilization of these materials, approve proposals under 
the Plan schemes which include – proposals regarding cost effective measures 
that would enable energy conservation, improvement in quantity and quality of oil 
and co-products and reduction in losses, etc.  As informed by the Ministry , the 
unsatisfactory progress of R&D projects was due to various reasons such as 
failure to purchase equipment in time, non -availability of material used to carry 
out the research, non -submission of utilization certificates, dislocation of work 
due to freq uent change in top position in these institutes and change in site 
locations for installation of pilot plan.  The Committee strongly recommend that 
the Department in consultation with other Ministries involved should streamline 
the procedure and documentat ion, for transparency and accountability in 
operation at each level for giving timely approval for purchase of various 
research equipments.  The Committee also desire that strict instructions should 
be issued and regular monitoring done so that research projects are pursued with 
all seriousness. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
2.36 The Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils and Fats (DVVO&F) is 
operating a Plan Scheme on “Research and Development and Modernisation of 
the Laboratory of the Directorate of VVO&F”.  
 
The new R&D projects are scrutinized by Technical Committee i.e. Sub -
Committee of Science and Technology Advisory Committee (STAC) and 

approved by STAC, consisting of experts from CFTRI, BIS, CSIR, OTAI etc. and 
representatives of various Ministries like Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Health 
and Department of Science and Technology,  under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary (Food and Public Distribution). The progress of the projects is 
monitored periodically by the Project Implementation Commit tee (PIC) of the 
Department.  
 
Procedures have been streamlined in the Department for giving timely 
approval and for regular monitoring of projects.   The institutes have been 
advised to complete the project in time.  For better operation and monitoring of  
R&D projects, norms for financial assistance have been revised in 2009-10.  
 
During the 10 th Five Year Plan 21 R&D projects were funded out of which 
13 projects were completed and 8 projects have been carried over to the 11 th 
Plan period. During the 11 th Plan period (2007 -2012) out of 8 ongoing R&D 
projects, 5 projects have been completed.  During 2009 -10, 3 on -going R&D 
projects and 4 new R&D projects have been funded and the Department have 
utilized 121% budgetary allocation in R&D projects.   
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 29,  Para No. 7.27) 
 
2.37 The Committee are concerned to note that the number of inspection s 
carried out by the officials of DVVO&F as well as the number of samples 
analyzed is on the decline.  The number of inspections carried out in 2008 -09 is 
1125 which declined to 980 in 2009 -10. The number of samples analyzed during 
the year 2008-09 is 3423 which declined to 3089 in 2009-10.  The Committee are 
of the view that in a country like ours, where edible oils are the main cooking 
medium and adulteration to edible oils is so widespread, the quality control of 
edible oils is very essential.  The Commi ttee, however, are shocked to find that 
the number of inspections carried out and the number of samples analyzed are 
almost negligible. The Committee, therefore, recommends that to keep a check 
on adulteration of edible oils, number of inspections and draw ing of samples 
across length and breadth of the country needs to be increased.  The Committee 
also desire that special attention be paid for drawing samples from rural / tribal / 
jhugi–jhopdi, unauthorized residential areas in cities and other vulnerable f ar-
flung areas.  Cases of adulteration, if proved, should be decided expeditiously.  
The Committee also desire that exemplary punishment must be imposed on the 
offenders. 

 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
2.38 The Directorate of VVOF is carrying -out inspections of industries engaged 
in production of edible oils and collects samples from these units for analysis.  
The subject matter regarding adulteration of edible oils from retail outlets lies 
within the purview of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Foo d Safety and 
Standards Authority of India (PFA).  The matter has been taken up with that 
Ministry.  Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare) has informed that the implementation of the PFA Act, 1954 & 
Rules frame d there under vest with the Food (Health) Authorities of the 
States/U.Ts..  The enforcement staff/machinery of the concerned State/U.T. 
Governments draw the samples of commonly used food commodity suspected to 
be adulterated/misbranded and take punitive action where samples are not found 
conforming to PFA Act/Rules.  The concern of the Committee to draw large 
number of samples of edible oils particularly from the vulnerable areas, 
expeditious disposal of cases and imposition of exemplary punishment have 
been conveyed to the State/UT Governments. 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 

 
 
  CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19,  Para No. 5.10) 
 
3.1 The Committee observe that despite various measures being adopted by 
the Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC), the expenditure on Establishment  
Cost has risen from Rs. 234.63 crore during the year 2007 -08 to Rs. 394.65 
crore during the year 2009 -10.  The Committee note that no fresh recruitment is 
being made in CWC since 1998 with a view to reducing the manpower and the 
resultant cost. The plea o f the Government that increase in Establishment Cost 
during 2007-08 and 2008-09 was mainly due to implementation of the revision of 
Pay Scales of Employees under CDA and IDA pattern is not convincing.  The 
Committee feel that even after taking into account  the payment of salary arrears 
and other benefits accrued from the Sixth Pay Commission to the employees, the 
Establishment Cost is still very high. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that Government should find ways and means for restructuring t he 
policy, plan and program of CWC to reduce the Establishment Cost which will 
further enhance its profits. 
 
Action Taken by the Government: 
 
3.2 (i) The rise in establishment cost during the year 2009-10 compared to 
2007-08 is attributable mainly to revis ion in Pay and Allowances in all the 
categories of employees implemented during 2008 -2009 and consequential 
increase in provisions for gratuity, leave & other employee’s benefits. The 
breakup of increase in establishment cost from 2007 -08 to 2009 -10(provisional) 
is as under: 
(Amount in crore Rs.) 
Head of Account 2007-08 2009-10 
(prov) 
Increase 
Pay & Allowances 157.40 244.25 86.85 
Contribution to Provident 
Fund 
14.62 24.15 
9.53 
Provision for Gratuity 10.89 84.24 73.35 
Provision for PLI 3.71 3.18 -0.53 
Provision for Leave 
Benefits  
13.68 19.15 
5.47 
Provision for post -
retirement medical 
benefits 
10.90 3.90 
-7 

Provision for Death 
Compensation 
0.03 0.10 
0.07 
Provision for LTC 0.00 0.68 0.68 
Provision for Pay 
Revision 
23.40 15.00 
-8.4 
Total 234.63 394.65 160.02 
 
From the table above it may be seen that the increase in the 
establishment cost in 2009 -10 compared to 2007 -08 was only due to 
implementation of the revision of pay scales of employees under CDA pattern 
pay scales w.e.f. 1.1.2006 and employees un der IDA pattern pay scales w.e.f. 
1.1.2007 and related provisions. However, in  order to reduce the administrative 
cost, CWC has taken various measures such as reduction in non -plan 
expenditure on heads like publicity, telephone, travel, entertainment etc. ; cost 
effective methods like computerization etc. Furthermore, Non -Core Services are 
being outsourced and 13 number of Construction Cells have been closed. No 
fresh recruitment is being made since 1998 to reduce manpower and 
establishment costs. The Corpo ration also implemented VRSs during the years 
1994, 1998, 2002, 2005 & 2008 which has resulted in reduction in manpower by 
2475 number of employees.  
 
(ii) CWC has given due consideration to the recommendations of TCS on 
Organisational Restructuring and Hu man Resource Systems, which were 
implemented in the Corporation after examination and acceptance by the Board 
of Directors. The main recommendation of TCS Report was to reduce manpower 
especially in Groups ‘C’ & ‘D’. There has been no fresh recruitment aft er 1998 in 
any cadre. Besides, the Corporation also introduced VRS during the year 1994, 
1998, 2000, 2005 and lastly exclusively for Engineers during 2008. However, 
considering the commercial requirement specially at higher managerial levels, 
during 2008 -09, the Corporation has made some Direct Recruitments of 40 
JTAs(Group-C) and 30 Management Trainees (Group -A). The capacity handled 
per employee has also increased from 1630 MT during 2007 -08 to 1773 during 
2008-09 while turnover per employee has substanti ally increased from Rs. 12.81 
lakh in 2007-08 to Rs. 14.31 lakh in 2008-09.  
 
(iii) It may therefore be seen that sincere efforts have been made by CWC to 
reduce establishment costs but due to revision in Pay Scales of employees at all 
levels there has been unavoidable increase in establishment costs.  
 

(iv) However, the concern expressed by the Committee with regard to 
increase in the establishment costs has been noted and efforts will be made to 
reduce establishment cost of CWC.  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of Food & 
Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20,  Para No. 5.18) 
 
3.3 The Committee note that the prospective plan drawn by CWC for 
construction of godow ns in 2010 -11 does not include any NE States.  The 
Committee are not convinced with the plea of the Government that since the 
storage capacity available with CWC in the NE region is not fully utilized, 
therefore, construction of additional capacity in the region could not be 
considered.  The Committee feel that due to difficult geographical conditions in 
NE region, poor people of the region are deprived of the benefits of Public 
Distribution System (PDS) due to inadequacy of storage space. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation made in Demands for Grants 
(2009-10) that separate funds i.e. 10% of the total plan funds be earmarked for 
construction of godowns in NE States and construction of godowns in the region 
be stepped up. The Com mittee desire to be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard.  
 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
3.4 It is submitted that the storage requirement for PDS is being met by 
respective State Governments/State Government Agencies like Civil Supplies 
Corporation, State Warehousing Corporation(SWCs) and also Food Corporation 
of India. The Central Government’s Schemes for creating storage capacity are 
also available to them.for construction of godowns in identified locations.  
 
Besides, the Assam SWC and Meghala ya SWC were also operating a 
total of 2.61 Lakh MT with 50 warehouses . CWC is operating 9 warehouses in 
NE region with a total capacity of 1.01 Lakh MT. The average occupancy of 
these warehouses during the years 2006 -07, 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 was 65%, 
75% and 79% respectively. As on 1st February, 2010, the average capacity of 
the region was 84%, which shows that the storage space is still available. 
However CWC is making efforts to get the land allotted and undertake 
construction wherever land is made availa ble by the State Governments as 
getting land at suitable locations is difficult. Recently, the Government of Tripura 
expressed their willingness to make available suitable land and their proposal is 
being examined. Similarly, Government of Assam has also b een requested to 
allot land at Amingaon, Nowgaon etc. FCI has also desired construction of 
warehousing capacity on the railway land through CWC at Saichapara, 
Nowgaon, Dibrugarh, Kokrajhar, Bhairbi, Dimapur & Jiribam. 

 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food &  Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21,  Para No. 5.19) 
 
3.5 The Committee are deeply concerned to note that CWC has failed to 
achieve physical and financia l targets set for construction of godowns during 
2008-09 and 2009 -10.  The total achievement in respect of physical target for 
construction of godowns during 2008 -09 is only 0.54 lakh MT as against set 
target of 0.92 lakh MT.  Total achievement in respect of financial target during 
this period is Rs. 16.58 crore as against the target of Rs. 35.98 crore.  During the 
financial year 2009-10 also, CWC has constructed merely 24,500 MT capacity by 
the end of February, 2010 and propose to complete the work in resp ect of the 
remaining 66,550 MT capacity by the end of March, 2010.  Keeping in view the 
slow pace of construction of godowns, the Committee doubt whether the CWC 
would be able to achieve physical and financial targets set for construction of 
godowns by the  end of March, 2010. The Committee feel that inadequacy of 
storage capacity poses a serious threat to running of efficient public distribution 
system and desire that CWC should pursue the matter with concerned State 
Government/UT Administration vigorously and ensure that funds do not remain 
unutilized for want of locations or otherwise and the efforts for construction of 
godowns are geared up so as to create adequate storage space.  
 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
3.6 The targets and achievements for crea tion of storage capacity by CWC 
during last three years are as follows:- 
 
Year Target Achievement 
 Physical   
 
(lakh MT) 
Financial 
Targets 
including the 
cost of land 
(Rs. In crore) 
Physical 
(Lakh MT) 
Financial Targets 
including the cost 
of land 
(Rs. In crore) 
2006-07 5.90 109.63 3.78 78.66 
2007-08 2.13 23.50 2.40 22.88 
2008-09 0.92 35.98 0.54 16.58 
 
During the year 2008 -09, the shortfall in achieving the physical target was 
due to dispute in getting land at Hubli, which is still unresolved. This target  also 
included construction of 0.18 lac MT for Central Railside Warehouse Company 
Limited(CRWC), which had been achieved. i.e. the total achievement for this 
year was 0.72 lac MT. 

 
During the year 2009 -10, the physical target for construction of storage 
capacity was 91,050 MT with an estimated outlay of Rs. 39.50 crore. The 
achievement in this regard is 89,500 MT with a financial outlay of Rs. 17.97 crore 
(provisional). The short fall of 1550 MT was due to the fact that only 23,400 MT 
capacity at Bhatinda w as completed as against proposed 25,000 MT owing to 
late removal of stocks by F.C.I. from the plinth. 
  
The storage capacity is created by CWC on the basis of demand 
requirements of either the State Government or FCI or the local market. 
Whenever such dema nds are received, feasibility survey is undertaken and the 
capacity to be created is decided. CWC has tentative plan to construct the 
storage capacity of about 1.77 lakh MT at different locations during the year 
2010-11 which includes 64,000 MT for utilisa tion by FCI. CWC is also proposing 
to take up construction of capacity of about one lakh MT on behalf of Orissa 
SWC and Orissa State Civil Supplies Corporation and 0.35 lakh MT capacity at 
Visakhapatnam on behalf of APSWC during the year 2010-11. 
 
Due to t hese additional construction taking place in the year 2010 -11, 
there will be substantial increase in storage capacity available with CWC for 
foodgrain storage.  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Paragraph 6.7) 
 
3.7 The Committee are constrained to note that while on the one hand, the 
consumption of sugar has drastically increased in the country from 199 lakh 
tones in 2006-07 to 230 lakh tones in 2009 -10, on the other hand the production 
has decreased from 282 lakh tones to 160 lakh tones during the same period. 
The Committee observe that despite a number of steps taken by the Government 
for cane development and to incre ase the production of sugarcane, the 
production of sugarcane has not shown any improvement which is evident from 
the fact that the country has to import a large quantity of raw sugar to meet the 
domestic requirement. The Committee feel that in order to bri dge the gap 
between demand and supply, the farmers should be made aware of the R&D 
technology and motivated and given more incentives for opting to grow 
sugarcane to avoid dependency on imported sugar. The Committee observe that 
over the years, the level o f ground water has gone down considerably, thereby 
creating irrigation problem for the sugarcane growers. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that for improved irrigation, the Government should give a look into 
the new technology for water conservation and  drip system which should be 
within the reach of every farmer. Further, the Government should make 
arrangement for distribution of loan directly to farmers from the Sugar 

Development Fund to enable them to purchase good quality of seed and 
fertilizers so as to boost their production capacity.   
 
3.8 The Committee has desired that the farmers should be made aware of the 
R&D technology and given more incentives for opting to grow sugarcane.  The 
scheme for cane development loan to the sugar factories under SD F already 
includes a component of incentives to cultivators to switch over to new and 
improved varieties of sugarcanes and for field demonstrations aimed at farmers’ 
awareness.  As regards the concern of depleting water table and need for 
improved irrigation, it may be stated that the scheme for cane development loan 
includes the components of irrigation by drip system, rain guns, sprinklers, etc.  A 
provision for assistance for deepening of existing bore -wells and for digging new 
bore-wells also exists in addition to tube wells.   
 
As regards direct disbursement to the farmers, it may be stated that the 
Sugar Development Fund has been created for financing activities to improve 
financial viability of the sugar factories by various methods.  It is also not practical 
to monitor disbursement to and recovery of loan from farmers in the absence of 
sugar factories taking the responsibility and furnishing the requisite security for 
SDF loan.  The sugar factories are required to pass on the benefits of the cane 
development to the farmers in cash or in kind by supply of seed and fertilizers 
etc. within specified time period.  The disbursement is monitored both by the 
Central and the State Government. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department o f 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 

 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4,  Para No. 3.27) 
 
4.1 The Committee note that food subsidy is provided to FCI for 
reimbursement of the difference between economic cost of foodgrains and their 
issue price.  The Committee note with concern that despite several measures 
taken by the Government to contain the amount of Food Subsidy, there has been 
huge increase in the allocation of Food Subsidy during the last three years. The 
Food Subsidy released to FCI and States in 2008 -09 was Rs. 43,668 crore, 
which was increased to   Rs. 54,539 crore in 2009 -10. The Dep artment of Food 
and Public Distribution has projected Rs. 72,235 crore for the financial year 
2010-11 which as indicated by the Secretary during evidence is short by Rs. 
14,952 crore to meet the requirement of Food Subsidy during 2010 -11.  The 
Committee ar e convinced with the arguments of the Department of Food and 
Public Distribution that less amount of subsidy will affect the functioning of FCI in 
getting the credit from Financial Institutions.  The inadequate allocation of food 
subsidy also has a cascadi ng effect as interest on cash credit increases, thereby 
increasing the subsidy further.   The decentralised procurement operation of the 
States will also be seriously affected due to cash crunch on account of 
inadequate subsidy.  The Committee while apprec iating the difficulties of the 
Department, recommend that subsidy given to FCI should be realistic and based 
on the actual cost.  The Ministry of Finance may accordingly allocate sufficient 
funds as per the requirements under food subsidy.   
  
The Committee also recommend that the proposal to reduce the gap between 
Central Issue Price for APL households and open market prices may be 
considered so as to check the growing food subsidy budget.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
4.2 The Department of Food & Publ ic Distribution projected demand of 
Rs.72,235 crore for the financial year 2009 -10,against which only an amount of 
Rs.58242.45 crore was  allocated by the Ministry of Finance and there was a 
shortfall of Rs.13992.53 crore in 2009 -10.  The estimated require ment of food 
subsidy during 2010 -11 taking into account the  shortfall in funds allocation last 
year is at Rs.83927.62 crore.  However, the food subsidy allocated by Ministry of 
Finance for 2010 -11 (BE) for food subsidy is only Rs.55211 crore.  Therefore, 
there is a shortfall of Rs.28716.62 crore. 

 
The Department of Food & Public Distribution has been continuously 
pursuing the proposal for increase of Central Issue Prices (CIPs) for Above 
Poverty Line (APL) families to reduce the increasing food subsidy budget. 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution O.M. No.G -20017/2/2010-AC dated 20 th July 
2010 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 3.36) 
 
4.3 The Committee note that strengthening of PDS is a new scheme under 
the 11 th Plan having four components i.e. training, evaluation, curbing 
leakages/diversion of foodgrains and generating awareness amongst the TPDS 
beneficiaries. The PDS, which is one of the most important schemes of the 
Government to provide subsidized foodgrains to the poor people is jointly 
implemented by the Central and State/UT Governments. The Committee observe 
that there is no satisfactory improvement in PDS  in many States despite the fact 
that the Government has taken several measures to strengthen the PDS such as 
undertaking regular review meetings with the State Governments to ensure 
effective implementation of PDS, directing the State/UT Governments to 
implement measures such as strengthening monitoring and vigilance, increasing 
transparency in functioning of TPDS, use of ICT tools for computerization of 
TPDS operations and improving efficiency of FPS operations by way of doorstep 
delivery of foodgrains, e tc. The Committee hope that the Department would 
make concerted efforts to closely monitor implementation of the aforementioned 
measures by the States/UTs so that the AAY and BPL families do get their due 
share of foodgrains on a regular basis.  
 
Reply of Government 
 
4.4 The State/UT Governments are being requested for implementation of the 
orders/instructions issued to them from time to time for smooth functioning of 
TPDS. On certain schemes/plans, the information relating to their implementation 
is called on monthly/quarterly basis from the State/UT Governments and is being 
utilized for further monitoring and review. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 

Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9,  Para No. 3.50) 
 
4.5 The Committee observe that necessary provisions have been made in the 
PDS (Control) Order 2001 for issue of ration card s to eligible AAY, BPL and APL 
families in the country.  Elimination of bogus ration cards as well as bogus units 
in them is a continuous exercise by the State Governments so that diversion of 
essential commodities could be checked.  By issuing special ins tructions to the 
State Governments for taking penal action against the staff for issuance of 
bogus/ineligible ration cards, 21 State Governments have deleted 171.91 lakh 
bogus/ineligible ration cards between July, 2006 and 31.01.2010.  The 
Committee apprec iate that all the State/UT Governments have been further 
directed to take up a special campaign from October, 2009 to December, 2009 
for verification of all AAY and BPL ration card holders so as to detect and 
eliminate bogus/ineligible ration cards.  Despi te all these steps taken by the 
Government, it is noticed that while on the one hand a large number of 
bogus/ineligible ration card holders continue to exist, on the other hand a large 
number of genuinely eligible poor remain deprived of the cards.  The Co mmittee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that far more stringent measures may be taken by 
the Central Government as well as all State/UT Governments to remedy the 
anomaly in this regard. 
Reply of Government 
 
4.6 The recommendation of the Committee has been n oted and the concerns 
of the Standing Committee for taking more stringent measures to remedy the 
anomaly will be communicated to all States/UT Governments. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.20 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 

CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES TO 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5,  Paragraph No. 3.28) 
 
5.1 The Committee also note that a draft scheme for direct transfer of food 
subsidy in cash to the BPL and AAY beneficiaries, instead of distribution of 
foodgrains to them, has been prepared. The draft scheme proposes that 
equivalent amount of food subsidy will be directly deposited by the concerned 
district authority in the bank/post office accounts to be opened by each of the 
beneficiaries. The proposal, which was resubmitted to the Ministry of Finance, is 
still under consi deration of that Ministry. The Committee are of the view that 
implementation of the scheme on pilot basis will test the feasibility of an 
alternative mode of transfer of food subsidy to the intended population of the 
country. The Committee, therefore, urge  the Department to take all necessary 
action to expedite finalization and implementation of the draft scheme.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government: 
  
5.2 The Department of Expenditure  has been requested vide communication 
dated 22 -3-2010 to expedite the decision.  The matter is being pursued with 
Department of Expenditure for early decision. 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8, Paragraph No. 3.46) 
 
 
5.3 The Committee note that the AAY Scheme, which is a segment of the BPL 
households covered under TPDS, was launched in December, 2000 for one 
crore poorest of the poor families to be identified from amongst the BPL families.  
As per the guidelines issued, the State/UT Government shall identify the AAY 
families from amongst the landless agricultural labourers, marginal farmers, rural 
artisans, households  headed by widows or terminally ill persons/disabled 
persons/persons aged 60 years or more, primitive tribal households, etc.  The 
States/UTs have so far identified 2.43 crore families to be covered under AAY.  
The Committee further note that BPL populatio n was determined on the basis of 
population projection of the Registrar General of India for March, 2000 and the 

State-wise poverty estimates of the Planning Commission for 1993 -94.  The 
Committee are disturbed to note that as against 6.25 crore accepted n umber of 
BPL families, the State Governments have issued 11.12 crore BPL ration cards, 
the excess being due to inclusion and exclusion errors. The Committees are of 
the view that considering the rate of increase in population as well as the 
changes in socio-economic profiles of the people, it is too archaic and unrealistic 
to rely on almost two decades old methodology.  Moreover, considering the 
number of excess BPL ration cards issued by a large number of State 
Governments, it becomes all the more necessar y to review the methodology and 
conduct fresh census for finalizing the number of BPL population. The Committee 
note that the Ministry of Rural Development has constituted an Expert Groups for 
finalizing the methodology for identification of BPL families i n rural areas which 
has submitted its report in August, 2009 and which is being examined by that 
Ministry in consultation with the State/UT Governments, etc.  The Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation is also yet to issue the new guidelines for  
identification of BPL families in urban areas.  The Committee therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Department may impress upon the Ministry of Rural 
Development and Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation to expedite 
the finalization and issue  of the new guidelines for identification of BPL/AAY 
families in rural and urban areas without further delay. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government: 
 
5.4 A copy of the recommendation of the Standing Committee is being sent to 
Ministry of Rural Development and M inistry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation to expedite the finalization of the new guidelines for identification of 
BPL families in rural and urban areas and to inform this Department of the action 
taken thereon. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food &  Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G -20017/2/2010-AC dated 20 th July 
2010 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 22,  Paragraph No. 5.23) 
 
 
5.5 The Committee note that the Ministry is in the process of setting up of the 
Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority (WDRA) for which one post 
each of Joint Secretary and Director have been filled up so far. The Selection 
Committee has also completed the process of selection of the Chairperson and 
two members. However, in order to be functional, the remaining staff of the 
WDRA needs to be put in place. As the availability of storage space in all the 
States/UTs is a basic requirement for the effective implementation of the various 
welfare schemes of the Department of Food and Public Dis tribution, the 

Committee strongly recommend that the process of setting up of the WDRA be 
expedited and completed without any delay. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government: 
 
5.6 The recommendation of the Standing Committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Consumer Affairs, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution  O.M. No.G-20017/2/2010-AC dated 20th July 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                           VILAS MUTTEMWAR 
  25th February, 2011            Chairman, 
6 Phalguna,1932 (Saka)                         Standing Committee on Food,  
                                                         Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
 
 
 
   

APPENDIX -I 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON 
MONDAY, 27TH DECEMBER, 2010 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1535 hours in Committee 
Room No. ‘G- 074’, Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
1. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik , (Acting Chairman) – M.P. Rajya Sabha 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
4. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
5. Shri Sukhdeo Singh Libra 
6. Shri Laxman Tudu 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
7. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
8. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
9. Shri Sanjay Raut 
10. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.K.Misra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director  
3. Shri Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 

2. Hon’ble members were informed by Director, Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution that a tele phonic message was 
received from Hon. Chairman stating that due to indisposition he would not be 
able to attend the sitting. Therefore, in the absence of Hon’ble Chairman,                  
Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik was unanimously chosen to preside over t he 
meeting by the Members present, in terms of Rule 258 (3) of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  Thereafter, the acting 
Chairman welcomed all the Members, specially Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra, the 
newly nominated member to the sit ting of the Committee convened for 
consideration and adoption of Draft Action Taken Report pertaining to the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution. 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the said draft report on 
Action Taken by the Governmen t on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands 
for Grants (2010 -11) relating to the Department of Food and Public Distribution 
and adopted the same. 
 
4. Thereafter, the Chairman informed th e members that Forward Contract 
(Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2010 had been  referred to the Committee by 
Hon’ble Speaker on 16 December 2010  for examination and report within three 
months and in this connection, the Department of Consumer Affairs had been  
requested to furnish the background note and other relevant information. The 
Committee desired to undertake a study visit to share the views of some of the 
State Governments/organizations concerned on the provisions of the proposed 
Bill as well as various subjects selected by the Committee.  
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the aforesaid report 
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament during the ensuing 
Budget Session of Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

  
APPENDIX- II 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC           
DISTRIBUTION (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations   29 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have  
   been accepted by the Government  
 
Recommendation Nos.1,2,3,7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,  
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29 
  
Total              19 
 Percentage                   65.52% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government 
 
   Recommendation  Nos. 19, 20, 21, 23 
      
 Total              4   
    
Percentage                 13.80% 
 
(iii) Observations /Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 4, 6 and 9 
 
Total              3  
Percentage                   10.34% 
(v) Observations /Recommendations in respect of which the replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
 
   Recommendation No. 5, 8 and 22 
Total               3 
 Percentage                             10.34% 
 