 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
        (2009-2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION         
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS)–Hallmarking of Jewellery 
 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2010/ Bhadrapada, 1932 (Saka) 
9 

 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTIRBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS)–Hallmarking of Jewellery 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 31.08.2010 
       Laid in Rajya Sabha on 31.08.2010 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2010/ Bhadrapada, 1932 (Saka) 

 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE       ii 
INTRODUCTION          iv 
REPORT 
CHAPTER   I  Introductory  .. … …. … …  1 
 
CHAPTER  II  The Hallmarking of Jewellery Scheme… … …  4 
 
CHAPTER III  Setting up of  Assaying & Hallmarking 
Centres in all the States/UTs…. … … …  17 
 
CHAPTER IV  Funds allocated by the Government for 
 implementation of the Scheme and its utilization…   27 
 
CHAPTER V  Mandatory Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery… …    34 
 
CHAPTER VI  Evaluation Study of Gold Hallmarking of  
   Jewellery Scheme… … … … …   40 
 
CHAPTER VII Awareness Programmes … … … …  43 
 
CHAPTER VIII  Enforcement/Monitoring  of the Scheme… …  49 
 
CHAPTER IX Manpower with BIS  … … … …    53 
 
 APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the Ninth sitting of the Co mmittee held on           
 25th January, 2010         
 
II  Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Committee held on           
 5th May, 2010        
 
III Minutes of the Twenty First sitting of the Committee held on       
 21st July, 2010. 
 
IV Minutes of the Twenty Fourth sitting of the Committee held on       
 25th August, 2010.    
 
 
              
56 
 
 
58 
 
 
61 
 
 
  
  63 
(i)

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2009-10. 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar  - Chairman      
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
4. Shri Tara Chand Bhagora 
5. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
6. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
7. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
8. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
9. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
10. Shri Lalchand Kataria 
11. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee* 
12. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
13. Shri Sohan Potai 
14. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
15. Shri Dinubhai Solanki 
16. Shri Laxman Tudu 
17. Shri D. Venugopal  
18. Shri Madhusudan Yadav 
19. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
23. Shri P. Kannan 
24. Shri Lalhming Liana 
25. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
26. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
27. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
28. Dr. T.N. Seema 
29. Shri Veer Singh 
30. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
31. Vacant                     
      * Nominated w.e.f. 04.08.2010 
 
(ii) 
 

 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P.K. Mishra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma  - Director 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (iii)        

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution (2009-10) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on 
their beha lf, present this Ninth Report on the subject “Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) –
Hallmarking of Jewellery” of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs). 
 
2.  The subject BIS –Hallmarking of Jewellery was s elected by the Committee for 
examination during the year 2009 -10. The Committee was briefed on the subject by the 
representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) on 25.01.2010. The Committee invited views/suggestions 
from the Jewellers and heard the views of  some of the prominent jewellers and at their 
sitting held on 05.05.2010. The Committee also took oral evidence of the representatives of 
the Department of Consumer Affairs on 21.07.2010. 
 
3.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Officers of the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) for 
placing before them the detailed written notes on the subject and for furnishing the 
information to the Committee, desired in connection with the examination of the subject 
during the briefing and oral evidence.  
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Jewellers for furnishing their 
comments/suggestions and appearing before the  Committee for tendering evidence in 
connection with examination of the subject. 
 
5.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
25th August, 2010. 
 
6.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Re commendations 
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;                                                        VILAS MUTTEMWAR 
  25 August, 2010                              Chairman, 
   3 Bhadrapada,1932 (Saka)                                    Standing Committee on Food,  
                                                                                  Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
 
 
(iv) 

 
 
CHAPTER  I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BI S) as the National Standards Body of India     
came into existence, through an Act of Parliament dated 26 November, 1986, on           
1 April, 1987, with  broadened scope and more powers, taking over the staff, assets, 
liabilities and functions of erstwhi le Indian Standards Institution (ISI).  Through this 
change over, the Government envisaged building a climate for quality culture and 
consciousness and greater participation of consumers in formulation and 
implementation of National Standards. 
1.2 BIS is a n autonomous body under the administrative control of the Ministry of 
Food, Consumer Affairs & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs).  It is 
formulating need -based Indian Standards in line with the national priorities as a time 
bound program me and harmonizes national standards with regional and international 
standards in order to facilitate adoption of international standards by all segments of 
business and industry, wherever feasible. 
1.3 The Bureau is a Body Corporate consisting of 25 membe rs representing both 
Central and State Governments, Members of Parliament, industry, scientific and 
research institutions, consumer organizations and professional bodies, the Union 
Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution being its Presid ent and the 
Minister of State for Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution as its Vice -
President. 
1.4 BIS derives its income mainly from certification, training institute and sale of 
Indian standards.  The Certification Scheme is basically voluntary in nature but for a 
number of items affecting health and safety of the consumer and those of mass 
consumption, it has been made mandatory by the Government  through various 
statutory measures. 
1.5 BIS having Headquarters at New Delhi, has a network of 5 Re gional Offices 
(ROs) at Kolkata (Eastern), Chennai (Southern), Mumbai (Western), Chandigarh 

 
 
(Northern) and Delhi (Central), and 20 Branch Offices (BOs) at Ahmedabad, Bangalore, 
Bhubaneshwar, Bhopal, Coimbatore, Faridabad, Ghaziabad, Guwahati, Hyderabad, 
Jaipur, Kanpur, Lucknow, Nagpur, Parwanoo, Patna, Pune, Rajkot, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Vishakapatnam and Dehradoon and serves as effective links 
between State Governments, industries, technical institutions, consumer organizations, 
etc. of the region. BIS has  the network of eight BIS laboratories spread throughout the 
country. 
Functions of BIS 
1.6 The functions of BIS are to :- 
(a) Establish review, publish and promote in such manner as may be 
prescribed the Indian Standard, in relation to any article or process. 
(b) Specify a standard mark to be called the Bureau of Indian Standards 
Certification Mark which shall be of such design and contain such 
particulars as may be prescribed to represent a particular Indian Standard. 
(c) Grant, renew, suspend or cancel a l icense for the use of the Standard 
Mark. 
(d) Provide services to the manufacturers and consumers of articles or 
processes. 
(e) Coordinate activities of any manufacturer or association of manufacturers 
or consumers engaged in standardization and in the improvem ent of the 
quality of any articles or process or in the implementation of any quality 
control activities. 
(f) Product Certification to ensure conformity of the product to the relevant 
Indian Standard.  
 
Formulation of Standards 
1.7 For formulation and review o f standards, BIS functions through the Committee 
mechanism in terms of Sectional Committees, Subcommittees and Panels set up for 
dealing with specific group of subjects under respective Division Councils.  The 
Sectional Committees, Subcommittees and Panels comprise of representatives from the 
industry, government, research and development organizations, consumer 
organizations and individual experts. 

 
 
1.8 A proposal for formulation of Indian Standard(s) can be submitted by any 
stakeholder including Ministries  of the Central Government, State Governments, Union 
Territory Administrations, individual Consumer or Consumer Organisations, Industrial 
Units, etc.  The proposal, when approved by the concerned Division Council, is 
forwarded to an appropriate Sectional C ommittee for formulation of Indian Standard(s). 
Standards are made by 14 Technical Division Councils pertaining to specific fields.  
1.9 The Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) has been successfully promoting and 
nurturing the standardization movement in the country and has initiated several steps 
towards enhancing the efficiency of its operations and upgrading of services. During  
2008-09, BIS formulated 319 (137 new and 182 revised) standards, bringing the total 
number of standards in force to 18477 as on 31 March, 2009. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
THE HALLMARKING OF JEWELLERY SCHEME 
General 
2.1 The Scheme on Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery was launched by BIS in April 
2000 to provide third party assurance to consumers on the purity of gold jewellery or its 
fineness. The Scheme was introduced on voluntary basis under BIS Act, 1986. Under 
the scheme, a jeweler  has to obtain Hallmark license from BIS to get his jewellery 
hallmarked.   Jewellers desirous of Hallmarking their gold jewellery need to first become 
a `BIS Certified Jeweller‟.  To get BIS certification, a jeweler needs to apply to BIS and 
ensure the purity of jewellery received from artisans/karigars, by following a systematic  
Quality Assurance System.  The jeweller‟s Quality Assurance System and conformity of 
test reports form the basis for the homogeneity of batches of jewellery offered to a 
recognized Hallmarking Centre for hallmarking.  Only BIS Certified Jewellers can get 
their jewellery assayed and hallmarked from the BIS recognized Assaying and 
Hallmarking Centres. 
Objectives of the Hallmarking Scheme 
2.2 The Committee have been informed that the Scheme was introduced to :- 
(i) protect consumer against victimization of irregular gold quality. 
(ii) develop export competitiveness of gold jewellery industry and thus provide 
strong impetus for gold jewellery exports. 
(iii) develop India as a leading gold market centre in the world commensurate 
with its status as the top most consumer. 
Responsibilities of the Certified Jewellers 
2.3 The Jewellers holding BIS license shall have to provide: 
 Commitment to quality 
 Assurance of consistency in quality and purity of hallmarked gold jewellery 
 A quality assurance system for the purpose of operating Hallmarking Scheme 
 Provide complete customer satisfaction 
 Display all requirements describi ng the components of Hallmark including the 
magnifying glass. 
 
Benefits to Customers 

 
 
2.4 Hallmarking of jewellery provides: - 
(i) third-party assurance and satisfaction that the right quality of gold for the 
given price has been  purchased. 
(ii) Protection against victimization of irregular gold quality/purity. 
(iii) Opportunity for filing complaint in case purity is found less from that 
declared by the jeweler. 
 
Criteria for recognition of Assaying & Hallmarking Centres 
2.5 An Assaying and Hallmarking Centre where the pu rity of jewellery is assessed is 
recognized by BIS only after ensuring that it follows the documented BIS Criteria which 
is in line with International norms for sampling, assaying and marking and the Centre is 
equipped with required facilities, trained and  competent  manpower.  The norms for 
recognition of these Centres have been aligned with those in other parts of the world, to 
ensure the acceptability of the Indian hallmarked jewellery world over. 
 
Parameters for specifying Indian Standards of Products 
2.6 As regards the basic parameters of specifying Indian Standards of products by 
BIS with particular reference to gold jewellery, the Department has stated that the Indian 
Standard IS 1417:1999 `Gold and Gold Alloys, Jewellery/Artefacts – Fineness and 
Marking – Specification‟ (third revision) specifies nine grades of gold used in the 
manufacture of jewellery/Artefacts, based on their gold content.  It also specifies the 
guidelines for marking of purity and other details on tested jewellery/Artefacts the 
requirements of fineness of solders used for manufacture of different grades of jewellery 
and random assaying of samples of jewellery/artefacts as per requirements in IS 
1418:1999 “Assaying of Gold in Gold Bullion, Gold Alloys and Gold Jewellery/Artefacts 
– Cupellation (Fire Assay) Method”.  Hallmarked jewellery articles have details as 
under: 
a) BIS mark 
b) Purity grade/fineness 
c) Assay Center‟s identification mark 
d) Year of marking denoted by a letter symbol (as defined by BIS) and 
e) Jeweller‟s mark/manufacturer‟s identification mark 

 
 
 
 
Obligations of Assaying & Hallmarking Centres 
2.7 The Committee have been informed that Assaying & Hallmarking Centres have:- 
(i) To strictly follow the documented Quality Management System for 
Sampling, Assaying and Hallmarking  of gold jewellery as per the 
documented BIS Criteria through competent and trained manpower. 
(ii) To Hallmark each jewellery article only after ensuring the purity/fineness of 
the articles as per prescribed test method and sampling plan. 
(iii) Ensuring safe custody of jewellery. 
(iv) Return of gold jewellery after hallmarking within 48 hours. 
2.8 When enquired whether the consumers have to pay extra money to purchase 
hallmarked jewellery, the Department replied that price of jewellery articles is decided 
by market forces.   There is no requirement that consumers should pay extra money to 
purchase hallmarked jewellery.  However a licensed jeweler has to pay Rs.18/ - per 
article subject to a minimum of Rs.100/ - per consignment, excluding applicable Service 
Tax and other levies which are payable extra, to the recognized Assaying & Hallmarking 
Centres, for getting gold jewellery articles tested and hallmarked. 
2.9 The Department has  informed that the hallmark is placed on each gold jewellery 
article by the BIS recognized Assayin g & Hallmarking Centre after checking every such 
article for its declared purity.  Hallmarking is not done by the jewellers.  BIS maintains 
surveillance on certified jewellers and recognized Assaying & Hallmarking Centres as 
per guidelines adopted for the purpose.  These include collection of hallmarked 
jewellery samples from licensees‟ retail outlets and getting them tested in independent 
BIS recognized Assaying & Hallmarking Centres.  In case found guilty, suitable action is 
taken against the jewellers an d Assaying & Hallmarking Centres to prevent exploitation 
of the consumers. 
Achievements under the Scheme 
2.10 The Department has informed that the Hallmarking Scheme, since its inception in 
2000, has progressed considerably.  The number of jewellers who ha ve taken the 
license and the number of hallmarked jewellery articles has gone up to 7185 and 721.47 
lakhs respectively as on 31 st December, 2009 from 186 and 0.94 lakhs respectively as 

 
 
on 31 st March, 2001.  The number of articles hallmarked annually has go ne up to 140 
lakhs from 0.94 lakhs during the same period.  The number of BIS recognized Assaying 
& Hallmarking Centres as on 28th Feb. 2010 were 151. 
Advantages to gold jewellers 
2.11 When asked about the advantages to the gold jewellers to get themselves  
registered under the Gold Hallmarking Scheme, the Department in a written note stated 
that (a) it helps them to keep a check on quality of jewellery articles sold by them (b) 
project them as quality conscious jewellers and (c) help them in ensuring custom er 
satisfaction, thus promoting their brand image in market and so the business. 
2.12 On being asked whether the jewellers are satisfied with the scheme, the 
Department replied that jewellers by and large are satisfied with the Scheme of Gold 
Hallmarking.  The issues raised by their Association earlier were considered by the 
Technical Committee of BIS and suitable amendments were made in the relevant 
Standard. 
2.13 Asked to furnish to details of issues raised by the Jewellers Association out of 
which how many issues have been considered by the Technical Committee of BIS and 
made suitable amendments in the relevant standards. 
2.14 The Department has stated that the issues raised by jewellers association and 
accepted by the concerned Technical Committee of BIS are: 
a) Introduction of new grade 708(17 carat) 
b) Exemption of Hallmarking below 9 carat gold. 
Issues not agreed to by the Technical Committee are: 
i) Inclusion of grades between 22 & 18 C i.e. of 20K gold in IS 1417 
ii) Non Hallmarking of articles below 5 gm. 
iii) Exemption from Hallmarking of antique jewellery, wax filled and fused 
jewellery. 
iv) Marking of “KDM” and fineness like 22K, 18K etc. by jewellers on articles 
submitted for hallmarking. 
Views/Suggestions of Jewellers/Association of Hallmarking Centres 

 
 
2.15 The Commi ttee invited views/suggestions of various leading jewellers of the 
country and also shared the views of representatives of some of the leading Delhi 
based jewellers at their sitting held on 5 May, 2010, who all were of the view that 
hallmarking of jeweller y be made mandatory.  The main points emerged/suggestions 
given by them are given below:-   
(i) The main benefit of hallmarked jewellery is that the customer gets a 
quality assured product and will be sure of its value that remains in a 
family for generations. 
(ii) When customer buys right purity gold, then in the long term the larger part 
of the piece of jewellery gets the appreciation benefit of the gold rates.  
This may vary from 5% to as high as 25% of the total weight of the 
jewellery piece. 
For example if you buy 100 gms of gold jewellery of 80% purity and 
your friend buys the same thing of 91.67% purity, then in the long run the 
worth of your friend‟s jewellery would be 11.7% more.  There are various 
other benefits of buying Hallmarked Jewellery:- 
 Customer will not be cheated by jeweler 
 Jeweller can not misrepresent the customer 
 It leads to greater transparency 
 Purity of the item is checked by BIS authorized Assaying and Hallmarking 
Centres. 
(iii) There are several additional benefits to consumers if t hey purchase 
hallmark gold jewellery, some of which are:- 
 Hallmarked jewellery is longlasting 
 Hallmarked jewellery has no superfluous shine. 
 Investment in Hallmark jewellery means investment in real gold 
 Valuable than Non-Hallmark Jewellery. 
 Bankers prefer Hallmarked Gold Jewellery as security while giving loans 
against jewellery. 
 (iv) Since the customers spend their whole life savings in buying jewellery, it is 
very essential that they receive good quality of gold.  Hallmarked jewellery 
ensures the custom ers that they are paying the right price for the right 
quality of gold. 
(v) The principal objective of assaying and Hallmarking is to protect a 
consumer against victimization of irregular gold quality.  Besides 
consumer satisfaction, hallmarking helps to c reate an export 
competitiveness of gold jewellery industry thus provide strong impetus for 
gold jewellery exports. 

 
 
(vi) It develops gold based financial products that will help in mopping up the 
vast dormant gold resources lying with the household sector.  It also helps 
develop India as a leading gold market centre in the world commensurate 
with its status as the topmost consumer. 
(vii) There is a guideline of Reserve Bank of India in which it advises the banks 
to prefer Hallmarked Gold Jewellery as securit y while giving loans against 
jewellery. 
(viii) Selling Hallmark Gold Jewellery provided by jewellers is clear indication of 
their capabilities, strong evidence of their commitment to quality, 
assurance of consistency in purity and quality of gold jewellery. 
(ix) It provides opportunity to describe the way they maintain their standards 
for quality control and later demonstrate that they consistently do what 
they claim.   
(x) It provides international competitiveness and enhanced customer 
satisfaction.  It al so provides third -party assurance and satisfaction that 
they have got the right purity of gold for the given price and protection 
against victimization of irregular gold quality/purity. 
(xi) It is beneficial for jeweller at the time of buy back as well. 
(xii) Jewellery distribution across the country happens mainly through 
metropolitan cities having sufficient number of BIS recognized Assaying 
and Hallmarking Centres.  Once the Hallmarked jewellery is distributed 
through metropolitan cities, it may not be n ecessary to have Assaying and 
Hallmarking Centres in remote, hilly and tribal areas. 
(xiii) We are pleased with the steps taken by the Government for making 
Hallmarking of Jewellery compulsory in the country. 
 (xiv) Some dealers sell 18 ct Hallmarked jewel lery to the consumers            
mis-representing them as 22 ct jewellery.  Therefore, it is extremely 
essential that Hallmarking Scheme be publicized heavily for the benefit of  
public at large. 
(xv) The govt. should also promote Hallmark jewellery by pub licity, organizing 
special programmes with the help of jewellers. 
(xvi) In order to protect the interest of illiterate consumer, Hallmark jewellery 
should be promoted by creating public awareness through programmes 
like TV Advertisements. 
(xvii) Gems and J ewellery Export Promotion Council is taking an initiative for 
promoting Hallmarked jewellery.  The initiative should be supported by the 
government. 

 
 
(xviii) The interest of consumers be protected from the fraudulent Hallmarking of 
gold jewellery by penalizing the cheaters, imposing heavy fine on them. 
 (xix) The govt. should allocate some budget for creating awareness among the 
consumer about the benefits of Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery Scheme by 
way of advertisement.  `Further, the government can also sub -allocate the 
budget among the jewellers. 
2.16 The Indian Association of Hallmarking Centres (Registered under the Societies 
Registration Act), as an All India Association of BIS recognized Assaying & Hallmarking 
Centres also expressed their views with reg ard to the Mandatory Hallmarking of 
jewellery. The gist of the main points/grievances/suggestions brought forward by them 
is as given below:- 
ISSUES SUGGESTIONS 
 
1) Even after 10 years of voluntary 
hallmarking, why no hallmarking 
centres have come up in 1 7 
States? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presently hardly 20% of the jewellery sold in the 
country is hallmarked. Due to poor consumer 
awareness, jewellers are not voluntarily adopting 
hallmarking and hence there is no business 
potential for hallmarking in these 17 States. 
 
Most of the jewellery so ld in the country is 
originating from the major manufacturing centres 
like Mumbai, Kolkata, Rajkot, Chennai, 
Coimbatore etc. and after manufacturing, it is 
hallmarked in these cities itself and then 
distributed to all the major cities, towns and 
villages in the country.  Hence even if there is no 
hallmarking centre in Mizorum, hallmarked 
jewellery is easily available for sourcing for sales 
in Mizorum and hence there is very low 
hallmarking business for a hallmarking centre in 
Mizoram. 
 
Even though the Gover nment has announced 
subsidy of Rs.30 lakhs or 30% of capital 
investment, in effect the Promoter of an HM cnetre 
will get only Rs.12 lakhs, that too after 2 years and 
hence there is no motivation for anybody to set up 
an HM centre, where there is poor busin ess 
potential. 
 
The total investment on land, building and 
machinery for an HM centre comes to Rs.120 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2)Poor consumer awareness and 
demand for hallmarked jewellery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3)Only the big jewellers have 
taken BIS license, the medium 
and small jewellers have 
abstained from taking license: 
 
lakhs, whereas, for subsidy purposes, BIS will 
consider only the cost of equipments/machinery 
for the purpose of subsidy.  Even expenses like 
strong room,  industrial wiring etc are not 
considered and 30% subsidy woud come to about  
Rs.13.5 lakhs and the same is disbursed in two 
equal installments which will not motivate a 
Promoter to start a hallmarking centre in places 
like Mizoram having low business potential.   
 
The solution is to remove the % ceiling of subsidy.  
For new centres in places like Mizoram, release 
Rs.50 lakhs as one installment after getting the 
BIS license and after 6 months of operation, on 
condition that in case of premature closure, the y 
shall refund the entire Rs.50 lakhs to the 
Government. 
 
Also for such centres, BIS shall give the 
exemption of paying royalty for 3 years. 
 
If these 2 steps are taken by the Government and 
BIS, our association assures you that HM centres 
will come up in the remaining 17 states within 6 
months time. 
 
BIS is collecting Rs.2 per piece on hallmarked 
jewellery as royalty, in addition to the license fees 
from the hallmarking centres.  Out of these several 
crores collected every year, hardly any money is 
spend o n promotion and advertisement of 
hallmarked Jewellery.  The Ministry shall instruct 
the BIS to spend a minimum 25% of their earnings 
from Royalty in a state, in that state itself, for 
promotion and advertisement of hallmarked 
jewellery. 
 
The Indian Associa tion  of Hallmarking centres 
shall be consulted for their valuable inputs on the 
theme and message of the advertisements on 
hallmarking. 
 
The BIS license fees should be made affordable 
and licensing procedures to be simplified. The 
present fees of Rs.20,00 0 and 10,000/ - are not 
affordable to small jewellers. 
 

 
 
 
One reason is the very high BIS 
license fees and the hassles of 
renewing it every 3 years. 
 
 
 
 
 
4)In addition to advertisement in 
print, electronic media, what other 
steps can be taken promote 
hallmarked jewellery? 
 
 
 
 
 
5)One reason is that many big 
jewellers are happy with the  
hallmarking scheme by setting up 
their own hallmarking centres in 
benami names, mostly above 
their own shops or on the back 
side or next building and hallmark 
their substandard jewellery. 
 
 
6)Despite repeated complaints on 
such benam i centres, BIS is not 
doing anything to prevent these 
centres which is spoiling the 
credibility of the hallmarking 
scheme among other honest 
jewellers as well as among the 
general public and consumer 
organizations. 
 
7)Market reports indicates that 
many HM centres are indulging in 
malpractices in connivance with 
the jewellery suppliers and 
jewellers and hallmark jewellery 
without proper testing and quality 
control: 
 
 
 
Instead of periodic renewal, it should be made a 
one time registration, just like Sales Tax/VAT 
registration, with  one time registration fees of 
Rs.5000/- and from the 3 lakhs jewellers, BIS will 
be collecting Rs.150 crores, this way BIS will get 
the money and the jewellers will get hassle free 
license for years to come. 
 
Hallmarked jewellery should be made easily 
pledgeable for loans.  The Reserve Bank of India 
can instruct the Banks to give gold loans upto 90% 
of their market value on hallmarked jewellery 
which will motivate consumers to buy quality 
certified jewellery rather than going for cheaper 
low quality jewellery. 
 
 
Hallmarking is 3 rd party certification by an 
independent agency and BIS should  formulate 
guidelines to ensure that jewellers shall not 
promote hallmarking centres in benami names. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIS shall stipulate that the Promoter of a new HM 
centre shall obtain the No objection certificate 
from the local jewellers association and the Indi an 
Association of Hallmarking centres, stating that 
the Promoter has no links with retail jewellery 
business/jewellery shop. 
 
 
 
 
One solution is to restrict, at least for the next 3 
years or mandatory hallmarking is practiced all 
over the country, setting up of new centres in 
existing cities, so that new centres will come up 
only in unrepresented cities and states.  This will 
help to set up a vast network of HM centres all 
over the country as well as ensure that the 
existing centres do not bargain for busin ess from 
jewellers by compromising quality. 

 
 
 
Malpractices by HM centres and 
jewellers can be detected by 
conducting market sample 
purchases from hallmarked 
jewellers on a regular basis, at 
least once in 6 months from every 
shop. 
 
 
Presently, BIS does not conduct 
surveillance audit on HM centres 
even once in a year.  Many HM 
centres have not been inspected 
even after 3 years of operation 
which will lead to huge 
malpractices.  Also BIS has not 
conducted market sample 
purchases from the jewellery 
shops for the past several years. 
 
 
8)Several years back BIS has 
fixed a very high hallmarking 
charge of Rs.18 per piece and the 
centres are not perm itted to make 
their invoice at a lower rate.  
Centres have to pay Rs.2 per 
piece hallmarked or 10% of the 
HM charges, whichever is higher 
and the centres have to pay 
service tax on Rs.18 per piece 
invoiced whereas in reality, most 
of the centres are chargi ng Rs.10 
per piece. 
 
9)Presently the entire 
responsibility of hallmarked 
jewellery is on the hallmarking 
centre and whenever low 
caratages are detected in a 
hallmarked jewellery, the HM 
centre is put under stop marking 
or closed down. 
 
In the past 10 years , no action 
has been taken on any jeweler for 
 
The present HM department at BIS is not active in 
monitoring and promoting the hallmarking scheme 
and their inactivity has lead to severe malpractices 
at these centres and jewellery shops.  If BIS do 
not have th e capability or manpower to monitor 
the scheme, it should be outsourced to 
independent agencies without further delay.  The 
results of the market sample purchases from 
jewellers should be published in the BIS website. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIS should be concerned ab out quality alone and 
shall not be permitted to interfere in the pricing 
mechanism of the hallmarking scheme.  
Hallmarking charges shall be left to the market 
forces which will benefit the consumers. 
 
Presently the HM centres are paying 33% of their 
collection as royalty Hallmarking should be used 
for consumer benefit and protection and not for 
BIS to make money. 
 
 
 
 
Whenever under caratege is detected in a 
hallmarked jewellery kept at a centre, the centre 
shall be held fully responsible and shall be 
punished without mercy or leniency. 
 
 
 
 
 
But once it leaves the HM centre, the jeweler also 
should be held responsible for under caratage.  

 
 
malpractices done by them, 
whereas several hallmarking 
centres were closed down as 
penalty.  
 
 
 
 
10)It can properly implemented if 
done in a phased manner all over 
the country, with a clear road 
map. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Many wholesalers and jewellers do malpractices 
on hallmarked jewellery. 
 
Hence the HM centre and the jeweler should be 
given the same punishment after thorough enquiry 
by the BIS. 
 
 
Presently BIS does not have the manpower to 
monitor and streamline the HM scheme.   As of 
now 2 -3 officers in Delhi BIS HQ is looking after 
the scheme with no effect.  Hence a separate 
department under the Ministry or BIS shall be 
formed to implement and monitor the mandatory 
hallmarking of jewellery all over the country. 
 
 
 
2.17 The issues raised/suggestions made by the aforementioned representatives of 
Jewellers/Hallmarking Centres have been tak en note of and discussed at the relevant 
Chapters in the draft Report. 
 

 
 
2.18 The Committee note that Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) as the National 
Standards Body is formulating need based Indian Standards in line with the 
national priorities.  The sche me of Hallmarking of gold jewellery was launched by 
BIS, in April, 2000 to provide third party assurance to consumers on the purity of 
gold jewellery or its fineness.  Under the scheme, a jeweler has to obtain 
Hallmarking license from BIS to get his jewell ery hallmarked from the BIS 
recognized Assaying & Hallmarking Centres and to ensure the purity of jewellery 
received from artisans by following a systematic quality assurance system. 
  The Committee observe that the number of jewelers who have taken 
license under the scheme has gone up from 186 as on 31 st March, 2010 to 7185 as 
on 31st December, 2009. However, the Committee feel that the progress is not at 
all satisfactory considering the fact that the scheme was launched about 10 years 
ago and there are ab out 33 lakh jewelers in the country. Apparently, sincere 
efforts have not been made by the government to bring more jewelers under the 
ambit of BIS Hallmarking Jewellery Scheme.  The Committee, therefore,  desire 
that the Government should make vigorous ef forts to motivate/encourage more 
number of jewelers throughout the country to obtain the hallmarked license from 
BIS for getting their jewellery hallmarked so that more number of people enjoy 
the benefits of the Scheme.  
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER  III 
SETTING UP OF  ASSAYING & HALLMARKING CENTRES IN ALL THE STATES/UTs. 
3.1 The following Statement as furnished by the Department of Consumer Affairs 
shows the list of State-wise Assaying and Hallmarking Centers:- 
List of State-wise A&H Centres 
S.No.                     Name of the State/UT  Number of Centres 
1. Andhra Pradesh     09 
 2. Chandigarh      01 
  
3. Chattisgarh      01 
  
4. Gujarat      14 
  
5. Haryana      01 
  
6. Jharkhand      01 
  
7. Karnataka      12 
  
8. Kerala      21  
      
9. Maharashtra     21 
  
10. Madhya Pradesh     03 
  
11. New Delhi      19 
  
12. Orissa      02 
  
13. Punjab      01 
  
14. Rajasthan      01 
  
15. Tamil Nadu      26 
  
16. Uttar Pradesh     04 
  
17 West Bengal     10 
       ----------------- 
 Total      147 
       ------------------ 
 

 
 
3.2 As regards the reasons for not setting up of Assaying & Hallmarking centres in 
the remaining 18 states the Department explained as under:- 
As per the World Gold Council data, 67% of total gold offtake in the country is 
confined to 7 major consuming States of  Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Andhra 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Gujarat and Delhi.  Further 88% of gold jewellery is being 
produced in 67 cities in the country and the remaining 12% in the other towns, villages 
and remote areas put together.  As such the requ irement of Assaying & Hallmarking 
Centres is more in these major consuming States/production centres and accordingly 
more such Centres have come up to these places.  Apparently, the quantum of 
jewellery being produced/consumed in the other States/UT is not  sufficient to generate 
adequate response of entrepreneurs to set up assaying & Hallmarking Centres there, 
where such Centres may not be viable.  
3.3 In this context, Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs stated during oral 
evidence:- 
“So far only 147 centres are there in the country which are operating in big and 
metropolitan cities.  If hallmarking is made mandatory, there will be a large 
number of centres.  The problem is that since the hallmarking is not compulsory, 
jewellers do not go to them and they do not generate sufficient business.” 
 
3.4 The Committee during briefing meeting pointed out that the Scheme was 
launched to give relief to the common man and not only to the people living in metro or 
big cities and desired to know why it was not being implemented in all the cities country-
wide.  The DG, BIS stated that 88% of offtake of gold for making the jewellery is right 
now concentrated in about 67 cities of India. 
3.5 The Committee were, however,  informed that to encourage entrepreneurs to set 
up more Assaying & Hallmarking Centres in the country in view of Government‟s 
intention to bring gold jewellery articles under compulsory certification in a phased 
manner, Government has introduced a scheme for extension of financial assistance to 
entrepreneurs setting up such centres.  The assistance is to the extent of 15% of the 
cost of machinery and equipment required for setting up of the Centres, subject to a 

 
 
maximum of Rs.15 lakhs (30% of cost of machinery and equipment subject to maximum 
of Rs.30 lakhs for Centres in North Eastern Region, special category states of Himachal 
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Uttarakhand and rural areas of the country).  Subject 
to availability of applicants, priority is given for setting up of the Centres in locations 
where such Centres do not exist.  This is in addition to the scheme being operated by 
BIS for recognition of Assaying & Hallmarking Centres. 
3.6 In this context, the representative of the Ministry stated during evidence:- 
“Hallmarking is a plan scheme.  Earlier  BIS used to give advertisement in every 
city but now the scheme has been improved and now we can find any person 
desirous of getting the benefit of the scheme can install the testing centre.  We 
have liberalized the scheme completely.  For this whatever a dvertisement is 
required, we will increase it within the next 2-3 months.” 
 
3.7 Asked to state the efforts made to encourage setting up of more hallmarking 
centres in the country particularly in the hilly and rural areas, the Department replied 
that in ord er to speed up the work of setting up of more A&H Centres throughout the 
country in view of Governments commitment to introduce mandatory hallmarking of gold 
jewellery articles, the following modifications in the existing Scheme have been made 
recently: 
(a) Training of BIS Officers in India itself rather than in an Assaying Office in 
UK/Switzerland as approved by the EFC in its meeting held on 
23.10.2007, within the outlay of Rs.0.40 crores, 
(b) Consideration of requests received for setting up of Gold Assa ying and 
Hallmarking Centres in the NE Region and Special Category States even 
if such requests are not in response to specific advertisements seeking 
Expressions of Interest for setting up of such Centres in that region/States; 
(c) Extending Central assis tance to more than 50 centres to facilitate 
establishment of such Centres in locations where no Assaying & 
Hallmarking Centre (assisted or otherwise) exists; and  
(d) Enhancement of the quantum of financial assistance for setting up of 
Assaying & Hallmarki ng Centres in rural areas from 15% to 30% of the 
cost of equipment and machinery subject to a maximum of Rs.30 lakhs.  
The Municipal Acts concerned will be the basis for definition and 
identification of rural areas. 

 
 
Setting up of Assaying & Hallmarking Cen tres in North Eastern Region and 
Remote and Backward Areas 
3.8 Asked to state the number of Assaying & Hallmarking Centres set up in the North 
Eastern Region and the remote and backward areas, the Department stated that no 
Assaying & Hallmarking Centre has  so far come up in the North Eastern Region and 
remote and backward areas. 
3.9 In this context,  in reply to a query, the Department stated that as per World Gold 
Council data for gold off -take, Assam, Chattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh and Orissa 
together acco unt for only 4.5% of the total gold consumption in the country.  Gold 
consumption in other North -Eastern States, J&K, Uttrakhand and Goa is also 
insignificant.  Apparently, the quantum of jewellery being produced/consumed in these 
States is not sufficient to generate adequate response of entrepreneurs where such 
centres may not be viable. 
3.10 In this context, DG, BIS further stated during briefing – 
“Despite the central assistance being given, it has been seen that in some 
areas they are not coming e.g. in  North East or special category areas or 
in hilly states despite assistance of 30 lakh being given, nobody is coming 
forward to set up centres.  On 16 January, 2010 another advertisement 
was given asking them to get assistance and set up centres but the 
private entrepreneurs first make assessment and if it is viable they come 
forward but if they find that even after taking subsidy of thirty lakhs, they 
have to invest seventy lakhs and even then if the number of hallmarked 
items are very less, they will not get any profit.” 
3.11 The Department has, however, informed that in response to a recent 
advertisement released by BIS in 34 National Dailies inviting expressions of interest 
from interested entrepreneurs for setting up of such centres in  special category  States, 
rural areas where no Assaying   & Hallmarking Centres exist, six entrepreneurs have 
expressed interest in setting up of Assaying & Hallmarking Centres. 
312 As regards the efforts made by BIS during the last 10 months to improve the 
performance of the Scheme; the DG, BIS stated that in the year 2009 -10, about 140 
advertisements were given in prominent newspapers.   

 
 
3.13 The Committee desired to know as to whether keeping in view the lack of interest 
of entrepreneurs, can the Government consider sett ing up of its own Assaying & 
Hallmarking Centres in such areas where no entrepreneur is coming forward to set up 
Centre.  The Department in reply stated that setting up of Assaying & Hallmarking 
Centres is a market driven activity open to entrepreneurs bot h in private and public 
sector.  Lack of interest of entrepreneurs to set up the Centres in remote, hilly and tribal 
areas is on account of lack of demand.  Presently, neither BIS nor the Government has 
any proposal to set up Assaying & Hallmarking Centres of their own. 
3.14 The Committee desired to know whether the existing Assaying & Hallmarking 
Centres are adequate for testing the purity of gold jewellery.  The Department in reply 
stated that as per the information provided by Indian Association of Hallm arking 
Centres, in the country as a whole, in more than 60% of the Hallmarking Centres, 
capacity utilization is hardly 20% of the installed capacity.   Therefore, it is apparent that 
the existing capacity is adequate to meet the current demand. 
Infrastructure facilities available in the Hallmarking Centres 
3.15 Asked to state whether the existing centres are self sufficient in terms of 
infrastructure to test the purity of jewellery, the Department replied that the Assaying & 
Hallmarking Centres are set up by entrepreneurs but recognized by BIS.  Recognition is 
given only after ensuring that the Centres have acquired the specified infrastructure and 
competency  for carrying out assaying & hallmarking of jewellery articles.  The facilities 
are further verified  through surprise surveillance audits conducted by BIS at periodical 
intervals. 
3.16 The Committee desired to know that if the hallmarking of jewellery is made 
mandatory, whether the BIS has adequate infrastructure to assess the purity of gold 
jewellery in the country, the DG replied that at present, it is not but as the Government 
is proposing to make it mandatory in phases, the purpose would be served after the 
areas are notified.  With the machinery available at present, it is thought that it should 
not be made mandatory in one go because it will not be possible to give license to all 
and assign  work to all of them as we do not have sufficient number of centres.   

 
 
3.17 When asked as to how it is ensured that the certified Assaying & Hallmarking 
Centres a re checking properly/assaying  correctly the purity  and quality of jewellery 
before stamping them with the BIS logo of certification, the Department, stated as 
under:- 
 Assaying & Hallmarking Centres are recognized by BIS after ensuring that the 
centre ha s acquired the specified infrastructure and competence for carrying out 
Assaying & Hallmarking of jewellery as per the BIS criteria.  This is also monitored 
through periodical surveillance audits.   
 
 
 

 
 
3.18 The Committee are disturbed to note that so far only 147 BIS recognized 
Assaying & Hallmarking centres to assess the purity of gold jewellery have been 
set up in the country, that too mostly in big  and metropolitan cities of seventeen 
States. The consumers of the remaining States/UTs, especially in the  special 
category States of Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and other States such 
as Bihar and Goa are completely deprived of the benefits of the Scheme. The 
reasons put forward by the Ministry that the quantum of jewellery being produced 
in other States /UTs is not sufficient to generate adequate response from 
entrepreneurs to set up centres are not acceptable to the Committee. The 
Committee feel that the Scheme has not been taken up with the seriousness it 
deserves.  The Committee find that in order to encourage the entrepreneurs to set 
up Assaying & Hallmarking Centres, the scheme for extension of financial 
assistance to entrepreneurs  to the extent of 15% of the cost of machinery and 
equipment required for setting up of the Centres, subject to a maximum  of     
Rs.15 lakhs (30% of cost of machinery and equipment subject to maximum of 
Rs.30 lakhs for Centres in North Eastern Region, special category States of 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Uttarakhand and rural areas of the 
country) has been introdu ced by the government.  The Committee are dismayed 
to note that despite the central assistance given by the government, not many 
centres have been set up in the country and only one centre each has come up in 
the States /UT of Punjab, Haryana, Chhatisgarh, Jharkhand and Chandigarh.   
The Committee feel that apparently, the central assistance of Rs.15 lakh       
(Rs.30 lakhs for the North Eastern Region and special category States) does not 

 
 
seem to be  sufficient to encourage the entrepreneurs to set up thes e centres. 
The Committee were informed during examination of the Subject that the total 
investment on land, building and machinery for a Hallmarking Centre comes to 
about Rs.120 lakhs.  As such, an assistance to the tune of Rs.15 lakhs,  that too 
released in two installments – one after setting up of the centre and the other 
after successful operation of the centre for one year, is certainly not sufficient to 
attract the entrepreneurs to set up the centres. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the Ministry should assess the viability of the centres and also liberalise the 
scheme by increasing the amount of central assistance and simplifying the 
procedure for release of funds so that more entrepreneurs come forward to set 
up these centres, not only in the big cities but also in the rural and hilly areas.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
3.19 The Committee are unhappy to note that no Assaying & Hallmarking Centre 
has so far come up in the North Eastern Region and remote and backward areas 
despite central assistance of Rs.30 lakh being given for the purpose.  The plea of 
the Government that as per the World Gold Council data for gold offtake, Assam, 
Chhatisgarh, Himachal Pradesh and Orissa put together account for only 4.5% of 
the total gold consumed in the country and gold consumers in other North 
Eastern States, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttrakhand and Goa are insignificant, is  not 
convincing to the Committee. The Committee feel that keeping in view the 
interests of the consumers of North Eastern Region and special category States, 
sincere efforts were required to be made to encourage the entrepreneurs to set 
up centres in these areas. 
 The Committee note that in response to a recent advertisement released by 
BIS in 34 National Dailies inviting expressions of interest from interested 
entrepreneurs for setting up of such centres in special category States, rural 
areas where no Assaying   & Hallmarking Centres exist, six entrepreneurs have 
expressed interest in setting up of Assaying & Hallmarking Centres. 
 The Committee hope that these cases wi ll be finalized expeditiously for 
setting up of the Assaying & Hallmarking Centres in North Eastern region, the 
special category States and rural areas without further delay. 
 
 

 
 
3.20 The Committee note with concern that in case the hallmarking  of jewellery  
is made mandatory, adequate infrastructure to assess the purity of gold jewellery 
is not available in the country. The Committee agree with the proposal of the 
Government to make the hallmarking of jewellery mandatory in the four 
metropolitan cities of De lhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai in the first phase and 
in the rest of the country later, as they find that to assess the purity of jewellery 
produced in the 4 metro cities, there are adequate number of centres.  The 
Committee, however, desire that simulta neously the Department should also take 
vigorous steps to set up Assaying & Hallmarking Centres in other parts of the 
Country so that when the Scheme is made mandatory, sufficient infrastructure is 
available to assess the purity of jewellery. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER  IV 
FUNDS ALLOCATED BY THE GOVERNMENT FOR IMPLEMENTATION                 
OF THE SCHEME AND ITS UTILIZATION 
4.1 The Department has stated that the funds are released to BIS by the 
Government for giving financial assistance to entrepreneurs who set up A ssaying & 
Hallmarking centres under the central assistance scheme. When asked whether the 
funds provided by the Government to BIS for setting up of Assaying and Hallmarking 
Centres are sufficient,  the Department has stated that funds released so far have been 
found sufficient to meet the demand. 
4.2 The Department has furnished the following statement indicating the B.E., funds 
released to BIS and the amount utilized by BIS during the last three years. 
(Rs. In crores) 
Year BE Funds Released to BIS Amount utilized by BIS 
2007-08 4.00 1.00 0.32 
2008-09 3.00 Nil 0.41 
2009-10 1.00 0.81 0.58* 
* As on 31.12.09 
From the above statement it has been noted that there is big mismatch between 
BE, funds released and amount utilized eg. During 2008 -09, BE was Rs.3 cr ores and 
the funds released to BIS was nil whereas amount utilized was 0.41 crore.  In the year 
2009-10, BE was Rs.1.00 crore and the funds released to BIS was 0.81 crore and the 
actual utilization was 0.58 crores.  In this regard, the Department have stat ed that 
setting up of Assaying & Hallmarking centres is a commercial activity.  Entrepreneurs 
set up these centres at locations of their choice.  As on 31.12.09, 147 Centes in 46 
locations in India have been set up, of which 23 are with central assistance.   Under 
utilization of funds has been due to lack of demand for assistance.  
4.3 The original estimates, the revised estimates, the actual expenditure and the 
reasons for shortfall in achievement of physical and financial targets for the years  2007-
08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 has been given in the following  statement.  

 
 
Gold Hallmarking Scheme 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
BE RE Actual 
Exp. 
Shortfall/ 
excess exp.. 
if any with 
reasons for 
variations  
  
BE RE Actual 
Exp. 
Shortfall/ 
excess 
exp.. if any 
with 
reasons fo r 
variations  
BE RE Actual 
Exp. 
Shortfall/ 
excess 
exp.. if any 
with 
reasons for 
variations 
(till date) 
4.00 4,00 1.00 * Setting up 
of Assaying 
& 
Hallmarking 
(A&H) 
Centres 
Target : 37 
Achievement 
: 11 
. 
* 
Organization 
of   
`programmes 
for training of 
artisans. 
Target : 15 
Achievement 
: 10 
  
* Training 
programmes 
for A&H 
personnel.  
Target : 2 
Achievement 
:2 
3.00 0.01 Nil * Setting up 
of  Assaying 
& 
Hallmarking 
(A&H) 
Centres,  
Target : 27 
Achievement 
:  7  
  
* 
Organization 
of   
programmes 
for training 
of artisans 
Target : 15 
Achievement 
: 7 
  
* Training 
programmes 
for A&H 
personnel.  
Target : 2  
Achievement 
: 2. 
1.00 0.81 0.81 * Setting up 
of  Assaying 
& 
Hallmarking 
(A&H) 
Centres,  
Target : 26 
Achievement 
:  3  
  
* 
Organization 
of   
programmes 
for training 
of artisans 
Target : 15 
Achievement 
: 1 
  
* Training 
programmes 
for A&H 
personnel.  
Target : 2  
Achievement 
: Nil 
Due to lack of interest of entrepreneurs, the achievements under the Central assistance 
Scheme has not been to the expected level.  
 
4.4 The Co mmittee observed that target for setting up of Assaying & Hallmarking 
Centres during the last three years was not achieved.  In 2007 -08 as against the target 
of 37 achievement was 11.  In 2008 -09 achievement was 7 against the target of 27 and 
in the year 2 009-10, as against the target of 26, the achievement was only 3.  The 
targets for organization of programmes for training of artisans and Assaying & 

 
 
Hallmarking personnel for the said period were also not achieved. In this context the 
Department has stated  that implementation of the scheme has not been upto the 
expected level.  Against the target for setting up of a total of 50 Assaying & Hallmarking 
Centres under central assistance during the 11th Five Year Plan, only 23 could be set up 
and recognized by BIS so far owing to lack of interest on the part of entrepreneurs to set 
up such Centres on commercial considerations, apparently due to inadequate demand 
consequent on non -introduction of hallmarking on mandatory basis.  The recent 
liberalization of the sc heme is likely to encourage entrepreneurs to come forward and 
set up more such Centres.  Introduction of mandatory hallmarking, even if in phases, is 
also bound to encourage setting up of more such Centres in different parts of the 
country. 
4.5 In this context, the Department have further stated as under:- 
“Central Assistance under the Scheme is released for a maximum of two Centres 
at important locations other than Metros/major production/consumption Centres 
where assistance may be extended up to a maximum  of four Centres.  In view of 
limited demand from unrepresented areas, so far only 23 centres have been  set 
up under the Scheme.  During 2008 -09 no funds were released to BIS since it 
already had unspent balance from the previous year and no additional 
requirements were projected.  During 2009 -10, against BE of Rs.1.00 crore, 
Rs.0.81 crore was released to BIS.” 
4.6 As regards the procedure for releasing funds to the beneficiaries, the Department 
of Consumer Affairs have stated that BIS is the executing age ncy for implementation of 
the Central Sector Scheme for extension of financial assistance to entrepreneurs who 
set up Assaying & Hallmarking Centres.  Funds are released to BIS by the Government 
for giving such assistance to eligible beneficiaries.  BIS pr ovides assistance to the 
beneficiaries in two installments as under: 
(a) 1st installment of 50% of assistance after setting up of the Centres and 
obtaining BIS recognition; and  
(b) 2nd installment of balance 50% after one year of successful operation of 
the centre. 
4.7 Availability and installation of all the machinery and testing equipments in the 
Centres are verified by BIS physically as per the documented norms.  All the 

 
 
bills/vouchers relating the said machinery and equipment are also verified before 
release of payment to the beneficiaries. 
4.8 During evidence the Committee pointed out that the funds are not being utilized 
because the people are not coming forward to set up Assaying & Hallmarking centres 
with the less incentive being given to them. The representative of the Department in 
response stated that they will look into the matter as to how can the entrepreneurs be 
encouraged and take steps accordingly. 
4.9 As regards the steps taken to review the financial and physical performances 
against plan provisions and targets fixed,  the Department in a note furnished to the 
Committee have stated that as suggested by the Planning Commission, an evaluation 
study is being undertaken shortly: 
* to assess the effectiveness or otherwise of the Scheme, 
* the re asons for lack of interest on the part of entrepreneurs to avail 
assistance and set up centres 
 * Suggest measures for its more effective  implementation and based on the 
findings of the study, suitable modifications in the Scheme may be 
considered at a later stage.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
4.10 The Committee note with concern the uneven pattern of the budget 
estimates and expenditure, i.e. the funds released to BIS and the amount actually 
utilized by BIS during the last three years.  In the year 2007 -08, as against BE of 
Rs.4 crores,  funds released to BIS were Rs.1 crore and the amount actually 
utilized by it was Rs.0.32 crores.  In the year 2008 -09, against  the BE of Rs.3 
crores, Nil amount was released to BIS,  whereas in the year 2009 -10, BE was 
reduced to merely Rs.1 crore out of which only 0.81crore was released to BIS and 
only 0.58 crores was actually utilized by BIS as on 31 st December, 2009.  The 
reasons put forward by the Department that under utilization of funds has been 
due to lack of demand for assistance,  are unacceptable to the Committee.  The 
Committee are of the opinion that this trend merely indicates the lack of 
seriousness on the part of the Ministry to implement this very important scheme, 
to  protect the interest of the consumers.   The Committee deplor e the slackness 
and improper planning on the part of the Government to spend the funds. The 
Committee recommend that the Department should give adequate publicity to 
such Schemes so as to create interest among the consumers and educate them 
about the benef its of purchasing only hallmarked jewellery.  Further, as earlier 
stated, the Department should also explore the possibility of liberalizing the 
scheme of providing financial assistance for setting up of Assaying & 
Hallmarking Centres so as to motivate mor e and more entrepreneurs to set up 
Assaying & Hallmarking Centres in the remaining 18 States/UTs of the Country.  
 
 

 
 
4.11 The Committee are disturbed to note that  there is a great shortfall in the 
achievement of physical targets as well, over the last thre e years. As against the 
targets of setting up of 37, 27 and 26 Assaying & Hallmarking Centres, the 
achievement was only 11, 7 and 3 during the years 2007 -08, 2008-09 and 2009-10, 
respectively. Further, the targets in respect of conducting training programm es 
for artisans and Assaying & Hallmarking personnel were also not achieved for the 
said period. The Department  themselves have conceded that implementation of 
the scheme has not been upto the expected level and have admitted that against 
the target for s etting up of a total of 50 Assaying & Hallmarking Centres under 
central assistance during the 11 th Five Year Plan, only 23 could be set up and 
recognized by BIS.   
 The Committee find that to review the financial and physical performances, 
the Department, as suggested by the Planning Commission, is undertaking an 
evaluation study shortly to assess the effectiveness or otherwise of the scheme, 
the reasons for lack of interest on the part of entrepreneurs to avail assistance to 
set up centres and suggest meas ures for its effective implementation. The 
Committee feel that the performance of the Scheme should have been reviewed 
much earlier and remedial steps taken in order to improve its performance.  The 
Committee observe that the performance of the Scheme was unsatisfactory not 
for want of funds but due to the lack of proper planning on the part of the 
Department.  The Committee strongly deplore the lack of professionalism on the 
part of the Department of Consumer Affairs, who could not take timely action to 
spend the money  and achieve the financial as well as physical targets under the 

 
 
Scheme. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should make 
proper planning to ensure achievement of physical targets during 2010 -11.  The 
Committee also desire tha t the evaluation study should be undertaken urgently 
and based on the assessment and outcome of the study, necessary modifications 
may be made in the scheme so as to make it more effective.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER V 
MANDATORY HALLMARKING OF GOLD JEWELLERY 
 
5.1 The Committee have been informed  that it was proposed to bring hallmarking of 
gold jewellery under mandatory certification w.e.f. 1st January, 2008 in a phased manner 
– in the four metro cities of Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai in the first phase and in 
the rest of the country later, based on the experience gained in the four metros.  The 
Scheme, however, could not be introduced so far for want of an enabling legislative 
framework for its implementation under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986.  The 
Bill for Amendment to BIS Act is under consideration of the Department in consultation 
with Legislative Department, Ministry of Law & Justice. 
5.2 In this  context, the repr esentatives of the Department stated during briefing 
meeting as under:- 
 “Under Section 14 of BIS Act, the Central Government has powers under which 
the Indian Standard mark can be made compulsory  in respect of any process or 
article, in the public intere st.  These compulsions are possible only for the 
Industries mentioned in the First Schedule of the Industries Development and 
Regulation Act, 1951.  In this first schedule of Industries Development and 
Regulation Act, manufacturing of gold and silver is in cluded.  However, when we 
tried to interpret that definition to include gold jewellery, we ran into legal 
problems.  There the gold being manufactured or refined would be covered.  That 
would be covering only primary gold.  But in the country we have lakhs  of 
jewellers who are actually selling gold jewellery to the people. That definition 
could not fit in our existing framework.  As a result, so far, we have not been able 
to make hallmarking of gold jewellery mandatory.  That is one aspect of the 
problem. 
Now, when we went and framed some regulations, we were advised by 
the Law Ministry that `first you have to amend your Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act to provide for compulsory marking of gold jewellery.  Only then, it would be 
possible to go ahead.‟  So, we have already made the draft, which is in the final 
stages of getting approval from the Law Ministry.  We are hopeful that in the 
ensuing Session of Parliament we will be able to introduce this amendment to 
BIS Act, which will give us legal powers to make it mandatory.” 
5.3 During examination of Demands for Grants for the year 2008 -09, the Department 
had informed that mandatory Gold Hallmarking Scheme is planned to be implemented 
in a phased manner in the country.  In the first phase, 4 metro cities I.e. Del hi, Mumbai, 

 
 
Chennai and Kolkatta are proposed to be covered.  When asked about the reasons for 
spilling over of targets with regard to making of the hallmarking of gold jewellery 
mandatory, the Department stated that Hallmarking of Gold jewellery has not b een 
made compulsory due to absence of enabling legislative framework for its 
implementation under Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986. 
5.4 However, during evidence on 21 st July, 2010, the Committee pointed out that 
there is a demand from the jewellers who  are honestly trying to sell BIS hallmarked 
jewellery to make it mandatory as there are chances of jewellers  selling non hallmarked 
jewellery, to exploit the market.  The Committee, therefore, desired to know as to why 
there was so much delay to amend the  Act so as  to make hallmarking of gold jewellery 
mandatory and what efforts were made by the Department to expedite it.  The 
Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs responded as under:- 
“After detailed discussions, Law Ministry has given its approval to  the proposed 
amendments in the Act but the Cabinet Secretary had said that we should have 
little more consultations with other Departments namely the Department of 
Industrial Policy and Promotion, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of 
Commerce.  We are going to discuss with the Department of Industrial Policy and 
Promotion.”  
He further added that:- 
“Consultations with these Departments were held earlier, the approval of Law 
Ministry was obtained and the matter was sent for Cabinet‟s approval.  The 
Cabinet‟s Committee opined that since the concerned Departments were 
consulted long back, they may again be consulted.” 
5.5 When the Committee pointed out that almost a decade had passed since the 
launch of the scheme in 2000, but it was yet to be made mand atory, the Secretary, 
Consumer Affairs stated that Amendments were proposed only in 2007. During 
evidence, the Committee enquired about the major amendments proposed to be made 
in the Bill.  The Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs responded as under:- 
“There is a provision in Section 14 of the Industries Development and Regulation  
Act that if BIS mark is to be made mandatory for a product, it should be in the 
First Schedule of that Act.  Now we want to delink it from the Industries 
Development and Re gulation Act.  We want to say if mandatory certificate is 
going to be introduced for any product, it should be in public interest.  That is not 
going to be in the law.  If it is in public interest, the Government can make any 

 
 
product or process certification mandatory.  That is one major amendment which 
we are proposing.  
The second major amendment is, today if a product is to be made mandatory for 
certification by BIS, then the whole process has to be done by BIS.  But for two 
or three items like jewellery  where the number of dealers are in lakhs, we are 
now trying to introduce another scheme which is called Registration Scheme 
where a person will say that he has complied with all the requirements of BIS. 
BIS will authorize certain laboratories where offici als  can go and check.  But it 
will be very difficult to introduce compulsory hallmarking. 
Thirdly, we are trying to introduce a system of compounding of offence.  If a 
person is misusing the BIS norm, then BIS will file a case in the court and the 
court will give six months prison term to the guilty.” 
5.6 The Committee pointed out that though the jewellery having a BIS mark carries 
an assurance of purity, the jewellers selling the hallmarked jewellery charge exorbitant 
making charges.  There is no control on the making charges and the customers are 
exploited.  The Committee, therefore, desired to know whether any system has been 
evolved by BIS to have a check on this to give protection to the consumer.  The 
Department in this regard stated that making charges depend upon the type of jewellery 
being purchased by the consumer and it is a bilateral issue between jeweler and 
customer in which BIS has no role to play.  The DG, BIS, in this context during evidence 
stated – “There are no standard for designs.  But theoretically it is possible.  If we say 
that nobody shall charge in excess of a certain percent of the price of intrinsic gold in it, 
for that, a law may be necessarily required.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
5.7 The Committee are deeply concerned to note the delay in the 
implementation of Mandatory Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery Scheme which was 
proposed to be implemented w.e.f. 1 st January, 2008 in a phased manner i.e.in the 
four metro cities of Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkatta and Chennai in the first phase and in 
the rest of the cou ntry, later.  As informed by the Department of Consumer 
Affairs, the Scheme could not be introduced so far for want of an enabling 
legislative framework for its implementation under the BIS Act, 1986. The 
Committee have been informed that the  amendments i n the Act as approved by 
the Law Ministry were sent for  Cabinets approval.  The Cabinet Committee has 
opined that since the concerned Departments namely, the Department of 
Industrial Policy and Promotion, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of 
Commerce were consulted long back, they may again be  consulted, after which 
the matter will again be placed before the Cabinet.  The Committee are not 
convinced with the reasons advanced by the Ministry for the delay in making 
necessary amendments in the Act. T he Committee feel this to be on account of 
slackness on the part of the Government and lack of seriousness on their part to 
implement the scheme in the right earnest.  
 The Committee feel that until and unless the Hallmarking of gold jewellery 
is made mandatory, the scheme will not have the desired result of protecting the  
interest of the consumers by preventing sale of inferior quality of gold, promoting 
export competitiveness and developing India as a leading gold market centre in 
the world.  The Committ ee observe  that due to increase in the purchasing power 
of the middle and upper -middle classes,  there is an increasing market for gold 

 
 
jewellery.  Even the people of small towns and villages often invest their hard 
earned savings in gold jewellery as a h edge against inflation and difficult times. 
All such consumers rightly deserve to get insurance of their investment in gold, 
which is possible only if the Hallmarking of gold jewellery is made mandatory. 
 During examination of the Subject it was brought to  the notice of the 
Committee that BIS market surveys in 2002 had revealed a 10 -15% adulteration in 
22 carat jewellery which at today’s gold prices, will be estimated to 20 thousand 
crores per annum of loss to the consumers.  The matter thus deserves seriou s 
consideration.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Department to 
take up the matter with utmost seriousness and finalise the modalities of the Bill 
for its early introduction in the Parliament so as to bring hallmarking of jewellery 
under mandatory certification.  As regards operational issues arising out of the 
making of hallmarking of jewellery mandatory, the Government may constitute a 
high powered Committee to tackle those issues.  However, in no case, the 
introduction of the Bill should be delayed. 

 
 
5.8 The Committee also note that though the jewelers selling hallmarked 
jewellery give an assurance of purity, yet they charge exorbitant making charges 
which puts heavy burden on the consumer in the guise of providing quality 
assurance.  The  Committee are dismayed to note that BIS has no control on the 
situation whereby the customers are being exploited by the BIS certified jewelers.  
in this regard, the Committee were informed during evidence that it is a bilateral 
issue between the jeweler and the customer and BIS has no role to play, which 
the Committee do not find convincing.  The Committee feel that in order to 
regulate the making charges, a law may necessarily be required.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that BIS should look into th is aspect and evolve a system 
to regulate the making charges to ensure that a ceiling is imposed thereon.  As 
certain amendments in the BIS Act, 1986 are already under consideration of the 
Government, the Committee desire that necessary amendments may be m ade to 
this effect also in the  BIS Act, so as to give protection to the consumer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER  VI 
EVALUATION STUDY OF GOLD HALLMARKING OF  JEWELLERY SCHEME 
 
6.1 Asked whether the Scheme of gold hallmarking of jewellery has been 
evaluated/reviewed by an independent agency, the Department in a note furnished to 
the Committee stated as under :- 
An evaluation study of the Scheme has recently been awarded to an 
independent agency with the following terms of reference: 
(a) Evaluation of the procedure for provid ing central assistance to Gold 
Assaying & Hallmarking Centres across the country. 
(b) Whether financial assistance under the Scheme act as an incentive for 
Gold Assaying & Hallmarking Centres. 
(c) Whether consumers are aware of the benefits of Assaying/Hallmarking  
Centres. 
(d) Efficacy of training provided to artisans and whether such training has 
helped in improving their skills. 
(e) Identify problems of the Assaying & Hallmarking Centres, if any, in 
carrying out their operations and suggest appropriate solutions to 
overcome these problems. 
(f) Evaluate reasons for slow progress of the Scheme and satisfactory 
progress in certain States. 
(g) Comments on effectiveness of the Scheme and suggest measures to 
make its implementation more effective. 
6.2 The study will cover the metro cit ies of Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkatta & Chennai, 15 
locations where Assaying & Hallmarking Centres have already been set up with Central 
Assistance and 15 other locations in different parts of the country where, as per the 
World Gold Council, the offtake of gold is on the high side or are capital cities of special 
category states.  The study should gauge the level of awareness among the 
consumers/potential consumers about the purity of gold jewellery sold in the country, 
the role of hallmarking and the importance of purchasing hallmarked jewellery. The 
study should cover at least 100 consumers/potential consumers selected on random 
basis in each Centre/location, out of which about 50% may be from rural areas. 
6.3 Asked whether the study will also cover the remote, hilly and backward areas, 
the Department stated that the study will cover Jammu, Shimla and Dehradun among 

 
 
other locations.  The study would cover 100 consumers, of which about 50% will be 
from rural areas, representing different social -economic categories  on stratified 
sampling basis in each location.  The Agency will submit the Report within a period of 
two months. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
6.4 The Committee note that an evaluation study of the Scheme of Hallmarking 
of Gold Jewellery has been given to an independent agency to study and evaluate 
inter alia, the procedure for providing central assistance to Assaying & 
Hallmarking Centres; whether the assistance acts as an incentives for the 
centres; the reasons for slow progress of the scheme and to suggest measures 
to make its  implementation more effective.  The study to be conducted in metro 
cities of Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai would gauge the level of awareness 
among the consumers about the purity of gold jewellery, the role of hallmarking 
and importance of purchasing  hallmarked jewellery and would also cover rural 
areas. The Committee feel that such an evaluation study should have been 
conducted much earlier after watching the performance of the Scheme in the first 
two years of the 11th Five Year Plan to know the reasons for its slow progress and 
to take consequential measures to make its implementation more effective.  The 
Committee deplore the lackadaisical manner of implementing the scheme by the 
Ministry.  The Committee hope that as the present study would cover th e 
consumers representing different socio economic categories on stratified  
sampling  basis in each location, it would help to identify the problems and 
shortcomings in the Scheme.  The Committee desire that based on the findings 
and outcome of the study, suitable modifications may be made in the Scheme to 
make it more effective. 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – VII 
AWARENESS  PROGRAMMES 
7.1 Asked  to state the steps taken by the Government to create awareness among 
the consumer  about the benefits of hallmarking of gold jewel ery, the Department stated 
in a written note that BIS releases advertisements both in print and electronic media in 
English and local languages and organize awareness programmes at regular intervals 
across the country including rural and remote areas to ma ke the scheme popular.  So 
far 240 awareness programmes have been organized by BIS during last four years.  
Department of Consumer Affairs has also been running a multi -media publicity 
campaign both in print and electronic media under the `Jago Grahak Jago ‟ theme to 
create awareness among consumers and Hallmarking is one of the issues being 
highlighted in the campaign.  Programmes like `Nukkad Natak‟ are also organized for 
the benefit of consumers in remote and rural areas.  When asked  about the number of 
`Nukkad Natak‟ organized for the benefit of consumers in remote and rural areas, the 
Department stated that BIS has not yet organized any `Nukkad Natak‟ in rural/remote 
areas.    
7.2 The Committee desired to know as to how far the publicity campaign in pri nt and 
electronic media under `Jago Grahak Jago‟ theme has proved useful to create 
awareness amongst the consumers.  The Department is reply have stated that a survey  
was conducted by an empanelled agency of Planning Commission in 59 districts of 12 
States i.e. Delhi, Madhya Pradesh, Haryana, West Bengal, Gujarat, Karnataka, 
Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, Assam and Meghalaya.  Data was 
collected from house wives; students, employed (including self employed); unemployed, 
trade/industry, farmers and senior citizens.   About 53% respondents  were  from rural  
areas  and  47% from urban areas.  The survey revealed that majority of consumers are 
satisfied with the campaign "Jago Grahak Jago: and it has resulted an increased 
awareness amongst consumers of their rights. 
7.3 The Committee desired to know whether any advisory is issued by BIS to help 
the consumers from being cheated by such fraudulent hallmarking gold jewellery shops 
and in what manner the consumers are made aware of such advisory? The Department 

 
 
have stated in reply that consumers are advised to check five components of `Hallmark‟ 
i.e. BIS standard Mark, Fineness, Assaying & Hallmarking Centre‟s mark, Year of 
Marking, and Jeweller‟s mark, before buying hallmarked jewellery.  Bureau of Indian 
Standards release advertisements both in print and electronic media in English and 
local languages and organize awareness programmes at regular intervals to make 
consumers aware of hallmarked jewellery.    Regarding the checking facilities availa ble 
in hallmarked  jewellery shop, the Committee were informed that BIS licensees selling 
hallmarked jewellery are required to clearly display information about the five 
components in the hallmark and also have a magnifying glass of at least                       
10 x magnification to facilitate the consumer to view the hallmarking done by Assaying 
and Hallmarking Center.  Any consumer who purchases hallmarked jewellery can also 
get the same tested from any of the BIS recognized Assaying & Hallmarking Centres. 
7.4 The Committee pointed out that people in India particularly in South are willing to 
invest in gold rather than in real estate and desired to know in what manner the 
Government gives guarantee of purity of gold to those people?  The Department state d 
that the interests of consumers are being protected in following ways:  
(a) Making them aware of the benefits of the Hallmarking of gold jewellery  
through publicity campaigns and other consumer awareness programmes 
through which consumers are advised to  check the following five 
components of „Hallmark‟  before buying jewellery: 
 (I)  BIS Standard Mark,  
 (ii) Purity Grade/Fineness, 
 (iii) Assay Centre‟s identification mark, 
 (iv) Year of Marking denoted by a letter symbol (as defined by BIS),  
  and 
 (v) Jeweller‟s mark/manufacturer‟s identification mark.   
 
 (b) Making available on BIS website the list of BIS licensed jewellers who 
 sell hallmarked jewellery.  
(c) Whenever a complaint is received regarding lesser purity than that 
declared on the hallmarked gold jewellery along with the supporting assay 
report from any BIS recognized Assaying & Hallmarking Centre, the 

 
 
jewellery is required to be  replaced  free of cost by the licensee. in case 
the complaint is proved to be genuine.    
7.5 When enquired as to whether the Government have any mechanism to protect 
the interest of illiterate and poor consumers, the Department stated in a written note that  
the interests of illiterate and poor consumers are being protected by making them aware 
of the benefits and  contents of the hallmark through awareness programmes at regular 
intervals and through advertisements in electronic media.   
7.6 Asked about the  safeguards  available to the consumers who are cheated by 
fraudulent gold jewellers, the Department  stated t hat whenever a complaint supported 
by the cash memo issued by the jeweler and an assay report of any BIS recognised 
Assaying & Hallmarking Centre is received from any consumer about lesser purity of 
gold in the hallmarked gold jewellery article purchased b y him/her than that is declared 
on it and if the complaint is proved genuine, the licensee jeweler has to replace the 
jewellery free of cost to the consumer.  The Committee, however, observed that merely 
giving advertisement in newspapers will not be fruit ful.  If it is done nation wide on TV in 
between news and other programmes then people will understand its importance and 
follow it.  In this regard the Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs stated that they 
will take up this campaign nation wide. 
7.7 The Committee pointed out that it was brought to their notice by one of the 
leading jewellers that the differentiation between hallmarked and non -hallmarked 
jewellery is normally done by the Touch Stone and any jeweller hardly employs cartage 
machine as th e same costs several lakhs rupees and is not very accurate too and 
enquired whether it is mandatory for all the jewellers to use Touch Stone and cartage 
machine in their jewellery shops? If not, how the consumer can make the difference 
between hallmarked and non-hallmarked jewellery in the absence of these instruments? 
In response, the Department stated that there is no provision for use of touchstone/ 
cartage machine as per BIS scheme for certification of gold jewellery.  Hallmarking is 
done by BIS recognized Assaying and Hallmarking Centres by following the BIS criteria 
which includes 100% XRF testing for homogeneity of samples, followed by fire assay 
method on random sampling basis. A consumer can differentiate between hallmarked 
and non -hallmarked jewell ery by checking the five components of Hallmark The 

 
 
licensee is required to mandatorily display this information at a prominent place of his 
sales outlet as per the BIS scheme for certification of gold jewellery.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
7.8 The Committee note that to create awareness among the consumers about 
the benefits of Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery, BIS  releases advertisements both 
in print and electronic media in English and local languages and organize 
awareness programmes at regular intervals acro ss the country including rural 
and remote areas, to make the scheme popular. The BIS has organized 240 
awareness programmes during the last four years. The Committee find that as per 
the study conducted by an empanelled agency of Planning Commission in 59 
Districts of 12 States, `Jago Grahak Jago’ multi-media publicity campaign, both in 
print and electronic media, has resulted in an increased  awareness amongst 
consumers.  The Committee, however, feel  that a lot more  needs to be done to 
make the scheme po pular and make the people aware about the benefits of the 
Scheme.  The Committee, therefore, desire that BIS should organize more 
awareness programmes to educate the people at large about the benefits of 
Gold/silver Hallmarking. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
7.9 The Committee fu rther note that `Nukkad Nataks’ organized by the BIS for 
the benefit of consumers have not yet been organized in rural and remote areas.  
The Committee feel that unless the Scheme is widely popularized and consumers 
of rural, remote and hilly areas are mad e aware of the benefits of the Hallmarking 
of Jewellery, they cannot come forward to opt for the Hallmarked jewellery, 
thereby defeating the very purpose of the Scheme. 
 The Committee feel that people tend to learn quickly and easily with the 
help of such street plays and therefore, recommend that `Nukkad Natak’ and 
other awareness programmes may be organized by BIS in rural, remote and hilly 
areas also so as to spread the reach of the Scheme to the farthest corners of the 
country and interests of the consu mers in small towns and villages who invest 
their hard earned savings in gold jewellery are protected. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
ENFORCEMENT/MONITORING  OF THE SCHEME 
8.1 The Department has furnished the following  details of license granted to gold 
jewellers, renewed or suspended by BIS under the scheme during the last three years:- 
  Licenses granted  : 3719 
  Licenses renewed  : 2132 
  Licenses suspended : Nil 
As regards the position of renewal of remaining 1587 licenses, the Department 
has stated that l icenses are granted on different dates, for three years validity period, 
and therefore they fall due for renewal on different dates.  The 2132 licenses that were 
renewed during the three years were those which were granted  before three years.   
8.2 The Committee pointed out that as per a news report samples of jewellery were 
collected by BIS from shops in 8 cities wherein 88% of the samples failed to conform to 
the claimed standards and desired to know as to what steps have been taken by the 
Government against the jewellery shops whose samples did not conform to the claimed 
standards by jewellers?  The Department in this regard stated that out of 120 samples 
of non-hallmarked jewellery collected in 2001-02 from eight cities, 107 samples failed to 
conform to the  declared purity.  Legal cases have been filed against all the 107 
jewellers in MRTP Commission out of which 98 cases have been disposed off by the 
Commission.  Nine cases are still pending.  Asked about the reasons for pendency of 9 
cases for such a long period, the Department stated that a t present only 08 (eight) 
cases are pending decision. These cases were filed before the Hon‟ble Monopolies and 
Restrictive Trade Practices (MRTP) Commission which has since been wound up and 
the said cases have been tran sferred to the Hon‟ble Competition Appellate Tribunal.. 
Pendency is due to Court procedural system.  
8.3 As regards the sample survey conducted after 2001 -02, the Department stated 
that a market survey was conducted by BIS in 2006 through an independent ag ency in 
16 cities. i.e. Jammu, Ludhiana, Chandigarh, New Delhi, Gurgaon, Meerut, Kanpur, 
Jaipur, Jodhpur, Indore, Ranchi, Bhubaneshwar, Vadodara, Pune, Madurai and 

 
 
Thiruvananthapuram. . Out of 162 samples drawn for the survey, 16 passed and 146 
failed. 
8.4 When asked about the number of fraudulent gold hallmarking jewellery shops 
detected during raids/inspection  conducted by BIS enforcement machinery on the BIS 
licensed jewellery shops,  the Department stated that no raids have been conducted by 
BIS enforcement machinery so far on BIS licensed jewellery shops selling hallmarked 
jewellery.  Explaining the reasons therefor,  the Department has stated that m onitoring 
of BIS jewellers is done through market surveillance where jewellery samples are drawn 
from retail outlets for getting them tested from independent Assaying and Hallmarking 
Centres and action is taken against the defaulters as per BIS guidelines.  
8.5 The Committee observed that as per the news item, there have been instances 
of jewellers deceiving buyers by inscribing 916 (the BIS hallmark for 22 carat gold) on 
non-hallmarked gold jewellery and asked to state the number of licenses of accredited 
gold purity testing centres charged with fraudulent hallmarking of gold jewellery 
cancelled by BIS during  the last three years in the country. The Department stated in 
reply that five Assaying & Hallmarking Centres – two in Tamilnadu and one each in 
Kerala, Mumbai and Delhi were derecognized by BIS during the last three years for 
violating BIS criteria for ju dging of their performance.  The Department further stated 
that consumers are advised to check five components of `Hallmark‟ i.e. BIS Standard 
Mark, Fineness, Assaying  & Hallmarking Centre‟s mark, Year of Marking, and jeweler‟s 
mark, before buying hallmarked jewellery.   
8.6 As regards the raids conducted and licenses cancelled in respect of jewellers, 
DG, BIS,  during evidence stated as under :- 
“Sir, it is negligible, I may tell you the reason.  Our enforcement machinery has 
very limited resources.  We are not upto the mark to endorse it in this big country, 
we have derecognized 6 Hallmarking Centres because we found that the purity 
was different and the mark indicated was different.  If a jeweler gets the jewellery 
tested in the centre, it is his duty to  mention actual caratage .  If it is 21 carat, 
mark of 21 carat should be there.  In this case the mistake is not on the part of 
the jeweler but it is on the part of the testing centre who has tested it. 
He further stated that with the limited machinery, t hey could get 760 samples 
tested during the last 3 years out of which 50 samples failed because the 
declared purity did not match with the marked purity.” 

 
 
When asked what action was taken in such cases, he stated that they are 
punished as per the punishment prescribed for such offence. 
8.7 On being enquired about the difficulty to involve private agencies for checking 
misuse of BIS Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery, the Department stated that since the 
Scheme is intended to give third party assurance on the pur ity of gold jewellery articles, 
it may not be appropriate to assign the work to private agencies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
8.8 The Committee are dismayed to note that the Government has no 
monitoring mechanism for enforcement of the Scheme as  no raids are stated to 
have been conducted by the BIS enforcement machinery on BIS licensed 
Jewellery shops selling hallmarked jewellery despite the fact that instances of 
jewelers deceiving buyers by selling inferior quality of gold jewellery against the 
declared purity have been found in the different parts of the country.  
 The plea of the Government that  BIS conducts  market surveillance on 
certified jewellers as per documented guidelines and, therefore, does not take 
raids at licensed  premises, is not acceptable to the Com mittee.  The Committee 
are further disturbed to note that BIS has very limited resources and machinery to 
enforce the Scheme.  The Committee are of the opinion that unless there is strict 
monitoring of the scheme people will not have faith on the genuinene ss of the 
dealers and will not opt for Hallmarked jewellery which will  affect  the 
performance of the scheme.  The Committee, therefore, desire that BIS should  
strengthen its monitoring mechanism by conducting regular surveys and  
inspections, particularly of the BIS certified shops, so that the fraudulent dealers 
are identified and punished.  Names of such dealers should be notified and 
publicized for the information of general public.  This will also instill the feeling of 
security and boost the confide nce of the consumers. They may also explore the 
possibility of involvement of independent agencies in such a process, if required. 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER  IX 
Manpower with BIS 
9.1 The Committee have been informed that adequate manpower is not available 
with BIS for i mplementation of the Hallmarking Scheme.  Information given by BIS 
regarding vacant posts is as under 
(i) Scientific posts  : 140  
(a) posts are deemed to have lapsed due to their 
remaining vacant for more than one year  093 
(b) Vacancy due to non-availability of eligible 
 Candidate for promotion     014 
(c) Recruitment process in progress    033 
 
 (ii) Non-Scientific posts            475 
(a) posts are deemed to have lapsed due to their 
remaining vacant for more than one year  172 
(b) Appointments orders under issue    075 
(c) Recruitment process in progress    017  
(d) Pending promotions      211 
 
CONSUMERS’ GRIEVANCES REDRESSAL CELL OF BIS 
9.2 The Committee have been informed that BIS has set up a grievances Redressal 
Cell which deals with the grievances r elating to purity of gold jewellery also. Three 
complaints were received from the consumers during the last three years. 

 
 
9.3 The Committee are shocked to note that as many as 140 Scientific Posts 
and 47 Non Scientific Posts are lying vacant in BIS. They a re further  disturbed to 
note that 93 Scientific Posts and 172 Non Scientific Posts are deemed to have 
lapsed due to their remaining vacant for more than one year.  Further, for 33 
Scientific Posts and 17 Non Scientific Posts, the recruitment process is in  
progress.  The Committee deplore the inaction on the part of BIS due to which a 
large number of posts rendered lapsed. 
 The Committee are of the opinion that large number of vacancies in any 
institution hampers its proper functioning.  In case of BIS, it is evident from the 
fact that due to shortage in manpower, they are not able to provide proper 
surveillance and enforcement over the Scheme.  The Committee wonder that with 
such a large number of vacancies, how will BIS discharge its duties effectively 
and achieve the avowed  objectives to the entire satisfaction of the consumers. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that prompt action may be taken by BIS to fill up 
the vacant posts.  Suitable action may also be taken at a higher level to reactivate 
and revive the posts which were lapsed due to remaining vacant for more than 
one year. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
9.4 The Committee note that a Grievances Redressal Cell has been set up by 
BIS which deals with the grievances relating to purity of gold jewellery.  While 
noting that only thr ee complaints were received from the consumers during the 
last three years, the Committee feel that there is a lack of awareness amongst the 
consumers about existence of such a Cell in BIS.  The Committee feel that unless 
the people are made aware about th e existence of a Cell which is looking into 
their grievances relating to purity of gold, setting up of such a Cell would be a 
futile exercise.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that besides creating 
awareness about benefits of Hallmarked Jewellery, the consumers should 
simultaneously be made aware about the existence of the Grievances Redressal 
Cell and also about the procedure for making complaints thereunder, so that 
greater number of consumers approach the Cell and get their grievances 
redressed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;                                             VILAS MUTTEMWAR 
 25 August, 2010                                   Chairman, 
  3 Bhadrapada,1932 (Saka)                        Standing Committee on Food,  
                                                                  Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-I 

 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DIS TRIBUTION HELD ON MONDAY,                         
25TH JANUARY, 2010 
The Committee sat from 1200 hrs to 1330 hrs in Committee Room „C‟, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
   Shri Vilas Muttemwar  -     Chairman 
    
Members 
  Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
4. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
5. Shri Lal Chand Kataria 
6. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
7. Shri Danapal Venugopal  
   
Rajya Sabha 
 
8. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
9. Shri Lalhming Liana 
10. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
11. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
12. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P.K. Misra    -   Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma   -  Director 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad      -  Deputy Secretary 

 
 
Representatives of the Department of Consumer Affairs:- 
1. Shri Rajeev Agarwal             - Secretary 
2. Shri Rakesh Kacker            - Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Sharad Gupta                - DG (Bureau of Indian Standards) 
4. Shri Sanjay Singh             - Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Alinda Chandra  - AD GM (BIS) 
2. At the outset, Ho n‟ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the 
Department of  Consumer Affairs to the sitting of the Committee convened to have 
briefing on the subject „Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) -Hallmarking of Jewellery‟ 
selected for examination during 2009 -10.  In his opening remarks the Chairman 
observed inter -alia that the performance of BIS on Hallmarking of Jewellery Scheme 
was not satisfactory due to the fact that the scheme was getting affected owing to lack 
of interest among the entrepreneurs and also fo r want of infrastructure in the Assaying 
and Hallmarking Centres and asked the Secretary to explain the achievements of 
Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery Scheme since its inception, alongwith steps taken to 
provide uniformity and self-sufficiency to the existing Assaying and Hallmarking Centres 
in the country.  
3. The Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs explained in brief the functioning 
of BIS, specifically the Hallmarking Scheme. Thereafter, he resolved the queries raised 
by the Members, particularly wi th regard to the steps taken for setting up of Assaying 
and Hallmarking Centres to assess purity of Jewellery, encouraging entrepreneurs for 
implementing Hallmarking Schemes, implementation of modifications done in the 
existing scheme and efforts made to s et up Assaying & Hallmarking Centres throughout 
the country so as to implement mandatory hallmarking of Gold Jewellery. The 
Committee expressed its concern for not achieving the target fixed for 2009 -10 for 
setting up the Assaying and Hallmarking Centres b y BIS. The Secretary, Department of 
Consumer Affairs assured that they will take necessary steps to improve the 
performance of the Scheme. The Committee suggested that the Government should 
enhance the funds on the publicity campaign of the Scheme which was agreed to by the 
Secretary of Department of Consumer Affairs.    

 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept on record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******  

 
 
  APPENDIX - II 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND  
 PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, 5TH MAY, 2010. 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1630 hrs in Committee Room No. „139‟, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar - Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
4. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
5. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
6. Shri Lal Chand Kataria 
7. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
8. Smt. T.Ratna Bai 
9. Shri P.Kannan 
10. Shri Lalhming Liana 
11. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
12. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
13. Dr.T.N.Seema 
14. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P.K. Misra  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad  - Additional Director 

 
 
 
2. At the outset Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the non -officials 
(Jewellers) to the sitting of the committee convened to have evidence on the subject 
„Bureau of Indian St andards (BIS) -Hallmarking of Jewellery‟ selected for examination 
during 2009-10. He apprised them of the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the Directions 
by the Speaker and expressed the hope that they would follow the guidelines of conduct 
and etiquette wh ile placing their views before the Committee. Hon‟ble Chairman, in his 
welcome speech raised various issues especially the aims and objectives of 
Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery Scheme, grievances of the Jewellers who opted for the 
Hallmarking Scheme, diffic ulties faced in getting jewellery hallmarked at Assaying and 
Hallmarking Centres, benefits of the Hallmarking schemes to the consumers and the 
shortcomings noticed during implementation of the scheme as well as efforts required to 
be made to create awarene ss amongst consumers, especially the people living in 
village and backward areas, etc. The issues raised by the Hon‟ble Chairman were 
further supplemented by the Members of the Committee. The witnesses placed their 
views/suggestions on hallmarking of jewel lery scheme which inter -alia covered the 
following points:- 
 (i) There are five essential ingredients for hallmarked jewellery i.e. BIS logo, 
Purity of Gold, Hallmarking Centre‟s logo, Jeweller‟s Identification Mark and the 
year of Hallmarking. 
 (ii) Need to educate the consumers regarding benefits of Hallmarked 
Jewellery i.e. customers get quality assured product. 
Non-official witnesses:-  
1. 
 
2. 
Shri Pawan Gupta,  Director 
 
Shri  Rahul Gupta,  CEO.  
 
P. P. Jewellers, 
New Delhi 
3. 
 
 
Shri Satyender Gupta, Director P.C.Jewellers Pvt Ltd, 
New Delhi 
4. Shri  Suresh M. Nair,  
Sr. Mngr. Imp. & Exp 
 
 
Tribhovandas Bhimji Zaveri Pvt Ltd, 
New Delhi 

 
 
  
 (iii) In the absence of mandatory provision of hallmarking of gold jewellery, 
 most of the jewellers are selling non-hallmarked ornaments. 
 (iv) The license fees should be based on the Annual turnover of the jewellers.  
 (v) There is a need to promote hallmarked jewellery by organizing special 
programmes with the help of jewellers. 
 (vi) Need to adopt Open Cover Policies by Hallmarking Centres wherein 
Assaying and Hallmarking Centres are not within the reach of 
jewellers/consumers in remote/sub-urb areas.  
 (vii) Need to stop exploitation of consumers by the jewellers who are selling 18 
carat gold by mis-representing that they are selling 22 carat gold of hallmarking. 
 (viii) Need for transparency in the transaction of gold business. 
 (ix) Need to spread awareness amongst consumers about the purity of 
hallmarked jewellery on the pattern of Kerala State where the customers bring    
their own lense to test the purity of gold. 
 (x) Need to specify all the carats which is sold by the jewellers and to have 
carat based license to prevent consumers from getting cheated.  
 (xi) Need to circulate the details of Assaying and Hallmarking Centres 
recognized by BIS to Jewellers for their use. 
 (xii) Hallmarking schemes should also be applicable to wholesale sector of 
gold jewellery. 
4. The witnesses resolved the queries raised by the Members.  The Chairman then 
thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Comm ittee and sharing their views with 
the Committee in a free and frank manner. They were asked to send the written replies 
to the points on which the information was not readily available with them. 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
   The Committee then adjourned. 
************ 

 
 
APPENDIX-III 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND  
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, 21st JULY, 2010. 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1645 hrs in Committee Room No. „G 074‟, 
Ground floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
Present 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar - Chairman 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
4. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
5. Shri Lal Chand Kataria 
6. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
7. Smt. T.Ratna Bai 
  8. Shri Lalhming Liana 
  9. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
 10. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
 11. Dr.T.N.Seema 
12. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P.K. Misra  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad  - Additional Director 

 
 
Representatives of the Department of Consumer Affairs:- 
1. Shri Rajiv Agarwal             - Secretary 
2. Shri Rakesh Kacker            - Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Desh Deepak Verma  -            AS&FA 
4. Shri Sanjay Singh            - Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Sharad Gupta             - DG (Bureau of Indian Standards) 
2. At the outset Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of t he Department 
of Consumer Affairs to the sitting of the committee convened to have evidence on the 
subject „Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) -Hallmarking of Jewellery‟ selected for 
examination during 2009 -10 and apprised them of the provisions of Direction 55(1) of 
the Directions by the Speaker.  
3. Hon‟ble Chairman, in his welcome speech raised various issues pertaining to 
Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery Scheme. The issues raised by the Hon‟ble Chairman 
were further supplemented by the Members of the Committe e. The points discussed 
during the course of evidence includes need for mandatory hallmarking of jewellery, 
setting up of assaying and hallmarking centres in all the States/UTs, infrastructural 
facilities in assaying and hallmarking centres, setting up of assaying and hallmarking 
centres in North-Eastern States as well as remote and backward areas, funds allocated 
by the Government of India for implementation of the scheme and its utilization, role of 
enforcement machinery of BIS, report on evaluation study  of Gold Hallmarking of 
Jewellery, publicity campaign in print and electronic media to create awareness 
amongst the consumers, consumer grievances redressal cell of BIS and reasons for 
delay in amendment of BIS Act.  
4. The witnesses answered to the querie s raised by the Members.  The Chairman 
then thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee and sharing their views 
with the Committee in a free and frank manner. They were asked to send the written 
replies to the points on which the information was not readily available with them. 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
   The Committee then adjourned. 
************ 

 
 
APPENDIX-IV 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND  
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FOUR TH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 25TH AUGUST, 2010 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1535 hrs in Committee Room „C‟, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 Present 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar - Chairman  
Members  
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
3. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
4. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
6. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
7. Shri Lal Chand Kataria 
8. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
9. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
   
 Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
11. Shri Lalhming Liana 
12. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
13. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
14. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
15. Dr. T.N.Seema  
16. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
  

 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P.K.Misra  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad  - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of two draft reports 
pertaining to the Department of Consumer Affairs and Department of Food and 
Public Distribution, respectively. 
3. The Committee first took up for consideration the draft report on the 
subject „Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) - Hallmarking of Jewellery‟ pertaining 
to the Department of Consumer Affairs an d adopted the same with slight 
modifications.  
4.     The Committee then took up for consideration the draft report on the 
subject       „Production, Consumption and Pricing of Sugar‟ pertaining to the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution and also ad opted the same with 
slight modifications.  
5.  The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the aforesaid Reports 
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament during the current 
Session of Parliament. 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
/……………./ 
 
 