 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND                       
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION  
(2010-2011) 
 
   FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained 
in the Fifth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2010-2011) of the 
 Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2011  /   Asadha, 1933 (Saka) 
14 


 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD,  
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND 
 PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2010-2011) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained 
in the  Fifth Report of the Committee  on Demands for Grants  (2010-2011) of the 
Ministry of  Consumer Affairs, Food  and Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs.}  
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24.08.2011    
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 24.08.2011 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2011  / Asadha, 1933 (Saka) 
 
  


 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
 
Composition of the Committee ………………………………………… (ii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………... (iv) 
 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………… 01 
 
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
 accepted by the Government…………………………… 12 
  
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
 the Government‟s replies………………………………... 25 
 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
 replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee ……………………………………….. 29 
 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
 which final replies of the Government are  
still awaited……………………………………………… 32 
   
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the 11th sitting of the Committee held on  35 
4th July, 2011.  
 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Fifth Report  
of the Committee ………………………………………..  37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2010-11 
 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
4. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
5. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
6. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
7. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
8. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
9. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
10. Shri  Lal Chand Kataria 
  11. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
12. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
13. Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra  
14. Shri Sohan Potai 
15. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
16. Shri Dinubhai Solanki 
17. Shri Laxman Tudu 
18. Shri Danapal Venugopal 
19. Shri Adagooru H. Vishwanath 
20. Shri Madhusudan Yadav 
21. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
23. Shri P. Kannan  
24. Shri Lalhming Liana 
25. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
26. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
27. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
28. Shri Sanjay Raut 
29. Dr. T.N. Seema 
30. Shri Veer Singh 
31. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
(ii)

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. K. Misra  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma  - Director 
3. Shir Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, The Chairman of the Standi ng Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution (20 10-2011) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Fourteenth Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations co ntained in the Fifth Report of the 
Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (20 10-2011) of the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
  
2. The Fif th Report was presented to Lok Sabha and  laid in Rajya Sabha on                    
23rd April, 2010. The Government have furnished their replies indicating Action Taken 
on the recommendations contained in the Report on 22nd July, 2010. The draft Report was 
considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 4th July, 2011. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.   
   
 
 
  
 
  NEW DELHI                      VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
  04 July, 2011___                  Chairman 
  13 Asadha, 1933 (Saka)             Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
  

 
 
CHAPTER -I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on  Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on 
“Demands for Grants (2010-2011)” pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
1.2 The Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 23 April, 2010.  It contained 20 obser vations/ recommendations. Action Taken 
Notes in respect of all the 20 observations/recommendations contained in the Report have 
been received and these have been categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations /recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government : 
 
Serial Nos. - 2, 3, 3a, 4, 6, 9, 12, 14, 15, 18 and 19 
(Paragraph Nos. – 2.16, 2.17, 3.10, 3.11, 3.17, 3.33, 5.18, 6.7, 6.8, 
7.19, and 7.20) 
      (Chapter –II, Total   11) 
 
(ii) Observations/recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
 
Serial Nos. 5, 7, 10 and 13  
(Paragraph Nos. - 3.12, 3.25, 3.40 and 5.19) 
      
      (Chapter –III, Total 4) 
 
  

 
 
(iii) Observations /recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
 
Serial Nos. 1, 8, and 16 
(Paragraph Nos. – 2.15, 3.26, and 7.11)  
 
      (Chapter – IV, Total 3)   
 
(iv) Observations /recommendations in respect of which the interim 
replies of the Government have been received. 
   Serial No. 11 and 17 
   (Paragraph Nos. – 4.5, and 7.12) 
 
 (Chapter – V, Total 2) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the replies in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this report, alongwith 
the final re plies in respect of the Observations/Recommendations for which only 
interim replies have been received from the Government, be furnished to the 
Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee strongly emphasize that utm ost importance should be given 
to the implementation of Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In case where it is not possible for the Government to implement the 
recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported 
to the Committee in time with reasons for non-implementation. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
the recommendations. 
  

 
 
A. Need to chalk out a Strategy to avoid delay in implementation of Schemes/ 
 Programmes/Projects 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.1, Para No. 2.15) 
 
1.6  The Committee in their earlier report had recommended as below:- 
 
“The Committee note that out of total outlay of Rs.209 crore each for Plan 
Schemes during 2008 -09 and 2009 -10, the Department could utilize Rs.142.33 
crore against RE of Rs.160 crore and Rs.144.07 crore against RE of Rs.164 crore, 
respectively. The Committee feel that on the one hand, funds for Plan Schemes 
have not been utilized fully during the last two years and on the other, the 
Department considers funds allocated for 2010-11 as insufficient. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Department should take steps to get timely 
clearance of all the Plan schemes so that allocated funds could be utilized 
properly and the physical and financial targets set for various schemes in the 
financial year could be achieved.  The Committee also desire that the Department 
should chalk out strategy well in advance for implementation of its schemes and 
make sincere efforts to compl ete all the procedural formalities to avoid delay in 
the implementation the schemes/programmes/projects.”  
  
1.7  In their action taken reply the Ministry have stated as under:- 
 
 “The observations of the Committee have been noted and all efforts would be 
 made for smooth implementation of the schemes/programmes/projects.” 
 
 
1.8  In their original report, the Committee had strongly recommended that the 
Department should take steps to get timely clearance of all the plan schemes and 
also chalk out strategy w ell in advance for proper utilization of the allocated funds 
and to avoid delay in the implementation of their schemes. The Ministry in its action 
taken reply has merely stated that efforts will  made for the smooth implementation 
of the schemes/programmes/ projects. The Committee are not satisfied with such 
general and vague reply and feel that the Department should have spelt out the steps 
taken by them to avoid the delay in the implementation of the schemes due to 
procedural formalities. The Committee, the refore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire the Department to apprise the Committee about the 
detailed action taken in this regard. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
B. Need for early introduction of the Bills to amend the Consumer Protection 
Act, 1986 and the BIS Act, 1986 in the Parliament. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.3, Para No. 2.17) 
 
1.9  The Committee in their original report had recommended as below:- 
“The Committee note with concern that proposals for Amendment of Bills namely 
Consumer Protection Act, 1986, FC (R) Act , 1952, BIS Act, 1986 and National 
Trade Practices Regulation Authority Bill are under active consideration of the 
Department of Consumer Affairs but no time frame has been indicated for their 
introduction in Parliament. One of the  most important Bills, vi z. National Trade 
Practices Regulation Authority Bill proposes to deal with unfair trade practices 
which were otherwise not covered under the Consumer Protection Act. The 
Committee feel that there is an urgent need to expedite the early introduction of 
these Bills so as to give justice to the consumers at large. The Committee hope 
that the Department would take sincere efforts to expedite and finalize all the 
formalities linked with the introduction of these Bills. 
 
1.10  The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
“The Draft Bill to carry out amendment in the BIS Act, FC(R) Act and Consumer 
Protection Act has been finalized in consultation with Legislative Department, 
Ministry of Law & Justice.  Approval of Government is being sought. 
 
  The National Trade Practices Regulation Authority Bill is under 
examination in consultation with the concerned Departments.” 
 
 
1.11  The Committee in their earlier report had expressed concern over the delay 
in the introduction of Amendment Bills on impo rtant Acts namely Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986, FC(R) Act, 1952, and BIS Act, 1986. The Committee find that 
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill has already been introduced in 
the Parliament. The Draft Bill s to carry out amendment in the BIS Act and 
Consumer Protection Act have been finalized in consultation with Legislative 
Department, Ministry of Law & Justice and approval of Government is being 
sought. The Committee would like the Department to make concerted efforts to 
obtain approval of the G overnment expeditiously so as to facilitate introduction of 
the remaining Bills in the Parliament at the earliest. 
 

 
 
C. Need to fix time frame to fill up vacant posts of the Presidents and Members 
in the State Commissions and District Fora.   
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4, Para No. 3.11) 
 
1.12  The Committee in their earlier report observed as follows:- 
“The Committee  observe that 4 vacancies of President and 18 vacancies of 
Members are still lying vacant in the State Commissions. Besides, 57 posts of 
President and 189 posts of Members are vacant in the District Fora of different 
States namely Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chattisgarh, Haryana, 
Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh.  
The Committee are disappoint ed to note that although the Department has  been 
calling for information regarding vacancies in the State Commissions from the 
States/UTs through Monthly and Quarterly Periodical Reports but it could not 
gather information relating to reasons for existence  of vacancies.  However , the 
Department has now made necessary modification in the periodical returns 
wherein the States/UTs are required to explain the „reasons‟ for existence of 
vacancies and action taken to fill up the vacant posts. The Committee recomm end 
that the Department should chalk out strategy to fill up the vacant posts of 
President and Members in a time bound manner, especially in District Foras.” 
 
 
1.13  The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
“As per provisions of Section 9(a) of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, it is the 
responsibility of the concerned State Government to establish the District Fora in 
the State and also take action for filling up the vacant posts of Presidents & 
Members. 
 
However, the States/UTs ar e also impressed upon by the Central Government 
from time to time to ensure that the posts in the Fora are not vacant and advance 
action initiated to ensure the functionality of Fora & consequential disposal of 
cases. This issue is also taken in meetings with Secretaries in-charge of Consumer 
Affairs in States/UTs organized by this Department as well as Conferences held 
by National Commission. The issue of advance as well as follow up action 
required to be taken for timely filling up of   vacancies in the C onsumer Fora was 
also discussed in the Conference of the National Commission held on 14 th & 15th 
March, 2010 with Presidents of State Commissions & Secretaries in -charge of 
Consumer Affairs in States/UTs.  
 
 As a result of these concerted efforts, there is  a decrease in the number of 
vacant posts, both in State Commissions & District Fora. As on 01.06.2010, there 
were only 2 vacancies of Presidents & 17 vacancies of Members in the State 
Commissions while in the District Fora, the vacancies have decreased to  48 
vacancies of Presidents from 51 & to 175 vacancies of Members from 189.” 
 
 

 
 
1.14  The Committee had recommended the Department to chalk out strategy to 
fill up the vacant posts of Presidents and Members in a time bound manner 
especially in the District Fora. The Ministry in its reply has stated that though filling 
up of vacant posts of Presidents and Members in the State Commissions and District 
Fora is the responsibility of the concerned State Government, yet the issue is being 
taken up in the meetings of the Department with the Secretaries in -charge of 
Consumer Affairs in States/UTs and discussed in the  conferences held by the 
National Commission with Presidents of State Commissions. The Committee, 
however, are pained to observe that all these efforts h ave resulted only in marginal 
decrease in the number of vacant posts. The number of existing vacancies of the 
Members are 17 in case of the State Commissions and 48 of Presidents and 175 of 
Members in case of District Fora which is still considerably high.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Department should inquire into the reasons for the 
existence of these vacancies and take suitable action to address the problems by 
fixing a time frame for filling up of the vacant posts in the  State Commissions a nd 
District Fora by the concerned state Governments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
D. Need for setting up Consumer Welfare Fund in all the States 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.8, Para No. 3.26) 
 
1.15  The Committee had recommended in their earlier report as below:-  
 
“The Committee note that under the scheme „Consumer Welfare Fund‟, financial 
assistance is provided to States/UTs in the form of seed money to promote and 
protect the welfare of consumers, generate consumer awareness and strengthening 
consumer movement in the country. De spite the fact that the ratio of amount of 
seed money has been increased to 50:50, 14 States have not yet set up Consumer 
Welfare Fund in their respective budget head and not availed of the benefits of 
Consumer Welfare Fund which reflects that these States  are not serious towards 
the welfare of consumers. The Committee note that the Government has now 
decided to support the Central Share upto 75% to those States/UTs which are 
willing to establish a corpus of Rs. 10 crore in their States/UTs. The Committee 
hope that all these 14 States will create separate Corpus Fund in their respective 
States/UTs and would avail the 75% financial assistance from Central 
Government under the Consumer Welfare Fund. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the matter may be ta ken up with the States/UTs at the highest 
level to impress upon them the importance of creation of the State Consumer 
Welfare Fund in their respective State Budget, to protect the interest of the 
consumers.”  
 
1.16  In their action taken reply the Ministry have stated that:- 
 
“The Department has been taking up the matter of setting up the State Consumer 
Welfare Fund by writing letters/reminders at various levels.  At the highest level, 
Secretary (CA) has also written D.O. letters to the Chief Secretaries of  the States 
that have not opted for the scheme so far.” 
 
 
1.17  The Committee in their original report had observed that despite the ratio of 
amount of seed money having been increased to 50:50, 14 States had not yet set up 
Consumer Welfare Fund in their r espective budget head and not availed of the 
benefits of Consumer Welfare Fund from the Central Government which reflected 
their non serious attitude towards the welfare of consumers. As per the Action 
Taken Reply of the Department, the Committee note that  the Department has been 
taking up the matter by writing letters/reminders at various levels including at the 
highest level by writing D.O. letters from the Secretary (CA) to the Chief Secretaries 
of the States. However, in the reply, there is no indicatio n as to whether or not any 
of these 14 States have created Consumer Welfare Fund in their budget heads in 
pursuance of the efforts made by the Department. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that the remaining States /UTs be 
impressed upon to take necessary steps to create State Consumer Welfare Funds in 
their respective Budgets and avail of the financial assistance from the Central 
Consumer Welfare Fund so as to promote and protect the welfare of the consumers. 
 

 
 
E. Need for creating consumer awareness through continuous publicity 
campaign.  
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.9, Para No. 3.33) 
 
 
1.18  The Committee had recommended as below:- 
 
“The Committee note that out of Rs. 409 crore allocated for creating awareness 
amongst consumers for the XI Five Year Plan (2007-12) the Department spent Rs. 
211.17 crore in the first three years of plan period. The Committee also note that 
apart from the TV and print media, the Department follows other medium such as 
radio, cinema and also outdoor activities with innovative use of Railway Stations, 
Post Offices, Railway Tickets, Utility Bills, and Meghdoot Post Cards as 
communication channels to intensify the consumer awareness campaign. In 
respect of rural areas, media strategies goes to the  extent of creating awareness 
through hoardings, kiosks,  wall paintings, bus panels, village boards, Railway 
branding etc.  The Committee fail to understand as to why the very idea of 
launching Publicity Campaign through advertisement cannot be explored o n the 
pattern of Pulse Polio Campaign and Anti Tobacco Campaign as all these 
activities are to be carried out by the outdoor publicity units of DAVP through 
their empanelled agencies. The Committee further note that Media Planning for 
the publicity campaign has been entrusted to DAVP  which ensures representation 
of the regional TV channels that are empanelled with DAVP for telecast of spots 
in the regional languages. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department 
should explore the feasibility of laun ching Publicity Campaign through 
advertisement on the pattern of Pulse Polio Campaign and Anti Tobacco 
Campaign as a continuous process and intimate the Committee about the action 
taken in this regard within three months. The Committee also recommend that the 
Department should chalk out its schedule for the Consumer Awareness 
Programme in the beginning of the financial year.”   
 
 
1.19  The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
“The observations of the Committee have been noted.  The m atter has been taken 
up with DAVP to suggest a suitable line of action for implementing the 
suggestions/observations of the Committee. 
 
 As regards chalking out the schedule of consumer awareness programme 
at the beginning of financial year is concerned, t he Department is already 
following this course of action.  The Empowered Committee of the Department 
headed by Secretary(CA) chalks out the Annual Plan for publicity in the month of 
March itself for the ensuing financial year.  This is followed up by drawi ng up 
detailed quarterly plans.” 
 
 

 
 
1.20  The Committee in their earlier report had desired that the Department 
should explore the feasibility of launching Publicity Campaign for creating 
awareness through advertisement on the pattern of Pulse Polio Campaig n and Anti 
Tobacco Campaign as a continuous process and intimate the Committee about the 
action taken in this regard.  The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has  informed 
that the matter has been taken up with DAVP to suggest a suitable line of action for 
implementing the suggestions/observations of the Committee. However, the 
Department has neither mentioned as to what follow up action has been taken by 
them nor informed as to whether or not the DAVP has furnished their suggestions 
regarding the line of act ion to be followed for creating consumer awareness. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Department to take up the matter with DAVP to 
obtain their suggestions and take suitable action in coordination with DAVP to 
create consumer awareness among the masses. 
 
 
 

 
 
F. Need to provide necessary assistance to NABCONS to study and ascertain 
the benefits of Future trading to small/marginal farmers. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.15, Para No. 6.8) 
 
1.21  In their original report the Committee had recommended as under:-  
 
“The Committee note that the Government has awarded the work to conduct study 
to ascertain the percentage of small and marginal farmers benefitted from 
futures/forward trading in the States of Punjab, Gujarat, Karnataka, Maharashtra, 
Kerala and Andhra Pradesh  to an independent agency viz. M/s NABARD 
Consultancy Services (NABCONS) . The Committee recommend that FMC 
should provide all the required assistance to the agency and complete the 
necessary formalities required for evaluation. The Government should keep a  
close watch on the functioning of the NABCONS so that the study is completed 
and report is submitted within the stipulated time frame i.e. by the end of June, 
2010.” 
 
1.22  The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as below:- 
 
“The study to asc ertain the percentage of small and marginal farmers benefited 
from futures/forward trading was awarded to NABCONS on 15 th March 2010 
with a condition that they should complete certain formalities, such as signing of 
Letter of Agreement, Terms of Reference,  issue of bank guarantee equal to 50% 
of the advance payment and performance guarantee before commencement of 
studies. NABCONS could not complete the formalities within the short time 
available before the end of the financial year 2009 -10, which necessitat ed 
issuance of fresh sanction by the Department of Consumer Affairs which was 
issued on 27th April 2010. Subsequently, all the formalities were completed within 
15 days and the study commenced by the 13 th May 2010. The NABCONS have 
already completed the pr oposed preparatory work and prepared a questionnaire 
for the study.  The study is expected to be completed by the middle of August 
2010. NABCONS is being extended all necessary assistance to ensure that the 
study is completed within the stipulated 3 months  time. The Government and 
FMC are closely monitoring the progress of the study.” 
 
1.23  The Committee in their original report had recommended that FMC should 
provide all the required assistance to M/s NABARD Consultancy Services 
(NABCONS) in conducting th e study to ascertain the percentage of small and 
marginal farmers benefitted from futures/forward trading in the States of Punjab, 
Gujarat, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Kerala and Andhra Pradesh. The Committee 
also desired that the Government should closely wat ch the functioning of the 
NABCONS so that the study was completed within the stipulated time frame. The 
Ministry in its Action Taken Reply stated that as NABCONS could not complete the 
formalities within the short time available before the end of the finan cial year, it has 
been issued fresh sanction for the study which was expected to be completed by the 
middle of August 2010. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department 
should furnish the details of the findings of the NABCONS and the follow up action 
taken by the Department thereon. 

 
 
G. Need for supplying essential commoditi es at subsidized rates by all S tate 
 Governments. 
   Recommendation (Sl. No.16, Para No. 7.11) 
 
1.24  The Committee in their earlier report had recommended as below:-  
 
“The Com mittee observe that the main reasons for rise in prices of essential 
commodities especially pulses, rice, sugar, tea during the last year were (i) 
shortfall in domestic supply relative to demand; (ii) increase in MSP and bonus; 
(iii) hardening of internati onal prices; (iv) changes in consumption pattern; (v) 
adverse weather and climate change. Increase in prices of onion and potato was 
due to seasonal factor and loss of crop due to flood. Consequent upon the fiscal 
and administrative measures taken by the G overnment to contain the prices of 
essential commodities, there was some sign of reduction in prices of these 
commodities in open market but still the prices are very high and beyond the 
purchasing power of poor persons. The Committee are of the opinion th at the 
State Governments have an important role in checking the rise in prices of 
essential commodities through a set of administrative and regulatory measures 
which is corroborated with facts that the State Governments of Maharashtra and 
Goa made availabl e potato and onion to the consumers at lower than market 
prices by bearing the cost of subsidy. The Government of Delhi has also been 
supplying pulses and atta at lower rates through various outlets. The Committee 
are of the opinion that if all the State G overnments/UTs follow the concept of 
Maharashtra, Goa and Delhi, the prices of the commodities will certainly come 
down. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should 
pursuade all the States/UTs to emulate the pattern of Government of Maha rashtra, 
Goa and Delhi to supply the essential commodities like pulses, onion and potato 
at subsidized rates.” 
 
 1.25  The Ministry in their reply have stated as under:- 
 
“The recommendations of the Standing Committee have been brought to the 
notice of the State Governments.  They have advised to constitute similar steps to 
check price rise and give competition to the private trade.” 
 
1.26  The Committee, in their original report had recommended that the 
Government should persuade all the States/UTs to emul ate the pattern of the 
Government of Maharashtra, Goa and Delhi to supply the essential commodities 
like pulses, onion and potato at subsidized rates to bring down their prices. The 
Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated that the recommendations of the 
Standing Committee have been brought to the notice of the State Governments. The 
Committee are not satisfied with the sketchy reply given by the Ministry as it failed 
to indicate any steps taken to persuade the State Governments/UTs Administration 
to s upply essential commodities to the people at subsidizes rates. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Department to impress upon  all the States/UTs to take similar 
steps as taken by the State Government of Maharashtra, Goa and Delhi in 
supplying essential comm odities to the consumer s at rates lower than the market 
rates, so as to check the rise in prices. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the specific initiatives and follow up action taken by the Ministry in this regard. 

 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
  ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.2, Para No. 2.16) 
 
2.1 The Committee observe that the Department is facing difficulties in the 
implementation of various schemes, namely non receipt of utilization certificates  from 
the State Governments in respect of plan funds, non -availability of land in various States 
required for implementation of projects/schemes, non receipt of consent from various 
States regarding setting up of Consumer Helpline, delay on the part of CPW D for 
construction of building, non-finalization of specifications of equipments by DGS&D and 
non-utilization of funds by DAVP which is affecting performance of the Department in 
general. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Department should  take 
up the matter at the highest level to impress upon the State Governments/UTs to furnish 
utilization certificates of funds allocated  to them and send their consent or proposals 
regarding setting up of Consumer Helpline in time. Regarding availability  of land 
required for implementation of projects/schemes, the Department should look for other 
alternatives like sharing office in office buildings of other Departments. The Department 
should also issue strict guidelines to CPWD, DGS&D and DAVP to avoid de lay in 
completion of the projects. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 As recommended by the Committee the matter has been taken up with the State 
Governments/ CPWD/DGS&D/DAVP. 
 
  So far as the State Consumer Help line is concerned funds are provided to 
States/UTs for establishing State Consumer Help line s.  State Consumer Help line is 
sanctioned on the basis of the Undertaking fr om the States/UTs. That they will run the 
project after 5 years from their own resources.  So far, 19 States/UTs have availed the 
benefit of the Scheme.  Rests of the States/UTs have not so far sent their undertaking for 
establishing the State Consumer Help line in their States.   All these States have been 
reminded from senior level several times and departmen t is still making effort to pursue 
these States for sending Undertaking at the earliest so that State Consumer Help line may 
be established in the remaining State at the earliest.   The last reminder was sent from 
Secretary (CA) to the concerned Chief Secretaries on 12 th July, 2010.  A DO letter from 
Secretary (CA) to Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development has also being written on 
14th July, 2010 with a request to instruct the CPWD to utilize the funds fully during the 
financial year.  DAVP and State Governments have also been reque sted to avoid delay in 
completion of the project.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) H-11012/8/2010-P&C 
Dated 22.07.2010] 
  

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.3, Para No. 2.17) 
 
2.3 The Committee note with conc ern that proposals for Amendment of Bills namely 
Consumer Protection Act, 1986, FC (R) Act, 1952, BIS Act, 1986 and National Trade 
Practices Regulation Authority Bill are under active consideration of the Department of 
Consumer Affairs but no time frame ha s been indicated for their introduction in 
Parliament. One of the  most important Bills, viz. National Trade Practices Regulation 
Authority Bill proposes to deal with unfair trade practices which were otherwise not 
covered under the Consumer Protection Act.  The Committee feel that there is an urgent 
need to expedite the early introduction of these Bills so as to give justice to the 
consumers at large. The Committee hope that the Department would take sincere efforts 
to expedite and finalize all the formalities linked with the introduction of these Bills. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.4   The Draft Bill to carry out amendment in the BIS Act, FC(R) Act and Consumer 
Protection Act has been finalized in consultation with Legislative Department, Ministry 
of Law & Justice.  Approval of Government is being sought. 
 
  The National Trade Practices Regulation Authority Bill is under examination in 
consultation with the concerned Departments. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) H-11012/8/2010-P&C 
Dated 22.07.2010] 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
  

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.3a, Para No. 3.10) 
 
2.5  The Committee note that percentage of disposal of cases by National 
Commission, State Commissions and District Fora since their inception is 87.65, 78.16 
and 90.93 respectively.  The Committee feel that performance in terms of disposal of 
cases by National Commission and District Fora is comparatively satisfactory, whereas, 
the position regarding disposal of cases by State Commissions is not satisfactory and 
needs to be monitored by the National Commission.  The Committee have been informed 
that for quicker disposal of complaints and strengthening of Consumer fora, a proposal to 
further amend the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 is under active 
consideration. The Committee desire that the Department of Consumer Affairs should 
make sincere efforts to complete all the formalities for early introduction of the 
Amendment Bill in the Parliament. The Committee also observe that under section 24B 
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, the National Commission has administrative 
control over all the State Commissions which includes overseeing the functioning of the 
State Commissions as also the District Fora to ensure that the objects and purposes of the 
Act are best served. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the National Commission 
should exercise its powers under the existing provisions of the Act for monitoring the 
functioning of the State Commissions and District Fora . 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6  The National Commission is monitoring the functioning of the State 
Commissions/District Fora, including disposal rate on regular basis and the following 
steps are being taken up to reduce the pendency of consumer cases: 
 
(a)  Conferences of the Presidents of State Commissions and Secretaries in-charge 
of Consumer Affairs in the States Governments are organized to discuss 
various problems, being faced by the Consumer Fora,  including low rate of 
disposal of cases. 
 
(b)  The Consumer Fora are advised to dispose of consumer cases by adopting 
Alternative Dispute Resolution Mechanism, including Lok Adalat system. 
Some of the Consumer Fora are disposing of cases by adopting Lok A dalat 
system. 
 
(c)  Keeping in view the large pendency in some of the States, it was proposed to 
establish additional/Circuit Benches of the State Commissions and District 
Fora. Some of the States have established the additional/Circuit Benches of 
the State Commissions and District Fora in their States. 
 
(d)  The State Governments are being requested by the President, National 
Commission to fill up the vacant posts of Presidents and Members of the State 
Commissions and District Forums at the earliest. 
 
(e)  The President of the National Commission also visits the States to have first 
hand information with regard to functioning of the Consumer Fora in the State 
and interacts with the Presidents of the State Commissions as well as 

 
 
Secretary, In -charge, Consume r Affairs to evolve ways and means for 
effective functioning of the Consumer Fora in the State. 
 
(f)  The National Commission while notifying the Consumer Protection 
Regulations, 2005, fixed Bench Mark for the Consumer Fora. As per 
Regulation No. 19 (1), a Consumer Forum is expected to dispose of at least 75 
to 100 matters every month.  
 
(g)  Keeping in view the observations of the Parliament Standing Committee, the 
National Commission is writing letters to the State Commissions, informing 
them about the ob servation of the Committee and requesting them to dispose 
of the cases as early as possible. They are also being requested to inform the 
specific reasons for low rate of disposal of cases. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) H-11012/8/2010-P&C 
Dated 22.07.2010] 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4, Para No. 3.11) 
 
2.7  The Committee  observe that 4 vacancies of President and 18 vacancies of 
Members are still lying vacant in the State Commissions. Besides, 57 post s of President 
and 189 posts of Members are vacant in the District Fora of different States namely 
Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh.  The Committee a re 
disappointed to note that although the Department has  been calling for information 
regarding vacancies in the State Commissions from the States/UTs through Monthly and 
Quarterly Periodical Reports but it could not gather information relating to reasons for 
existence of vacancies.  However , the Department has now made necessary modification 
in the periodical returns wherein the States/UTs are required to explain the „reasons‟ for 
existence of vacancies and action taken to fill up the vacant posts. The Com mittee 
recommend that the Department should chalk out strategy to fill up the vacant posts of 
President and Members in a time bound manner, especially in District Foras. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8  As per provisions of Section 9(a) of the Consumer Prote ction Act, 1986, it is the 
responsibility of the concerned State Government to establish the District Fora in the 
State and also take action for filling up the vacant posts of Presidents & Members. 
 
However, the States/UTs are also impressed upon by the Ce ntral Government 
from time to time to ensure that the posts in the Fora are not vacant and advance action 
initiated to ensure the functionality of Fora & consequential disposal of cases. This issue 
is also taken in meetings with Secretaries in -charge of Co nsumer Affairs in States/UTs 
organized by this Department as well as Conferences held by National Commission. The 
issue of advance as well as follow up action required to be taken for timely filling up of   
vacancies in the Consumer Fora was also discussed  in the Conference of the National 
Commission held on 14 th & 15 th March, 2010 with Presidents of State Commissions & 
Secretaries in-charge of Consumer Affairs in States/UTs.  
 
 As a result of these concerted efforts, there is a decrease in the number of va cant 
posts, both in State Commissions & District Fora. As on 01.06.2010, there were only 2 
vacancies of Presidents & 17 vacancies of Members in the State Commissions while in 
the District Fora, the vacancies have decreased to 48 vacancies of Presidents fro m 51 & 
to 175 vacancies of Members from 189. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) H-11012/8/2010-P&C 
Dated 22.07.2010] 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
  

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.6, Para No. 3.17) 
 
2.9  The Committee note that the scheme „Computerization and Computer Networking 
of Consumer Fora‟ (CONFONET) was launched in March, 2005 with a view to 
facilitating the consumers to file cases online and assess the status of their pendency in 
the State Commissions and District Fora. The Committee also observe that every year, a 
large amount is released to NIC for providing necessary hardware and software system, 
developing software and providing maintenance and n ecessary training to officials of 
Consumer Fora. The Committee find that installation of computer hardware/software has 
been completed at 565 Consumer Fora and has not been done in 42 locations majorly of 
which are in three States of Madhya Pradesh (10), Uttaranchal (13) and Bihar (16), due to 
unavailability of physical sites. The Committee are of the view that with the advancement 
of technology, everything is accessible on the website and internet. Thus, there is an 
urgent need to put all the consumer rela ted information on the website of State 
Governments/UTs. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government 
should persuade the State Governments of Madhya Pradesh, Uttaranchal and Bihar to 
provide suitable locations in those States for insta lling computer hardware at the earliest, 
to facilitate the online filing of cases by the aggrieved consumers.    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10  This Department recently held Video Conferencing Meetings with all States/UTs 
including Madhya Pradesh, Uttaran chal and Bihar to review the progress of 
computerization of the Consumer Fora under the „CONFONET‟ Project. During the 
Video Conferencing review meeting, the issue of non -installation of hardware in a 
number of locations due to sites not being made availab le to NIC by the State 
Government was also discussed & remedial measures suggested.   Overall the number of 
locations where hardware is not installed has come down from 42 locations to 18.  
Uttrakhand has come down from 13 to 2, Bihar from 16 to 3. 
 
 Various instructions have also been issued recently by this Department about the 
necessity of active involvement of the States for making the „CONFONET‟ Project a 
success. This has also been taken up recently by Secretary (CA) with the Chief 
Secretaries/Administrators of States/UTs.     
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) H-11012/8/2010-P&C 
Dated 22.07.2010] 
 
  
  

 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.9, Para No. 3.33) 
 
2.11  The Committee note that out of Rs. 409 crore al located for creating awareness 
amongst consumers for the XI Five Year Plan (2007-12) the Department spent Rs. 211.17 
crore in the first three years of plan period. The Committee also note that apart from the 
TV and print media, the Department follows other  medium such as radio, cinema and 
also outdoor activities with innovative use of Railway Stations, Post Offices, Railway 
Tickets, Utility Bills, and Meghdoot Post Cards as communication channels to intensify 
the consumer awareness campaign. In respect of r ural areas, media strategies goes to the 
extent of creating awareness through hoardings, kiosks,  wall paintings, bus panels, 
village boards, Railway branding etc.  The Committee fail to understand as to why the 
very idea of launching Publicity Campaign th rough advertisement cannot be explored on 
the pattern of Pulse Polio Campaign and Anti Tobacco Campaign as all these activities 
are to be carried out by the outdoor publicity units of DAVP through their empanelled 
agencies. The Committee further note that Media Planning for the publicity campaign has 
been entrusted to DAVP  which ensures representation of the regional TV channels that 
are empanelled with DAVP for telecast of spots in the regional languages. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Departmen t should explore the feasibility of 
launching Publicity Campaign through advertisement on the pattern of Pulse Polio 
Campaign and Anti Tobacco Campaign as a continuous process and intimate the 
Committee about the action taken in this regard within three months. The Committee also 
recommend that the Department should chalk out its schedule for the Consumer 
Awareness Programme in the beginning of the financial year.”   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.12  The observations of the Committee have been noted.  The mat ter has been taken 
up with DAVP to suggest a suitable line of action for implementing the 
suggestions/observations of the Committee. 
 
 As regards chalking out the schedule of consumer awareness programme at the 
beginning of financial year is concerned, the  Department is already following this course 
of action.  The Empowered Committee of the Department headed by Secretary(CA) 
chalks out the Annual Plan for publicity in the month of March itself for the ensuing 
financial year.  This is followed up by drawing up detailed quarterly plans.” 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) H-11012/8/2010-P&C 
Dated 22.07.2010] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.20 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
  

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.12, Para No. 5.18) 
 
2.13  The Committee note that the BE for the scheme for „Standardization and Quality 
Control‟ of BIS for the year 2009 -10 was Rs. 15.26 crore which was reduced to Rs. 0.67 
crore at RE Stage and the actual expenditure during  the year was NIL. The heavy 
reduction of BE at RE stage is attributed to the realistic assessment of likely expenditure 
during the year after taking into consideration the unspent balance of funds available with 
BIS out of the funds released during the pr evious year. The Committee are surprised to 
note that BIS, an important organization of the Department has not been able to submit 
the utilization certificates on time thereby resulting into reduction of funds at RE stage 
every year. The Committee, therefo re, recommend that the Department should conduct 
review meetings with BIS and other concerned officials/departments on regular basis to 
asses the requirement of funds by BIS on realistic basis and stress upon them the need for 
timely submission of Utilization Certificates.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.14  Actual expenditure incurred under the Scheme for „Standardization and Quality 
Control‟ during the year 2009 -10 was Rs.0.40 crore against the revised estimates of 
Rs.0.67 crores during the year.  Review meetings are being conducted at regular intervals 
at the levels of Secretary and Additional Secretary to review the progress of expenditure 
and to sort out problems in implementation of the Schemes.  A Steering Committee 
consisting of Additional Secretary (Co nsumer Affairs), Chairman of the Committee, 
AS&FA, Director General (BIS) and nominee of the Planning Commission has been set 
up for giving guidance for proper implementation of the Schemes.  Meetings of the 
Committee are held regularly to monitor the progress of the Schemes. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) H-11012/8/2010-P&C 
Dated 22.07.2010] 
 
  

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.14, Para No. 6.7) 
  
2.15  The Committee are unhappy to note that the Government could not utilize the 
entire funds allocated by the Planning Commission for strengthening the Forward Market 
Commission which is evident from the fact that from 2007 -08 to 2009 -10, the total BE 
was Rs. 56.40 crore and RE was Rs. 21.40 crore i.e. less than half of BE and the actual 
expenditure during these three years was only Rs. 8.36 crore i.e. 14.82% of BE and 
38.97% of RE. The plea of the Government that the under -utilization was due to non -
identification of suitable premises for shifting the office and delay in approval of price 
dissemination project is not at all convincing to the Committee. The Committee feel that 
the very purpose of allocation of huge funds is defeated if the funds earmarked for a 
particular purpose are not utilized. The Committee, wh ile considering it lackadaisical 
attitude on the part of FMC recommend that the Government of India should take prompt 
action to resolve all the issues so that the funds do not remain unutilized on flimsy 
grounds.  
  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.16  The allo cation of funds under the plan scheme was done keeping in mind the 
financial requirement of FMC in the event of the passage of the Forward Contracts 
(Regulation) Amendment Bill. This would have facilitated the restructuring and 
strengthening of FMC, which in turn would have enabled FMC to upscale its manpower, 
activities and thereby, the utilization of the plan funds.  
 
 Shortfall in expenditure in 2009 -10 was primarily in the areas of IT and hiring of 
office premises. The allocation for IT and hiring of pr emises was made keeping in mind, 
increased induction of manpower linked with the passage of the Bill. The scope for 
utilization of funds was severely restricted due to non -passage of the FC(R) Amendment 
Bill which was in the process of consultation with th e stake holders. Within these 
limitations FMC has tried its best to augment utilization of plan funds wherever there was 
scope to do so. The total expenditure incurred by FMC in 2009 -10 was almost more than 
double that of in the previous year, i.e. Rs. 719 .31 lakh as against Rs. 331.51 lakh in the 
previous year, indicating a rise of 117% in the expenditure over the year and 89% of the 
RE for 2009-10. The major expenditure incurred in 2009-10 was under the head Capacity 
Building/Training/Consultancy and Awar eness development programmes which was Rs. 
350.55 lakh as against RE of Rs 428.10 lakh for the year 2009 -10 and actual expenditure 
of Rs. 221.41 lakh in the previous year. FMC has also started working on installation of 
electronic Price Ticker Boards under  the Price Dissemination Project since 2008 -09. 
Installation of the Price Dissemination Ticker Board under the Price Dissemination 
Scheme required a lot of ground work which was time consuming.  Due to the procedural 
delay, the project could not be commenc ed in 2008 -09. However, the expenditure 
incurred on installation of price ticker boards under the Price Dissemination Project has 
shown a sharp rise from Rs. 62.40 lakh in 2008 -09 to Rs. 315.92 lakh in 2009 -10, 
witnessing a rise of 406.28%. A note proposin g amendment to the Forward Contracts 
(Regulation) Act 1952 has, however, been sent to the Cabinet Secretariat on 31.5.2010. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) H-11012/8/2010-P&C 
Dated 22.07.2010] 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.15, Para No. 6.8) 
 
2.17  The Committee note that the Government has awarded the work to conduct study 
to ascertain the percentage of small and marginal farmers benefitted from futures/forward 
trading in the States of Punjab, Gujarat, K arnataka, Maharashtra, Kerala and Andhra 
Pradesh to an independent agency viz. M/s NABARD Consultancy Services 
(NABCONS). The Committee recommend that FMC should provide all the required 
assistance to the agency and complete the necessary formalities requi red for evaluation. 
The Government should keep a close watch on the functioning of the NABCONS so that 
the study is completed and report is submitted within the stipulated time frame i.e. by the 
end of June, 2010. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.18  The study to ascertain the percentage of small and marginal farmers benefited 
from futures/forward trading was awarded to NABCONS on 15 th March 2010 with a 
condition that they should complete certain formalities, such as signing of Letter of 
Agreement, Terms of Refe rence, issue of bank guarantee equal to 50% of the advance 
payment and performance guarantee before commencement of studies. NABCONS could 
not complete the formalities within the short time available before the end of the financial 
year 2009 -10, which nece ssitated issuance of fresh sanction by the Department of 
Consumer Affairs which was issued on 27 th April 2010. Subsequently, all the formalities 
were completed within 15 days and the study commenced by the 13 th May 2010. The 
NABCONS have already completed the proposed preparatory work and prepared a 
questionnaire for the study.  The study is expected to be completed by the middle of 
August 2010. NABCONS is being extended all necessary assistance to ensure that the 
study is completed within the stipulated 3 months time. The Government and FMC are 
closely monitoring the progress of the study. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) H-11012/8/2010-P&C 
Dated 22.07.2010] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.23 of Chapter-I of the Report)  

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.18, Para No. 7.19) 
 
2.19  The Committee are happy to note that in pursuance of the recommendations made 
by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution in their 27 th and 28th Reports (14th Lok Sabha), the Government have issued 
strict instructions to States/UTs to strengthen their enforcement machinery and take all 
necessary measures to prevent hoarding and blackmarketing of essential commodities. 
Besides, the Government has constituted a Standing Core Group of State Chief Ministers 
of eight States under the Chairmanship of Hon‟ble Prime Minister to recommend 
measures inter -alia for better implementation of and amendment of Essential 
Commodities Act, 1 955. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government 
should improve its monitoring mechanism over the functioning of the States/UTs and 
impress upon them to take strict action against the hoarders and blackmarketers who 
create artificial scarcity o f food commodities in the market with a motive to earn more 
profit.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.20  The State Governments/UT Administrations have been repeatedly requested to 
strictly enforce both the Acts and also monitor such enforcements. Video Confere nces 
were held with the State Governments under Chairmanship of Secretary (CA) in 
November, 2009 and January, 2010 wherein the State Governments have again been 
advised to implement and enforce the two Acts effectively.  A Conference of Chief 
Ministers was also convened on 06.02.2010 by this Department under the Chairmanship 
of Hon‟ble Prime Minister wherein this aspect was reiterated to the State Governments. A 
Standing Core Group of State Chief Ministers and concerned Central Ministers has been 
constituted as decided in the Chief Ministers Conference held on 06.02.2010.  The first 
meeting of the Core Group was held on 08.04.2010 under the Chairmanship of Prime 
Minister.  It was decided in this meeting to set up a Working Group, inter alia, on 
Consumer Affairs to be Chaired by the Chief Minister of Gujarat.  This Working Group 
has since been constituted and is required to suggest strategies/plan of action for reducing 
the gap between farmgate and retail prices and better implementation and amendment to 
Essential Commodities Act.   
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) H-11012/8/2010-P&C 
Dated 22.07.2010] 
 
  

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.19, Para No. 7.20) 
 
2.21  The Committee are surprised to note that only 4 Sta tes namely, Tamil Nadu, 
Gujarat, Orissa and Maharashtra are reporting detention cases under the Blackmarketing 
of Essential Commodities Act and some of the State Governments opine Prevention of 
Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commod ities Act, 1980 as 
draconian and hence using it sparingly.  The Committee recommend that the Department 
should take prompt steps to elicit information and reasons from the States/UTs which do 
not prefer to follow the Essential Commodities Act and consider it draconian. The 
Department should also discuss these issues at the highest level and impress upon the 
States/UTs to follow the provisions of Essential Commodities Act in true spirit and 
furnish the details of action taken in this regard within the stipulated time frame.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.22  The enforcement of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 lies with the State 
Governments/Union Territories. The State Governments/UT Administrations have been 
delegated powers to take necessary action under t he provisions of both “The Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 and “The Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of 
Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980”, to prevent mal -practices in essential 
commodities. States/UTs have been requested repeatedly f rom time to time to take 
necessary actions under both the Acts to prevent hoarding and smuggling.  
 
            The Central Government has been taking various measures to persuade the State 
Governments/UT Administrations to effectively implement the provis ions of Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955.  These include d.o.letters, conferences with Food 
Secretaries/Chief Secretaries of States/UTs including Video Conferences.  
 
 The Hon‟ble  Minister for Consumer Affairs, Food & Public  Distribution had 
written to  th e Chief Ministers of all the States/UTs vide his letter dated 23.09.2009 and 
21.12.2009 where he had reiterated the requirement of strict enforcement of the 
provisions of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and the  Prevention of 
Blackmarketing and Mainten ance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980 
against unscrupulous elements indulging in malpractices.  The Chief Ministers of some of 
the States have indicated the action taken by them towards implementing the provisions 
of both these Acts.  Some mo re State Governments have acknowledged the receipt of the 
Hon‟ble Ministers letter and have informed that they were having the matter looked into. 
Secretary (CA) has written on 9 th July 2010 to  Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs to 
indicate the experienc e arising out of implementation of Essential Commodities Act, 
1955 and  Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential 
Commodities Act, 1980.  
 
  The latest in the series of interactions with the States/UTs is the Conference of 
Chief Ministers held under the Chairmanship of Hon‟ble Prime Minister on 06.02.2010. 
A Standing Core Group of State Chief Ministers and concerned Central Ministers has 
been constituted as decided in the Chief Ministers Conference held on 06.02.2010.  The 
first meeting of the Core Group was held on 08.04.2010 under the Chairmanship of Prime 
Minister.  It was decided in this meeting to set up a Working Group, inter alia, on 
Consumer Affairs to be chaired by the Chief Minister of Gujarat.  This Working Group 

 
 
has since been constituted and is required to suggest strategies/plan of action for reducing 
the gap between farmgate and retail prices and better implementation and amendment to 
Essential Commodities Act.   
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) H-11012/8/2010-P&C 
Dated 22.07.2010] 

 
 
 CHAPTER III   
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S 
 REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.5, Para No. 3.12) 
 
3.1  The Committee observe that only 1651 cases pertaining to State Commissions and 
16,617 cases pertaining to District Fora have been disposed off by the method of Lok 
Adalat during 2009 -10 throughout the country, which indicates that the concept of 
disposal of ca ses through Lok Adalat has not been adopted by majority of the States. In 
the opinion of the Committee, the concept of Lok Adalat is convenient, cheap, quick and 
free from Legal Technicalities where the cases are decided with mutual consent of both 
the parties. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should encourage 
all the States/UTs to set Lok Adalat or Circuit Benches for quick disposal of large 
number of cases pending in the State Commissions and District Fora. The Committee 
also desire  that Department should impress upon all the State Governments/UTs to 
furnish information regarding disposal of cases by Lok Adalat method which would help 
the Department itself to make proper planning and strategy to lessen the burden on the 
consumer courts and to deliver inexpensive justice to the consumers.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2  Information relating to disposal of cases by Lok Adalat method in the State 
Commissions and District Fora is also being called for from all States/UTs in the 
Quarterly Periodical Returns being obtained from them. On analysis of these Reports, the 
States/UTs are advised to take remedial action in respect of all shortcomings observed 
including low rate of disposal of cases by Lok Adalat method. 
 
 As on 01.06.2010, the disp osal of cases by Lok Adalat method has also increased 
further to 1841 cases in State Commissions from 1651 and 19,684 cases in District Fora 
from 16,617. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) H-11012/8/2010-P&C 
Dated 22.07.2010] 
 
 
  
  

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.7, Para No. 3.25) 
 
3.3  The Committee are unhappy to note that the allocation of funds under the scheme 
Consumer Welfare Fund has been considerably decreasing during the past three years. 
Every year, a huge amount is provided in the Central Budget but very little amount is 
being utilized by the Department. During 2007 -08, the BE and RE was Rs. 20.60 crore 
but the actual expenditure was only Rs. 8.73 crore i.e. less than 50% of the BE and RE. 
Similarly, the BE which was Rs. 16.08 crore during 2008 -09 was reduced to Rs. 8.65 
crore whereas the actual expenditure during the year was only Rs. 4.91 crore. The 
Committee cannot accept the argument of the Department that the funds could not be 
utilized due to de lay in issue of revised Guidelines in 2007 -08 for release of funds to 
States/UTs as well outstanding audit paras for some of the major projects because these 
formalities are of usual nature which should have been resolved in consultation with the 
concerned authority well in advance. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government should make vigorous efforts to utilize the entire funds in the financial year 
so that the consumers are not deprived of the benefits of the Consumer Welfare Fund.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.4  As a result of rigorous and persistent efforts made by the Department at senior 
levels the expenditure was Rs.10.94 crores, during the year 2009-10, which is more than 
double the expenditure of the year 2008-09.  Efforts will be continued in future also, for 
utilizing the allocation at its maximum. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) H-11012/8/2010-P&C 
Dated 22.07.2010] 
 
  

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.10, Para No. 3.40) 
 
3.5  The Committee note that the Government contemplates to set up a National Trade 
Practice Regulatory Authority (NTPRA) with a view to cover areas which have not been 
covered under Competition Act and Consumer Protection Act and to deal with cases of 
unfair trade pra ctices which have not been covered under the Consumer Protection Act, 
1986. Every year, a provision of token money is made in the Central Budget with the 
hope that scheme would be approved by the Ministry of Law and Justice but it seems that 
it may take some time to complete the procedural formalities. While considering it a right 
step taken by the Government, the Committee recommend that Government should 
vigorously pursue the matter with the concerned authorities to get clearance of the Bill so 
that regul atory and adjudicatory framework to address the gap in legislation for 
protection of intermediate consumers is established expeditiously. 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.6  The proposal for setting up of the National Trade Practices Regulation Authority 
(NTPRA) is still under consideration of the Government. A draft Bill is being finalized in 
consultation with the Ministry of Law. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) H-11012/8/2010-P&C 
Dated 22.07.2010] 
  
  

 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.13, Para No. 5.19) 
 
3.7  The Committee note that BIS could not achieve the physical targets fixed for 
hallmarking of gold jewellery during 2007 -08 and 2008-09 due to increase in number of 
certification bodies, manpower constraints a nd non -introduction of compulsory 
hallmarking of gold jewellery articles w.e.f. 1.1.2008. The  hallmarking of gold jewellery 
scheme is linked with the amendment to the BIS Act which is being finalized in the 
Department. Regarding manpower constraint, it has been stated that posts which are lying 
vacant for more than a year have lapsed.  The Secretary stated during evidence that they 
have sought permission of the Ministry of Finance to fill up 90%of the sanctioned posts 
which have lapsed. Their approval is sti ll awaited. Further, proposal for filling up of 74 
Posts of Scientist B and 101 non -scientific posts in various Grades is under consideration 
of the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should take 
all measures to expedite intr oduction of the bill in the Parliament and the filling up of 
sanctioned posts of BIS, for effective implementation of the Hallmarking scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.8  The main reason for declining trend in hallmarking of jewellery articles is non -
introduction of hallmarking on a mandatory basis as proposed earlier and the resultant 
lack of interest on the part of jewellers to get jewellery articles hallmarked.  At present 
only BIS is engaged in certification of gold jewellery articles.   There is no o ther 
authority engaged in certification of these articles as against a number of certification 
bodies in the case of Management Systems Certification.  A Draft Bill for amendment of 
the BIS Act has been finalized in consultation with Legislative Department , Ministry of 
Law & Justice.  Approval of the Government is being sought for the proposed 
amendments before introduction of the Bill before Parliament.   A case for revival of 
some of the posts that have lapsed is also under consideration of the Government. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) H-11012/8/2010-P&C 
Dated 22.07.2010] 
 

 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.1, Para No. 2.15) 
 
4.1  The Committee note that out of total outlay of Rs.209 crore each for Plan 
Schemes during 2008 -09 and 2009 -10, the Department could utilize Rs.142.33 crore 
against RE of Rs.160 crore and Rs.144.07 crore ag ainst RE of Rs.164 crore, respectively. 
The Committee feel that on the one hand, funds for Plan Schemes have not been utilized 
fully during the last two years and on the other, the Department considers funds allocated 
for 2010 -11 as insufficient. The Commi ttee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Department should take steps to get timely clearance of all the Plan schemes so that 
allocated funds could be utilized properly and the physical and financial targets set for 
various schemes in the financial yea r could be achieved.  The Committee also desire that 
the Department should chalk out strategy well in advance for implementation of its 
schemes and make sincere efforts to complete all the procedural formalities to avoid 
delay in the implementation the schemes/programmes/projects.”  
  
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2  The observations of the Committee have been noted and all efforts would be 
made for smooth implementation of the schemes/programmes/projects.” 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) H-11012/8/2010-P&C 
Dated 22.07.2010] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
  

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.8, Para No. 3.26) 
 
4.3  The Committee note that under the scheme „Consum er Welfare Fund‟, financial 
assistance is provided to States/UTs in the form of seed money to promote and protect the 
welfare of consumers, generate consumer awareness and strengthening consumer 
movement in the country. Despite the fact that the ratio of a mount of seed money has 
been increased to 50:50, 14 States have not yet set up Consumer Welfare Fund in their 
respective budget head and not availed of the benefits of Consumer Welfare Fund which 
reflects that these States are not serious towards the welfa re of consumers. The 
Committee note that the Government has now decided to support the Central Share upto 
75% to those States/UTs which are willing to establish a corpus of Rs. 10 crore in their 
States/UTs. The Committee hope that all these 14 States will create separate Corpus Fund 
in their respective States/UTs and would avail the 75% financial assistance from Central 
Government under the Consumer Welfare Fund. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the matter may be taken up with the States/UTs at the highest level to impress upon 
them the importance of creation of the State Consumer Welfare Fund in their respective 
State Budget, to protect the interest of the consumers.”  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.4  The Department has been taking up the matter of se tting up the State Consumer 
Welfare Fund by writing letters/reminders at various levels.  At the highest level, 
Secretary (CA) has also written D.O. letters to the Chief Secretaries of the States that 
have not opted for the scheme so far.” 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) H-11012/8/2010-P&C 
Dated 22.07.2010] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.17 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.16, Para No. 7.11) 
 
 
4.5  The Committee observe that the main reasons for rise in prices of essential 
commodities especially pulses, rice, sugar, tea during the last year were (i) shortfall in 
domestic supply relative to demand; (ii) increase in MSP and bonus; (iii) hardening of 
international prices; (iv) changes in consumption pattern; (v) adverse weather and climate 
change. Increase in prices of onion and potato was due to seasonal factor and loss of crop 
due to flood. Consequent upon the fiscal and administrative measures taken by t he 
Government to contain the prices of essential commodities, there was some sign of 
reduction in prices of these commodities in open market but still the prices are very high 
and beyond the purchasing power of poor persons. The Committee are of the opinio n that 
the State Governments have an important role in checking the rise in prices of essential 
commodities through a set of administrative and regulatory measures which is 
corroborated with facts that the State Governments of Maharashtra and Goa made 
available potato and onion to the consumers at lower than market prices by bearing the 
cost of subsidy. The Government of Delhi has also been supplying pulses and atta at 
lower rates through various outlets. The Committee are of the opinion that if all the Sta te 
Governments/UTs follow the concept of Maharashtra, Goa and Delhi, the prices of the 
commodities will certainly come down. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government should pursuade all the States/UTs to emulate the pattern of Government of 
Maharashtra, Goa and Delhi to supply the essential commodities like pulses, onion and 
potato at subsidized rates.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 4.6  The recommendations of the Standing Committee have been brought to the notice 
of the State Governments.  They  have advised to constitute similar steps to check price 
rise and give competition to the private trade. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) H-11012/8/2010-P&C 
Dated 22.07.2010] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.26 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.11, Para No. 4.5) 
 
5.1  The Committee regret to note t hat evaluation study carried out in 8 States has 
pointed out serious shortcomings in the functioning of Strengthening of Weights and 
Measures Infrastructure of States/UTs Scheme viz. (i) States are not able to provide its 
resources for operational expendit ure ; and (ii) larger mobile kits do not reach all places. 
The Committee are unable to understand as to how the Department will make this scheme 
effective until and unless the shortcomings are removed from the scheme. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should conduct such survey in all 
other States for efficient functioning of Weight and Measure Laws. The Committee also 
desire that the Department should impress upon DGS&D to procure kits well in advance 
and provide to States which were affected due to operational problem and ensure that 
similar problem does not arise at the fag end of the financial year.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2  (i) The recommendations of the Standing Committee to conduct a survey in all 
other States for efficient functioning of Weights and Measures Laws are being examined. 
 
(ii) DGS&D has been advised to procure the equipments well in advance to avoid 
any type of operational difficulties at the end of the financial year. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) H-11012/8/2010-P&C 
Dated 22.07.2010] 
 
  
  

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.17, Para No. 7.12) 
 
5.3  The Committee note that the agricultural produce market in India is fragmented 
and controlled by the Agricultural Pro duce Market Commodity Act (APMC). The basic 
purpose of APMC Act was to help the farmers to get a possible price. Unfortunately, the 
provisions of the said Act have become ineffective and the farmers have to sell their 
produce through intermediators at very  low prices. The Committee have been informed 
that an idea of spot exchange has been developed wherein the consumers are in a position 
to purchase the produce directly from farmers at a cheap rate from organized retail sector 
through contract farming. But the concept of organized retail sector and contract farming 
is possible only when the provisions of APMC Act are suitably amended. Therefore, the 
Government contemplates to insert a Competition Clause in the APMC Act so that the 
farmers have choice to sell  their produce to multiple agencies at high prices. The 
Committee, while considering it a right step taken by the Government, recommend that 
the Government should bring Amendment Bill in the Parliament so that the interest of the 
farmers and consumers are protected and the farmers are saved from the clutches of 
middleman and traders which will automatically help the Government to bring down the 
sky high prices of essential commodities.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.4  The agriculture marketing system in the country is services through a network of 
regulated markets. The purpose of regulation of agricultural markets was to protect 
farmers from the exploitation of intermediaries and traders and also to ensure better 
prices and t5imesly payment for his produce. Over a period of time these markets have, 
however, acquired the status of restrictive and monopolistic markets, providing no help in 
direct and free marketing, organized retailing and smooth raw material supplies to agro -
processing, competitive trading, in formation exchange and adoption of innovative 
marketing systems. In order to provide better market access through alternative marketing 
channel and better remuneration to farmers, Central Government advised all the State 
Governments to modify their Marketi ng Legislation as per Model APMC Act 2003 for 
promoting competitive and transparent transactional methods, to provide contract 
farming, Direct Marketing and enabling setting up markets in private and co -operative 
sector. The status of reform by states is annexed at Annexure. 
 
Among others, the Model Act also provides an institutional framework to support 
contract farming, an arrangement under which companies enter into contracts for 
marketing of the agricultural produce and also provide technologies and capital support to 
farmers. Theses arrangements can provide an effective method of linking small farm 
sector to agro-processing industry and to sources of extension advice, seeds, credit and to 
assured and profitable markets. There is provision in the Model A PMC act for e -trading 
under which the National Spot Exchange can transact agricultural produce at electronic 
platform. The States of Gujarat, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and 
Orissa have provided provisions in their APMC Act for settin g up of National Spot 
Exchange in the APMC. This will facilitate on line trading of agricultural produce and it 
is reported that the prices realization of farmers enhances up to 4 -5% in comparison to 
the traditional marketing channel. 
 

 
 
The Ministry of agri culture has set a Committee of Minister In -charge agricultural 
marketing on market reforms and the issues related various areas of reforms are being 
examined by the committee including electronic trading. The states are being persuaded 
to complete the proc ess of reforms early in the interest of farmers and more so in the 
interest of the consumers. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) H-11012/8/2010-P&C 
Dated 22.07.2010] 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI               VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
04 July, 2011___                Chairman 
13 Asadha, 1933 (Saka)      Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
  

 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF TH E ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON 
MONDAY, THE 4th JULY, 2011 
 
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1500 hrs. in Committee Room „C‟, Ground 
floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar     -     Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
3. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
4. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
6. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
7. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
8. Shri Lal Chand Kataria 
9. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
10. Shri Sukhdeo Singh Libra  
11. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
12. Shri Danapal Venugopal 
13. Shri Adagooru H. Vishwanath 
 
  

 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
14. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
15. Shri Lalhming Liana 
16. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
17. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
18. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
19. Shri Sanjay Raut                                                                                                                                                                     
20. Dr. T. N. Seema 
21. Shri Veer Singh 
22. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.K.Misra - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou - Under Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the draft Report on the Action 
Taken by the Government  on the observations/recommendations of the Committee 
contained in the Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) relating to the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). In 
his opening remarks Hon‟ble Chairman highlighted the important points reiterated by the 
Committee in the draft Report in respect of the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Committee's original report. 
 
3. The Committee took up for consi deration the draft Report and unanimously 
adopted the same without any amendments/modifications.  
 
4.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the aforesaid Report and 
present the same to the Parliament during the ensuing Monsoon Session of Parliament. 
The Committee also decided to convene the next sitting on 26th July, 2011. 
  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
********* 

 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON  
THE OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE  
FIFTH REPORT OF THIS STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD,  
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations:-            19 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government :- 
 
Recommendation Nos. 2.16, 2.17, 3.10, 3.11, 3.17, 3.33,  
5.18, 6.7, 6.8, 7.19 and 7.20 
    Total: 11 
Percentage: 57.89% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government:- 
 
 Recommendation Nos. 3.12, 3.25, 3.40, and 5.19   
        Total: 04 
Percentage: 21.05% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration:- 
 
  Recommendation Nos. 3.26, and 7.11    
  Total: 02 
Percentage: 10.53% 
   
 
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect of which the replies of 
the Government are still awaited:- 
   Recommendation Nos. 4.5 and 7.12 
 Total: 02 
Percentage: 10.53% 