 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
              AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2011-2012) 
 
 
      FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of   the 
Committee (2010 -11) on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) pertaining to the  
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food and Public Distribution)} 
 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
            May, 2012/ Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 
21 


TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2011-2012) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
{Action Taken by    the   Government    on    the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of   the Committee (2010 -
11) on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) pertaining to the  Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution)} 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on18.05.2012 
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 18.05.2012 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
May, 2012/ Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 
 


 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
 
Composition of the Committee …………………………………………          (ii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………...          (iv) 
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………………             
 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government……………………………   
  
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
 the Government‟s replies………………………………...  
 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee ………………………………………..   
 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are  
still awaited………………………………………………   
   
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the Fourteenth sitting of the Committee held on    
17th May, 2012 …………………………………..  
 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report  
of the Committee (2010-11) ………………………………   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2011-12) 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Jaywant Gangaram Awale** 
3. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
4. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary  
6. Shri Sanjay Dhotre  
7. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome  
8. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
9. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav**   
10. Shri Lal Chand Kataria  
11. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase  
12. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
13. Shri Prabodh Panda  
14. Shri Sohan Potai 
15. Shri Purnmasi Ram  
16. Shri Ramkishun 
17. Shri Chandulal Sahu (Chandu Bhaiya) 
18. Dr. Naramalli Sivaprasad* 
19. Shri E.G. Sugavanam $ 
20. Smt. Usha Verma**  
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
23. Dr. M.S. Gill 
24. Shri P. Kannan 
25. Shri Lalhming Liana 
26. Shri Sanjay Raut 
27. Dr. T.N. Seema 
28. Shri Veer Singh 
29. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki # and @ 
30. Vacant# 
31. Vacant# 
________________________________________ 
*   Nominated w.e.f. 25.11.2011 
**  Nominated w.e.f. 03.01.2012 
$   Nominated w.e.f. 12.04.2012 
#   Vice Shri Kanjibhai Patel, Shri Rajniti Prasad and Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki retired from 
Rajya       Sabha w.e.f. 02.04.2012. 
@  Nominated w.e.f. 04.05.2012.  
 
 
 

SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. K. Misra  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Anil Kumar  - Committee Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
  
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution (2011 -12) having been authorized by the Committee to 
submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty First Report on Action  
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Twelfth Report of the Committee (2010-11) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) 
of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food and Public Distribution). 
 
2.  The Twelfth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on      5 th August, 2011. The Government have furnished their replies indicating 
Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Report on 4 th November, 
2011.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 17th May, 2012.  
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.  
 
5.  For facility of refer ence and convenience, the Observations/Comments of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the text of the Report. 
  
 
  
 
  NEW DELHI;                      VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
17 May, 2012                 Chairman, 
27 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka)                   Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution deals with the Action Taken by the Government on                      
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report                        
of the Committee (2010 -11), (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) 
pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
 
1.2 The Twelfth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table      
of Rajya Sabha on 05.08.2011. It contained 33 observations/ recommendations. 
Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 33 observations/r ecommendations 
contained in the Report have been received and these have been categorized as 
follows:- 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government : 
 
 Serial Nos.:- 1, 3, 4,  6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 1 7, 
18,  20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32 and 
33 
    
Paragraph Nos:- 3.3, 4.16, 4.22, 4.37, 4.40, 4.45, 4.51, 4.55, 
4.58, 4.67, 4.77, 4.78, 4.79, 4.80, 4.82, 5.6, 5.14, 
5.19, 5.25, 5.28, 6.5, 6.18 , 6.21, 7.6, 7.11, 7.13, 
8.8 and 8.11     
          (Chapter – II, Total - 28) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government 
Serial Nos. 5, 19, 26 and 29   
(Paragraph Nos. – 4.30, 5.10, 6.19 and 7.7) 
           (Chapter – III, Total - 4)

(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
          of the Government have not been accepted by the 
         Committee and which require reiteration: 
Serial No. 2   
(Paragraph No. – 4.7)  
            (Chapter – IV, Total -1)   
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
interim replies of the Government have been received. 
   Serial No.:- Nil 
   (Paragraph No. – Nil) 
    (Chapter – V, Total - 0) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the replies in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee strongly emphasize that utmost importance should 
be given to the implementation of Observat ions/Recommendations 
accepted by the Government. In case where it is not possible for the 
Government to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any 
reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee in time with 
reasons for non-implementation. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations. 
 

A. Need to take concrete steps to convince remaining States/UTs to 
adopt Decentralized Procurement (DCP) Scheme 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.  2, Para No. 4.7) 
 
1.6 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows: - 
 
"The Committee are constrained to note that even after more than                 
13 years of its inception, the DCP Scheme has been undertaken by only 
five States fo r wheat and nine States for rice which indicates the 
Government‟s inability to convince the remaining States about the 
advantages  of the Scheme.  The Committee also observe that success of 
DCP Scheme greatly depends upon the infrastructure and resources 
available with the respective State Governments; speedy release of funds 
to the DCP States and proper planning for distribution of foodgrains.   In 
the opinion of the Committee, DCP Scheme is one of the most important 
Schemes being implemented with a view t o lessening the burden on FCI 
and reducing the dependence on the Central Government.  The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Government to remove the anomalies in 
the Scheme so that States can contribute towards the central pool thereby 
enhancing the food secu rity. The Committee, also recommend the 
Department to take concrete steps  to convince the remaining States/UTs 
to adopt the DCP Scheme in the interest of the farmers and in making the 
States self sufficient in production, procurement and distribution of 
foodgrains."  
  
 
1.7 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:-  
 
"The Scheme of Decentralized Procurement (DCP) of foodgrains 
was introduced in 1997 -98 with a view to enhance the efficiency of 
procurement and PDS and to encourage local pro curement and reduce 
out go of food subsidy.  In this method of procurement, the State 
undertakes the responsibility of procurement of foodgrains, its scientific 
storage and distribution through Targeted Public Distribution System 
(TPDS).  The surplus of fo odgrains procured by DCP states, in excess of 
their TPDS requirement is handed over to FCI for the Central Pool stocks 
and deficit, if any, is met by FCI. 
 The decision regarding adoption of DCP system lies with the State 
Government. The determining factor  are infrastructure and resources 
available with the respective State Governments including manpower, 
storage and necessary logistics required for procurement and accordingly, 
State Government‟s readiness to undertake DCP procurement. 
 The major infrastruc ture required for procurement operation is the 
storage facilities for the foodgrains.  To assist and encourage the State 
Government to create sufficient storage space, Government of India has 

launched the Scheme for construction of godowns for FCI – storage 
requirements through private entrepreneurs – 2008 on 28.07.2008. 
 This Department has also formulated and circulated on 08.04.2010 
a similar scheme for creation of storage space in the DCP States.  The 
State Government or any agency designated by it will  assess the storage 
gap.  The storage space to be created in the DCP States would be so as 
to meet  maximum of its annual TPDS/OWS requirement.  
 At present, the States of West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, 
Chhatisgarh, Uttarakhand, A&N Island, Orissa, Tamil Nad u, Karnataka 
and Kerala are procuring rice under Decentralized Procurement Scheme.  
Government of UP was adopting DCP method for procurement of rice 
upto KMS 2008 -09.  But the same has discontinued the procurement of 
rice under Decentralized procurement.  The States of West Bengal, 
Madhya Pradesh, Chhatisgarh, Uttarakhand and Gujarat are procuring 
wheat under DCP Scheme.  The number of States procuring rice and 
wheat under DCP Schemes is 10.  All other State Governments have 
been requested to adopt DCP syst em for procuring foodgrains vide this 
Department‟s letter dated 10.01.2011. 
 In response to the above referred letter of this Department, 
Government of Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana and Sikkim have 
expressed their inability to adopt the method of procurem ent of foodgrains 
under reference.  States have been again requested to adopt this DCP 
method of procurement of foodgrains."  
 

 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.8 While noting that even after more than 13 years of its inception, the 
Decentralised Procurement (DCP) Scheme has been undertaken by only 
five States for wheat and nine States for rice which indicated the 
Government's inability to convince the remaining States  about advantages 
of the Scheme, the Committee urged the Government to  remove the 
anomalies i n the Scheme and also take concrete steps to convince the 
remaining States/UTs to adopt the Scheme.  The Department in their action 
taken reply have  stated that the States of West Bengal, Madhaya Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh, Uttrakhand and Gujarat are procuring w heat under DCP 
Scheme while the number of States procur ing rice and wheat under it is 
ten.  All other States have been requested to adopt DCP Scheme through 
their letter dated 10.01.2011 and in response to their letter the Government 
of Andhra Pradesh, Del hi, Haryana and Sikkim have expressed their 
inability to adopt the method of procurement of foodgrains under the 
scheme and they were again requested by the Department to adopt the 
DCP Scheme. 
  
The Committee are disappointed with the Action Taken Reply of  the 
Department as it does not indicate any concrete steps taken by them to 
convince the remaining States/UTs to adopt DCP Scheme after 
presentation of t he 12th R eport of the Committee on 05.08.2011. The 
Committee take a serious view of the casual approach of the Depart ment 
towards the recommendation of the Committee as also for trying  to 
convince the Committee by mentioning about sending of a letter to the 
States on 10.01. 2011, i.e ., before the Committee's recommendation  was 
communicated to them.  The Commi ttee, therefore, emphatically reiterate 
their earlier recommendation that the Department should remove the 
anomalies in the DCP Scheme and also take concrete steps to convince the 
remaining States/UTs to adopt the scheme. The Committee be apprised of 
the action taken in this regard. 

 
B. Need to expedite the finalisation of Revised Proposal regarding 
Direct Disbursement of Food Subsidy in Cash to BPL/AAY 
Beneficiaries 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Para No. 4.16) 
 
1.9 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
"The Committee note that on requests received from the State 
Governments of U.P., Haryana and Government of NCT of Delhi for direct 
disbursement of food subsidy in cash to BPL/AAY beneficiaries, instead of 
distributing the  foodgrains to them under TPDS, a draft Scheme was 
prepared to test the feasibility of this alternative mode of transfer of food 
subsidy. The Committee have been informed that the Department of 
Expenditure has decided that following the finalization of pov erty 
estimates by the Planning Commission, the Department of Food & Public 
Distribution and Delhi Government  would work out the final contours of 
the Scheme in consultation with the Planning Commission taking into 
account the likelihood of making use of UID Cards to be issued in the near 
future. The Department of Expenditure has requested for a revised 
proposal on the issue which is presently under examination by the 
Department.  The Committee, recommend the Department to expedite the 
finalization of revis ed proposal as desired by the Department of 
Expenditure, for an early decision on the issue." 
 
 
1.10 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
 " The Department has prepared a draft scheme to test the 
feasibility of direct transfer o f food subsidy in cash to BPL/AAY 
beneficiaries under TPDS.  The scheme envisages transfer of food 
subsidy in cash to BPL/AAY families instead of distribution of foodgrains 
as is being done at present.  This scheme has been prepared on the basis 
of proposa ls received from the State Governments of Uttar Pradesh, 
Haryana and Delhi.  The draft Scheme is for pilot implementation in five 
districts. 
 Under the draft scheme, it is proposed to disburse equivalent 
amount of food subsidy in cash instead of subsidized  foodgrains to the 
eligible BPL and AAY families.  The amount of food subsidy will be 
deposited directly by the concerned district authorities in bank/post office 
accounts to be opened by each of the beneficiaries.  With the cash 
subsidy, the BPL/AAY famil ies would be able to purchase foodgrains and 
sugar of their choice from open market instead of taking delivery from the 
fair price shops as at present.  The draft scheme was referred to Ministry 
of Finance, Department of Expenditure on 26.6.2009 for placin g it before 
the Committee on Non -Plan Expenditure for appraisal.  Since then, that 
Department was being reminded to indicate the latest status of the 

proposal.  Department of Expenditure conveyed its observations vide 
letter dated 24.1.2011 and advised thi s Department to submit a revised 
proposal.   
 A meeting was held in the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution, New Delhi on 29.4.2011 with the representatives of State 
Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Government of NCT of 
Delhi. These State G overnments, as well as State Government of Bihar, 
were requested to furnish requisite information to further consider the 
proposal.  The information has been received from the State Government 
of Haryana and Government of NCT of Delhi.  The information is still 
awaited from State Governments of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar.  The matter 
is being pursued with them to send the information." 
 
 
 
  

Comments of the Committee 
 
1.11 Noting that a draft scheme for an alternate mode of transfer of food 
subsidy was under e xamination of the Department, t he Committee had 
recommended expeditious finalization of the said proposal regarding direct 
disbursement of food subsidy in cash to BPL/A AY beneficiaries.  In their 
action taken reply the Department have stated, inter-alia, that Government 
of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, NCT of Delhi and Bihar were requested to 
furnish requisite information to further consider the proposal.  The 
information has been received from the State Governm ent of Haryana and 
NCT of Delhi, while the same is still awaited from Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. 
The matter has been pursued with them to send the information. While 
hoping that the Department will constantly pursu e the matter, the  
Committee would like to be apprised of t he details of the action taken by 
the Department in this regard especially, after 05.08.2011, i.e ., the date of 
presentation of the original Report of the Committee to the Parliament.  
 
 
 
 

C. Need for timely s ettlement of  the claims of States/UTs under  Hill 
Transport Subsidy (HTS) Scheme 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.  4, Para No. 4.22) 
 
1.12 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
"The Committee note that under Hill Transport Subsidy, the Union 
Government reimburses the transportation cost of foodgrains from bas e 
depots of FCI upto the designated Principal Distribution Centres in States 
which are predominantly hilly.  The Committee are deeply concerned to 
note that huge amount is pending with FCI for being paid to State/UTs viz. 
Mizoram, Tripura, Arunachal Prades h, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Lakshadweep and Sikkim on account of cost of transportation of 
foodgrains under Hill Transport Subsidy (HTS Scheme).  The Committee 
have been informed that no HTS claim has been received from 
Meghalaya, Manipur, Nagala nd, A&N Islands.  The States in respect of 
which full HTS claim have been received i.e Mizoram, Tripura, Arunanchal 
Pradesh, J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Lakshadweep and Sikkim, only part 
payment has been paid and the huge amount is still pending which clearly 
indicates that the Department is not serious towards reimbursement of 
HTS claims of States/UTs.  Moreso, the Department does not seem to 
have made any efforts to find out the reasons for non submission of HTS 
claims which proves  that the Government is not serious towards 
settlement of claims.  The Committee are not happy with the situation and 
recommend that the Department/FCI should find out the reasons for non 
submission of HTS claims and make sincere efforts for liquidation of 
outstanding dues of these S tates/UTs fully, so that States/UTs may be 
able to lift the foodgrains periodically and the poor people of hilly and 
inaccessible States are not deprieved of the benefits of subsidized 
foodgrains under HTS Schemes." 
 
 
1.13 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
  
"Under the Hill Transport Subsidy Scheme, re -imbursement of 
expenditure incurred by States on transportation of PDS foodgrains from 
FCI Base Depots to designated Principal Distribution Centre is made by 
FCI on submission of  claims by the States.  The States are required to 
submit certain details and documentary evidence with the claims such as 
cheque Nos. particular of banks, details of the recipients and proof of 
payments to them etc. Accordingly, FCI has been releasing pay ments to 
the concerned State in all cases in which proper claims alongwith the 
required details / documents are received by it.  Following amounts have 
been released by FCI in such case: - 

 
Mizoram Rs.384.46 lakh against the bills from 
01.04.2009 onwards. 
Arunachal Pradesh Rs.4576 lakhs as provisional advance for the 
period from 2007-08 to 2009-10 
Himachal Pradesh 2010-11 – Rs.396.30 lakhs. 
2011-12 – Rs.8.42 lakhs. 
Lakshadweep 2010-11 – Rs.13.10 lakhs. 
Sikkim 2009-10 – Rs.90.25 lakhs. 
2010-11 – Rs.61.63 lakhs. 
 
2. However, many bills / claims could not be processed and were 
returned to the concerned State Governments as the same were not 
accompanied by the required information and documents. To avoid such 
problem, States have been requested again and a gain to ensure that all 
claims/bills for HTS are complete and supported by the requisite details/ 
documents to avoid any problem/delay in processing them for release of 
fund. FCI has also been advised that any request for relaxation of 
prescribed procedure /documents may be sorted out by it in consultation 
with the concerned State Government keeping in view that there is no 
misuse of the HTS scheme, in case of specific problems faced by the 
States in furnishing the specific nature of documents.  
 
3. So far r easons for non - submission of HTS claims by some States 
is concerned, FCI is in the process of ascertaining the same from the 
State Governments through its regional offices." 
 
 

Comments of the Committee 
 
1.14 Expressing their unhappiness with the situatio n, the Committee had 
recommended that the Department/FCI should find out the reasons for non-
submission of Hill Transport Subsidy (HTS) claims by some States and 
make sincere efforts for liquid ation of outstanding dues of the se 
States/UTs so that the poor people of hilly and inaccessible States are not 
deprived of the benefits of subsidized foodgrains under HTS Scheme.  The 
Department in their action taken reply ha ve stated that FCI has been 
releasing payments to the States in all cases in which proper claim s along 
with required details/documents are received and has accordingly, 
released the amount to the States of Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Himachal Pradesh, Lakshadweep and Sikkim. Further, FCI through its 
Regional Offices is in the process of ascertaining  the reasons for non -
submission of HTS claims by some States concerned.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate that the States should be requested again to ensure that 
all claims/bills for HTS are complete and supported by the requisite 
details/documents to avoid delay in processing for release of funds.  The 
Committee further desire the Ministry to take their recommendation 
seriously to find out the reasons for non -submission of HTS claims by 
some States and take necessary remedial steps for early liquidation  of 
outstanding dues of those States/UTs. The Committee be apprised of the 
details of action taken in the matter.  

D. Need to i nstall Global Positioning System (GPS) in all vehicles 
carrying PDS foodgrains in all States/UTs on top priority 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.  6, Para No. 4.37) 
 
1.15 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
"The Committee note that in order to curb the diversion and 
leakages of foodgrains meant for TPDS, Government is taking up piloting 
of innovative s/new technologies such as GPS, RFIDS, Bar coded 
coupons, stamping of PDS foodgrains, etc.  One of the steps taken by the 
Department to prevent leakages/diversion of foodgrains was installation of 
Global Positioning System (GPS) on vehicles carrying subsid ized 
foodgrains on pilot basis in three States namely NCT of Delhi, Chhatisgarh 
and Tamil Nadu.  In this regard, the Committee also note that as per the 
findings of the National council for Applied Research (NCAER), the level 
of diversion of wheat in Assam  and Mizoram is 100% for APL and of rice 
is 83.38% and 81.12% for APL respectively which shows that foodgrains 
meant for APL families have not reached to them at all in these two 
States.  The level of diversion of wheat for APL in respect of Chhatisgarh 
and Jharkhand is 78.34% and 54.53%, respectively. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the procedure for sanction of funds for 
installation of GPS be simplified and GPS devices be installed not only in 
the three pilot States but in all the States/UTs of the Country on top priority 
to curb the menace of diversion and leakage of foodgrains." 
 
  
1.16 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
"Initially, in March 2008, the funds were sanctioned and released to 
State Governments of Chhat tisgarh, Tamil Nadu and NCT of Delhi for 
installation of GPS sets on pilot basis as per details given in succeeding 
paragraphs. 
 
2. An amount of Rs.12.24 lakh was sanctioned and a sum of Rs.11.02 
lakh was released to Government of Tamil Nadu vide sanction letter dated 
25th March, 2008, for installation of GPS sets.  The Government of Tamil 
Nadu submitted Utilization Certificate for an amount of Rs.11.66 lakhs for 
installation of GPS sets on the vehicles carrying foodgrains meant for 
TPDS.  The UC for this a mount has been accepted and the balance 
amount of Rs.64,000/ - has been sanctioned/released to the State 
Government of Tamil Nadu vide letter dated 25th November, 2009. 
 
3. An amount of Rs.4.13 lakh was sanctioned and released to the 
Government of NCT of De lhi in March, 2008 for installation of GPS sets.  
The Government of NCT of Delhi did not utilize the amount and refunded 
the sum of Rs.4.13 lakh to this Department. 
 

4. As regards the Government of Chhattisgarh, an amount of 
Rs.29.61 lakh was sanctioned an d released to the Government of 
Chhattisgarh in March, 2008 for installation of GPS sets. The State 
Government of Chhattisgarh furnished Utilization Certificate (UC) for a 
sum of Rs.29.56 lakh.  The UC furnished by State Government of 
Chhattisgarh has been accepted for a sum of Rs.22.95 lakh and the State 
Government has been requested in September, 2011 to refund the 
balance amount of Rs.6.66 lakh along with penal interest thereon.  A 
proposal from the State Government of Chhattisgarh for sanction of more 
funds for installation of GPS sets on vehicles carrying TPDS commodities 
is also under consideration in the Department. 
 
5. In addition to above, this Department has invited proposals vide 
letter dated 18 th May, 2011 from all States/UTs for sanctioning of f unds 
under the scheme during the year 2011 -12 for installation of Global 
Positioning System (GPS) sets on vehicles carrying TPDS commodities.  
The matter is being pursued with the State/UT Governments for sending 
complete proposals in this regard. " 
 
 
 

Comments of the Committee 
 
1.17 The Committee in their original report had recommended that the 
procedure for sanction of funds for installation of Global Positioning 
System (GPS) be simplified and GPS devices be installed not only in the 
three pilot States but in all the States/UTs of the country on top priority to 
curb the menace of diversion and leakages of foodgrains.  The Department 
in their action taken reply ha ve stated, inter -alia, that the proposals have 
been invited on 18.05.2011 from all the States /UTs for sanctioning of funds 
under the scheme during the year 2011 -12 for installation of GPS sets on 
vehicles carrying TPDS commodities and the matter is  being pursued with 
them in this regard.  While reiterating their earlier recommendation, the 
Committee desire that the matter may be vigorously pursued with all the 
States/UTs and the Committee be apprised of the follow up action 
taken/latest status of the matter, State/UT-wise. 

E. Implementation of Computerisation of TPDS Commodities and Smart 
Card based Delivery of Essential Commodities in all the States/UTs 
required 
Recommendation (Serial No.  8, Para No. 4.45) 
 
1.18 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
"The Committee note that the Smart Card based delivery of TPDS 
Scheme is being implemented on pilot basis in UT of Chandigarh and 
State of Haryana.  The Committee have been informed that out of the total 
approved expenditure of Rs.142.29 crore, Government of Haryana and 
Chandigarh UT have been provided funds of Rs.25 c rore and Rs.1.10 
crore for  implementation of the Scheme.  The Committee have been 
further  informed that the assessment of the Scheme shall be taken upon 
completion of the pilot project.   The Committee hope that Smart card 
based delivery of essential com modities will improve the efficiency of the 
Public Distribution System and desire that the Government should 
persuade the State/UT Governments of Haryana and Chandigarh to 
expedite completion of the projects so that assessments of the Scheme 
could be done at the earliest.  The Committee also recommend that all 
necessary steps be taken for expeditious implementation of the project all 
over the country." 
   
 
1.19 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
" The Committee had been informe d that to improve quality of 
delivery of services under TPDS and to assess replicability of new 
technologies, a pilot scheme on smart card based delivery of TPDS 
commodities was approved for Chandigarh(UT) and Haryana in 
December, 2008 with an outlay of Rs .142.29 crore. Implementing 
agencies for this Scheme are NIC, State Government of Haryana and 
Chandigarh(UT) Administration. Under this scheme, the existing ration 
cards are to be replaced by smart cards. These smart cards will contain 
bio-metric features of adult members of the ration card holder families. 
TPDS commodities to smart card holder families will be issued from fair 
price shops after verification of genuineness of the smart card holder 
through smart card transaction terminal. Similarly, release of TPDS 
commodities by State/UT Administration to field units will be based on 
actual off-take/lifting by smart card holders. An amount of Rs. 25 crore to 
the Government of Haryana, Rs.1.10 crore to Chandigarh UT and Rs. 
1.00 crore to NIC was released on 2 6-12-2008. Another installment of Rs. 
92.50 lakh has been released to NIC on 17.01.2011. Chandigarh UT had 
completed trial run of smart card based transaction of TPDS commodities 
on 7th June 2010. Government of Haryana had also completed trial run of 
smart card based transaction of TPDS commodities on 17th June 2010. In 
the State/UT Food Secretaries conference at New Delhi, on 13th July 
2010, the Hon‟ble MOACAF&PD had inaugurated the scheme by issuing 
Smart Cards to some TPDS beneficiaries of Haryana.  

 
The Committee had also been informed about status of 
implementation of smart card scheme in Chandigarh (UT) and State of 
Haryana. As per the recommendations of the Task Force on 
Computerisation of PDS, the formulation of Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
(CSS) for r emaining States/UTs, integrating the scheme on 
„Computerization of TPDS Operations‟ at Centre and 4 pilot States 
(covering select districts) and scheme on „Smart Card based delivery of 
Essential Commodities‟ at Chandigarh Union Territory and Haryana, was 
to be taken up by December 2012. 
 
Further, it is submitted that a High Powered Committee (HPC) headed by 
Justice D.P. Wadhwa (Retd.) had been set up under the directions of the 
Hon‟ble Supreme Court to monitor and expedite the Computerisation of 
PDS. The HP C has submitted a preliminary report in the matter to the 
Hon‟ble Supreme Court. In its Order dated 14.09.2011, the Court has 
given detailed directions for end -to-end computerization of PDS in a time -
bound manner. Further action for Computerisation of PDS would be taken 
by Centre and State/UT Governments in accordance with the directions of 
the Hon‟ble Supreme Court." 
 
 
 

Comments of the Committee 
 
1.20 Hoping that Smart Card based delivery of essential commodities 
would improve efficiency of TPDS, the Comm ittee in their original report 
had recommended that all necessary steps be taken for expeditious 
implementation of the project all over the country.  The Department in their 
action taken reply ha ve stated that UT of Chandigarh and Haryana had 
completed trial run of smart card based transaction of TPDS commodities 
on 07.07.2010 and 17.06.2010, respectively.  They have further stated that 
as per the recommendations of the Task Force on Computerisation of PDS, 
the formulation of Centrally Sponsored Scheme for remaining States/UTs 
integrating the scheme on 'Computerisation' of TPDS Operations at Centre 
and at 4 Pilot States (covering select districts) and scheme on Smart Card 
based delivery of Essential Commodities at UT of Chandigarh and Haryana 
was to be taken up by December, 2012.  Consequent upon the preliminary 
report submitted by the High Powered Committee headed by Justice D.P. 
Wadhwa, the Supreme Court in its Order dated 14.09.2011, has given 
detailed directions for end -to-end Computerisation of PDS in a time-bound 
manner and further action would be taken by the States/UTs  as per 
direction of the  Hon'ble Court. The Committee desire that the Department 
should closely monitor the implementation of the project by the States/UTs 
and apprise them of the latest progress thereof.  

F. Early Finalisation of Identification of Rural Poor/BPL Households in 
Urban Areas required 
  
Recommendation (Serial No.  10, Para No. 4.55) 
 
 
1.21 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
" The Committee observe that Public Distribution System  (Control) 
Order, 2001 mandates the States/UT Governments to identify eligible 
BPL families to issue  ration cards.  As per this Order, the State 
Governments have to formulate suitable guidelines for identification  of 
BPL/AAY families as per the poverty estimates adopted by the Central 
Government.  The Committee find that the Expert Group constituted by 
the Ministry of Rural Development to suggest methodology for conducting 
next BPL census in rural areas has submitt ed its report and a draft note 
for Cabinet has been circulated to the concerned Ministries/Departments 
for their comments.  The Committee desire that the matter may be 
followed up with the concerned Ministries/Departments and the 
methodology for identification of rural poor  be finalized at the earliest. 
 
 The Committee also note that the expert Group constituted by the 
Planning Commission to recommend common methodology for 
identification of BPL households in urban areas is expected to submit its 
report by  May, 2011.  The Committee hope that the expert group 
constituted by the Planning Commission would submit its report with in 
the stipulated time and a common methodology for identification of BPL 
households in urban areas would be formulated soon."   
 
 
1.22 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
"The Ministry of Rural Development had appointed an Expert Group 
for suggesting suitable framework and methodologies for identification of 
the rural poor.  The Expert Group submitted its Re port which has been 
considered by an inter -ministerial core group.  The core group has also 
held wide consultations on the subject including with the State 
Governments.  As reported by the Ministry of Rural Development, the 
methodology for conducting the S ocio-Economic and Caste Census in 
rural area has been approved by the Union Cabinet with the modification 
that: 
(i)   The Ministry of Rural Development further discuss the criteria 
for inclusion/exclusion with the Dr. N.C. Saxena Committee 
and 
(ii)    Census be completed by December, 2011. 
 
Ministry of Rural Development is taking necessary action in this 
regard. 

 
Ministry of Rural Development has also reported that the               
Socio-Economic and Caste Census has been formally launched on 
29.6.2011 in the State of Tripura.  This will be followed in other States/UTs 
in a phased manner taking into consideration their preparedness and other 
relevant considerations.  The Census is targeted to be completed by 
December, 2011.  
 
For urban areas, the Planning C ommission have set up an Expert 
Group headed by Prof. S.R. Hashim on 13.5.2010, to recommend the 
detailed methodology for identification of families living below poverty line 
in the urban areas.  As reported by Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty 
Alleviation, the above Expert Group has submitted its interim report. Union 
Cabinet has approved the following proposals from Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Poverty Alleviation: 
 
(i)   Approval of the approach recommended in the Interim Report 
of the Hashim Expert Group on identification of the urban poor 
areas for the 12 th Five Year Plan period; and the Survey 
Questionnaire devised for conducting the BPL survey ; and 
 
(ii)  Approval to conduct the Below Poverty Line (BPL) survey in 
urban areas along with the   propo sed caste enumeration and 
rural BPL survey with the assistance of the RGI as per the 
approach proposed above. 
             
The approval of Cabinet has been accorded with the modification 
that the proposed BPL Census be completed by December, 2011."  
 
 
 

Comments of the Committee 
 
1.23 Observing that the PDS (Control) Order, 2001 mandates the 
States/UTs to identify eligible BPL families, the Committee in their original 
report had desired that the methodology for identification of rural poor as 
well as BPL  households in urban areas  be finalized at the earliest.  In their 
action taken reply , the Department  have stated that Ministry of Rural 
Development has already formally launched on 29.06.2011, the  Socio -
Economic and Caste Census  (SECC) in Tripura, to be foll owed in other 
States/UTs in a phased manner and targeted to be completed by December, 
2011.  Further, it has been stated that Union Cabinet has approved the 
proposal of the Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation  for 
conducting BPL survey in urban areas and the same was said to be 
completed by December, 2011. The Committee are made to understand that 
SECC is yet to be launched in various major States though the original 
scheduled date of completion was December, 2011. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Department to take all possible steps by maintaining 
continuous consultation with the concerned Central 
Ministries/Departments and all  States/UTs so as to complete identification 
of the poor in rural as well as urban areas of the country at the earliest.   
  

G. Early Adoption of Monthly Certification Scheme by all States/UTs for 
improving efficiency and Monitoring of Fair Price Shops emphasised 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.  14, Para No. 4.78) 
 
1.24 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
 " The Committee observe that to improve the efficiency of Fair Price 
Shops operations and to monitor their  functioning, directions were issued 
to State/UT Governments to introduce Monthly Certification Scheme to be 
implemented by Village Panchayats/Urban Local Bodies/Vigilance 
Committees/Women‟s Self Help Groups for delivery of TPDS commodities 
at Fair Price Shops. The Committee note that upto 31 st January, 2011, 21 
State/UT Governments have reported regarding the implementation of 
Monthly Certification Scheme. The Committee feel that mere issuance of 
directions to State/UT Governments is not sufficient and desire that the 
Department should take concrete  steps to try and convince the remaining 
States/UTs to facilitate an early adoption of the Scheme." 
 
 
 
1.25 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
" The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. It is 
stated that upto 31.08.2011, 22 State/UT Governments have reported 
regarding the implementation of Monthly  Certification Scheme. The 
remaining State/UT Governments have again been advised to introduce 
and implement the Monthly Certification by Village Panchayats/Urban 
Local Bodies/Vigilance Committees/Women‟s Self Help Groups on 
delivery of TPDS commodities (f oodgrains, etc.) at fair price shops and 
their distribution to ration card holders." 
 
 
 

Comments of the Committee 
 
1.26 While noting that upto 31.01.2011, 21 State/UT Governments ha d 
reported the implementation of Monthly Certification Scheme (MCS) meant 
to improve the efficiency in the functioning of Fair Price Shops, the 
Committee ha d desired in their earlier  Report the Department to take 
concrete steps to convince the remaining States/UTs for an early adoption 
of the Monthly Certification Scheme. The Department in their action taken 
reply has stated that upto 31.08.2011, 22 State/UT Governments have 
reported implementation of the MCS and the remaining State/UT 
Governments have again been advised to implement the Scheme. The 
Committee desire that the Depa rtment should follow up the matter with all 
the States/UTs and they be apprised of the further progress/outcome of the 
efforts made in the matter.  

H. Need for Effective Implementation of the PDS (Control) Order, 2001 
by all the States 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15, Para No. 4.79) 
 
1.27 The Committee in their earlier report observed/ recommended as follows:- 
 
" The Committee note that the Public Distribution System (Control) 
Order, 2001 mandates the State and UT Governments to carry out all 
required action to ensure smooth functioning of TPDS.  It also mandates 
inter-alia that while making monthly allocation to the fair price shops, 
designated authority of State Governments shall take into account the 
balance stock, if any, lying undistributed with the fair price shop owners for 
the subsequent allocation.  The Committee desire that the amount of 
foodgrains which remains unlifted during a particular month and left with 
the Fair Price Dealers after distribution to the beneficiaries, should be 
adjusted against  the next month allocation of that Fair Price Shop or 
should be taken back, to prevent black marketing or diversion of 
foodgrains.  The Committee also desire that the matter may be taken  up  
at the highest level in the State Governments for effective impl ementation 
of the PDS (Control) Order, 2001 by all the States, to streamline the 
functioning of TPDS  in the country."   
 
 
 
1.28 The Ministry in their action taken reply to have stated as under:- 
 
" Public Distribution System (Control) Order, 2001 mandates  that 
while making monthly allocations to the fair price shops, the designated 
authority of State Governments shall take into account the balance stock, 
if any, lying un -distributed with the fair price shop owners for the 
subsequent allocations.   The reco mmendations of the Standing 
Committee have been noted and conveyed to all the State/UT 
Governments for taking more stringent measures to implement the 
relevant clauses of the PDS (Control) Order, 2001." 
 
 
 
 

Comments of the Committee 
 
1.29 In their origina l report, the Committee ha d recommended that  the 
designated authority of the State Government should adjust the 
undistributed stock during a month against the next month allocation of 
that Fair Price Shop or it should be taken back to prevent black marketi ng 
or diversion of foodgrains and the matter be taken up at the highest level in 
the State Government for effective implementation of the PDS (Control) 
Order, 2001 by all the States. The Department in their reply have stated that 
the recommendation s of the  Committee have been conveyed to all the 
State/UT Governments for taking more stringent measures to implement 
the relevant clauses of the PDS (Control) Order, 2001.  The Committee are 
not satisfied with the action taken reply of the Government as merely 
conveying the Committee's recommendation is not enough.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that th e Department should obtain the details 
of the latest response/feedback from all the State/UT Governments 
concerned as to what stringent measures have been taken by  them under 
the relevant clauses of the PDS(Control) Order, 2001. T he Committee be 
apprised of the details of action taken by the States/UTs, State/UT-wise.   

I. Early Recovery of Outstanding Dues by FCI required 
  
Recommendation (Serial No.  18, Para No. 5.6) 
 
1.30 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
" The Committee are deeply concerned to note that a high amount 
of  outstanding dues are to be recovered by FCI from the  Ministry of Rural 
Development and the Ministry of  Human Resource Development on 
account of providing foodgrains for various welfare schemes on payment 
basis.  Outstanding dues to be recovered from the Ministry of Rural 
Development during each of the years 2008 -09, 2009-10 and 2010-11 are 
Rs.2890.82 crore .  From the Ministry of Human Resource Development, 
the outstanding dues to be recovered during the year 2008 -09, 2009 -10 
and 2010 -11 are Rs.148.47 crore, Rs.166.33 crore, and Rs.39.53 crore 
respectively.  As on 31.1.2011, against the total foodgrains supp lied to 
that Ministry (amounting to Rs.1002.91 crore), payment of Rs.611.87 crore 
has been received by FCI.  Apart from this, a revolving fund of Rs.300 
crore has been provided by the Ministry against bills in the pipeline.  The 
Committee are surprised to note  that no time limit has been prescribed for 
making payment by the Ministry of Rural Development.  Further, the 
Committee are not convinced with reasoning of the Department that 
prescribed time limit of 20 days in respect of the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development for making payment after submission of bills is not 
strictly adhered to as the Ministry depends on allocation of funds by the 
Ministry of Finance.  The Committee, therefore,  desire that the 
department should take up the matter with the con cerned Ministries i.e. 
the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Rural Development and the 
Ministry of Human Resource Development at the highest level so that the 
outstanding dues of FCI are liquidated at the earliest and the burden on 
food subsidy bill is reduced." 
 
1.31 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
  
" The issue of outstanding dues of the FCI pending against the 
Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of Human Resource 
Development has been taken up with these Ministrie s at the highest level 
from time to time. In reply to one of the letters sent by MOS(I/C)CAF&PD, 
Hon‟ble MOHRD stated that they are fully alive to the need for prompt 
payments for foodgrains supplied by FCI. Keeping this in view, MoHRD 
has issued guidelines to all States/UTs to ensure payments within 20 days 
after receiving bills from FCI. It is being regularly monitored with the States 
by MoHRD during MDMS National Monitoring and Steering Committee 
meetings as well as during Regional Workshops held with States. Similarly 
to clear all pending dues, the issue has been taken up with MoRD from 
the highest level from time to time. Due to concerted efforts made by this 

Deptt., the outstanding dues have been recovered to some extent from 
MoHRD. Following table sho ws status on the details of amount received 
and outstanding dues of FCI against MoRD and MoHRD during 2008 -09, 
2009-10 and 2010-11: 
 
Ministry of Rural Development :- Against the food grains supplied under 
SGRY Scheme 
                                                                                     (Rs. in crore) 
Year Amount Received Balance as on 31st March 
2008-09 7500 2890.82 
2009-10 - 2890.82 
2010-11 - 2890.82 
  Scheme has since closed on 31.03.2008. 
 
Ministry of Human Resource Development: 
                                                                                               (Rs. in crore) 
Year Amount Received Balance as on 31st 
March 
2008-09 1430.68 148.47 
2009-10 1272.35 166.33 
2010-11 Centralized 300.40 39.53 
 Decentralized 925.94 (Provisional) 309.17 
 
Since 01.04.2010 this Scheme has been decentralized and the 
payment is to be made by concerned Revenue District Authorities." 
 

Comments of the Committee 
 
1.32 Expressing deep concern about the high amount of outstanding dues of 
FCI, the Committee in their original report had desired that the Department should 
take up the matter with the concerne d Ministries, i.e,  the Ministry of Rural 
Development and the Ministry of HRD as well as M/o Finance, at the highest level 
to get the outstandin g dues of FCI liquidated at the earliest.  The Department in 
their action taken reply ha ve stated that the issue of outstanding dues of the FCI 
pending against M/o RD and M/o HRD has been taken up at the highest level from 
time to time and due to concerted efforts made by this Department, the 
outstanding dues have been recovered to some extent from M/o HRD. It is further 
stated that the Scheme has been decentralised and the payment is to be made by  
the concerned Revenue District Authorities, w.e.f. 01.04.2010.  The Committee are 
dismayed to note that the balance outstanding amount against the Ministry of 
Rural Development for the SGRY Scheme which has since been closed on 
31.03.2008 is Rs. 2890.82 crore since the year 2008 -09 and the same amount is 
outstanding during the years 2009 -10 and 2010 -11 also.  This only indicates that 
no amount has been received from the Ministry of Rural Development during the 
last three years. The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire the Ministry to take up the matter with the Ministry of 
Rural Development at the highest level for liquidating the outstanding dues of FCI 
pertaining to that Ministry.  
The Committee are also concerned to note that  an amount of Rs. 309.17 
crore is still outst anding against the Ministry of HRD . Though the scheme is 
stated to be  decentralized and the payment is to be made by the concerned 
Revenue District Authorities, the Committee strongly feel that the Department 

should in consultation with the Ministry of Fin ance, continue to strictly monitor 
the liquidation of the outstanding dues of FCI.  

J.  Need to get Outstanding Dues Liquidated by CWC expeditiously  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.  24, Para No. 6.5) 
 
1.33 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
"The Committee are deeply concerned to note the continuous rise in 
outstanding dues of CWC during the last 3 years i.e. from Rs.151.60 
crore, in 2008 -09 to Rs.185.48 crore in 2009 -10 and Rs.215.00 crore in 
2010-11.   The Committee desire that the pending dues should be cleared 
expeditiously and a time limit should be fixed within which the amount is 
receivable by CWC from the depositors, failing which some penal interest 
be levied.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that to liquidate the 
outstanding dues fully at the earliest CWC should  review the norms fixed 
for recovery of outstanding dues so as to enhance its profitability." 
 
1.34 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
 "The position of the total outstandi ng dues as well as outstanding 
dues against the Food Corporation of India (FCI) during the last three 
years is given below: 
                                                      (Figures in crore Rs.) 
As on Total outstanding 
dues 
Outstanding dues 
against FCI 
31.3.2009 151.60  73.25 
31.3.2010 185.48   98.81 
31.3.2011 225.37 126.20 
 
It may be seen that the outstanding dues against FCI is constantly 
on the rise. To reduce the outstanding dues, various steps have been 
taken by the CWC particularly with FCI to settle the disputes and to realise 
the outstanding dues.  In this regard, meetings at General Manager, FCI 
level by their Regional Managers and at Zonal Office and Head Office of 
FCI at CWC Corporate Office have been held to sort out the disputes and 
to realise the outstanding dues.  The meetings with FCI at Zonal Office, 
Kolkata on 1.2.2011 and FCI Headquarter on 23.2.2001,  9.9.2010 and 
3.5.2011 have been held.  FCI Headquarter has issued instructions to 
their field officers for settlement of CWC dues.  Besides, action has also 
been taken to review the credit facilities of private parties and action 
against them in case of default and also withdrawal of credit facilities in 
case of failure to settle CWC dues on time.  Review of credit facilities is 
being made in respect of outstanding dues for expeditious realization of 
dues from the depositors. 
In view of the steps being taken by the Corporation, it is hoped that 
the outstanding dues will reduce considerably in coming months." 

 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.35 Deeply concerned with the continuous rise in the outstanding dues 
of CWC during the year s 2008 -09 to 2010 -11, the Committee ha d 
recommended that CWC should review the norms fixed for recovery of 
outstanding dues at the earliest. The Department in their action taken reply 
have stated that to reduce the outstanding dues, various steps have been 
taken by the CWC, particularly with FCI, such as holding various meetings 
with GM, RMs of FCI, review of credit facilities of private parties as well as 
in respect of outstanding dues from the depositors.  The Department ha ve 
also hoped that the outstanding dues will reduce considerably in coming 
months owing to steps being taken by the CWC in this regard.  The 
Committee urge the Department to make continuous effor ts to get 
liquidated the outstanding dues of CWC.  
  

K. Need to fill up all the Vacant Posts in Warehousing Development and 
Regulatory Authority (WDRA) expeditiously  
Recommendation (Sl.No.27, Para No.6.21) 
1.36 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
"The Committee note that the Warehousing Development and 
Regulatory Authority has been constituted recently and is functioning with 
meager staff of five regular officers out of 19 sanctioned posts.  These five 
regular officers  include one Joint Secretary, 2 Directors, 1 Under 
Secretary and 1 Section Officer.   The Committee have been informed that 
for issuance of Negotiable Warehouse Receipt, the Warehouses have to 
get themselves registered with the Authority.  The Committee ha ve also 
been informed that the format of Negotiable Warehouse Receipts (NWR) 
has been finalized in consultation with warehousemen, banks and 
advisory committee.  The Committee note that about 316 applications 
from 18 States for registration of Warehouses h ave been received by the 
Authority till date.  Taking into consideration wide magnitude   and 
importance of work to be performed by the Authority, process of  filling up 
of remaining posts in WDRA be expedited, to ensure its smooth 
functioning in the interest of farmers." 
 
1.37 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
 "The Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority (WDRA) 
was set up on 26 th October 2010. At that time, one Joint Secretary and 
one Director (both from central sta ffing) were in position. The Authority 
has been seriously making efforts to fill up the remaining vacancies. Three 
vacancy circulars were issued i.e. on 13.03.2009 by the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution, and on 28.01.2011 and 11.07.2011 by 
Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority informing all 
Ministries/ Departments of Government of India. The NIC had placed 
these circulars on the website of the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution/WDRA and these were published in the Employment Ne ws. 
One post each of Director (Technical), Under Secretary (Admn Fin.), 
Section Officer (Admn & Fin.) and Private Secretary were filled up against 
the first circular while one post each of Section Officer (Technical), Under 
Secretary (Technical) and Princi pal Private Secretary were also filled up 
against the second circular. 
 
 The Authority has issued another circular on 11.07.2011, the last 
date of receipt of the application being 29 th August 2011. Efforts are being 
made to fill up the vacant posts at the earliest to ensure smooth 
functioning of the office of WDRA." 

 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.38 Noting that the Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority 
(WDRA) had been functioning with meager staff of five regular officer s out 
of 19 sanctioned pos ts and taking into consideration  the wide magnitude 
and importance of work to be performed by the Authority, the Committee  
had recommended that the process of filling up of remaining posts in 
WDRA be expedited, to ensure its smooth functioning in the inte rest of 
farmers. The Department in their action taken reply ha ve stated that the 
Authority has been seriously making efforts to fill up the remai ning 
vacancies.  Three vacancy  circulars were issued, one circular by the 
Department of FPD and two circulars  by WDRA informing all 
Ministries/Departments of Government of India. Besides publishing in 
Employment News, t hese circulars were also placed  on the website of the 
Department FPD/WDRA.  Some posts have been filled up against first two 
circulars. While appreciating the efforts made so far, the Committee desire 
that continuous efforts be made till all the vacant posts are filled up to 
ensure smooth functioning of the office of WDRA.  

L. Need for optim al utilisation of Funds allocated to Directorate of 
Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils and Fats (DVVO&F) for their R&D Activities 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.  33, Para No.8.11) 
 
1.39 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
"The Committee are pained to note that funds allocated for 
Research a nd Development and modernization of laboratory of the 
Directorate of VVO&F during the year 2010 -11 could not be fully utilised. 
The Committee find that the difficulties faced by the Department in 
achieving the targets in respect of Research & Development b y Research 
Institute are (a)  failure to purchase equipment in time (b) non -availability 
of material needed to carry out  the research, non -submission of utilization 
certificate and progress report and frequent changes in top positions. 
keeping in view the  declining production of oilseeds, the Committee feel 
that the need of the hour is to develop high yielding oilseeds varieties to 
meet the increasing consumption, for which focused R&D is required to be 
done.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend t hat the 
Government should ensure that the funds allocated for R&D Projects are 
fully utilised by the DVVO&F to get the desired results.  The Department 
should also, in consultation with other Ministries, streamline the procedure 
and documentation for trans parency and accountability at each level for 
giving timely approval  for purchase of various research equipments." 
 
 
1.40 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
"Procedures have been streamlined in the Department for giving 
timely approval and for regular monitoring by Project Implementation 
Committee (PIC).   The institutes have been advised to purchase the 
equipments in time and complete the projects in time."   
 
 

Comments of the Committee 
 
1.41 Noting that funds allocated for R &D and modernisation of laboratory 
of the Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils and Fats (DVVO&F) during 
the year 2010 -11 could not be fully utilized and there has been decline in 
production of oilseeds, the Committee ha d recommended that th e 
Department should ensure full utilization of the funds allocated for R&D 
Projects and also streamline the procedure for p urchasing R&D equipment 
in time. The Department in their action taken reply ha ve stated that the 
procedures have been streamlined in the Departme nt for giving timely 
approval and for regular monitoring by Project Monitoring Committee (PIC) 
and the Institutes have been advised to purchase the equipments in time 
for completion of the Projects in time. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the details of the streamlined procedures and its consequences 
in facilitating the purchase of R & D equipments. 

CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
  ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.1, Para No. 3.3) 
 
2.1 The Committee note that BE of Department of Food & Public Distribution 
for the year 2010-11 for its Plan Schemes was Rs. 100 crore which was reduced 
at RE Stage to Rs. 66.11 crore but Actual Expenditure was only Rs. 58.85 crore.  
The Department has informed that in the meeting held to finalise the 
implementation model of computerization of TPDS, it was decided that a single 
application be considered for developments by one agency for all four pilot 
States.  Moreover, Hon‟ble Supreme Court also directed for total computer ization 
by using same software by all the States.  Since the Request for Proposal (RFP) 
could not be finalized earlier, the amount under BE of Rs. 33.40 crore was 
revised to Rs. 4 crore at RE stage.  The Department has also informed that non 
submission of adequate proposals and utilization certificates in respect of 
'Strengthening of PDS and Capacity Building‟ and 'Village Grain Bank‟ Schemes 
resulted into shortfall in  expenditure. The  Committee  are unable to accept the 
plea of the Government that due to delay in finalization of RFP as well as non -
submission of adequate proposals and utilization certificates in respect of 
Strengthening of PDS & Capacity Building and setting up of Village Grain Banks, 
there was less expenditure in the Plan Schemes.  It indi cates nothing but  lack of 
seriousness on the part of the Government to implement  the Schemes.  In the 
opinion of the Committee, the Department could not take timely action and get 
completion of procedural formalities well in advance due to which the BE w as 
reduced by the Planning Commission at RE stage and there was less 
expenditure during the year.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
the Department should make proper planning to get completion of procedural 
formalities well in advance and take effective steps to convince the States/UTs 
for submission of adequate/eligible proposals under its various Schemes.  The 
States should also be persuaded to set up sanctioned VGBs and to expedite 
submission of utilization certificates so that Schemes a re implemented within the 
stipulated time limit.  

Reply of the Government 
 
2.2      Actual expenditure for the FY 2010 -11 was Rs. 64.74 crore against BE 
of Rs. 100 crore and RE of Rs. 66.11 crore.  
   
BE had to be reduced at RE stage in respect of computer ization of TPDS 
as Request for Proposal (RFP) for the Scheme on Computerization of TPDS 
Operations was being considered for release to the empanelled Implementation 
Agencies. In a meeting held on 02.07.2010 to discuss and finalize the 
implementation model of the Computerization of TPDS Scheme, NIC inter -alia 
observed that as there was not much  variance across the State PDS processes, 
a single application may be considered for development by one agency for all 
four Pilot States, Department of Information Te chnology(DIT) also suggested to 
develop an application which can be offered a s a nation-wide solution for roll out 
and to ensure that the existing systems are integrated.  Moreover, in view of the 
directions given by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in its order dated 27.07.2010 
relating inter -alia to computerization of TPDS that there must be total 
computerization of the PDS on top priority basis; that Union of India must prepare 
a software and the same software should be used by all the states; and that 
Union of  India may consider computerization in consultation with specialized 
agencies like Unique Identification Authority of India, a Task Force headed by 
DG-NIC was set up on 09.08.2010 by the Department, for working out the 
modalities for integration of the exi sting projects including Pilot Scheme of 
Computerization of TPDS Operation and also to suggest as to how UIDAI will be 
eventually leveraged.  The Task Force submitted its report on Computerization of 
PDS Operations to this Department on 1.11.2010.  The rec ommendations of the 
Task Force, including revised timelines for implementation of the scheme on 
Computerization of TPDS operation were accepted by the Department. Due to all 
these reasons Request for Proposal (RFP) could not be finalized and the amount 
of BE 2010 -11 o f Rs. 33.40  crore had to be reduced to Rs. 4.00 crore at RE 
stage.    
          Under Village Grain Bank Scheme,  against the  BE 2010 -11 of  Rs. 17.00 
crore,  RE  2010 -11  was  revised at  Rs. 13.00 crore and  in respect of 
Strengthening of PD S & Capacity Building it was reduced from BE of Rs.1.14 

crore to Rs.0.69 crore in  the absence of  receipt of adequate proposals from 
States and  also due to  non - furnishing of UCs  by the States for past grants 
sanctioned under the Schemes despite severa l reminders to States. However, 
the provision made in RE 2010-11 was fully utilized.   
         The Department has been requesting States/UTs for furnishing utilization 
certificates for funds allocated in the previous years and to send fresh proposals 
so a s to ensure full utilization of funds provided under the schemes. The 
Department has been actively pursuing with the State Governments regarding 
establishment of new VGBs and utilization of funds under Village Grain Bank 
Scheme. It has been writing to the States to send proposals for setting up of 
more VGBs.  Seven review meetings were held during 2008 to 2010 and at least 
five letters were written to the State Food Secretaries. As per the suggestion of 
the Standing Committee, the Department has also writte n at the level of 
Secretary (F&PD) to the Members of Parliament representing tribal 
constituencies on 21.4.2011 to consider the need for setting up of VGBs in the 
villages under their constituencies and send proposals for establishment of VGBs 
through the State Government concerned. 
         As regards Strengthening of PDS & Capacity Building, the amount could 
not be released to State Governments for want of UCs/appropriate UCs.  Also 
due to non submission of Report by Indian Institute of Public Administrat ion 
(IIPA) for the scheme PDS -Evaluation, Monitoring and Research,  the payment 
could not be released which resulted in the reducing of BE at RE stage. 
        The utilization of funds in the Plan Schemes Village Grain Bank and 
Strengthening of PDS & Capac ity Building depends on the responses received 
from State/UT Governments and their compliance with the mandatory 
requirement of furnishing UCs for past releases to enable the Department  to 
make fresh additional releases.  However, the Government is making all efforts 
to see that the funds allocated are fully utilized. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 

Recommendation (Serial No.3, Para No. 4.16) 
 
2.3 The Committee note that on requests received from the State 
Governments of U.P., Haryana and Government of NCT of Delhi for direct 
disbursement of food subsidy in cash to BPL/AAY beneficiaries, instead of 
distributing the foodgrains to them under TPDS , a draft Scheme was prepared to 
test the feasibility of this alternative mode of transfer of food subsidy. The 
Committee have been informed that the Department of Expenditure has decided 
that following the finalization of poverty estimates by the Planning  Commission, 
the Department of Food & Public Distribution and Delhi Government  would work 
out the final contours of the Scheme in consultation with the Planning 
Commission taking into account the likelihood of making use of UID Cards to be 
issued in the n ear future. The Department of Expenditure has requested for a 
revised proposal on the issue which is presently under examination by the 
Department.  The Committee, recommend the Department to expedite the 
finalization of revised proposal as desired by the Department of Expenditure, for 
an early decision on the issue. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 The Department has prepared a draft scheme to test the feasibility of 
direct transfer of food subsidy in cash to BPL/AAY beneficiaries under TPDS.  
The scheme envis ages transfer of food subsidy in cash to BPL/AAY families 
instead of distribution of foodgrains as is being done at present.  This scheme 
has been prepared on the basis of proposals received from the State 
Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Delhi.  The draft Scheme is for pilot 
implementation in five districts. 
 Under the draft scheme, it is proposed to disburse equivalent amount of 
food subsidy in cash instead of subsidized foodgrains to the eligible BPL and 
AAY families.  The amount of food subsidy  will be deposited directly by the 
concerned district authorities in bank/post office accounts to be opened by each 
of the beneficiaries.  With the cash subsidy, the BPL/AAY families would be able 
to purchase foodgrains and sugar of their choice from open market instead of 

taking delivery from the fair price shops as at present.  The draft scheme was 
referred to Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure on 26.6.2009 for 
placing it before the Committee on Non -Plan Expenditure for appraisal.  Since 
then, that Department was being reminded to indicate the latest status of the 
proposal.  Department of Expenditure conveyed its observations vide letter dated 
24.1.2011 and advised this Department to submit a revised proposal.   
 A meeting was held in the Depar tment of Food and Public Distribution, 
New Delhi on 29.4.2011 with the representatives of State Governments of Uttar 
Pradesh, Haryana and Government of NCT of Delhi. These State Governments, 
as well as State Government of Bihar, were requested to furnish r equisite 
information to further consider the proposal.  The information has been received 
from the State Government of Haryana and Government of NCT of Delhi.  The 
information is still awaited from State Governments of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar.  
The matter is being pursued with them to send the information. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
 (Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.5 Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.4, Para No. 4.22) 
 
 
2.6 The Committee note that under Hill Transport Subsidy, the Union 
Government reimburses the transportation cost of foodgrains from base depots 
of FCI upto the designated Principa l Distribution Centres in States which are 
predominantly hilly.  The Committee are deeply concerned to note that huge 
amount is pending with FCI for being paid to State/UTs viz. Mizoram, Tripura, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Laksha dweep and 
Sikkim on account of cost of transportation of foodgrains under Hill Transport 
Subsidy (HTS Scheme).  The Committee have been informed that no HTS claim 

has been received from Meghalaya, Manipur, Nagaland, A&N Islands.  The 
States in respect of w hich full HTS claim have been received i.e Mizoram, 
Tripura, Arunanchal Pradesh, J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Lakshadweep and 
Sikkim, only part payment has been paid and the huge amount is still pending 
which clearly indicates that the Department is not serious towards reimbursement 
of HTS claims of States/UTs.  Moreso, the Department does not seem to have 
made any efforts to find out the reasons for non submission of HTS claims which 
proves  that the Government is not serious towards settlement of claims.  The 
Committee are not happy with the situation and recommend that the 
Department/FCI should find out the reasons for non submission of HTS claims 
and make sincere efforts for liquidation of outstanding dues of these States/UTs 
fully, so that States/UTs may be a ble to lift the foodgrains periodically and the 
poor people of hilly and inaccessible States are not deprieved of the benefits of 
subsidized foodgrains under HTS Schemes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.7  Under the Hill Transport Subsidy Scheme, re-imbursement of expenditure 
incurred by States on transportation of PDS foodgrains from FCI Base Depots to 
designated Principal Distribution Centre is made by FCI on submission of claims 
by the States.  The States are required to submit certain details and documentary 
evidence with the claims such as cheque Nos . particular of banks, details of the 
recipients and proof of payments to them etc. Accordingly, FCI has been 
releasing payments to the concerned State in all cases in which proper claims 
alongwith the required details / documents are received by it.  Following amounts 
have been released by FCI in such case:- 
 
Mizoram : Rs.384.46 lakh against the bills from 
01.04.2009 onwards. 
Arunachal Pradesh : Rs.4576 lakhs as provisional advance for the 
period from 2007-08 to 2009-10 
Himachal Pradesh : 2010-11 – Rs.396.30 lakhs. 
2011-12 – Rs.8.42 lakhs. 
Lakshadweep : 2010-11 – Rs.13.10 lakhs. 
Sikkim : 2009-10 – Rs.90.25 lakhs. 
2010-11 – Rs.61.63 lakhs. 
 

2. However, many bills / claims, as indicated in the Annexure - I could not 
be processed and were returned to the concerned State Governments as the 
same were not accompanied by the required information and documents. To 
avoid such problem, States have been requested again and again to ensure that 
all claims / bills for HTS  are complete and supported by the requisite details / 
documents to avoid any problem / delay in processing them for release of fund. 
FCI has also been advised that any request for relaxation of prescribed 
procedure / documents may be sorted out by it in consultation with the concerned 
State Government keeping in view that there is no mis -use of the HTS scheme, 
in case of specific problems faced by the States in furnishing the specific nature 
of documents.  
3. So far reasons for non - submission of HTS claim s by some States is 
concerned, FCI is in the process of ascertaining the same from the State 
Governments through its regional offices. 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.8 Please see Para No.1.14 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.6, Para No. 4.37) 
 
2.9 The Committee note that in order to curb the diversion and leakages of 
foodgrains meant for TPDS , Government is taking up piloting of innovatives/new 
technologies such as GPS, RFIDS, Bar coded coupons, stamping of PDS 
foodgrains, etc.  One of the steps taken by the Department to prevent 
leakages/diversion of foodgrains was installation of Global Posi tioning System 
(GPS)  on vehicles carrying subsidized foodgrains on pilot basis in three  States 
namely  NCT of Delhi, Chhatisgarh and Tamilnadu.  In this regard, the 
Committee also note that as per the findings of the National council for Applied 
Research (NCAER), the level of diversion of wheat in Assam and Mizoram is 
100% for APL and of rice is 83.38% and 81.12% for APL respectively which 

shows that foodgrains meant for APL families have not reached to them at all in 
these two States.  The level of  dive rsion of wheat for APL in respect of 
Chhatisgarh and Jharkhand is 78.34% and 54.53%, respectively. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the procedure for sanction of funds for 
installation of GPS be simplified and  GPS devices be installed not only in the 
three pilot States but in all the States/UTs of the Country on top priority to curb 
the menace of diversion and leakage of foodgrains. 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.10 Initially, in March 2008, the funds were sanctioned and released to State 
Governments of Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu and NCT of Delhi  for installation of 
GPS sets on pilot basis as per details given in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
2. An amount of Rs.12.24 lakh was sanctioned and a sum of Rs.11.02 lakh 
was released to Government of Tamil Nadu vide sanction letter dated 25th March, 
2008, for installation of GPS sets.  The Government of Tamil Nadu submitted 
Utilization Certificate for an amount of Rs.11.66 lakhs for installation of GPS sets 
on the vehicles carrying foodgrains meant for TPDS.  The UC for this amount has 
been accepted and the balance amount of Rs.64,000/ - has been 
sanctioned/released to the State Government of Tamil Nadu vide letter dated 25th 
November, 2009. 
 
3. An amount of Rs.4.13 lakh was sanctioned and released to the 
Government of NCT of Delhi in March, 2008 for installation of GPS sets.  The 
Government of NCT of Delhi did not utilize the amount and refunded the sum of 
Rs.4.13 lakh to this Department. 
 
4. As regards the Government of Chhattisgarh, an amount of Rs.29.61 lakh 
was sanctioned and released to the Government of Chhattisgarh in March, 2008 
for installation of GPS sets. The State Government of Chhattisgarh furnished 
Utilization Certificate (UC) for a sum of Rs.29.56 lakh.  The UC furnished by 
State Government of Chhattisgarh has been accepted for a sum of Rs.22.95 lakh 
and the State Government has been requested in September, 2011 to refund the 

balance amount of Rs.6.66 lakh along with penal interest thereon.  A proposal 
from the State Government of Chhattisgarh for san ction of more funds for 
installation of GPS sets on vehicles carrying TPDS commodities is also under 
consideration in the Department. 
 
5. In addition to above, this Department has invited proposals vide letter 
dated 18 th May, 2011 from all States/UTs  for sanctioning  of funds under the 
scheme during the year 2011 -12 for installation of Global Positioning System 
(GPS) sets on vehicles carrying TPDS commodities.  The matter is being 
pursued with the State/UT Governments for sending complete proposals in this  
regard.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.11 Please see Para No.1.17 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.7, Para No. 4.40) 
 
2.12 The Committee note that the `Scheme of Computerisation of TPDS‟ is 
under process in three districts each of the four pilot States i.e. Andhra Pradesh, 
Assam, Chhatisgarh and Delhi.  The Committee also note that in view of th e 
direction given by Hon‟ble Supreme Court in its order dated 27 th July, 2010 
relating inter -alia to computerization of TPDS, there must be the total 
computerisation of the PDS on top priority basis and  the Union of India must 
prepare a software which  sh ould be used by all the States and the  Union of 
India may consider computerization in  consultation with the specialized agencies 
like Unique Identification Authority of India.  The Committee further note  that a 
task force headed by  DG/NIC was set up on 9th August, 2010 by the Department 
which is  entrusted with the responsibility of review and integration of existing 
project and to provide as to how UIDAI will be eventually leveraged for linking 
with the said projects.  Based on its recommendations,   t he overall scope of the 
projects will now be extended upto Fair Price Shops and beneficiary transaction 

level, in terms of Software functionality to build single unified software for end to 
end computerization of TPDS processes. Since computerization of PD S 
operations is very essential to improve its overall efficiency and functioning, the 
Committee desire  that the work of total computerization of PDS operations be 
accorded priority and necessary steps be taken for implementation of the 
recommendations of the task force and computerization of PDS operations at the 
earliest. 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.13 The Committee had been informed that implementation of the 
Computerisation of TPDS operations in 3 districts each of the 4 Pilot States had 
been taken up. A Task Force on Computerisation of PDS was formed and was 
entrusted with the responsibility of review and integration of existing projects 
being undertaken by this Department and also to provide insight as to how UIDAI 
will be eventually leveraged for linking with the said projects. The Task Force had 
given its report on 01.11.2010, which has been accepted by the Department.  
 
Based on the proposal of National Informatics Centre (NIC) regarding 
development of CAS, implementation at Central Ministry a nd support to States, 
this Department had issued Letter of Intent on 31.01.2011 to NIC. NIC would also 
provide the required hardware infrastructure and other operational support at the 
Centre. NIC is currently preparing the standards for processes, data an d meta 
data for TPDS as well as customizing the Common Application Software (CAS). 
Based on the recommendations of the Task Force, the overall scope of the 
project would extend upto FPS and beneficiary transaction level in terms of 
software functionality t o build single unified software for end to end 
computerization of TPDS processes.  
 
When asked by the Committee about the reasons for underutilization of 
funds under the scheme of computerization of Targeted Public Distribution 
System operation in select States/UTs, for which outlay for the year 2010-11 was 
Rs.33.40 crore, reduced at RE stage to Rs.4.00 crore and actual expenditure 
incurred is Rs.1.57 crore (upto January, 2011), in reply, the Ministry informed that 

under the Scheme for Computerisation of TP DS Operations, a Request for 
Proposal (RFP) for the scheme was under preparation for release to the 
empanelled implementation agencies. Further, in view of the directions given by 
Hon‟ble Supreme Court in its order of 27th July, 2010 relating inter -alia to  
computerisation of TPDS that there must be total computerisation of the PDS on 
top priority basis; that Union of India must prepare a software and the same 
software should be used by all the States; and that Union of India may consider 
computerisation in consultation with the specialised agencies like Unique 
Identification Authority of India, a Task Force headed by DG -NIC was setup on 
09.08.2010 by the Department, for working out the modalities for integration of 
the existing projects including Pilot Schem e of Computerisation of TPDS 
Operations and also to suggest as to how UIDAI will be eventually leveraged. 
The Task Force submitted its report on Computerisation of PDS Operations to 
this Department on 1st November, 2011. The recommendations of the Task 
Force, including the revised timelines for implementation of the scheme on 
Computerisation of TPDS Operations, were accepted by this Department. As the 
RFP could not be finalised earlier for reasons explained above, the amount under 
BE 2010 -11 of Rs. 33.40 cr ore was revised to Rs. 4.00 Crore at RE 2010 -11 
stage. 
 Further, it is submitted that a High Powered Committee (HPC) headed by 
Justice D.P. Wadhwa (Retd.) had been set up under the directions of the Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court to monitor and expedite the Compute risation of PDS. The HPC 
has submitted a preliminary report in the matter to the Hon‟ble Supreme Court. In 
its Order dated 14.09.2011, the Court has given detailed directions for end -to-
end computerization of PDS in a time -bound manner. Further action for 
Computerisation of PDS would be taken by Centre and State/UT Governments in 
accordance with the directions of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
 

Recommendation (Serial No.8, Para No. 4.45) 
 
2.14 The Committee note that the Smart Card based delivery of TPDS Scheme 
is being implemented on pilot basis in UT of Chandigarh and State of Haryana.  
The Committee have been infor med that out of the total approved expenditure of 
Rs.142.29 crore, Government of Haryana and Chandigarh UT have been 
provided funds of Rs.25 crore and Rs.1.10 crore for  implementation of the 
Scheme.  The Committee have been further  informed that the assessment of the 
Scheme shall be taken upon completion of the pilot project.   The Committee 
hope that Smart card based delivery of essential commodities will improve the 
efficiency of the Public Distribution System and desire that the Government 
should persu ade the State/UT Governments of Haryana and Chandigarh to 
expedite completion of the projects so that assessments of the Scheme could be 
done at the earliest.  The Committee also recommend that all necessary steps be 
taken for expeditious implementation of the project all over the country. 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.15 The Committee had been informed that to improve quality of delivery of 
services under TPDS and to assess replicability of new technologies, a pilot 
scheme on smart card based delivery  of TPDS commodities was approved for 
Chandigarh(UT) and Haryana in December, 2008 with an outlay of Rs.142.29 
crore. Implementing agencies for this Scheme are NIC, State Government of 
Haryana and Chandigarh(UT) Administration. Under this scheme, the exist ing 
ration cards are to be replaced by smart cards. These smart cards will contain 
bio-metric features of adult members of the ration card holder families. TPDS 
commodities to smart card holder families will be issued from fair price shops 
after verificati on of genuineness of the smart card holder through smart card 
transaction terminal. Similarly, release of TPDS commodities by State/UT 
Administration to field units will be based on actual off -take/lifting by smart card 
holders. An amount of Rs. 25 crore to the Government of Haryana, Rs.1.10 crore 
to Chandigarh UT and Rs. 1.00 crore to NIC was released on 26 -12-2008. 
Another installment of Rs. 92.50 lakh has been released to NIC on 17.01.2011. 
Chandigarh UT had completed trial run of smart card based transa ction of TPDS 

commodities on 7th June 2010. Government of Haryana had also completed trial 
run of smart card based transaction of TPDS commodities on 17th June 2010. In 
the State/UT Food Secretaries conference at New Delhi, on 13th July 2010, the 
Hon‟ble MOACAF&PD had inaugurated the scheme by issuing Smart Cards to 
some TPDS beneficiaries of Haryana.  
 
The Committee had also been informed about status of implementation of 
smart card scheme in Chandigarh (UT) and State of Haryana. As per the 
recommendations of the Task Force on Computerisation of PDS, the formulation 
of Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) for remaining States/UTs, integrating the 
scheme on „Computerization of TPDS Operations‟ at Centre and 4 pilot States 
(covering select districts) and scheme on „Smart Card based delivery of Essential 
Commodities‟ at Chandigarh Union Territory and Haryana, was to be taken up by 
December 2012. 
 
Further, it is submitted that a High Powered Committee (HPC) headed by Justice 
D.P. Wadhwa (Retd.) had been set up under  the directions of the Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court to monitor and expedite the Computerisation of PDS. The HPC 
has submitted a preliminary report in the matter to the Hon‟ble Supreme Court. In 
its Order dated 14.09.2011, the Court has given detailed directions f or end -to-
end computerization of PDS in a time -bound manner. Further action for 
Computerisation of PDS would be taken by Centre and State/UT Governments in 
accordance with the directions of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011 ] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.16 Please see Para No.1.20 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.9, Para No. 4.51) 
 
2.17 The Committee note that Village Grain Banks can be set up in food scarce 
areas like the drought prone areas, hot and cold desert areas, tribal areas and 
inaccessible hilly areas to provide safe guard against starvation during the period 

of natural calamity or during le an season when the marginalized food insecure 
households do not have sufficient resources to purchase ration. These villages 
are to be identified by the concerned State Governments/UT administrations. The 
Committee, however, are dismayed to note the overal l performance of the 
Scheme since out of the 20, 401 VGB sanctioned by the Department till date, 
only 13, 796 VGBs have been set up by the States.  The Committee feel that 
there is need for establishment of more VGBs in food scarce areas where 
people,  esp ecially those in tribal areas are suffering from malnutrition.   The 
Committee have been informed that  during 2010 -11,  the Department was 
allocated         Rs.17 crore as BE which was reduced to Rs.13 crore at RE stage.  
The Department has informed that it has sanctioned 1709 VGBs and utilized the 
funds of Rs.13 crore allocated as RE 2010 -11. The Committee are not satisfied 
with the reasoning of the Department that the reduction of funds at RE stage and 
non achievement of the targets was due to non -receipt of adequate eligible 
proposals from the State Governments during 2010-11.  It only goes to prove that 
the Government is not serious about implementation of the Scheme. The 
Committee desire that the Government should view the setting up of the VGBs 
seriously and  evolve and put in place an effective system of monitoring and 
control over the performance of the VGB Scheme on top priority.  The Committee 
strongly recommend that the Government should take up the matter with the 
State Governments/UT administrat ion at the highest levels and find out the 
reasons for  non submission of sufficient proposals and take necessary remedial 
measures.  The Government should also persuade them for submission of more 
proposals  for setting up of Village Grain Banks so that m ore and more people 
specially living in tribal areas can take advantage under the Scheme. The 
Committee also feel that there is need to spread awareness among the poor 
people by initiating publicity campaigns about the scheme.   Local NGO‟s, 
Women Self Help Group, etc. could be roped in to facilitate the implementation of 
the scheme.  The Committee, therefore, desire  the Department to examine and 
revamp the scheme at the earliest to make it more effective so as to achieve its 
desired objective.   
 
 

Action taken by the Government 
 
2.18           Under Village Grain Bank Scheme,  against the  BE 2010 -11 of  Rs. 
17.00 crores,  RE  2010 -11  was  revised at  Rs. 13.00 crore  in  the absence of  
receipt of adequate proposals from States for setting up VGBs  and  also due to  
non- furnishing of UCs  by the States for past grants sanctioned under the 
Scheme despite many reminders to States.  The provision made in  RE 2010 -11 
has been fully utilized.   
           The Department has been requesting States/UTs for furn ishing utilization 
certificates for funds allocated in the previous years and to send fresh proposals 
so as to ensure full utilization of funds provided under the scheme. The 
Department  has been  actively and seriously   pursuing  with the State 
Governments regarding establishment of new VGBs and  utilization of  funds 
under Village Grain Bank Scheme. It has been  writing  to the States  and holding 
review  meetings with them  to   send proposals for setting up of  more VGBs.   
Seven  review meetings  have  been held  during  2008  to 2010 and at least five 
letters  were  written to the  State Food Secretaries. As per the suggestion of the 
Standing Committee, the  Department,  has also written at the level of Secretary 
(F&PD) to the Members of Parliament rep resenting tribal constituencies on 
21.4.2011 to consider the need for setting up of VGBs in the villages under their 
constituencies and send proposals for establishment of VGBs through the State 
Government concerned. 
 
          The VGB Scheme provides for Village Panchayat/Gram Sabha, Women Self 
Help Group or Non Governmental Organization with proven track record can set 
up a  Grain Bank in villages  identified by the State/UT Governments.  All out 
efforts   are being made to utilize the provision earmarked  for Village Grain Bank 
Scheme.  However, the utilization of funds depends on the responses received 
from State/UT Governments and their compliance with the mandatory 
requirement for furnishing UCs for past releases to enable the Department to 
make fresh additional releases.   

          In order to generate more demand for establishment of Village Grain 
Banks in tribal and remote inac cessible areas and among poor people, the 
States have been requested to include  awareness on VGB Scheme in their  
publicity  campaigns.  The Department will review the   scheme    to revamp it 
and to make it more effective to achieve the objectives  of  the  Scheme as 
recommended by the Standing Committee. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
 
  Recommendation (Serial No.10, Para No. 4.55) 
 
2.19 The Committee observe that Public Distribution System  (Control) Order, 
2001 mandates the States/UT Governments to identify eli gible BPL families to 
issue  ration cards.  As per this Order, the State Governments have to formulate 
suitable guidelines for identification of BPL/AAY families as per the poverty 
estimates adopted by the Central Government.  The Committee find that the 
Expert Group constituted by the Ministry of Rural Development to suggest 
methodology for conducting next BPL census in rural areas has submitted its 
report and a draft note for Cabinet has been circulated to the concerned 
Ministries/Departments for their co mments.  The Committee desire that the 
matter may be followed up with the concerned Ministries/Departments and the 
methodology for identification of rural poor  be finalized at the earliest. 
 
 The Committee also note that the expert Group constituted by th e 
Planning Commission to recommend common methodology for identification of 
BPL households in urban areas is expected to submit its report by May, 2011.  
The Committee hope that the expert group constituted by the Planning 
Commission would submit its repor t with in the stipulated time and a common 
methodology for identification of BPL households in urban areas would be 
formulated soon. 
 
 

Action taken by the Government 
  
2.20 The Ministry of Rural Development had appointed an Expert Group for 
suggesting suit able framework and methodologies for identification of the rural 
poor.  The Expert Group submitted its Report which has been considered by an 
inter-ministerial core group.  The core group has also held wide consultations on 
the subject including with the S tate Governments.  As reported by the Ministry of 
Rural Development, the methodology for conducting the Socio -Economic and 
Caste Census in rural area has been approved by the Union Cabinet with the 
modification that: 
 
(i)   The Ministry of Rural Developmen t further discuss the criteria for 
 inclusion/exclusion with the Dr. N.C. Saxena Committee and 
 
(ii)     Census be completed by December, 2011. 
 
Ministry of Rural Development is taking necessary action in this regard. 
 
Ministry of Rural Development has als o reported that the Socio -Economic 
and Caste Census has been formally launched on 29.6.2011 in the State of 
Tripura.  This will be followed in other States/UTs in a phased manner taking into 
consideration their preparedness and other relevant considerations.  The Census 
is targeted to be completed by December, 2011.  
 
For urban areas, the Planning Commission have set up an Expert Group 
headed by Prof. S.R. Hashim on 13.5.2010, to recommend the detailed 
methodology for identification of families living below  poverty line in the urban 
areas.  As reported by Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation, the 
above Expert Group has submitted its interim report. Union Cabinet has 
approved the following proposals from Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation: 
(i)       Approval of the approach recommended in the Interim Report of the 
Hashim Expert Group on identification of the urban poor areas for the 
12th Five Year Plan period; and the Survey Questionnaire devised for 
conducting the BPL survey ; and 
 
(ii)        Approval to conduct the Below Poverty Line (BPL) survey in urban areas 
along with the   proposed caste enumeration and rural BPL survey with 
the assistance of the RGI as per the approach proposed above. 

 
            The approval of Cabinet has b een accorded with the modification that the 
proposed BPL Census be completed by December, 2011. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.21 Please see Para No.1.23 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 4.58) 
 
2.22 The Committee note that as per the Public Distribution System (Control) 
Order, 2001, the States/UT Governments have to conduct perio dical checking of 
ration cards to weed out ineligible and bogus ration cards as well as  bogus units 
in ration cards.  The Committee note that  since July, 2006, States/UT  
Governments have reported deletion of 208.57 lakhs bogus/ineligible ration 
cards, o ut of which 46.86 lakh bogus/ineligible ration cards have been deleted 
during the years 2009 and 2010.  The Committee find that  instructions have  
been issued to all States/UTs Governments to issue warning to the bogus ration 
cards holders, through advert isement in the newspaper, to surrender the ration 
cards and to initiate criminal prosecution against bogus ration card holders, etc.  
The Committee are of the view that it is  the responsibility of the Government not 
only to eliminate the bogus ration card s but also to ensure that no eligible 
candidate is denied a ration card.  The Committee, therefore, feel that 
identification of bogus/ineligible ration cards should be an ongoing process for 
which the Central Government should continuously monitor the acti on taken by 
the States/UTs in this regard, so that targeted  beneficiaries get the benefit of 
Public Distribution System. 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.23 The Standing Committee have noted that in consultation with the State/UT 
Governments, a Nine P oint Action Plan was evolved in 2006, which inter -alia 
includes continuous review of BPL/AAY lists and to eliminate bogus/ineligible 

ration cards alongwith strict action to be taken against the guilty to ensure 
leakage free distribution of foodgrains. Stat e/UT Governments were also 
requested to initiate penal action against the Government staff found responsible 
for issuing bogus/ineligible ration cards and the families/persons possessing 
such ration cards. Instructions were also issued to all State/UT Gove rnments to 
carry out an intensive campaign from October, 2009 to December, 2009 to 
review the existing lists of BPL/AAY families and eliminate ineligible/bogus ration 
cards. Instructions have also been issued to all State/UT Governments to issue 
warning to  the bogus ration card holders, through advertisements in the 
newspapers, to surrender the bogus cards and to initiate criminal prosecution 
against bogus card holders etc. 
It is submitted that  in terms of the PDS (Control) Order, 2001, State/UT 
Governments are to review the lists of BPL and AAY families every year for the 
purpose of deletion of ineligible families and inclusion of eligible families.  The 
exercise of deletion of bogus/ineligible cards and inclusion of eligible families is a 
continuous process  and State Governments are to periodically carry out the 
same. As per reports received upto 31.08.2011, 26 State/UT Governments have 
since July 2006 reported deletion of 209.55 lakh bogus/ineligible ration cards. 
Further, State/UT Governments have been dir ected to ensure that genuine and 
needy beneficiaries are being included against the numbers deleted/eliminated 
by them, within the accepted number of BPL/AAY families as conveyed by the 
Central Government. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 4.67) 
 
2.24 The Committee are concerned to note that a large quantity of foodgrain 
i.e. about 48,315 tonnes of wheat procured by Punjab has been declared unfit for 
human consumption.  As per press reports, this stock which was enough to feed 
about 7.1 million people per month through Public Distribution System, had piled 
up over the previous three years.  The Committee ob serve that a large quantity 

of  foodgrains lying in open are getting rotten but the FCI has no arrangements to 
keep it in the covered godowns.  In a country where incidents of hunger and 
malnutrition are still reported, such careless losses are a matter of  serious 
concern.  Intervention by Supreme Court in the matter further highlights the 
gravity of the situation.  The Committee note that in response to Supreme Court 
Directions, Government has decided to allocate on adhoc basis, an additional 
quantity of 2 5 lakh  of wheat/rice at BPL prices to State Governments.  The 
Committee feel that while on the one hand inadequacy of covered capacity is the 
main reason for rotting of large quantity of foodgrains every year, on the other 
hand it was brought to their not ice  during their  recent study visit to the State of 
Rajasthan that godowns constructed by private parties in response to tenders 
floated by FCI, were not taken over  by FCI, resulting in losses. 
 Similarly, the Committee during oral evidence were informe d that in 
Punjab, which is the largest procuring State, the construction of 16 lakh tonnes of 
capacity had been sanctioned but as the rates were not offered as per guidelines  
of Central Vigilance Commission, it had to be re -tendered. The Committee also 
note that movement of foodgrains to distribution centres is also very slow due to 
shortage of covered space.  The Committee have been informed that 18 lakh 
tonnes movement of wheat per month is needed from Punjab but only 8 lakh 
tonnes is being moved.  As a result of huge  piling up of foodgrains, and rotting 
thereby poses heavy losses to the Government. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department, in consultation with FCI/CWC/State 
Governments should construct storage godowns in various States so that surplus 
foodgrains from Punjab and Haryana could be moved for distribution under PDS 
throughout the country. The Committee also  recommend that Department 
should give special attention to the major wheat producing States such as Punjab 
and Haryana an d create adequate storage capacity there.  The Department 
should also consider creation of storage space in other States such as 
Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu where non cultivable land is available 
and can be used as warehousing HUB to create moder n silos/godowns for 
storing of foodgrains which will be beneficial to serve as supply centres both for 
Northern & Southern Regions, so that foodgrains can be lifted, moved and stored 
in a decentralized and time bound manner by using latest scientific technology. 

 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.25  Accrual of damage foodgrains in FCI:  
 i)   The details of the trend of accrual of damage foodgrains in FCI is as under:   
 (Figure in Lakh MT) 
 Year Damaged foodgrains 
2000-2001 1.82 
2001-2002 0.65 
2002-2003 1.35 
2003-2004 0.76 
2004-2005 0.97 
2005-2006 0.95 
2006-2007 0.25 
2007-2008 0.34 
2008-2009 0.20 
2009-2010 0.07 
2010-2011 0.06 
2011-2012 (upto July‟11) 0.005 
 
As may be seen from the above that accrual of damaged foodgrains has 
come down over the years. 
          The following table would indicate percentage of accrual of damaged 
foodgrains vis-à-vis off take from FCI stocks for the last four years: - 
 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
 
Off take of stock from FCI (Excluding DCP States)                                  (Lakh MT) 
 
Wheat 119.89 120.16 172.99 209.60 
Rice 204.61 186.04 198.07 222.50 
Total 324.50 306.04 371.06 432.10 
Quantity accrued as non-issuable 
(in Lakh MT) 
0.34 0.20 0.07 0.06 
Percentage of non-issuable stock 
 
  
In terms of quantity 0.10 0.07 0.02 0.014 
 
It can be seen that the percentage of the damaged foodgrains to the total 
stocks issued has been declining for last 04 years and in the year 2010 -11 the 
percentage of damaged foodgrains is only 0.014%.  
 
ii)       Priority for Movement of Older Stocks: 
          In 2010-11, FCI reviewed the position of stocks in consultation with State 
Agencies of Punjab and Haryana and priority was given to movement of 

foodgrains of older crop years.  The following table shows the crop year wis e 
stock of wheat  as on 1.4.2010 and 1.8.2011 :                                 
 
(Figure in Lakh MTs) 
Regions Crop Year Opening (as on 
01.04.2010)  
Despatch/Issued out Closing (  as on 
01.08.2011) 
Punjab 2008-09  7.67 7.35 0.32 
2009-10 42.72 39.94 2.78 
2010-11 85.55 56.9 28.65 
Haryana 2008-09  2.08 2.071 0.006 
2009-10 30.15 26.1 4.05 
2010-11 53.89 38.13 15.76 
 
iii) Regarding decision to allocate on adhoc basis, an additional quantity 
of 25 lakh MTs of wheat/rice at BPL prices to State Governments  the 
following is submitted: 
 
  During the current financial year 2011 -12, Ministry of CA, F&PD vide 
orders dated 16.05.2011 has made allocation of 50 lakh tonnes of foodgrains for 
the beneficiaries of BPL categories under TPDS to various States/UTs at BPL  
central issue price.  Moreover, in pursuance to the directions of the Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court in its order dated 14 th May 2011 to allocate additional quantity of 
foodgrains for distribution to the 150 poorest districts or the extreme vulnerable 
sections of society and the decision of the Central Vigilance Committee on PDS 
headed by Justice(Retd) Shri D.P. Wadhwa, vide their letters no. 
DR/Secy/CVC/2011 dated 30 th June 2011, 4 th, 6th, 12th, 13th and 14th July 2011, 
Ministry has    allocated following   quanti ty of foodgrains per month details are 
as under: 
Period: August to October 2011                                
Position upto 26.8.2011 
 

 
Period: September to November, 2011 
Kerala BPL Price 
Palakkad and Waynd 393 62 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
BPL Price Jhabua, Mandla, Umaria, 
Shahdol, Barwani, Khargone, 
Shivpuri, Sidhi, Tikamgarh, 
Balaghat, Chhatarpur, Betul, 
Khandwa, Sheopur and Dhar 8776 19114 
Chhattisgarh BPL Price Bastar, Dhantewada, Kanker, 
Koria, Sarguja, Jaspur, 
Dhamtari, Raigarh, Bilaspur, and 
Rajnandgaon 13961 962 
Sikkim BPL Price 
North District, Sikkim 67.66 0 
Tripura BPL Price 
Dhalai 109 0 
Total  
 23306.66 20138 
Grand Total  
 63792.02 65431.53 
 
iv) In recent times the movement of wheat from Punjab has been 
adversely affected by the increased procurement of wheat in the States of 
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and U.P.  Since U.P. and Rajasthan were the 
major wheat consuming States due to which wheat was moved from 
Punjab as per the statement given below: 
Name of 
State 
 
Issue Price For Districts Per month allocated 
quantity  ( in MTs) 
Rice Wheat 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
BPL Price Chamba & Sirmaur 1274 1697 
Uttrakhand BPL Price Tehri 291 148.53 
Rajasthan  BPL Price Banswara, Dungarpur, Udaipur, 
Sirohi, Karoli, Jhalawar & Pratapgarh 
0 8423 
Bihar Bihar  BPL Price Araria, Vaishali, Gaya, Madhubani, 
Muzaffarpur, Na wadah, Samastipur, 
Sheohar, Katihar, Jamui, Lakhisarai, 
Moghyr, Purnea, Supaul and 
Darbhanga 
27804 33230 
Manipur BPL Price Tamenglong 100 0 
Jharkhand BPL Price Sarakela, Singhbhum -West, Godda, 
Simdega, Gumla, Chatra, Garhwa, 
Palamu, Latehar, Lohardagga, 
Dumka, Jamtara, Sahebganj and 
Pakur 
9412.36 0 
Haryana  BPL Price Mahindergarh & Sirsa 0 1194 
Haryana AAY Price Mahindergarh & Sirsa 0 70 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
BPL Price 
Doda, Kupwara & Poonch 
1604 531 
Total Total  40485.36 45293.53 

( Fig. in LMTs) 
Year wise Movement of 
wheat Ex. Punjab 
To Uttar  Pradesh To Rajasthan Total 
2010-11 (upto July,10) 7.02  1.48  8.50  
2011-12 (up to July,11) 1.32  0.27  1.59  
 
Thus a quantity of 1.59 Lakh MTs of wheat was moved from Punjab to UP 
and Rajasthan during 2011 -12 (up to July, 2011) as against 8.50 Lakh MTs 
moved during 2010-11 (up to July, 2010) to these States.   
However, this year due to good crop and procurement in the States of 
U.P. and Rajasthan pr ocurement has reached 34.60 Lakh MTs in U.P. as 
compared to 16.45 Lakh MTs last year.  Similarly, in Rajasthan procurement 
during 2011 -12 has reached 13.02 Lakh MTs of wheat against 4.75 Lakh MTs 
during 2010-11.  Due to increased procurement of wheat in th ese two States the 
internal requirement of wheat in U.P. and Rajasthan has come down which has 
adversely affected the outward movement of wheat from Punjab. 
 In M.P. Region there has been a heavy procurement to the tune of 48.94 
Lakh MTs (2011-12) in comparison to last year ( 2010 -11) procurement of 35.38 
Lakh MTs whereas,  the local consumption of M.P. Region is around 25 Lakh 
MTs leaving a surplus of around 24 Lakh MTs of wheat.  As huge quantity of 
wheat stocks is stored in MP for unscientific plinths th e same is being liquidated 
and till August, 2011 a quantity of 8.26 Lakh MTs is to be moved out from the 
M.P. Region, which in turn has also adversely affected the movement of wheat 
from Punjab. 
 However, we are continuing our efforts to move as much wheat  and rice 
out of Punjab as possible but the same is dependent upon the availability of 
vacant space, off-take, procurement etc. in the consuming regions.  The following 
table shows the comparative movement of wheat and rice, out of Punjab from 
April to Sept, 2010 vis-à-vis April to Sept, 2011.      
                                                                                          (Figure in Lakh MTs) 
Month 2010-11 2011-12 
Wheat Rice Total Wheat Rice Total 
April 11.13 3.96 15.09 9.22 6.52 15.74 
May 8.58 4.57 13.15 6.99 6.39 13.38 
June 7.76 3.29 11.05 6.72 4.55 11.27 
July 8.14 4.03 12.17 6.74 6.54 13.28 
August 6.66 5.66 12.32 7.30 6.70 14.00 
September 7.12 7.52 14.64 8.30 8.50 16.80* 
Total 49.39 29.03 78.42 45.27 39.20 84.47 
*September, 2011 plan. 

 
 Also, the movement from Punjab to other deficit States has increased over 
the years as shown below:         
   
           (Figure in Lakh MTs) 
Year Wheat Rice Total Increase in 
Movement over 
last year 
2008-09 68.19 53.96 122.15  
2009-10 94.48 61.15 155.63 33.48 
2010-11 94.67 71.21 165.88 10.25 
2011-12 
(Upto Aug,2011) 
36.97 30.70 67.67  
  
The recommendation of the Committee that movement of wheat from 
Punjab should be 18 lakh tonnes per month is only possible if allocation of 
foodgrains to these States is increased and the allocated quantity is fully lifted. 
Hence, to sort out the storage problem in the Punjab Region, the allocation of 
foodgrains in the consuming Regions is to be increased, so as to increase the 
outward movement of foodgrains from Punjab Region. 
 
v) Construction of godowns under Private Entrepreneurs Guarantee 
Scheme (PEG 2008-2009): 
 
Government of India has formulated a scheme for construction of godowns 
through private entrepreneurs PEG -2008 for Non -DCP states vide letter dated 
28.07.2008. For DCP states, Government of India issued a scheme for 
construction of godowns (PEG-2009) vide letter dated 08.04.2010. 
Based on storage gap recommended by State Level Committees, High 
Level Committee (HLC), constituted by Department of Food & Public Distribution 
under the chairmanship of C&MD, FCI has approved a capacity of 151.16 lakh 
MT at various locations in 19 S tates under the above mentioned Schemes. A 
capacity of 20 lakh MT was transferred out of Punjab against which a capacity of 
2.60 l akh MT was approved for Rajasthan for construction of storage capacity 
against the capacity transferred from Punjab. Out of the above approved 
capacity, 2.30 lakh MT has been sanctioned to Private Investors through tenders 
and a capacity of 0.30 lakh MT ha s been allotted to SWC for  construction of 
godowns on their own land under 9 year guarantee.  

A capacity of 0.40 lakh MT has been sanctioned to private i nvestor on 2 nd 
December, 2010, 1.22 lakh MT capacity on 23 rd December, 2010, 0.18 lakh MT 
capacity on 12th January, 2011 and 0.40 lakh MT on 10 th June, 2011 for 
construction of godowns in Rajasthan. The capacities sanctioned to private 
investors are still under construction and hence it is incorrect to state that FCI 
has delayed taking over of godowns constructed by private parties. 
 
The progress of construction work for Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan, 
Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu are as under: 
 
1. Punjab 
A total capacity of 51.25 lakh MT has been approved for construction of 
godowns in Punjab. Out of this, capac ities of 13.08 lakh MT and 7.02 lakh MT 
were sanctioned by HLC to private investors during its meeting on 12.01.2011 
and 09.08.2011. So far, Pungrain has executed agreement with Private Investors 
for a capacity of 12.29 lakh MT. Pungrain has again invited tender for 22.71 lakh 
MT capacity which has been opened on 26.08.2011.  
 
Out of the approved capacity of 51.25 lakh MT, a capacity of 3.677 lakh MT 
has been allotted to CWC and PSWC for construction on their own land. Out of 
this, 1.356 lakh MT capacity ha s been completed and construction works for 
0.199 lakh MT are under progress. Construction works for balance capacity are 
yet to start. 
 
A proposal was submitted by Government of Punjab for giving counter-offer 
at Rs. 5.00 per quintal per month (for lease only) to all eligible bidders for the 
balance capacity at centers where rates were higher than Rs. 5 per quintal per 
month and the same were not sanctioned by HLC. The proposal was referred to 
CVC seeking their advice on the issue. CVC has examined the cas e and advised 
to first negotiable with L -1 bidders of these locations after bringing out the 
exceptionality of the situation and after exhausting on  the capacity of L -1 
bidders, negotiated L -1 rates may be counter offered to L -2, L-3 etc. However, 
Pungrain, in the meanwhile, floated tenders for the same locations which were 
referred to CVC. HLC considered the matter in detail and  decided on 01.06.2011 

that tender floated on 26/27.06.2010 may be cancelled.  In view of this, tenders 
against counter offers were not sanctioned in Punjab.  
 
2. Haryana 
A total capacity of 38.80 lakh MT has been approved for construction of godowns 
in Haryana. Out of this, a capacity of 19.20 lakh MT has been sanctioned to Private 
Investors but HAFED has confirmed that so far letter  of memorandum has been issued 
to Private Investors for a capacity of 13.72 lakh MT.  
Out of the approved capacity, a capacity of 0.89 lakh MT has been allotted to 
CWC and HSWC for construction, out of which the construction works of 0.49 lakh MT 
capacity have been completed and 0.395 lakh MT is under construction.  
 
3.     Rajasthan 
A total capacity of 2.6 lakh MT has been approved for construction of godowns in 
Rajasthan. Out of this, a capacity of 0.40 lakh MT has been sanctioned to Private 
Investor on 2 nd December, 2010, 1.22 lakh MT capacity on 23 rd December, 2010, 0.18 
lakh MT capacity on 12th January, 2011 and 0.40 lakh MT on 10th June, 2011. 
 
A capacity of 40,000 MT was allotted to RSWC.  Since RSWC could not arrange 
land at Pratapgarh (7500 MT) and Jha lawar (2500 MT). A capacity of 10000 MT has 
been shifted for tenders under PEG scheme. RSWC has issued notice for inviting 
tender on 30.6.2011 for construction of 10,000 MT capacity at Pratapgarh. The tender 
was opened on 25.07.2011 and is under technical evaluation. For capacity to be 
constructed by RSWC on own land, it has been assured by RSWC that 25,000 MT 
capacity would be completed by Dec, 2011 and  another 5,000 MT capacity by March 
„2012. 
 
4.    Maharashtra : 
A total capacity of 8.295 lakh MT has been approved for construction of godowns 
in Maharashtra. Out of this, a capacity of 3.819 lakh MT capacity allotted to CWC and 
MSWC. Construction works for a capacity of 0.491 lakh MT has been completed and 
1.423 lakh MT capacity is under construction. Constru ction work for balance capacity of 
1.905 lakh MT is yet to start.  
 
HLC during its meeting on 9.8.2011 has sanctioned a capacity of 2.67 Lakh MT 
to private investors. 
 

5.     Tamil Nadu 
A total capacity of 3.45 lakh MT has been approved for construction of go downs 
in Tamil Nadu. Out of this, a capacity of 0.80 lakh MT capacity allotted to CWC and 
TNSWC. Construction works for a capacity of 0.303 lakh MT has already been 
completed and 0.047 lakh MT capacity is under construction. Construction works for 
balance capacity of 0.45 lakh MT is yet to start.  
 
SLC, Tamil Nadu had sanctioned a capacity of 1.25 lakh MT, 0.10 lakh MT, 0.70 
lakh MT and 0.15 lakh MT during its meeting on 15.07.2010, 08.09.2010, 06.01.2011 & 
30.05.2011 respectively. However tenders for 1.85 lakh MT have already been cancelled 
since the successful tenders could not fulfill terms and conditions of the tender. NIT has 
been published on 25.6.2011 for a balance capacity of 0.45 lakh MT. 
vi) Setting up of hubs: 
In respect of creating storage hub in  form of godowns/ Silos, it is informed that 
presently Government of India is considering creation of 20 lakh MT storage capacity 
through Silos on Public Private Partnership (PPP) Model in the country. The Planning 
Commission has set up a Working Group to develop model for construction of silos and  
to assess the capacity requirements in terms of silos.  The Planning Commission has 
also appointed M/s Mott MacDonald as consultant for carrying out the feasibility study on 
Modern Storage of foodgrains. As per terms of reference, the consultant is to suggest 
the location where these silos are to be located.  
 
In order to avoid secondary movement of foodgrains and double handling, setting 
up of hubs is not recommended. The storage capacity in district should be l argely used 
for meeting storage requirements of the district or adjoining area. The storage capacity 
of FCI, at present, is distributed in a highly skewed manner. Some districts have very 
large storage capacity – sufficient to meet several year‟s requirement of foodgrains while 
some districts have no storage capacity at all or have very small storage capacity, 
insufficient to meet storage requirement of even 4 month. 
 
 As an example, 8 revenue districts of Bihar viz. Arwal, Banka, Lakhisarai, 
Shekhpura, Gop alganj, Sheohar, Khagaria and Jahanabad have no storage 
capacity. 
 

On the other hand, the following districts of Bihar have excess storage 
capacity.  
(Figures in MT)  
Sl. 
 No. 
Revenue 
district 
Capacity Monthly Allocation 
(TPDS/Adhoc Additional/OWS) 
Owned Hired Total Wheat Rice Total 
1. Patna 201300 0 201300 15338 18814 34152 
2. Buxur 41650 0 41560 1991 6571 8562 
3. Gaya 68020 0 68020 8920 13881 22801 
4. Muzaffarpur 59120 10000 69120 14908 23027 37935 
5. Sasaram 0 13000 13000 4552 10082 14634 
6. Samastipur 0 22500 22500 11950 17411 29361 
7. Saharsa 17340 0 17340 4126 8265 12391 
 
Similar situation prevails in other States also.  For example, Manmad has 
an effective storage capacity of 3.51 lakh MT while the average annual off-take in 
2010-11 was only 1.44 lakh MT.   As a result of the above distortion, Government 
of India has decided (under the PEG scheme) that the storage gap will be 
calculated at district/area level.  As a result, there is no policy at present to create 
hubs of storage capacity. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
 (Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.13, Para No.4.77) 
 
2.26 The Committee observe that for greater transparency in the fu nctioning of 
TPDS, various measures such as display of lists of BPL and AAY families at 
FPS, display of allocated quantities of foodgrains on websites, adoption and 
implementation of Citizen‟s Charter, Public Awareness Campaign have 
reportedly been initiat ed.  Further,  the Committee note that upto March, 2011,    
30 States/UT Governments have reported the adoption and implementation of 
the revised model Citizen‟s Charter issued in July, 2007.  The Committee feel 
that delay in implementation of Citizen‟s Ch arter by all States/UTs may be due  
to lack of coordination with the State Governments.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Department should persuade the remaining State Governments 
to adopt and implement the revised model Citizen‟s Charter so as t o ensure 
greater transparency in the functioning of TPDS. 

Action taken by the Government 
 
2.27 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. Upto 
31.08.2011, 32 State/UT Governments have reported the adoption and 
implementation of the revised model  Citizen‟s Charter issued in July, 2007. The 
remaining three States/UTs which have not reported implementation/adoption of 
the revised Citizen‟s Charter have again been advised  to adopt the same 
urgently.  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.14, Para No. 4.78) 
 
2.28 The Committee observe  that to improve the efficiency of Fair Price Shops 
operations and to monitor their  f unctioning, directions were issued to State/UT 
Governments to introduce Monthly Certification Scheme to be implemented by 
village panchayats/urban local bodies/vigilance committees/Women‟s Self Help 
groups for delivery of TPDS commodities at Fair Price Sho ps. The Committee 
note that upto 31 st January, 2011, 21 State/UT Governments have reported 
regarding the implementation of Monthly Certification Scheme. The Committee 
feel that mere issuance of directions to State/UT Governments is not sufficient 
and desire that the Department should take concrete  steps to try and convince 
the remaining States/UTs to facilitate an early adoption of the Scheme. 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.29 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. It is stated that 
upto 31.08.2011, 22 State/UT Governments have reported regarding the 
implementation of Monthly Certification Scheme. The remaining State/UT 
Governments have again been advised to introduce and implement the Monthly 
Certification by Village Panchayats/Urban Loca l Bodies/Vigilance 
Committees/Women‟s Self Help Groups on delivery of TPDS commodities 
(foodgrains, etc.) at fair price shops and their distribution to ration card holders. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
 (Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 

 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.30 Please see Para No.1.26 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.15, Para No. 4.79) 
 
2.31 The Committee note that the Public Distribution System (Contr ol) Order, 
2001  mandates the State and UT Governments to carry out all required action to 
ensure smooth functioning of TPDS.  It also mandates inter-alia that while 
making monthly allocation to the fair price shops, designated authority of State 
Governments shall take into account the balance stock, if any, lying undistributed 
with the fair price shop owners for the subsequent allocation.  The Committee 
desire that the amount of foodgrains which remains unlifted during a particular 
month and left with the Fair Price Dealers after distribution to the beneficiaries, 
should be adjusted against the next month allocation of that Fair Price Shop or 
should be taken back, to prevent black marketing or diversion of foodgrains.  The 
Committee also desire that the mat ter may be taken  up  at the highest level in 
the State Governments for effective implementation of the PDS (Control) Order, 
2001 by all the States, to streamline the functioning of TPDS  in the country.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.32 Public Distri bution System (Control) Order, 2001 mandates that while 
making monthly allocations to the fair price shops, the designated authority of 
State Governments shall take into account the balance stock, if any, lying un -
distributed with the fair price shop owner s for the subsequent allocations.   The 
recommendations of the Standing Committee have been noted and conveyed to 
all the State/UT Governments for taking more stringent measures to implement 
the relevant clauses of the PDS (Control) Order, 2001. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
2.33 Please see Para No.1.29 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 

Recommendation (Serial No.16, Para No. 4.80) 
 
2.34 The Committee note that the Central Government allocates the foodgrains 
to the States/UTs at Central issue price for distribution to the TPDS beneficiaries.  
However, the State/UT Governments have been given flexibility fix margin over 
and above the CIP rates to be charged by Fair Price Dealers to cover transport, 
margin etc. for distribution to APL and BPL beneficiaries.  The Committee feel 
that one of the major reasons for diversion of foodgrains under TPDS has been 
due to very less margin for the Fair Price Shops owners, due to which the dealer 
is tempted to indulge in malpractices.  The Committee are not convinced with the 
argument of the Ministry that fixing of margin to the Fair Price Shop Dealers on 
distribution of foodgrains under TPD S falls within the jurisdiction of the State 
Governments, and as such, necessary action in  the matter is to be taken by the 
State Governments. Since management and operation of Public Distribution 
System is the joint responsibility of the Central and the State Governments, the 
Committee, desire that the matter regarding increase of commission of Fair Price 
Shop Owners should be taken up with the State Governments for a reasonable 
increase in their commission as it would make the Fair Price Shop Owner 
economically sustainable  and  help in curbing the diversion of PDS foodgrains to 
the open market.    
 Action taken by the Government 
 
2.35 Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) is operated under the joint 
responsibility of Central Government and State/UT Governments.  The Central 
Government is responsible for procurement, allocation and transportation of 
foodgrains upto the designated depots of the Food Corporation of India.  The 
operational responsibilities for lifting and distributing the allocated foodg rains 
within the States/UTs, identification of eligible Below Poverty Line (BPL) families, 
issuance of ration cards to them and supervision over distribution of allocated 
foodgrains to eligible card holders through the Fair Price Shops (FPSs) are of the 
State/UT Governments. 
 In order to maintain supplies and securing availability and distribution of 
essential commodities under TPDS, Public Distribution System (Control) Order, 
2001, has been notified by the Government of India on 31 st August, 2001.  This 

order, inter -alia, provides that State Governments shall issue an order under 
Section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act for regulating the sale and 
distribution of essential commodities.  The licenses to the fair price shop owner 
shall be issued under the s aid order and shall lay down the duties and 
responsibilities of the fair price shop owner. 
 Since 2001, State/UT Governments have been given the flexibility in the 
matter of fixing the margin for the Fair Price Shops (FPSs) except in the case of 
distribution of foodgrains under Antyodaya Anna Yojana wherein the end retail 
price is to be retained at Rs.2/- a kg for wheat and Rs.3/- a kg for rice.  The rates 
of commission to FPS owners are, therefore, to be determined by the respective 
States/UTs.  States/UTs, depending on their policies, have fixed respective rates 
of commission to Fair Price shop dealers.   
 Further, the recommendations of the Standing Committee regarding a 
reasonable increase in commission of Fair Price Shop owners have been 
forwarded to th e Secretary, Department of Food and Civil Supplies of all 
State/UT Governments vide this Department‟s d.o. letter No.6(4)/2001 -PD-I 
dated 26.9.2011 to take further necessary action. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.17, Para No. 4.82) 
 
2.36 The Committee note that the Government is working on the National Food 
Security Bill pursuant to the President‟s address to the  joi nt session of 
Parliament on 4 th September, 2009.  The Department of Food and Public 
Distribution has tentatively estimated the subsidy requirement as Rs.1,06,819 
crore in the initial phase.  Comments of all State Governments and UT 
administrations on the F ramework Note finalized by National Advisory Council 
(NAC) on draft National Food Security Bill (NFSB) have been sought by the 
Department of Food & Public Distribution.  The Committee have also been 
informed that as per the  decision taken in its meeting h eld on 21.1.2011, the 
NAC has put a Framework Note on the draft National Food Security Bill in the 

public domain inviting comments, before the draft Bill is taken up for the 
consideration by the NAC.  The Finance Minister in his budget speech 2011 -12 
has a lso stated that after detailed consultation with all stake holder s including 
State Governments, the Government is close to the finalisation of National Food 
Security Bill.  Other aspects of the proposed law on the Food Security, including 
coverage, entitle ment are under consideration of the Government.  Taking into 
consideration the paramount importance of the Bill i.e. assuring foodgrains to one 
and all, the Committee  strongly recommend that Department of Food & Public 
Distribution should take up the matt er on priority basis with all concerned i.e. 
State Governments, UT administrations, Planning Commission and the Ministry 
of Rural Development, to expedite an early introduction of the Bill in Parliament. 
 
Action taken by the Government 
2.37 In pursuance of  the announcement made by the President of India in her 
address to the Joint Session of Parliament on 4 th June, 2009, to enact a new law 
– the National Food Security Act – the Government prepared a Concept Note 
and had consultations with the Central Minist ries/Departments, States/Union 
Territories, experts and other stakeholders. Based on their 
comments/suggestions and recommendations of the National Advisory Council 
(NAC) and the Expert Committee constituted under the Chairmanship of 
Chairman, Prime Minister‟s Economic Advisory Council, the Department of Food 
& PD have prepared a draft National Food Security Bill. Central 
Ministries/Departments and States/Union Territories have been requested for 
their comments on the draft Bill. The draft Bill has also bee n placed on the 
website of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution seeking 
comments/suggestions of all stakeholders by 30.09.2011.  After taking into 
consideration the comments/suggestions received, the Department will take 
necessary f urther action to obtain approval of Government at the appropriate 
level, before introduction of the Bill in the Parliament. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 

Recommendation (Serial No.18, Para No. 5.6) 
 
2.38 The Committee are deeply concerned to note that a high amount of  
outstanding dues are to be recovered by FCI from the  Ministry of Rural 
Development and the Ministry of Human Resource Develo pment on account of 
providing foodgrains for various welfare schemes on payment basis.  
Outstanding dues to be recovered from the Ministry of Rural Development during 
each of the years 2008 -09, 2009-10 and 2010 -11 are Rs.2890.82 crore.  From 
the Ministry o f Human Resource Development, the outstanding dues to be 
recovered during the year 2008 -09, 2009-10 and 2010 -11 are Rs.148.47 crore, 
Rs.166.33 crore, and Rs.39.53 crore respectively.  As on 31.1.2011, against the 
total foodgrains supplied to that Ministry (amounting to Rs.1002.91 crore), 
payment of Rs.611.87 crore has been received by FCI.  Apart from this, a 
revolving fund of Rs.300 crore has been provided by the Ministry against bills in 
the pipeline.  The Committee are surprised to note  that no time lim it has been 
prescribed for making payment by the Ministry of Rural Development.  Further, 
the Committee are not convinced with reasoning of the Department that 
prescribed time limit of 20 days in respect of the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development for making payment after submission of bills is not strictly adhered 
to as the Ministry depends on allocation of funds by the Ministry of Finance.  The 
Committee, therefore,  desire that the department should take up the matter with 
the concerned Ministries i.e.  the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Rural 
Development and the Ministry of Human Resource Development at the highest 
level so that the outstanding dues of FCI are liquidated at the earliest and the 
burden on food subsidy bill is reduced.   
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.39 The issue of outstanding dues of the FCI pending against the Ministry of 
Rural Development and Ministry of Human Resource Development has been 
taken up with these Ministries at the highest level from time to time. In reply to 
one of the letters sent by MOS(I /C)CAF&PD, Hon‟ble MOHRD stated that they 
are fully alive to the need for prompt payments for foodgrains supplied by FCI. 
Keeping this in view, MoHRD has issued guidelines to all States/UTs to ensure 

payments within 20 days afte r receiving bills from FCI. It is being regularly 
monitored with the States by MoHRD during MDMS National Monitoring and 
Steering Committee meetings as well as during Regional Workshops held with 
States. Similarly to clear all pending dues, the issue has b een taken up with 
MoRD from the highest level from time to time. Due to concerted efforts made by 
this Deptt., the outstanding dues have been recovered to some extent from 
MoHRD. Following table shows status on the details of amount received and 
outstanding dues of FCI against MoRD and MoHRD during 2008 -09, 2009 -10 
and 2010-11: 
 
Ministry of Rural Development:- Against the food grains supplied under SGRY 
Scheme 
                                                                                                        (Rs. in crore) 
Year Amount Received Balance as on 31st March 
2008-09 7500 2890.82 
2009-10 - 2890.82 
2010-11 - 2890.82 
 Scheme has since closed on 31.03.2008. 
 
Ministry of Human Resource Development: 
                                                                                                      (Rs. in crore) 
Year Amount Received Balance as on 31st March 
2008-09 1430.68 148.47 
2009-10 1272.35 166.33 
2010-11 Centralized 300.40 39.53 
 Decentralized 925.94 (Provisional) 309.17 
 
Since 01.04.2010 this Scheme has been decentralized and the payment is to 
be made by concerned Revenue District Authorities. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
2.40 Please see Para No.1.32 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.20, Para No. 5.14) 
 
2.41 The Committee note that upto 28 th February, 2011, utilisation of owned 
(CAP)  storage capacity of FCI was 26% and hir ed (CAP) storage capacity was 

51% and the total utilization of capacity was only 30% whereas the present norm 
of occupancy level or capacity utilization of each category of storage is 75%.  
The Committee express their deep anguish over the underutilization  of CAP 
storage capacity (both owned as well as hired).  The Committee also regret to 
observe that a huge amount is spent every year on hiring the godowns by FCI 
though the owned capacity is not utilized to the optimum.  The Committee fail to 
understand th at when Corporation is not able to utilize owned capacity  to the 
maximum,  what is the logic behind  hiring the capacity and wasting the 
Government money thereon.  The Committee desire  that utmost care should be 
exercised by FCI to maximize storage capac ity  utilization  for owned as well as 
hired.  The Committee also strongly recommend  that FCI should make proper 
assessment of availability of owned storage capacity and required capacity and  
take necessary steps to maximize utilization of both owned as well as hired 
capacities so as  to avoid infructuous expenditure on account of rental charges.   
 
Action taken by the Government 
2.42 It is submitted that CAP (Covered and Plinth) capacity is used as a 
temporary mode of storage for a short duration only wh en no covered capacity is 
available at a particular location. Further, this capacity is used to store 
wheat/paddy only and not rice. These factors are responsible for lower utilization 
of CAP capacity as it is utilized only as a last resort and that too fo r wheat/paddy 
only.  
The utilization of CAP capacity as on 31.7.2011 is given as under: 
 
 Owned Hired Total 
Capacity (in Lakh MT) 26.36 9.38 35.74 
Stock (in Lakh MT) 15.83 11.11 26.94 
%age Utilization 60 118 75 
 
 The overall utilization of CAP capacity as on 31.7.2011 has been 75%.   
 
 Regarding lower utilization of owned capacity as compared to the hired 
capacity it is submitted that this is a natural phenomenon due to the following 
reasons: 
 
i) The storage capacity is hired only when there is absolute ne cessity of the 
same which becomes all the more reason for it to be fully/more utilized. 

 
ii) Owned storage capacity once constructed at a particular place/location 
cannot be shifted if the same is required at a different location due to changed 
procurement patterns or change in off take of foodgrains on account of consumer 
preferences, Government policies etc. whereas the hired capacity can be de -
hired and re hired as per the requirement making its utilization more than that of 
owned capacity. 
 
iii) Owned storage ca pacities are created at certain remote/hill areas also 
keeping in view the regional requirements where private parties do not come 
forward to offer hired capacity. Higher utilization of capacity in such places is not 
possible due to various factors such as  difficult terrain, improper infrastructure, 
climatic conditions, limitation of railways/other transportation facilities etc. 
Examples of the same are NE Zone, Himachal Pradesh, J&K etc. 
 
iv) At many times, hired storage capacity is taken on „Actual Utilizatio n Basis‟ 
(AUB) where the capacity hired is shown equal to stock stored there -in making 
the capacity utilization 100%.  This aspect also increases the overall capacity 
utilization of hired storage capacities as compared to owned capacities. 
 
v)  Some part of t he owned storage capacity remains under repair and 
maintenance resulting in overall less utilization as compared to hired capacity 
because the hired capacity is taken only when it is fully storage worthy. 
 
vi)  Often it is not cost effective to undertake long distance transportation and 
double handling of food grains just to ensure utilization of FCI vacant space at far 
off places in place of hiring the fresh storage space at the place where it is 
required because of proximity to the procurement or consumption centres.  
 
Further, it is submitted that adequate checks and balances are in place in 
the form of Internal Audit and CAG audit so as to ensure proper utilization of 
available capacity whether owned or hired and to ensure that no infructuous 
expenditure is made on account of rental charges by hiring the godowns 
unnecessarily. Review of capacity utilization is also carried out by Regional 
Offices/ Zonal Offices to ensure optimum utilization of storage capacity and to 
minimize the cost of storage.  
 
However it  may be appreciated that FCI is dealing with seasonal 
commodities like wheat, paddy and rice and the utilization of capacity cannot be 
uniform throughout the year. But the availability of capacity is to be ensured for 
the peak season requirement during the  months of May/June by hiring godowns 
which are generally hired for a period not less than one year. The utilization of 
storage capacity available with FCI as on 30.6.2011 is given as under: 

 
(Fig. In LMTs) 
 Covered CAP Total 
Capacity  297.66 34.86 332.52 
Stock  275.45 27.20 302.65 
%age Utilization 93 78 91 
 
From the above, it may be seen that the overall utilization of capacity as 
on 30.06.2011 has been 91% and the capacity utilization of covered capacity, 
which is the preferred mode of storage, has be en 93%.  Even for CAP storage, 
the capacity utilization of 78% is more than the accepted optimum utilization 
norm of 75%. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.21, Para No. 5.19) 
 
2.43 The Committee are deeply concerned to note the inability of FCI to 
achieve the physical as well as financial targets set during the year 2010 -11 in 
respect of North Eastern and other than Nort h Eastern States.  In States other 
than North East, the set  physical target during the year 2010 -11 was 2.5 lakh  
tonnes but achievement was nil.  In North Eastern States, the set targets during 
the same period was 5000 tonnes, but achievement was totally nil.  As far as the 
financial targets are concerned, the target set for other than North Eastern 
States during 2010 -11 was 10 crore but achievement was only 0.95 crore.  In 
North Eastern States too,  set target was 30 crore but achievement was only 
0.40 crore.   In this context, the Committee have  been informed that against the 
targeted capacity of 7500 MT, a capacity of 5000 MT at Hailakandi in Assam 
Region will be created during the financial year 2011 -12 and construction of 
godown at Lakshadweep will b e completed by May 2011.  The Committee, 
however,  are unhappy with the slow pace of construction of godowns in these 
areas.  The Committee feel that inadequacy of storage capacity poses a serious 
threat to running of efficient Public Distribution System.  So far as the North 
Eastern States are concerned,  they are the most disadvantaged States in terms 

of infrastructure, communication and rail/road network etc.  The Committee, 
therefore,  strongly recommend that FCI should make sincere efforts for 
speeding up the work of  construction of godowns for achievement of set 
physical and financial targets in North Eastern States as well as other than 
North Eastern States so that people of the country  are not deprived of the 
benefits of Public Distribution System due to inadequacy of storage space. 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.44 The above position enumerated by the Standing Committee is as on 
30.9.2010, the same has now been updated upto 31.3.2011 and  the status that 
has emerged is as under: 
i)        Agains t the physical target of 7500 MT capacity ( 5000 MT at Hailakandi 
in North East and 2500 MT at Lakshadweep ) for the financial year 2010 -11, the 
achievement in North East area was made as per the target set i.e. 5000 MT at 
Hailakandi in Assam.  The targeted  capacity of 2500 MT at Lakshadweep/UT, 
could not be achieved during FY 2010 -11 due to difficult terrain and limited 
working period.  The same has been achieved in July 2011.  It is stated that  in 
the  States other than North East, the  projected  physica l target for FY 2010 -11 
was 2500 MT only and not 2.5 lakh tonnes as mentioned.    
 
ii)        Regarding financial achievement, a target of Rs.35 crores (Rs.25 crores 
for North East areas and Rs.10 crores for the areas other than North East) was 
set in the year 2010-2011. Against the said target, the achievement in North East 
was of Rs.17.24 crores.  The shortfall was mainly because of the land dispute at 
Changsari in Assam. The land cost as notified by the State Government was paid 
to State Government, howe ver the dispute has not been resolved by the State 
Government. For resolving the issue with the State Government, matter was 
vigorously taken up in various meetings at different levels unfortunately the issue 
of land compensation is still unresolved on the  part of State Government. The 
unresolved land dispute has affected the 11 th Five Year Plan and has resulted in 
non-utilisation of the budget earmarked for Changasari.  
 

 Further, for the areas other than North East, against the financial target 
of Rs.10 c rores, the actual expenditure incurred was Rs.3 crores.  Three 
projects were identified in J&K and accordingly Rs. 5.25 crores was earmarked 
exclusively for land cost. Efforts were made for taking over of land from State 
Government but State Government cou ld not identify suitable land for the 
proposed projects. Later, the State Government came up with the proposal to 
drop the proposed projects from 11th Five Year Plan and requested the 
appropriate authority to consider accommodation of storage capacity unde r 
Private Entrepreneurs Guarantee (PEG) Scheme. In view of the inability to 
identify suitable land and on the request of Government of J&K, High Level 
Committee (HLC) of FCI considered the request of State Government and 
accordingly dropped the projects from the Plan Scheme.  
 
iii)      In addition, the full budget earmarked for Lakshadweep/UT project also 
could not be utilised. The proposed project is on the island of Union Territory of 
Lakshadweep which is connected with main land through sea only. At 
Lakshadweep, no single element of building construction is available and all the 
materials are to be transported from main land through sea route only. In the 
Region, the transportation through sea is available only for limited period due to 
prolonged rainy s eason and turbulent behaviour of sea. It is added that the 
project is merely delayed for 3½ months from   March, 11 to July, 11 and in 
between the financial year has changed. 
 
As suggested by the Committee, it is submitted that all out efforts are 
made to achieve the maximum storage capacity, construction, especially in North 
East Region wherever land is handed over in time by the State Government. 
However, due to non -handing over/non -availability of land, which is a State 
Government subject, the targets set out could not be met out fully. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 

Recommendation (Serial No.22, Para No. 5.25) 
 
2.45 The Committee are concerned to note that despite several remedial steps 
taken by FCI, the foodgrains loss on account of storage, transit and pilferage 
continues to increase every year. During 2010 -11, the storage and transit loss 
was of the value of Rs.267.14 crore and Rs.237.57  crore respectively.  Further, 
the  value of pilferage loss during 2010 -11 amounted to  Rs.1,64,270.  The 
Committee are of the opinion that due to poor maintenance of godowns, large 
quantity of food grains of high value is lost every year.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that FCI should adopt scientific and modern 
technology for storage of foodgrains.  The Committee, also desire that physical 
verification of stocks of foodgrains should be done frequently i.e once in the six 
months so that any damage to foodgrains due to storage be timely detected.  
Besides, the Government should also recruit personnel who have technical 
knowledge and expertise with a view to ensuring safe storage, minimizing 
storage loss. Any damage of foodgrains that occurs du e to human error should 
be thoroughly investigated and responsibility be fixed for the losses and the 
guilty official be punished.  Regular inspection and constant monitoring are also 
required to ensure that losses do not increase further.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that vigorous efforts be made to minimize the storage 
and transit losses so that the funds earmarked for the poorest of the poor reach 
the actual beneficiaries.  Necessary steps should also be taken so that losses 
due to thefts/pilferage be kept at the minimum.     
Action taken by the Government 
2.46 The details of storage, transit and pilferage (theft) losses occurred in FCI 
during 2008-09 to 2011-12 (upto July, 2011) are given as under: 
 
Storage Losses (Wheat + Rice) 
                                              (Quantity in lakh MT/ Value in Rupees Crores) 
Year 
 
Quantity 
Received 
Quantity of 
Loss 
% age of Loss Value of Loss 
2008-09* 620.17 0.58 0.10 101.31 
2009-10* 725.27 1.31 0.18 228.36 
2010-11** 530.77 1.56 0.29 292.91 
2011-12 
(Upto July‟11) 
186.69 0.58 0.31 108.14 
 (*Audited) (** Provisional) 

 
   Transit Losses (Wheat + Rice)                                                                                        
                    (Quantity in lakh MT/ Value in Rupees  Crores)   
Year 
 
Qty. Moved Qty of Loss %age of Loss Value of Loss 
2008-09* 303.84 1.06 0.35 117.42 
2009-10* 346.56 1.55 0.45 233.32 
2010-11** 317.39 1.60 0.50 257.42 
2011-12  
( Upto July‟11) 
111.01 0.57 0.52   94.01 
    (*Audited)   (** Provisional)  
 
 
   Pilferage /Theft Losses  
 
 
With a v iew to minimize storage  and transit loss of foodgrains and to 
introduce modern technology besides bringing additional resources through 
private sector participation, Government of India had announced a National 
Policy on Handling, Storage  and Transportation of foodgrains in June, 2000 for 
bulk and conventional godowns. 
 
Under the National Storage Policy, integrated bulk handling, storage and 
transportation facilities for foodgrains especially for wheat, were proposed to be 
constructed on „Build Own  and Operate‟ through private participation at the 
identified locations in procuring  and consuming areas as well as at port town. A 
total capacity of 5.5 lakh MT has been created in the first phase at the identified 
base depots and field depots through private sect or participation on Build Own  
and Operate (BOO) basis. Rail India Technical Enterprises (RITES) was 
appointed as Consultant by the FCI for selection of Developer -cum-Operator 
(DCO). The transportation of foodgrains from Base Depots (Procurement areas) 
to the field depots (Consuming areas) is to be carried out in specially designed 
top loading and bottom discharge bulk rail wagons, procured by the DCO. The 
details of capacity created under this scheme are as follows:- 
Year No.  of cases Quantity(MT) Amount(Rs.) Remarks 
2008-09 02 01.15 17422 2 cases closed 
2009-10 06 34.20 486227 Under process 
2010-11 03 06.50 89100 One case settled 
2011-12 
(Upto July‟11) 
01 0.50 7000 Under process 

Circuit-I                  Circuit-II        
       
Location Storage size Location Storage size 
Base Depot Moga (Pb)   2,00,000 MTs Base Depot Kaithal (HR)  2,00,000 MTs 
Field Depot  Field Depot  
Chennai (TN)    25,000 MTs Navi Mumbai    50,000 MTs 
Coimbatore    25,000 MTs Hooghly (WB)    25,000 MTs 
Bangalore (KNK)    25,000 MTs  
 
 
 
 
  As regards regular inspection and constant monitoring of quality of  
stocks, the following checks and super checks are conducted for ensuring 
procurement of stocks as per prescribed specifications and for  p roper 
preservation of foodgrains in storage:  
 
a) Checks/super checks are conducted by various authorities to ensure 
procurement of stocks as per prescribed specifications. Technical 
Assistants accept rice stocks on 100% Check. 
 
Supervisory Checks of Procured Stocks 
 
Sl. No. At the level  At the level of 
officer 
% of Test Check 
1. Manager (QC) Concerned 25% rice consignments accepted by each 
TA on day to day basis. 
2. AGM (QC) Concerned 10% rice consignments accepted by each 
TA on fortnightly basis at each depot. 
3. Area Manager, concerned  2% rice consignments accepted by each 
TA on fortnightly basis at each depot. 
4. DGM (QC) of Region 10 depot during each month spread over 
at least 3 FCI districts. 
5. GM (Region) At least 4 depot every month spread o ver 
at least two FCI districts. 
6. GM (QC), DGM (QC), Zonal 
Office. 
A minimum of two depot in different 
procuring Regions each month. Next 
month different Regions are covered. 
 
b) Following checks/super checks are conducted in the godowns to ensure 
proper preservation of foodgrains in storage: 
 
i) Fortnightly inspection of stocks on 100% basis by TAs for declaring 
categorization and classification. 
 

ii) Monthly inspection by Manager (QC) - 33% of stocks (1/3 rd of stocks) in a 
month. Monthly Inspection Repo rts (MIR) of Manager (QC) are scrutinized at 
Zonal level. Suggestions made therein are to be implemented and monitored 
through action taken reports (ATR) 
 
iii) Quarterly inspection by AGM (QC). 
 
a) 1/3rd of depots in a month so as to cover all the depots in the District in 
three months. 
 
b) 5% of stocks are to be checked in a depot having capacity of more than 
25000 MTs. 
 
c) 10% of stocks in respect of depot having less than 25000 MTs. 
 
d) Squad Inspection reports (SIR) of AGM (QC) are scrutinized in Zonal 
office.  
iv) Quality Control Squads 
 
In addition to above super checks squads are sent from Headquarters, 
Zonal office and Regional office as per instructions in vogue: 
 
a)    Two depots,  minimum of 10,000 MT capacity and above of high 
procuring Regions namely Punjab, H aryana & A.P. must be visited each 
month to check the quality of the stock procured/lying there by 
Headquarters, QC Division. 
 
b) Five depots of capacity of 5,000 MT and above must be visited by Zonal 
squads of QC officers/officials to check the quality. 
 
c) The high procuring Regions constitute a team for checking of quality of 
the stocks at ten depots per month. 
 
i) Regarding recruitment of personnel who have technical knowledge and 
expertise with a view to ensuring safe storage and minimizing storage loss, it is 
submitted that FCI recruits personnel on the basis of availability of vacancies and 
as per qualifications, experience etc. prescribed in FCI (Staff) Regulations from 
time to time, which also includes Technical (Quality Control) Cadre. 
 
ii)    As regards storag e and transit losses, the above observations/ 
recommendations of the Standing Committee have been circulated to Executive 
Directors (Zone) / General Managers (Region), Food Corporation of India for 
compliance.  The field functionaries have also been advise d to make vigorous 

efforts by taking necessary/remedial measures, investigating losses, fixing 
responsibility on delinquents, making recoveries for unjustified losses and close 
monitoring of losses in Monthly Performance Review Meetings etc.   so as to 
minimize storage and transit losses to the maximum extent.   
 
iii)    Regarding physical verification of stocks once in six months, instructions do 
exist for conducting physical verification of stocks on quarterly basis, which have 
been reiterated.   
 
iv)      The following steps have been taken by FCI  to detect / curb  pilferage 
(theft) : 
 
a) Installation of barbed wire fencing on boundary walls, provision of street 
lights in the godowns/complexes and proper locking of the sheds. 
 
b) Security staffs of FCI as well  as other Agencies like Home Guards, 
Special Police Officers, are deployed for security of stocks. 
 
c) Deployment of Central Industrial Security Force and State Armed Police 
has been done at vulnerable depots/ godowns in the naxal prone area. 
 
d) Security inspections as well as surprise checks of the depots are being 
conducted from time to time at various levels to detect and plug any 
security lapses. 
 
e) FIRs have also been lodged with the Police where pilferage has come to 
notice.  Apart from this, departmental ac tion including recovery of loss 
has been resorted to act as deterrent. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.23, Para No. 5.28) 
 
2.47 The Committee are disturbed to note that the number of corruption cases 
including vigilance cases detected on various counts during the period 2008, 
2009 and 2010 were 797, 910 and 613 respectively.  During 2010,  cases 
referred to CBI and CVC were 3 & 1 respectively.  The Committee feel  that such 
a gigantic proportion of corruption prevalent in FCI is due to lack of institutional 
mechanism for vigilance available at zonal and regional offices of FCI.  The 

Committee, therefore, strongly recomm end that FCI should strengthen its 
vigilance mechanism in coordination  with the States/UTs so as to detect the 
corrupt practices by FCI officers and take stringent action against them.  Further, 
the Committee also desire that  efforts should be made for e arly disposal of 
pending cases as delay in disposal of cases would further encourage corrupt 
practices and undermine the authority of law.   
 
Action taken by the Government 
2.48 As apprised to the Committee earlier, the number of vigilance cases 
instituted on various counts during the years 2008, 2009 and 2010 were 2190, 
1832 and 2159 respectively. Of these, the number of corruption cases registered 
both by CBI and the Vigilance/Anti -corruption Bureau of State Governments 
during the said years 2008, 2009 and 2010 were 11, 19 and 11 respectively.  The 
other vigilance cases were instituted for misconduct and negligence detected on 
various counts such as purchase of sub-standard food grains, storage and transit 
losses of foodgrains, irregularities in award of various types of contracts etc.    
 
Food Corporation of India is a gigantic organization with huge work force.  
The volume of operations of the FCI has been steadily increasing over the years 
whereas the manpower has been sharply declining as is evident fro m the data 
given below: 
Year Procurement 
(in lakh MT) 
Off take  
(in lakh MT) 
Total turnover  
(in lakh MT) 
Man power 
(As on 31 st 
March) 
2000-2001 359.00 171.58 530.58 60915 
2001-2002 223.39 312.79 536.18 59089 
2002-2003 354.48 490.05 844.53 57073 
2003-2004 386.97 461.74 848.71 54908 
2004-2005 414.67 376.37 791.04 44156 
2005-2006 423.63 407.02 830.65 42449 
2006-2007 343.38 367.28 710.66 41358 
2007-2008 398.64 374.66 773.3 39361 
2008-2009 567.91 395.66 963.57 36566 
2009-2010 574.16 500.28 1074.44 33473 
  
This has resulted in tremendous pressure on the existing workforce.  
However, the number of vigilance cases instituted each year has remained more 
or less static and has recently shown a declining trend during the period as could 
be seen from the data given below: 

 
Year No. of cases 
2001 2508 
2002 2956 
2003 2542 
2004 2235 
2005 2877 
2006 2940 
2007 2594 
2008 2190 
2009 1832 
2010 2159 
 
 FCI has a well structured vigilance organization covering all zones and 
Regions.  The Vigilance Division in H eadquarter is headed by the Executive 
Director (Vig.)/CVO, who is assisted by General Manager (Vig.)/Deputy General 
Managers (Vig.) and Asstt. General Manager (Vig.) along with Manager(Vig.) and 
supporting staff.  Similar vigilance set -up exists in the Zon es/Regions.  In Zones, 
Vigilance Division is headed by General Manager (Vigilance & Security) who is 
assisted by Deputy General Manager(Vig.)/Asstt. General Manager (Vig.), 
Manager (Vig.) and supporting staff.  General Manager (Vigilance) directly 
functions under the Executive Director (Zone).  Similarly in the Regions 
depending upon the staff strength and work load, Vigilance Unit is headed by 
Deputy General Manager (Vig.) or Asstt. General Manager (Vig.) and is assisted 
by Manager and supporting staff. 
 Due to focussed and proactive measures taken by the Vigilance Division 
both at Hqrs. level as well as Zonal/Regional level, FCI has been able to ensure 
that the number of new vigilance cases initiated is not allowed to escalate in spite 
of manpower constraints. 
Besides taking action against those accused of misconduct, FCI‟s 
Vigilance Division has also been taking major initiatives in the area of preventive 
vigilance.  These are aimed at modifying and improving the existing system so as 
to reduce the scope for any illegal activity and cover the following:- 
i)  Since acceptance of poor quality stock is a major source of corruption, 
changes have been made in the „Quality Super Check System‟ to 
improve effectiveness.  
ii)  Regular and surprise checks of field ac tivities are undertaken by staff 
from Regional Offices, Zonal Offices and Headquarters. 

iii)  Cases of d amages of foodgrain above a certain quantity are scrutinised 
by Headquarters Vigilance Division to ensure that good stock is not 
passed off as damaged s tock, and to  fix responsibility for misconduct 
and negligence. 
iv)  Officials in Doubtful Integrity List are not posted in sensitive seats. 
v)  Rotation of officials in sensitive seats is made and maximum tenures in 
sensitive districts has been prescribed. 
vi) The list of sensitive districts has been comprehensively reviewed and 
revised recently. 
vii)  Negotiations are prohibited in all tenders except in very special cases. 
viii) Modifications have been made in Model Tender Forms so as to simplify 
pre-qualification conditions, increase competition, and to provide security 
for performance in the form of Bank Guarantees. 
ix)  All tenders are published in website with provision for down loading 
tender form. 
x).  Tender results are published in web-site of FCI.  
xi)  Stringent penalty of recovery from contractors has been introduced to 
deter manipulation/losses. 
xii)  E-purchase has been successfully implemented in Karnataka Region 
and is now being extended across the country in a phased manner. 
xiii)  E-payment has been introduced for all payments exceeding Rs. 1 lakh. 
xiv) An Audit Committee of the Board of Directors has been set up with the 
responsibility, inter alia, of monitoring Internal Audit. 
xv)  The System of Internal Audit has been reviewed and modifie d in order to 
increase its   effectiveness. 
xvi) As a pilot project, firms of Chartered Accountant are being engaged to 
conduct detailed Internal Audit in one Region in each Zone, as a 
measure of overcoming the shortage of staff within the FCI. The regions  
selected for the pilot are Assam, West Bengal, U.P., Maharashtra and 
A.P. 
      
Efforts have been made for speedy disposal of pending cases. Special focus 
has been given to cases pending for more than one year. The number of cases 
pending has been steadil y going down as can be seen from the data given 
below: 
 
     
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
    Year  Pending vigilance 
cases at the end of 
year 
 Vigilance cases 
older than one  year 
2007  1382 265 
2008 797 139 
2009  910 86 
2010 613 33 
2011 (31.7.11) 519 20 

 
Recommendation (Serial No.24, Para No. 6.5) 
 
2.49 The Committee are deeply concerned to note the continuous rise in 
outstanding dues of CWC during the last 3 years i.e. from Rs.151.60 crore, in 
2008-09 to Rs.185.48 crore in 2009 -10 and Rs.215.00 crore in 2010 -11.   The 
Committee desire that the pending dues should be cleared expeditiously and a 
time limit should be fixed within which th e amount is receivable by CWC from the 
depositors, failing which some penal interest be levied.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that to liquidate the outstanding dues fully at the earliest  
CWC should  review the norms fixed for recovery of outstandin g dues so as to 
enhance its profitability. 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.50  The position of the total outstanding dues as well as outstanding dues 
against the Food Corporation of India (FCI) during the last three years is given 
below: 
                                                    (Figures in crore Rs.) 
As on Total outstanding 
dues 
Outstanding dues 
against FCI 
31.3.2009 151.60  73.25 
31.3.2010 185.48   98.81 
31.3.2011 225.37 126.20 
  
It may be seen that the outstanding dues against FCI is cons tantly on the 
rise. To reduce the outstanding dues, various steps have been taken by the 
CWC particularly with FCI to settle the disputes and to realise the outstanding 
dues.  In this regard, meetings at General Manager, FCI level by their Regional 
Managers and at Zonal Office and Head Office of FCI at CWC Corporate Office 
have been held to sort out the disputes and to realise the outstanding dues.  The 
meetings with FCI at Zonal Office, Kolkata on 1.2.2011 and FCI Headquarter on 
23.2.2001, 9.9.2010 and 3.5.2011 have been held.  FCI Headquarter has issued 
instructions to their field officers for settlement of CWC dues.  Besides, action 
has also been taken to review the credit facilities of private parties and action 
against them in case of default and also w ithdrawal of credit facilities in case of 

failure to settle CWC dues on time.  Review of credit facilities is being made in 
respect of outstanding dues for expeditious realization of dues from the 
depositors. 
In view of the steps being taken by the Corpora tion, it is hoped that the 
outstanding dues will reduce considerably in coming months. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
2.51 Please see Para No.1.35 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.25, Para No. 6.18) 
 
2.52 The Committee are happy to note that the Corporation is making use of 
owned capacity to the maximum which is evident from the declining trend of  rent 
paid by the Corporation for the last three years i.e. from Rs.26.23 crore in 2008 -
09 to Rs.22.56 crore upto February, 2011.  The Committee hope that the 
Corporation will continue to make maximum use of owned capacity and minimize 
dependency on hired capacity during the coming years also thereby enhancing 
their profits. 
Action taken by the Government 
2.53 The CWC has been hiring godowns as a last resort as well as monitoring 
the utilisation of hired godowns to ensure that these are gainfully utilised. As a 
result of such constant monitoring, hired godowns remaining idle are dehired. 
The statement showing the % utilization of owned and hired capacity during last 
four years and the current year as given below:  
                                                                                                                              (Figures in lakh MT) 
Yearly Owned Hired 
Average Capacity Utilisation % of 
capacity 
utilisation 
Capacity Utilisation % of  
 capacity 
utilisation 
2007-08 67.27 48.30 72 13.32   9.68 73 
2008-09 67.47 55.15 82 12.22   9.79 80 
2009-10 67.82 58.30 86 13.30 11.34 82 
2010-11 68.74 60.64 88 12.52 10.74 86 
2011-12 
(upto July 
2011) 
70.07 65.63 94 11.28 10.48 93 

 
The utilisation of both the owned and hired capacity is constantly on  the 
increase. 
 
 As regards the rent paid by the Corporation for the hired godowns, there is 
a continuous declining trend, as indicated in the table below: 
 
Year Rent Paid  
(Rs. in crore) 
2008-09 26.23 
2009-10 25.94 
2010-11 24.28 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
 (Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.27, Para No. 6.21) 
 
2.54 The Committee note that the Warehousing Development and Regulatory 
Authority has been constituted recently and  is functioning with meager staff of 
five regular officers out of 19 sanctioned posts.  These five regular officers 
include one Joint Secretary, 2 Directors, 1 Under Secretary and 1 Section 
Officer.   The Committee have been informed that for issuance of Negotiable 
Warehouse Receipt, the Warehouses have to get themselves registered with the 
Authority.  The Committee have also been informed that the format of Negotiable 
Warehouse Receipts (NWR) has been finalized in consultatio n with 
warehousemen, banks and advisory committee.  The Committee note that about 
316 applications from 18 States for registration of Warehouses have been 
received by the Authority till date.  Taking into consideration wide magnitude   
and importance of work to be performed by the Authority, process of  filling up of 
remaining posts in WDRA be expedited, to ensure its smooth functioning in the 
interest of farmers. 
Action taken by the Government 
2.55 The Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority (WDRA ) was 
set up on 26 th October 2010. At that time, one Joint Secretary and one Director 
(both from central staffing) were in position. The Authority has been seriously 
making efforts to fill up the remaining vacancies. Three vacancy circulars were 

issued i.e. on 13.03.2009 by the Department of Food and Public Distribution, and 
on 28.01.2011 and 11.07.2011 by Warehousing Development and Regulatory 
Authority informing all Ministries/ Departments of Government of India. The NIC 
had placed these circulars on the website of the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution/WDRA and these were published in the Employment News. One post 
each of Director (Technical), Under Secretary (Admn Fin.), Section Officer (Admn 
& Fin.) and Private Secretary were filled up against t he first circular while one 
post each of Section Officer (Technical), Under Secretary (Technical) and 
Principal Private Secretary were also filled up against the second circular. 
 
 The Authority has issued another circular on 11.07.2011, the last date of 
receipt of the application being 29th August 2011. Efforts are being made to fill up 
the vacant posts at the earliest to ensure smooth functioning of the office of 
WDRA. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
 O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
2.56 Please see Para No.1.41 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.28, Para No. 7.6) 
 
2.57 The Committee note that in order to make sugar cultivation mo re 
profitable, the Government of India has fixed the Fair and Remunerative Price 
(FRP) of sugarcane for the sugar season 2010-11 at Rs.139.12 per quintal linked 
to  9.5%  recovery level.  The Committee, however, feel that in reality the position 
is quite different and the cane growers do not get the announced prices and opt 
for other cash crops.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government may take steps to ensure that adequate FRP of sugarcane is paid to 
the farmers so as to encourage them to c ultivate sugarcane crops, thereby 
ensuring adequate production of sugar by the sugarmills.  The Government 
should fix the FRP every year in advance so that the farmers get right price 
signal so that sugarcane remains equally competitive with other food/cash crops.  

Action taken by the Government 
 
2.58 As per clause 3(A) of the Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966 : 
“A producer of sugar or his agent shall pay, for the sugarcane purchased 
by him to the sugarcane grower or the sugarcane growers cooperative 
society, either the minimum price of sugarcane fixed under clause 3, or 
the price agreed to between the producer or his agent and the sugarcane 
grower or the sugarcane growers cooperative society, as the case may 
be” 
 As such, the cane growers cannot get less than  the Fair and 
Remunerative Price (FRP) or sugarcane fixed by the Government. 
 As regards, the recommendation of the Committee to fix the FRP every 
year in advance so that farmers get right price signal and ensure that sugarcane 
remain equally competitive w ith other food/cash crops, it is stated that the action 
on the suggestion of the committee has been taken.  Accordingly, the FRP for 
the year 2011-12 sugar season was fixed at Rs.145/- per quintal linked to a basic 
recovery rate of 9.5% subject to a premiu m of Rs.1.53 per quintal for every 0.1 
percentage point increase in recovery above that level, in March, 2011. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.30, Para No. 7.11) 
 
2.59 The Committee are constrained to note that as on 15 th January, 2011, a 
total of Rs.4545.09 crore which includes Rs.4318.28 crore for 2010 -11 sugar 
season, Rs.17.46 crore for 2009 -10 sugar season and Rs.20 9.35 crore for 2008-
09 and earlier sugar seasons are outstanding as Cane Price Arrears.  The 
Committee are pained to note that although payment of sugar cane is required to 
be done within 14 days of the supply of sugarcane by the farmers as per 
Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966, it is, however seldom done.  The Cane Price 
Arrears pertaining to  sugar season 2008 -09 and earlier are still outstanding and 
yet no action has been taken against the sugar mills for recovery of cane arrears 
alongwith interest @ 15% a s per the provision of Sugarcane (Control) Order 
1966.  The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Ministry stating that 

Cane Price Arrears are generally high in the beginning of the season and start 
declining as the sugar season advances, as su ch, the cane price arrears for 
2010-11 sugar season are likely to decline further in the coming months. The 
Committee feel that there is a need to protect and promote the interest of farmers 
in such a manner that farmers continue to cultivate sugarcane wit hout any 
hindrance.  Farmers need to be paid remunerative price immediately on delivery 
of his agricultural produce.    The Committee, therefore, recommend that to 
motivate farmers to continue with sugarcane cultivation all 
aid/incentives/assistance given to sugar mills should be subjected to liquidation 
of cane arrears by the mills.  In case of default, such aid/assistance should be 
suspended and strict action  taken against defaulting sugar mills under the 
provision of this Order.  
Action taken by the Government 
2.60 As per the latest information of cane price dues for various cut off dates 
furnished by the States for the sugar season 2010-2011, as on 20.09.2011, out of 
total cane price dues of Rs. 43948.00 crores, an amount of Rs. 43192 .57 crores 
has been  paid, leaving a balance of Rs. 755.44crores.Thus, the cane price 
arrears for 2010-2011 sugar season have reduced  from Rs.4318.28 crores as on 
15th January,2010 to Rs.755.44 crores as on 20.9.2011 , which is just 1.72 % of 
the cane price payable, as given in the table below:- 
(Rs. In lakhs) 
SL. 
No. 
 
STATE 
 
 
AS ON 
 
CANE PRICE 
PAYABLE 
(2010-11) 
CANE PRICE 
PAID 
(2010-11) 
CANE PRICE 
ARREARS 
(2010-11) 
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 
1 PUNJAB 31.07.2011 73384.14 73267.75 116.39 
2 HARYANA 31.07.2011 92952.46 92952.46 0.00 
3 RAJASTHAN 15.07.2011 880.07 880.07 0.00 
4 U.P. 31.08.2011 1303112.73 1286479.33 16633.40 
5 UTTARAKHAND 31.08.2011 65577.13 59951.16 5625.97 
   6 M.P. 30.06.2011 11437.61 11232.42 205.19 
7 GUJARAT 15.08.2011 202415.47 201314.00 1101.47 
8 MAHARASHTRA 30.06.2011 1352743.79 1345671.08 7072.71 
9 BIHAR 31.08.2011 83032.85 80338.57 2694.28 
10 ANDHRA PR. 15.08.2011 199756.97 196147.92 3609.05 
11 KARNATAKA 31.08.2011 624754.00 615675.00 9079.00 

12 T.NADU. 31.08.2011 367466.14 340180.98 27285.16 
13 ORISSA 30.06.2011 5695.63 5693.94 1.69 
14 W.BENGAL 30.06.2011 1387.09 1344.26 42.83 
15 PUDUCHERRY 30.06.2011 7948.69 5872.28 2076.41 
16 GOA 15.07.2011 2255.39 2255.39 0.00 
 
 TOTAL  4394800.16 4319256.61 75543.55 
 
2. The cane price arrears for the season 2009 -10 have also reduced from Rs.17.46 
crores to Rs. 6.65 crores and for the sugar season 2008-2009 and earlier sugar seasons 
from 209.35 crores to Rs. 202.48  Crores. The Statement showing the State -wise, sugar 
mill wise position of cane price arrears of 2009 -10 and 2008 -09 and earlier sugar 
seasons, as available on date, along with the reasons for non -payment, is given in 
Annexure-II. It may kindly be seen that, the presence of cane price arrears of 2009 -10 
and earlier sugar seasons are mainly because of matter s being subjudice before the 
courts and stay by courts, etc.  In several cases, the State Governments have issued 
Revenue recovery Certificates to the defaulting sugar mills. 
3. Further, the buffer and transport subsidy schemes in the past were 
formulated with the condition that the settlement of cane price arrears was to be 
first priority, from the disbursements under these schemes and the subsequent 
disbursements were linked to the submission of Utilization Certificates to this 
effect. 
4. During the curre nt sugar season 2010 -2011, the Central Government has 
allowed export of 26.18 lakhs  tonnes of sugar under  various categories to 
augment the liquidity of the sugar factories, so as to enable them to settle cane 
price dues/arrears at the earliest. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.31, Para No. 7.13) 
 
2.61 The Committee express concern over the rising trend in prices of suga r 
during the last two years.  The Committee feel  that the mismatch between 
domestic production and demand for sugar is primarily responsible for rise in 
price of sugar.  The Committee find that due to various measures taken by the 
Government, the price of sugar has come down to some extent but it is  still very 

high in the open market. The Committee feel that the cyclic nature of sugarcane 
production, which has been observed  over the years needs to be regulated.  It 
has been observed that two to three years of very high/surplus production results 
in a glut in the market and crash of sugar prices, leading to shifting in cultivation 
from cane to other crops, in turn resulting in reduced production, shortage and 
consequent rise in sugar prices again.  The Committee, therefore, strongly desire 
that the Government should sincerely work for a long -term policy to deal with the 
problem.  They should also continue to take measures so that the prices of Sugar 
remain more or less stable during high as well as low production years. 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.62 Sugar is an agro-based industrial product for which the basic raw material is 
Sugarcane. The production of sugarcane depends upon rainfall,  the vagaries of 
nature, the economics of various crops leading t o shift in cropping patterns apart 
from pricing policies on sugarcane and the capacity of the industry to pay agreed 
sugarcane prices in time. The Industry‟s capacity, in turn, is dependent upon the 
prices of sugar in the domestic market. This complex inte r play of multiple forces 
gives rise to cyclicity and variation in the levels of production of sugar from one 
sugar season to other sugar season. 
2. Sugar Industry is traditionally a seasonal industry where the sugar produced 
in the 6 -7 months (between Nov ember to April) is to be consumed in a staggered 
manner over whole year and also during the lean period of the ensuing sugar 
seasons. This leads to the price economics going awry in the times of abundant 
sugar production and with chain reactions like build  up of cane price arrears and in 
turn diversion of area to other crops. In order to provide an avenue for utilization of 
surplus sugarcane, Government has amended the Sugarcane (Control) Order, 
1966 on 28.12.2007, thereby, providing for production of ethan ol directly from 
sugarcane juice in case of sugar mills.  Similarly, under Sugar Development Fund 
(SDF), concessional loans are provided for setting of Co -generation as well as 
Ethanol plants as ancillary units to the sugar factories.  The other types of 
concessional fundings from SDF are for the promotion of sound cultivation practices 

(cane development loans) as well as for enhancing the operational efficiency of the 
sugar plants (loans for modernization /expansion of crushing capacities). 
 
3.  As a long term policy measures for the benefit of sugarcane farming 
community, the Government has introduced the concept of “Fair and 
Remunerative Price” (FRP) for sugarcane from 2009 -10 sugar season instead of 
a Statutory Minimum Price (SMP) previously fixed by the  Government.  Under 
FRP, the farmers would get an “upfront” payment of margins on account of profit 
and risk, not available under SMP. Ever since introduction of FRP, the sugarcane 
planting area and the sugarcane production has been on the upswing for the last 
two sugar seasons and the estimates are quite promising for the coming year 
also, as reflected from the figures of sugar production as given below:- 
 
Sugar Season Sugar Production (In lac tons) 
2009-10 188.51 
2010-11 242.00 * 
*   Provisional 
 
 A co mparison of the SMP in the earlier years and the FRP 
announcements in the recent years is given below:- 
 
 (Rs. Per quintal) 
 2008-09 Sugar season 2009-10 sugar season 2010-11 sugar 
season 
2011-12 
1 2 3 4 
SMP Rs. 81.18 per quintal 
linked to 9% with incre ase 
of Rs. 0.90 for every 0.1% 
point increase in recovery 
above 9%. 
Rs. 107.76 per quintal 
linked to 9.5% with 
increase of Rs.1.13 for 
every 0.1% point increase 
in the recovery above 
9.5%. 
 
 
 
---- 
 
 
 
---- 
FRP - Rs.129.84 per quintal 
linked to 9.5% recover y 
level with increase of 
Rs.1.37 per quintal for 
every 0.1% point increase 
in the recovery above 
9.5%. 
Rs.139.12 per quintal 
linked to 9.5% 
recovery level with 
increase of Rs.1.46 
per quintal for every 
0.1% point increase 
in the recovery above 
9.5%. 
Rs.145.00 per quintal 
linked to 9.5% 
recovery level with 
increase of Rs.1.53 
per quintal for every 
0.1% point increase 
in the recovery above 
9.5%. 
 
4.  Though the wholesale prices as well as retail prices of sugar depend upon a 
number of factors including deman d and supply situation, market sentiments, 

trend of international prices and production, etc., the Government endeavours to 
keep the market stable through its policy of regulated release of sugar for open 
market. 
5. In order to maintain the liquidity of th e sugar industry and to ensure cane 
payments to the farmers, Government, through its timely intervention by the way of 
export policy has permitted export of 26.18 lac tonnes of sugar during 2010 -11 
sugar season.  Keeping domestic retail prices at a reasona ble level and allowing 
Industry to generate profits through international trade is the corner stone of this 
policy, so that:. 
 the consumers get adequate sugar throughout the year at a fair  
price; 
  the cane growers receive a fair price;   
 the sugar produce rs get a reasonably fair return from the sale of 
sugar. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.32, Para No. 8.8) 
 
2.63 The Committee are concerned to note that while on the one hand there is 
stagnating production of oil seeds in the country for the last two decades on the 
other hand, the consumption of edible oil has been increasing rapidly which is 
attributed to rise in popu lation and living standards.  The Committee note that as 
per the Second Advance Estimate of Ministry of Agriculture released on 9th 
February, 2011 for 2010 -11, estimated oilseeds production is about 278.48 lakh 
tonnes, i.e. 29.65 lakh tonnes higher than 20 09-10.  Production of oil from these 
oilseeds in 2010 -11 is likely to be about 66.34 lakh tonnes, i.e. higher by 7.46 
lakh  tonnes as compared to 2009-10 but it is still short of the total requirement of 
the country which is evident from the fact that  dur ing the oil year 2010-11, 26.12 
lakh tonnes of edible oils had to be  imported to meet the deficit in domestic 
production during the same period.  The Committee are of the view that to bridge 
the gap between demand and supply of edible oils, the rise in pr oduction of oil 
seeds and consequent productivity of edible oils is imperative.  The Committee 
find that the production of oilseeds declined mainly in the States of Andhra 

Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, and U.P.  during 2009 -10 
due to   drought in kharif 2009. The Committee observe that though the 
Government of India has taken various measures including implementation of a 
centrally sponsored Integrated Scheme of Oil Seeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize  
(ISOPOM) to increase production and  improve availability of edible oil in the 
country, the results are not very effective. The Committee feel that the Country 
may be self sufficient in edible oil if new and  high yielding varieties are 
developed  on a large scale for which a scientific  tec hnology break through is 
needed.  Considering the overall scenario with regard to oilseeds and edible oil in 
the country, the Committee desire that the  Department should make sincere 
efforts in consultation with the Department of Agriculture in the field of nurturing 
improved, high yielding varieties of oilseeds. The Committee recommend that 
other ways & means should also be explored to increase production and 
productivity of traditional oilseeds crops and adequate steps be taken to 
popularize use of non -traditional secondary source of edible oils to reduce the 
dependency of imported edible oils.  Further, to increase production, there is 
imperative need to have improved technology for extraction of edible oils.   
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.64 The su bject matter primarily relates to production and productivity of 
oilseeds which lies within the purview of Ministry of Agriculture.  The matter has 
been taken up with that Ministry. 
 The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation is implementing a 
Centrally Sponsored Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize 
(ISOPOM) in 14 major oilseeds growing States w.e.f.1.4.2004. The production of 
oilseeds has increased from 25.19 million tonnes in 2003 -04 to 31.10 million 
tonnes in 2011-12( 4th  Advance Estimates). This was brought about not only by 
increase in area but also by improving the productivity from 1064 kg. to 1159 kg. 
per hectare during above period. Despite increase in production and productivity, 
the production of oilseeds is less than the demand. 
Under ISOPOM, financial assistance is provided for purchase of breeder 
seed, production of foundation seed, production and distribution of certified seed, 

distribution of seed minikits, distribution of plant protection equipments, 
weedicides, suppl y of rhizobium culture/phosphate solubilising bacteria, 
distribution of gypsum/pyrite/ liming/dolomite, distribution of sprinkler sets and 
water carrying pipes, publicity, etc. to encourage farmers to grow oilseeds on a 
large scale.  In order to disseminat e information on improved production 
technologies amongst the farmers, block demonstrations and Integrated Pest 
Management (IPM) demonstrations are organized through State Departments of 
Agriculture. There is a substantial yield gap between and within stat es in respect 
of various major oilseeds. In order to bridge the yield gap, Frontline 
Demonstrations are being organized through ICAR to demonstrate the latest 
input production and protection technologies.  The Government of India have 
focused on transfer o f technology through demonstration and trainings and 
supply of critical inputs under the scheme.  To promote the cultivation of newly 
released varieties of oilseeds, the farmers are given seed minikits of oilseeds of 
the varieties/hybrids, not older than 1 0 years, free of cost.  The seed minikits are 
given to the farmers to bring more area under high yielding varieties/hybrids.  
Further, to make ISOPOM more effective, the Government of India has 
modified/restructured Centrally Sponsored Integrated Scheme of  Oilseeds, 
Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize (ISOPOM) during 11 th  plan period. The details of 
modification made under ISOPOM are as under;  
i) To increase the Seed Replacement Rate (SRR), the assistance on 
Production of Foundation and Certified Seed has been enhanc ed from Rs. 
500/- per qtl to Rs. 1000/ - per qtl.  Similarly, the subsidy on Distribution of 
Certified Seed has been enhanced from Rs. 800/ - per qtl to Rs. 1200/- per qtl 
during 11th Plan Period.  The Government has further enhanced the subsidy 
for distribu tion of certified seed of oilseeds from Rs1200/ per quintal to 
Rs2000/ per quintal for Rabi Summer of 2009-10. 
ii) The Private Sector seed producing agencies have been involved in the 
distribution of Certified Seeds of Oilseeds besides NSC, SFCI, NAFED, 
KRIBHCO and IFFCO.   
iii) Enhancement of rationalization of subsidy on demonstration, sprinkler sets, 
rhizobium cultures, irrigation pipes besides inclusion of new components i.e.  
supply of improved farm implements and micronutrients during 11 th Plan 
Period.   
  

Keeping in view the fact that there is a constraint in area expansion under 
oilseeds, the thrust during 11 th plan is being given towards yield improvement in 
oilseeds besides promoting the cultivation of oil palm under ISOPOM in 9 States, 
for augmenting the i ndigenous availability of edible oils in the country. Under 
ISOPOM, an area of 173127 hectare has been achieved under oil palm 
plantation upto 2010-11. The oil palm starts yield after 4 -5 years of its plantation. 
These new plantations will help in increasing the domestic supply of edible oils.  
Besides ISOPOM, Government provides support for oilseeds under various 
other schemes viz Macro Management of Agriculture (MMA) and  Rashtriya 
Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY).  The Macro Management of Agriculture (MMA) 
Scheme provides assistance for oilseeds development to the States not covered 
under ISOPOM.  Under RKVY, the States can support crop development 
activities approved by the State Level Sanctioning Committee headed by the 
Chief Secretary of the State.  
Government of India has launched Oilpalm Area Expansion (OPAE) 
Programme for bringing 60,000 hectares, during 2011 -12 under RKVY. This 
programme also includes a strategy indicating State specific targets for area 
expansion, interventions, pattern of assistance, re search and development 
components, institutional linkages, monitoring, initiatives for creating processing 
facilities in needy States have been highlighted to augment the production of 
palm oil after 4-5 years. 
Government of India is implementing a Central  Sector scheme of Integrated 
Development of Tree Borne Oilseeds (TBOs) to harness the potential of tree 
borne oilseeds. The various programmes of the scheme viz: Development of elite 
planting material and model plantation, awareness programme, Back -ended 
credit linked subsidy programme etc. are implemented for exploitation of existing 
potential and augmentation of future potential of TBOs.  The superior trees 
having more yield and high oil content have been identified in the country. The 
seed material of su ch plants have been collected and provided to various 
Agricultural Universities and institutions for developing model plantation up to 
2009-10. 
The R&D Projects on edible oils undertaken by Department are in the field 
of improving the processing technology  for production of edible oils, use of 

secondary sources of oilseeds/edible oils, refining and storage studies etc. These 
projects and their findings may bring the required technological break through for 
improving and enhancing  the yield of edible oilseeds / edible oils. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.33, Para No. 8.11) 
 
2.65 The Committee are pained to note that fun ds allocated for Research and 
Development and modernization of laboratory of the Directorate of VVO&F 
during the year 2010 -11 could not be fully utilised. The Committee find that the 
difficulties faced by the Department in achieving the targets in respect of 
Research & Development by Research Institute are (a)  failure to purchase 
equipment in time (b) non -availability of material needed to carry out  the 
research, non -submission of utilization certificate and progress report and 
frequent changes in top pos itions. keeping in view the declining production of 
oilseeds, the Committee feel that the need of the hour is to develop high yielding 
oilseeds varieties to meet the increasing consumption, for which focused R&D is 
required to be done.  The Committee, ther efore, strongly recommend that the 
Government should ensure that the funds allocated for R&D Projects are fully 
utilised by the DVVO&F to get the desired results.  The Department should also, 
in consultation with other Ministries, streamline the procedure and documentation 
for transparency and accountability at each level for giving timely approval  for 
purchase of various research equipments. 
Action taken by the Government 
2.66 Procedures have been streamlined in the Department for giving timely 
approval and for regular monitoring by Project Implementation Committee (PIC).   
The institutes have been advised to purchase the equipments in time and 
complete the projects in time.   
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
(Comments of the Committee) 
2.67 Please see Para No.1.44 of Chapter-I of the Report. 

 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S 
 REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.5, Para No.  4.30) 
 
3.1 The Committee note that as per Public Distribution System (Control) 
Order, 2001, the State Governments/UT administrations are to ensure that during 
transportation and storage at different s tages in the distribution chains, the 
foodgrains retain their required quality specifications.  The Committee are 
surprised that despite there being  joint inspection of foodgrains stocks in FCI 
godowns and presence of quality control cells in the  Departm ent of Food and 
Public Distribution,  there are complaints of beneficiaries getting inferior quality of 
foodgrains. The Committee feel that this could be the handiwork of some 
intermediaries which leads to diversion of good quality foodgrains and making 
the poor people getting inferior quality of foodgrains.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Department should make independent surprise 
visits and inspections at fair price shops or entrust the job to some other 
independent agency or vigil ance committees to evaluate the situation and  take 
immediate action thereon.  The Committee are of the view  that  the CCTV 
monitoring of fair price shops can also be helpful  to monitor the distribution of 
the PDS items at fair price shops.  The Committe e also desire that 24X7 toll free 
complaining facilities may be set up in all the States/UTs by the Department for 
registering the  grievances/complaints of TPDS beneficiaries.  Further, the 
Committee also desire that foodgrains should be supplied to benef iciaries in 
packings of 5kg, 10kg, and  20kg bearing FPS stamp on it, which  will minimize 
the chances of diversion. 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
3.2 Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) is operated under the joint 
responsibility of the Central a nd the State/Union Territory (UT) Governments. 
Central Government is responsible for procurement, allocation and transportation 
of foodgrains upto the designated depots of the Food Corporation of India. The 

operational responsibility for allocation and dis tribution of foodgrains within the 
States/UTs, identification of eligible Below Poverty Line (BPL) families, issuance 
of ration cards to them and supervision over and monitoring of functioning of Fair 
Price Shops (FPSs) rests with the concerned State/UT Government. 
In order to maintain supplies and securing availability and distribution of 
essential commodities, Public Distribution System (Control) Order, 2001 has 
been notified on August 31, 2001 which mandates the State and UT 
Governments to carry out all required action to ensure smooth functioning of 
TPDS. 
In order to assess the quality of foodgrains at the time of procurement, 
storage and distribution, the officers of Quality Control Cells of this Department 
inspect the procurement centres, Storage Depot s, railheads and Fair Price 
Shops throughout the country. The short comings/discrepancies, if any, observed 
by the Inspecting Officers during their course of inspection are forwarded to 
concerned agencies, such as, Food Corporation of India, State Governme nts, 
etc. for taking remedial measures. 
The Quality Control Officers of this Department have inspected 1141 Fair 
Price Shops during 2010 -11 and 606 during 2011 -12 (upto September, 2011) 
throughout the country. Department has issued instructions to the Food  
Secretaries of all State Governments to ensure that only good quality foodgrains 
are issued for public distribution system. Further the State Government have 
been requested to intimate the requirement for training of their Quality Control 
Staff.   
Further, a Conference of State Food Secretaries on Best Practices and 
Reforms in the Targeted Public Distribution System was held in 12 -13 July, 2010 
where it was resolved among others that distribution of PDS items by fair price 
shops may be monitored through me asures including CCTV monitoring of FPS 
and grievance redressal should be undertaken through toll free call centres and 
web based complaint registration and monitoring systems. 
Vigilance Committees have been in existence since the inception of the 
PDS. The Central Government has been requesting the State Governments from 
time to time to activate these Committees and reconstitute them, if not done so 
already, by associating members from amongst the card holders, consumer 

activists as well as people‟s represe ntatives.  The recommendations of the 
Standing Committee have been noted and the concerns of the Committee have 
again been conveyed to all State/UT Governments for taking the requisite 
stringent measures to remove the deficiencies in the system.  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
 (Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011]    
 
Recommendation (Serial No.19, Para No.  5.10) 
 
3.3 The Committee note that net expenditure incurred by FCI including  the 
establishment cost, is reimbursed by the Government in the form of food subsidy.  
The Committee are deeply concerned to note that in 2010 -11, the establishment 
cost of FCI was Rs.3307.41 crore i.e. an increase of 64.47% over the previous 
year (2009-10) of Rs. 2011.11 crore.  The reasons attributed for the increase in 
establishment cost during 2010 -11 (RE) are the pay revision of executives, 
announcements of fringe benefits to category I and II employees of the 
Corporation and impact of revision of maxi mum gratuity ceiling from Rs.3.50 
lakhs to Rs.10 lakhs w.e.f. 24 th May, 2010 (for employees under CDA) and w.e.f. 
1.1.2007(for employees under IDA) and consequent payment of arrears. While 
agreeing with the aforesaid reasoning of the Department,  the Commi ttee feel 
that  establishment cost is still very high and can be further reduced so that there 
is increase in the food component under the food subsidy.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that further ways and means should be devised to 
reduce the establishment cost so that substantial amount of food subsidy which 
is basically meant for the poor section of the society, percolates down to 
legitimate beneficiaries only. 
Action taken by the Government 
 
3.4 The pay revision of executives, fringe bene fits to Category I and II 
employees of the Corporation are arrears payments for which cannot be avoided. 
Such payments are to be released to the employees at the time of pay revision 
approximately once in 10 years. The revision of maximum gratuity ceiling from 
Rs.3.50 lakhs to Rs.10 lakhs w.e.f. 24 th May, 2010 (for employees under CDA) 

and w.e.f. 1.1.2007 (for employees under IDA) and consequent payment of 
arrears is in accordance with the provisions of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972. 
The Food Corporatio n of India has implemented instructions on economy 
measures and rationalization of expenditure issued by Department of 
Expenditure vide OM No.7 (1)/E.Coord/2009 dated 7th September, 2009. 
 The Sanctioned Strength of staff of the Corporation has been reduce d 
from 55045 to 36515 (excluding Hindi and Watch and Ward posts) alongwith 
restructuring of FCI in January, 2010. The restructuring of FCI was carried out 
with a view to rationalize the number of sanctioned posts and to strengthen the 
functional areas like Quality Control and Accounts. 
 The establishment cost of FCI is not as high as compared to its level of 
operations.  In 2009 -10, the expenditure was only 2.12% of turnover (purchase 
+sales).  All possible efforts are being made to keep the establishment c ost 
under check.  In fact, the handling cost of DPS and contract labour is much less 
than the handling cost in depots having departmental labour.  The labour unions 
have been demanding that DPS labour should also be paid at par with 
departmental labour.  M oreover, as per the ban imposed by the Government of 
India on recruitment from the years 1984 to 2001,  the staff in position on 
31.03.2011 was only 30656 against 60915 ten years back.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
Recommendation (Serial No.26, Para No. 6.19) 
 
3.5 The Committee note with concern that perspective plan drawn for the 
construction of the godowns during the financial year 2011 -12 is devoid of N.E. 
States.  The Committee are not convinced with the plea of the Government that 
since the storage capacity available with CWC in the N.E. Region is not fully 
utilized, CWC has no major plan for construction of additional capacity in the 
Region.  The Commi ttee note that in N.E. States, there is 93% utilization of  the 
storage space and construction of additional storage capacity would definitely be 
profitable for CWC.  The Committee had earlier made recommendations  in DFG 
(2010-11) that sepa rate funds i.e. 10% of the total plan funds be earmarked for 

construction of godowns in N.E. States and construction of godowns in N.E. 
Region be stepped up.  The Committee, therefore, would again like to 
recommend that the CWC should explore the possibility of constructing additional 
storage capacity  in N.E. Region so that the people of the area could fully avail 
the benefit of PDS. 
Action taken by the Government 
3.6 No plan for construction of additional godown in the North East States for 
the year 2011-12 could be drawn up in view of following reasons. 
(i) Land is not available for construction of additional storage capacity except 
in Central Warehouse, Sorbhog (Assam) where land is available for 
construction of 4000 MT capacity only and Central Warehouse, D hubri 
where 2000 MT capacity can be constructed.  
 
(ii)  CWC was operating 9 warehouses in NE Region with a total capacity of 
1.01 lakh MT with an average utilisation of 92% during the year 2010 -11.  
Occupancy of the Region as on 31.07.2011 also remained at 92%. 
 
(iii) The average capacity utilisation of the Region during the years 2007 -08, 
2008-09, 2009 -10 and 2010 -11 was 75%, 79%, 93% and 92% 
respectively. Since the existing capacity could not even be fully utilized, 
and in the absence of any assured business, const ruction of additional 
capacity could not be considered. 
 
(iv) In NE Region, besides CWC, the Assam and Meghalaya State 
Warehousing Corporations (SWCs) were operating a total capacity of 2.66 
lakh MT with 50 warehouses. The utilization of both these SWCs was 75%  
and 79% respectively as on 31.07.2011.  The existing capacity of these 
SWCs is also not even fully utilized.  However, Meghalaya SWC has a 
plan to construct 6500 MT in the year 2011-12. 
 
(v) However, considering the recommendations of the Hon‟ble Committee, 
CWC would consider construction of additional storage capacity in the 
existing vacant lands at the following warehouses during 2012-13: 
(i) CW, Sorbhog : 4000 MT 
(ii) CW, Dhubri  : 2000 MT 
     _________ 
Total   : 6000 MT 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. Mo.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 

  
Recommendation (Serial No.29, Para No. 7.7) 
 
 
3.7 The Committee note that in order to mitigate the hardship of the 
sugarcane growers, the Gover nment of India had created a buffer stock of 50 
lakh tonnes of sugar for a period of one year in 2006 -07, and 2007 -08 sugar 
season when there was excess production of sugar. Subsequently, as the 
production of sugar declined, the Government did not consider  it necessary to 
maintain the buffer stock of sugar. The plea of the Government that to build up 
the buffer stock of sugar, the Government have to bear carrying cost for the 
maintenance which would impose heavy burden on the Government exchequer 
is not acc eptable to the Committee. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend the Government to review its buffer stock policy with regard to sugar. 
The Committee are of the opinion that the buffer stock of sugar is very much 
essential not only to meet the requir ement of PDS, but also to meet crisis 
situation in the years of deficit sugar production. The Committee desire that the 
Government should take appropriate measures to maintain a strategic stock of 
sugar.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
3.8 The concept of buffer stock of sugar is different from that of foodgrains.  
The Central Government creates buffer stock of sugar in years of excess 
production with a view to stabilise sugar price in the country and to ensure that 
excess production does not lead to high c ane price arrears.  The Central 
Government had created a buffer stock of 50 lakh tonnes for a period of one year 
(20 lakh from 01.05.2007 to 30.04.2008 and 30 lakh tonnes from 01.08.2007 to 
31.07.2008) when there was excess production of sugar in 2006 -2007 and 2007-
08 sugar seasons.  Sugar is a controlle d commodity and supplies are made in 
the open market only against Release Orders.  The Government thus has control 
over the stock position, maintained by the sugar mills.  Adequate care is taken to 
ensure th at a minimum required quantity of sugar is maintained within the 
country.  Advance action is taken in years of deficit sugar production to ensure 
that supplies are maintained.  Sugar being a perishable commodity, it may not be 

advisable to maintain stocks over a long period, which will affect its quality 
adversely.  The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and the 
Government would ensure that stock of sugar is not allowed to fall below 
strategic levels. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
 (Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 

CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.2, Para No. 4.7) 
 
4.1 The Committee are constrained to note that even after  more than 13 years of 
its inception, the DCP Scheme has been undertaken by only five States for wheat 
and nine States for rice which indicates the Government‟s inability to convinc e the 
remaining States about the advantages  of the Scheme.  The Committee also 
observe that success of DCP Scheme greatly depends upon the infrastructure and  
resources available with the respective State Governments; speedy release of funds 
to the DCP States and proper planning for distribution of foodgrains.   In the opinion 
of the Committee, DCP Scheme is one of the most important Schemes being 
implemented with a view to lessening the burden on FCI and reducing the 
dependence on the Central Government.  The Committee, therefore, urge the 
government to remove the anomalies in the Scheme so that States can contribute 
towards the central pool thereby enhancing the food security. The Committee, also 
recommend  the Department to take concrete steps  to convin ce the remaining 
States/UTs to adopt the DCP Scheme in the interest of the farmers and in making 
the States self sufficient in production, procurement and distribution of foodgrains. 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
4.2 The Scheme of Decentralized Procurem ent (DCP) of foodgrains was 
introduced in 1997-98 with a view to enhance the efficiency of procurement and PDS 
and to encourage local procurement and reduce out go of food subsidy.  In this 
method of procurement, the State undertakes the responsibility of procurement of 
foodgrains, its scientific storage and distribution through Targeted Public Distribution 
System (TPDS).  The surplus of foodgrains procured by DCP states, in excess of 
their TPDS requirement is handed over to FCI for the Central Pool stocks and deficit, 
if any, is met by FCI. 
 The decision regarding adoption of DCP system lies with the State 
Government. The determining factor are infrastructure and resources available with 
the respective State Governments including manpower, storage and neces sary 

logistics required for procurement and accordingly, State Government‟s readiness to 
undertake DCP procurement. 
 The major infrastructure required for procurement operation is the storage 
facilities for the foodgrains.  To assist and encourage the Stat e Government to 
create sufficient storage space, Government of India has launched the Scheme for 
construction of godowns for FCI – storage requirements through private 
entrepreneurs – 2008 on 28.07.2008. 
 This Department has also formulated and circulated on 08.04.2010 a similar 
scheme for creation of storage space in the DCP States.  The State Government or 
any agency designated by it will assess the storage gap.  The storage space to be 
created in the DCP States would be so as to meet  maximum of its annu al 
TPDS/OWS requirement.  
 At present, the States of West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Chhatisgarh, 
Uttrakhand, A&N Island, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Kerala are procuring 
rice under Decentralized Procurement Scheme.  Government of UP was  adopting 
DCP m ethod for procurement of rice upto KMS 2008 -09.  But the same has 
discontinued the procurement of rice under Decentralized procurement.  The States 
of West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Chhatisgarh, Uttrakhand and Gujarat are 
procuring wheat under DCP Scheme.  T he number of States procuring rice and 
wheat under DCP Schemes is 10.  All other State Governments have been 
requested to adopt DCP system for procuring foodgrains vide this Department‟s 
letter dated 10.01.2011. 
 In response to the above referred letter of  this Department, Government of 
Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana and Sikkim have expressed their inability to adopt 
the method of procurement of foodgrains under reference.  States have been again 
requested to adopt this DCP method of procurement of foodgrains.  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.G-20017/10/2011-AC dt. 4.11.2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
4.3 Please see Para No.1.8 of Chapter-I of the Report. 

  
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-  NIL   - 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI            VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
17 MAY, 2012            CHAIRMAN, 
27 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka)       Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 

 
APPENDIX I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2011 -12) 
HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 17TH MAY, 2012 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs. in Room No. '115-
A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaywant Gangaram Awale 
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
5. Shri Lal Chand Kataria 
6. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
7. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
8. Shri Chandulal Sahu 
9. Smt. Usha Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
11. Shri Lalhming Liana 
12. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. K. Misra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou - Under Secretary 
 
 

 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the draft Reports on 
the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the  (i) Tenth Report of the  Committee (2009 -10) on the subject 
'Production, Consumption and Pricing of Sugar' and (ii) Twelfth Report of the 
Committee (2010-11) on DFG (2011 -12) pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Publ ic 
Distribution). In his opening remarks Hon‟ble Chairman highlighted the important 
recommendations contained in both the draft Reports. 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration both the above stated draft 
Reports. After due deliberation, the Commi ttee unanimously adopted the draft 
Report on the subject 'Production, Consumption and Pricing of Sugar' without 
any amendments/modifications. However the draft Report on DFG (2011-12) was 
adopted with minor modifications. 
 
4.  The Committee then authorized  the Chairman to finalize the aforesaid 
Reports and present the same to the Parliament. 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
********* 
 
 
  
 
 

APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS  OF THE  ACTION  TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWELFTH REPORT  OF  
THE  STANDING  COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFA IRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION (2010-11) 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)   
(i) Total number of Recommendations:        33 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which h ave been accepted 
by the Government : 
 
 Serial Nos.:- 1, 3, 4,  6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 
18,  20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32 and 
33 
    
Para Nos:-    3.3, 4.16, 4.22, 4.37, 4.40, 4.45, 4.51, 4.55, 4.58, 
4.67, 4.77, 4.78, 4.79, 4.80, 4.82, 5.6, 5.14, 5.19, 
5.25, 5.28, 6.5, 6.18, 6.21, 7.6, 7.11, 7.13, 8.8 
and 8.11     
          (Chapter – II, Total - 28) 
Percentage : 84.85% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies rec eived from the 
Government 
Serial Nos. 5, 19, 26 and 29   
(Para  Nos. – 4.30, 5.10, 6.19 and 7.7) 
           (Chapter – III, Total - 4) 
Percentage : 12.12% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepte d by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
Serial No. 2   
(Para No. – 4.7)  
            (Chapter – IV, Total -1)   
Percentage : 3.03% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
interim replies of the Government have been received. 
   Serial No.:- Nil 
   (Para No. – Nil) 
    (Chapter – V, Total - 0) 
Percentage : 00.00% 