 STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2012-13) 
  
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION  
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
THE BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012 
 
 
   THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
August, 2013/ Bhadra, 1935 (Saka) 
30 

 
 
2 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
 AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2012-13) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
THE BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30th August, 2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30th August, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2013/ Bhadra, 1935 (Saka) 

 
 
3 
CONTENTS 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE……………                            iii 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………….               v 
REPORT 
Chapter I
  
Introductory ……………………….            
A. Origin and Development of Bureau of Indian Standards 
B. Importance of Standards  
C. Bureau of Indian Standards 
D. Performance & Achievements  
E. Salient features of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act  
F. Shortcomings in the BIS Act, 1986 
G. Need for Amendment of the Act 
H. Proposed Amendments 
I. Process of consultation held by the Committee whil e examining 
the said Legislation 
 
 1 
Chapter II Section/Clause-wise analysis of the Bill...  
A. Definitions  
B. Ambiguity regarding 'Registration' and 'Self Declaration 
of Conformity' (SDOC) 
C. The Executive Committee 
D. Clause 14 – Amendment of Section 37 
E. Clause 7 — Compulsory use of Standard Mark for 
articles and processes of any Industry 
F. Hallmarking of Precious Metal Articles, Registration for 
Self Declaration and Enforcement of Orders 
G. Clause 12 — Penal Provisions 
H. Miscellaneous 
 
 23 
 APPENDICES  
I The Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986  -- 
II The Bureau of Indian Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2012  -- 
   
 ANNEXURES  

 
 
4 
I Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 24th July, 2012  -- 
II Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 22nd February, 2013 -- 
III Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 27th February, 2013   -- 
IV Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 4th March, 2013 -- 
V Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 6th March, 2013 -- 
VI Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 11th March, 2013 -- 
VII Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 16th April, 2013 -- 
VIII Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 9th July, 2013 -- 
IX Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 22nd August, 2013 -- 
X Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 27th August, 2013 -- 
 
 
 
 

 
 
5 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2012-13 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
4. Shri Kantilal Bhuria 
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary  
6. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
7. Shri Sanjay Dhotre  
8. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
9. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
10. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav   
11. Shri Sohan Potai 
12. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
13. Shri C. Rajendran 
14. Shri Purnmasi Ram  
15. Shri Chandulal Sahu (Chandu Bhaiya) 
16. Shri Adhi Sankar 
17. Shri Suresh K. Shetkar@@ 
18. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
19. Shri  Laxman Tudu 
20. Vacant** 
21. Vacant*** 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
23. Shri Lalhming Liana 
24. Smt Rajani Patil@ 
25. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
26. Ms. Rekha  
27. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy 
28. Dr. T.N. Seema 
29. Shri Birender Singh 
30. Shri Veer Singh 
31. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
___________________________________________________________ 
Shri Lalchand Kataria, MP ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent his appointment as 
Minister of State w.e.f 28.10.2012. 
**Vice Shri A. Sai Prathap has been nominated to the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers w.e.f.09.01.2013. 
@Smt Rajani Patil has been nominated to the Committee on FCA&PD w.e.f. 18.03.2013. 
@@ Shri Suresh K. Shetkar has been nominated to the Committee on FCA&PD w.e.f. 01.05.2013. 
*** Vice Shri N. Chaluvaraya Swamy, MP resigned from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 21.05.2013. 
(ii)

 
 
6 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.  Shri P.K. Misra  - Additional Secretary 
2.  Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3.   Ms. Bhavna Tanwar - Executive Assistant 
 

 
 
7 
 INTRODUCTION 
  
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution (2012-13) having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report 
on their behalf, present this Thirtieth Repor t on “The Bureau of Indian Standards 
(Amendment) Bill, 2012” pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
2.  The Bureau of Indian Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2012 was introduced in Lok 
Sabha on 3rd May, 2012. Hon’ble Speaker referred the Bill to the Standing Committee on 
Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution under Rule 331E(i)(b) of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha on 28 th May, 2012 for examination 
and report. The Committee invited the views/suggestions of the Individuals/Institutions/ 
Stakeholders etc. on the various provisions of the Bill through the Print and Electronic 
Media including the LSTV.  In response thereto, the Committee received number of 
Letters/Memoranda containing views/suggestions from various Institutions/ Individuals/ 
Stakeholders etc. which were considered by the Committee while examining the Bill. The 
Committee also elicited opinion of various Experts and Associations/Agencies who have 
direct bearing on the Bill and heard the views of some of them namely, Voluntary 
Organization in Interest of Consumer Education (VOICE), Confederation of Indian 
Industry (CII), Federation of Industries of India (FII), All India Gems & Jewellery Trade 
Federation, Akhil Bhartiya Grahak Panchayat, Mumbai Grahak Panchayat, Consumers 
Association of India and Confederation of Indian Steel Producers Association  who 
tendered their views/suggestions on the various proposed amendments to the Bill before 
the Committee at various sittings held on  4th, 6th and 11th March and 16th April, 2013.  
 3.   The Committee also invited comments/suggestions from all the State 
Governments/UT Administrations and consequently, received responses from many 
State Governments/UT Administrations. 
4. The Committee were briefed by the representatives of the nodal Ministry viz. 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs) on the various provisions of the Bill at their sitting held on 27th Febru ary, 2013.  
The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of Consumer 
Affairs at their sittings held on 16th April, and 9th July, 2013.  
(v) 

 
 
8 
5.  The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report on the Bill at their sitting 
held on 27th August, 2013. 
6. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Officials of the State 
Governments/UT Administrations and Experts/Associations as well as Individuals/ 
Institutions/Stakeholders/Organisations etc. who placed before the Commit tee their 
valuable suggestions which were of great help while arriving at the conclusion during 
examination of the Bill.   
7.  The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distr ibution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs) as well as the Bureau of Indian Standards for tendering oral evidence before the 
Committee and for furnishing the detailed information/material as and when desired, in 
connection with the examination of the Bill.  
8.  During the examination of the Bill, the Committee were immensely benefited by 
the suggestions made by the Members of the Committee for which I express my sincere 
thanks to them. 
9. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation of the invaluable assistance rendered by the officials/staff of Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee.  
10. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/ recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                                        VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
27th August, 2013                                       Chairman, 
5 Bhadra, 1935 (Saka)                              Standing Committee on Food,  
                                                       Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution  
 
 
 
 
(vi)

 
 
9 
CHAPTER – I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
A. ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
 
During the pre -independence period, standardization activity was sporadic and 
confined mainly to a few government purchasing organizations. Later on, for economic 
development through coordinated utilization of resources, the government recognized 
the role of standardization in gearing industry for competitive efficiency and quality 
production. The Indian Standards Institution (ISI) was, therefore, set up in 1947 as a 
registered society, under a Government of India resolution with the objective of 
promoting standardization, quality control and simplification in industry and commerce. 
 
1.2 The Indian Standards Institution gave the nation the standards it needed for 
orderly industrial and commercial growth, quality production and competitive efficiency. 
Product certification scheme was launched in 1955 through ISI Certification Mark Act, 
1952. 
 
1.3 In 1986 the government recognized the need for strengthening this National 
Standards Body due to fast changing socio -economic scenario and accorded it a 
statutory status. Thus came the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 (Appendix I) and 
on 1 Ap ril 1987, newly formed BIS took over staff assets, liabilities and functions of 
erstwhile ISI. Through this change over, the Government envisaged building of the 
climate of quality culture and consciousness and greater participation of consumers in 
formulation and implementation of National Standards. 
 
B.  IMPORTANCE OF STANDARDS 
1.4 Over the years, Standards have started playing a pivotal role in the nation’s 
competitiveness. Ever since fiscal barriers for international trade have started getting 
successively lowered and border taxes increasingly harmonized, technical barriers to 

 
 
10 
trade have assumed greater importance.  For example, the World Trade Organisation 
agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade encourages all member countries to adopt 
International St andards and also move towards mutual recognition of their certification 
systems. WTO guidelines also provide that enforcement of standards should have 
uniform application both for domestic industry and for imported items. In other words, 
standards cannot be enforced selectively only for imported items for protecting domestic 
industry. Establishment and enforcement of Standards, therefore, has become more and 
more important for the competitiveness of industry and consequently, that of a nation. In 
view of th e increasing significance of Standards and conformity assessment systems in 
world trade, it is also essential that the Bureau of Indian Standards re -orients itself to 
adequately address the future challenges as the National Standards Body of India.   
 
1.5 Apart from international trade, Standards are also fundamental to consumer 
protection. They are the signaling mechanism to indicate what a consumer can expect 
from a product or service. They empower the consumer to seek redressal of his 
grievances on this account.  For both these reasons, viz. international trade and industry 
competitiveness as well as consumer protection, Standards have become a very 
important ingredient in supportive infrastructure of a country. Over a time the ISI Mark 
has achieved certain respectability in terms of adherence to established quality.   
 
C. BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
 
1.6 The Bureau of Indian Standards Act contained the legal framework and provisions 
for the establishment of the Bureau for the harmonious development of the activities of 

 
 
11 
standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and processes. According to 
the Department of Consumer Affairs, in order to attain this, the Bureau would strive: 
 
a) To provide harmonious development of standards. 
b) To satisfy th e customer’s need for quality and safety of goods and services 
through operation of Certification Schemes of BIS.  
c) To generate awareness on standards, standard mark, and safety & quality of 
products through Seminars, Awareness Programmes and Publicity Campaigns. 
d) To provide effective and timely service  
 
1.7 The Bureau is a body corporate consisting of 25 members representing both 
Central and State governments, Members of Parliament, industry, scientific and research 
institutions, consumer organization s and professional bodies with Minister in charge of 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution as its President and with 
Minister of State or a Deputy Minister of Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution as its Vice-President. 
 
1.8 Bureau of Indian Standards is a statutory organization functioning under the 
administrative control of Department of Consumer Affairs, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution, Government of India. It has six advisory committee s to 
provide guidance and one Executive Committee (EC) with DG as Chairman, to which 
Bureau has delegated powers for smooth functioning of BIS. 
 
1.9 The Bureau has its Headquarters in New Delhi.  It has a network of 05 regional 
offices, 34 branch offices, 04 inspection offices and 08 laboratories which act as effective 
link between BIS, government, industry and consumers. The key activities of BIS are as 
follows: 
 
1. Standardization 
2. Certification 
a) Product 

 
 
12 
b) Management Systems 
c) Hallmarking 
3. Laboratory 
4. Sales of Indian Standards and other publications 
5. International Activities 
6. Consumer Related Activities  
7. Promotional Activities and Publicity 
8. Training Services 
9. Information services 
10. Finance & Accounts 
 
D.   PERFORMANCE & ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
1.10 BIS, as a statutory body has completed 25 years of functioning. It has made 
impact not only at national level but also at international level. There are at present 
18901 Indian Standards in force covering products, code of practice, test methods, 
guidelines etc. BIS is formulating standards to safeguard health & safety issues and to 
keep pace with technological advancements in order to protect Indian consumers and 
help industry to upgrade quality. In this era of WTO/TBT, the national standards also 
play a vital role, because the technical regulations for mandatory compliance are based 
on these national standards.  
 
1.11 BIS has been an active member of International Organizations namely: 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and Interna tional Electro -technical 
Commission (IEC).  BIS holds secretariat of some of the important ISO Committees 
which are of trade interest to India.  As member of ISO, BIS takes active part in the 
development of International Standards with a view to protect th e interests of Indian 
trade & industry. BIS is currently a participating member in 302 technical committees/ 
subcommittees of ISO and 68 technical committees/ subcommittees of IEC 
 
The quantitative achievements of BIS are given below: 

 
 
13 
Sl. 
No. 
Activity Achievement 
1. Standards Formulations 
   a Indian Standards (IS) in force 18901 
   b Standards harmonized with 
international standards 
84% (where corresponding 
Indian Standard exists) 
2 Certification (No. of operative licences) 
   a Product Certification (including 253 
licences of foreign manufacturers) 
25932 
   b System Certification 1198 
   c Hallmarking 10910 
 
E. SALIENT FEATURES OF BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS ACT 
  
1.12 Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 (63 of 1986) received the assent of 
President of India on 23 rd December 1986 and came into force on 01 Apr 1987.  The Act 
has the mandate for establishment of a Bureau for the harmonious development of the 
activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and for matter 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 The Act empowers Bureau to grant, renew, suspend or cancel a licence for use of 
Standard Mark as determined by the regulations. The Standard Mark of the 
Bureau is popularly known `ISI’ Mark.  
 The functions of the Burea u inter -alia include to establish, publish and promote 
Indian Standards in relation to any article or process; establish, maintain and 
recognize laboratories for the purpose of standardization and quality control, to 
undertake research for the formulation of Indian Standards in the interests of 

 
 
14 
consumers and manufacturers, appointment of agents in India or outside for the 
inspection and testing. 
 
F. SHORTCOMINGS IN THE BIS ACT, 1986  
 
1.13 Explaining the shortcomings in the BIS Act, 1986, the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution stated in a written note as under:- 
 
 The Preamble of the Act does not have clear mandate for BIS being termed as a 
national standards body (NSB), despite the fact it functions as NSB.   
 Section 14 also restricts Central Government to notify only those article or process 
as given in Schedule of Industries (Development & Regulations) Act, 1951, under 
compulsory regime.   
 There are no specific provisions for `Hallmarking’ of precious metal 
article/jewellery.   
 There is a felt need to have an alternate system to product certification which may 
be simpler and based on self declaration of conformity.  
  There is no flexibility in the Act as it exists, to provide for such scheme and to 
provide registration instead of licencing.   
 Bureau has powers to appoint agents for inspection and testing, but not for 
collection of samples.  The existing provisions of Act do not explicitly provide 
power to carry out survey of any article or process relating to Indian Standards, 
which is quiet essential for ensuring quality. 
 
G. NEED FOR AMENDMENT OF THE ACT:-  
 

 
 
15 
1.14 Since its enactment in 1986, the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 has not 
been amended.  Historically, the primary focus of establishment of standards has been 
on industr ial products. Gradually, and particularly with the introduction of ISO -9000 
regime, standards for “processes” have also become important.  The “processes” are 
both for the manufacturing as well as for the services sector, covering Indian Standards 
IS/ISO 9001, IS/ISO14001, IS/ISO 22000, IS/ISO 27001, IS: 15700 etc.  
 
1.15 Section 14 of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act gives the power to the Central 
Government to notify any article or process of any scheduled industry which shall 
conform to the Indian Standard and direct the use of the Standard Mark under licence as 
compulsory on such article or process.  Thus, unless a product or process finds an entry 
in the first schedule of the Industries (Development and Regulation), Act, 1951, the 
Government does not have any power under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act to 
make licensing compulsory for such an article or process. In the interest of public health, 
safety and environmental considerations it has become necessary to bring under 
mandatory certification, ce rtain articles  (like helmets, toys, etc) not included in the first 
schedule of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951.  It is therefore 
proposed to de -link the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Industries 
(Development and Regulat ion) Act, 1951 so as to empower the Government to bring 
under compulsory certification regime any article and/or ‘process’ which it considers 
necessary, in public interest.  
 
1.16 Further, with regard to establishment of standards, the focus has always bee n on 
the “producer” of product or service and not on its “dispenser” or the seller.  However, 
there have been requirements where the dispenser, or retailer also needed to be brought 

 
 
16 
under the standardisation regime. This is particularly so in respect of je welers selling 
gold and silver jewellery where, for protecting consumers from unscrupulous jewelers, 
need has been felt for enforcement of “Hallmark” on jewellery articles sold in the country. 
The need for enforcement of “Hallmark” has also been emphasized  by the Department 
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee in its various reports .  Enforcement of 
mandatory hallmarking has not been possible due to absence of an enabling provision in 
the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986. It is therefore proposed to  amend the said Act 
to incorporate an enabling provision for mandatory hallmarking of precious metal articles. 
This will also facilitate India’s accession to the Convention on Control and Marking of 
Precious Metals (popularly known as Vienna Convention 197 2) that will give a boost to 
export of jewellery articles to member countries of the Convention, apart from creation of 
internationally recognized hallmarking centres and availability of quality products for 
consumers within the country.  
 
H. THE PROPOSED AMENDMENTS: 
1.17 According to the Statement of objects and reasons of the Bill, the Bill seeks to 
amend the BIS Act, 1986, inter-alia  
 (a) to amend the long title of the said Act to name the Bureau of Indian Standards 
to be  a national standards body and  to include the articles, processes and services in 
addition to goods for the purpose of marking and quality certification; 
 (b) to amend section 11 of BIS Act, 1986 so as to allow  any person who is a 
registered user of a self declaration of conformity to  display or make self declaration on 
an article or process that his article conforms to the Indian Standards  or make  a public 
claim through advertisements, sales, promotion  leaflets, price lists or like that his article 
conforms to the Indian Standards; 
 (c)   to amend section 14 of BIS Act, 1986 so as to empower the Central 
Government, after consulting the Bureau, by order published in the Official Gazette, to 
notify that any article or process of any industry (other than an article or process meant 

 
 
17 
for export) shall conform to the Indian Standard and direct that the use of the Standard 
Mark under a licence shall be compulsory; 
 (d) to insert a new section 14A in BIS Act, 1986 so as to empower the Central 
Government, after consulting the Bureau, by order  published in the Official Gazette, to 
make it compulsory for the jewellers selling the precious metal articles in such 
geographical area and having such minimum turnover as may be specified by regulation 
to use Hallmark under a licence and that such article conforms to the Indian Standards; 
 (e) to insert a new section 14B in BIS Act, 1986 so as to,— 
 (i)  empower the Central Government, after consulting the Bureau, by order 
published in the Official Gazette, to notify that any article or process shall con form 
to the Indian Standard and to direct registration or grant self declaration of 
conformity with the Bureau as compulsory;  
 (ii)  provide an option to any person in respect of any article or process 
notified by the Central Government for making  regist ration or grant of self 
declaration of conformity with, or taking licence, from the Bureau; 
 (iii) provide that when an article or process notified for registration or in 
respect of which self declaration of conformity has been granted is subsequently 
notified, which shall conform to the Indian Standard, then, in addition to such 
registration or self declaration of conformity, it shall be compulsory to obtain a 
licence for such article or process in place of such registration or self declaration 
of conformity; 
 (f) to insert a new section 14C in BIS Act, 1986 so as to empower the Central 
Government to authorise any authority to be enforcement authority for enforcement of 
orders issued under section 14 or section  14A or section 14B  of that Act; 
 (g) to amen d section 15 of BIS Act, 1986 so as to empower the Bureau to grant, 
renew, suspend or cancel registration or grant self declaration of conformity; 
 (h) to amend section 33 of the BIS Act, 1986 so as to,— 
  (i) provide for enhancement of quantum of fine fro m rupees fifty thousand 
to rupees two lakhs for contravention of section 11 or section 12 or section 14 or 
section 14A or section 14B or section 15 of the BIS Act, 1986; 
  (ii) provide for compounding of the offences punishable with fine except 
when a pers on has committed offence of similar nature for the second time or 
thereafter on which a similar offence committed by him has been compounded. 

 
 
18 
 
1.18 The Department has stated that the main objectives of the proposed amendments 
are as under: 
 (i) to remove the restrictions imposed by reference to ‘Scheduled Industry’  in 
section 14 of the  Bureau of Indian Standards Act by including articles and 
process of any industry so as to empower the Government to bring under 
compulsory certification regime any article or process which it considers 
necessary from point of view of health, safety, environment, prevention of 
deceptive practices and security ;   
(ii) to  allow  introduction of registration to the relevant Indian Standard as an 
alternative mechanism to the co mpulsory  certification regime, in order to 
facilitate the growth of emerging technologies, particularly  in the areas of  
information technology, bio technology,  nano  technology, etc.  This will 
protect industries and consumers from spurious and sub -standards 
imports;   
(iii) to facilitate  introduction of  Hallmarking of precious metal articles under 
compulsory certification regime in different   parts of the country in order to 
protect the interest of consumers from  exploitation by unscrupulous 
jewelers by ensuring necessary mechanism in place;   
 (iv) to strengthen the penal provisions for better and effective compliance with 
the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards  Act, 1986. 
(v) compounding of offences under sections 11, 12, 14, 14A, 14B or  15 of the 
Act . 
1.19 The Committee enquired upto what extent, the proposed amendments be 
beneficial to the Bureau, State Governments/UT Administrations or the Central 
Government, other stakeholders and Consumers, the Ministry stated that this 
amendment Bi ll will be mainly beneficial to the consumers. For example, in case of 
compulsory hallmarking of precious metal articles, purchasers (consumers) of such 
articles will be greatly benefitted as they will not be cheated and will be getting the gold 
jewellery of the purity declared by the jewellers. Similarly, some countries may be 
dumping sub -standard products, which are relatively cheaper (for example, Electronic 
and IT products, mobile telephones, batteries for the mobile telephones, digital blood 
pressure measuring equipment, decorative lights, toys etc) to India. Such products may 

 
 
19 
adversely affect the health and safety of consumers. With a view to protect consumers 
from receipt of sub standard products and taking into consideration the demands from 
different industries (and particularly the IT industry) that instead of taking licence from 
BIS by the process mentioned above, they may be permitted to declare themselves that 
their product 'conforms to the relevant Indian Standard', another process for checking 
conformity of the product through self declaration has been introduced in the proposed 
amendment. This will protect consumers from spurious and sub -standard domestic or 
imported products.  
 
1.20 Therefore, the only way left out to stop import of sub standa rd products in the 
present era of non -tariff measures is to enforce technical regulations, that is, only those 
products would be allowed to be imported to our country, which as a minimum, meet laid 
down national standards. To check whether the products con form to the relevant Indian 
Standards, BIS has been operating third party product certifications activity as per which 
licence is granted to manufacturer if he is found competent to product products to 
conform to Indian Standards. There have been demands f rom different industries  (and 
particularly the IT industry) that instead of taking licence from BIS by the process 
mentioned above, they may be permitted to declare themselves that their product 
'conforms to the relevant Indian Standard'. Therefore, with a view to include another 
process for checking conformity of the product through self declaration, amendment has 
been proposed. This is likely to help the domestic industry to facilitate their growth in 
emerging technologies, particularly in the areas of i nformation technology, bio 
technology, nano technology, etc. This will protect industries and consumers from 
spurious and sub-standards imports.  
1.21 There are more than 850 enforcement cases pending in various courts against 
various persons for misuse of BIS standard mark. This is taking considerable time of BIS 
officers attending courts. A proposal has been made in the amendment to BIS Act to 
strengthen the penal provisions for better and effective compliance with the provisions of 
the Bureau of Indian S tandards Act, 1986 and also to provide for compounding of the 
offence punishable with fine. This will be beneficial to BIS as well as to the industry. 
Further, for ensuring that the licensee continually produces the products as per relevant 
Indian Standards, his market samples are procured by BIS technical officers for testing in 
BIS laboratories. This collection of market samples takes considerable time of BIS 

 
 
20 
officers. Therefore, it has been proposed in the amendment to this Act that Bureau shall 
also be given powers to appoint agents for collection of market samples. If this proposed 
amendment is accepted, it would save considerable time of BIS officers and thus, will be 
beneficial to the Bureau.  
 
1.22 When the Committee enquired how the Amendment Bill w ill affect the working of 
the Bureau and its stakeholders, the Ministry informed that with the introduction of new 
sections 14 A (enabling compulsory hallmarking) and 14B (compulsory registration), the 
workload for the Bureau would increase significantly. The Department of Electronics and 
IT (Diety), Central Government has already notified 15 electronic and IT products under 
compulsory registration, as per which the manufacturers (domestic and foreign) of these 
products have to get registration from Bureau before they can sell their products in 
India. During discussions in various meetings with Deity/manufacturers, it is observed 
that there may be about 5000 registrations for these 15 electronic and IT products. 
Similarly, there may be other Central Governme nt Departments, which may consider 
bringing the products under their control under compulsory registration scheme of BIS. 
With compulsory gold hallmarking, all the jewellers in the specified locations and having 
specified minimum turnover would approach BI S for licence. Additionally, the testing 
centres (Assaying and Hallmarking Centres) for testing purity of gold jewellery and 
articles would also increase and they would require recognition of BIS before they can 
test the purity of the gold jewellery sent b y the jewellers. Therefore, BIS would require 
additional human resources as well as other physical resources depending upon the 
quantum of work likely to come when amendment bill to BIS Act is passed.  
 
1.23 In reply to a query as to what will be the infra structure required after the 
Amendment Bill comes into effect, the Department stated as under:- 
  'It is expected that one technical office and one staff would be able 
to handle registrations for about 150 manufacturers. Further, the grant of 
registration is proposed to be decentralized through 34 Branch Offices of 
BIS and one department at Headquarters for foreign manufacturers. 
Adequate physical infrastructure and IT equipment would be required.  

 
 
21 
  In implementing amendment Bill making it compulsory for 
Hallmarking by the Jewellers as per proposed Section 14 (a), - resources, 
particularly 
  (i) Manpower would be required for activities, such as grant of 
licence, monitoring of the licensed jewellers, carrying out market survey, 
collection of samples of Hallmarked Items, their testing and enforcement of 
the provisions of the Act for compulsory Certification for Hallmarking.  
  (ii) Further, infrastructure in terms of creation of more numbers 
of Assaying and Hallmarking Centres will be required in order to mee t the 
increased demand for Hallmarking as the number of licensed jewellers will 
increase substantially.  
 
1.24 The Committee also enquired about the role of the State Governments in the 
implementation of standards of the Bureau of Indian Standards and how the proposed 
amendment will affect the State Governments, the Ministry informed that the BIS 
Product Certification Scheme is voluntary in nature. However, as per Section 14 of BIS 
Act, the Central Government in the public interest can notify any product of  the 
scheduled industry which shall conform to the Indian Standard and shall compulsory 
have BIS Standard Mark after obtaining a licence from BIS. Additionally, there are other 
statutory and/or regulatory provisions of various Government Departments (like FSSAI 
regulations, GAS cylinder rules, Atomic energy regulation board etc) as per which BIS 
Standard Mark on some products is mandatory. As on date, 90 such products (like 
packaged drinking water, cement, electrical appliances, pneumatic tyres and tubes, L PG 
cylinders, milk powder, etc.) have been notified by various Central Government 
Ministries/Departments. These notifications are normally issued in a document called 
'Quality Control Order' as per, which, a manufacturer of such products has to use BIS 
Standard mark on the products after obtaining license from BIS. As such, no 
manufacturer can manufacture these products without BIS standard mark on them. 
Similarly, these products cannot be imported, sold, distributed unless they have BIS 
standard mark. The enforcement authority for implementation of such quality control 
orders normally rests with the State Governments/UT Administrations. Additionally, if 
some manufacturer is using BIS standard mark without obtaining license from Bureau 

 
 
22 
(misusing BIS Standard mark), and thus violating provisions of BIS Act; in that case also 
Bureau takes the help of State Governments/UT Administrations to take action against 
such manufacturers.  
 
1.25 The Committee was further informed that in the proposed amendments to BIS 
Act, a new Section 14 B has been introduced, as per which the Central Government in 
the public interest can notify any product which shall conform to the Indian Standard 
and shall compulsory use the words 'self declaration -conforming to IS…'on such 
products, after obtaining registration from BIS. If this amendment is accepted and 
thereafter some Central Government ministries/departments notify the products under 
this section, then the enforcement authority of such orders would normally be with the 
State Governments/UT Administrations. Similarly, if hallmarking on precious metal (for 
example, gold) articles is made compulsory under proposed Section 14 A of BIS Act, 
then the enforcement authority will have to ensure that the jewellers located in the 
specified geographical areas and having specified minimum turnover (as determined by 
the regulations – to be prepared subsequently) shall compulsorily sell only hallmarked 
precious metal articles (for example, gold jewellery) after obtaining licence from Bureau. 
The enforcement authority would be defined in the notification (Quality Control Order), 
which normally will be with the State Governments/UT Administrations. Thus, the 
workload of State Governments/UT Administrations will increase.  
 
PROCESS OF CONSULTATION HELD BY THE MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, 
FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION WHILE DRAFTING THE BILL 
 
1.26 The Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) invited comments from various Ministries/Departments on the dr aft 
note for Cabinet for Amendment to Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986. The Ministry 
received comments from the following Ministries/Departments:- 
  (i) Agriculture and Cooperation (ii) Commerce (iii) Industrial Policy and 
Promotion (iv) Health and Fam ily Welfare (v) Information Technology (vi) Finance (vii) 
Posts (viii) Information and Broadcasting. The suggestions/views of the Ministries were 
considered and the relevant clauses were modified suitably and appropriate changes 
made in the draft bill before submitting it to the Cabinet for its approval.  

 
 
23 
 The Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution received the 
approval of the Cabinet and then presented the Bill in the Parliament on 3rd May, 2012.  
 
I. PROCESS OF CONSULTATION HELD BY THE  COMMITTEE WHILE 
 EXAMINING THE SAID LEGISLATION 
 
1.27 The Bureau of India Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2012 (Appendix II) was 
introduced in Lok Sabha on 3rd May, 2012 which was referred to the Standing Committee 
on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distrib ution by Hon’ble Speaker for examination 
and report on 28 th May, 2012 as per Rule 331 (E) (1) (b) of the ‘Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha’. The Committee accordingly, obtained written 
information on various issues provided in the Bi ll from the Nodal Ministry i.e. Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). The 
Committee were briefed by the representatives of the Department of Consumer Affairs 
on the various aspects of the Bill at a sub sequent sitting of the Committee. The 
Committee also took oral evidence of the representatives of the Nodal Ministry and BIS.  
 
1.28  The Committee decided to invite the views of experts, organizations, individuals 
and other stakeholders through print and electronic media including the Lok Sabha TV. 
In order to obtain views/suggestions from various Institutions/ Individuals/ Stakeholders/ 
Experts etc. a Press Advertisement was issued and in response thereto the Committee 
received a number of letters/Memoran da containing their views. Accordingly, as decided 
by the Committee, selected experts/representatives of associations/ trade federations 
who have direct bearing on the Bill deposed before the Committee to share their 
views/suggestions on the various proposed amendments to the Bill, namely:  
(a) VOICE  
(b) Federation of Industries of India (FII) 
(c) Confederation of Indian Steel Producers Association (CISPA) 
(d) Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) 
(e) Consumers Association of India (CAI) 
(f) All India Gems & Jewellery Trade Federation (GJF) 
(g) Mumbai Grahak Panchayat 
(h) Akhil Bharatiya Grahak Panchayat 

 
 
24 
 
 The aforesaid experts and stakeholders raised few reservations on some of the 
provisions of the Bill and suggested some modifications/amendments.  
 
1.29 Since the Quality Control Order s to include a particular product in the mandatory 
list of products is to be issued by the Central Ministries and their enforcement authorities 
would normally be the State Governments/UT Administrations, the Committee also 
invited comments/suggestions of t he various concerned Central Government Ministries, 
State Governments/UT Administrations. Consequently, the Committee received 
responses from various Central Government Ministries viz. Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry, Agriculture, Chemicals and Fertilizers, Road Transport & Highways, Science and 
Technology, Drinking water & Sanitation, Finance, Micro Small and Medium Enterprises, 
Textiles, Steel, Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises, Food Processing Industries and 
State Governments/UT Administrations viz . Assam, Rajasthan, Mizoram, Chhattisgarh, 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab and Nagaland.   
  
1.30 The Committee desired to know whether there was a possibility of duplicacy of work 
in case of formulation of standards by BIS a nd other mandated authorities such as Food 
Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), the Department in a written 
communication stated that BIS has so far formulated around 1000 Indian Standards in the 
area of food quality and safety, which include p roduct specifications, methods of test, 
codes of practice and terminology. Indian Standards are formulated by a process of 
consultation with consumers, regulatory and other Government bodies, industry, scientists, 
technologists and testing organizations th rough duly constituted technical committees. 
Indian Standards on food products are comprehensive documents covering requirements, 
sampling plans, methods of tests etc. whereas FSSAI regulations cover mandatory 
requirements for food products. The standards laid down by BIS and FSSAI regarding food 
articles have been mostly harmonized. Differences, if any, are resolved in technical 
committees where experts from both organizations participate. In unresolved cases 
concerning food articles, finally the standards laid down by FSSAI will prevail.  
  
1.31 The Committee also invited comments on the views expressed by some 
organizations that other Accredited Certification Bodies such as NABL, Quality Council of 

 
 
25 
India, Food Safety& Standards Authority of India, etc, ma y be allowed to carry out the 
implementation of National Standards. The Ministry in reply stated as under:- 
 
 “BIS is a ‘certification body’ which certifies quality standards of products and 
services. Bodies like Quality Council of India (QCI) and NABL are  Accreditation 
bodies that give accreditation/recognition to quality ‘Laboratories’. As regards 
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) it is mandated under the 
Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 to ‘fix food standards and regulate – 
monitor the manufacturing, import, processing, distribution and sell of food so as 
to ensure safe and wholesome food for the people'. Both BIS and FSSAI will 
function harmoniously to protect consumer interests.” 
 The Committee would deal with various provisions of  the Bill which need comments 
in the subsequent chapters.  
 
  
 
 

 
 
26 
1.32 The Committee note that the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 was 
enacted to provide for the establishment of a Bureau for the harmonious 
development of the activities of Standardizat ion, marking the quality certification 
of goods, granting, renewing or cancelling the licence for the use of Standards 
Mark in order to promote International trade of Indian goods and protect the Indian 
consumers. Despite the Indian economy going under lib eralization, privatization 
and globalization wherein  the markets are opened for foreign goods and the 
Indian goods facing international competition, the BIS Act, 1986 has never been 
amended to adopt to the challenges of the global trade. The Committee, th erefore, 
feel that the Bureau of Indian Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2012, which seeks to 
proclaim the Bureau of Indian Standards as the National Standards Body, de -
linking the BIS Act from the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 
which restricted the Bureau from bringing important products and services under 
compulsory certification scheme, introduction of the provision for self -declaration 
of conformity and giving more teeth to the Bureau by strengthening the penal 
provisions of the BIS Act, i s the need of the hour. The Committee observe that the 
Government had held consultations for finalizing the Amendment Bill with various 
Central Government Departments/Ministries viz. the Department of Industrial 
Policy and Promotion, Ministry of Commerce, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Ministry of Agriculture & Co-operation and Department of Information and 
Technology etc. who more or less have no objection to the provisions of the Bill. 
While examining the Bill, the Parliamentary Standing Committee  on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution also invited views/comments of various 
Central Ministries/ Departments as well as State Governments/UTs and received 
comments from some of them who have by and large agreed to the various 
provisions of the  Bill. The Committee also held wide consultations with the 
experts, Organizations and other Stakeholders. In these consultations, few 
reservations on some of the provisions of the Bill were also expressed which will 
be discussed subsequently in relevant ch apters of the report. Keeping in view the 
importance of the Bill which aims at ensuring standard quality of products being 
manufactured and traded, thus benefiting the consumers at large, the Committee 
recommend the passage of the Bureau of Indian Standard s (Amendment) Bill, 

 
 
27 
2012 subject to their observations/recommendations contained in the subsequent 
chapters of the Report.  
1.33 The Committee note that the BIS has a network of 5 regional offices, 34 
branch offices, 4 inspection offices and 8 laboratories  which act as an effective 
link between BIS, Government, Industry and consumers. The Committee also note 
that with the introduction of new sections 14A and 14 B, the workload for the 
Bureau would increase significantly. For example, the Department of Elect ronics 
and IT has already notified 15 electronic and IT products under compulsory 
registration and expect about 5000 registrations for these products alone. 
Similarly, there will be other Central Government Departments which may bring 
their products under compulsory registration scheme of BIS. Therefore, BIS would 
require additional human resources and infrastructure depending on the increase 
in the quantum of work. The Committee are of the view that the Bureau is not 
equipped with enough manpower resources , infrastructure, laboratories and 
skilled manpower. The Committee have been informed that bodies like Quality 
Council of India (QCI) and National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration 
Laboratories (NABL) are accreditation bodies that give accreditation/recognition of 
quality 'Laboratories'. The Committee recommend that for better implementation of 
the Act and enforcement of mandatory standards, the Bureau should involve other 
organizations/institutions such as Quality Council of India and other a ccreditation 
boards to carry out surveys, inspection and testing the quality of the goods, etc. 
This will reduce the workload of the Bureau thus helping it focus on its prime 
motive of standards formulation. Such decentralization of functions will also 
imbibe faith and confidence in the minds of the industry pertaining to 
transparency of its operations. The Committee also recommend that the Bureau 
should be strengthened in terms of manpower, technical expertise and testing 

 
 
28 
facilities like laboratories. Bure au should open more regional centers covering all 
the districts and specially the industrial zones and equip them with the latest 
technological advanced facilities and equipments. Further, the BIS website should 
be regularly updated and made more user frie ndly enabling the 
consumers/manufacturers to access information and download forms etc. for their 
use. The Committee also recommend that the Bureau may invigorate its working 
and focus on ground level implementation so that the provisions of the Bureau of 
Indian Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2012 are executed as per the spirit of the Bill. 
 
 

 
 
29 
1.34 The Committee note that neither the BIS Act, 1986 nor the amendment Bill 
provide for a direct redressal forum, like a Tribunal to deal with complaints relating 
to f aulty execution of the Bill. In the absence of such a redressal forum, 
interpretation or application of these provisions of the Bill for fair implementation 
of the proposed mechanism would be a great challenge. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend for setting up of such a redressal forum or tribunal under the 
Bureau of Indian Standards which may exclusively deal with the complaints and 
issues pertaining to the misinterpretation or faulty execution of the provisions of 
the Bureau of Indian Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2012.  

 
 
30 
1.35 The Committee note that at present BIS has the mandate to formulate 
standards on any product or services for the entire country. The Committee are 
informed that Indian Standards are formulated by a process of consultation wit h 
consumers, regulatory and other Government bodies, industry, scientists, 
technologists and testing organizations through duly constituted technical 
committees and Indian Standards on food products are comprehensive 
documents covering requirements, sampli ng plans, methods of test, etc. The 
Committee also note that BIS has so far formulated around 1000 Indian Standards 
in the area of food quality and safety, which include product specifications, 
methods of test, codes of practice and terminology. The Commit tee further note 
that the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has been created in 
2006 to specifically deal with food sector as a specialized agency. It is mandated 
under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 to 'fix food standards and r egulate 
– monitor the manufacturing, import, processing, distribution and sale of food so 
as to ensure safe and wholesome food for the people'. Both BIS and FSSAI 
function harmoniously to protect consumer interests. The Committee are of the 
view that the s tandards laid down by BIS and FSSAI regarding food articles have 
been mostly harmonized. The Committee recommend that differences, if any, 
should be resolved in technical committees where experts from both organizations 
participate and in unresolved cases concerning food articles, finally the standards 
laid down by FSSAI should prevail.  

 
 
31 
1.36 The Committee also note that implementation of mandatory standards is 
mostly done by officers appointed by State Governments or by higher officers in 
the concerned Ce ntral Ministries. However, there does not exist any monitoring 
mechanism on the part of BIS, resulting in inferior quality products being offered 
to the consumers inspite of formulation and existence of standards, voluntary and 
mandatory. The Committee are  of the view that it should be the endeavour of the 
Government to protect the consumers' interest, health and safety, as well as 
support Indian manufactures, small, medium and large to be competitive in 
serving the Indian as well as global markets. This ca n be done only by formulating 
a well-devised policy on standards which should be properly implemented with an 
effective monitoring mechanism. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Bill should provide for mass and regular market checks by BIS and the  
implementation of standards should not be left to the States only.   

 
 
32 
 
CHAPTER II 
SECTION/CLAUSE-WISE ANALYSIS OF THE BILL 
 
A. DEFINITIONS 
The Clause (3) proposes to amend Section 2 of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 1986 containing various definitions which are as under:- 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - 
a. "article" means (as respects standardisation and marking) any substance, artificial 
or natural, or partly artificial or partly natural, whether raw or partly or wholly 
processed or manufactured; 
b. "Bureau" means the Bureau of Indian Standards established under section 3 ; 
c. "consumer" means a consumer of any article or process ; 
d. "covering" includes any stopper, cask, bottle, vessel, box, crate, cover, capsule, 
case, frame, wrapper or other container; 
e. "Executive Committee" means the Executive Committee constituted under sub -
section (1) of section 4; 
f. "Fund" means the Fund constituted under section 18; 
g. "Indian Standard" means the standard (including any tentative or provisional 
standard) established and published by the Bureau, in relation to any article or 
process indicative of the quality and specification of such article or process and 
includes -  
i. any standard recognised by the Bureau under clause (b) of section 10; and 
ii. any standard e stablished and published, or recognised, by the Indian 
Standards Institution and which is in force immediately before the date of 
establishment of the Bureau; 
h. "Indian Standards Institution" means the Indian Standards Institution set up under 
the Resolution  of the Government of India in the late, Department of Industries 
and Supplies No. 1 Std.(4)/45, dated the 3rd day of September, 1946, and 
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860; 
i. "inspecting officer" means an inspecting officer appointed under section 25; 
j. "Licence" means a licence granted under section 15 to use the Indian Standards 
Certification Mark in relation to any article or process which conforms to the Indian 
Standard and includes any licence granted under the Indian Standards Institu tion 
(Certification Marks) Act, 1952 and is in force immediately before the date of 
establishment of the Bureau; 
k. "manufacturer" means the manufacturer of any article or process; 
l. "mark" includes a device, brand, heading, label, ticket,. pictorial representa tion, 
name, signature, word, letter or numeral or any combination thereof; 
m. "member" means a member of the Bureau; 
n. "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
o. "Process" includes any practice, treatment and mode of manufacture of any 
article; 

 
 
33 
p. "registering authority" means any authority competent under any law for the time 
being in force to register any company, firm or other body of persons, or any trade 
mark or design, or to grant a patent; 
q. "regulations" means regulations made by the Bureau under this Act; 
r. "rules" means rules made by the Central Government under this Act; 
s. "Specification" means a description of an article or process as far as practicable 
by reference to its nature, quality, strength, purity, composition, quantity, 
dimensions, weight, grade, durability, origin, age, material, mode of manufacture 
or other characteristics to distinguish it from any other article or process; 
t. "Standard Mark" means the Bureau of Indian Standards Certification Mark 
specified by the Bureau to represent a particular Indian Standard and also 
includes any Indian Standards Institution Certification Mark specified by the Indian 
Standards Institution; 
u. "trade mark" means a mark used or proposed to be used in relation to goods for 
the purpose of indicating, or s o as to indicate, a connection in the course of trade 
between the goods and some person having the right, either as proprietor or as 
registered user, to use the mark, whether with or without any indication of the 
identity of that person; 
v. an article is said  to be marked with a Standard Mark if the article itself is marked 
with a Standard Mark or any covering containing, or label attached to, such article 
is so marked. 
 
2.2 The Government under Clause 3 have proposed to add new sub sections under 
the existing Section 2 for the purpose of defining ‘hallmark, ‘jeweller’, ‘precious metals’, 
‘precious metal articles’, ‘registration’, ‘registered user’ and ‘self declaration of conformity’ 
which is as under:- 
 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,—  
(i) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—  
'(fa) "Hallmark" means the Bureau of Indian Standards Certification Mark 
specified by the Bureau to represent a particular Indian Standard in relation 
to precious metal article;';   
(ii) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—  
'(ia) "jeweller" means a person selling precious metal articles;'; 
(iii) after clause (m), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
'(ma) "precious metal" means gold, silver, platinum and palladium;  
(mb) "precious metal article" means any article made entirely or in part   
from precious metals or their alloys;';  
(iv) after clause (p), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—  
'(pa) "registration" means the registration granted by the Bureau for 
self declaration under sub-section (1A) of section 15; 

 
 
34 
 
(pb) "registered user" means a person who has been granted registration 
or self declaration of conformity by the Bureau under sub-section (1A) of 
section 15;  
(pc) "self declaration of conformity" means a declaration by a 
manufacturer of his product in conformity with the Indian Standard;';   
(v) in clause (t), for the words "includes any", the words "includes Hallmark or   
the mark of an international body or institution or any" shall be substituted. 
 
 
Summary of views/suggestions placed before the Committee 
 
2.3 Ministry of Commerce (Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion)  – 
'Precious metal articles' means any article made entirely or in part from precious metal or 
their alloys incl uding gems studded jewellery made from precious metal because 
diamond/stone studded jewellery made from precious metal is becoming more popular 
and by inclusion of such items the scope and coverage will be substantially enlarged. 
 
Department of Information Technology (DIT): 
 
i. 'Registration' be defined as Registration of goods granted by an agency/ 
Organisation notified by the Government as a part of the scheme notified under 
article 14 B of this Act. 
ii. The industry has all along been arguing in favour of open system   and any control 
by a single agency creates a doubt in the mind of industry.  Thus, in order to take 
the industry along and in line with the international practice it is proposed to use 
liberalized – decentralized approach. 
iii. Definition of ‘Standard mark’ amended to include hallmark. The Standard Mark 
shall also include any other Mark that Govt. may notify in consultation with the 
Bureau or otherwise under scheme notified by BIS/Govt. 
 
     With the proposed amendment of BIS, it would be possible to e volve/grant a 
‘Standard Mark’ only for Licensing by BIS. Provision for evolving/ granting a “Standard 
Mark” for Registration or for depicting Compliance to Standards even with/ without 
registration is also needed. 
 

 
 
35 
Consumer Association of India – Jeweller means a person selling or manufacturing or 
otherwise dealing in precious metal articles.  
  
VOICE – The definition of “services” should be incorporated because BIS has already 
started certifying services standards of ISO. Also the definition of jeweler sho uld be 
amended as under:  
 Section 2 (ia) “jeweller” means person making, selling precious metal articles. 
                (ma) Add the word “diamond” 
 
Mumbai Grahak Panchayat  have suggested that the word “service(s)” needs to be 
defined also the definition of (ia) “jeweller” means a person selling precious metal articles 
should be amended to be read as (ia)”jeweller” means a person manufacturing and/or 
repairing and/or selling precious metal articles. 
 
 
2.4 In response to the above suggestions made by the Department of Industrial Policy 
and Promotion, the Department of Consumer Affairs replied that since any article made 
entirely or in part from precious metals has been defined as a ‘precious metal article’, 
gems studded jewellery made from precious metal like diamond would also be covered 
within the purview of the definition.  Modification of the definition is therefore not found 
necessary. This definition has been taken from the Indian Standard. 
 
2.5 To the suggestions made by Department of Information Te chnology (DIT), the 
Department of Consumer Affairs replied as follows:- 
i. Registration is a scheme parallel to the existing statutory core licencing function of 
BIS.  It’s basic objective is to allow self declaration by manufacturers, of 
conformance of their  products to the relevant Indian Standard(s) so that they are 
freed from the delay and costs involved in obtaining a licence.  On par with the 
situation prevailing in licencing where no agency other than BIS grants licenses, 
registration of manufacturers s hould also be confined to BIS, the statutory 
authority concerned.   
ii. Multiplicity of agencies for the purpose of registration under BIS Act is likely to 
result in lack of uniformity and difficulties in enforcement of compliance with the 
Standards and theref ore not considered feasible. Orders in respect of articles to 

 
 
36 
be brought under mandatory registration in any case are issued by the nodal 
Ministry/Dept. concerned taking into consideration its special requirements, if any. 
The nodal Ministry/Department wou ld also play the dominant role in monitoring 
the performance of the manufacturers granted registration.  
iii. Use of Standard Mark is not permitted under registration. Further, permission for 
self-certification under registration scheme can be granted to ‘regis tered users’       
possessing valid registration from the Bureau under sub section (1A) of     section 
15.  Entities not registered with the Bureau cannot have the facility of self -
declaration of conformance. Since BIS does not handle with matters relating  to 
non licencees/non registered units, enforcement of conformity and punishment for 
infringement of the Act and Rules/Regulations framed there under will not be 
possible in the cases of non licencees /unregistered entities. 

 
 
37 
 
2.6 The Committee note that c lause 3 of the Bill intends to add new sub -
sections under the already existing definitions under Section 2 of the Principal Act 
for the purpose of defining 'Hallmarking', 'jeweller', 'precious metal article', 
'registration', 'registered user' and 'self dec laration of conformity' as the terms are 
used elsewhere in the Act. The Committee observe that insertion of these 
definitions would provide better clarity and facilitate Indian Standardization of 
goods, articles, processes and services. The Committee, howe ver, find that the 
term "jeweller" has been defined in a narrow and vague sense. The Committee fail 
to understand the rationale of not including "manufacturing and repairing" in the 
definition of jeweller. The Committee, therefore, desire that "jeweller” m ay be 
defined as " means a person manufacturing, selling or repairing precious metal 
articles”.  
 The Committee find that in the Bill "services" has been included in the 
preamble to the Act but the definition of ‘services’ does not appear anywhere in 
the text of the Bill. A suitable definition for the term “services” may, therefore, be 
included in the definitions under Section 2 of the principal Act of 1986 since BIS 
has already started certifying services standard of ISO. The Committee also 
recommend that in Section 2 of the Principal Act in sub -section (g), after the word 
'specification of such article' the words 'or service' may be added. 

 
 
38 
B. Ambiguity regarding 'Registration' and 'Self declaration of Conformity'  
 (SDOC)  
 
2.7 Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) in their written Memoranda have pointed out 
the Ambiguity regarding ‘Registration’ and ‘Self Declaration of Conformity (SDOC)’ which 
is as under:-  
 
Provision as read in the Amendment Bill  Inferred meaning 
'2 pa) "registration" means the regist ration granted by 
the Bureau for self declaration  under sub -section ( 1A) 
of section 15; 
Implies Registration is the method by which  a 
manufacturer can make a ‘self declaration of 
conformity. 
2 (pb) "registered user"  means a person who has been 
granted re gistration or self declaration of conformity 
by the Bureau under sub-section (1A) of section 15; 
This implies that Registration and Self 
Declaration are two different options, but the 
owner of either will be called ‘Registered 
user’. 
2 c) "self declaratio n of conformity" means a 
declaration by a manufacturer  of his product in 
conformity with the Indian Standard;'; 
A separate definition implies ‘Self 
declaration’ is an independent option 
10 "( da) grant, renew, suspend or cancel, registration 
or self declaration of conformity;"; 
 
Also  
15 (a), (1A) The Bureau may, for the purpose of self 
declaration under sub -section ( 1) of section 14B, by 
order, grant, renew, suspend or cancel registration or 
grant self declaration of conformity  in such manner as 
may be determined by regulations." 
The terms are used as alternates. 
 
Purely from ‘self declaration’ perspective, 
which signfies a voluntary action, the use of 
regulatory terms grant, renew, suspend and 
cancel appear contradictory 
11 (3) No person, other than a registered user in 
possession of a valid registration or self declaration of 
conformity, shall, on and after the commencement of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards (Amendment) Act, 2012 
display on and after such commencement in relation to 
any article or process, the words "Self declaration — 
conforming to IS.............." on an article or packaging, as 
the case may be, or make a public claim, through 
advertisements, sales promotion leaflets, price lists or 
the like, that his article 
conforms to the Indian Standa rd or make such a 
declaration on the article.'.  
Here it appears a Registered user can have 
either a ‘registration’ or ‘self declaration of 
conformity’ (same as in definition of 
‘Registered user’). 
14B. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 
14, where the Central Government, after consulting the 
Bureau, is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient 
in the public interest so to do, it may, by order, 
published in the Official 
Gazette,— 
(a) notify any article or process which shall conform to 
the Indian Standard; 
and 
(b) direct registration or grant self declaration of 
conformity with the Bureau as compulsory for the 
purpose of self declaration on such article or process as 
under: 
‘‘Self declaration—Conforms to IS.............." 
Here the term s used are registration and 
‘grant’ self declaration of conformity.  
 
Para b) is also bad in English – direct grant 
self declaration of conformity with the Bureau 
as compulsory for the purpose of self 
declaration 
 
Also the intent of making a voluntary acti on 
(self declaration) as compulsory is self 
contradictory 
 
 
15 (2) The grant or renewal of the licence under sub-
section (1) or as the case may be, registration or allow 
self declaration of conformity or renewal thereof under 
sub-section (1A)" shall be subject to such 
The term used is ‘allow’ self declaration.  
 
This implies that self declaration can be 
allowed without a formal ‘registration’. 

 
 
39 
conditions and on payment of such fees as may 
be determined by regulations. 
 
 The definitions of ‘registration’ a nd ‘self declaration of conformity’ need to be 
clarified with respect to their usage in the rest of the body of the Bill. The amendment Bill 
needs to be re -drafted to remove any ambiguity in the understanding and further 
treatment of these two  terms – ‘Registration’ and ‘SDOC’ and preferably provide for 
SDOC as an additional option without the need for ‘granting’ Registration. 
 
2.8 The Department of Consumer Affairs were requested to furnish their comments on 
each of the above issues. In response the Depar tment have furnished the following 
table:- 
 
Statement in Proposed 
amendment to BIS Act 
Interpretation by CII Department’s 
response 
'2 pa) "registration" means the 
registration granted by the Bureau 
for self declaration under sub-
section (1A) of section 15; 
Implies Registration is 
the method by which  a 
manufacturer can make 
a ‘self declaration of 
conformity. 
"Registration" is  a 
process by which 
Bureau grants 
permission to a 
manufacturer to make a   
self declaration under 
sub-section (1A) of 
section 15 on his 
product.    
2 (pb) "registered user" means a 
person who has been granted 
registration or self declaration of 
conformity by the Bureau under 
sub-section (1A) of section 15; 
This implies that 
Registration and Self 
Declaration are two 
different options, but the 
owner of either will be 
called ‘Registered user’. 
The words, "registration 
or self declaration" are 
to be corrected as 
"registration for self 
declaration". 
2 c) "self declaration of 
conformity" means a declaration 
by a manufacturer of his product 
in conformity with the Indian 
Standard;'; 
A separate definition 
implies ‘Self declaration’ 
is an independent 
option 
The definition may be 
corrected as follows: 
 
2 c) "self declaration of 
conformity" means a 
declaration by a 
manufacturer that his 
product conforms to the 
Indian Standard; 
 
The right of self 
declaration accrues to 
the manufacturer on his 
getting registration from 

 
 
40 
BIS. It is not an 
independent option.   
 
10 "(da) grant, renew, suspend or 
cancel, registration or self 
declaration of conformity;"; 
 
Also  
 
15 (a), (1A) The Bureau may, for 
the purpose of self declaration 
under sub-section (1) of section 
14B, by order, grant, renew, 
suspend or cancel registration or 
grant self declaration of 
conformity in such manner as may 
be determined by regulations." 
 
The terms are used as 
alternates. 
 
Purely from ‘self 
declaration’ 
perspective, which 
signfies a voluntary 
action, the use of 
regulatory terms grant, 
renew, suspend and 
cancel appear 
contradictory 
10 (da) The words , 
"registration or self 
declaration" are to be 
corrected as 
"registration for self 
declaration". 
 
15(a)(1A)- Words 
"registration or grant 
self declaration " to be 
corrected as  
"registration for  self 
declaration" 
 
The comment of CII is 
based on presumption 
that ‘Self declaration’ is 
an indepe ndent option.  
It is not so, as 
explained above. 
 
11 (3) No person, other than a 
registered user in possession of a 
valid registration or self 
declaration of conformity, shall, on 
and after the commencement of 
the Bureau of Indian Standards 
(Amendment) Act, 2012 display 
on and after such commencement 
in relation to any article or 
process, the words "Self 
declaration — conforming to 
IS.............." on an article or 
packaging, as the case may be, or 
make a public claim, through 
advertisements, sales promotion 
leaflets, price lists or the like, that 
his article 
conforms to the Indian Standard 
or make such a declaration on the 
article.'. 
Here it appears a 
Registered user can 
have either a 
‘registration’ or ‘self 
declaration of 
conformity’ (same as in 
definition of ‘Registered 
user’). 
Registration and Self 
Declaration are not two 
different options 
 
The words , 
"registration or self 
declaration" are to be 
corrected as 
"registration for self 
declaration". 
14B. (1) Without prejudice to the 
provisions of section 14, where 
the Central Government, after 
consulting the Bureau, is of the 
opinion that it is necessary or 
Here the ter ms used 
are registration and 
‘grant’ self declaration 
of conformity.  
 
The statement in 
proposed amendment 
to be corrected as 
follows: 
 

 
 
41 
expedient in the public interest so 
to do, it may, by order, published 
in the Official 
Gazette,— 
(a) notify any article or process 
which shall conform to the Indian 
Standard; 
and 
(b) direct registration or grant self 
declaration of conformity with the 
Bureau as compulsory for the 
purpose of self declaration on 
such article or process as under: 
‘‘Self declaration—Conforms to 
IS.............." 
 
Para b) is also bad in 
English – direct grant 
self declaration of 
conformity with the 
Bureau as compulsory 
for the purpose of self 
declaration 
 
Also the intent of 
making a voluntary 
action (self declaration) 
as compulsory is self 
contradictory 
 
 
(b) direct registration 
for self declaration of 
conformity with the 
Bureau as compulsory 
for the purpose of self 
declaration of 
conformity on such 
article or process as 
under: 
 
‘‘Self declaration —
Conforms to 
IS.............." 
 
15 (2) The grant or renewal of the 
licence under sub-section (1) or 
as the case may be, registration 
or allow self declaration of 
conformity or renewal thereof 
under sub-section (1A)" shall be 
subject to such conditions and on 
payment of such fees as may be 
determined by regulations. 
 
The term used is ‘allow’ 
self declaration.  
 
This implies that self 
declaration can be 
allowed without a formal 
‘registration’. 
A formal registration is 
mandatory before self-
declaration 
 
 

 
 
42 
2.9 The Committee note that throughout the proposed amendment the terms 
‘Registration’ or ‘Grant of self declaration of conformity’ have been used 
differently. The Committee feel that it is ver y important to understand how it will 
impact the manufacturers - whether the conditions for ‘registration’ and SDOC will 
be identical or different. In view of the above, the amendment needs to be re -
drafted to remove any ambiguity in the understanding and further treatment of 
these two terms – 'Registration' and 'SDOC'. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that these terms may be clarified in the draft bill and be used in an 
unambiguous way.  
 
  

 
 
43 
 
2.10 The Committee note that huge money is spent in establish ing the standards 
but these standards are not used by the industry. Consequently, the consumers 
get inferior quality of produce and the money spent on establishing the standards 
goes waste. The Committee, therefore, desire that some portion of the budget o f 
the Department should be earmarked to oversee its implementation. 
 The Committee also feel that some sort of incentive will help in encouraging 
the industry to use ISI/BIS specifications. The Committee, therefore, desire that if 
any product uses such sta ndards/mark laid down by BIS for the first time in the 
industry, it should get 1% to 5% rebate in excise duty/VAT. It may cover some cost 
of compliance by the producer. 
 

 
 
44 
C. THE EXECUTIVE COMITTEE 
 
2.11  The Clause 4 proposes to amend Section 4(1) of the B ureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 1986.  
4. (1) The Bureau may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, constitute an Executive Committee which shall consist of the 
following members, namely:- 
a. Director-General of the Bureau, who shall be its ex-officio Chairman; 
b. such number of members, as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Executive Committee constituted under sub -section (1) shall perform, exercise 
and discharge such of the functions, powers and duties of the Bureau  as may be 
delegated to it by the Bureau. 
2.12 The Government under Clause 4 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 4(1) of the 
BIS Act which is as under:-  
 
4. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (b), the 
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 
"Provided that a member of the Executive Committee as may be prescribed, 
may, authorise any person to represent him in the Committee.”  
 
2.13 When asked about the role, powers and functions of the Executive Committee, the 
Ministry in their written replies has given the extracts from the proceedings of the first 
meeting of the BIS held on 18th April, 1987 informing as under:- 
“Delegation of Functions, Powers and Duties of the Executive Committee – 
Having considered item 3.2 of the Agenda, the Bureau RESOLVED that the following 
functions, powers and duties of the Bureau be delegated to the Executive Committee: 
i) Powers and functions of the Bureau as laid down under section 10 (1) of 
the Act and rules 7 to 13 of the Rules framed thereunder; 
ii) Constitution of technical Committees of experts for the formulation of 
standards in respect of articles or processes (section 5(3) of the Act); 
iii) Advising the Central Government in public interest for notifying any article 
or process of any scheduled industry to conform to Indian Standard and direct the 
use of Standard Mark under a licence as compulsory on such article or process 
(section 14 of the Act); 

 
 
45 
iv) To borrow money from any source as may be deemed fit for discharging all 
or any of th e functions of the Bureau with the consent of the Central Government 
or in accordance with the terms of any general or specific authority given to it by 
the Central Government (section 19 (1) of the Act); 
v) Approval of the Revised Budget Estimates for the  current year and Budget 
Estimates for the next year and forwarding them to the Central Government 
(section 20 of the Act) 
vi) Preparation of the Annual Report within nine months from the end of the 
year to which it relates for approval of the Bureau and f orwarding copies of the 
Annual Report to the Central Government for being laid before each House of 
Parliament (sections 21 and 23 of the Act); 
vii) Creation of posts subject to approval of the Central Government. 
 
2.14  In reply to a query, the Ministry in their written reply has informed that the effect of 
the proposed amendment would be that the Executive Committee members due to their 
preoccupation or otherwise, unable to attend the meeting themselves will be empowered 
to nominate their representatives in the meetings of the Executive Committee. 
Amendment will also ensure adequate representation of EC members and assist wider 
views on the issues leading to better decision. It would also facilitate meeting the 
requirement of quorum of the meeting of the Executive Committee. 
 
Summary of views/suggestions placed before the Committee 
 
Ministry of Science and Technology (Department of Biotechnology) - Since 
Members of the Executive Committee are the nominated officials of various Government 
Departments/Institutions for a defined term, they only are supposed to participate in the 
meetings of the Executive Committee. Therefore there should not be further 
nomination of another person by the member(s) of the Executive Committee. 
 
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sani tation -  Authorized person, nominated by the 
member of the Executive Committee should have professional educational qualifications 
and experiences relevant to the sector represented.  
 

 
 
46 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers – Considering the nature of the job necessitating 
specialized knowledge, provisions related to enabling Member of the Executive 
Committee to nominate another persons are not advisable under normal circumstances. 
It may be reviewed and Bureau be advised to prepare minimum qualification cr iteria, 
guidelines for accepting alternate members. Provisions for nomination of alternate 
member are advisable under special conditions provided nominated alternate member 
meets qualifying requirements of Bureau. This Department agrees that if a member fe els 
to invite any subject area expert to attend a meeting, this provision should be there.  
 
Ministry of Agriculture – It is felt that another person nominated by the Member of the 
Executive Committee should have adequate technical competence. A suggestion  can be 
that there may be a Principal Executive Member and an Alternate Executive Member 
(having competence) and Alternate Member may attend the meeting if Principal Member 
is not able to attend the meeting. Such a system is followed by BIS in various Sect ional 
Committees.  
Ministry of Science and Technology – Since Member(s) of the Executive Committee 
are the nominated officials of various Government Departments/Institutions for a defined 
term, they only are supposed to participate in the meetings of the E xecutive Committee. 
Therefore, there should not be further nomination of another person by the member(s) of 
the Executive Committee.  
 
Ministry of Finance – The technical qualifications required by the Member or the 
nominee will have to be prescribed as necessary which is a matter of detail or procedure.  
 
UT of Andaman and Nicobar -  While nominating any other person on behalf of any 
member of the Executive Committee, the nominated Member should be a resourceful 
person from this field.  
 
Government of Naga land – The concerned Department of the State Government 
believes that the empowerment of a member of the Executive Committee of the Bureau 
by the Central Government to authorize any person to represent him in the Committee, is 
done ensuring that the repres entatives has all the qualification essential to be a member 
of the Committee. 

 
 
47 
VOICE - The Executive Committee may nominate another person who is conversant with 
the standardization process and the working of BIS so that he is able to make valuable 
contribution in the deliberations. 
 
Confederation of Indian Steel Producers Association (CISPA) – Any member of the 
Executive Committee should not be permitted to nominate any other person for attending 
a meeting vide Clause 4 and 14. However, in exceptional case s, it may be permitted with 
the approval of Director General of BIS.  
 
Cold Rolled Steel Manufacturers Association of India – Any member of the Executive 
Committee should not be permitted to nominate any other person for attending a meeting 
vide Clause 4 a nd 14 of the Amendment Bill to maintain continuity and accountability. 
However, in exceptional cases, it may be permitted with the approval of Director General 
of BIS.  
Consumer Association of India – We totally oppose the system of an Executive 
Committee Member nominating any persons to represent him in the Committee. Any 
such nomination by the Executive Committee member should be subject to acceptance 
by the Director of BIS, who should be given complete information regarding the 
background of the alternate person recommended for nomination.  
 The nomination of another person by the Executive Committee member, whose 
bonafide is not known to BIS, is not reasonable and bad in law.  
 
Mumbai Grahak Panchayat  - The person nominating should delegate sufficient 
deciding powers and authority to commit on his behalf to such a nominee. Rules under 
the act should be framed accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Department of Consumer Affairs: 
2.15 As per the BIS Rules, 1987, the quorum for the meeting of Executive Committee 
shall be three. In order to ensure that a meeting is not cancelled due to lack of quorum 
and EC is well represented, the EC members are being empowered to nominate another 
person on his behalf for attending the Executive Committee meetings. Thus the basic 
intention behind this amendment is to ensure maximum representation/participation of 
the members during the decision making process of the EC.   

 
 
48 
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend section 4 of the Act by introducing a `proviso’ 
empowering a member of the Executive Committee to represent him in the Committee, 
as may be “prescribed”.  Clause 14 of the Bill empowers Central Government to make 
rules in this regard.  Central Government shall take care of such technical qualifications 
while prescribing the rules. 
 
2.16 During evidence, representatives of Voluntary Organization in the interest of 
Consumer Education (VOICE) have suggested that power to nominate can also be 
widened to say 'nominated members and alternate member who can attend the meetings 
of the Executive Committee of the Bureau when there is a possibility that members may 
not attend'. 
 
2.17 Further the Bill empowers the Executive Committee for making regulations with 
respect to Hallmarking scheme, registration or self -declaration of conformity scheme and 
compounding of offences by amending Section 38(2)(c), (d) and (e) of the Bureau of 
Indian Standards Act, 1986 vide clause 15(a) and 15(b) which state as follows:- 
 
15. In section 38 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—   
 (a) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—  
“(ca) the jewellers, precious metal article, geographical areas and 
minimum turnover for jewellers under section 14A;’’; 
(b) for clauses (d) and (e), the following clauses shall be substituted, 
namely:— “(d) the manner of grant, renewal, suspension or 
cancellation of licence under sub-section (1) and the manner of 
granting registration, or allowing  self declaration of conformity, its 
renewal, suspension or cancellation under sub-section (1A) of 
section 15; 
(e)  the conditions subject to which a licence may be granted or renewed or 
registration or allowing self declaration of conformity may be granted or 
renewed and the fees payable therefor under sub-section (2) of 
section 15.”. 
 
 

 
 
49 
2.18 The Committee note that the  functions and duties of the Executive 
Committee of BIS include, inter -alia, human resource management, financial 
decision making, looking into economical aspects and other such tasks which 
require specific knowledge and experience on the part of the Membe rs of the 
Committee. The Committee also note that the quorum for the meetings of the 
executive committee is only three members. It has been proposed in the Bill that 
the members of the Executive Committee may authorize any person to represent 
him in the Committee. This provision is proposed to be made to ensure adequate 
representation of Executive Committee members in case of inability of the 
members to attend the meeting due to their preoccupation or otherwise. The 
Committee feel that if members of the Exe cutive Committee are allowed to 
nominate the people who will attend the meetings of the Executive Committee in 
their place, it would result in lack of seriousness on the part of the Members. The 
Committee are of the view that atleast two ‘Alternate Members ’ should be 
appointed to the executive committee who may possess the same or equivalent 
qualifications as of the other members so that if the existing members of the 
executive committee are unable to attend the meetings due to preoccupation, 
then the alter nate members can be nominated in their place to attend the 
meetings. The Committee, therefore, recommend that power to nominate may be 
vested with the Presiding Officer of the Executive Committee who may nominate 
alternate members to participate in the mee tings of the Executive Committee 
when there is possibility that members may not attend. This would help solve the 
quorum problem as well as help to get valuable inputs of the alternate members. 
 
 

 
 
50 
D. Clause 14 – Amendment of Section 37 
2.19 37(1) The Centr al Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :- 
a. the number of members of the Bureau and the interest such members would 
represent under clause (e) of sub-section (3) of section 3; 
b. the term of office of the members of the Bureau, the manner for filling vacancies 
and the procedure to be fol lowed in the discharge of their functions by, the 
members under sub-section (4) of section 3; 
c. the manner in, and the purposes for, which the Bureau may associate with itself 
any person for assistance and advice under sub-section (5) of section 3; 
d. the numbe r of members of the Bureau who will be members of the Executive 
Committee under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4; 
e. the terms and conditions of service of the Director -General of the Bureau under 
sub-section (2) of section 7; 
f. the design and the par ticulars to represent a particular Indian Standard under 
clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 10; 
g. the purposes for which laboratories for the purposes of standardisation and quality 
control shall be established by the Bureau under clause (h), of sub -section (1) of 
section 10; 
h. the purposes for which agents may be appointed by the Bureau in India or outside 
India under clause (1) of sub-section (1) of section 10; 
i. the times and places at which any article or process may be inspected under 
clause (n) of sub-section (1) of section 10; 
j. the additional functions that may be performed by the Bureau under section 10; 
k. the cases in which, and the conditions subject to which, exemption may be 
granted under section 12; 
l. the form in which, and the time at which, the Bur eau shall prepare its budget 
under section 20 and its annual report under section 21; 
m. the manner in which the accounts of the Bureau shall be maintained under section 
22; 
n. the conditions subject to which inspecting officer may exercise his powers under 
sub-section (2) of section 25; 
o. any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which 
provision is to be, or may be, made by rules. 
 The Government under Clause 14 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 37 of the 
Act which is as under:- 
 14. In section 37 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), - 
  (i) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- 

 
 
51 
   "(d) the number of members of the Bureau who will be members of 
the Executive Committee and the power of a member to  authorize a person 
to represent him under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4,"; 
 (ii) after clause (n), the following clauses shall be inserted namely:- 
  "(na) the manner of compounding of offence under sub -section (1A) of 
 section 33;  
  (nb) the application for compounding of an offence under sub -section (1C) 
 of section 33;" 

 
 
52 
2.20 The Committee note that vide Clause 14 of the Amendment Bill, Government 
proposes to amend Section 37 of the Principal Act. The Committee desire that 
words 'alternate members' be inserted in Clause 14 (i) (d) of the Amendment Bill so 
that it should read as 'The number of members of the Bureau who will be members 
or alternate members of the Executive Committee'. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
53 
 
E. CLAUSE 7 — COMPULSORY USE OF STANDARD MARK FOR ARTICLES 
AND PROCESSES OF ANY INDUSTRY. 
 
2.21  The Clause 7 proposes to amend Section 14 of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 1986 which prescribes the compulsory use of standard mark for articles and 
processes of any industry.  
14. If the Central Government, after consulting the Bureau, is of the opinion that it is 
necessary or expedient so to do, in the public interest, it may, by order published in the 
Official Gazette, - 
a. notify any article or process of any scheduled industry which shall conform to the 
Indian Standard; and 
b. direct the use of the Standard Mark under a licence as compulsory on such article 
or process. 
Explanation - For the purposes of this section, the expression "scheduled industry" shall 
have the meanin g assigned to it in the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 
1951. 
Under Clause 7 of the Bill, Government proposes to amend Section 14 of the Act which 
is as under:- 
7. For section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:—   
‘14. If the Central Government, after consulting the Bureau, is of the opinion 
that it is necessary or expedient so to do, in the public interest, it may, by order 
published in the Official Gazette,—  
 (a) notify any article or process of any industry which shall conform to 
 the Indian Standard; and  
(b) direct the use of the Standard Mark under a licence as 
 compulsory on such article or process:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to an article or process 
meant only for export.  
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section and section 14B, the 
expression "article" includes an article imported into India which is of the same 
nature or description as an article manufactured in India.’.  
 
2.22  Ministry in their written reply has  informed that the intention behind this 
substitution is to bring more flexibility in notifying the products under mandatory 
certification of BIS, it is proposed to delete the words “of any scheduled industry”.  

 
 
54 
Further it clarifies the applicability of su ch provisions in respect of articles imported into 
and exported out of India. 
 
 Section 14 of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act gives the power to the Central 
Government to notify any article or process of any scheduled industry which shall 
conform to the Indian Standard and direct the use of the Standard Mark under licence as 
compulsory on such article or process.  Thus, unless a product or process finds an entry 
in the first schedule of the Industries (Development and Regulation), Act, 1951, the 
Government does not have any power under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act to 
make licensing compulsory for such an article or process. In the interest of public health, 
safety and environmental considerations it has become necessary to bring under 
mandatory certification, certain articles  (like helmets, toys, etc) not included in the first 
schedule of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951.  It is therefore 
proposed to de -link the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 so as to empower the Government to bring 
under compulsory certification regime any article and/or ‘process’ which it considers 
necessary, in public interest.  
2.23 The Committee have also been informed that further with regard to  establishment 
of standards, the focus has always been on the “producer” of product or service and not 
on its “dispenser” or the seller.  However, there have been requirements where the 
dispenser, or retailer also needed to be brought under the standardisation regime. This is 
particularly so in respect of jewelers selling gold and silver jewellery where, for protecting 
consumers from unscrupulous jewelers, need has been felt for enforcement of “Hallmark” 
on jewellery articles sold in the country. 
 
Summary of views/suggestions placed before the Committee 
Confederation of Indian Steel Producers Association (CISPA) –  Shifting of products 
from the voluntary to the mandatory list is a strategic decision with vide ranging 

 
 
55 
implication beyond the jurisdiction of a particular ministry on the downstream and 
upstream industries, foreign trade and industrial development of the country. It is, 
therefore, impertinent that the decision be broadbased by the inclusion of all 
stakeholders in the decision making and should not  be left to the discretion of only the 
concerned ministry which may be more interested in improving its own performance and 
is also vulnerable to pressures from producers under its administrative control.  
 
Cold Rolled Steel Manufacturers Association of In dia (CORSMA) – All decisions 
regarding the formulation of standards and inspection of various products should be 
taken and notified by BIS and the power cannot be delegated to any Ministry of the 
Central Government. Infact, empowering a Ministry of the Cen tral Government for 
shifting of a product from the voluntary list to the mandatory list and appointment of 
inspectors negates the very concept of an independent and statutory organization 
stipulated in the BIS Act, 1986.  
 Decision to shift a product from the voluntary to the mandatory list cannot be left 
to the concerned ministry since it has wide ranging implications beyond the jurisdiction of 
the concerned ministry. Besides, the concerned ministry is invariably inclined to improve 
its own performance and its also under from the powerful lobbies under its administrative 
control to bend the policies in their favour.  
 
  

 
 
56 
2.24 The Committee desire that Section 14 (E) be inserted in Clause 8 of the 
Amendment Bill, indicating that the Ministry proposing shifti ng of a product 
should submit a comprehensive memorandum to the Bureau of Indian Standards 
including, inter-alia, the impact of the proposal on the upstream and downstream 
industry, prices, foreign trade threat of cartelization and feasibility of implementing 
the order. The proposal should comply with the three basic conditions stipulated 
in Clause 14 of the BIS Act, 1986 i.e. it is necessary, expedient to do so and is in 
the public interest. 
 
  

 
 
57 
2.25 The Committee note that the proposed amendment in Sectio n 14 of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act removes the restrictions imposed by reference to 
'Scheduled Industry' by including articles and process of any industry so as to 
empower the Government to bring under compulsory certification regime any 
article or process which it considers necessary from the point of view of health, 
safety, environment, prevention of deceptive practices and security.  Keeping in 
view the safety and well being of the consumers, the Committee feel that delinking 
the Bureau of Indian  Standards Act, 1986 from the Industries (Development & 
Regulation) Act, 1951 is a welcome step. The Committee feel that shifting of 
products from the voluntary to the mandatory list beyond the jurisdiction of a 
particular Ministry is a strategic decision with wide ranging implications on foreign 
trade and industrial development of the country. It is, however, essential to ensure 
that quality control is not discriminatory to favour a group of producers and is 
mainly based on quality related complaints by co nsumer organizations. The 
Committee also feel that it is necessary to have uniform integrated policy and 
procedures. Therefore, the authority to process and issue Quality Control Orders 
must rest with the BIS/Ministry of Consumer Affairs.  However, issue o f Quality 
Control Orders should be done after due deliberation and consultation with all the 
stakeholders and experts in the related field. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
a new Section 14 (D) in Clause 8 of the Amendment Bill be inserted accordingly . 
The Committee also recommend that the decision regarding shifting of a product 
from the voluntary to the mandatory category should be taken by an Empowered 
Committee comprising of all the stakeholders as indicated below:- 
(a) Secretary, Department of industrial Policy and promotion (Chairman) 
(b) Representative of the concerned Ministry 
(c) Representative of the Ministry of Commerce 
(d) Representative of BIS 
(e) Representative of Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)  
(f) Representative of Competition Commission of India 
(g) Representative of the small and medium scale producers of the 
industry 
(h) Association of the major consumers of the products. 

 
 
58 
F. HALLMARKING OF PRECIOUS METAL ARTICLES, REGISTRATION FOR 
 SELF DECLARATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF ORDERS 
 
2.26   The Clause 8 of the Bill proposes to add new sub sections after Section 14 of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 empowering the Government of India to notify 
jewellery under mandatory certification of BIS. 
(A)  INSERTION OF  NEW SECTION 14A — COMPULSORY USE OF 
HALLMARKING OF PRECIOUS METAL ARTICLES 
  
 The Government under Clause 8 of the Bill proposes to insert new Section 14A which 
is given as under:-  
 
  '14A. Where the Central Government, after consulting the Bureau, is of 
the opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do, it may, 
by order, published in the Official Gazette, make it compulsory for such 
jewellers selling such precious metal article in such geographical areas and 
having such minimum turnover, as may be specified by regulations, to use 
Hallmark under a licence and that such article shall conform to the Indian 
Standard. 
 
 14 B (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 14, where the Central 
Government, after consulting the Bur eau, is of the opinion that it is necessary 
or expedient in the public interest so to do, it may, by order, published in the 
Official Gazette,-   
   (a) notify any article or process which shall conform to the Indian 
  Standard;  
  and 
  (b) direct registration or grant self declaration of conformity with 
the Bureau as compulsory for the purpose of self declaration on such 
article or process as under: 
    'Self declaration – Conforms to IS………….' 
 (2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section (3), a person ma y, in respect of 
any article or process notified under sub -section (1), exercise an option for 
making registration or grant of self declaration of conformity with, or taking 
licence from, the Bureau.  
  
 (3) When an article or process notified for registra tion or in respect of which 
self declaration of conformity has been granted under sub -section (1), is 
subsequently notified under section 14, then, in addition to such registration or 
self declaration of conformity, a licence shall be compulsorily taken fr om the 
Bureau for such article or process in place of such registration or self 
declaration of conformity.  
 
 14 C. The Central Government may, by order, authorize any authority to be 
enforcement authority for enforcement of any order issued by it under se ction 
14, or section 14A or section 14B, in such manner as may be specified in the 

 
 
59 
order.' 
 
 
 
Summary of Views/suggestions placed before the Committee  
All India  Gems & Jewellery Trade Federation: 
1. Before Hallmarking is made Mandatory in 4 Metros, issues o f the city and the 
entire country should be addressed. 
2. The Road map of implementation of hallmarking should be clearly informed. 
3. We strongly oppose License leading to a License Raj in our industry.  
4. Sufficient infrastructure should be in place before legislation is introduced. 
5. A proper committee with sufficient members of the trade should be formed across 
the country prior to implementation. 
6. Exemptions should be clearly defined with practical understanding of ground 
realities chances of confusion should be avoided. 
7. Penal provisions should not lead to cancellation of license and prosecution. once 
a jewellery is hallmarked, jeweller should not be held responsible in any way. Hall 
Marking Centre, BIS, ministry of consumer affairs and Central Government 
should take the responsibility. 
8. Hall Marking Centre's licenses have been issued to jewellers and to entities who 
are very close to jewellers which Is against the basic fundamentals of the wishes 
of the central government.  
9. Many hall marking centres do not have the  facility of Hallmarking but they have 
been allotted license and are marking jewellery at their free will. BIS has taken 
some action and some licenses have been cancelled but the actions are not 
sufficient. This is is an act of deceiving and cheating consumers. 
10. Rampant Changes are made in the act without knowing the true nature of the 
industry and without taking the industry into confidence. Use of cadmium in 
soldering of jewellery has been banned. more than 90% jewellery being 
hallmarked today contains cad mium. No awareness programs were conducted 
for the small artisans before implementing. 
11. It is the responsibility of central government as well of the jewellers to provide 
good quality jewellery to consumers. We recommend there should be a one time 
Registration Fee collected by BIS and not every three years. 
12. The industry should be given recognition & should be taken into confidence as 
we support Hallmarking. 
 
Confederation Of Indian Industry (CII): 
 
 Government may first consider a suitable legislation to con trol the supply chain in 
the gems and jewellery trade before imposing mandatory quality certification, because 
the latter is fully dependent on compliances. 
 
 
 If at all mandatory certification needs to be notified, it should cover manufacturers 
also under the proposed legislation, otherwise it would lead to tactics of routing jewelry 
through non certified jewelers (operating below the threshold value).Government may 
estimate the estimated workload and the available capacity of hallmarking assaying 
centers before the amendment. Clear provisions need to be made in the legislation 

 
 
60 
prohibiting any ownership / collaboration or other forms of relationships among assaying 
centers and jewelers. Government may also consider bringing assaying centers in the 
purview of Section 33. 
 
Consumer Association of India (CAI): while presenting their views before the 
Committee stated that 
  “There is a fraud going on in the jewellery industry in the name of 
wastage.  Everybody fixes wastage as per his norms, as per his whims and  
fancies from 6 per cent up to 23 per cent, 30 per cent.  We may provide that 
wastage should be only this much after some study.  Even while purchasing, 
they say there is wastage.  When I purchase jewellery, they say there is 
wastage of 8 per cent. Honest people say, there is nil wastage actually in the 
industry, in the trade. 
 Most of the assaying centres are owned by jewellers only.  The assaying 
centre must be an independent body” 
 
2.27 The Committee enquired about the details of the existing infrastruct ure, viz. 
Assaying and Hallmarking Centres, the estimated requirement and the steps being taken 
to set up more of such centres to meet the requirement under the Bill, the Ministry 
informed that the proposed section 14 (A) will enable compulsory use of Hall mark for 
precious metal articles, if Government so decides. With respect to related provision of 
compulsory Hallmarking, it is mentioned that BIS is presently operating about 10,000 
licences on voluntary basis under Hallmarking scheme. It is anticipated th at with the 
implementation of compulsory Hallmarking of gold/silver jewellery/artefacts, there willb e 
manifold increase in the number of licences. However, this would depend on such 
geographical areas and such minimum turnover as may be specified. Samples  of 
Hallmarked jewellery/artefacts collected by BIS from the market are tested in this 
laboratory to check their conformity to the relevant Indian Standard. In addition, there are 
218 BIS recognized Assaying and Hallmarking Centres operating all over India . Since 
the setting up of Assaying and Hallmarking Centres is demand driven, more centres are 
expected to come up depending on the geographical areas and minimum turnover of the 
jewellers specified at the time of making hallmarking compulsory. At present, for setting 
up of Assaying and Hallmarking Centres in deficient locations, financial assistance is 

 
 
61 
provided by the Central Government through Plan Funds, which has been continuing 
since 10th Plan.  
 
 
 
2.28 The Committee also enquired what will be the requi red infrastructure when the 
Amendment Bill comes into effect. The Department stated in reply that it is expected that 
one technical officer and one staff would be able to handle registrations for about 150 
manufacturers. Further, the grant of registration is proposed to be decentralized through 
34 Branch Offices of BIS and one department at Headquarters for foreign manufacturers. 
Adequate physical infrastructure and IT equipment would be required. In implementing 
amendment Bill making it compulsory for Hall marking by the Jewellers as per proposed 
Section 14(A), - resources, particularly 
 (i)  Manpower would be required for activities, such as grant of licence; 
monitoring of the licensed jewellers, carrying out market survey, collection of 
samples of Hallmark ed items, their testing and enforcement of the provisions of 
the Act for compulsory Certification for Hallmarking. 
 (ii) Further, infrastructure in terms of creation of more numbers of Assaying 
and Hallmarking Centres will be required in order to meet the increased demand 
for Hallmarking as the number of licensed jewellers will increase substantially. 
 
2.29 During the deliberations of the Committee, it was, inter -alia, informed that many 
jewellers charge higher prices for hallmarked jewellery articles as co mpared to the 
ordinary jewellery articles which discourages the consumers from purchasing hallmarked 
articles. In this context, the Committee enquired the Department regarding the cost of 
getting an article hallmarked incurred by a jeweller and existence o f any mechanism 
through which this practice of charging different rates can be checked. To this, the 
Department replied as follows:-  
(a) The present charges for hallmarking are as follows:  
 
(i)  Rs. 25/- per article and 
 (ii) Minimum charge for a consignment is Rs. 150/- 
 
(b)  Possibility of fixing a ceiling of the additional amount which can be charged 
for hallmarking is being examined.  
 

 
 
62 
 The Department of Consumer Affairs also stated that It is mandatory for a 
BIS licensed jeweller to prominently displ ay their Hallmarking licence and also to 
display the components of the Hallmark.  In addition information about 
Hallmarking scheme is available on BIS website ( www.bis.org.in).  BIS is regularly 
organizing consumer awa reness programmes in which details of the Hallmarking 
scheme and its benefits are explained to the public/consumers. BIS is also 
considering to make it mandatory for the jeweller to provide a card with each 
hallmarked article explaining the implications of the hallmark put on the concerned 
jewellery, as well as indicate the provisions regarding feedback/complaint to BIS.  
The Department of Consumer Affairs is also covering “Hallmarking” as a theme 
under its “Jago Grahak Jago” campaign. 
  
 On being asked reg arding jewellers charging exhorbitant prices in the name of 
‘making charges’ and ‘wastages’ which results into a loss to the consumers and whether 
the Department has taken any measure to regulate these practices, the Committee were 
informed that the Hallmarking only provides assurance to the consumer about the purity 
of the precious metal in the hallmarked  article. The Scheme does not address issues 
like price of the precious metal, making charges, wastages, etc.  The consumers will be 
sensitized to such u nethical trade practices through awareness campaign under “Jago 
Grahak Jago”. 

 
 
63 
  
2.30 The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Department towards making 
hallmarking of precious metals articles mandatory as recommended by this 
Committee in their previous Report on Hallmarking of gold jewellery. Nevertheless, 
the Committee are apprehensive regarding the implementation of the same as 
there are presently only 218 Assaying and Hallmarking centres in the entire 
country and with the implementation of compulsory hallmarking of jewellery, there 
will be manifold increase in the number of licenses. Mandatory Hallmarking of 
precious metal articles is not feasible without the existence of adequate number of 
functioning A&H centres. The Committee, therefore, desire the  Government to set 
up the required number of hallmarking centres as a pre -emptive step to make 
hallmarking of jewellery as mandatory. For this, wider publicity of the financial 
assistance provided by the Government for setting up of these A&H centres is 
necessary so as to expedite the process of setting up of these A&H centres.  The 
Committee also desire that the A&H centres should also be held 
responsible/accountable in case of non -conformity of hallmarked 
jewellery/articles, thereby ensuring efficient fun ctioning on the part of these 
centers. The Committee also recommend the strengthening of the Enforcement 
Wing of the BIS to ensure that the 'Mandated Hallmarking' is implemented 
properly.  
  

 
 
64 
2.31 The Committee note that various jewellers charge different prices for 
hallmarked jewellery and non-hallmarked jewellery and the price of the hallmarked 
jewellery is far more than that of the ordinary non -hallmarked jewellery, thus 
discouraging the consumer from buying hallmarked jewellery. In this context, 
during oral evidence the Committee were informed by the representatives of the 
Department of Consumer Affairs that the present charges for hallmarking are 
Rs.25 per article and a minimum charge for a consignment is Rs.150/ - The 
Committee are however dismayed to n ote that the Department has no control on 
the situation whereby the customers are being exploited by the BIS Certified 
Jewellers. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should 
take concrete steps to prevent jewellers from over charg ing or charging higher 
price in the name of Hallmarked Jewellery and to curb such malpractices on the 
part of the jewelers so as to protect the interest of the consumers at large. The 
Committee also note that many jewelers charge exorbitantly high making c harges 
and also charge money on the pretext of ‘wastage charges’ from the consumers. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department of Consumer 
Affairs should look into these aspects so that the consumers are not exploited by 
the jeweller s. The Committee are also of the view that unless the consumers of 
rural/remote and hilly areas are made aware of the benefits of the Hallmarked 
Jewellery, they cannot come forward to opt for the Hallmarked Jewellery. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend th at the consumers should be 
enlightened/encouraged to buy only hallmarked jewellery through wider media 
publicity. They also need to be sensitized about the unethical trade practices like 
charging of high making charges and wastage charges through media publicity.  

 
 
65 
 
G. CLAUSE 12 — PENAL PROVISIONS 
 
2.32 The Clause 12 proposes to amend Section 33(1) and add new sections namely 
Section 33(1A) to 33(1F) to the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 which prescribes 
the penal provisions in relation to contraventi on of the provisions of the said Act  by 
substituting the existing section and adding subsequent sub sections as under:— 
33. (1) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 11, or section 12 or section 
14 or section 15 shall be punishable with imp risonment for a term which may extend to 
one year or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both. 
(2) Any court trying a contravention under sub -section (1) may direct that any property in 
respect of which the contravention has taken place shall be forfeited to the Bureau. 
 Under Clause 12, the Government propose to amend  section 33 of the principal 
Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
“(1) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 11 or section 12 or 
section 14 or section 14A or  section 15 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one year, or with fine which shall not be less than two lakh 
rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.  
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, any offence punishable under this Act, not being an offence punishable with 
imprisonment only, or with imprisonment and also with fine, may, either before or after 
the institution of any prosecution, be compounded by an officer of the Bureau, not 
below the rank of Scientist G or Additional Director General of the Bureau appointed 
by the Director General in the Bureau in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the sum so specified shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum 
amount of the fine which may be imposed under sub-section (1) for the offence so 
compounded:  
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to an offence 
committed by a person for the second time or thereafter on which a similar offence 
committed by him has been compounded.  
(1B) Every officer referred to in sub-section (1A) shall exercise the powers to 
compound an offence, subject to the direction, control and supervision of the Bureau.  
(1C) Every application for the compounding of an offence shall be made in such 
manner as may be prescribed.  
(1D) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution, 
no prosecution shall be instituted in relation to such offence, against the offender in 
relation to whom the offence is so compounded.  

 
 
66 
(1E) Where the composition of any offence is made after the institution of any 
prosecution , such compositio n   shall be brought by the officer referre d to in 
sub-section (1A) in wri ting, to the notice of the Court in which the prosecution is 
pending and on such notice of the composition of the offence being given, the 
person against whom the offence is so compounded shall be discharged.  
 
(1F) Any person who fails to comply with an or der made by the officer 
referred to in sub -section (1A) shall be  punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to two years, or with fine not exceeding ten lakh rupees, or 
with both.’’.  
 
 
2.33  Ministry in respect of the above clause has justif ied its intent by stating that these 
sub sections are required to enhance the penalties to minimum of 2 Lakhs for violations 
under this Section to have desired deterrent effect. It has also mentioned that as per 
existing provisions, complaint is filed befo re the court of law by the Bureau for misuse of 
standard Mark which takes long time in securing conviction against offenders, hence it is 
proposed to introduce provision for compounding of offences which are committed out of 
ignorance and the violators are willing to stop the misuse and offence forthwith. 
 
Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion (DIPP):  
 
1. The penalty must be enhanced substantially. “…a term which may extend to one 
year” or with fine not less than Rs.50,000, is clearly inadequate in t he present economic 
context.  It should be imprisonment of one year plus a fine not less than Rs.2 lakhs. 
 
Justification; 
After the introduction of  
Registration scheme the volume of work will increase substantially. It will not be feasible 
to monitor each  and every case. The punishment should be high enough to act as a 
deterrent on its own. 
 
2. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974), any offence punishable under this Act, may, either before or after the insti tution of 
any prosecution, be compounded by an officer of the Bureau, not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary to the Central Government appointed by the Central Government to exercise 
powers under this section, on payment by the person referred to in sub section (1). 
 
Justification 
The authority to compound an offence should rest with a senior officer. 
 
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting: 
 

 
 
67 
Before adding ‘any article or processes’ pertaining to Entertainment & Media Sector 
including film, music, broadcasti ng and print industry under the regime of compulsory 
licensing, Department of Consumer Affairs should consult this Ministry. 
 
Reply of the Government : 
 
2.34 The BIS Act provides for imprisonment or fine or fine with imprisonment as punishment 
for contravention of sections 11, 12, 14 or 15 of the Act. DIPP does not appear to be in favour of 
award of punishment in monetary terms only but with imprisonment also, which will necessitate 
initiation of time -consuming prosecution proceedings even in cases where a simple fine is 
considered adequate.  Since the principal Act provides for fine (only) as a kind of punishment, 
there does not appear to be enough justification for removing that provision from the Act.  
Therefore, the suggestion is found unacceptable.  The  suggestion to enhance the minimum fine 
from Rs. 50,000/- to Rs.2 lakh is however acceptable 
 
 In reply to point 2 raised by DIPP, the Government stated that the suggestion has been 
partially accepted and the section has been modified suitably to provide f or compounding by 
Scientist F who is above the level of Director in Government of India. 
 
2.35 While taking the evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs), the Committe e enquired regarding the 
number of cases/incidents wherein BIS/Prosecution has pleaded imprisonment for an 
offender/defaulter. In reply to this, the Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs stated as 
under:- 
  'In the year 2012-13, we have filed 66 cases. 52 are in our favour. But we don't  
  have information regarding our prosecution imprisoning anyone'.  
 
2.36 The Committee also enquired about the number of defaulters/offenders not 
conforming to/misusing BIS standards been identified by the BIS in the la st three years 
and what action was taken against them, the Department in their written reply stated as 
under:- 
The details of defaulters/offenders misusing BIS Standard Mark during each of 
last three years and  the status of action taken as on date are given below 
 
Year No. of 
Defaulters/
Offenders 
Action Taken 

 
 
68 
detected  Prosecution 
Pending in 
Court       
Case Decided 
in favour of 
BIS      
Cases 
Closed by 
BIS   
Prosecution                  
to be       
Launched        
2010-11 135 81 43 07 04 
2011-12 125 86 23 05 11 
2012-13 112 31 08 01 72 
 
 Action against BIS product certification licensees are taken if their product do not 
conform to the Indian Standards or they misuse the Standard mark. These actions, as 
given in BIS certification regulations, can be 
  
a) Stoppage of Marking till they take corrective action and their samples pass after 
taking these actions, or 
b) Non renewal of their licence, or 
c) Cancellation of licence. 
 
 As regards steps taken in order to deter the manufacturers and traders from 
following such malpractices/fraudulent activities, the Department stated that the following 
steps are taken in order to deter the manufacturer/traders from misuse of BIS Standard 
Mark: 
 
a. Conducting Consumer Awareness programme 
b. Advertisement in Newspapers and Journals 
c. Press release in Newspapers after raids and case decided by Court. 
d. Market survey for identifying spurious and sub -standard products and 
conducting raids if misuse found.  
 

 
 
69 
2.37 The Committee feel that the Bill needs to give more teeth to the Bureau in 
order to create a fear in the minds of the defaulting manufacturers/ traders so as to 
refrain them from indulging in illegal and inappropriate practices. The penal 
provisions in the Bill need to be made more stringent and should be formulated in 
such a manner  that it should act as an effective deterrent against offenders. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that in case of large scale 
manufactures of Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG) Companies, the 
provisions should clearly specify the fine as a parti cular percentage, say 5% of the 
turnover of the brand/line of product of the Company/Organisation so that the 
penalty imposed is in tune with the scale of operation of the defaulter. 
Accordingly, the Committee desire that in Section 33 (1) (F), after the w ords 
'extend to two years', the words 'or with fine which shall be 5% of the average 
turnover of the offender averaged over last three years subject to a minimum of 
Rs. 10 lakhs or both' may be inserted. The repetition of the offence must also be 
strictly penalized.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
70 
H. MISCELLANEOUS 
2.38 The important points/suggestions brought out in the written Memoranda as well as 
during Oral evidence are given as under:-  
   
Underwriters' Laboratory India Pvt. Ltd – Currently the BIS Act focuses on 2ndparty 
certification – done by the Indian Government. With provisions of the Bill seeking to 
expand the conformity 'mechanisms' available to the GOI, consideration should be given 
to alignment with the WTO Technical Barriers to Trade Agreement which outlines these 
mechanisms, along with the use of independent third party testing, inspection and 
certification providers.  
 
VOICE – International Organization for Standardization (ISO) develops and publishes 
standards but does not involve itself in certification of standards. Similarly for wider reach 
of ISI marked products and services to masses, BIS standards conformity assessment 
should also be delegated to other competent certifying accredited bodies. However BIS 
should lay down accreditation guidelines and the overall control should be kept with BIS.  
 

 
 
71 
2.39 The Committee desire that after Clause (o) of the Section 10(1) of the 
Principal Act, the following Clause be inserted:-m, 
 
OO : To recommend to the Central Government to appoint, authorize and notify 
agencies for mar ket surveillance of products and services so as to keep abreast 
of the trends in the markets, to identify products and services being sold in the 
market that either do not conform to standards or have not been licensed or 
registered in respect of products or services in spite of direction on compulsory 
use of Standard Mark under license and/or conform to a notified standard. 
 
OOA: To prosecute manufactures and resellers of products or services who 
either misuse standard mark or violate this Act in any manne r or sell products or 
services in violation of direction for compulsory use of standard mark under 
licence and/or conforming to a national standard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           NEW DELHI                   VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
     27th August, 2013                            Chairman, 
5 Bhadra, 1935(Saka)                                Standing Committee on Food,  
                               Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution  
  
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
72 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2011-12) HELD ON 
TUESDAY, THE 24th JULY, 2012 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1135 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Ground floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 PRESENT 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar     -     Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Jaywant Gangaram Awale 
3. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
5. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Lal Chand Kataria 
7. Shri Prabodh Panda 
8. Shri Sohan Potai 
9. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
10. Shri Ramkishun 
11. Shri Chandulal Sahu 
12. Smt. Usha Verma 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
14. Dr. M. S. Gill 
15. Shri Vivek Gupta 
16. Shri P. Kannan 
17. Shri Lalhming Liana 
18. Shri Sanjay Raut 
19. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.K.Misra - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director    
2. Shri Khakhai Zou - Under Secretary 

 
 
73 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider the Memorandum No. 5 regarding the course of action 
to be taken by the Committee in the examination of 'The Bureau of Indian standards 
(Amendment) Bill, 2012' pertaining to the Department of Consumer Affairs. 
 
3. The Committee, after due deliberations, approved the course of action to be taken 
on 'The Bureau of Indian standards (Amendment) Bill, 2012' as contained in the 
Memorandum No. 5. 
  
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
********* 
 

 
 
74 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2012-13) HELD ON 
FRIDAY, THE 22nd FEBRUARY, 2013 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1525 hrs. in Com mittee Room ‘D’, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  Shri Vilas Muttemwar, M.P. -  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
4. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
5. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
6. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
7. Shri Birender Singh 
8. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 1. Shri P. K. Misra - Joint Secretary  
 2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
 3. Shri Khakhai Zou - Under Secretary 
 
 
 WITNESSES 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Publi c Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
 
1. Shri Pankaj Agrawala  - Secretary 
2. Shri Ganga Murthy  - Principal Advisor 
3. Shri Afzal Amanullah  - Special Secretary/DG, BIS  
4. Shri P. K. Jha   - AS & FA 
5. Shri Manoj Kumar Parida  - Joint Secretary 
6. Smt. Alka Panda   - Additional DG, BIS 
7. Shri P. K. Gambhir  - Scientist G & Chief (Certification), BIS 
8. Shri P. K. Batra   - Scientist G & Chief (Labs), BIS 
9. Shri J. Roy Chowdhary  - Scientist F, BIS 
10. Shri A. K. Sharma   - Scientist G & Head (CMD- III), BIS 
11. Lt. Col (Rtd) K. Shantanu  - Bureau Secretary 
12. Shri Bhupal Singh   - Director (Legal) 

 
 
75 
 The sitting of the Committee was scheduled to be held to have briefing by the 
representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) on ‘The Bureau of Indian Standards (Amendment) Bill, 
2012’  
 As there was lack of quorum even after waiting for 25 minutes, Hon'ble Chairman 
decided under the provisions of Rules 259(1) of the Rules of Procedure and                  
Conduct of Busi ness in Lok Sabha to postpone the sitting of the Committee to                                     
27th February, 2013.  
********* 

 
 
76 
                       
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTR IBUTION (201 2-13) HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, THE 27th FEBRUARY, 2013 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 16 45 hrs. in Main Committee Room , Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Kantilal Bhuria 
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
4. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
5. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Sohan Potai 
7. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
8. Shri Chandulal Sahu 
9. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
11. Shri Lalhming Liana 
12. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
13. Dr. T. N. Seema 
14. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.K.Misra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou - Under Secretary 

 
 
77 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
 
1) Shri Pankaj Agrawala - Secretary 
2) Shri Ganga Murthy  - Principal Advisor 
3) Shri Afzal Amanullah  - Special Secretary/DG, BIS  
4) Shri P. K. Jha   - AS & FA 
5) Shri Manoj Kumar Parida - Joint Secretary 
6) Smt. Alka Panda  - Additional DG, BIS 
7) Shri P. K. Gambhir  - Scientist G & Chief (Certification), BIS 
8) Shri P. K. Batra  - Scientist G & Chief (Labs), BIS 
9) Shri E, Devender  - Scientist G & Chief (Standardization), BIS 
10) Shri A. K. Sen   - Scientist F & DDG (HP), BIS 
11) Shri J. Roy Chowdhary - Scientist F, BIS 
12) Shri A. K. Sharma  - Scientist G & Head (CMD- III), BIS 
13) Lt. Col (Rtd) K. Shantanu - Bureau Secretary 
14) Shri Bhupal Singh  - Director (Legal) 
15) Shri B. N. Dixit   - Director (Consumer Affairs) 
 
 
At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to the sitt ing of the 
Committee convened for briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) on the Bureau of 
Indian Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2012. Thereafter, Secretary and other officials of the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution were invited to the sitting of the Committee. 
After welcoming them, the Chairman apprised them of the provisions of Direction 55(1) of 
the Directions by the Speaker.  
 
2. Hon’ble Chairman then request ed the representatives of the Department to brief 
the Committee on various issues such as the salient features of the Bill, aims and 
objectives, major weaknesses/shortcomings in the existing Bureau of Indian Standards  
Act, 1986, etc.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Secr etary, Department of Consumer Affairs addressed the issues 
raised by the Hon’ble Chairman and also briefed the Committee on the various issues 

 
 
78 
related to the Bill with the help of a power point presentation . The supplementary queries 
of the Members of the Committee were also responded to by the representatives of the 
Department. 
 
 
4. The following are some of the important points that emerged during the 
deliberations of the Committee:- 
 
I. Need to strengthen the working of the Bureau by making it proactive and 
answerable; 
II. Need to have sufficient infrastructure before making hallmarking of precious 
metals and its products mandatory; 
III. Need to give more teeth to the vigilance division of the Bureau by making the 
punitive provisions in the amendment Bill more severe;  
IV. Need to harmonize the Indian Standards with the International Standards to 
simplify trade procedures and boost Indian economy; 
V. Need to involve State Governments/UT Administrations and other Organizations 
to make the provisions of the Amendment Bill more executable; etc. 
5. The Hon’ble Chairman then thanked the Secretary and other representatives of 
the Department of Consumer Affairs for free and frank discussion and also for briefing 
the Committee properly.  
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 
 
79 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2012-13) HELD ON 
MONDAY, 4TH MARCH, 2013 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1650 hrs. in Committee Room  No. 'D', Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 PRESENT 
  Shri Vilas Muttemwar, M.P. -  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
4. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
6. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
7. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
8. Shri Poonam Prabhakar 
9. Shri C.Rajendran 
10. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
 
12. Shri Lalhming Liana 
 
13. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
 
14.  Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
     1. Shri P. K. Misra - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou - Under Secretary 

 
 
80 
 
WITNESSES 
(I) FEDERATION OF INDUSTRIES OF INDIA (FII) 
 
 
(II) VOLUNTARY ORGANIZATION IN INTEREST OF CONSUMER 
EDUCATION (VOICE) 
 
 
 
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members o f the Committee to 
the sitting convened to hear the views and suggestion s of the representatives of 
Federation of Industries of India (FII) and Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer 
Education (VOICE) on the 'Bureau of Indian Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2012.' 
  [The witnesses were then called in] 
 
2. The Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of Right to Food 
Campaign to the sitting and mentioned, inter -alia, that the discussions held shall be kept 
confidential as required under the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the 
Speaker and requested the representatives of the Right to Food Campaign to share their 
views/suggestions on any chapter, clause or provision  of the National Food Security Bill, 
2011 which they fe lt should be cons idered by the Committee in their report. Thereafter 
the representatives briefed the Committee about the views/suggestions of the 
organization on the Bill. The following are some of the important points that emerged 
during the deliberations of the Committee:- 
  
i. Selling companies have their own system to follow and do not want  to 
follow Indian system of mandatory Quality Control Orders. 
ii. There is need to check the quality of material imported according to the 
norms set by BIS. 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1. Shri S.P.Bhatia Vice President 
2. Shri Sushil Naithani Executive Member 
3. Shri H.L.Bhardwaj Secretary General 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1. Prof. Sri Ram Khanna Managing Trustee 
2. Shri Ashok Kanchan Member 

 
 
81 
iii. Need to revise BIS norms to make  registration process, quality checks etc. 
smooth and efficient. 
iv. Need to upgrade standards of items in the country in order to have 
standards of their own and to comply with WTO regime. 
v. Need to re-think over the issue of bringing the raw material which is in short 
supply or not made in our country under the ambit of the Bill. 
vi. To protect the interest of the consumers, there is a need to monitor the 
standards of items by frequent testing of samples collected from market, 
factories, etc. and to detain the person (s), if found guilty. 
vii. There is a need to check/dilute the monopoly of BIS from becoming the 
only certification body and to have multiple agencies for product 
certification. 
viii. BIS should be made accountable and enforcemental agency for the 
implementation of standards. 
ix. The word 'Articles' should be replaced with 'Articles and Services' as per 
amendments proposed in order to have services of different types 
subjected to standards. 
x. As per the Competition Act passed by the House, the fine should be 
revised to 5 per cent of the turnover of the company. 
xi. Need to spread awareness amongst consumers to buy atleast ISI marked 
products or products which have higher standards.   
 
4. The queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee during the 
course of the deliberation were responded to by the representatives of the Right to Food 
Campaign. The Hon’ble Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee and sharing their views with them.  
[The witnesses then withdrew.] 
 
5. The Hon’ble Chair man then highlighted the important recommendations 
contained in the draft Report of the Committee (2012 -13) on the action taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report 
of the Committee (2011 -12) on DFG (2012 -13) pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer 

 
 
82 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department  of Consumer Affairs). The Committee 
then took up for consideration the above stated draft Report. After due deliberation, the 
Committee unanimously adopted the dr aft Report  without any 
amendments/modifications.  
6.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the aforesa id Report and 
present the same to the Parliament. 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
********* 
 

 
 
83 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2012-13) HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, THE 6th MARCH, 2013 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament Ho use 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 PRESENT 
  Shri Vilas Muttemwar, M.P. -  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Kantilal Bhuria 
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
4. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
5. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
6. Shri Sohan Potai 
7. Shri C. Rajendran 
8. Shri Chandulal Sahu 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri Bhushanlal Jangde 
10. Shri Lalhming Liana 
11. Dr. Bharat Kumar Raut 
12. Dr. T. N. Seema 
13. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. K. Mishra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
I. Representatives of Consumers Association of India: 
1. Shri M.R. Krishnan, Deputy Director, Consumer Association of India 
 
II. Representatives of All India Gems & Jewellery Trade Federation: 
1. Shri Ashok Minawala, Past Chairman 
2. Shri Pramod Agrawal, Member, Board of Director 
3. Shri Manish Jain, Member, Board of Director 
4. Shri Sribash Dasmohapatra, Executive Director 
5. Shri Gopal K. Verma, Regional Manager 
 

 
 
84 
 
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to 
the sitting convened to hear the views and sugge stions of the representatives of            
(i) Consumers Association of India  (CAI) and (ii) All India Gems & Jewellery Trade 
Federation (GJF) on the various provisions of ‘The Bureau of Indian Standards 
(Amendment) Bill, 2012.’ 
  [The witnesses were then called in one by one] 
[The representative of Consumers Association of India (CAI), was called in] 
 
3. The Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representative of Consumers 
Association of India  (CAI) to the sitting and men tioned, inter -alia, that the discussions 
held shall be kept confidential as required under the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker . Hon’ble Chairman then requested the representative of the 
CAI to share his views/suggestions on any chapter, clause or provisions of ‘The Bureau 
of Indian Standards (Amendment)  Bill, 2012’ which he felt  should be considered by the 
Committee in their report. Thereafter the representative of the CAI briefed the Committee 
about the views/suggestions of the organization on the Bill. The following are some of the 
important points that emerged during the deliberations of the Committee:- 
 
VI. Need to cover all the persons related to precious metals trade i.e. from 
artisans to sellers and hold them accountable under the ambit of the Bill; 
VII. Need to amend the punitive provisions under the Bill for making them more 
stringent by including both imprisonment as well as penalty; 
VIII. Need to make the Assaying and Hallmarking Centres independent of the 
Jewellers to prevent malpractices and frauds ; and 
IX. Need to put a check on the heavy charges levied by the Jewellers in the 
name of ‘wastages’, thus depriving the consumers of their rightful quantity 
of precious metal for the amount paid by them; etc. 
  
4. The queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee during the 
course of the deliberation were responded to by the representative  of the CAI. The 
Hon’ble Chairman then thanked the witness for appearing before the Committee and 
sharing the views of the CAI with them.  

 
 
85 
[The witness then withdrew.] 
 
[The representatives of All India Gems & Jewellery Trade Federation (GJF), were then 
called in] 
 
5. After welcoming the witnesses, the Hon’ble Chairman apprised them of the  
provisions of Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker regarding the 
confidentiality of the proceedings of the sitting. 
 
6. Thereafter, the representatives of the GJF tendered their views/suggestions on 
the various provisions of the Bill. Some of the important points that emerged during the 
deliberations of the Committee are as follows:- 
(i) Need to provide for 100% hallmarking and do away with the licensing 
system to avoid the prevalence of ‘License Raj’ in the industry; 
(ii) Need to hold the Assaying and Hallmarking Centre responsible for any 
deficiency in quality of Hallmarked jewellery and not the jeweller; 
(iii) Need to replace the word ‘license’ with either the word ‘registration’ or 
‘regulation’ to curb the fears of licensing malpractices in the minds of the 
traders ; and 
(iv) Need to give a window period of approxim ately one year to the jewellers to 
help them finish their old jewellery stocks first before introducing mandatory 
hallmarking in the country; etc. 
  
7. The representatives of the All India Gems & Jewellery Trade Federation  (GJF) 
responded to the queries ra ised by the Chairman and the members  during the course of 
the sitting.  
 
8. The Hon’ble Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee and sharing their views with them in a free and frank manner.  
[The witnesses then withdrew.] 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
********* 

 
 
86 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2012-13) HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, THE 11th MARCH, 2013 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1655 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 PRESENT 
  Shri Vilas Muttemwar, M.P. -  Chairman 
 
   MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Sohan Potai 
4. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
5. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
6. Shri Bhushanlal Jangde 
7. Dr. Bharat Kumar Raut 
8. Dr. T. N. Seema 
9. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P. K. Mishra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
 
 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of Confederation of Indian Steel Producers Association: 
1. Shri S. S. Beriwala  - President, CISPA and Managing  
Director, Shyam Steel Industries, Kolkata 
2. Shri Kamal Aggrawal - Senior Vice President, All India  
 
Induction Furnace Association of India 
3. Shri S. C. Mathur  - Secretary General, CISPA, New Delhi  
4. Shri Vinod Vashist  - Chairman, All India Steel Rerollers  
Association of India 
5. Shri Pawan Bansal  - Chairman, All India Induction Furnace  
Association of India, Rajasthan 
 
Representatives of Confederation of Indian Industry: 
 
1. Shri Anupam Kaul  -  Principal Counsellor 
2. Shri C. N. Sinha  -  Consultant 

 
 
87 
3. Dr. Rajiv Kumar  -  Chief Scientist, Tata Chemicals Ltd.,  
Pune 
4. Shri Manoj Belgaonkar -  General Manager, Quality Management  
Indust Sector, Siemens Ltd.  
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to 
the sitting convened to hear the views and sugge stions of the representatives of            
(i) Confederation of Indian Steel Producers Association (CISPA) and (ii) Confederation of 
Indian Industry (CII)  on the various provisions of ‘The Bureau of Indian Standards 
(Amendment) Bill, 2012.’ 
  [The witnesses were then called in one by one] 
[The representative of Confederation of Indian Steel Producers Association (CISPA), 
was called in] 
 
2. The Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representative of Confederation of Indian 
Steel Producers  Association (CISPA) to the sitting and mentioned, inter -alia, that the 
discussions held shall be kept confidential as required under the provision s of Direction 
55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker . Hon’ble Chairman then requested the 
representative of the CISPA to share their views/suggestions on any chapter, clause or 
provisions of ‘The Bureau of Indian Standards (Amendment)  Bill, 2012’ which they felt 
should be considered by the Committee in their report. Thereafter the representative of 
the CISPA briefed the Committee about the views/suggestions of the organization on the 
Bill. The following are some of the important points that emerged during the deliberations 
of the Committee:- 
 
X. Need to reconsider including Steel products in the Mandatory list of BIS as 
its effects go against India’s foreign trade policy to develop free trade 
among countries ; 
XI. Need to include the raw materials used in making s teel products in the 
mandatory list; 
XII. Need to form a committee comprising representatives of the Ministry of 
Commerce, the concerned Ministry, BIS, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Competition Commission of India to consider inclusion of any 
product/service in the mandatory list ; and 

 
 
88 
XIII. Need to give the responsibility of inspecting quality of steel products to the 
BIS alone and not to the Ministry of Steel which lacks the qualified Officers,  
in order to prevent occurrence of Inspector-raj; etc. 
  
3. The queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee during the 
course of the deliberation were responded to by the representative  of the CISPA. The 
Hon’ble Chairman then thanked the witness for appearing before the Committee and 
sharing their views with them.  
 
[The witness then withdrew.] 
[The representatives of Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), were then called in] 
 
 
4. After welcoming the witnesses, the Hon’ble Chairman apprised them of the  
provisions of Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Spea ker regarding the 
confidentiality of the proceedings of the sitting. 
 
5. Thereafter, the representatives of the CII tendered their views/suggestions on the 
various provisions of the Bill. Some of the important points that emerged during the 
deliberations of the Committee are as follows:- 
(v) Need to distinguish between the concepts of ‘Registration’ and ‘Self 
Declaration of Conformity’ and apply regulating provisions accordingly; 
(vi) Need to discontinue with the registration trend and provide for strong penal 
actions in case of false declaration under the ‘Self declaration of 
Conformity’ scheme; 
(vii) Need to limit the search and seizure operation to those 
manufacturers/traders against whom a complaint has been filed and not to 
those under Self declaration of Conformity t o avoid reoccurrence of 
Inspector-raj; and 
(viii) Need to make the scheme of Self declaration of conformity more broad 
based by including other bodies such as Quality Council Of India, National 
Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL), etc. 
 

 
 
89 
6. The representatives of the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) responded to the 
queries raised by the Chairman and the members during the course of the sitting.  
7. The Hon’ble Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee and sharing their views with them in a free and frank manner.  
[The witnesses then withdrew.] 
 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
********* 
 
 

 
 
90 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMI TTEE 
ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2012 -13) HELD ON 
TUESDAY, THE 16th APRIL, 2013 
 
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 PRESENT 
  Shri Vilas Muttemwar, M.P. -  Chairman 
 
  MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
5. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
6. Shri Adhi Sankar 
   
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
7. Shri Birender Singh 
8. Shri Veer Singh 
9. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. K. Mishra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of Akhil Bharatiya Grahak Panchayat: 
 
1. Shri Bheemsen Sachdeva - Member 
2. Shri Suraj Prakash Manchanda - Member 
3. Shri Santosh Godbole  - Member  
4. Ad. Shri Bhupendra Parekh - Member 
 
Representatives of Mumbai Grahak Panchayat: 
 
1. Shri Vivek Patki   - Vice President  
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department 
of Consumer Affairs) 

 
 
91 
 
1.Shri Pankaj Agrawala  - Secretary 
2. Shri Afzal Amanullah  - Special Secretary/DG, BIS  
3. Shri P. K. Jha   - AS & FA 
4. Shri Manoj Kumar Parida  - Joint Secretary 
5. Shri A. K. Jain   - Director (BIS) 
6. Shri S. K. Nag   - Director (P&C) 
7. Smt. Alka Panda   - Additional DG, BIS 
8. Shri P. K. Gambhir  - Scientist G & Chief (Certification), BIS 
9. Shri P. K. Batra   - Scientist G & Chief (Labs), BIS 
10. Smt. Parminder Bajaj  - Scientist G & Chief (Standardization), BIS 
11. Shri A. K. Sen   - Scientist F & DDG (Hallmarking), BIS 
12. Shri Rahul Kumar   - Scientist F & Head (IRD) 
13. Shri J. Roy Chowdhary  - Scientist F (IRD&TISC), BIS 
14. Shri A. K. Sharma   - Scientist G & Head (CMD- III), BIS 
15. Lt. Col (Rtd) K. Shantanu  - Bureau Secretary 
16. Shri Bhupal Singh   - Director (Legal) 
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to 
the sitting convened to hear the views and sugge stions of the representatives of            
(i) Akhil Bharatiya Grahak Panchayat and (ii) Mumbai Grahak Panchayat and to take oral 
evidence of the  representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)  on the various provisions of ‘The Bureau 
of Indian Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2012.’ 
  [The witnesses were then called in one by one] 
[The representative of Akhil Bharatiya Grahak Panchayat and Mumbai Grahak 
Panchayat were called in] 
 
2. The Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representative of Akhil Bharatiya Grahak 
Panchayat and Mumbai Grahak Panchayat  to the sitting and mentioned, inter -alia, that 
the discussions held shall be kept confidential as required under the provisions of 
Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker . Hon’ble Chairman then requested the 
representative of both the Grahak Panchayats to share their views/suggestions on an y 
chapter, clause or provisions of ‘The Bureau of Indian Standards (Amendment)  Bill, 
2012’ which they feel should be considered by the Committee in their report. Thereafter 
the representative of the Akhil Bharatiya Grahak Panchayat  and Mumbai Grahak 
Panchayat briefed the Committee about the views/suggestions of the organization on the 
Bill. The following are some of the important points that emerged during the deliberations 
of the Committee:- 
 
     I. Need to define the term ‘services’ in the Bill for better clarity; 

 
 
92 
II. Need to redefine the term ‘Jewellers’ as persons manufacturing, selling and 
repairing precious metal articles and bring them under the purview of the 
Bill; 
III. Need to have fixed Hallmarking charges on the hallmarked articles sold by 
the jewelers instead of giving them a freehand for levying it on percentage 
basis; and 
IV. Need to have flexible but stringent penal provisions which should be in 
proportion to the level/intensity of violation of law/non -conformity to 
standards; etc. 
  
3. The queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee during the 
course of the deliberation were responded to by the representative  of both the Grahak 
Panchayats. The Hon’ble Chairman then thanked the witness for appearing before the 
Committee and sharing their views with them.  
 
[The witness then withdrew.] 
[The representatives of Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs), were then called in] 
 
 
4. After welcoming the Secretary and other offi cials of the Department of Consumer 
Affairs, the Chairman apprised them of the provisions of Direction 55(1) of The Directions 
by the Speaker. Hon’ble Chairman, in his opening remarks sought comments of the 
Secretary on important issues related to the Bill such as functions of the Bureau after the 
Bill comes into effect, availability of resources, qualified manpower and infrastructure 
with the Bureau to execute the provisions of mandatory standardization, relevance of 
grant, renewal, cancellation, etc of Self Declaration of Confor mity, appropriateness of 
enforcement of ‘Quality Control Orders’ issued by various Central Ministries by the State 
Governments considering the availability of technically  qualified manpower required for 
the same, etc.  
 
5. Thereafter, the Secretary, Depart ment of Consumer Affairs addressed to the 
concerns raised by the Hon’ble Chairman in his remarks. During the discussions, the 

 
 
93 
issues raised by Hon’ble Chairman were further supplemented by the Members of the 
Committee. 
 
6. The following are some of the import ant points that emerged during the 
deliberations of the Committee:- 
 
(i) Need for amending the Bureu of Indian Standards Act, 1986 in order to 
make widen its scope and give more power to the Bureau to curb 
malpractices and fraudulent activities prevailing in the market; 
(ii) Need to make the penal provisions more stringent to make the BIS Act self 
deterrent; 
(iii) Need to protect the consumers from being exploited at the hands of 
jewelers in the name of BIS hallmarked jewellery, exorbitantly high making 
charges and process loss/wastage charges; and 
(iv) Need to establish at least one Assaying and Hallmarking centre in each 
district before the Bill comes into effect in order to ensure proper 
implementation of mandatory hallmarking provision; etc. 
  
7. The representatives of the Department responded to the queries raised by the 
Chairman and the members on the aforesaid issues.  
 
8. The Hon’ble Chairman then thanked the Secretary and other representatives of 
the Department of Consumer Affairs for briefing the Committee on the various provisions 
of the Bill and responding to their queries in a satisfactory manner.  
[The witnesses then withdrew.] 
 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
********* 
 

 
 
94 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2012-13) HELD ON 
TUESDAY, THE 9th JULY, 2013 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  Shri Vilas Muttemwar, M.P. -  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.   Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
5. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
6. Shri Prataprao G. Jadhav 
7. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
8. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
9. Shri Chandulal Sahu 
10. Shri Adhi Sankar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
12. Shri Lalhming Liana 
13. Smt. Rajani Patil 
14. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
15. Dr. T. N. Seema 
16. Shri Birender Singh 
17. Shri Veer Singh 
18. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. K. Misra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
 
1.  Shri Pankaj Agrawala  - Secretary 
2. Shri Manoj Kumar Parida  - Joint Secretary 

 
 
95 
3. Shri Ashok Kumar Jain  - Director (BIS)  
4. Shri Sunil Soni   - Director General, BIS  
5. Smt. Alka Panda   - Additional DG, BIS 
6. Shri P. K. Gambhir  - Scientist G & Chief (Certification), BIS 
7. Shri Parminder Bajaj  - Scientist G & Chief (Standardization), BIS 
8. Smt. Madhulika Prakash  - Scientist F & DDG (Enf.), BIS 
9. Shri A. K. Sen   - Scientist F & DDG (Hallmarking), BIS 
10. Shri A. K. Sharma   - Scientist F & Head (CMD-III), BIS 
11. Shri J. Roy Chowdhary  - Scientist F (IR&TISC), BIS 
12. Shri Kulvinder Kumar Arora - Director (Legal), BIS 
 
At the outset, th e Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to 
the sitting convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)  on the 
various provisions of ‘The Bureau of Indian Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2012.’ 
2. Thereafter, Secretary and other offi cials of the Department of Consumer Affairs 
were invited to the sitting of the Committee. After welcoming them, the Chairman 
apprised them of the provisions of Di rection 55(1) of The Directions by the Speaker. 
Hon’ble Chairman, in his opening remarks, sought comments of the Secretary on various 
important issues  related to the Bill  such as provision for third party certification, 
composition and working of the Execu tive committee of the Bureau, steps taken for 
further simplification of the process of registration with the Bureau for its effective 
functioning, etc.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs  addressed to the 
concerns raised by the Hon’ ble Chairman in his remarks. During the discussion, t he 
issues raised by Hon’ble Chairman were further supplemented by the Members of the 
Committee. 
 
4. The following are some of the important points that emerged during the 
deliberations of the Committee:- 
 
I. Need for fixing responsibility of Hallmarking centres and Jewellers in case 
of detection of deviations from the set standards in the hallmarked 
jewellery; 

 
 
96 
II. Repercussions of the Quality Control Orders issued by the other Central 
Ministries on the secondary  sector industries especially the Ministry of 
Steel’s Quality Control Order, 2012; 
III. Need and availability of additional manpower and infrastructure for smooth 
implementation of the Bill; 
IV. Need to protect consumers interest by  stopping misleading and fraudul ent 
advertisements; 
V. Scope for involving other Authorities to be vested with the power to grant, 
renew, cancel the registration for Self Declaration of Conformity ; and 
VI. Need to make the penal provisions more stringent and ensuring their 
implementation acts as a deterrent by itself, etc. 
  
5. The representatives of the Department responded to the queries raised by the 
Chairman and the members on the aforesaid issues.  
 
6. The Hon’ble Chairman then thanked the Secretary and other representatives of 
the Department of Consumer Affairs for briefing the Committee on the various provisions 
of the Bill and responding to their queries in a satisfactory manner. 
 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 
 
97 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY  FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2012-13) HELD ON 
THURSDAY, THE 22nd AUGUST, 2013 
 
The Committee sat at 1530 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 PRESENT 
  Shri Vilas Muttemwar, M.P. -  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Kantilal Bhuria 
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
4. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
5. Shri C. Rajendran 
6. Shri Suresh K. Shetkar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
7. Shri Bhushan Lal Jangde 
8. Smt. Rajani Patil 
9. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P. K. Misra - Additional Secretary  
   2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
 3. Shri Khakhai Zou - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 The sitting of the Committee was scheduled to be held to consider and adopt the 
draft report of the Committee on ‘The Bureau of Indian Stand ards (Amendment) Bill, 
2012’  
 As there was lack of quorum even after waiting for 20 minutes, Hon'ble Chairman 
decided under the provisions of Rules 259(1) of the Rules of Procedure and                  
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha to postpone the sitt ing of the Committee to                                     
27th August, 2013.  
********* 

 
 
98 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2012-13) HELD ON 
TUESDAY, THE 27th AUGUST, 2013 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs. in Room No. 115 -A, First floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar     -     Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
3. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
4. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
5. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
6. Shri C. Rajendran   
RAJYA SABHA 
7. Dr. Bhushanlal Jangde 
8. Smt. Rajani Patil 
9. Dr. T.N. Seema 
10. Shri Veer Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.K.Misra  - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 
 
 At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting convened 
for consideration and adoption of two draft Reports of the Committee (2012 -13) on (i) 
'Bureau of Indian Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2012' and (ii) the Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations of the Committee contained in their 

 
 
99 
Twenty-ninth Report on Demands for Grants  (2013 -14) pertaining to the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs).  
 
3. The Committee first took up for consideration the draft Report on 'Bureau of Indian 
Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2012' and after due deliberation adopted the same without 
any amendments/modifications.  
 
4. XXXXXXXXX   XXXXXXXX   XXXXXXXX 
 
5.  The Committee then authorized th e Chairman to finalize the aforesaid Reports 
and present the same to the Parliament during the current Monsoon Session of 
Parliament.  
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
********* 

 
 
100 
APPENDIX- I 
 
THE BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS ACT, 1986 
No. 63 of 1986 
[ 23rd December, 1986. ] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of a Bureau for the harmonious development of the 
activities of standardisation, marking and quality certification of goods and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows :- 
 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - 
w. "article" means (as respects standardisation and marking) any substance, artificial or 
natural, or partly artificial or partly natural, whether raw or partly or wholly processed or 
manufactured; 
x. "Bureau" means the Bureau of Indian Standards established under section 3 ; 
y. "consumer" means a consumer of any article or process ; 
z. "covering" includes any stopper, cask, bottle, vessel, box, crate, cover, capsule, case, 
frame, wrapper or other container; 
aa. "Executive Committee" means the Executive Committee constituted under sub-section (1) 
of section 4; 
bb. "Fund" means the Fund constituted under section 18; 
cc. "Indian Standard" means the standard (including any tentative or provisional standard) 
established and published by the Bureau, in relation to any article or process indicative of 
the quality and specification of such article or process and includes -  
i. any standard recognised by the Bureau under clause (b) of section 10; and 
ii. any standard established and published, or recognised, by the Indian Standards 
Institution and which is in force immediately before the date of establishment of 
the Bureau; 

 
 
101 
dd. "Indian Standards Institution" means the Indian Standards Institution set up under the 
Resolution of the Government of India in the late, Department of Industries and Supplies 
No. 1 Std.(4)/45, dated the 3rd day of September, 1946, and registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860; 
ee. "inspecting officer" means an inspecting officer appointed under section 25; 
ff. "Licence" means a licence granted under section 15 to use the Indian Standards 
Certification Mark in relation to any article or process which conforms to the Indian 
Standard and includes any licence granted under the Indian Standards Institution 
(Certification Marks) Act, 1952 and is in force immediately before the date of 
establishment of the Bureau; 
gg. "manufacturer" means the manufacturer of any article or process; 
hh. "mark" includes a device, brand, heading, label, ticket,. pictorial representation, name, 
signature, word, letter or numeral or any combination thereof; 
ii. "member" means a member of the Bureau; 
jj. "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
kk. "Process" includes any practice, treatment and mode of manufacture of any article; 
ll. "registering authority" means any authority competent under any law for the time being in 
force to register any company, firm or other body of persons, or any trade mark or design, 
or to grant a patent; 
mm. "regulations" means regulations made by the Bureau under this Act; 
nn. "rules" means rules made by the Central Government under this Act; 
oo. "Specification" means a description of an article or process as far as practicable by 
reference to its nature, quality, strength, purity, composition, quantity, dimensions, weight, 
grade, durability, origin, age, material, mode of manufacture or other characteristics to 
distinguish it from any other article or process; 
pp. "Standard Mark" means the Bureau of Indian Standards Certification Mark specified by 
the Bureau to represent a particular Indian Standard and also includes any Indian 
Standards Institution Certification Mark specified by the Indian Standards Institution; 
qq. "trade mark" means a mark used or proposed to be used in relation to goods for the 
purpose of indicating, or so as to indicate, a connection in the course of trade between the 
goods and some person having the right, either as proprietor or as registered user, to use 
the mark, whether with or without any indication of the identity of that person; 
rr. an article is said to be marked with a Standard Mark if the article itself is marked with a 
Standard Mark or any covering containing, or label attached to, such article is so marked. 
 
CHAPTER II 
THE BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act, a Bureau, to 
be called the Bureau of Indian Standards. 
(2) The Bureau shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and 
a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be 
sued. 

 
 
102 
(3) The Bureau shall consist of the following members, namely :- 
a. the Minister incharge of the Ministry or Department of the Central Government having 
administrative control of the Bureau who shall be ex-officio President of the Bureau; 
b. The Minister of State or a Deputy Minister, if any, in the Ministry or Department of the 
Central Government having administrative control of the Bureau who shall be ex-officio 
vice-President of the Bureau, and where there is no such Minister of State or Deputy 
Minister, such person as may be nominated by the Central Government to be the Vice-
President of the Bureau; 
c. the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry or Department of the 
Central Government having administrative control of the Bureau ex-officio; 
d. the Director-General of the Bureau ex-officio; 
e. such number of other persons, to represent the Government, industry, scientific and 
research institutions and other interests, as may be prescribed, to be appointed by the 
Central Government. 
(4) The term of office of the members referred to in clause (e) of sub-section (3) and the manner 
of filling vacancies among, and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions 
by, the members, shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(5) The Bureau may associate with itself, in such manner and for such purposes as may be 
prescribed, any persons whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying with any of the 
provisions of this Act and a person so associated shall have the right to take part in the discussions 
of the Bureau relevant to the purposes for which he has been associated but shall not have the 
right to vote. 
4. (1) The Bureau may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute an Executive Committee which shall consist of the following 
members, namely:- 
c. Director-General of the Bureau, who shall be its ex-officio Chairman; 
d. such number of members, as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Executive Committee constituted under sub-section (1) shall perform, exercise and 
discharge such of the functions, powers and duties of the Bureau as may be delegated to it by the 
Bureau. 
5. (1) Subject to any regulations made in this behalf, the Bureau may, from time to time and as 
and when it is considered necessary, constitute the following Advisory Committees for the 
efficient discharge of its functions, namely:- 
a. Financial Committee; 
b. Certification Advisory Committee; 
c. Standards Advisory Committee; 
d. Laboratory Advisory Committee; 
e. Planning and Development Advisory Committees; 
f. such number of other committees as may be determined by regulations. 
(2) Each Advisory Committee shall consist of a Chairman and such other members as may be 
determined by regulations. 

 
 
103 
(3) Without prejudice to the powers contained in sub-section (1), the Bureau may constitute, as 
and when considered necessary, such number of technical committees of experts for the 
formulation of standards in respect of articles or processes. 
6. No act or proceedings of the Bureau, the Executive Committee or any Committee constituted 
under section 5 shall be invalid merely by reason of :- 
a. any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the Bureau or the Committee; or 
b. any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Bureau or Committee; 
or 
c. any irregularity in the procedure of the Bureau or the Committee not affecting the merits 
of the case. 
7. (1) The Central Government shall appoint a Director-General of the Bureau. 
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the Director-General of the Bureau shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 
(3) Subject to the general superintendence and control of the Bureau, the Director-General of the 
Bureau shall be the Chief Executive Authority of the Bureau. 
(4) The Director-General of the Bureau shall exercise and discharge such of the powers and duties 
of the Bureau as may be determined by regulations. 
8. (1) The Bureau may appoint such other officers and employees as it considers necessary for the 
efficient discharge of its functions under this Act. 
(2) The terms and conditions of service of officers and employees of the Bureau appointed under 
sub-section (1) shall be such as may be determined by regulations. 
 
CHAPTER III 
TRANSFER OF ASSETS, LIABILITIES, ETC. OF THE INDIAN STANDARDS 
INSTITUTION TO THE BUREAU 
9. (1) On and from the date of establishment of the Bureau, - 
a. any reference to the Indian Standards Institution in any law other than this Act or in any 
contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the Bureau; 
b. all properties and assets, movable and immovable, of, or belonging to, the Indian 
Standards Institution shall vest in the Bureau; 
c. all the rights and liabilities of the Indian Standards Institution shall be transferred to, and 
be the rights and liabilities of, the Bureau; 
d. without prejudice to the provisions of clause (c), all debts, obligations and liabilities 
incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with 
or for the Indian Standards Institution immediately before that date, for or in connection 

 
 
104 
with the purposes of the said Institution shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered 
into, or engaged to be done by, with or for, the Bureau; 
e. all sums of money due to the Indian Standards Institution immediately before that date 
shall be deemed to be due to the Bureau; 
f. all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or 
against the Indian Standards Institution immediately before that date may be continued or 
may be instituted by or against the Bureau; and 
g. every employee holding any office under the Indian Standards Institution immediately 
before that date shall hold his office in the Bureau by the same tenure and upon the same 
terms and conditions of service as respects remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement 
or other terminal benefits as he would have held such office if the Bureau had not been 
established and shall continue to do so as an employee of the Bureau or until the expiry of 
a period of six months from that date if such employee opts not to be the employee of the 
Bureau within such period. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or in any other law 
for the time being in force, the absorption of any employee by the Bureau in its regular service 
under this section shall not entitle such employee to any compensation under that Act or other law 
and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority. 
 
CHAPTER IV 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE BUREAU 
10. (1) The Bureau may exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to it by 
or under this Act and, in particular, such powers include the power to - 
a. establish, publish and promote in such manner as may be prescribed the Indian Standard, 
in relation to any article or process; 
b. recognise as an Indian Standard, in such manner as may be prescribed, any standard 
established by any other Institution in India or elsewhere, in relation to any article or 
process; 
c. specify a Standard Mark to be called the Bureau of Indian Standards Certification Mark 
which shall be of such design and contain such particulars as may be prescribed to 
represent a particular Indian Standard; 
d. grant, renew, suspend or cancel a licence for the use of the Standard Mark; 
e. levy fees for the grant or renewal of any licence; 
f. make such inspection and take such samples of any material or substance as may be 
necessary to see whether any article or process in relation to which the Standard Mark has 
been used conforms to the Indian Standard or whether the Standard Mark has been 
improperly used in relation to any article or process with or without a licence; 
g. seek recognition of the Bureau and of the Indian Standards outside India on such terms 
and conditions as may be mutually agreed upon by the Bureau with any corresponding 
institution or organisation in any country; 
h. establish, maintain and recognise laboratories for the purposes of standardisation and 
quality control and for such other purposes as may be prescribed; 
i. undertake research for the formulation of Indian Standards in the interests of consumers 
and manufacturers; 

 
 
105 
j. recognise any institution in India or outside which is engaged in the standardisation of any 
article or process or the improvement of the quality of any article or process; 
k. provide services to manufacturers and consumers of articles or processes on such terms 
and conditions as may be mutually agreed upon; 
l. appoint agents in India or outside India for the inspection, testing and such other purposes 
as may be prescribed; 
m. establish branches, offices or agencies in India or outside; 
n. inspect any article or process, at such times and at such places as may be prescribed in 
relation to which the Standard Mark is used or which is required to conform to the Indian 
Standard by this Act or under any other law irrespective of whether such article or process 
is in India or is brought or intended to be brought into India from a place outside India; 
o. coordinate activities of any manufacturer or association of manufacturers or consumers 
engaged in standardisation and in the improvement of the quality of any article or process 
or in the implementation of any quality control activities; 
p. perform such other functions as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Bureau shall perform its functions under this section in accordance with, and subject to, 
such rules as may be made by the Central Government. 
11. (1) No person shall use, in relation to any article or process, or in the title of any patent, or in 
any trade mark or design the Standard Mark or any colourable imitation thereof, except under a 
licence. 
(2) No person shall, notwithstanding that he has been granted a licence, use in relation to any 
article or process the Standard Mark or any colourable imitation thereof unless such article or 
process conforms to the Indian Standard. 
12. No person shall, except in such cases and under such conditions as may be prescribed, use 
without the previous permission of the Bureau, - 
a. any name which so nearly resembles the name of the Bureau as to deceive or likely to 
deceive the public or which contains the expression "Indian Standard" or any abbreviation 
thereof; or 
b. any mark or trade mark in relation to any article or process containing the expressions 
"Indian Standard" or "Indian Standard Specification" or any abbreviation of such 
expressions. 
13. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, no registering 
authority shall - 
a. register any company, firm or other body of persons which bears any name or mark; or 
b. register a trade mark or design which bears any name or mark; or 
c. grant a patent, in respect of an invention, which bears a title containing any name or mark 
if the use of such name or mark is in contravention of section 11 or section 12. 
(2) If any question arises before a registering authority whether the use of any name or mark is in 
contravention of section 11 or section 12, the registering authority may refer the question to the 
Central Government whose decision thereon shall be final. 

 
 
106 
14. If the Central Government, after consulting the Bureau, is of the opinion that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do, in the public interest, it may, by order published in the Official Gazette, - 
c. notify any article or process of any scheduled industry which shall conform to the Indian 
Standard; and 
d. direct the use of the Standard Mark under a licence as compulsory on such article or 
process. 
Explanation - For the purposes of this section, the expression "scheduled industry" shall have the 
meaning assigned to it in the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. 
 
CHAPTER V 
LICENCE 
15. (1) The Bureau may, by order, grant, renew, suspend or cancel a licence in such manner as 
may be determined by regulations. 
(2) The grant or renewal of the licence under sub-section (1) shall be subject to such conditions 
and on payment of such fees as may be determined by regulations. 
16. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 15 may prefer an appeal to the 
Central Government within such period as may be prescribed. 
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period prescribed therefor : 
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period prescribed therefor if the 
appellant satisfies the Central Government that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the 
appeal within the prescribed period. 
(3) Every appeal made under this section shall be made in such form and shall be accompanied by 
a copy of the order appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed. 
(4) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be prescribed : 
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the appellant shall be given a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard. 
 
CHAPTER VI 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
17. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this 
behalf, make to the Bureau grants and loans of such sums of money as that Government may 
consider necessary. 

 
 
107 
18. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Bureau of Indian Standards Fund and 
there shall be credited thereto - 
a. any grants and loans made to the Bureau by the Central Government under section 17; 
b. all fees and charges received by the Bureau under this Act; 
c. all sums received by the Bureau from such other sources as may be decided upon by the 
Central Government. 
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting -  
a. the salary, allowances and other remuneration of the members, Director-General, officers 
and other employees of the Bureau; 
b. expenses of the Bureau in the discharge of its functions under section 10; 
c. expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Act. 
19. (1) The Bureau may, with the consent of the Central Government or in accordance with the 
terms of any general or special authority given to it by the Central Government, borrow money 
from any source as it may deem fit for discharging all or any of its functions under this Act. 
(2) The Central Government may guarantee in such manner as it thinks fit, the repayment of the 
principal and the payment of interest thereon with respect to the loans borrowed by the Bureau 
under sub-section (1). 
20. The Bureau shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year as may be 
prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure 
of the Bureau and forward the same to the Central Government. 
21. The Bureau shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year as may be 
prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial 
year, and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government. 
22. (1) The Bureau shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an 
annual statement of accounts, in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Bureau shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India 
at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such 
audit shall be payable by the Bureau to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Bureau shall have the same rights and privileges and the 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in 
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to 
demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers 
and to inspect any of the offices of the Bureau. 
(4) The accounts of the Bureau as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be 
forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be 
laid before each House of Parliament. 

 
 
108 
23. The Central Government shall cause the annual report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
received, before each house of Parliament. 
 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
24. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Bureau shall, in the exercise 
of its powers or the performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on 
questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time : 
Provided that the Bureau shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is given under this sub-section. 
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not shall be 
final. 
25. (1) The Bureau may appoint as many inspecting officers as may be necessary for the purpose 
of inspecting whether any article or process in relation to which the Standard Mark has been used 
conforms to the Indian Standard or whether the Standard Mark has been properly used in relation 
to any article or process with or without licence, and for the purpose of performing such other 
functions as may be assigned to them. 
(2) Subject to any rules made under this Act, an inspecting officer shall have power to - 
(a) inspect any operation carried on in connection with any article or process in relation to which 
the Standard Mark has been used; and 
(b) take samples of any article or of any material or substances used in any article or process, in 
relation to which the Standard Mark has been used. 
(3) Every inspecting officer shall be furnished by the Bureau with a certificate of appointment as 
an inspecting officer and the certificate shall, on demand, be produced by the inspecting officer. 
26. (1) If the inspecting officer has reason to believe that any article or process in relation to 
which the contravention of section 11 or section 12 has taken place are secreted in any place, 
premises or vehicles, he may enter into and search such place, premises or vehicle for such article 
or process. 
(2) Where, as a result of any search made under sub-section (1), any article or process has been 
found in relation to which contravention of section 11 or section 12 has taken place, he may seize 
such article and other things which, in his opinion, will be useful for, or relevant to, any 
proceeding under this Act : 
Provided that where it is not practicable to seize any such article or thing, the inspecting officer 
may serve on the owner an order that he shall not remove, part with, or otherwise deal with, the 
article or things except with the previous permission of the inspecting officer. 

 
 
109 
(3) The provision of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, relating to searches and seizures shall, 
so far as may be, apply to every search or seizure made under this section. 
27. The Bureau may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to any member, member of 
the Executive Committee, officer of the Bureau or any other person subject to such conditions, if 
any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act (except the 
powers under section 38) as it may deem necessary. 
28. Every licensee shall supply the Bureau with such information, and with such samples of any 
material or substance used in relation to any article or process, as the Bureau may require. 
29. Noting in this Act shall exempt any person from any suit or other proceeding which might, 
apart from this Act, be brought against him. 
30. Any information obtained by an inspecting officer or the Bureau from any statement made or 
information supplied or any evidence given or from inspection made under the provisions of this 
Act shall be treated as confidential : 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the disclosure of any information for the 
purpose of prosecution under this Act. 
31. All members, officers and other employees of the Bureau shall be deemed, when acting or 
purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the 
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
32. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government or any officer 
of the Government or any member, officer or other employee of the Bureau for anything which is 
in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made 
thereunder. 
33. (1) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 11, or section 12 or section 14 or 
section 15 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with 
fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both. 
(2) Any court trying a contravention under sub-section (1) may direct that any property in respect 
of which the contravention has taken place shall be forfeited to the Bureau. 
34. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act save on a 
complaint made by or under the authority of the Government or Bureau or by any officer 
empowered in this behalf by the Government or the Bureau, or any consumer or any association 
recognised in this behalf by the Central or State Government. 
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
specially empowered in this behalf shall try any offence punishable under this Act. 
35. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who at 
the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the 
conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of 
the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly : 

 
 
110 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his 
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, 
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall 
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly. 
Explanation - For the purposes of this section, - 
a. "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of 
individuals; and 
b. "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
36. All orders and decisions of, and all other instruments issued by, the Bureau shall be 
authenticated by the signature of such officer or officers as may be authorised by the Bureau in 
this behalf. 
37. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :- 
p. the number of members of the Bureau and the interest such members would represent 
under clause (e) of sub-section (3) of section 3; 
q. the term of office of the members of the Bureau, the manner for filling vacancies and the 
procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, the members under sub-
section (4) of section 3; 
r. the manner in, and the purposes for, which the Bureau may associate with itself any person 
for assistance and advice under sub-section (5) of section 3; 
s. the number of members of the Bureau who will be members of the Executive Committee 
under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4; 
t. the terms and conditions of service of the Director-General of the Bureau under sub-
section (2) of section 7; 
u. the design and the particulars to represent a particular Indian Standard under clause (c) of 
sub-section (1) of section 10; 
v. the purposes for which laboratories for the purposes of standardisation and quality control 
shall be established by the Bureau under clause (h), of sub-section (1) of section 10; 
w. the purposes for which agents may be appointed by the Bureau in India or outside India 
under clause (1) of sub-section (1) of section 10; 
x. the times and places at which any article or process may be inspected under clause (n) of 
sub-section (1) of section 10; 
y. the additional functions that may be performed by the Bureau under section 10; 
z. the cases in which, and the conditions subject to which, exemption may be granted under 
section 12; 

 
 
111 
aa. the form in which, and the time at which, the Bureau shall prepare its budget under section 
20 and its annual report under section 21; 
bb. the manner in which the accounts of the Bureau shall be maintained under section 22; 
cc. the conditions subject to which inspecting officer may exercise his powers under sub-
section (2) of section 25; 
dd. any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is 
to be, or may be, made by rules. 
38. (1) The Executive Committee may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules 
generally to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations 
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :- 
a. the members of the Advisory Committees constituted under section 5 ; 
b. the powers and duties that may be exercised and discharged by the Director-General of the 
Bureau under sub-section (4) of section 7; 
c. the terms and conditions of service of officers and employees of the Bureau under sub-
section (2) of section 8; 
d. the manner of grant, renewal, suspension or cancellation of licence under sub-section (1) 
of section 15; 
e. the conditions subject to which a licence may be granted or renewed and the fees payable 
therefor under sub-section (2) of section 15. 
39. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the 
rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule or regulation. 
40. Nothing in this Act shall affect the operation of the Agricultural Produce (Grading and 
Marking) Act, 1937 or the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, or any other law for the time being in 
force, which deals with any standardisation or quality control of any article or process. 
41. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty :- 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of five years from the 
commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament. 

 
 
112 
42. (1) The Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks) Act, 1952, is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purported to have done or 
taken (including any rule, regulation, notification, scheme, specification, Indian Standard, 
Standard Mark, inspection order or notice made, issued or adopted, or any appointment, or 
declaration made or any licence, permission, authorisation or exemption granted or any document 
or instrument executed or direction given or any proceedings taken or any penalty or fine 
imposed) under the Act hereby repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the 
general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 with regard to the effect of 
repeal. 
  
C. RAMAN MENON, 
Additional Secy. to the Govt. of India. 
 
 
Home 
 

 
 
113 
1  
 
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 52 of 2012 
 
 
THE BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
63 of 1986.  
 
 
 
 
 
10  
A 
 
BILL 
 
to amend the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986. 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
 
1. (1) This Act may be calle d the Burea u of India n Standard s (Amendment) 
Act, 2012. 
 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 
2. In the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 (hereinafter referred to as the principal 
Act), in the long title,— 
 
(i) after the words "establishment of a Bureau", the words "to be a national 
standards body" shall be inserted; 
 
(ii) for the word "goods", the words "goods, articles, processes and services" 
shall be substituted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title 
and 
commencement. 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of long  title. 

 
 
114 
 
 
Amendme nt 
of sectio n  2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of sectio n  4. 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of sectio n  10. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment  of 
sectio n  11. 
2 
 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,— 
 
(i) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
'(fa) "Hallmark" means the Bureau of Indian Standards Certification Mark 
specified by the Bureau to represent a particular Indian Standard in relation to 
precious metal article;'; 5 
 
(ii) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
'(ia) "jeweller" means a person selling precious metal articles;'; 
(iii) after clause (m), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
'(ma) "precious metal" means gold, silver, platinum and palladium; 
 
(mb) "precious metal article" means any article made entirely or in part 10  
from precious metals or their alloys;'; 
 
(iv) after clause (p), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
'(pa) "registration" means the registration granted by the Bureau for self 
declaration under sub-section (1A) of section 15; 
 
(pb) "registered user" means a person who has been granted registration 15 
or self declaration of conformity by the Bureau under sub-section (1A) of 
section 15; 
 
(pc) "self declaration of conformity" means a declaration by a manufacturer 
of his product in conformity with the Indian Standard;'; 
 
(v) in clause (t), for the words "includes any", the words "includes Hallmark or 20  
the mark of an international body or institution or any" shall be substituted. 
 
4. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (b), the following 
proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 
"Provided that a member of the Executive Committee as may be prescribed, may, 
authorise any person to represent him in the Committee.". 25  
5. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),— 
(i) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(da) grant, renew, suspend or cancel, registration or self declaration of 
conformity;"; 
(ii) in clause (e), for the word "licence", the words "licence or registration or self 30  
declaration of conformity" shall be substituted; 
(iii) after clause (j), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(ja) recognise with the prior approval of the Central Government the mark 
of any international body or institution in relation to any article or process at par 
with the Standard Mark for such article or process;"; 35  
(iv) in clause (l), for the words "inspection, testing", the words "inspection, 
collection of samples, testing" shall be substituted; 
(v) after clause (n), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(na) carry out surve y of any articl e or proces s relatin g to Indian  
Standard;" . 40  
 
6. In section 11 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
‘(3) No person, other than a registered user in possession of a valid registration 
or self declaration of conformity, shall, on and after the commencement of the Bureau 

 
 
115 
3 
 
of Indian Standards (Amendment) Act, 2012 display on and after such commencement 
in relation to any article or process, the words "Self declaration — conforming to 
IS.............." on an article or packaging, as the case may be, or make a public claim, 
through advertisements, sales promotion leaflets, price lists or the like, that his article 
5 conforms to the Indian Standard or make such a declaration on the article.'. 
 
7. For section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
 
 
 
‘14. If the Central Government, after consulting the Bureau, is of the opinion that 
it is necessary or expedient so to do, in the public interest, it may, by order published 
in the Official Gazette,— 
 
10 (a) notify any article or process of any industry which shall conform to the 
Indian Standard; and 
 
(b) direct the use of the Standard Mark under a licence as compulsory on 
such article or process: 
 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to an article or process meant 
15 only for export. 
 
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section and section 14B, the expression 
"article" includes an article imported into India which is of the same nature or description 
as an article manufactured in India.’. 
 
8. After section 14 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
 
 
 
20  '14A. Where the Central Government, after consulting the Bureau, is of the 
opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do, it may, by order, 
published in the Official Gazette, make it compulsory for such jewellers selling such 
precious metal article in such geographical areas and having such minimum turnover, 
as may be specified by regulations, to use Hallmark under a licence and that such 
25 article shall conform to the Indian Standard. 
 
14B. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 14, where the Central 
Government, after consulting the Bureau, is of the opinion that it is necessary or 
expedient in the public interest so to do, it may, by order, published in the Official 
Gazette,— 
 
30 (a) notify any article or process which shall conform to the Indian Standard; 
and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Substitution 
of new 
sectio n  for 
sectio n 14. 
 
Compulsory 
use of 
Standard 
Mark for 
articles  and 
processes  of 
any  industr y. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertio n     of 
new   sections  
14A, 14B  and 
14C.  
 
Compulsory 
use of 
Hallmar k  for 
precious  
metal  
article.  
 
 
Compulsory 
registration 
for self 
declaration.  
 
(b) direct registration or grant self declaration of conformity with the Bureau 
as compulsory for the purpose of self declaration on such article or process as 
under: 
 
35 ‘‘Self declaration—Conforms to IS.............." 
 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), a person may, in respect of any 
article or process notified under sub-section ( 1), exercise an option for making 
registration or grant of self declaration of conformity with, or taking licence from, the 
Bureau. 
 
40  (3) When an article or process notified for registration or in respect of which self 
declaration of conformity has been granted under sub-section ( 1), is subsequently 
notified under section 14, then, in addition to such registration or self declaration of 
conformity, a licence shall be compulsorily taken from the Bureau for such article or 
process in place of such registration or self declaration of conformity. 

 
 
116 
 
 
E n forc emen t 
of orders. 
 
 
Substitution 
of  Chapter 
heading.  
 
 
Amen d men t 
of section  15. 
4 
 
14C. The  Central Government may, by order, authorise any authority to be 
enforcement authority for enforcement of any order issued by it under section 14, or 
section 14A or section 14B, in such manner as may be specified in the order.’. 
 
9. In Chapter V of the principal Act, for the Chapter heading "LICENCE" the following 
Chapter heading shall be substituted, namely:— 5 
 
"LICENCE   AND REGISTRATION OR SELF DECLARATION OF CONFORMITY". 
 
10. In section 15 of the principal Act,— 
 
(a) afte r sub -sectio n (1), the followin g sub -sectio n shal l be inserted, 
namely:— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A m e n d m e nt 
of sectio n  26. 
 
 
A m e n d m e nt 
of sectio n  33. 
 
"(1A) The Burea u may, for the purpos e of self declaratio n under 
sub-section (1) of   section 14B, by order, grant, renew, suspend or cancel 
registration or grant self declaration of conformity in such manner as may be 
determined by regulations."; 
 
(b) in sub-sectio n (2), after the words, bracket s and figur e "unde r sub- 
section (1)", the words, brackets, figure and letter "or as the case may be, registration 
or allow self declaration of conformity or renewal thereof under sub-section (1A)" shall 
be inserted. 
 
11. In section 26 of the principal Act, in sub-sections (1) and (2), for the words and 
figures ‘‘section 11 or section 12’’, the words, figures and letters ‘‘section 11 or section 12 
or section 14 or section 14A or section 14B or section 15’’ shall respectively be substituted. 
 
12. In section 33 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections 
shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
“(1) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 11 or section 12 or 
section 14 or section 14A or  section 15 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one year, or with fine which shall not be less than two lakh 
rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both. 
 
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, any offence punishable under this Act, not being an offence punishable with 
imprisonment only, or with imprisonment and also with fine, may, either before or after 
the institution of any prosecution, be compounded by an officer of the Bureau, not 
below the rank of Scientist G or Additional Director General of the Bureau appointed 
by the Director General in the Bureau in such manner as may be prescribed: 
 
Provided that the sum so specified shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum 
amount of the fine which may be imposed under sub-section (1) for  the offence so 
compounded: 
 
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to an offence 
committed by a  person for the second time or thereafter on which a similar offence 
committed by him has been compounded. 
 
(1B) Every officer referred to in sub-section (1A) shall exercise the powers to 
compound an offence, subject to the direction, control and supervision of the Bureau. 
 
(1C) Every application for the compounding of an offence shall be made in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
 
(1D) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution, 
no prosecution shall be instituted in relation to such offence, against the offender in 
relation to whom the offence is so compounded. 
 
(1E) Where the composition of any offence is made after the institution of any 
prosecution , such compositio n   shall be brough t by the office r referre d to in 
 
10  
 
 
 
 
 
 
15  
 
 
 
 
 
 
20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
25  
 
 
 
2  of  1974.  
 
30  
 
 
 
 
 
 
35  
 
 
 
 
 
 
40  
 
 
 
 
 
 
45  

 
 
117 
5 
 
sub-section (1A) in writing, to the notice of the Court in which the prosecution is 
pending and on such notice of the composition of the offence being given, the person 
against whom the offence is so compounded shall be discharged. 
 
(1F) Any person who fails to comply with an order made by the officer referred 
5 to in sub-section (1A) shall be  punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine not exceeding ten lakh rupees, or with both.’’. 
 
13. In section 34 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the words “recognised in this 
behalf by the Central or State Government’’ shall be omitted. 
 
14. In section 37 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 
 
10 (i) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
“(d) the number of members of the Bureau who will be members of the 
Executive Committee and the power of a member to authorise a person to represent 
him under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4;”; 
 
(ii) after clause (n), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
15  “(na) the manner of compounding of offence under sub-section (1A) of 
section 33; 
 
(nb) the application for compounding of an offence under sub-section 
(1C) of section 33;”. 
 
15. In section 38 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 
 
20 (a) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
“(ca) the jewellers, precious metal article, geographical areas and minimum 
turnover for jewellers under section 14A;’’; 
(b) for clauses (d) and (e), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(d) the manner of grant, renewal, suspension or cancellation of licence 
25 under sub-section (1) and the manner of granting registration, or allowing self 
declaratio n of conformit y, its renewal, suspensio n or cancellatio n   under 
sub-section (1A) of section 15; 
 
(e) the conditions subject to which a licence may be granted or renewed or 
registration or allowing self declaration of conformity may be granted or renewed 
30 and the fees payable therefor under sub-section (2) of section 15.”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of sectio n  34. 
 
Amendment  
of sectio n  37. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 
of sectio n  38. 

 
 
118 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
The Burea u of India n Standard s Act, 1986 (BIS Act, 1986 ) provide s for the 
establishmen t of a Burea u for the harmoniou s developmen t of the activitie s of 
standardisation , marking and quality certificatio n of goods and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. Section 10 of the said Act provides that the functions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards , inter alia, are   to establish, publish and promote Indian 
Standards, to grant, renew, suspend or cancel licence for the use of the Standards Mark and 
to specify a Standard Mark to be called the Bureau of Indian Standards Certification Mark. 
The Bureau of Indian Standards have, so far, formulated over 18,500 standards for about 
9,500 article or process of industry. 
 
2. Under the aforesaid Act, it is not compulsory to obtain licence from the Bureau by 
the producer or dispenser of a product or service  for the use of the Standard  Mark even 
after a standard for a product or service has been established and published by the Bureau, 
unless the Central Government, under section 14 of the Act, after consulting the Bureau, by 
order published in the Official Gazette, directs that the use of Standard Mark under a licence 
is compulsory. However, any person may apply to the Bureau of Indian Standards for 
licence if a standard has been established and published by the Bureau of Indian Standards 
only when an article or process  is of any scheduled industry specified in the  Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. 
 
3. In view of the provisions of section 14 of the BIS Act, 1986, no one can declare that 
his article or process conforms to the Indian Standard unless he obtains a licence from the 
Bureau and the article or process is of the scheduled industry. 
 
4. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the aforesaid Act, inter alia,— 
 
(a) to amend the long title of the said Act to name the Bureau of Indian Standards 
to be  a national standards body and  to include the articles, processes and services 
in addition to goods for the purpose of marking and quality certification; 
 
(b) to amend section 11 of BIS Act, 1986 so as to allow  any person who is a 
registered user of a self declaration of conformity to display or make self declaration 
on an article or process that his article conforms to the Indian Standards  or make  a 
public claim through advertisements, sales, promotion  leaflets, price lists or like that 
his article conforms to the Indian Standards; 
 
(c)   to amend section 14 of BIS Act, 1986 so as to empower the Central 
Government, after consulting the Bureau, by order published in the Official Gazette, 
to notify that any article or process of any industry (other than an article or process 
meant for export) shall confor m to the Indian Standard and direct that the use of the 
Standard Mark under a licence shall be compulsory; 
 
(d) to insert a new section 14A in BIS Act, 1986 so as to empower the Central 
Government, after consulting the Bureau, by order published in the Official Gazette, 
to make it compulsory for the jewellers selling the precious metal articles  in such 
geographical area and having such minimum turnover as may be specified by regulation 
to use Hallmark under a licence and that such article conforms to the Indian Standards; 
 
(e) to insert a new section 14B in BIS Act, 1986 so as to,— 
 
(i)  empower the Central Government, after consulting the Bureau, by 
order published in the Official Gazette, to notify that any article or process shall 
conform to the Indian Standard and to direct registration or grant self declaration 
of conformity with the Bureau as compulsory; 
 
 

 
 
119 
7 
 
(ii)  provide an option to any person in respect of any article or process 
notified by the Central Government for making  registration or grant of self 
declaration of conformity with, or taking licence, from the Bureau; 
 
(iii) provide that when an article or process notified for registration or in 
respect of which self declaration of conformity has been granted is subsequently 
notified, which shall conform to the Indian Standard, then, in addition to such 
registration or self declaration of conformity, it shall be compulsory to obtain a 
licence for such article or process in place of such registration or self declaration 
of conformity; 
 
(f) to insert a new section 14C in BIS Act, 1986 so as to empower the Central 
Government to authorise any authority to be enforcement authority for enforcement 
of orders issued under section 14 or section  14A or section 14B  of that Act; 
 
(g) to amend section 15 of BIS Act, 1986 so as to empower the Bureau to grant, 
renew, suspend or cancel registration or grant self declaration of conformity; 
 
(h) to amend section 33 of the BIS Act, 1986 so as to,— 
 
(i) provide for enhancement of quantum of fine from rupees fifty thousand 
to rupees two lakhs for contravention of section 11 or section 12 or section 14 
or section 14A or section 14B or section 15 of the BIS Act, 1986; 
 
(ii) provide for compounding of the offences punishable with fine except 
when a person has committed offence of similar nature for the second time or 
thereafter on which a similar offence committed by him has been compounded. 
 
5.  The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
The 13th April, 2012. K.V. THOMAS. 

 
 
120 
 
8 
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend section 4 of the Act to empower the Central Government to 
make rules to empower a member to authorise any person to represent him in the Executive Committee of the 
Bureau. 
 
2. Clause 8 of the Bill seeks  to insert three new sections 14A, 14B and 14C. New section 14A  
seeks to empower the Central Government, after consulting the Bureau, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, make it compulsory for the jewellers selling the precious metal articles  in such geographical  
area and having such minimum turnove r, as may  be specified by regulations to use  Hallmark under a 
licence and that article conforms to the Indian Standards, new section 14B seeks to empower the Central 
Government, after consulting the Bu reau, by order published in the Official Gazette, to notify any article 
or process which shall conform to the Indian Standard and direct registration or  grant self declaration of 
conformity with the Bureau as compulsory while new section 14C seeks to empo wer the Central 
Government by order to authorise any authority to be  enforcement authority for enforcement of any order 
issued by it under the new section 14 or section 14A or section 14B in such manner as may be specified in 
the order. 
 
3. Clause 10 of t he Bill  seeks to insert a new sub -section (1A)  in section 15 and to amend sub -
section (2) thereof  to empower the Bureau to make  order to grant, rene w, suspend or cancel registration 
or grant self declaration of conformity in accordance with the  regulations and subject to the condition and 
on payment of fees for grant or renewal of self declaration of conformity in accordance with the regulations 
in this behalf, respectively. 
 
4. Clause 12 of the Bill proposes to amend section 33 of the Act  to empower the Central 
Government to make rules to provide for the manner of compounding of offences and  making application 
therefor. 
 
5. The matters in respect of which the rules and regulations may be made, or orders to be issued are 
matters of detail or procedure. The delegation of the legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
121 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65 of  1951.  
ANNEXURE 
 
EXTRACTS FROM THE BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS ACT, 1986 
(63 OF 1986) 
An Act to provide for the establishment of a Bureau for the harmonious development 
of the activities of standardisation, marking and quality certification of goods and for matters 
connected therewith or incidential thereto. 
 
* * * * * 
 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
*  * * * * 
(t) “Standard Mark” means the Bureau of Indian Standards Certification Mark 
specified by the Bureau to represent a particular Indian Standard; and also includes 
any Indian Standards Institution Certification Mark specified by the Indian Standards 
Institution;  
 
* * * * * 
 
4. (1) The Bureau may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, constitute an Executive Committee which shall consist of the following 
members, namely:— 
 
* * * * * 
(b) such number of members, as may be prescribed. 
* *  * * * 
CHAPTER IV 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF  THE  BUREAU 
 
10. (1) The Bureau may exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be 
assigned to it by or under this Act and, in particular, such powers include the power to— 
 
*  * * * * 
(e) levy fees for the grant or renewal of any licence; 
* * * * * 
 
(l) appoint agents in India or outside India for the inspection, testing and such 
other purposes as may be prescribed; 
 
* * * * * 
 
14. If the Central Government, after consulting the Bureau, is of the opinion that it is 
necessary or expedient so to do, in the public interest, it may, by order published in the 
Official Gazette,— 
 
(a) notify any article or process of any scheduled industry which shall conform 
to the Indian Standard; and 
 
(b) direct the use of the Standard Mark under a licence as compulsory on such 
article or process. 
 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “scheduled industry” 
shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Industries (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 1951. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Constitutio n 
of   Executive 
Committee.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Function s   of 
the  Bureau. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Compulsory 
use of 
Standard 
Mark for 
articles  and 
processe s  to 
certain 
scheduled 
industries.  

 
 
122 
 
          10 
 
 
 
 
Grant  of 
licence. 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to 
search  and 
seizure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Penalt y for 
improper  use 
of  Standard 
Mark, etc. 
 
 
Cognizanc e  of 
offences  by 
courts.  
 
 
 
 
Power to make 
rules. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to make 
regulations.  
CHAPTER V 
LICENCE 
15 . (1) * * * * * 
 
(2) The grant or renewal of the licence under sub-section (1) shall be subject to such 
conditions and on payment of such fees as may be determined by regulations. 
 
* * * * * 
 
26. (1) If the inspecting officer has reason to believe that any article or process in 
relation to which the contravention of section 11 or section 12 has taken place are secreted 
in any place, premises or vehicles, he may enter into and search such place, premises or 
vehicle for such article or process. 
 
(2) Where, as a result of any search made under sub-section (1), any article or process 
has been found in relation to which contravention of section 11 or section 12 has taken place, 
he may seize such article and other things which, in his opinion, will be useful for, or relevent 
to, any proceeding under this Act: 
 
Provided that where it is not practicable to seize any such article or thing, the inspecting 
officer may serve on the owner an order that he shall not remove, part with or otherwise deal 
with, the article or things except with the previous permission of the inspecting officer. 
 
* * * * * 
 
33. (1) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 11, or section 12 or 
section 14 or section 15 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to one year or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both. 
 
* * * * * 
 
34. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act, save 
on a complaint made by or under the authority of the Government or Bureau or by any officer 
empowered  in this behalf by the Government or the Bureau, or any consumer  or any 
association recognised in this behalf by the Central or State Government. 
 
* * * * * 
37 . (1) * * * * * 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
*  * * * * 
(d) the number of members of the Bureau who will be members of the Executive 
Committee under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4; 
 
* * * * * 
38 . (1) * * * * * 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
*  * * * * 
(d) the manner of grant, renewal, suspension or cancellation of licence under 
sub-section (1) of section 15; 
 
(e) the conditions subject to which a licence may be granted or renewed and the 
fees payable therefor under sub-section (2) of section 15. 
 
* * * * * 

 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
————— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
to amend the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
————— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri K.V. Thomas, Minister of State for Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution) 
 
GMGIPMRND—429LS(S3)—27.04.2012. 

 
Extra portion 
 
G. FUNCTIONS OF BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
 
2.1 The core activities of Bureau of Indian Standards are standard formulation and 
certification of articles and processes under licence.   Bureau of Indian  Standards has 
the power to grant licence unde r clause (d) of sub -section (1) of section 10 and sub -
section (1) of section 15 of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act.   Taking of such licence 
is, by and large, voluntary.  Even after a standard for a product or service has been 
established and published by the Bureau of Indian Standards, it is not incumbent on the 
producer or dispenser of such a product or service to necessarily obtain licence from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards, unless the Government makes taking such licence 
compulsory under section 14 of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act.  However, any 
person can apply voluntarily to the Bureau of Indian Standards for licence provided a 
standard has been established and published by the Bureau of Indian Standards. The 
Government exercises the power und er section 14 for ensuring compulsory compliance 
with standards in public interest from the point of view of public health and safety of 
consumers (e.g. cement, packaged drinking water, etc).  
2.2 Under the explicit provisions of the Act, no one can declar e that his article or 
process conforms to the relevant Indian Standard unless he obtains a licence from the 
Bureau. The only exception is Section 12 according to which, no person shall, except in 
such cases and under such conditions as may be prescribed, u se without the previous 
permission of the Bureau, any mark or trade mark in relation to any article or process 
containing the expression “Indian Standard” or “Indian Standards Specification” or any 
abbreviation of such expression.  
2.3 It can, therefore, b e seen that section 12 permits the use of the expression 
“conforms to Indian Standard” as an exception to the general rule where such 
expression should normally not be used.  It has now been felt that in a fairly large 
number of cases, especially in the em erging technologies such as information 
technology, bio -technology and nano technology, a need may arise for an article or 
process to use the expression “conforms to Indian Standard”.  In such an eventuality, it 

 
may be appropriate to have an explicit provision in the Act as has been proposed in this 
note. 
 
J. FUTURE GOALS 
 
- To formulate Indian standards in line with national priorities, incorporating 
technical advancements. Keeping pace with international standardization at the 
same protecting the interest of Indian trade and industry. 
 
- To continue to serve consumers and customers by way of providing quality 
goods and services. 
 
- To encourage Indian industries to adopt Indian Standards voluntarily to face 
international competitiveness.  
 
 
On being asked whether other Accredited Certification Bodies such as NABL, Quality 
Council of India, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, etc. may be allowed to 
carry out the implementation of National Standards, the Department stated that it is 
submitted that B IS is a 'certification body' which certifies quality standards of products 
and services. Bodies like Quality Council of India (QCI) and NABL are Accreditation 
bodies that give accreditation/recognition of quality 'Laboratories'. As regards Food 
Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), it is mandated under the Food Safety 
and Standards Act, 2006 to 'fix food standards and regulate – monitor the 
manufacturing, import, processing, distribution and sell of food so as to ensure safe and 
wholesome food fo r the people'. Both BIS and FSSAI will function harmoniously to 
protect consumer interests.  

 
 When asked by the Committee which standard will prevail whether laid down 
under Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) and BIS in respect of food 
articles under the given circumstances, the Ministry replied as under___________Reply 
awaited. 
 On being enquired whether any steps being taken by the Bureau for mass and 
regular market checks for implementation of standards, the Department stated 
_________Reply awaited. 
 
G. License 
15. (1) The Bureau may, by order, grant, renew, suspend or cancel a licence in such 
manner as may be determined by regulations. 
(2) The grant or renewal of the licence under sub-section (1) shall be subject to such 
conditions and on payment of such fees as may be determined by regulations. 
The Government in Clause 10 proposes to amend Section 15 as under:- 
10. In Section 15 of the principal Act, - 
  (a) after sub -section (1), the following sub -section shall be inserted, 
 namely :- 
  '(1A) – The Bureau may, for the purpose of self declaration under sub -
section (1) of section 14B, by order, grant, renew, suspend or cancel registration 
or grant self declaration of conformity in such manner as may be determined by 
regulations.': 
  (b) in sub-section (2), after the words, brackets and figure 'under sub -
section (1)', the words, brackets, figure and letter' or as the case may be, 
registration or allow self declaration of conformity or renewal thereof under sub -
section (1A)' shall be inserted.  
 
Summary of Views/Suggestions placed before the Committee 

 
Consumer Association of India – Suspension or cancellation of license is to be widely 
publicized in all the media. 
 