 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2011-12) 
  
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
FORWARD CONTRACTS (REGULATION) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
December, 2011/  Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) 
15 


 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER  
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2011-12) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
FORWARD CONTRACTS (REGULATION) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 2010 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  22.12.2011 
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.12.2011 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI  
 
 
 
December, 2011/  Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) 

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE……………                  v  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………….     vii 
REPORT 
Chapter I
  
Introductory………………………….. 
A. Background………………………. 
B. Reopening of the Forward Markets 
C. Present Position of Regulation of Forward Market (Trading) 
D. Regulatory measures,  
E. Economic functions of the futures markets 
F. Objectives of the FC(R) Amendment Bill 2010 
G. Important Amendments Proposed to the FC(R) Act 1952:  
H. Constitutional & Legal Frame Work 
I. Benefits to the farmers 
1 
1 
2 
4 
4 
5 
8 
8 
12 
18 
Chapter II Amendment of the definition of Commodity Derivative ...  31 
Chapter III
  
(a) Establishment & Constitution of the Forward Markets 
Commission…………………………………………………….. 
(b) Management of Commission………………………………….. 
(c) Grants by Central Government Accounts and Audit………... 
(d) Registration of Members and Intermediaries…………………. 
(e) Penalties and Procedure……………………………………….. 
(f) Insider trading…………………………………………………… 
(g) Investigation……………………………………………………… 
(h) Appeal to Appellate Tribunal…………………………………… 
(i) Exemption from Tax on Wealth and Income……………….... 
(j) Power to make Rules and Regulations……………………….. 
35 
 
41 
46 
48 
51 
55 
58 
60 
63 
65 
  
APPENDICES 
 
I Dissent notes submitted by:-…………………………………………. 
(A)       Shri Prabodh Panda, MP(LS),              
(B)       Dr. Ramchandra Dome, MP(LS)  and  
(C)       Dr. T.N. Seema, MP (RS) 
67 
II The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2010................. 73 
III The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952…………………………. 132 

 
 
 
 
 ANNEXURES  
I Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 21.01.2011….. 211 
II Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 09.03.2011….. 
III Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 25.03.2011….. 
IV Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 26.07.2011….. 
V Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 12.12.2011….. 
VI Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 16.12.2011….. 
VII Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 19.12.2011….. 

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2011-12. 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar   - Chairman 
    MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
3. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
4. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary  
5. Shri Sanjay Dhotre  
6. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome  
7. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
8. Shri Lal Chand Kataria  
9. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase  
10. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
11. Shri Prabodh Panda  
12. Shri Sohan Potai 
13. Shri Purnmasi Ram  
14. Shri Ramkishun 
15. Shri Chandulal Sahu (Chandu Bhaiya) 
16. Dr. Naramalli Sivaprasad 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
23. Dr. M.S. Gill 
24. Shri P. Kannan 
25. Shri Lalhming Liana 
26. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
27. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
28. Shri Sanjay Raut 
29. Dr. T.N. Seema 
30. Shri Veer Singh 
31. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri P.K. Misra  - Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution (2011-12) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Fifteenth Report on ―The Forward Contracts 
(Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2010‖ pertaini ng to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
 
2.  The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2010 was introduced in        
Lok Sabha on 6 th December, 2010. Hon‘ble Speaker referred the Bill to the Standing 
Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution under Rule 331E of 
the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha on 16 December, 
2010 for examination and report within three months. The Committee invited the 
views/suggestions of the Individuals/Institutions/Stakeholders etc. on the various 
provisions of the Bill through the Print and Electronic Media including the LSTV.  The 
views/suggestions of the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission were also 
obtained. The Committee heard the views/suggestions of the representatives of the 
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce 
and Industry (FICCI), Sarthak Advocates and Solicitors and PRS Legislative 
Research on the Bill at its si tting held on 25 th March, 2011. The Committee also 
discussed the Bill with the officials of the State Governments of Rajasthan, Gujarat, 
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal during their study visits 
to these States during the months of February and November, 2011. The Committee 
discussed the views/ suggestions on the various provisions of the Bill as received 
from the Ministries/Institutions/ Universities/General Public etc. at their sitting held on                      
26th July, 2011. The representatives of the Department of Consumer Affairs and the 
Forward Markets Commission tendered oral evidence and gave clarification on the 
various provisions of the Bill before the Committee at its sittings held on                        
21st January, 9 th March 12 th December and 16 th December, 2011.  The Committee 
considered and adopted the draft Report on the Bill at their sitting held on                    
19th December, 2011. 
  
3.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Ministry of Fina nce, 
Planning Commission and Officials of State Governments of (i) Rajasthan, (ii) 

 
 
 
 
Gujarat, (iii) Andhra Pradesh, (iv) Maharashtra, (v) Tamil Nadu and (vi) West Bengal 
as well as the representatives of the National Commodity Exchanges such as Indian 
Commodities Exchange Ltd. (ICEX) National Multi -Commodities Exchange (NMCE), 
The National Board of Trade Ltd., Indore, Multi Commodity Exchange of India Ltd.,  
Mumbai, National  Commodity & Derivatives Exchange Ltd.,  Mumbai, Bombay 
Commodity Exchange Ltd., Mumbai,  Indian Commodity Exchange Ltd., Mumbai, 
ACE Derivatives and Commodity Exchange Ltd., Mumbai  and the East India Jute & 
Hessian Exchange Ltd., Kolkata.  The Committee also express their thanks to the 
representatives of the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Federation of Indian 
Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI), Sarthak Advocates & Solicitors, New 
Delhi and PRS Legislative Research, New Delhi for appearing before the Committee 
and also furnishing their views/suggestions to the Committee. The Co mmittee also 
express their thanks to Individuals/Institutions/Organizations etc. who furnished their 
views/suggestions on the provisions of the Bill to the Committee. 
 
4.  The Committee also express their thanks to the representatives of Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) as 
well as the Forward Markets Commission for tendering evidence before the 
Committee and for furnishing the detailed information/material, desired in connection 
with the examination of the Bill. 
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/ recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi                                        VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
19 December, 2011                          Chairman, 
28 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)                      Standing Committee on Food,  
                                                            Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
A. BACKGROUND 
 
 The Commodity Futures Market in India dates back to more than a century.  
The first organized futures market was established in 1875, under the name and 
style of  'Bombay Cotton Trade Association' to trade in cotton contracts, just 10 years 
after the establishment of Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) in USA and thus became 
the 2 nd oldest commodity exchange in the world.  Subsequently, many regional 
exchanges like Gujarat Vyapar Mandali (1900) for oilseeds, Chamber of Commerce 
at Hapur (1913) and East Ind ia Jute Association Ltd. (1927) for raw jute etc. came 
into existence.   By the 1930s, there were more than 300 commodity exchanges in 
the country dealing in commodities like turmeric, sugar, gur, pepper, cotton, oilseeds 
etc. This was followed by institut ions for futures trading in oilseeds, foodgrains, etc.  
The futures market in India underwent rapid growth between the period of First and 
Second World Wars.  As a result, before the outbreak of the Second World War, a 
large number of commodity exchanges t rading futures contracts in several 
commodities like cotton, groundnut, groundnut oil, raw jute, jute goods, castorseed, 
wheat, rice, sugar, precious metals like gold and silver were flourishing throughout 
the country. Trading was conducted through both op tions and futures instruments. 
However, there was no market regulator and hence there was no uniformity in 
trading practices. Further, there was no structured clearing and settlement system.   
 
1.2 During the second world war, the colonial government suspe nded forward 
trading in most of the major commodities as a part of its war mobilization efforts to 
contain rising price expectations.  After the dawn of independence, the futures 
markets were put under the Central List of subjects under the Constitution of  India.  
State governments were no more competent to regulate or intervene in futures 
trading.  In its wake, the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 (FCR Act, 1952) 
was passed to regulate this market with Forward Markets Commission (FMC) being 
set up in 1953 at Mumbai as the regulator.  However, options which were then 

 
 
 
 
perceived to be risky instruments of trading, were totally banned under the Act itself.  
Futures trading started to gain momentum in many commodities. However, in the 
mid-1960s, the Gove rnment imposed a ban on the futures trading of most of the 
commodities on the assumption that this led to inflationary conditions.   
 
B.  Reopening of the Forward Markets  
 
1.3 The Department of Consumer Affairs have stated that with substantial growth 
achieved in agriculture in the closing decades of the 20 th century and India‘s strong 
emergence on the agri commodity marketing and export front, it was felt necessary 
to provide the farmers the benefit of price discovery and price risk management in 
marketing their produce and thereby to reverse the adverse terms of trade that they 
have been suffering for their produce. The restrictions on forward trading were 
accordingly lifted in April, 2003 and 3 national electronic commodity exchanges 
came into operation in the same year.  Since then several changes have taken place 
in the Commodity Futures Market. While the Commodity Futures Market has been 
liberalized with effect from April, 2003 and modern institutional structures are in the 
process of being evolved, th e Forward Markets Commission (FMC) the market 
Regulator, is broadly functioning in its traditional manner. Some of the existing 
provisions of the FCR Act have also become redundant in view of the rapid 
expansion of the Commodity Futures Market. Also, the C ommodity Futures Market 
has been witnessing exponential growth in the last three years. 
There are now 21 commodity Exchanges in the country including five National 
Multi-Commodity Exchanges, located at Mumbai (2), Ahmedabad (2) and Gurgaon.  
These five nat ional Exchanges are state -of-the art, de -mutualized and corporatized 
trading platforms with professional management from the beginning with facilities for 
on-line trading across the country. At present, 113 commodities have been notified 
for trading and more than 40 commodities are actively traded. 

 
 
 
 
 
1.4 The current size of the Commodity Futures Market has crossed Rs. 100 lakh 
crore, registering a rapid Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR growth of 40%. 
The Commodity group -wise value of trade from 2003 -04 to 2 010-11 is given in the 
table below:  
                 (In Rs. Crore) 
Year Bullion Metals Energy Agri Others Total 
2003-04 3315 2134 - 123914 - 1,29,363 
2004-05 179053 618 1900 390188 - 5,71,759 
2005-06 760675 18723 181883 1192227 1614 21,55,122 
2006-07 1723348 405637 230712 1317125 104 36,76,926 
2007-08 1725952 897714 500942 941283 98 40,65,989 
2008-09 2973675 618776 1026442 627303 2760 52,48,956 
2009-10 3164152 1801636 1577882 1217949 3135 77,64,754 
   2010-11 5493892 2687673 2310988 1456389 - 11948942 
  2011-12 
(till 31.10.11) 
6423687 1545332 1584446 1083495 1 10636961 
 
1.5 As stated earlier, there was no regulator and hence, no uniformity in trading 
practices, therefore, after independence, the Forward Contract (Regulation) Act, 
1952 was passed to regulate this market and the FMC was set up in 1953 as the 
regulator.  A bill to amend Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 was introduced 
in Rajya Sabha on 23rd December, 1998 and the same was referred to the Standing 
Committee on Food, Civil Suppl ies and Public Distribution for examination and 
report.  The bill, after incorporating the recommendations of the Standing Committee 
was passed by Rajya Sabha on 15th December, 2003 but could not be passed by 
Lok Sabha due to its dissolution.  The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment 
Bill, 2006 was introduced in Lok Sabha on 21.03.2006 and the same was again 
referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution for examination and report.  The report of the Standing Committee 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 19.12.2006.  The Department has informed the 
Committee that the recommendation of the Committee were examined and 
incorporated in a draft note for the cabinet for moving official amendments to the said 
Bill and was circulated to all concerned Departments.  Their comments along with 

 
 
 
 
the views of the Department were incorporated in the Cabinet Note which was 
considered by the Cabinet on 3.5.2007.  However, the cabinet postponed the 
decision thereon and advised the Ministry to carry out wider consultations with all the 
stakeholders including the political parties and thereafter submit the revised note for 
approval.  The Bill of 2006 was, however, withdrawn due to issuance of the Forward 
Contracts (Regulation) Ordi nance and the Ministry of Law (Legislative Department) 
had advised that the Bill of 2008 required to be consequentially amended before it 
was considered for passing in Lok Sabha. Accordingly, a Cabinet Note for moving 
official amendments was sent to Cabine t which approved the proposal with the 
direction that a final decision regarding the definition of "commodity derivative" be 
taken by the Minister of Agriculture, Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
and the Minister of Finance.  However, the sai d Bill also lapsed upon the dissolution 
of the Fourteenth  Lok Sabha on 17.05.2009.  
 
1.6 The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2010 as introduced in    
Lok Sabha on 6th December, 2010 has now again been referred to the Committee 
by the Hon'ble Speaker on 16th December, 2010 for examination and report. 
 
C.   PRESENT POSITION OF REGULATION OF FORWARD MARKET (TRADING) 
 
1.7  There are three tiers of regulations of forward trading viz. The Central 
Government, Forward Markets Commission and the Reco gnised Commodity 
Exchanges/ Associations. The Central Government broadly determines the policy as 
to commodities in which futures/forward trading is to be permitted and the 
recognition of Exchange/Association through whom such trading is to be conducted. 
The Forward Markets Commission performs the role of approving the Rules and 
Regulations of the Exchange subject to which the trading is to be conducted, accord 
permission for commencement of trading in different contracts, monitor market 
conditions continuously and take remedial measures whenever the trading tends to 
go outside the permissible limits. The Recognised Exchange/Association provide the 
frame work of Rules and Regulations for conduct of trading, the place where the 
trading is to be conducted, rep orting and recording of contracts, execution & 
settlement of contracts, forum for exchange of documents and payments, etc. 
 

 
 
 
 
D. Regulatory measures  
 
1.8 However, futures trading have the potential risk of being misused by 
unscrupulous elements.  In order t o safeguard the market against such elements, 
regulatory measures as under are prescribed by the Forward Markets Commission:- 
(a) Limit on open position of an individual operator, to prevent over-trading; 
(b) Limit on intra-day price fluctuation, to prevent abrupt upswing or downswing in 
prices (commonly referred to as circuit limits); 
(c) Special margin deposits to be collected on outstanding purchases and/or 
sales, to curb excessive speculative activity, through financial restraints (by 
reducing the leverage / ability of individual operators to hold large positions);  
 
(d) During times of extreme situations of shortages, the Commission may even 
take more stringent steps, viz., skipping trading in certain deliveries of the 
contract, closing the markets for a specified peri od or even closing out the 
contract, to overcome such emergency situations. 
 
E. Economic functions of the futures markets 
 
1.9 In a free market economy, futures trading performs two important economic 
functions, viz., price discovery and price risk managem ent.  Such trading in 
commodities is useful to all sectors of the economy.  The forward prices give 
advance signals of an imbalance between demand and supply.  This helps 
the government and the private sector with exposure to commodities and 
price volatili ty to make plans and arrangements in a shortage situation for 
timely imports, instead of having to rush in for such imports in a crisis -like 
situation when the prices are already high.  This ensures availability of 
adequate supplies and averts spurt in pri ces.  Similarly, in a situation of a 
bumper crop, the early price signals emitted by the futures market help the 
importers to defer or stagger their imports and exporters to plan exports, 
which protects the producers against unremunerative prices.   At the  same 
time, it enables the importers to hedge their position against commitments 
made for import and exporters to hedge their export commitments. As a 
result, the export competitiveness of the country improves. 

 
 
 
 
 
1.10 When enquired as to what difficulties a re being faced by Forward Market 
Commission at present which would be overcome by enactment of the proposed 
Amendment Bill, 2010, the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) in a written note stated as under:- 
 
i) The Present Act does not confer upon FMC, the market regulator, various 
powers required for effective regulation of these markets. That is why the 
Government had to confer most of its powers (except for  recognition, 
withdrawal of recognition, notifyi ng the commodities for prohibition/regulation 
(under section 17, 15 and 18) and supersession of the Board of Directors of 
an Exchange) to the Forward Markets Commission through  delegation.  The 
proposed Amendment Bill (FCR Amendment Bill 2010) seeks to pr ovide FMC 
with original powers for effective regulation of the markets. 
ii) The penal Provisions in the present Act are inadequate for regulating the 
markets effectively.  The proposed amendments seek to provide for 
imposition of financial penalty, after adjud ication, for various contraventions, 
such as failure to furnish information, return, etc; failure by any person to 
enter into agreement with clients, failure to redress clients‘ grievances, insider 
trading, adoption of fraudulent and unfair trade practices , default in case of an 
intermediary and failure to comply with the directives of FMC.  Depending on 
the gravity of the offences, the financial penalty could be as high as               
Rs 25 lakh for certain offences.  As per the proposed provision,  the FMC will 
have original powers to impose financial penalties upto maximum of                  
Rs 25 lakh (for some offences like insider trading, unfair practices etc. the 
penalty has also being linked to the profits made out of such transactions, 
etc.), whereas as per the present provisions, only a penalty of Rs 1,000/ - can 
be imposed, that too by the competent court on conviction.  No penalty can be 
imposed at present by the FMC directly on the members or their clients. 
iii) The present Act does not provide for  a statutory power for registration of 
members (brokers) and other intermediaries. The registration of the 
intermediaries is essential for their effective monitoring and surveillance by 
the FMC to ensure compliance with regulatory provisions. 

 
 
 
 
iv) The present A ct does not provide for corporatization and demutualization of 
the existing Commodity Exchanges. The proposed amendments seek to 
provide for corporatization and demutualization of the Commodity Exchanges 
which will usher in separation of trading interests from ownership and 
management of Exchanges. 
v) The present Act does not provide for an Appellate Authority.  The proposed 
amendments seek to designate Securities Appellate Tribunal (SAT) as the 
Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of F.C(R) Act.  The Amendment  Bill 
provides for an appeal against the order of FMC and Adjudicating Officer 
before SAT and against the order of SAT before the Supreme Court. 
vi) The present Act prohibits options in goods. The proposed amendment seeks 
to introduce options in goods.  This w ill provide the farmers with a better and 
more easily manageable risk management tool. In options, farmers are not 
required to monitor the futures prices on a day -to-day basis, nor do they have 
to keep paying or receiving margins to/from the exchanges, til l the contract is 
settled. Besides, they can protect themselves against a fall in the prices 
without sacrificing the benefit from any potential upside. 
vii) Post-amendment, greater participation of banks will facilitate and accelerate 
their credit provisioning against forward sales by farmers as well as being 
aggregators for farmers‘ direct participation in forward trading. 
 
1.11 The Act defines ‗ready delivery contracts‘, ‗forward contracts‘ and ‗options‘ in 
goods. 
 
1.12 Ready delivery contracts are contracts f or supply of goods and payment 
thereof where both the delivery and payment is completed within 11 days from the 
date of the contract.  Such contracts are outside the purview of the FCR Act. 
     
1.13 Forward Contracts, on the other hand, are contracts for supply of goods and 
payment, where supply of goods or payment or both take place after 11 days from 
the date of contract or where delivery of goods is totally dispensed with, i.e., the 
contract is settled by payment of cash difference based on the movement in prices. 
 

 
 
 
 
1.14 Forward contracts other than specific delivery contracts are what are 
generally known as 'futures contracts' though the Act does not specifically define the 
futures contracts.  Such contracts can be performed either by delivery of goods a nd 
payment thereof or by entering into offsetting contracts and payment or receipt of 
amount based on the difference between the rate of entering into contract and the 
rate of offsetting contract.  Futures contracts are usually standardized, contracts 
where the quantity, quality, date of maturity, place of delivery are all standardized 
and the parties to the contract only decide on the price and the number of units to be 
traded.  Futures contracts are entered into through the Commodity Exchanges. 
 
F. Objectives of the FC(R) Amendment Bill 2010 
 
1.15 The main objectives of the FC(R) Amendment Bill 2010 are as follows: 
I. Strengthening of the regulatory framework including enforcement and 
penal provisions for the commodity derivatives markets. 
II. Functional and Fin ancial Autonomy for the market regulator, the Forward 
Markets Commission (FMC) to better regulate the commodity derivatives 
market. 
III. Permitting new products, viz., options in the commodity derivative market 
which are more suitable for participants like farm ers to cover their price -
risks.   
 
G. Important Amendments Proposed to the FC(R) Act 1952:  
1.16 The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2010, inter alia, 
seeks to make amendments to the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, in 
respect of the following:– 
(a) to redefine the expression ―forward contract‖ so as to include therein 
―commodity derivative‖ and also to define new expressions such as 
―commodity derivative‖, ―corporatisation‖, ―demutualisation‖ and ―intermediary‖ 
which have been used in the Bill; 
(b) to increase the maximum number of members of the Forward Markets 
Commission from four, as at present,  to nine out of which at least three would 
be whole-time members besides the Chairman;  
(c) to confer power upon the Commission to levy fees;  

 
 
 
 
(d) to provide for constitution of a fund called the ―Forward Markets Commission 
General Fund‖ to which all grants, fees and all sums received by the 
Commission except penalty shall be credited, and apply the funds for meeting 
its expenses;  
(e) to confer power upon the  Central Government to issue directions to the 
Commission on matters of policy and to supersede it in certain extreme 
circumstances;  
(f) to make provisions for corporatisation and demutualisation of recognised 
associations in accordance with the scheme to be approved by the 
Commission;  
(g) to make provisions for registration of members and intermediaries; 
(h) to allow trading in options in goods and commodity derivatives; 
(i) to make provision for investigation, enforcement and penalty in case of 
contravention of the provisions of the Act;  
(j) to make provision for transfer of the duties and functions of a clearing house 
of an exchange to a clearing corporation;  
(k) to make provisions for exemption from payment of tax on wealth, income and 
profits or gains of the Commission; and 
(l) to make provision for appeals from the orders of the Forward Markets 
Commission and Adjudicating Officer to the Securities Appellate Tribunal for 
the purposes of the Act and from the order of the Securities Appellate Tribunal 
under the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 to the Supreme Court;  
(m)  to make consequential changes in the Securities and Exchange Board of 
India Act, 1992. 
 
1.17 (1)  Up-dation of existing definition and insertion of new definitions 
The Amendment Bill proposes to modify some of  the existing definitions and 
also insert some new definitions so as to make the provisions of the FCR Act more 
relevant and useful in tune with the changes in the commodity derivatives market in 
the recent years.  It provides for the amendment of the defi nition of the expression 
―forward contract‖ so as to include therein ―commodity derivative‖ and also insert 
new expressions such as ―commodity derivative‖, ―corporatization‖, 
―demutualization‖, ―intermediary‖ etc which have been used in the Bill. 
 

 
 
 
 
(2)  Strengthening of Forward Markets Commission 
The Amendment Bill proposes to restructure and strengthen FMC.  
Accordingly, the following changes in the composition and functioning of FMC are 
proposed: 
 Increase in the number of Members from 4 to 9 with at least three whole-time 
Members and Chairman. 
 Provisions relating to term of office and conditions of service of Chairman and 
Members of the FMC and its Officers and employees. 
 Provisions to confer power upon the Commission to recruit its Officers and 
employees so as to provide flexibility in recruiting experts and professionals 
belonging to commodity derivatives market. 
 Provisions to provide for constitution of ‗FMC General Fund‘ to which all 
grants, fees and all sums received by the FMC shall be credited except 
penalties and apply the funds for meeting the expenses of FMC.  The FMC 
will also have the powers to levy fees. 
(3)  Enhancement of the powers of the Forward Markets Commission 
The Bill proposes to enhance the powers of the FMC by devolving most of the 
existing powers of the Central Government on the FMC, such as: 
 Powers relating to recognition, withdrawal of recognition. 
 Power to supersede governing body of the recognized associations. 
Besides the Bill also proposes to confer upon the FMC additional powers , 
such as the following: 
(a) to regulate the business of associations and intermediaries; 
(b) to call for information from agencies; 
(c) to protect the interests of market participants; 
(d) to promote and regulate self-regulatory organizations; 
(e) to prohibit fraudulent and unfair trade practices; 
(f) to promote investor education and training of intermediaries; 

 
 
 
 
(g) to prohibit insider trading; 
(h) to adjudicate and make Regulations; and 
(i) to investigate intermediary or person associated with the commodity 
derivatives market. 
(4)   Corporatisation and Demutualisation of the existing Commodity 
Exchanges 
Provisions relating to corporatization and demutualization of the existing 
Commodity Exchanges in accordance with the scheme to be approved by the FMC, 
are proposed to be inserted on the line s of similar provisions contained in the 
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (SCR Act). 
 
 
(5)   Provisions of Clearing Corporation 
The Amendment Bill also proposes to make provision for Clearing Corporation 
to which all the clearing functions of th e existing clearing houses of the Exchanges 
will be transferred in a time bound manner. 
 
(6)   Registration of Members and Intermediaries 
The proposed Amendment Bill provides for registration of members and 
intermediaries associated with the commodity deri vatives market.  At present, there 
is no statutory provision for registration of brokers, sub -brokers/authorised 
representatives and other intermediaries with the FMC.   The registration of the 
intermediaries will facilitate more effective monitoring of th ese intermediaries by the 
FMC.  Provision relating to suspension or cancellation of certificate of registration 
has also been provided in the Bill. 
 
(7)    Enhancement of penal provisions 
The existing penalty provisions in the FCR Act are grossly inadequat e.  In 
order to make the penalty provisions more effective and deterrent, the existing 
monetary limit of the penalty is proposed to be enhanced to a minimum of ―rupees 
twenty five thousand‖ as against the existing provision of ―rupees one thousand 
only‖.  New provisions are proposed to be inserted to provide for penalty, to be 
imposed after adjudication, of up to ―rupees twenty five lakhs‖ covering 

 
 
 
 
contraventions, such as failure to furnish information, return etc; failure by any 
person to enter into an agr eement with clients; failure to redress clients‘ grievances; 
insider trading, fraudulent and unfair trade practices; default in case of an 
intermediary; and failure to comply with directives of the FMC. 
 
(8)   Provisions relating to the Appellate Tribunal and appeal to the Supreme 
Court 
The Amendment Bill proposes to make provision for designating the 
Securities Appellate Tribunal (SAT) as the Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of 
FCR Act.  The Amendment Bill provides for an appeal from the order of FMC an d 
Adjudicating Officer to SAT and from SAT to Supreme Court under the FCR Act. 
 
(9)   Permitting trading in options in goods or commodity derivatives 
Trading in options in goods is banned under the existing provisions of the 
FCR Act.  The Amendment Bill pr oposes to make provisions for allowing trading in 
options in goods or commodity derivatives and for this purpose, Section 19 of the 
FCR Act is proposed to be amended.  This will provide a new facility for risk 
management to market participants and other stakeholders, including farmers.   
 
(10)   Other provisions 
The Amendment Bill also provides for certain other provisions, such as the 
following: 
a. Exemption of FMC from payment of tax on wealth, income and profits or 
gains on the lines of SEBI. 
b. Conferring pow ers upon the Central Government to issue directions on 
matters of policy to FMC and also to supersede it if so warranted. 
H. Constitutional & Legal Frame Work 
 
1.18 The subject ―stock exchanges and futures markets‖ is under the Union List in 
Schedule VII o f the Constitution of India, whereas the ―Trade and Commerce‖ and 
―Agriculture‖ are the subjects within the jurisdiction of States. Therefore, the 
regulators of commodities Exchanges do not have jurisdiction over spot Markets 
even in non -Agricultural Commodities. Asked whether the regulator of Commodities 

 
 
 
 
markets should have a mandate to regulate the spot markets in Commodities and 
the steps taken to resolve the issue, the Committee was informed by the Ministry 
that the proposed Bill does not seek to bring spot market and future market under 
the same regulatory framework. The Bill deals only with commodity derivatives 
contracts.  However, since the spot markets and derivatives markets are closely 
linked, it is desirable that both the spot markets and derivat ives market are under the 
purview of the same regulator.   
 
1.19 The objective and functioning of futures and spot market are completely 
different. However, some of the national commodity Exchanges are taking initiatives 
to set up national level electronic  Exchanges for spot transactions for agricultural 
commodities. Ideally, there should be convergence of spot and futures markets 
under a uniform regulatory framework for the optimization of the benefits of these 
reforms. 
 
1.20 Thus, the legislation to be en acted by the Parliament for bringing spot trading 
within the purview of the Commodity Futures Regulator can cover both inter -state 
trading as well as intra -state spot trading in the aforesaid commodities. A Bill to 
provide for regulation of electronic spot  trading in commodities as aforesaid is under 
consideration of the Department of Consumer Affairs.  
 
1.21 Keeping in view the enormous importance of the Bill, especially for the 
farming community, the Committee sought the views/suggestions from 
institutions/individuals/stakeholders etc. on the provisions of the Bill through letters 
and press release which were published in leading newspapers. The Committee also 
held discussions with the State Governments of Rajasthan, Gujarat, Andhra 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal on the various provisions of the 
Bill and took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) in this regard. The 
Committee considered the view s/suggestions furnished by various institutions 
/individuals/Cooperatives viz.  Sethkari Sangathana; The Thodupuzha Taluk Co -
operative Rubber Marketing Society Ltd.; and Consortium of Indian farmers 
Associations and took evidence to share the views of the representatives of the 
following Institutions/Organizations :- 

 
 
 
 
  (i) Confederation of Indian Industry (CII),  
(ii) Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI),  
(iii) Sarthak Advocates and Solicitors and  
(iv) PRS Legislative Research.  
 
1.22  The important points/suggestions brought  out in the written Memoranda as 
well as during Oral evidence are given as under:-  
 
 Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)  in their Memorandum submitted to 
the Committee stated that the Amendment bill propo ses to permit options in 
commodities. Over a period of time, it has also been realized that options are better 
suited to Indian farmers than futures as explained further in their note.  The FCRA 
Amendment Bill will further help the farmers and consumers by  making available 
more convenient instruments such as options, derivatives on weather etc.,  these 
instruments are particularly useful for farmers and others who are risk averse. 
Options would prove very helpful to the farmers because it would give them Pr ice 
protection down side and full opportunity to benefit from rising price.  By entering into 
an option contracts, the farmers will get a right to sell but would not be bound to sell 
if the price falls.  It will improve the quality of price discovery and p rice risk 
management through more effective regulation. They have also stated that one of 
the reasons for farmers to sell their produce at a lower price than the optimum price 
is insufficient price information. In order to help the farmers to get benefit f rom the 
futures market, it is imperative that futures prices are disseminated at the farm -gate.  
FMC and the national commodity exchanges hope to achieve this through the 
implementation of the price dissemination project.   
 Further, introduction of Newer Products/instruments such as option is also 
supported by Ace Derivatives and Commodity Exchange Ltd . as in the 
Memorandum submitted by them, it   has been stated that with a small investment 
outlay, the farmers/Constituents would be able to hedge the price  risk on their 
produce very efficiently.  Availability of Option would give a simpler alternative to the 
farmers.  
 
 India Pepper and Spice Trade Association (IPSTA)  in their Memorandum 
submitted to the Committee welcomed the passage of Bill since it would  go a long 

 
 
 
 
way in the overall development of the future trade. They have further supported the 
substitution of the new sections viz. 12 A & 12 B for option which will give impetus 
for trading as well as reduce the risk involved in it.  
 
  In a Memorandum s ubmitted by Kerala Agricultural University  it has been  
stated that Future Contracts are traded in the commodity bourses in India.  Further 
contracts have the inherent weakness that they have unlimited potential for profit.  It 
is high time that the options must be made available to the players in the commodity 
value chain to limit their cost of transaction.  The introduction will also enhance 
greater participation by the stakeholders and infuse greater liquidity in the market.  
 
  Confederation of Indian I ndustry  have also stated that the commodity 
futures  Market has witnessed significant growth and its complexities have 
increased.  It is imperative to increase the number of members including whole -time 
members of FMC to strengthen the regulatory framewor k of this market.  Increase in 
the number of members of the Commission would enable FMC to involve 
professionals from areas relevant to commodity and financial market for 
development as well as regulation.  Effective regulation is required to ensure that t he 
markets are free from any kind of manipulation which leads to distorted price signals. 
They have also stated that for strengthening of FMC as a regulator and for effective 
regulations, FMC should have the powers to constitute and expend out of the 'FMC -
General Fund' in order to give it adequate financial autonomy.  Financial autonomy, 
on the lines of SEBI, is required by FMC for quicker and more effective 
implementation of its regulations, besides focusing on developmental activities such 
as awareness, d issemination of price information, connecting stakeholders to the 
markets through innovative models which are essential for delivering the benefits at 
the grass roots level.  In the present commodity market, FMC needs to employ 
modern technological tools a nd professionals to meet the regulatory challenges.  In 
order to do that, FMC needs to have independent sources of revenue by having 
General Fund and charge fee from the brokers.  Therefore, they are of the view that 
such powers should be given to FMC.  Si nce FMC does not have adequate financial 
and operational autonomy at present, it has to depend on the time -consuming 
Ministry's approval for taking regulatory decisions.  FMC is highly short -staffed and 
not able to recruit appropriate personnel mainly due to non -availability of trained 

 
 
 
 
personnel with specific qualifications and domain knowledge.  Further, FMC can 
seek staff only on deputation basis from the government departments/semi -
government agencies, from where either the relevant manpower is not avail able or 
they are not willing to join on short -term deputations/due to lower remuneration 
available in FMC vis -à-vis the market opportunities available for such personnel 
outside.  Without financial autonomy, it is not able to upgrade its human and 
technical resources for effective regulation of the market.  
 
  It is also stated that the administrative and financial autonomy envisaged in 
the Amendment Bill will facilitate FMC in raising its own financial resources and 
induction of adequate skilled manpower t o strengthen its regulatory oversight. 
Currently, efforts to take the benefits of Commodity Futures Market to the small 
producers are being made by cooperative federations such as NAFED, HAFED, 
Rubber Producers' Cooperatives, etc.  Besides, FMC has also be en trying to make 
the market more inclusive through aggregating small producers.  With financial 
autonomy and operational independence, FMC will be able to undertake such 
market development efforts in a more effective manner. With financial autonomy, the 
ability of FMC to undertake such market development efforts will be enhanced.  
Besides, farmers will also be able to use options contracts to hedge their prices in 
simpler ways.  Thus, by using futures prices at the time of selling the farmer can 
maximize his returns.  The benefits of futures market can percolate to farmers if price 
discovery is proper and the prices so discovered are disseminated to farmers in such 
a way that farmers have easy access to such prices.  
 
 The PHD Chamber of Commerce and Indust ry  in their memorandum have 
also stated that financial dependence on Govt. currently limits FMC's investment in 
infrastructure, technology, apart from human resources, which in turn adversely 
affects the quality of regulation.  Regulatory autonomy is also  needed for enforcing 
decision in a pro -active and quick manner.  Hence, any element of regulatory failure 
would be perceived as a failure of the future market, which would dissuade 
participants in the real sector from availing this price risk instruments.   Hence, there 
is an immediate requirements for the regulator to build its capacities and enhance its 
infrastructure for proper development and regulation of future market.  They have 
also favoured new hedging products-Options and Weather derivatives, which can be 
tailored to the risk appetite of farmers to hedge against particular risks. 

 
 
 
 
 
  Geogit Credit (P) Ltd -Non Banking finance company  registered with the 
RBI as an NBFC -ND in their Memorandum has stated that the enactment of the 
warehousing (Development and Regulation) Act of 2007 and its becoming law since 
October 2010 is a major step in the direction of improving food security and making 
available necessary funding to farmers.  They have also stated that Commodity 
Futures Market helps for the larger p articipation by enabling farmers who have stock 
to avail finance and obviate distress sales. 
 
1.22-A  The Government of Rajasthan  suggested that  the edible 
commodities which are surplus in production should only be allowed for future 
trading. Future tradi ng should be based upon the actual delivery, this will help to 
stabilize the prices during the year and minimize false scarcity of some commodity. 
In place of transaction of loss/ profit, there must be actual transaction of goods/ 
commodity between parties  (order wise) in every forward contract.  In the present 
system forward trade is being executed by NCDX and MCX but government does 
not have much to control or to regulate them.  Although by this Amendment Bill, 
government is likely to control to a greater extent, as commission is being constituted 
including the members dealing with Consumer Affairs, Commodity Derivatives, Food 
and Public Distribution, Agriculture or Finance and also one member from RBI.  
 
Participation of Banks, Insurance Company and Mutual Funds  
 
1.23 When asked by the Committee about the implication if the Government open  
to the financial players like Banks, Insurance Company and Mutual Funds, etc.  the 
Department stated that in their written reply that  active participation will also 
promote greater credit flow to farmers for post-harvest marketing.   
 
During evidence, when asked by the Committee about participation of 
financial players like Banks, Insurance Companies and Mutual funds in FMC, the 
Secretary, Department of Consumer Affair s has stated that there is no legal 
restriction or any bar on Banks, Financial Institutions and  Mutual Funds, etc. to be a 
Commodity participant so far Forward Contract Regulation Act is concerned.  These 
Financial Institutions have their own regulators/c ontrollers and they have to take 
permission from their controllers/regulators who will decide on the pros and cons of 

 
 
 
 
the investment to be made by these Financial Institutions before they are given 
permission to join/invest in Future Markets. 
 
 
1.24 The Me morandum submitted by Department of Financial Studies, 
University of Delhi stated  that permitting Institutional players like Banks and 
Cooperative will not only provide more liquidity to the market but also provide better 
price-discovery.   
 
  During the study visit undertaken by the Committee, the Committee heard the 
views of some of the State Governments. The views expressed by the 
representatives of the State Governments before the Committee and through 
subsequent written communications are as under:- 
 
1.24-A The Government of Maharashtra were of the view that the farmers may not 
get much benefit out of the Bill.  However, the State Government in general 
supported  the early passing of the Bill in Parliament while expressing the desire that  
certain issues such as representatives of State Governments  be nominated on the 
Forward Market Commission (FMC) by rotation, the number of days  of spot trading 
be increased to 30 days from 11 days at present, stock limit imposed on direct 
marketers be lifted in the interest of the farmers etc.   
 
 The Government of Tamil Nadu were unhappy  that the State Governments 
were not consulted before the Bill was introduced in Parliament.  They were of the 
view that the State Governments should have been given the opportunity to express 
their views while formulating the Bill.  The State Government also felt that there was 
lack of awareness among the farmers and expressed the apprehension that too 
much of speculation could harm the farmers interest.   The State Government furthe r 
desired that a regular consultation mechanism between the FMC and State 
Governments need to be put in place.   
 
I. Benefits to the farmers 
 
1.25 When the Committee desired to know as to what type of risks are faced by 
farmers in the pre and post harvest seasons and how will the Bill help the farmers to 

 
 
 
 
overcome those risks and to benefit them from the future markets, the Department of 
Consumer Affairs stated as under:- 
 
1.26 Farmers and growers benefit through the price signals emitted by the futures 
markets even if they may not directly participate in the futures market.  The futures 
markets lead to reduction in the amplitude of seasonal price variations and help the 
farmer realize somewhat better price at the time of harvest or to postpone the sale of 
his produce, in part or in full, thereby moderating market arrivals as well as the ability 
of the trade to monopolise price setting.  This indirectly benefits consumers as well.  
This also helps the farmer in planning his cultivation in advance as well as to  
determine the kind of crop which he would prefer to raise, by taking advantage of the 
advance information of the future price trends of alternate crops, and probable 
supply and demand of various commodities in advance. By providing the 
manufacturers and t he bulk consumers a mechanism for covering price -risks, the 
futures market induces them to pay higher price to the producers, as the need to 
pass on the price -risk to farmers is obviated.  The manufacturers are able to hedge 
their requirement of the raw materials  as also their finished products.  This results in 
greater competition in the market and ensure viability of the manufacturing units. 
 
 
 When asked whether the present amendment to FCR Bill, 2010 will actually  
benefit the farmers and consumers, th e Planning Comminsion in their written reply 
stated that as in the case of MSP for agricultural crops, the forward markets provide 
useful inputs to farmers at the time of sowing/harvesting with regard to the prices 
that can be expected in the spot markets.   The proposed amendments to FCR Bill, 
2010 would benefit farmers and consumers it seeks to introduce options in goods 
and commodity derivatives which are prohibited  in the present bill. This is expected 
to provide farmers and consumers a better risk mana gement tools.  Through 
improved price discovery at the exchange, farmers may be benefited in terms of 
taking decisions for sowing crops which are economically more viable besides 
hedging their price risks. 
 
 The Planning Commission in their written reply h as also informed that the 
Government set up an expert committee to go into the question in detail whether and 
to what extent futures trading has contributed to the price -rise in agricultural 
commodities in recent times.The Terms of Reference of the Committ ee were to 

 
 
 
 
examine whether futures trading has affected the wholesale and retail prices of 
agricultural commodities and how to make futures markets accessible to farmers.  
On the issue of the effect of futures trade on wholesale and retail prices, if any, the 
factural position has been set out in the report. The Said Committee was unable to 
find any conclusive causal relation ship between futures trading and inflation.  
  
1.27 During briefing, when asked how does the Department create awareness  
among farme rs, the Chairman, Forward Market Commission  stated that to create 
awareness among farmers various schemes for awareness programmes have been 
sanctioned.  Last year, they have conducted approximately 500 awareness 
programmes and this year there is plan for  conducting about six hundred such 
programmes. 
 
1.28 The Committee would  deal with various provisions of the Bill which need 
comments, in the subsequent Chapters. 

 
 
 
 
1.29  The Committee note that the futures trading in India started way back in 
the year 1875. However in the absence of a  regulator, there was no uniformity 
in trading practices.  To regulate this market, the Forward Contract 
(Regulation) Act, 1952 was passed and the Forward Market Commission (FMC) 
was set up in 1953 as the regulator.  Since th e Commodity Futures Markets 
had been witnessing exponential growth in the last many years, Bills to amend 
the Forward Contracts (Regulations) Act, 1952 were introduced twice in the 
past in the Parliament i.e. on 23 December, 1998 in the Rajya Sabha and on                       
21 March, 2006 in the Lok Sabha.  Both the Bills were referred to the Standing 
Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. The Bill of 
1998,  after incorporating Standing Committee's recommendations was passed 
by Rajya Sabha on 15 December, 2003 but could not be passed by Lok Sabha 
due  to its Dissolution.  The Bill of 2006 was, however, withdrawn due to 
issuance of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Ordinance and the Ministry of 
Law (Legislative Department) had advise d that the Bill of 2008 required to be 
consequentially amended before it was considered for passing in Lok Sabha. 
Accordingly, a Cabinet Note for moving official amendments was sent to 
Cabinet which approved the proposal with the direction that a final dec ision 
regarding the definition of "commodity derivative" be taken by the Minister of 
Agriculture, Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution and the Minister 
of Finance.  However, the said Bill also lapsed upon the dissolution of the 
Fourteenth Lok Sabha on 17 May, 2009.  
Again, the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2010, as 
introduced in Lok Sabha on 6 December, 2010  has been referred to the 
Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution for 
examination and Report.  Keeping in view the importance of forward and 
futures market in the country, the Committee recommend the passage of the 
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2010 subject to their 
observations/ recommendations which are contained in the subsequent  
paras/chapters of the Report.  

 
 
 
 
1.30 The Committee note that the Forward Contract (Regulation) Amendment 
Bill, 2010 inter alia proposes to strengthen and restructure FMC, amend 
definition of expression ―Forward Contract‖ to include therein ―commodity 
derivatives‖; allow trading in options and make provision for constitution of 
Appellate Tribunal. The Committee note that in the mid -1960s, the Government 
imposed a ban on the futures trading of most of the  commodities on the 
assumption that this led to infla tionary conditions. However, in order to 
provide the farmers the benefit of price discovery and price risk management 
in marketing their produce and thereby to reverse adverse terms of trade, the 
restrictions on forward trading were lifted in 2003. The Committee observe that 
the Commodity future market has been witnessing exponential growth in the 
last three years.  The current size of the  Commodity future market has 
crossed Rs.100 lakh crores, registering a rapid Compound Annual Growth 
Rate (CAGR) growth of 40 per cent.  The Committee also observe that forward 
trading has been regulated by the Government by imposing/lifting ban on 
trading in certain commodities.  The Committee, however, feel that  the 
intended benefit of commodity market has not been reali zed by farmers 
community, for whom the ban in forward trading was lifted. The Committee 
note that an Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of  Prof.  Abhijit Sen 
was set up in 2007 to study the impact of futures trading on Agricultural 
Commodity prices to go into the question in detail whether and to what extent 
futures trading has contributed to the price rise in agricultural commodities in 
recent times.  This Committee was unable to find any conclusive causal 
relationship between futures trading and inflation.  
While concurring with the views of the Abhijit Sen Committee, the 
Committee feel that the futures trading does not impact the prices of 
agricultural commodities.  At the same time the Committee also note that the 
Union Government fixes Minimum Sup port Price (MSP) every year based on 
the report from CACP (Commission on Agricultural Cost and Prices).  Further, 
State Governments are also entitled to use the mechanism of MIS(Market 
Intervention Scheme) particularly in case of perishable food items.  Mo reover, 
the Committee agrees with the views expressed by various cooperatives and 
farmers organizations which opined that the commodity futures market is 
useful to the real economy and the small/marginal farmers.  Since the Central 

 
 
 
 
Government determines th e policy as to the commodities in which 
future/forward trading is to be permitted, the Committee recommend that 
Government should exercise  its power with prudence  by imposing/lifting the 
ban on trading on certain agricultural commodities especially the f oodgrains  
taking into consideration the prevailing market situations and keeping in mind 
the interests of farmers and consumers 
 

 
 
 
 
 
1.31 The Committee note that due to inadequate storage facility and holding 
capacity of the farmers, they sell their produce  soon after harvest to local 
traders/middlemen, who store these goods and sell them at higher prices 
during the lean period.  The Committee feel that the success of futures market 
depends upon existence of adequate infrastructure and the  storage capacity/  
godowns.  Accordingly, there is an immediate need to enhance the 
infrastructural facilities for storage for proper development and regulation of 
futures market. The Committee, therefore, desire that warehouses/storage 
facilities  should be established at Block level so that farmers and traders may 
store their produce and against the receipt of warehouses, may forwardly sell  
their commodities at the best available price.  With the help of warehousing, 
bank credit and regulated futures market, the farmers c an space out their 
sales, thereby realizing better prices.  At the same time, the Committee would 
like to emphasize the need of networking Agricultural Produce Market 
Committee (APMC) with rural markets, Haatts, Panchayats and commodity 
exchanges to upgrade the infrastructure. 
 

 
 
 
 
1.32   The Committee note that the FCRA Bill proposes to permit new 
instruments viz. options in the commodity derivative market.  As informed by 
the Department it will be more suitable for participants like farmers to cover 
their price risk and will help the farmers and consumers by making available 
more convenient instruments such as options, derivatives on weather – an 
instrument used by companies to hedge against the risk of weather -related 
losses, etc.  The Committee feel that th ese instruments particularly the 
options, which are essentially similar to insurance products, will offer small 
producer a way to hedge against risk, their participation in large numbers will 
make the price discovery process more democratic and efficient.  The 
Committee note that by entering into an option contract, the farmers will get a 
right to sell but would not be bound to sell if the price falls  and it will be useful 
for farmers and others who are risk averse,  by improving the quality of price 
discovery and price risk management through more effective regulation. This 
will allow farmers to hedge against fall in prices and at the same time resume 
their right to take advantage in case of rise in prices. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that options in commodities  should be allowed as it will 
be beneficial to the farmers and the term "the option in goods" should be 
clearly defined and  be included in the definition of "Commodity Derivatives".  

 
 
 
 
 
1.33 The Committee find that there has been lack of awa reness and 
dissemination of information about the benefits of commodity markets. Due to 
insufficient price information, the farmers literally sell their produce at much 
lower rates than the optimum price of the commodity. Further, large size of 
standardized contract offered by exchanges also dissuade the farmers to go in 
for future/forward trading. Many times, small farmers are more confused in 
understanding the real price of the commodities and some time make losses 
by participating in these markets. The C ommittee feel that there is an urgent 
need to launch a massive awareness campaign to create awareness among 
the farmers about the benefits which can be accrued from commodity market. 
For this, it is imperative  to make adequate publicity programs on the 
Commodity Futures Market for the benefit of farmers.  These awareness 
programmes should cover all aspects of the Commodity Futures Market, 
especially those of specific relevance to the farmers.  The Committee feel that 
once the farmers are familiar with the functioning of the  and the use of price 
information in their sowing and selling decision, they can graduate to the next 
level of participation in the future market, for mitigating their price risk on the 
exchange platform. The consumers self -help groups, Co-operative societies, 
Cooperative marketing Federation, NGOs and the institutions of village 
Panchayats can also be used to create awareness.  
 The Forward Market Commission also  has to ensure transparency in the 
price discovery process so that farmers have the knowledge before moving 
their produce to mandis for sale.  The Committee in this context have been 
informed  that Electronic Price ticker boards indicating spot and futures prices 
of commodities of importance to a locality are being installed in m andis, which 
will be expanded to cover other important places with the significant farmer 
footfall viz., village panchayat offices, rural post offices, etc. The Committee 
desire that apart from this  the Government should also conduct capacity 
building pro grammes for cooperatives, agricultural universities and rural 
extension workers (Especially KVKs) in the area of Commodity Futures Market 
which would further transfer the knowledge about the Commodity Futures 
Market to the farmers at the grassroots level. Similarly, the other stakeholders 
like stockists, importers/exporters, warehouse entrepreneurs need also to be 

 
 
 
 
educated. The Committee are of the view that the electronic media,  especially 
local channels generally have more outreach to the viewers particu larly in 
rural and remote areas and would be an effective medium to create awareness.  
Similarly, weekly and fortnightly publications in regional languages can also 
be utilized for spreading awareness.  The Committee would like to be apprised 
about the steps taken in the direction of creating awareness. 

 
 
 
 
1.34 The Committee note that the stock exchanges and futures market is a 
subject assigned under the Union List, in Schedule VII of the Constitution of 
India, whereas the ‗Trade and Commerce‘ and ―Agricultur e‖ are the subjects 
within the jurisdiction of States. As such, the regulators of commodities 
exchanges do not have jurisdiction over spot markets, which are regulated by 
APMC Act, falling under the ambit of concerned State Governments. The 
Committee feel that for a healthy market, the spot market and future market 
need to be placed under the same regulator‘s framework. The Committee,   
recommend that in order to bring in better coordination and synergy between 
spot trading and future market, Government sho uld find out ways and means 
to put spot and commodity market under one regulatory framework. The 
Government may consider amendment to the Constitution for the purpose, if 
necessary.

 
 
 
 
1.35 The Committee note that as per the existing provisions, the Banks, 
Insurance Companies and  Mutual Funds, etc. can participate in the 
commodity  derivatives market, subject  to the permission granted by their 
respective regulators.  However, the participation in the commodity derivatives 
is presently confined to retailers o nly. The Committee feel that the 
participation of Banks, Insurance Company and  Mutual Funds, etc. would 
enable larger participation by professionals, which would improve the quality 
of price discovery, thereby leading to better price risk management.  Ban ks 
themselves will be able to hedge their price risks arising out of their exposure 
to commodity traders and processors as a lender. The Committee further 
opine that participation of Banks/Financial Institution will also promote greater 
credit flow to farm ers for post harvest marketing.   Considering all these 
aspects, the Committee recommend that Banks, Insurance Companies and 
Mutual Funds, etc.  should be allowed to participate in the Commodity Markets 
in the larger interest of the farmers community which  not only will provide 
more liquidity to the markets but also provide better price discovery and lower 
volatility. 

 
 
 
 
1.36 The Committee note that presently there is a minimum limit prescribed 
for the size of the transactions by the Commodity Exchanges, resu lting in the 
exclusion of direct participation of the large number of small 
farmers/producers in the futures market.  The Committee are of the considered 
view that market should be made more inclusive through aggregating small 
producers as the direct parti cipation of small producers can make the futures 
market truly participative.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Government should explore ways and means to ensure that the exchanges fix 
a reasonable minimum limit on the transactions size.  This sho uld be taken 
care of while framing the  rules/regulations in this regard. 

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
 CLAUSE 3 — Amendment of the definition of Commodity Derivative 
 
 The Clause (3) proposes to amend Section 2 of the Forward Commission 
Regulation Act, 1952 containing various definitions which are as under:- 
 
Definition    In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - 
(a) ―association‖  means any body of individuals whether incorporated or 
not, constituted for the purpose of regulating and controlling the busines s of 
the sale or purchase of any goods; 
(b) ―commission‖ means the Forward Markets Commission established 
under sec. 3; 
(c) ―forward contract‖ means a contract for the delivery of goods  [2][* * 
*]  and which is not a ready delivery contract: 
(d) ―goods‖ means every kind of movable property other than actionable 
claims, money and securities; 
(e)     ―Government security‖ means a Government security as defined in 
the Public Debt Act, 1944 (XVIII OF 1944); 
(f) ―non-transferable specific delivery contract‖  means a specific 
delivery contract, the rights or liabilities under which or under any delivery 
order, railway receipt, bill of lading, warehouse receipt or any other 
documents of title relating thereto are not transferable; 
(g) ―option in goods‖   means an ag reement, by whatever name called, 
for the purchase or sale of a right to buy or sell, or a right to buy and sell, 
goods in future and includes a teji, a mandi,  a teji -mandi, a galli, a put, a call 
or a put, and call in goods; 
(h) ―prescribed‖  means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(i) ―ready delivery contract‖  means a contract which provides for the 
delivery of goods and the payment of a price therefor, either immediately or 
within such period not exceeding eleven days after the date of the contra ct 
and subject to such conditions as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the  official Gazette, specify in respect of any goods, the period under such 

 
 
 
 
contract not being capable of extension by the mutual consent of the parties 
thereto or otherwise; 
 2[3] [Provided that where any such contract is performed  either wholly or in 
part:- 
(1) by tendering of the documents of title to the goods covered by the 
contract by any party thereto (not being a commission agent or a bank) who 
has acquired owners hip of the said documents by purchase, exchange or 
otherwise, to any other person (including a commission agent but not 
including a bank); or 
(2) by the realisation of any sum of money being the difference between 
the contract rate and the settlement rate or clearing rate or the rate of any 
offsetting contract: or 
(3) by any other means whatsoever, and as a result of which the actual 
tendering of the goods covered by the contract or payment of the full -price 
therefor is dispensed with then such contract sha ll not be deemed to be a 
ready delivery contract. 
 
Explanation. - For the purpose of this clause. - 
(i)  ―bank‖ includes any banking company as defined in the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 (110 of 1949), a co -operative bank as defined in the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), the State Bank of India and any 
of its subsidiaries and any corresponding new bank constituted under Sec. 3 
of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 
1970 (5 of 1970); 
(ii) ―commission agent‖  means a person who, in the ordinary course of 
business, makes contract for the sale or purchase of goods for others for a 
remuneration (whether known as commission or otherwise) which is 
determined in the contract itself or determinable from the terms of the contract 
in either case, only with reference to the quantity of goods or to the price 
therefor as stipulated in the contract]; 
 [4](j) ―recognised association‖  means an association to which recognition 
for the time being has been granted by the Central Go vernment under Sec. 6 
in respect of goods or classes of goods specified in such recognition; 

 
 
 
 
(jj) ―registered association‖ means an association to which for the time 
being a certificate of registration has been granted by the Commission under 
Sec.14-B]; 
(k) ―rules‖  with reference to the rules relating in general to the constitution 
and management of an association, includes in the case of an incorporated 
association, its Memorandum and articles of association; 
(l) ―securities‖ includes shares, scripts, sto cks, bonds, debentures, 
debenture-stocks, or other marketable securities of a like nature in or of any 
incorporated company or other body corporate and also government 
securities: 
(m) ―specific delivery contract‖   means a forward contract which provides 
for the actual delivery of specific qualities or types of goods during a specified 
future period at a price fixed thereby or to be fixed in the manner thereby 
agreed and in which the names of both the buyer and the seller are 
mentioned: 
(n) ―transferable spe cific delivery contract‖   means specific delivery 
contract which is not a non -transferable specific delivery contract   [5][and 
which is subject to such conditions relating to its transferability as the Central 
Government may by notification in the official Gazette, specify in this behalf. 
 
2.2 The Government have proposed to amend few existing definitions (e.g. 
―association‖, ―forward contract‖, ―ready delivery contract‖, ―specific delivery contract‖ 
and ―securities‖) and addition of various definitions (e .g ―Chairman‖, ―commodity 
derivative‖, ―corporatization‖, ―demutualization‖, ―Fund‖, ―intermediary‖, ―member‖, 
―notification‖ and ―scheme‖. 
 
2.3 Sarthak Advocates & Solicitor in their written memorandum has suggested 
to include 'option in good' in the definition of Commodity Derivatives. 
 In this context, the Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs while deposing 
before the Committee stated as under:- 
"options in goods are option in commodity derivatives.  They are 
of the same generic term, commodity derivatives includes option 
in goods". 

 
 
 
 
 
2.4 The Committee note that clause 3 of the Bill intends to amend a few 
existing definitions under Section 2 of the Principal Act e.g. ―association‖, 
―forward contract‖, ―ready delivery contract‖, ―specific delivery con tract‖ and 
―securities‖ while including  various additional  definitions such as, 
―Chairman‖, ―commodity derivative‖, ―corporatization‖, ―demutualization‖, 
―Fund‖, ―intermediary‖, ―member‖, ―notification‖ and ―scheme‖.  The 
Committee find that in the Bill,  "Forward Contract", has been included in the 
definition of Commodity Derivative as appearing in Sub -Clause (1) however, 
"option in good" does not appear in the definition of Commodity Derivative. 
The term "Commodity Derivative" has been widely used in the  Bill and  
Committee fail to understand  the rationale of not including "option in good" in 
the definition of Commodity Derivative.  The Committee, therefore, desire that 
"option in good" may be included in the definition of Commodity Derivative. 
 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
(A)  CLAUSE 4 — ESTABLISHMENT & CONSTITUTION OF THE FORWARD 
MARKETS COMMISSION 
 
   The Clause 4 proposes to amend Section 3 of the Forward Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1952 which prescribes the procedure for Establishment and 
constitution of the Forward Markets Commission as under:— 
 
1.  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish a Commission to be called the Forward Markets Commission for the 
purpose of exercising such functions and discharging such duties as may be  
assigned to the Commission by or under this Act. 
 
2.  The Commission shall consist of not less than two, but not exceeding 
four, members appointed by the Central Government one of them being 
nominated by the Central Government to be the Chairman thereof; and the 
Chairman and the other member or members shall be either whole -time as 
the Central Government may direct:  
 
Provided that the members to be so appointed shall be persons of 
ability, integrity and standing who have shown capacity in dealing with 
problems relating to commerce or commodity markets, or in administration or 
who have special knowledge or practical experience in any matter which 
renders them suitable for appointment on the commission. 
 
3.  No person shall be qualified for appointment as, o r for continuing to be, 
a member of the Commission if he has, directly or indirectly, any such 
financial or other interest as is likely to effect prejudicially his functions as a 
member of the commission, and every member shall, whenever required by 
the Central Government so do, furnish to it such information as it may require 
for the purpose of securing compliance with the provisions of this sub-section. 
 

 
 
 
 
4.  No member of the Commission shall hold office for a period of more 
than three years from the date of his appointment, and a member 
relinquishing his office on the expiry of his term shall be eligible for re -
appointment. 
 
5.  The other terms and conditions of service of members of the 
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed. 
 
3.2  The Government h as proposed to delete sub sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of 
Section 3 of the Principal Act and has proposed to substitute the following sub -
section:— 
―(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal with power subject to the provisions 
of this Act, to acquire hold and dispose of property, both moveable and 
immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.‖ 
Ministry in their written reply has informed that currently the Commodity market 
regulator functions as an attached office of the Department of Consumer Affairs. 
 
 Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)  in their memorandum suggested that 
to re-structure and strengthen the FMC and confer upon it more statutory powers on  
the lines of SEBI is indeed a right step.  It will enable FMC to play the role of an 
effective and strong regulator by ensuring that the commodity derivatives market has 
a healthy growth and the interests of various stakeholders in the commodity 
economy i s served.  With the help of a stronger regulator, a well regulated 
commodity derivatives market will attract participation from larger number of 
stakeholders, who will find this market a cheap and effective medium for hedging 
their risks.  This will result  in more accurate price signals.  Thus, a strong regulator 
would also help the economy to prevent and manage potential crisis.  
 
Planning Commission  in their written reply has suggested that keeping in 
view the specialized nature of activity performed by F MC, there is a need to impart 
more autonomy to FMC to recruit professionals having familiarity with the 
commodities derivatives market (they need not necessarily belong to these markets).  
It may, therefore, by desirable to provide such flexibility to FMC.   

 
 
 
 
 
Planning Commission has also suggested that there is need to upgrade the 
legal and regulatory system whereby FMC can discharge its role more effectively on 
the lines of similar measures taken for Securities and Exchange Board of India.  
Since the quali ty of regulation of markets  plays an important role in reducing 
information asymmetry, promoting confidence among and protecting the participants 
from manipulative practices, amendments to FCR Act are deemed necessary.   
 
Department of Financial Studies, University of Delhi in their Memorandum 
submitted to the Committee has suggested that the proposed restructuring of FMC 
shall provide the necessary autonomy and requisite teeth for effective regulation of 
the commodities market and shall go a long way in m aking them more efficient.  It 
will help in speeding up the process of regulation and monitoring and make regulator 
more responsive to changing environment.  With ever increasing integration of Indian 
Commodities Market with global markets, it is essential  that our markets get 
regulatory environment that match with global standards and approaches.  
 
Shetkari Sangathana in their Memorandum submitted to the Committee have 
appreciated the Government and the Ministry for making the Forward Market 
Commission (FMC) the kind of a regulator it is today but wish the regulator to have 
the strength to act independently and efficiently as  an autonomous body with 
powers that  are effective, which is essential for the further development of the 
Commodity Futures Market: t o make it more and more useful to the real economy 
and small/marginal farmers.  
  
In a Memorandum submitted by Kerala Agricultural University, it has 
been  stated that for efficient functioning of  a regulator like SEBI is sine qua non.  
 
Ace Derivatives a nd Commodity Exchange Ltd. in its Memorandum 
submitted to the Committee have stated that legal framework under which Forward 
Market Commission, the Regulator, operates is grossly inadequate to enable it to 
continue to discharge its role as an effective reg ulator in the expanding commodities 
market place and therefore it is the need of the hour that underlying legal framework 
of the Commission be suitably strengthened at the earliest possible. They have also 

 
 
 
 
stated that FMC can contribute to the healthy deve lopment of Indian Commodity 
Futures Market on par with the best in the world.  
 
During the study visit of the Committee to Mumbai undertaken in November, 
2011, the representatives of Ace Derivatives and Commodity Exchange Ltd., in reply 
to a query informed that the current regulatory framework does not provide adequate 
financial and operational autonomy.  As per the current practice, FMC has to solely 
depend on the funds from the Central Government and administratively FMC 
functions as an extended arm of th e Central Government.  Due to lack of financial 
autonomy, FMC is unable to hire talent from the market and most of the senior staff 
is on deputation from different ministries which affects its overall efficiency.    When 
the Committee pointed out that the Government proposed to amend sub Section 
2,3,4 and 5 of Section 3 of the Act by substituting the new Section 3(2) to give FMC 
financial and administrative autonomy to meet the growing challenges in the future 
and enquired how the amendment of the Sub Secti on, will grant financial and 
administrative autonomy to FMC, the Committee were informed that with the 
proposed amendments in the bill, FMC would be able to have adequate manpower 
with requisite skill sets.  Detailed provisions on appointment, terms of off ice, 
meetings, etc. entailed in the amendments would further increase the operational 
efficiency of the regulator. With the amendment Bill, constitution of a separate fund 
would provide the much needed financial autonomy to FMC. 
 
The Multi Commodity Exchange of India Ltd. in this context  stated that the 
size, growth and development mandate of the futures market warrant an 
autonomous and strong regulator.  The regulator has to possess operational 
autonomy in order to become proactive in enforcing regulation s.  At the same time, 
financial autonomy of the regulator will improve its outreach efforts to further deepen 
the market.  Financial dependence on government currently limits FMC's investment 
in Infrastructure, technology, apart from human resources, which  in turn adversely 
affects the quality of regulation.  When enquired whether the FMC be independent of  
Government like SEBI or not, representatives of the Bombay Commodity Exchange 
during interaction with the Committee informed that from operational point  of view 
FMC should function  independently.  This will enable them to take all administrative 
decisions without referring the same to the Ministry,  at the earliest.  

 
 
 
 
 
3.3 During evidence, when enquired why autonomy is important for the market of 
regulator, the Representative of CII stated as under:- 
"Autonomy is needed, because regulator needs domain specialization.  They 
also need talent to be attracted from the market to really make it to this size.  
If you compare the nearest closure to stock exchange , current regulator, as 
department, has got roughly under 100 staff, whereas SEBI has 600 staff to 
control this.  There are eight national exchanges; five are already live and 
three are going to come; whereas in stock exchange, there are three national 
level and few others." 
 
National Commodity and Derivatives Exchange Ltd., Mumbai , in their 
written submission has also stated that since FMC is proposed to be an independent 
regulatory body, it will have to recruit professionals suited to its requirements, on  a 
regular basis.  The process of recruitment through UPSC is long and in the present 
dynamic commodity market, FMC may not be able to afford delays.  Further, FMC 
could be in a better position to match the required skill and remuneration of the 
candidates. In the present commodity market, FMC needs to employ modern 
technological tools and professionals to meet the regulatory challenges.  In order to 
do that, FMC need to have independent sources of revenue by having General Fund 
and powers to charge fee from the brokers.  Therefore, they are of the view that such 
powers should be given to FMC and the proposed amendments will achieve the 
object of making FMC, an independent statutory body similar to SEBI. 
In reply to a query as to why it was necessary to gran t financial and functional 
autonomy to FMC, the Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs during  evidence 
stated that :- 
"if functioning of the Commission is not up to the mark,  the Government will 
have full right to issue instructions and whatever rules  are made by the 
Commission will be subject  to the approval of the Government." 
The Chairman, FMC, has further supplemented as under:- 
"We feel that a strong and autonomous regulator is essential for the  since the 
market has grown manifold.  If regulator  is strong, the market  participants will 
work according to rules". 

 
 
 
 
 
3.4  The Committee find that Clause 4 of the Bill proposes to amend             
Section 3 of the FC(Regulation) Act, 1952 which prescribes the procedure for 
establishment and constitutio n of the Forward Markets Commission laying 
down general qualifications for appointment to the post of the Members, their 
term of office and other terms and conditions of service of Members of the 
Commission.  The Committee note that at present FMC is an at tached body of 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution and is financially 
assisted by Department of Consumer Affairs. The Government propose to 
amend Sub Section (2),(3),(4),and (5) by substituting new Section 3(2) to give 
FMC financial an d functional autonomy to meet the growing challenges in the 
futures and Commodity  derivative market.  The Committee feel that there is a 
need to impart financial and operational autonomy to FMC so as to enable it to 
discharge its role in a more efficient manner.  Effective market regulation 
needs empowered, autonomous and independent regulator with appropriate 
channel of accountability and the proposed amendment would address these 
effectively.  While agreeing to the proposed amendment to grant financial a nd 
administrative autonomy to FMC, the Committee also desire that the 
provisions of sub sections (2),(3) and (4) should also be incorporated in the 
new Bill especially sub -section (4) which prescribes the  term of office of the 
Members of the Commission. T he Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Clause 4 should be suitably amended in the light of the above observation. 
  

 
 
 
 
(B)  CLAUSE 5 – MANAGEMENT OF COMMISSION 
 
3.5  Section 3 of the Forward Contract (Regulation) Act, 1952 deals with the 
establishment and c onstitution of the Forward Market Commission. Government 
have proposed to insert new Sections 3A, 3B, 3C, 3D, 3E, 3F, 3G and 3H through 
the FC(R) Amendment Bill, 2010. It is proposed that after section 3 of the principal 
Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
―3A (1)  The Commission shall consist of the following members, 
namely:— 
(a) a Chairman; 
 
(b) two members from amongst the officials of the Ministries or 
Departments of the Central Government dealing with Consumer 
Affairs, Commodity D erivatives, Food and Public Distribution, 
Agriculture or Finance; 
 
(c) one member from amongst the officials of the Reserve Bank; 
 
(d) five other members of whom at least three shall be the whole -time 
members. 
 
(2)  The general superintendence, direction a nd management of the affairs 
of the Commission shall vest in a board of members, which may exercise all 
powers and do all acts and things which may be exercised or done by the 
Commission. 
 
(3)  Save as otherwise determined, by regulations, the Chairman shall have 
powers of general superintendence and direction of the affairs of the 
Commission and may also exercise all powers and do all the acts and things 
which may be exercised or done by the Commission. 
 
(4)  The Chairman and members referred to in clauses  (a) and (d) of sub -
section (1) shall be appointed by the Central Government and the members 

 
 
 
 
referred to in clauses (b) and (c) of that sub -section shall be nominated by the 
Central Government and the Reserve Bank, respectively. 
 
 (5)  The Chairman and oth er members referred to in clauses (a) and (d) of 
sub-section (1) shall be persons of ability, integrity and standing who have 
shown capacity in dealing with problems relating to commodity markets or 
who have special knowledge or experience of commerce or e conomics or law 
or finance or in administration or have practical experience in any matter 
which renders them suitable for appointment on the Commission. 
 
3.6  In Clause 5, the Government has also proposed to insert a new Clause 3C 
which provides that the Central Government shall remove a member from office if 
he— 
 
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated as insolvent; 
(b) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; 
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the option of the Cen tral 
Government, involves a moral turpitude; 
(d) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his position as to 
render his continuation in office detrimental to the public interest; 
Provided that no member shall be removed under this clause un less he has 
been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
 

 
 
 
 
 3.7  Clause 5 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 3 of the Principal 
Act by inserting Sections 3A to 3H in the Principal Act. The Committee 
has examined Sub -Clause 3A(1) of C lause 5 of the Bill which provides 
the composition of FMC. As per the provisions, the FMC would consist 
of a Chairman, two Members from amongst officials of the  Ministries or 
Departments of the Central Government dealing with Consumer Affairs, 
Commodity D erivatives, Food and Public Distribution, Agriculture or 
Finance, one Member from RBI and 5 other Members of whom 3 shall be 
whole time Members. The Committee note that, as regulation is a highly 
technical activity especially in the case of commodity futur es, the 
Chairman of the Commission needs to be a financial and technical 
expert with professional qualifications in the working of financial 
sector/commodity markets. He should have a proven track record of at 
least 10 years in high managerial regulatory p osition in the financial 
sector/commodity market. The Committee also desire that out of five 
Members to be nominated on the FMC as per Sub -Clause (d) of Section 
3A, one Member from farmers organizations of national level/repute may 
also be associated.  The  Committee opine that parallel Dabba Market is 
too big and has very few staff for investigation and enforcement of rules.  
If autonomy to the Commission is granted, that deficiency will be made 
over.  The Committee feel that keeping in view the specialized  nature of 
activities performed by FMC, there is a need to recruit professionals 
having familiarity with the Commodities Derivatives Market.    
Recruitment of professionals with requisite expertise  would enable the 
Commission to discharge its duties more effectively. The Committee 
also recommend that the retirement age of Chairman and Members of 
FMC should also be prescribed which should not be more than 60 years. 

 
 
 
 
3.8 The Committee further note that the Central Government has been 
empowered to appoint Cha irman and other Members of the  Commission vide 
sub-clause 4 of Clause 3A. The Committee are of the view that in order to 
impart transparency in the system, there is a need to include in the Bill on 
provision for the constitution of a Selection Committee w hich may recommend 
names for the post of Chairman and Members of the Commission. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that a broad based Selection Committee with 
Member of Planning Commission Incharge of Agriculture Sector as Chairman 
and representative of  th e Central Government Department dealing with 
Commodity Market and Ministry of Finance, not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary be nominated as Members of this Body.  

 
 
 
 
 
3.9 The Committee further desire that in the event of any vacancy in the 
Commission, the C entral Government should, within one month from the date 
of occurrence of vacancy or removal of Member of Forward Market 
Commission/Tribunal and six months before the superannuation or tenure of 
Membership of Forward Market Commission/Tribunal, make a refe rence to the 
Selection Committee for filling up of vacancy. This will ensure that for the 
reasons of vacancy, the work of the Commission/Appellate Tribunal, is not 
held up. The Committee also desire that the Selection Committee may finalize 
and make selection within three months from the date on which a reference is 
made. 

 
 
 
 
(C) CLAUSE 9 — GRANTS BY CENTRAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS AND 
AUDIT 
 
3.10  Clause 9 of the Bill proposes to insert a new Chapter IIA after Chapter II of the 
Principal Act. Sub-clause 4F(4) of Chapter IIA of the Bill prescribes as under:— 
 
―(4) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf 
together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded an nually to the 
Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid 
before each House of Parliament.‖ 
 

 
 
 
 
3.11 Clause 9 proposes to insert Chapter II A in the Principle Act regarding 
Grants by the Central Government. Under this Chapter, sub -sections 4(d), 4(e), 
and 4(f) are proposed to be inserted in the Principal Act. Under sub -clause 4(f), 
there is a provision that a certified account of the commission together with 
the C & AG Audit Report thereon has to be forwarded annually to the Central  
Government and the Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament. The Committee note that no period has been prescribed 
for the laying of such reports.  The Committee feel that the report should be 
laid before each House of Pa rliament within 3 months of its receipt by the 
Central Government. The Committee, therefore, desire that this clause should 
be suitably amended. The Committee also note that there is no provision in the 
Act regarding preparation of Annual Report of the Com mission. The 
Committee desire that the Commission should prepare an Annual Report and 
the Central Government should lay it before each House of Parliament every 
year. This should be suitably provided for in the Act. 

 
 
 
 
(D) CLAUSE 21 — REGISTRATION OF MEMBERS AND INTERMEDIARIES 
 
3.12  Section 14A of the Forward Contract (Regulation) Act, 1952 deals with 
procedure regarding certificate of registration to be obtained by all associations. The 
Government have proposed to delete Chapter IIIA (Section 14A) from the Principal 
Act and have suggested to substitute a new Chapter IIIA (Section 14A) namely, 
―Registration of Members and Intermediaries‖. As per sub-section (3) of Section 14A, 
no foreign  participant or foreign intermediary associated with the commodity 
derivatives market, as the Commission may, by notification in this behalf, specify, 
shall deal in forward contract or option in goods or option in commodity derivative 
except under and in accordance with the conditions of a certificate of registration 
obtained from the Commission in accordance with the regulations made under this 
Act.   
 
3.13 Provided that a foreign participant or foreign intermediary dealing in forward 
contract or option in goods or option in commodity derivative immediately before the 
commencement of this Act, for which no certificate of registration was required prior 
to such commencement, may continue to deal in forward contract or option in goods 
until such time as rules may be made by the Central Government for such dealings 
or in case no such rules have been made until permitted as such by the Commission 
by notification. 
 
3.14 The Amendment Bill also proposes to replace chapter –III A of the Act so as 
to provide for mandatory registration of members and intermediaries.  This 
empowers the FM C to directly regulate the members/intermediaries, rather than 
leaving action on trade abuses, manipulation etc. of the members/intermediaries to 
the exchanges  to the Economic offices wing of the respective Sate Law & Orders 
maintenance mechanism. Compuls ory reservation of all market participant will 
restrict entry of undesirable entities into the commodity derivatives market. 
 
  CII in their Memorandum has stated that the Amendment Bill proposes to 
make registration of members of exchanges and other inter mediaries mandatory. It 
also proposes to replace Chapter IIIA of the Act so as to provide for mandatory 
registration of members and intermediaries. The registration of 

 
 
 
 
intermediaries/members is subject to the conditions stipulated in the certificate of 
registration. Presently, FMC does not have any statutory power for registration of 
members and other intermediaries and thus, does not have any direct power to 
penalise the wrongdoer.  With the passing of the Act the members and other 
intermediaries will be r egulated by FMC.  Provision of registration of members and 
other intermediaries by FMC would empower the FMC to directly regulate the 
members/intermediaries, rather than leaving action on trade -abuses, manipulations 
etc. of the members/intermediaries to th e Exchanges or to the State police 
authorities. Memorandum also states that this proposal is desirable in public interest 
as it will help bring about greater transparency and increase the confidence of 
market participants in the market. Besides, these are normal regulatory processes 
which are necessary for proper regulation of parties involved in the commodity 
market. 
 
PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry in their Memorandum submitted 
to the Committee has suggested that mandatory registration of intermediar ies and 
members with the FMC would lead to greater transparency and increased 
confidence of market participants in the functioning of the commodity derivatives 
market. Compulsory registration of all market participants will restrict entry of 
undesirable entities into the commodity derivatives market, timely detection of unfair 
trade practices and levy of deterrent penalty by an empowered regulator would go a 
long way in improving market practices. 

 
 
 
 
3.15  The Committee find that Government had imposed a ban on futures 
trading in most of the commodities, in mid -60s, to contain inflationary 
conditions. This ban was lifted in April, 2003 and the Forward Contracts in 
various Commodities were permitted. The Committee feel that the present 
Indian Commodity Market i s still in nascent stage and needs protection. The 
Committee per se is not averse to competition thrown by foreign participants 
and foreign intermediaries. The Committee, however, feel that an orderly, 
mature and vibrant commodity market needs to be in place in order to meet the 
challenges and competition from foreign participants.  The Committee feel that 
the time is yet not ripe to allow foreign participants/foreign intermediaries in 
Commodity Market.  Taking a holistic view of the matter, the Committee a re of 
the firm opinion that in the interest of Commodity Market, it will neither be 
desirable nor appropriate to allow foreign participants or foreign 
intermediaries in the Commodity Market. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the foreign participants or  foreign intermediaries should not be allowed to 
participate in the Commodity Market. Clause 21 of the Bill be thus suitably 
amended. 

 
 
 
 
 
(E)  CLAUSE 25 AND 26 - PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE 
 
3.16  Sub-Section (i) and (ii) of Section 20(e) states that any person who enters into 
any forward contract or any option in goods in contravention of any of the provisions 
contained in sub -section (1) or subsection (3A) or sub -section (4) of section 15, 
section 17 or section 19, shall, on conviction, be punishable–  
 
(i) for a first offence, with imprisonment which may extent to one year, or with 
a fine of not less than one thousand rupees, or with both; 
 
(ii) for a second or subsequent offence under clause(d) or under clause(e) 
[other than an offence in respect of a contrave ntion of the provisions of      
sub-section (4) of section 15], with imprisonment which may extend to one 
year and also with fine: provided that in the absence of special and adequate 
reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, th e 
imprisonment shall be not be less than one month and the fine shall be not 
less than one thousand rupees.]  
 
3.17  The Government has proposed the following amendments in Section 20(e)        
(i) and (ii) of the principal Act;— 
(A) in clause(i), for the words ―one thousand rupees‖, the words ―twenty -five 
thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty -five lakh rupees‖ shall be 
substituted; 
 
(B) in clause(ii),— 
(i) for the words, brackets and letter ―under clause (d)‖, the words, brackets 
and letters ―under clause (d) or under clause (da)‖ shall be substituted; 
 
(ii) for the words ―one thousand rupees‖, the words ―twenty five thousand 
rupees‖ shall be substituted. 
 

 
 
 
 
3.18  Similarly in section 21(h) (i) and (ii) of the principal Act the Government has 
proposed as under,— 
 
After the words ―shall, on conviction, be punishable —‖ occurring below clause 
(h), in clauses (i) and (ii), for the words ―one thousand rupees‖, the words 
―twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty -five lakh 
rupees‖ shall be substituted. 
 
3.19 The Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) in their written reply has stated that 
market has grown in volume and complexity since the FCRA, 1952 was enacted, 
there is a need to enhance the penal provisions too.  The amendment bill propo ses 
to empower FMC to investigate and punish any person resorting to insider trading. 
The proposed financial penalties are quite deterrent. Forward Markets Commission 
shall have to recruit efficient professionals and modern technology to check and 
investigate any untoward movement of prices and check any manipulation and 
insider trading.  As per the proposed provision, FMC will have original powers to 
impose financial penalties up to a maximum of Rs. 25 lakh (for some offences such 
as insider trading, unfair practices etc.  The penalty is also being linked to the profits 
made from such transactions).  This is a welcome change from present provisions 
under which, a penalty of only Rs. 1,000/ - can be imposed, that too through court 
orders.  Besides, the enhanc ed amounts are on the line of penal provisions in SEBI 
Act (Section 15A to 15HB).  It is further stated that the authority while imposing such 
penalties has to keep in mind the profits earned by the violator by the acts of 
violations.  Amounts of penalties have been reasonably deterrent in security market.   
 
3.20 Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) has also stated that passage of Bill will 
lead to effective monetary penalty structure for prevention of contravention, such as 
failure to furnish informatio n, return etc., failure by one person to enter into 
agreement with client, failure to redress client grievances. 
 
3.21 During the recent study visit of the Committee when enquired whether it would 
be desirable not to impose such a stiff penalty for the initial period of two three years, 
the representatives of Ace Derivative and Commodity Exchange Ltd. replied that 
FMC has been regulating the Commodity Futures Market for the last few years and 

 
 
 
 
is now well versed in regulating the behavior of market intermedi aries.  FMC should 
be empowered to impose stiff penalties right from the development stage of the 
market such that undesirable intermediary behavior is snubbed and prevented rather 
than cured once established.  It was stated by them that they supported the view that 
the penalty be imposed from day one. 
 
3.22 The representatives of Indian Commodity Exchange in their  submission has 
suggested that the purpose of penalty is to act as a deterrent and prevent deviant 
behavior.  The purpose of a penalty is not to  kill a business.  Principal of natural 
justice requires that punishment be commensurate with the offence.  They, therefore,  
favored a maximum penalty of Rs.10 lakhs.  They felt that imposition of penalty 
should not be held in abeyance for the initial two  to three years as it sends a wrong 
signal regarding regulators' seriousness in enforcing the rules. 

 
 
 
 
3.23  Clause 25 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 20 of the Principal Act 
which provides for punishment on conviction. Under Clauses 1(i) and 2(i) of    
sub-clause (e), amount of fine is proposed to be increased from Rs. 1,000/ - at 
present to Rs. 25,000/- which may extend upto Rs. 25 lakhs.  During interaction 
with  the representatives of various Commodity Exchanges, the Committee 
observed that they fav oured the imposition of stiffer penalty right from the 
development stage of the market so that undesirable intermediary behavior is 
snubbed rather than cured, if once established.  They also  desired that 
imposition of penalty should not be held in  abeyan ce for the initial two or 
three years as it sends a wrong signal regarding regulators seriousness in 
enforcing the rules. The Committee feel that the levy of deterrent penalty by an 
empowered regulator would go a long way in improving market practices.  Th e 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the minimum amount of fine 
should be Rs.5 lakhs which may extend upto Rs.50 lakhs  in proportion to the 
gain earned by the offender.  Provisions may also be made to increase the said 
limits of Rs.50 lakhs wit h the passage of time periodically, based on market 
needs.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the provision relating to the 
amount of fine should be amended suitably.  Requisite steps may also be 
taken to recruit efficient professionals and modern tech nology to check and 
investigate any untoward movement of prices and any manipulation and 
insider trading.    
 

 
 
 
 
 
(F)  CLAUSE 27 —     INSIDER TRADING 
 
3.24  Clause 27 – this Clause proposes to substitute section 21A of the Forward 
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952. 
 
3.25   The Government has now proposed to insert new Sections 21A, 21B, 21C, 
21D, 21E, 21F, 21G, 21H, 21I, 21J, 21 K, in place of Section 21A of the Principal 
Act.   
 
3.26 Proposed Section 21D states if any insider who,— 
 
(i) either on his own beh alf or on behalf of any other person, deals in 
forward contract or option in goods or option in commodity derivative 
on any association on the basis of any unpublished price sensitive 
information; or  
   
(ii) communicates any unpublished price sensitive in formation to any 
person, with or without his request for such information except as 
required in the ordinary course of business or under any law; or 
 
(iii) counsels, or procures for any other person to deal in any forward 
contract or option in goods or opt ion in commodity derivative on the 
basis of unpublished price sensitive information, shall be liable to a 
penalty of twenty -five lakh rupees or three times the amount of profits 
made out of insider trading, whichever is higher. 
 
3.27 Section 21E. If any pe rson indulges in fraudulent and unfair trade practices 
relating to forward contract or option in goods or option in commodity derivative, he 
shall be liable to a penalty of twenty five lakh rupees or three times the amount of 
profits made out of such practices, whichever is higher. 
 
3.28 When enquired as to what type of activities are considered as "Fraudulent and 
Unfair trade practices", the Department of Consumer Affairs stated in their written 

 
 
 
 
reply that It is not practicable to exhaustively explain the term "fraudulent and Unfair 
Trade practices" in the Act itself to ensure that all unscrupulous market participants 
are booked under the Act and penalty imposed.  Such practices and conduct can 
vary from case to case and from time to time.  Therefore, it is  necessary that the 
term needs to be specified in detail which may also require expansion of its scope in 
the Regulations.   

 
 
 
 
3.29 The Committee note that the term "insider" has not been defined in the 
Bill.  In absence of a clear definition of the term in sider, it may not be possible 
to enforce the provision of the Act or to nail down the offenders.  The 
Committee feel that it may be worthwhile to provide for a definition for the term 
"insider" in the Bill and desire that beside that, a suitable enabling p rovision 
may also be made to allow the Forward Market Commission to expand the 
scope of the term insider. The Committee also note that it has not been clearly 
indicated in the Bill as to what constitutes price sensitive information. The 
Committee feel that  the clearly defined term of "price sensitive information" 
will help  in affixing the criminal liability sought to be imposed by the proposed     
Section 21D.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the term "price sensitive 
information" should be defined i nclusively and illustratively in the Bill so that 
intent of the Bill is not diluted.  
 

 
 
 
 
(G)  CLAUSE 30 — INVESTIGATION 
 
3.30 The Government have proposed that after Section 22B of the Principal Act, 
Section 22C (1) shall be inserted as under:- 
 
―Where the Commission has reasonable grounds to believe that— 
 
(a) the transactions in forward contracts or option in goods or option in 
commodity derivative are being dealt with in a manner detrimental to the 
commodity market or person associated with the commodity market; or 
 
(b) any intermediary or any person associated with the commodities market 
has violated any of the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made 
or directions issued by the Commission thereunder,  
 
It may, at any time by order in writi ng, direct any person (hereinafter in 
this section referred to as the Investigating Authority) specified in the order to 
investigate the affairs of such intermediary or person associated with the 
commodities market and to report thereon to the Commission." 
 
3.31 During evidence, the Committee enquired whether any qualification has been 
prescribed for the investigating authority, the representative of the Department of 
Consumer Affairs stated that  Appointment of Investigating Authority under the 
proposed section 22C(1) is an operational issue. Qualifications for appointment 
of investigating authority will be included in the Rules to be made by the 
Government. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
3.32  In clause 30 of the Bill, the Government has proposed to insert a new 
Section 22 -C(1) after  section 22(B) of the Principal Act, and  it has been 
provided in sub -Clause (b) of the proposed section that commission shall 
appoint an  investigating authority who will report to the Commission about  
violation of any provision of the Act. The Committee  are surprised to note that 
no qualification has been prescribed for the investigating authority. The 
Committee, therefore, hope that this aspect will be taken care of at the time of 
framing the Rules. 
 

 
 
 
 
(H)  CLAUSE 33 — APPEAL TO APPELLATE TRIBUNAL  
 
3.33  The Government has proposed that after Chapter V of the Principal Act, a 
new Chapter VA may be inserted as under:— 
Chapter VA 
24B. (1) Save as provided in sub -section (2), any persons aggrieved on or 
after the commencement of the Forward Contracts (Regul ation) Amendment 
Act, 2010, or by an order of the Commission made, or the rules or regulations 
made thereunder or by an order made by an adjudicating officer under this 
Act may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal having jurisdiction in the 
matter. 
 
(2) The Central Government shall specify, by notification, the matters and 
places in relation to which the Appellate Tribunal may exercise jurisdiction. 
 
(3) No appeal shall lie to the Appellate Tribunal from an order made by the 
Commission or an adjudicated officer with the consent of the parties. 
 
(4) Every appeal under sub -section (1) shall be filed within a period of forty -
five days from the date on which a copy of the order made by the Chairman of 
the Commission is received by and it shall be in such f orm and be 
accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed; Provided that the Appellate 
Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period if it is 
satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period. 
 
3.34  The Go vernment has proposed vide Clause 3 of the Bill that the Appellate 
Tribunal shall be established under sub -section (l) of section 15K of the Securities 
and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 for adjudicating offences relating to forward 
trading and future t rading. Asked about the reasons for not having a separate 
Appellate Tribunal for the Forward Markets Commission, the Department informed 
that the provisions to designate Securities Appellate Tribunal (SAT) for the purposes 
of FCR Act have been made to ensu re economy, exploit synergy and also to ensure 
consistency with other regulatory bodies such as the Securities and Exchange Board 
of India (SEBI). Strengthening of the FMC, in the wake of the present amendments, 

 
 
 
 
will ensure better regulation of the markets , and the need for appeals against FMC 
orders may not be large.  Hence, SAT can manage the resultant load of appeals. 
 
3.35  The State Government of Gujarat has suggested that for speedy disposal of 
cases, pending with Appellate Tribunal, time limit for di sposal of cases needs to be 
fixed. Asked whether any provision has been made in the Bill for disposal of cases in 
a prescribed time limit, the Ministry informed that the proposed amendments in the 
Act by way of insertion of Section 24B provides for appeal to the Appellate Authority 
against the order of the Adjudicating Officer and the sub Section (7) of Section 24B 
provides that the appeal shall be dealt with as expeditiously as possible and finally 
disposed of within six months from the date of receipt of the appeal. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
3.36  Clause 33 of the Bill proposes to insert Chapter VA in the Principal Act 
providing for appeal to Appellate Tribunal, procedure to be followed and other 
related matters thereto. The Committee note that this is a new addition to 1952 
Act whereby procedure for appeal to Appellate Tribunal has been laid down. 
Section 24B(i) provide that any person aggrieved by an order of the 
Commission or an Adjudicating Officer under this Act may prefer an appeal to 
the Appellate Tribunal having jurisdict ion in the matter.  However, no further 
details have been given about Appellate Tribunal in this clause. The Committee 
further note that in Clause 3 term ―Appellate Tribunal‖ has been defined as 
―the Securities Appellate Tribunal established under sub -section (i) of Section 
15K of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992‖. The Committee 
find that an Appellate Tribunal constituted under the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India Act, 1992 is proposed to be authorized to deal with the appeals 
arising out of the matters dealt with by the Forward Markets Commission. The 
Committee feel that the Commodity Futures Market is at a nascent stage and 
has not entered into the realm of litigations and disputes yet.  Therefore, at 
present it may be effective a nd economical to utilize the existing appellate 
structure for the purposes.  Considering the rate of growth of forward market 
during the last two years, the Committee feel that it would be difficult for the 
Appellate Tribunal under the Securities and Excha nge Board of India Act, 1992 
to deal with the matters of forward trading in Commodity Market. The 
Committee, therefore, would like to emphasize that there is a need for further 
strengthening the Appellate Tribunal under the Securities and Exchange Board 
of India Act, 1992 to deal with matters of forward trading in Commodity Market.  
As the market matures and needs for separate appellate infrastructure is felt, 
Government may consider setting up of exclusive appellate body for 
commodity future trading. The C ommittee also desire that all the cases 
pending with the Appellate Tribunal should be decided at the earliest as far as 
possible and the maximum time limit  be prescribed  in which the cases will be 
settled  and suitable provision be incorporated in the Bill itself in this regard. 

 
 
 
 
(I)  CLAUSE 35   —   EXEMPTION FROM TAX ON WEALTH AND INCOME 
 
3.37  Section 27 of the Forward Contract (Regulation) Act, 1952 deals with power to 
exempt and states that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, exempt, subject to such conditions and in such circumstances and in such 
areas as may be specified in the notification, any contract or class of contracts from 
the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act. 
 
3.38  The Government has pr oposed that after Section 27 A of the Principal Act, 
Section 27B shall be inserted:- 
 
―27 B. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Wealth –tax Act, 1957, the 
Income-tax Act, 1961, or any other enactment for the time being in force 
relating to tax on wealth, income, profits or gains, the Commission shall not be 
liable to pay wealth-tax, income-tax or any other tax in respect of their wealth, 
income, profits or gains derived.‖ 
 
3.39 When asked as to why the FMC has been exempted from payment of Tax on 
Wealth, Income and prepaid and others, the Committee was informed that Presently, 
it is a part of the Government. After the amendment, it would be a regulatory body 
like SEBI and not a commercial enterprise.  SEBI has been exempted from payment 
of wealth-tax, Income-tax or any other tax in respect of its wealth, income, profits or 
gains derived (section 25 of SEBI Act, 1992). 
 

 
 
 
 
3.40   Clause 35 of the Bill provides for grant of exemption to the Commission 
from Wealth tax and Income tax or any other tax in respe ct of income, profits 
or gains etc. The reasons for exemption as adduced by the Ministry are to 
make FMC self-sufficient so that it may not depend on Government assistance. 
The Committee note that this is a new insertion in the Act.  The Committee feel 
that the Commission may be exempted from the Wealth Tax and Income Tax 
concession for the initial five years as the sum realized by way of fee may not 
be adequate to meet its operational expenditure but in the long run, the 
situation is going to be entirely d ifferent since the growth of the Forward 
Market has been many fold.  The Government can reassess the entire situation 
after five years.  The Committee, therefore,  recommend that the Commission 
may be exempted from payment of Wealth Tax, Income Tax, etc., for the initial 
five years and thereafter if the FMC is found to be well established and self 
sufficient, the Government may consider withdrawing the tax concessions to 
the Commission, keeping in view the fact that the Ministry of Finance is trying 
to widen its tax net in the larger national interest. 
  

 
 
 
 
(J)  CLAUSE 37 — POWER TO MAKE RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
3.41 The Government have proposed vide clause 37 of the Bill that after section 28A 
of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
―28A. (1) The Commission may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, by notification, make regulations consistent with this Act and the 
rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act‖. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
3.42  Clause 37 seeks to insert n ew Section 28A relating to power to make 
regulations after Section 28A. The Committee feel that this should read as 
Section 28 and not 28A. This should, therefore, be amended suitably. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                   VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
19 December, 2011                   Chairman, 
28 Agrahayana, 1933(Saka)                Standing Committee on Food,  
                           Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution  
  

 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-I (A) 
  
NOTE OF DISSENT 
      Shri Probodh Panda, MP 
 
 I have gone through the D raft document of the subject 'Forward 
Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2010' for adoption.  However, I find that the 
deliberations on the subject are more required and needs to be more examined all 
the aspects related to agriculture marketing.  
 
 In course of discussion with some officials of the State Governments, it is 
observed that the views of the State Governments in this regard have not been 
invited by the Union Government.  What is done, is done only putting the Bill in 
website.  But the fact is that the subject is enlisted in Concurrent List as well as in the 
State List in case of the provision 33 in the Constitution.  
 
 It is learnt that an expert Committee has been set up under the 
Chairmanship of Abhijeet Sen to study the subject and make th e recommendations.  
The views  of the said Committee need to be examined and discussed.  They should 
be invited to make their presentations before the Committee. 
  
 We have to appreciate that the Union Government are used to fix MSP 
(Minimum Support Price) every year based on the report from CACP.  Besides that, 
National Commission on Farmers under the Chairmanship of Dr. M.S. Swaminathan 
expressed their concrete views regarding procurement price.  State Government 
also are entitled to use the mechanism of MIS (Market Intervention Scheme), 
particularly in case of perishable food items.  In addition to MSP, State Governments 
are putting bonus in case of procurement.  All these aspects are linked with the 
agriculture marketing.  Moreover, there is also Coopera tive Sector.  They are playing 
a very effective role in agriculture marketing in some State.  In the question of 
registration of intermediaries to get registered their opinions need to be examined.   
So in this juncture hurriedly, we should not complete th e process.  The 
imposition of a ban on forward trading of some food items should be  continued and 

 
 
 
 
also that should be extended to other food products,  particularly the items covering 
under CACP.   
 
 I would be obliged if my above views are well taken in the draft.  If not, please 
take it as my note of dissent.   
 
 
 
            -Sd- 
 
(PRABODH PANDA) 
MP (LS) 
Member, Standing Committee on FCA&PD 

 
 
 
 
APPENDIX- I (B) 
 
NOTE OF DISSENT 
 
Dr. Ramchandra Dome, MP 
 
 The Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs & Pu blic Distribution in 
its December, 2006 Report on the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 
2006 had recommended: 
 
'The Committee recommend that agricultural commodity especially foodgrains 
including coarsegrains, pulses, and sugar need not be per mitted to be traded 
in the commodity markets including forward/future contract derivatives and 
options, (Para 1.31, page 20)' 
 
 It is to be noted that the Government had imposed a ban on futures trading in 
some food articles like rice, wheat, tur dal and u rad dal in 2007 and sugar in 2009.  
Subsequently the ban on wheat and sugar futures has been lifted.  Futures trading in 
potatoes, chana and soya oil was also banned but the ban was lifted after six 
months.  This shows that the recommendation of the Standi ng Committee has not 
been followed properly.  The government has not been consistent with its policy vis -
à-vis allowing futures trading in essential commodities.   
 
 Para 1.30 of the present Report leaves it to the Government to "Exercise its 
power with pr udence by imposing/lifting the ban on trading on the commodities 
especially the foodgrains, keeping in mind the interests of the farmers and 
consumers".  In view of its track record, this cannot be left to the government.  The 
recommendation of the Standin g Committee to prohibit futures trading in essential 
commodities like foodgrains, pulses and sugar needs to be reiterated. 
 
Para 1.31 notes the shortage of storage and warehousing infrastructure.   
India's foodgrains storage capacity is only around 50 mill ion tons, which is less than 
25% of annual foodgrains production.  Over 95% of the cold storage capacity in India 
is in the private sector.  Lack of modern storage and warehousing infrastructure is a 
major reason for low procurement and wastage. 
 
 In the a bsence of such infrastructure and given the Indian realities where 
80% of Indian farmers are small and marginal peasants tilling less than                     

 
 
 
 
2 hectares of land, the assertions made in Para 1.31, 1.32 and 1.33 regarding 
farmers benefiting from trading in futures and options are totally misleading.  
 
Indian farmers need subsidized inputs and assured procurement at 
remunerative support prices. They do not need the speculative commodity futures 
market to dictate prices to them. 
 
Para 1.35 reco mmends banks, insurance companies and mutual funds to 
invest in the commodity futures market.  This is justified in the name of promoting 
credit flow to farmers.  Mutual funds are not known to be lending to farmers.  Yet 
they are going to be allowed to trade in futures.  
 
In view of this, I request you to record my dissent to the recommendations of 
this Report. 
 
Regards, 
 
-Sd- 
 
(RAMACHANDRA DOME) 
MP (LS) 
Member, Standing Committee on FCA&PD  

 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-I (C) 
 
NOTE OF DISSENT 
Dr. T.N. Seema, MP 
 
 The Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs & Public Distribution in 
its December, 2006 Report on the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 
2006 had recommended: 
 
'The Committee recommend that agricultural commodity especially foodgrains 
including coarsegrains, pulses, and sugar need not be permitted to be traded 
in the commodity markets including forward/future contract derivatives and 
options, (Para 1.31, page 20)' 
 
 It is to be noted that the Government had imposed a ban on futures trading in 
some food articles like rice, wheat, tur dal and urad dal in 2007 and sugar in 2009.  
Subsequently the ban on wheat and sugar futures has been lifted.  Futures trading in 
potatoes, chana and soya oil was also banned but the ban was lifted after six 
months. This sho ws that the recommendation of the Standing Committee has not 
been followed properly.  The government has not been consistent with its policy vis -
à-vis allowing futures trading in essential commodities.   
 
 Para 1.30 of the present Report leaves it to the G overnment to "Exercise its 
power with prudence by imposing/lifting the ban on trading on the commodities 
especially the foodgrains, keeping in mind the interests of the farmers and 
consumers".  In view of its track record, this cannot be left to the govern ment.  The 
recommendation of the Standing Committee to prohibit futures trading in essential 
commodities like foodgrains, pulses and sugar needs to be reiterated. 
 
Para 1.31 notes the shortage of storage and warehousing infrastructure.   
India's foodgrains storage capacity is only around 50 million tons, which is less than 
25% of annual foodgrains production. Over 95% of the cold storage capacity in India 
is in the private sector. Lack of modern storage and warehousing infrastructure is a 
major reason for low procurement and wastage. 
 
 In the absence of such infrastructure and given the Indian realities where 
80% of Indian farmers are small and marginal peasants tilling less than                      
2 hectares of land, the assertions made in Para 1.31, 1.32  and 1.33 regarding 
farmers benefiting from trading in futures and options are totally misleading. Indian 

 
 
 
 
farmers need subsidized inputs and assured procurement at remunerative support 
prices.  They do not need the speculative commodity futures market to d ictate prices 
to them. 
 
Para 1.35 recommends banks, insurance companies and mutual funds to 
invest in the commodity futures market. This is justified in the name of promoting 
credit flow to farmers.  Mutual funds are not known to be lending to farmers. Yet  they 
are going to be allowed to trade in futures.  
 
In view of this, I request you to record my dissent to the recommendations of 
this Report. 
 
Regards, 
 
 
          -Sd- 
 
(T.N. SEEMA) 
MP (RS) 
Member, Standing Committee on FCA&PD 

 
 
 
 
APPENDIX- II 
 
  
THE FORWARD CONTRACTS (REGULATION) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
 further to amend the Forward Contracts (Regulation) 
Act, 1952 and the Securities and Exchange Board of 
India Act, 1992. 
 
     BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -first Year of 
the Republic of India as follows:- 
 
 
 CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Forward Contracts 
(Regulation) Amendment Act, 2010. 
 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed 
for different provisions of this Act. 
 
 
Short title and 
commencemen
t. 
 CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENTS TO THE FORWARD CONTRACTS 
(REGULATION) ACT, 1952 
 
 
74 of 1952. 2.   In the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 
(hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the principal 
Amendment of 
long title. 

 
 
 
 
Act), in the long title, for the words ―the prohibition of 
options in goods‖, the words ―and to promote the 
development of, and to regulate, the commodity 
derivatives market‖ shall be substituted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 of 1992. 
3.   In section 2 of the principal Act,— 
 
(i) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
 
'(a) "Appellate Tribunal" means the 
Securities Appellate Tribunal established under 
sub-section (1) of section 15K of the Securities 
and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992; 
                
 (aa) "association" means any body of 
individuals, whether incorporated or not, 
constituted for the purposes of regulating and 
controlling the business of the sale or purchase of 
any goods and commodity derivative; 
 
         (ab) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the 
Commission referred to in clause (a) of sub -
section (1) of section 3A;'; 
    
 (ii) after clause (b), the following clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
           
 ‗(ba) ―commodity derivative‖ means – 
 
(i) a contract for delivery of goods, 
which is not a ready delivery contract, or  
 
(ii) a contract for differences which 
Amendment 
of section 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

 
 
 
 
derives its value from prices or indices of 
prices – 
 
(a) of such underlying goods, or  
 
(b) of related services and rights, 
such as warehousing and freight; or  
 
(c) weather and similar events and 
activities, having a bearing on the 
commodity sector.‖ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (bb) ―corporatisation‖ means the 
succession of a recognised association, 
being a body of individuals or a society 
registered under the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860, by another association, being a 
company incorporated for the purpose of 
assisting, regulating or controlling the 
business of buying, selling or dealing in 
goods or commodity derivatives carried on 
by such individuals or society; 
          
       (bc) ―demutualization‖ means the 
segregation of ownership and 
management from the trading rights of the 
members of a recognised association in 
accordance with a scheme approved by 
the Commission;‘; 
 
          (iii)  in clause (c), after the words ―delivery 
contract‖, the words ―and includes contract  for 
commodity derivative‖ shall be inserted; 
 
 
 
 
21 of 1860. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (iv)  after clause (c), the following clause 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
 ‗(ca) ―Fund‖ means the Forward Markets 
Commission General Fund constituted 
under sub-section (1) of section 4E;‘; 
 
(v)  after clause (e), the following clauses 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
‗(ea) ―intermediary‖ means a member 
of the association, and includes a 
collateral manager, a clearing house, or 
such other person who is associated with 
the commodity derivatives market and is 
specified as such by the Central 
Government for the purposes of this Act; 
 
    (eb) ―member‖ means a whole -time 
or part -time member of the Commission 
and includes the Chairman;‘; 
 
   (vi) after clause (f), the following clauses 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
‗(fa) ―notification‖ means a notification 
published in the Official Gazette and the 
expression ―notify‖ shall be construed 
accordingly; 
 
(fb) ‗‗option in commodity derivative‘‘ 
means an agreement, by whatever name 
called, for trading in a commodity 
derivative and  includes a teji, a mandi, a 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 of 1980 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
teji-mandi, a gali, a put, a call or a put and 
call in commodity derivative;‘; 
   
 (vii)  in clause (i),— 
 
(A) for the words ―eleven days‖, the 
words ―thirty days‖ shall be substituted; 
 
(B) in the Explanation, in clause (i), 
after the word and figures ―Act, 1970‖, 
the words, figures and brackets ―or under 
section 3 of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1980‖ shall be 
inserted; 
 
   (viii) in clause (j), for the words and 
figure ‗‗the Central Go vernment under section 6 
in respect of goods or classes of goods‘‘, the 
words and figure ―the Commission under section 
6 in respect of goods or classes of goods or 
commodity derivatives or classes of commodity 
derivatives with respect to which forward cont ract 
or classes of forward contracts or options‖ shall 
be substituted; 
 
  (ix)   for clause (jj), the following 
clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
        ‗(jj) ‗‗regulations‘‘ means the 
regulations made by the Commission 
under this Act;‘; 
 
    (x)   after clause (k), the following 

 
 
 
 
clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
‗(ka) ―scheme‖ means a scheme for 
corporatisation or demutualisation of a 
recognised association which may provide 
for— 
 
(A) the issue of shares for a lawful 
consideration and provision for trading rights in 
lieu of membership cards of members of a 
recognised association; 
 
(B) the restrictions on voting rights; 
 
(C) the transfer of property, business, assets, 
rights, liabilities, recognitions, contracts of the 
recognised association, legal proceedings by, 
or against, the recognised association, 
whether in the name of the recognised 
association or any trustee or otherwise and 
any permission given to, or by, the 
recognised association; 
 
(D) the transfer of employees of a recognised 
association to another recognised association; 
 
(E) any other matter required for the purpose 
of, or in connection with, the corporatisation 
or demutualisation, as the case may be, of 
the recognised association;‘; 
 
   (xi) in clause (m), for the words 
―forward contrac t which provides for‖, the words 
―forward contract which provides for, and is 

 
 
 
 
performed by,‖ shall be substituted. 
 
Amendment 
of section 3. 
 
4.   In section 3 of the principal Act, for sub -sections (2), 
(3), (4) and (5), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
     ―(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by 
the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal with power, subject to the provisions of 
this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, bot h 
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by 
the said name, sue or be sued.‖. 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of 
new  
sections 3A, 
3B,  
3C, 3D, 3E, 
3F,  
3G and 3H. 
Management 
of 
Commission.  
 
 
 
 
5. After section 3 of the principal Act, the following 
sections shall be inserted, namely:— 
  
      ―3A. (1) The Commission shall consist of the following 
members, namely:— 
      (a)  a Chairman; 
      (b) two members from amongst the 
officials of the Ministries or Departments 
of the Central Government dealing with 
Consumer Affairs, Commodity Derivatives, 
Food and Public Distribution, Agriculture or 
Finance; 
      (c)  one member from amongst the 
officials of the Reserve Bank of India; 
   (d)  five other members of whom at 
least three shall be the whole - time 
members. 
         (2) The general superintendence, direction and 
management of the affairs of the Commission shall 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
vest in a board of members, which may exercise all 
powers and do all acts and things which may be 
exercised or done by the Commission.  
         (3)  Save as otherwise determined by regulations, 
the Chairman shall have powers of general 
superintendence and direction of the affairs of the 
Commission and may also exercise all powers and do 
all acts and things which may be exercised or done by 
the Commission. 
         (4) The Chairman and members referred to in 
clauses (a) and (d) of sub -section (1) shall be 
appointed by the Central Government and the 
members referred to in clauses (b) and (c) of that sub -
section shall be nominated by the Central Government 
and the Reserve Bank, respectively.  
        (5)  The Chairman and other members referred to 
in clauses (a) and (d) of sub -section (1) shall be 
persons of ability, integrity and standing who have 
shown capacity in dealing with problems relating to 
commodity markets or who have special knowledge or 
experience of commerce or economics or law or 
finance or in administration or have practical 
experience in any matter which renders them suitable 
for appointment on the Commission:  
             Provided that every p erson appointed as 
Chairman and every other person appointed as 
member of the Commission and holding office as such 
immediately before the commencement of the Forward 
Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2010, shall, 
notwithstanding any order for their ap pointment made 
under sub -section (2) of section 3 as it stood before 
the commencement of the Forward Contracts 
(Regulation) Amendment Act, 2010, shall hold office till 
the Chairman or other member has been appointed in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
accordance with this section after su ch 
commencement and no person shall be entitled to 
claim any compensation for the premature termination 
of the term of his office or of any contract of service. 
 
      3B. (1) The term of office and other conditions of 
service of the Chairman and the members referred 
to in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3A 
shall be such as may be prescribed. 
Term of office 
and conditions 
of service of 
Chairman and 
members of 
Commission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (1), the Central Government shall have the 
right to terminate the services of the Chairman or a 
member appointed under clause ( d) of sub -section 
(1) of section 3A, at any time before the expiry of 
the period prescribed under sub -section ( 1), by 
giving him notice of not less than three months in 
writing or three months‘ salary and allowances in 
lieu thereof, and the Chairman or a member, as the 
case may be, shall also have the right to relinquish 
his office, at any time before the expiry of the period 
prescribed under sub -section ( 1), by giving to the 
Central Government notice of not less than three 
months in writing. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3C. The Central Government shall remove a member 
from office if he— 
             (a) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated as 
insolvent; 
             (b) is of unsound mind and stands so declared 
by a competent court; 
             (c) has been convicted of an offence which, in 
Removal of 
member from 
office. 
 

 
 
 
 
the opinion of the Central Government, 
involves a moral turpitude; 
             (d) has, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, so abused his position as to 
render his continuation in office detrimental to 
the public interest: 
 
                  Provided that no member shall be removed 
under this clause unless he has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
 
 3D.  (1) The Commission shall meet at such times and 
places, and shall observe such rules of procedure in 
regard to the transaction of business at its meetings 
including quorum at such meetings as may be provided 
by regulations. 
 
        (2) The Chairman or, if for any reason he is 
unable to attend the meeting of the Commission, any 
other member chosen by the members present from 
amongst themselves at the meeting shall p reside at 
the meeting.  
 
       (3)  All questions which come up before any 
meeting of the Commission shall be decided by a 
majority of votes of the members of the Commission 
present and voting, and in the event of an equality of 
votes, the Chairman or in his absence the member 
presiding, shall have a second or casting vote. 
 
Meetings of 
Commission. 
 
 3E. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be 
invalid merely by reason of— 
           (a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the 
constitution of, the Commission; or 
Vacancies, 
etc., not to 
invalidate        
proceedings  of 

 
 
 
 
           (b) any defect in the appointment of a person 
acting as a member of the Commission; or 
           (c) any irregularity in the procedure of the 
Commission not affecting the merits of the case. 
 
Commission. 
 
 3F.  Any member, who is a director of a company and 
who as such director has any direct or indirect pecuniary 
interest in any matter coming up for consideration at a 
meeting of the Commission, shall, as soon as possible aft er 
relevant circumstances have come to his knowledge, 
disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and 
such disclosure shall be recorded in the proceedings of 
the Commission, and the member shall not take any 
part in any deliberation or decision of the Commission 
with respect to that matter. 
 
 
Member not to 
participate in 
meetings in 
certain cases. 
 
Bar on future 
employment 
of members. 
 
 
 
Officers and 
other 
employees 
of 
Commission
. 
 
3G.   The Chairman and the whole-time members shall 
not, for a peri od of two years from the date on which 
they cease to hold office as such, except with the 
previous approval of the Central Government, accept 
any employment with any person dealing with the 
commodities derivatives or with any intermediary. 
 
3H.   (1) The C ommission may appoint such officers 
and other employees as it considers necessary for 
the efficient discharge of its functions under this 
Act. 
       (2) The terms and conditions of service of the 
officers and other employees of the Commission 
appointed under sub-section (1) shall be such as may 
be determined by regulations: 
            Provided that every officer and other employee 
holding any office under the Commission, before the  
 

 
 
 
 
commencement of the Forward Contracts 
(Regulation) Amendment Act, 2010, s hall continue 
to hold his office as such after such  
commencement for the same tenure and upon the 
same terms and conditions of service as respects 
remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement 
and other terminal benefits as he would have held 
such office if the said Act had not come into force 
and shall continue to do so as an officer or other 
employee of the Commission until the regulations 
are made under this sub -section or the expiry of 
one year from the date of such commencement or 
till the date on w hich such officer or other 
employee opts not to be the officer or other 
employee of the Commission, whichever is 
earlier.‖. 
 
Amendment 
of section 4.  
 
6. In section 4 of the principal Act,— 
       (a) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
            ―(a) to advise the Central Government in 
respect of matters arising out of the administration of 
this Act; 
            (aa) to grant or withdraw recognition of any 
association;‖; 
     (b) in clause (e), for the words ―registered  
association or any member of such association‖, the 
words ―any member of such association or any 
intermediary‖ shall be substituted; 
    (c) for clause (f), the following clauses shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
             ―(f)  to regulate the business of the 
associations; 
                 (g) to regulate the functioning of members of 
 

 
 
 
 
the associations, clearing houses, 
warehouses and intermediaries; 
              (h) to levy fees for carrying out the purposes of 
this Act; 
               (i) to conduct res earch for the purpose of 
development and regulation of commodity 
derivatives market; 
               (j)   to call from or furnishing to any such 
agencies, as may be specified by the 
Commission, such information as may be 
considered necessary by it for the efficient 
discharge of its functions; 
               (k)  to protect the interests of the market 
participants in commodity derivatives 
markets; 
              (l)     to promote and regulate self -regulatory 
oganisations; 
                (m)   to prohibit fr audulent and unfair trade 
practices relating to commodity derivatives 
markets; 
             (n)      to promote investors‘ education and 
training of intermediaries; 
               (o)    to prohibit insider trading in commodity 
derivative; 
               (p)   to advise the Central Government as to 
the goods in respect of which forward 
contract or option in goods or option in 
commodity derivative may be notified; 
               (q)   to perform such other duties and 
exercise such other powers as may be 
assigned to the Commission by or under this 
Act, or as may be prescribed.‖. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 of 1898. 
2 of 1974. 
7.  In section 4A of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), – 
 
(a)  for the words and figures "the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898", the words and figur es "the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973" shall be substituted; 
 (b)  for the word and figures "section 482", the 
word and figures "section 346" shall be substituted. 
 
Amendment of 
section 4A. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.  After section 4A of the principal Act, the followi ng 
sections shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
‗‗4B. Save as otherwise provided in section 4, if after 
making or causing to be made an inquiry, the 
Commission is satisfied that it is necessary, in the 
interest of trade and orderly development of 
commodity deriva tives market, it may issue 
directions to any intermediary or association. 
 
        4C.  If the Commission finds, after causing an 
inquiry to be made, that any person has violated, or 
is likely to violate any provisions of this Act or any 
rules or regulatio ns made thereunder, the 
Commission may pass an order requiring such 
person to cease and desist from committing or 
causing such violations.‖. 
 
Insertion of 
new sections 
4B and 4C. 
 
Power to 
issue 
directions by 
Commission. 
 
 
 
Cease and 
desist  
proceedings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. After Chapter II of the principal Act, the following Chapter 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
 
―CHAPTER IIA 
                               FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND 
AUDIT 
Insertion            
of new 
Chapter IIA. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
      4D.  The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, 
make to the Commission grants of such sums of 
money as that Government may think fit for being 
utilised for the purposes of this Act. 
 
Grants by 
Central 
Government. 
 
 
      4E. ( 1) There s hall be constituted a Fund to be 
called the Forward Markets Commission General 
Fund and there shall be credited thereto— 
       (i) all grants and fees received by the 
Commission under this Act; 
     (ii) all sums received by the Commission 
from such other  sources as may be 
decided upon by the Central Government. 
      
 (2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting— 
     (i) the salaries, allowances and other 
remuneration of the members, officers 
and other employees of the Commission; 
    (ii) the expenses of t he Commission in the 
discharge of its functions under section 
4; 
              (iii)  the expenses on objects and for 
purposes authorised by this Act: 
                        Provided that the sums authorised to be 
paid and applied from and out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India and appropriated by law made by Parliament for the 
services and purposes of the Commission shall continue to be 
paid and applied for such services and purposes of the 
Commission till the Fund is constituted under this 
section. 
 
Fund.  
 
 4F.  (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and 
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement 
Accounts and  
audit. 

 
 
 
 
of accounts in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
       (2) The accounts of the Commission shall be 
audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India at such intervals as may be specified by him and 
any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Commissi on to the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
      (3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
and any other person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Commission shall 
have the same rights and privileges and au thority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General generally has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts, and in particular, 
shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other 
documents and papers and to inspect any of the 
offices of the Commission. 
        (4) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any other 
person appointed by him in this behalf together with 
the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to 
the Central Government and that Government shall 
cause the same to be laid before each House of 
Parliament.‖. 
 
 
Amendme
nt of 
section 5. 
 
10.   In section 5 of the principal Act,— 
       (a) in sub-section (1),— 
       (i) for the words ―forward contracts‖, the 
words ―forward contracts or  option in goods 
or option in commodity derivative‖ shall be 
substituted; 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
       (ii) for the words ―Central Government‖, the 
word ―Commission‖  shall be substituted; 
     (b) in sub-section (2),- 
 
     (i) for the words ―forward contracts‖, the words 
―forward contracts or option in goods or option in 
commodity derivative‖ shall be substituted; 
     (ii) the following proviso shall be inserted at the 
end, namely:— 
 
                  ―Provided that the applications made to the 
Central Government, on or before the commencement 
of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 
2010 and pending with the Central Government on 
such date, shall be transferred  to the Commission and 
thereafter the Commission shall dispose of such 
applications in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act.‖. 
 
Amendment 
of section 6. 
 
11.   In section 6 of the principal Act,— 
           (a) in sub-section (1),— 
    (i) for  the words ―Central Government‖, the 
word ―Commission‖ shall be substituted;  
   (ii) for the words ―the goods or classes of 
goods with respect to which forward contracts 
may be entered‖, the words "the goods or 
classes of goods or commodity derivative or 
classes of commodity derivatives with respect to 
which forward contracts or options may be 
entered" shall be substituted; 
 
   (b) in sub-section (2),—  
        (i) for the words ―Central Government‖, at both the 
places where they occur, the word 
―Commission‖ shall be substituted;  
 

 
 
 
 
       (ii) in clause (b), for the words ―of not more than 
three persons‖, the words ―such number of 
persons as the Commission may, having regard 
to the interest of trade in commodities and 
commodities derivatives, specify,‖ shal l be 
substituted;  
   (c) in sub -section (3), for the words ―Central 
Government‖, the word ―Commission‖ shall be 
substituted;  
  (d) after sub-section (4), the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:—  
           ―Provided that the recognition granted  by the 
Central Government, before the commencement of the 
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2010, 
shall be deemed to have been granted by the 
Commission in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act.‖. 
Substitution 
of new 
section for 
section 7. 
 
Withdrawal of 
recognition. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12. For section 7 of the principal Act, the following 
sections shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
  ‗7.(1) If the Commission is of opinion that any 
recognition granted to an association under the 
provisions of this Act should, in the interest of the trade 
or in the public interest, be withdrawn, the Commission 
may, after giving a reasonable opportunity to the 
association to be heard in the matter, withdraw, by 
notification, the recognition granted to the said 
association: 
              Provided that no such withdrawal shall affect 
the validity of any contract entered into or made before 
the date of the notification, and the Commission may 
make such provision as it deems fit in the notification of 
withdrawal or in any su bsequent notification similarly 
published for the due performance of any contract 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
outstanding on that date. 
       (2) Where the recognised association has not been 
corporatised or demutualised or it fails to submit the 
scheme referred to in sub -section (1 ) of section 7B 
within the specified time therefor or the scheme has 
been rejected by the Commission under sub-section (5) 
of section 7B, the recognition granted to such 
association under section 6, shall, notwithstanding 
anything contained contrary to any  other provision of 
this Act, stand withdrawn and the Commission shall 
publish, by notification, such withdrawal of recognition: 
            Provided that no such withdrawal shall affect 
the validity of any contract entered into or made before 
the date of the notification, and the Commission may, 
after consultation with the association, make such 
provisions as it deems fit, in the order rejecting the 
scheme published in the Official Gazette under sub -
section (5) of section 7B. 
 
 7A. On and from  the appointed date, all recognized 
associations   (if not corporatised and demutualised 
before the appointed date) shall be corporatised and 
demutualised in accordance with the provisions 
contained in section 7B: 
           Provided that different appoint ed dates may be 
appointed for different recognised associations: 
           Provided further that the Commission may, if it is 
satisfied that any recognised association was 
prevented by sufficient cause from being corporatised 
and demutualised on or after the appointed date, 
extend the appointed date specified in respect of that 
recognised association and such recognised 
association may continue as such before such 
appointed date. 
Corporatisation 
and 
demutualisation 
of associations. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
  Explanation.—  For the purposes of this section, 
―appointed date‖ means the date which the 
Commission may, by notification, appoint. 
 
7B. (1) All recognised associations referred to in 
section 7A shall, within such time as may be specified 
by the Commission, submit a scheme for 
corporatisation and demutualisation for its approval: 
 
              Provided that the Commission may, by 
notification, specify name of the recognised 
association, which had already been corporatised and 
demutualised, and such association shall not be 
required to submit the scheme under this section. 
 
     (2)  On receipt of the scheme referred to in sub -
section (1), the Commission may, after making such 
inquiry as may be necessary in this behalf and 
obtaining such further information, if any, as it may  
require and if it is satisfied that it would be in the 
interest of the trade in goods or commodity derivatives 
and also in the public interest, approve the scheme 
with or without modification. 
 
      (3) No scheme under sub -section (2) shall be 
approved by the Commission if the issue of shares for 
a lawful consideration or provision of trading rights in 
lieu of membership card of the members of a 
recognised association or payment of dividends to 
members have been proposed out of any reserves or 
assets of that association. 
 
    (4) Where the scheme is approved under sub -
 
 
 
 
Procedure for  
corporatisation 
and 
demutualization. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
section (2), the scheme so  approved shall be 
published immediately by— 
 
              (a) the Commission in the Official Gazette; 
 
  (b) the recognised association in such two daily 
newspapers circulating   in India, as may be 
specified by the Commission,  
 
and upon such publication, notwithstanding anything 
contained contrary to any other provision of this Act or 
in any other law for the time being in force or any 
agreement, award, judgment,  decree or other 
instrument for the time being in force, the scheme shall 
have effect and be binding on all persons and 
authorities including all members, creditors, depositors 
and employees of the recognised association and on 
all persons having any contr act, right, power, 
obligation or liability with, against, over, to, or in 
connection with, the recognised association or its 
members. 
 
   (5)  Where the Commission is satisfied that it would 
not be in the interest of the trade in goods or 
commodity derivatives and also in the public interest to 
approve the scheme under sub -section (2), it may, by 
an order, reject the scheme and such order of rejection 
shall be published by it in the Official Gazette: 
 
          Provided that the Commission shall give a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard to all the 
persons concerned and the recognised association 
concerned before passing an order rejecting the 
scheme.   

 
 
 
 
 
   (6) The Commission may, while approving the 
scheme under sub -section (2), by an order in writing, 
restrict— 
 
     (a) the voting rights of the shareholders who are 
also members of the recognised association; 
 
    (b)  the right of shareholders or a member of the 
recognised association to appoint the 
representatives on the governing board of the 
association; 
 
     (c) the maximum number of representatives of 
the members of the recognized association to 
be appointed on the governing board of the 
association, which shall not exceed one-fourth 
of the total strength of the governing board. 
 
 
 
 
 
    (7)  The order made under sub -section (6) shall be 
published in the Official Gazette and on the 
publication thereof, the order shall, notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in the Companies 
Act, 1 956, or in any other law for the time being in 
force, have full effect. 
 
 (8)   Every recognised association, in respect of which 
the scheme for corporatisation or demutualisation has 
been approved under sub -section (2) shall, either by 
fresh issue of equity shares to the public or in any other 
manner as may be specified by the regulations made 
by the Commission, ensure that at least fifty -one per 
cent. of its equity share capital is held, within twelve 
months from the date of publication of the order under  
 
 
 
1 of 1956. 

 
 
 
 
sub-section (7), by the public other than shareholders 
having trading rights: 
             Provided that the Commission may, on 
sufficient cause being shown to it and in the public 
interest, extend the said period by another twelve 
months.‘. 
 
Amendme
nt 
of section 
8. 
 
13. In section 8 of the principal Act,— 
 
(a) in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2),  for the words ―Central 
Government‖ wherever they occur, the words ―Central 
Government or Commission‖ shall respectively be 
substituted; 
 
(b) in sub-section (2), in clause (c), for the words 
―direct the Commission‖, the words ―direct any 
agency or any of its officers‖ shall be substituted; 
 
(c) in sub-section (3), for the word ―inquiry‖, wherever it 
occurs, the words ―inquiry or inspection‖ shall be 
substituted. 
 
 
 14. In section 9A of the principal Act, in sub-section 
(2),— 
 
(a) for the words "Central Government",  wherever they 
occur, the words "Central Government or 
Commission" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words ―that Government‖, the words 
―that Go vernment or Commission‖ shall be 
substituted. 
Amendment of 
section 9A. 
 
 
 
15.  For section 10 of the principal Act, the following 
sections shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
Substitution 
of new 
sections for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 of 1956. 
 
   
 ‗‗10. (1) Whenever the Commission considers it 
expedient so to do, it may, by order in writing, direct 
any recognised association to make any rules or to 
amend any rules made by the recognised association 
within such period as it may specify in this behalf. 
           (2)  If any recognised association, against whom 
an order is issued by the Commission under sub -
section (1), fails or neglects to comply with such order 
within the specified period, the Commission may make 
the rules or amend the rules  made by the recognised 
association, as the case may be, either in the form specified in 
the order or with such modification thereof as the 
Commission may think fit. 
         (3) Where, in pursuance of sub -section (2), any 
rules have been made or amended, the rules so made 
or amended shall be published in the Offic ial Gazette, 
and shall, thereupon, have effect notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in the Companies 
Act, 1956 or any other law for the time being in force, 
as if they had been made or amended by the 
recognised association concerned. 
section 10. 
 
 
 
Power of 
Commission 
to direct rules 
to be made or 
to make rules. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 of 1956. 
10A. (1) A recognised association may, with the prior 
approval of the Commission, transfer the duties and 
functions of a clearing h ouse to a clearing corporation, 
being a company incorporated under the Companies 
Act, 1956, for the purposes of— 
 
           (a) the periodical settlement of contracts and 
differences thereunder; 
 
           (b) the delivery of, and payment for, goods; 
 
           (c) any other matter incidental to, or connected 
Clearing 
corporation. 
 

 
 
 
 
with, such transfer.  
 
   (2) Every clearing corporation shall, for the purpose 
of transfer of the duties and functions of a clearing 
house to a clearing corporation referred to in sub -
section (1), make bye-laws and submit the same to the 
Commission for its approval.  
 
  (3)  The Commission may, on being satisfied that it is 
in the interest of the trade and also in the public 
interest to transfer the duties and functions of a 
clearing house to a cle aring corporation, grant 
approval to the bye -laws submitted to it under sub -
section (2) and approve transfer of the duties and 
functions of clearing house to a clearing corporation 
referred to in sub-section (1).  
 
   (4) The provisions of sections 4, 5, 6 , 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 
12, 12A, 12B and 13 shall, as far as may be, apply to a 
clearing corporation referred to in sub -section (1) as 
they apply in relation to a recognised association.‖. 
 
 16. In section 11 of the principal Act,— 
      (a) in sub-section (1),— 
(i) for the words ―Central Government‖, the 
word  ―Commission‖ shall be substituted; 
 
(ii) for the words ―forward contracts‖, the words 
―forward contracts or option in goods or option 
in commodity derivative‖ shall be substituted; 
 
       (b) in sub -section (2), after the word ―goods‖,  
wherever it occurs, the words ―or forward contracts or 
option in goods or option in commodity derivative‖ shall 
Amendment of 
section 11. 

 
 
 
 
be inserted; 
 
      (c) in sub -section (3), in clause (aa), for the 
brackets, figure a nd letter ―(3A)‖, the brackets and 
figure ―(4)‖ shall be substituted; 
 
     (d) in sub-section (4) and the proviso, for the words 
―Central Government‖,  at both the places where they 
occur, the word ―Commission‖ shall be substituted. 
 
Substitutio
n of new 
sections 
for 
sections 
12  
and 12A. 
 
Power of 
Commissio
n to  
make or 
amend  
bye-laws 
of  
recognised  
association
.  
 
17. For sections 12 and 12A of the principal Act, the 
following sections shall be substituted, namely:— 
  
 
 ‗‗12. (1) The Commission may, either on a request in 
writing received by it in this behalf from the governing 
body of a recognised association, or if in its opinion it is 
expedient so to do, make bye -laws for all or any of the 
matters specified in section 11 or am end any bye-laws 
made by such  association under that section. 
 
     (2) Where, in pursuance of this section, any bye -
laws have been made or amended, the bye -laws so 
made or amended shall be published in the Official 
Gazette and shall thereupon have effect  as if they had 
been made or amended by the recognised association.  
 
      (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
section, where the governing body of a recognised 
association objects to any bye -laws made or amended 
under this section by the Commi ssion on its own 
motion, it may, within six months of the publication 
thereof under sub-section (2), apply to the Commission 
for a revision thereof, and the Commission may, after 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
giving a reasonable opportunity to the governing body 
of the association to b e heard in the matter, revise the 
bye-laws so made or amended, and where any bye -
laws so made or amended are revised as a result of 
any action taken under this sub -section, the bye -laws 
so revised shall be published and shall become 
effective as provided in sub-section (2).  
 
     (4) The making or amendment or revision of any 
bye-laws under this section shall in all cases be subject 
to such conditions in regard to the previous 
publications as may be prescribed: 
 
            Provided that the Commission may , in the 
interest of the trade or in the public interest, by order in 
writing, dispense with the condition of previous 
publication. 
  
Application of 
amendment 
of bye-laws 
to existing 
forward  
contracts or 
option in goods  
or  option in  
 commodity  
derivative. 
12A. Any amendment of a bye -law made under 
section 11 other than an amendment made in 
pursuance of clause (a) or clause (aa) of sub -section 
(3) of that  section or under section 12 shall also apply 
to all forward contracts or option in goods  or option in 
commodity derivative entered into before the date of 
its approval by the Commission or before the date of 
its publication in the Official Gazette, as the case may 
be, and remaining to be performed on or after the said 
date.‖. 
 
 18. In section 12B of the principal Act,— 
 
(a) in sub-section (1),— 
(i) for the words ‗‗forward contract‘‘, the words 
‗‗forward contract or option in goods or option in 
commodity derivative‘‘ shall be  substituted; 
Amendment 
of section 
12B. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
(ii) the words ‗‗of any goods or class of goods‘‘ 
shall be omitted; 
 
(iii) after the words ‗‗any such contract‘‘, the 
words ―or option in goods or option in commodity 
derivatives‘‘ shall be inserted; 
 
(b) in sub -section (3), for the words ‗‗forward 
contract‘‘, at both the places where they occur, the 
words ‗‗for ward contract or option in goods or 
option in commodity derivative‖ shall be substituted. 
 
 
 
 
 
19. For section 13 of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
 ―13. (1) Without prejudice to any oth er powers vested 
in the Commission under this Act, where the 
Commission is of the opinion that the governing body 
of any recognised association should be superseded, 
then, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or 
in any other law for the time bein g in force, the 
Commission may, after giving a reasonable opportunity 
to the governing body of the recognised association 
concerned to show cause why it should not be 
superseded, by notification, declare the governing body 
of such association to be superse ded for such period 
not exceeding six months as may be specified in the 
notification, and may appoint any person or persons to 
exercise and perform all the powers and duties of the 
governing body, and where more persons than one are 
appointed, may appoint one of such persons to be the 
chairman and another of such persons to be the vice -
chairman. 
Substitution 
of new 
section 
for section 13. 
 
Power of 
Commission 
to supersede 
governing 
body of 
recognised 
association. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
        
  (2) On the publication of a notification under sub -
section (1), the following consequences shall ensue, 
namely:— 
(a) the members of the governing body whi ch 
has been superseded shall, as from the date of 
the notification of supersession, cease to hold 
office as such members; 
(b) the person or persons appointed under sub -
section (1) may exercise and perform all the 
powers and duties of the governing body which has 
been superseded; 
(c) all such property of the recognised 
association as the person or persons appointed 
under sub-section (1) may, by order in writing, 
specify in this behalf as being necessary for the 
purpose of enabling him or them to carry out 
the purposes of this Act, shall vest in such 
person or persons. 
      
 (3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained 
in any law or the rules or bye -laws of the association 
whose governing body is superseded under sub-section 
(1), the person or perso ns appointed under that sub -
section shall hold office for such period as may be 
specified in the notification published under that sub -
section, and the Commission may, from time to time, by 
like notification, vary such period. 
    
 (4) On the determination  of the period of office of any 
person or persons appointed under this section, the 
recognised association shall forthwith reconstitute a 
governing body in accordance with its rules:  
          

 
 
 
 
         Provided that until a governing body is so 
reconstituted, the person or persons appointed under 
sub-section (1), shall, notwithstanding anything 
contained in sub -section (1), continue to exercise and 
perform their powers and duties.  
   (5) On the reconstitution of a governing body under 
sub-section (4), all  the property of the recognised 
association which had vested in, or was in the 
possession of, the person or persons appointed under 
sub-section (1), shall vest or revest, as the case may 
be, in the governing body so reconstituted.‖.  
 
Amendment 
of section 14. 
20. In section 14 of the principal Act, for the words 
―Central Government‖, at both the places where they 
occur, the word ―Commission‖ shall be substituted. 
 
 
Substitution 
of new 
Chapter for 
Chapter IIIA. 
21.  For Chapter IIIA of the principal Act, the following 
Chapter shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
 ―CHAPTER IIIA 
REGISTRATION OF MEMBERS AND 
INTERMEDIARIES 
 
 
Registration of 
members and 
intermediaries. 
 
14A. (1) On and from the commencement of the Forward 
Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2010, no person 
intending to act as a member or intermediary shall deal 
in forward contract or option in goods or option in 
commodity derivative except under and in accordance 
with the conditions of a certificate of registration 
granted by the Commission in accordance with the 
regulations made under this Act.  
 
 

 
 
 
 
        (2) A person, who in his capacity as a member or 
intermediary intends to d eal  in forward contract or 
option in goods or option in commodity derivative shall  
make an application for a certificate of registration to 
the Commission in such form  along with such fee and 
containing such particulars as may be provided by  
regulations:  
 
           Provided that a person who was acting as a 
member or intermediary, before the commencement of 
the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 
2010, may continue to do so for a period of six months 
from the date of such commencement if he has made 
an application for registration within the said period of 
six months, till the disposal of such application, 
whichever is later:  
 
          Provided further that the Commission may, by 
regulations, specify different fees for a class or classes 
of members or intermediaries on the basis of turnover 
of the business of such members or intermediaries.  
 
   (3) No foreign participant or foreign intermediary 
associated with the commodity derivatives market, as 
the Commission may, by notification in this behalf, 
specify, shall deal in forward contract or option in 
goods or option in commodity derivative except under 
and in accordance with the conditions of a certificate of 
registration obtained from the Commission in 
accordance with the regulations made under this Act:  
 
           Provided that a foreign participant or foreign 
intermediary dealing in forward  contract or option in 
goods or option in commodity derivative immediately 

 
 
 
 
before the  commencement of this Act, for which no 
certificate of registrat ion was required prior  to such 
commencement, may continue to deal in forward 
contract or option in goods  until such time as rules 
may be made by the Central Government for such 
dealings  or in case no such rules have been made 
until permitted as such by the  Commission  by 
notification.  
 
   (4) On receipt of an application under sub-section (2), 
the Commission may, after making such inquiry as it 
considers necessary in this behalf, by order in writing, 
grant a certificate of registration on such terms an d 
conditions as may be specified by regulations or refuse 
to grant such certificate:  
 
      Provided that, before refusing to grant such 
certificate, the person making the application shall be 
given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
 
 14B. T he Commission may, by order, suspend or 
cancel the certificate of registration in such manner as 
may be provided by regulations: 
 
           Provided that no order under this section shall 
be made unless the person concerned has been given 
an opportunity of being heard in the matter.‖. 
Suspension or 
cancellation 
of certificate 
of  
registration. 
 
 
 
22. For sections 15, 16 and 17 of the principal 
Act, the following sections shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
 
 
          ―15. (1) Subject to the provisions contain ed in 
sections 17 and 18, every forward contract, entered 
Substitution of  
new sections  
for sections 
15, 16 and 17. 
 
Forward 
contracts 

 
 
 
 
into otherwise than between members of a recognised 
association or through or with any such member, shall 
be illegal. 
      
 (2) Any forward contract entered into in pursuance of 
sub-section (1) whi ch is in contravention of any of the 
bye-laws specified in this behalf under clause (a) of 
sub-section (3) of section 11 shall be void— 
 
               (a) as respects the rights of any member of 
the recognised association who has entered into 
contract in contravention of any such bye-law; and 
 
              (b) as respects the rights of any other person 
who has knowingly participated in the transaction 
entailing such contravention. 
 
    (3) Nothing in sub -section (2) shall affect the right of 
any person ot her than a member of the recognised 
association to enforce any such contract or to recover 
any sum under or in respect of such contract: 
 
            Provided that such person had no knowledge 
that such transaction was in contravention of any of the 
bye-laws specified under clause (a) of sub -section (3) 
of section 11. 
 
   (4) Any forward contract entered into in pursuance of 
sub-section (1) which at the date of the contract is in 
contravention of any of the bye -laws specified in this 
behalf under clause (aa ) of sub -section (3) of section 
11 shall be illegal. 
 
    (5) No member of a recognised association shall 
illegal or void 
in certain 
circumstances
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
enter into any contract on his own account with any 
person other than a member of the recognised 
association, unless he has secured the consent or 
authority of such person and discloses in the note, 
memorandum or agreement of sale or purchase that he 
has bought or sold the forward contract, as the case 
may be, on his own account: 
 
           Provided that where the member has secured 
the consent or auth ority of such person otherwise than 
in writing he shall secure a written confirmation by such 
person of such consent or authority within three days 
from the date of such contract: 
 
          Provided further that in respect of any 
outstanding contract ente red into by a member with a 
person other than a member of the recognised 
association, no consent or authority of such person 
shall be necessary for closing out in accordance with 
the bye -laws, the outstanding contract, if the member 
discloses in the note, memorandum or agreement of 
sale or purchase in respect of such closing out that he 
has bought or sold the goods, forward contract or 
option in goods or option in commodity derivative, as 
the case may be, on his own account. 
 
Conseque
nces of 
contraventi
on of 
section 15. 
 
16. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
law for the time being in force or in any custom, usage 
or practice of the trade or the terms of any contract or 
the bye-laws of any association concerned relating to 
any contract,— 
 
        (a) every forward contract entered into on or 
before the date of commencement of the Forward 
 

 
 
 
 
Contracts (Re gulation) Amendment Act, 2010 , and 
remaining to be performed after the said date and 
which is not in conformity with the provisions of section 
15, shall be deemed to be closed out at such rate as 
the Commission may fix in this behalf and different 
rates ma y be fixed for different classes of such 
contracts;  
 
        (b) all differences arising out of any contract so 
deemed to be closed out shall be payable on the basis 
of the rate fixed under clause (a) and the seller shall 
not be bound to give and the buye r shall not be bound 
to take delivery of the goods. 
 
Power to 
prohibit 
forward 
contract  
or options in  
goods or 
option  
in commodity  
derivative. 
 
17.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification, 
declare that no person shall, save with the permissi on 
of the Central Government, deal in any forward 
contract or option in goods or option in commodity 
derivative specified in the notification, except to the 
extent and in the manner, if any, as may be specified in 
the notification. 
       
 (2) All forward contracts or options in goods or options in 
commodity derivative in contravention of the provisions of 
sub-section (1) entered into after the date of publication 
of the notification thereunder shall be illegal. 
      
 (3) Where a notification has been issu ed under 
sub-section (1), the provisions of section 16 shall, in 
the absence of anything to the contrary in the 
notification, apply to all forward contracts and options in 
goods for the sale or purchase of any goods specified 
in the notification (entered i nto on or before the date of 
the notification) and remaining to be performed after 
 

 
 
 
 
the said date.‖. 
 
Amendment 
of  
section 18. 
 
23. In section 18 of the principal Act,— 
 
(a) in sub-section (1),— 
 
(i) for the words ―non -transferable specific 
delivery cont racts‖, the words and brackets 
―specific delivery contracts (both transferable 
and non-transferable)‖ shall be substituted; 
 
(ii) in the proviso, for the words ―non -
transferable specific delivery contract‖, the 
words and brackets ―specific delivery contrac ts 
(both transferable and non-transferable)‖ shall 
be substituted; 
 
(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted; 
 
(c) in sub -section (3), for the words ―non -
transferable specific delivery contracts‖,  at both 
the places where they occur, the words and 
brackets "s pecific delivery contracts (both 
transferable and non -transferable)" shall be 
substituted. 
 
 
Substitution 
of new 
section for  
section 19. 
Option in 
goods  
or option in  
commodity  
derivative 
illegal  
24. For section 19 of the pri ncipal Act, the following 
section shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
       ―19. (1) Any option in goods or option in 
commodity derivative which has been entered into on 
or after the commencement of the Forward Contracts 
(Regulation) Amendment Act, 2010, otherwise than between 
members of a recognised association or through or with 
 
 

 
 
 
 
in certain 
circumstances
. 
any such member shall be illegal. 
            
(2) The provisions of sub -sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) 
of section 15 shall apply to options in goods or option 
in commodity derivative  as they apply in relation to a 
forward contract.‖. 
 
 25. In section 20 of the principal Act,— 
 
        (i)   in clause (a), in sub -clause (iii), for the words 
―forward contract‖, the words ―forward contract or 
option in goods or option in commodity der ivative" shall 
be substituted; 
 
       (ii)    clause (b) shall be omitted; 
 
        (iii)   in clause (c), for the words ―forward contract‖, the 
words ―forward contract or option in goods or option in 
commodity derivative" shall be substituted; 
 
      (iv)   after clause (d), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
                ―(da) fails to make or accept delivery of goods 
covered by non -transferable specific delivery contracts or 
by transferable specific contracts where rights and 
obligations have not been transferred, as the case may 
be; or‖; 
 
     (v)  for clause (e), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:—  
 
             ―(e) enters into any forward contract or option 
in goods or option in  commodity derivative in 
contravention of any of the provisions contained in 
Amendment of  
section 20.  
 

 
 
 
 
sub-section (1) or sub -section (4) or sub -section (5) of 
section 15 or section 17 or section 19,‖;  
 
    (vi)  after the words ―shall, on conviction, be 
punishable—‖ occurring below clause (e),—  
 
           (A) in cl ause (i), for the words ―one thousand 
rupees‖, the words ―twenty -five thousand rupees but 
which may extend to twenty -five lakh rupees‖ shall be 
substituted;  
 
          (B) in clause (ii),—  
               (I) for the words, brackets and letter ―under 
clause (d)‖, the words, brackets and letters ―under 
clause (d) or under clause (da)‖ shall be substituted;  
             (II) for the words ―one thousand rupees‖, the 
words ―twenty -five thousand rupees‖ shall be 
substituted. 
 
 26.   In section 21 of the principal Act,— 
 
       (i)   in clauses (a) to (f), for the words ―forward 
contracts‖, wherever they occur, the words ―forward 
contract or option in goods or option in commodity 
derivative‖ shall be substituted; 
      (ii)   in clau se (g), for the words and figures ―in 
respect of goods to which the provisions of section 15 
have been made applicable‖, the words "in respect of 
goods or option in goods or option in commodity 
derivative" shall be substituted; 
      (iii)   for clause (h), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
                      "(h) manipulates or attempts to 
manipulate prices in respect of forward 
Amendment 
of section 21. 
 

 
 
 
 
contracts or option in goods or option in 
commodity derivative;‖; 
      (iv) after the words ―shall, on conv iction, be 
punishable—‖ occurring below clause (h), in clauses (i) 
and (ii), for the words "one thousand rupees", the 
words ―twenty -five thousand rupees but which may 
extend to twenty-five lakh rupees‖ shall be substituted. 
 
Substitution 
of  
new 
sections for 
section 21A. 
 
Penalty for 
failure to 
furnish 
information, 
return, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27. For section 21A of the principal Act, the following 
sections shall be substituted, namely:— 
   
       ―21A. (1) If any person, who is required under this 
Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder,— 
(a) to furnish any document, return or report to the 
Commission, fails to furnish the same, he shall be 
liable to a penalty of twenty thousand rupees for each 
day during which such failure continues or five lakh 
rupees, whichever is less; 
(b) to file any return or furnish any information, books 
or other documents within the time specified 
therefor in the regulations, fails to file or furnish the 
same within the time specified therefor in the 
regulations, he shall be liable to a penalty not 
exceeding five thousand rupees for each day 
during which such failure continues or five lakh 
rupees, whichever is less; 
(c) to maintain books of account or records, fails to 
maintain the same, he shall be liable to a penalty 
of ten thousand rupees for each day during which 
such failure continues or five lakh rupees, 
whichever is less. 
 
(2) If any person who was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, an association for the conduct of the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
business of the association, obstructs any officer of the 
Commission or any other person authorised by it to 
conduct inspection or to discharge any other function 
assigned by the Commission, such person as well as 
the association shall be liable to a fine of one lakh 
rupees for every occasion of such obstruction.  
     
Penalty for 
failure by 
any person 
to enter into 
an 
agreement 
with clients. 
21B. If any person, who is registered as a member or 
an intermediary and is required under this Act or any 
rules or regulations made th ereunder to enter into an 
agreement with his client, fails to enter into such 
agreement, he shall be liable to a penalty of twenty 
thousand rupees for each such failure during which 
such failure continues or five lakh rupees, whichever is 
less. 
 
 
Penalty for 
failure to 
redress 
clients‘ 
grievances. 
 
 21C. If any person, who is registered as a member or 
an intermediary, after having been called upon by the 
Commission in writing to redress the grievances of 
clients, fails to redress such grievances within the  time 
specified by the Commission, he shall be liable to a 
penalty not exceeding two thousand rupees for each 
day during which such failure continues or five lakh 
rupees, whichever is less. 
 
 
Penalty for  
insider 
trading. 
 
21D. If any insider who,— 
(i) ei ther on his own behalf or on behalf of any 
other person, deals in forward contract or option in 
goods or option in commodity derivative on any 
association on the basis of any unpublished price 
sensitive information; or 
(ii) communicates any unpublished pri ce sensitive 
information to any person, with or without his 
request for such information except as required in 
 

 
 
 
 
the ordinary course of business or under any law; 
or 
 
(iii) counsels, or procures for any other person to 
deal in any forward contract or option in goods or 
option in commodity derivative on the basis of 
unpublished price sensitive information, 
 
shall be liable to a penalty of twenty -five lakh rupees or 
three times the amount of profits made out of insider 
trading, whichever is higher. 
 
Penalty for  
fraudulent 
and  
unfair trade  
practices. 
 
21E. If any person indulges in fraudulent and unfair 
trade practices relating to forward contract or option in 
goods or option in commodity derivative, he shall be 
liable to a penalty of twenty -five lakh rupees  or three 
times the amount of profits made out of such 
practices, whichever is higher. 
 
 
 21F. If any person, who is registered as an 
intermediary under this Act or any regulations made 
thereunder,— 
 
(a) fails to issue contract notes in the form and 
manner specified by the  association of which such 
intermediary is a member, he shall be liable to a 
penalty not exceeding five times the amount for which 
the contract note was required to be issued by that 
intermediary; 
 
(b) fails to deliver any goods or fails  to make 
payment of the  amount due to the client or in the 
manner or within the period specified in the 
regulations, he shall be liable to a penalty not 
Penalty for 
default in case 
of an 
Intermediary. 
 

 
 
 
 
exceeding five thousand rupees for each day during 
which such failure continues; 
 
(c) charges an amoun t of brokerage which is in 
excess of the brokerage specified by the association,  
 
he shall be liable to a penalty of five thousand rupees 
or five times the amount of brokerage charged in excess 
of the specified brokerage, whichever is higher. 
 
 21G. Any person, who fails to comply with the 
directions issued by the  Commission under section 4B, 
shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding two lakh  rupees 
for each day during which such failure continues which 
may extend to five  lakh rupees. 
 
Penalty for failure 
to comply with 
directions of 
Commission. 
 
 21H. (1) Without prejudice to any award of penalty by 
the adjudicating officer under this Act, if any person 
contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets th e 
contravention any of the provisions of this Act or of 
any rules or regulations made thereunder, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
 
       (2) If any person fails to pay the pe nalty imposed 
by the adjudicating officer or fails to comply with any 
of his directions or orders, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
one month but which may extend to three years or 
with fine or with both. 
 
Consequences of 
failure to pay 
penalty.  
 
 21-I. (1) For the purposes of adjudging under sections 
21A to 21G, the Commission shall appoint any of its 
officers not below the rank of a Division Chief to be an 
Power to 
adjudicate. 
 

 
 
 
 
adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry in the  
prescribed manner after giving any person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard for the purpose 
of imposing any penalty. 
  
             (2) While holding an inquiry, the adjudicating 
officer shall have power to summon and enforce the 
attendance of any person acquainted with the facts and 
circumstances of the case to give evidence or to 
produce any document which, in the opinion of the 
adjudicating officer, may be useful for or relevant to the 
subject matter of the inquiry and if, on such inquir y, he 
is satisfied that the person has failed to comply with the 
provisions of any of the sections specified in sub -
section (1), he may impose such penalty as he thinks 
fit in accordance with the provisions of any of those 
sections. 
 
 21J. While adjudging the quantum of penalty under 
section 21 -I, the adjudicating officer shall have due 
regard to the following factors, namely:— 
        (a) the amount of disproportionate gain or unfair  
advantage, wherever quantifiable, made as a resul t of 
the default; 
       (b) the amount of loss caused to a client or group 
of clients as a result of the default; 
      (c) the repetitive nature of the default. 
  
Factors to be 
taken into 
account by 
adjudicating 
officer. 
 
 
Crediting 
sums 
realised by 
way 
of penalties 
to 
Consolidated 
21K. All sums realised by way of penalties under this 
Act shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Fund of India. 
 
Power of 
court to order 
forfeiture of 
property. 
21L. Any court trying an offence punishable unde r this 
Act, may, if it thinks fit and in addition to any sentence 
which it may impose for such offence, direct that any 
money, goods or other property in respect of which the 
offence has been committed, shall be forfeited to the 
Central Government. 
 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, 
property in respect of which an offence has been 
committed, shall include deposits in a bank where the 
said property is converted into such deposits.‖. 
 
 
Amendment 
of 
section 22A. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28. In section 22A of the principal Act,— 
        (a) in sub-section (1),— 
 
              (i) after the words "forward contracts or 
options in goods", the words "or option in 
commodity derivative" shall be inserted; 
              (ii) after the words ―forward contract or option  
in goods‖, the words ―or option in commodity 
derivative‖ shall be inserted; 
 
         (b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-sections 
shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
           ―(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, shall, so far  as may be, apply to 
search or seizure made under sub -section (1) as they 
apply to any search or seizure made under the 
authority of a warrant issued under section 94 of the 
said Code. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 of 1974. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
            (3) The Commission may, notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, file cases in respect of 
offences committed under this Act, directly to the courts 
having jurisdiction in respect of such offences.‖. 
 
Amendment 
of 
section 22B. 
 
29. In section 22B of the principal Act, in sub -section 
(1), after the words ―or option in goods‖, the words ―or 
option in commodity derivative‖ shall be inserted. 
 
 
Insertion of 
new 
section 22C. 
 
 
Investigation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30.   After section 22B of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
        ―22C. (1) Where the Commission has reasonable 
grounds to believe that— 
 
          (a) the transactions in forward contracts or option 
in goods or option in commodity derivative are being 
dealt with in a manner detrimental to the commodity 
market or person associated with the commodity 
market; or  
 
           (b) any intermediary or any person associated 
with the commodities market has violated any of the 
provisions of this Act or the rules or regulat ions made 
or directions issued by the Commission thereunder, it 
may, at any time by order in writing, direct any person 
(hereafter in this section referred to as the 
Investigating Authority) specified in the order to 
investigate the affairs of such interme diary or person 
associated with the commodities market and to report 
thereon to the Commission.  
 
(2)   Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 235 
to 241 of the Companies  Act, 1956, it shall be the duty 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 of 1956.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of every manager, managing director, office r and other 
employee of the company and every intermediary 
referred to in section 14A, every  person associated 
with the commodities market to preserve and to 
produce to the  Investigating Authority or any person 
authorised by him in this behalf, all the  books, 
registers, other documents and record of, or relating to, 
the company or, as  the case may be, of or relating to, 
the intermediary or such person, which are in their  
custody or power.  
 
(3)  The Investigating Authority may require any 
intermediary or any person  associated with 
commodities market in any manner to furnish such 
information to, or produce such books, or registers, or 
other documents, or record before him or  any person 
authorised by him in this behalf as he may consider 
necessary if th e  furnishing of such  information or the 
production of such books, or registers, or other 
documents, or record is relevant or necessary for the 
purposes of its  investigation.  
 
(4)   The Investigating Authority may keep in its 
custody any books, register s, other documents and 
record produced under sub -section (2) or sub -section 
(3) for six months and thereafter shall return the same 
to any intermediary or any person associated with 
commodities market by whom or on whose behalf the 
books, registers, other documents and record are 
produced:  
             Provided that the Investigating Authority may 
call for any books, registers, other documents and 
record if they are needed again:  
             Provided further that if the person on whose 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
behalf the books, registers, other documents and 
record are produced requires certified copies of the 
books, registers, other documents and record 
produced before the Investigating Authority, it shall 
give certified copies of such books, registers, other 
documents and recor d to such person or on whose 
behalf the books, registers, other documents and 
record were produced.  
(5) Any person, directed to make an investigation 
under sub -section (1), may examine on oath, any 
manager, managing director, officer and other 
employee of  any intermediary or any person 
associated with commodities market in any manner, in 
relation to the affairs of his business and may 
administer an oath accordingly and for that purpose 
may require any of those persons to appear before him 
personally.  
(6)    If any person fails without reasonable cause or 
refuses— 
               (a) to produce to the Investigating Authority 
or any person authorised by it in this behalf any 
book, register, other document and record 
which is his duty under sub -section (2) or sub-
section (3) to produce; or  
                (b) to furnish any information which is his 
duty under sub-section (3) to furnish; or  
(c) to appear before the Investigating Authority 
personally when required to do so under sub -
section (5) or to answer any  question which is 
put to him by the Investigating Authority in 
pursuance of that sub-section; or  
(d) to sign the notes of any examination 
referred to in sub-section (7), 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year, o r with fine, which 
may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both, and 
also with a further fine which may extend to twenty 
thousand rupees for every day after the first during 
which the failure or refusal continues. 
 
 (7) Notes of any examination under sub -section (5) 
shall be taken down in writing and shall be read over 
to, or by, and signed by, the person examined, and 
may thereafter be used in evidence against him. 
(8) Where in the course of investigation, the 
Investigating Authority has reasonable ground to 
believe that the books, registers, other documents and 
record of, or relating to, any intermediary or any 
person associated with commodities market in any 
manner, may be destroye d, mutilated, altered, falsified 
or secreted, the Investigating Authority may make an 
application to the Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
having jurisdiction for an order for the seizure of such 
books, registers, other documents and record.  
(9) Afte r considering the application and hearing the 
Investigating Authority,  if necessary, the Magistrate 
may, by order, authorise the Investigating Authority—  
(a) to enter, with such assistance, as may be 
required, the place or  places where such books, 
registers, other  documents and record are kept;  
(b) to search that place or those places in the 
manner specified in the  order; and  
 (c) to seize books, registers, other documents and 
record, as it considers necessary for the 
purposes of the investigation.  
 
 
 (10)  The Investigating Authority shall keep in its  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
custody the books, registers, other documents and 
record seized under this section for such period not 
later than the conclusion of the investigation as it 
considers necessary and thereafter shall return the 
same to the company or the other body corporate, or, 
as the case may be, to the managing director or the 
manager or any other person, from whose custody or 
power they were seized and inform the Magistrate of 
such return:  
           Provided that the Investigating Authority may, 
before returning such books, registers, other 
documents and record as aforesaid, place 
identification marks on them or any part thereof.  
(11)   Save as otherwise provided in this section, every 
search or seizure ma de under this section shall be 
carried out in accordance with the provisions of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, relating to 
searches or seizures made under that Code.‖.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 of 1974. 
Amendment 
of section 23. 
31. In section 23 of the principal Act, after clause (d), 
the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
―(e) an offence falling under section 21H.‖. 
 
 
Insertion of 
new section 
24A. 
 
 
 
Civil court 
not to have 
jurisdiction. 
 
 
32. In Chapter V of the principal Act, after section 24 , 
the following section shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
―24A. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or 
proceeding in respect of any matter which an adjudicating officer appointed under 
this Act or the Appellate Tribunal is empowered by or under this Act to determine 
and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any 
action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this 
Act.‖. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Insertion of 
new Chapter 
VA. 
33. After Chapter V of the principal Act, the following 
Chapter shall be inserted, namely:— 
‗CHAPTER VA 
JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY OF APPELLATE 
TRIBUNAL 
 
 
Appeal to 
Appellate 
Tribunal. 
24B. (1) Save as provided in sub -section (2), any 
person aggrieved on or after the commenc ement of 
the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 
2010, or by an order of the Commission made, or the 
rules or regulations made thereunder or by an order 
made by an adjudicating officer under this Act may 
prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal  having 
jurisdiction in the matter. 
 
      (2) The Central Government shall specify, by 
notification, the matters and places in relation to which 
the Appellate Tribunal may exercise jurisdiction.  
    
  (3) No appeal shall lie to the Appellate Tribunal fro m 
an order made by the Commission or an adjudicating 
officer with the consent of the parties.  
    
  (4) Every appeal under sub -section (1) shall be filed 
within a period of forty-five days from the date on which 
a copy of the order made by the Chairman of  the 
Commission is received by the aggrieved person and it 
shall be in such form and be accompanied by such fee 
as may be prescribed:  
              
            Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may 
entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said perio d if 
it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not 
filing it within that period.  
 

 
 
 
 
     
 (5) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section (1), the 
Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the 
appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass suc h 
orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or 
setting aside the order appealed against.  
    (6) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every 
order made by it to the  parties to the appeal and to the 
concerned authority whose order has b een appealed  
against.  
    (7) The appeal filed before the Appellate Tribunal 
under sub -section (1) shall be dealt with by it as 
expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made 
by it to dispose of the appeal finally within six months 
from the date of receipt of the appeal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 of 1949. 
 
 
 
56 of 1980.
  
 
 
 
24C. The appellant may either appear in person or 
authorise one or more chartered accountants or 
company secretaries or cost accountants or legal 
practitioners or any of its o fficers to present his or its 
case before the Appellate Tribunal. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—  
 (a) "chartered accountant" means a chartered 
accountant as defined in clause (b) of sub -section 
(1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountant s Act, 
1949 and who has obtained a certificate of 
practice under sub -section (1) of section 6 of that 
Act;  
 (b) "company secretary" means a company 
secretary as defined in clause (c) of sub -section 
(1) of section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 
1980 and  who has obtained a certificate of 
practice under sub -section (1) of section 6 of that 
Act;  
Right to legal 
representation
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
23 of 1959. 
 
(c) "cost accountant" means a cost accountant as 
defined in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 2 
of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 and 
who has obta ined a certificate of practice under 
sub-section (1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(d) "legal practitioner" means an advocate, vakil or an 
attorney of any High Court, and includes a pleader in 
practice. 
 
36 of 1963. 
 
 
 
 
 
24D. The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 shall, 
as far as may be, apply to an appeal made to the 
Appellate Tribunal. 
 
24E.  Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of 
the Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the 
Supreme Court within si xty days from the date of 
communication of the decision or order of the Appellate 
Tribunal to him on any question of law arising out of 
such order:  
         Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is 
satisfied that the applicant was prevented by suffic ient 
cause from filing the appeal within the said period, 
allow it to be filed within a further period not exceeding 
sixty days.‖.  
 
Limitation.  
 
 
 
Appeal  to 
Supreme 
Court. 
Insertion of 
new 
sections 
26A, 26B, 
26C, 26D 
26E and 
26F. 
 
 
Power of 
Central 
34. After section 26 of the principal Act, the following 
sections shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
 
 
―26A. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions 
of this Act, the Commission shall, in exercise of its 
powers or performan ce of its functions under this Act, 
be bound by such directions on questions of policy as 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Government 
to issue 
directions. 
 
the Central Government may give in writing to it from 
time to time: 
             Provided that the Commission shall, as far as 
practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is given under this sub-section. 
         (2) The decision of the Central Government, 
whether a question is one of policy or not, shall be final. 
 
Power of 
Central 
Government 
to supersede 
Commission. 
26B.    (1) If at any time the Central Government is of 
the opinion— 
(a) that on account of grave emergency, the 
Commission is unable to discharge the 
functions and perform the duties imposed on 
it by or under the provisions of this Act; or 
(b) that the Commission ha s persistently made 
wilful default in complying with any direction 
issued by the Central Government under this 
Act or in the discharge of the functions and 
perform the duties imposed on it by or under 
the provisions of this Act and as a result of 
such defa ult the financial position of the 
Commission or the administration of the 
Commission has deteriorated; or 
(c) that circumstances exist which render it 
necessary in the public interest so to do, 
 
the Central Government may, by notification, 
supersede the  C ommission for such period, not 
exceeding six months, as may be specified in the 
notification. 
      
     (2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -
section (1) superseding the Commission,— 
 
 

 
 
 
 
(a) all the members shall, as from the date of 
supersession, vacate their offices as such; 
 
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which 
may, by or under the provisions of this Act, 
be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of 
the Commission shall, until the Commission 
is reconstituted under sub -section (3),  be 
exercised and discharged by such person or 
persons as the Central Government may 
direct; and 
 
(c) all property owned or controlled by the 
Commission shall, until the Commission is 
reconstituted, vest in the Central 
Government. 
 
      (3) On the expirat ion of the period of supersession 
specified in the notification issued under sub -section 
(1), the Central Government may reconstitute the 
Commission by fresh appointment and in such case 
any person or persons who vacated their offices under 
clause (a) of s ub-section (2), shall not be deemed 
disqualified for such appointment: 
 
            Provided that the Central Government may, at 
any time before the expiration of the period of 
supersession, take action under this sub-section. 
 
   (4)  The Central Government shall cause a notification 
issued under sub -section (1) and a full report of any 
action taken under this section and the circumstances 
leading to such action to be laid before each House of 
Parliament at the earliest. 

 
 
 
 
 
 26C.   (1) The Commission shall  furnish to the Central 
Government at such time and in such form and manner 
as may be prescribed or as the Central Government 
may direct, such returns and statements and such 
particulars in regard to any proposed or existing 
programme for the promotion and  development of the 
commodities market, as the Central Government may, 
from time to time, require. 
 
         (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -
section (1), the Commission shall, within ninety days, 
after the end of each financial year, submit to the 
Central Government a report in such form, as may be 
prescribed, giving a true and full account of its 
activities, policy and programmes during the previous 
financial year.  
 
         (3) A copy of the report received under sub -
section (2) shall be l aid, as soon as may be after it is 
received, before each House of Parliament. 
 
Returns and  and 
reports. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26D.  The Commission may, by general or special 
order in writing, delegate to any member or officer of 
the Commission or any other person subjec t to such 
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, 
such of its powers and functions under this Act (except 
the powers under section 28) as it may deem 
necessary. 
 
26E.   No order passed by the Commission or the 
adjudicating officer under this Act shall be appealable 
except as provided in section 24B and no civil court 
shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which 
Delegation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bar of 
jurisdiction. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
the Commission or the adjudicating officer is 
empowered by, or under, this Act to pass any order 
and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other 
authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in 
pursuance of any order passed by the Commission or 
the adjudicating officer by, or under, this Act. 
 
 
 
 
45 of 
1860. 
26F. All members, officers and other employees of the 
Commission shall be deemed, when acting or 
purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions 
of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.‖. 
Members, 
officers and  
employees of  
Commission  
to be public  
servants. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 of 1 
957. 
43 of 1 
961. 
 
35. After section 27A of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
         ―27B. Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Wealth-tax Act, 1957, the Income-tax Act, 1961, or any 
other enactment for the time being in force relating to 
tax on wealth, income, profits or gains, the 
Commission shall not be liable to pay wealth -tax, 
income-tax or any other tax in respect of their wealth, 
income, profits or gains derived.‖. 
Insertion of  
new section  
27B. 
 
Exemption  from 
tax on wealth 
and 
income. 
 
 
 
 36. In section 28 of the principal Act, in sub-section 
(2),— 
        (i) clause (cc) shall be omitted; 
       (ii) for clause ( g), the follow ing clauses shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
  ―(g) the duties and powers which may be 
performed or exercised by the Commission 
under clause (q) of section 4; 
Amendment of 
section 28. 

 
 
 
 
(h) the form and manner in which the annual 
statement of accounts shall be maintained 
under sub-section (1) of section 4F; 
 (i)   the rules for dealing by foreign participant or 
foreign intermediary under the proviso to sub -
section (3) of section 14A; 
 (j) the manner in which an inquiry shall be held 
under sub-section (1) of section 21-I; 
 (k)  the form  in which an appeal may be filed before 
the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section (4) of 
section 24B and the fees payable in respect of 
such appeal; 
 (l) the form and the manner in which returns and 
report to be made to the Central Government 
under section 26C; 
 (m) any other matter which is to be, or may be, 
prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to 
be, or may be, made by rules.‖. 
 
Insertion of 
new 
sections 
28A and 
28B. 
 
 
Power to 
make 
regulations. 
 
37.  After section 28 of the principal Act, the following 
sections shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
 
 ―28A. (1) The Commission may,  by 
notification, make regulations consistent  with this 
Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the 
purposes of this Act. 
 
 (2)  In particular,  and without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing power, such regulations 
may provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:— 
    (a) the time and places of meetings of the 
Commission and the procedure to be followed 
 
 

 
 
 
 
at such meetings unde r section 3D including 
quorum necessary for the transaction of 
business; 
     (b) the terms and other conditions of 
service of officers and employees of the 
Commission under sub -section (2) of section 
3H; 
    (c) the manner in which the fresh issue of 
equity shares shall be made to the public 
under sub-section (8) of section 7B; 
    (d) the conditions of certificate of 
registration to act as a member or 
intermediary to deal with forward contract or 
option in goods or option in commodity 
derivative under sub -section (1) of section 
14A; 
    (e) the fee for a class or classes of member or 
intermediary under the second proviso to sub -
section (2) of section 14A; 
      (f) the terms and conditions subject to 
which registration may be granted under sub -
section (4) of section 14A; 
      (g) the manner in which the certificate of 
registration may be suspended or cancelled 
under section 14B; 
       (h) any other matter relating to trading, 
clearing, settlement, and delivery of goods, 
forward contract, option in goods o r option in 
commodity derivative. 
  (3)  Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in 
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 

 
 
 
 
expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the regulation or 
both Houses agree that the regulatio n should not be 
made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that regulation. 
 
Application 
of other 
laws not 
barred. 
28B. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, 
and not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law 
for the time being in force.‖. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENT TO THE SECURIT IES AND EXCHANGE 
BOARD OF INDIA ACT, 1992 
 
38. In section 15U of the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India Act, 1992, in sub -section (2), for the 
words ―under this Act‖, the words ―under this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force‖ shall be 
substituted.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 15U of 
Act 15 of 1992. 

APPENDIX- III 
 
 
FORWARD CONTRACT (REGULATION) ACT, 1952. 
(Act No. 74 of 1952) 
CHAPTER  I 
Preliminary 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definition 
CHAPTER II 
Forward Markets Commission 
3. Establishment and constitution of the Forward Markets Commission. 
4. Functions of the Commission. 
4-A Powers of the Commission. 
  
CHAPTER III 
Recognised Associations 
5. Applications for recognition of association. 
6. Grant of recognition to association. 
7.   Withdrawal of recognition. 
8. Power of Central Government to call for periodical returns or direct 
inquiries to be made. 
9. Furnishing of annual reports to the Central Government by recognised 
association. 
9-A Power of recognised associat ions to make rules respecting grouping of 
members, restricting voting rights, etc  in special cases. 
10 Power of Central Government to direct rules to be made or to make rules. 
11 Power of recognised association to make bye-laws. 
12 Power of Central Govern ment to make, or amend bye -laws of recognised 
associations. 
12-A Application of amendment of bye-laws to existing forward contract. 

 
 
 
12-B  Power of Commission to suspend member of recognised association or to 
prohibit him from trading 
13 Power of Central Go vernment to suspend governing body of recognised 
association. 
14 Power to suspend business of recognised associations. 
  
  
  
CHAPTER   III-A 
Registered Associations 
14-A   Certificate of registration to be obtained by all associations. 
14-B   Grant or refusal of certificate of  registration. 
14-C  Application of Sections 8 and 12-B to registered associations. 
  
CHAPTER  IV 
Forward contracts & Options in Goods 
15. Forward contracts in notified goods illegal or void in certain circumstances. 
16 Consequences of notification under Sec. 15. 
17. Power to prohibit forward contracts in certain cases. 
18 Special provisions respecting certain kinds of forward contract. 
19 Prohibition of options in goods. 
  
CHAPTER V 
Penalties and Procedures 
20 Penalty for contravention of certain provisions of Chapter IV.  
21 Penalty for owning or keeping place used for entering into forward 
contracts in goods.  
21A  Power of Court to order forfeiture of property. 
22 Offences by companies. 
22A. Power to search and seize books of account or other documents. 
23. Certain offences to be cognizable. 

 
 
 
24 Jurisdiction to try offence under this Act. 
  
CHAPTER VI 
Miscellaneous 
25. Advisory Committee. 
26. Power to delegate. 
27. Power to exempt. 
27 A    Protection of action taken in good faith. 
28. Power to make rules. 
29 Repeal and savings. 
 
FORWARD CONTRACTS  (REGULATION)  ACT, 1952. 
(Act No. 74 of 1952) 
  
 An act to provide for the regulation of certain matters relating to 
forward contracts, the prohibition of options in goods and for matters 
connected therewith. 
  
CHAPTER  I 
Preliminary 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
(1) This Act may be called the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952. 
  
(2)   It extends to the whole of India  1[1] [* * *]. 
  
(3) Chapter I shall come into force at o nce, and the remaining provisions 
shall come into force on such date or dates as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be 
appointed for different provisions of this Act, for different States o r areas, and 
for different goods or classes of goods. 
                                                 
 

 
 
 
  
2. Definition    In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - 
(a) ―association‖  means any body of individuals whether 
incorporated or not, constituted for the purpose of regulating and contr olling 
the business of the sale or purchase of any goods; 
(b) ―commission‖ means the Forward Markets Commission 
established under sec. 3; 
(c) ―forward contract ‖ means a contract for the delivery of goods 
2[2][* * *]  and which is not a ready delivery contract: 
  
  
(d) ―goods‖ means every kind of movable property other than 
actionable claims, money and securities; 
(e)  (e)   ―Government security ‖  means a Government security as 
defined in the Public Debt Act, 1944 (XVIII OF 1944); 
  
(f) ―non-transferable specific  delivery contract ‖ means a specific 
delivery contract, the rights or liabilities under which or under any delivery 
order, railway receipt, bill of lading, warehouse receipt or any other 
documents of title relating thereto are not transferable; 
(g) ―option in goods ‖  means an agreement, by whatever name 
called, for the purchase or sale of a right to buy or sell, or a right to buy and 
sell, goods in future and includes a teji, a mandi,  a teji-mandi, a galli, a put, 
a call or a put, and call in goods; 
(h) ―prescribed‖  means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(i) ―ready delivery contract ‖  means a contract which provides for  
the delivery of goods and the payment of a price therefor, either immediately 
or within such period not exceeding eleven days aft er the date of the 
contract and subject to such conditions as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the  official Gazette, specify in respect of any goods, the period 
                                                 
 

 
 
 
under such contract not being capable of extension by the mutual consent of 
the parties thereto or otherwise; 
3[3] [Provided that where any such contract is performed  either wholly or 
in part:- 
(1) by tendering of the documents of title to the goods covered by the 
contract by any party thereto (not being a commission agent or a bank)  
who has acquired ownership of the said documents by purchase, 
exchange or otherwise, to any other person (including a commission 
agent but not including a bank); or 
(2) by the realisation of any sum of money being the difference 
between the contract rate and the settlement rate or clearing rate or the 
rate of any offsetting contract: or 
(3) by any other means whatsoever, and as a result of which the 
actual tendering of the goods covered by the contract or payment of the 
full-price therefor is dispensed with 
then such contract shall not be deemed to be a ready delivery contract. 
  
Explanation. - For the purpose of this clause. - 
(i)  ― bank‖ includes any banking company as defined in the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 (110 of 1949), a co -operative bank as defin ed in the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), the State Bank of India and any 
of its subsidiaries and any corresponding new bank constituted under Sec. 3 
of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 
1970 (5 of 1970); 
(ii) ―commission agent‖  means a person who, in the ordinary course of 
business, makes contract for the sale or purchase of goods for others for a 
remuneration (whether known as commission or otherwise) which is 
determined in the contract itself or determina ble from the terms of the 
contract in either case, only with reference to the quantity of goods or to the 
price therefor as stipulated in the contract]; 
                                                 
 

 
 
 
 4[4](j) ― recognised association ‖  means an association to which 
recognition for the time being has bee n granted by the Central Government 
under Sec. 6 in respect of goods or classes of goods specified in such 
recognition; 
(jj) ―registered association‖  means an association to which for the time 
being a certificate of registration has been granted by the Commission under 
Sec. 14-B]; 
(k) ― rules‖  with reference to the rules relating in general to the 
constitution and management of an association, includes in the case of an 
incorporated association, its memorandum and articles of association; 
(l) ― securities‖ includes shares, scripts, stocks, bonds, debentures, 
debenture-stocks, or other marketable securities of a like nature in or of any 
incorporated company or other body corporate and also government 
securities: 
(m) ― specific delivery contract ‖  means a forwa rd contract which 
provides for the actual delivery of specific qualities or types of goods during 
a specified future period at a price fixed thereby or to be fixed in the manner 
thereby agreed and in which the names of both the buyer and the seller are 
mentioned: 
(n) ― transferable specific delivery contract ‖  means specific delivery 
contract which is not a non -transferable specific delivery contract  5[5][and 
which is subject to such conditions relating to its transferability as the Central 
Government may by notification in the official Gazette, specify in this behalf. 
  
CHAPTER II 
  
Forward Markets Commission 
3.  Establishment and constitution of the Forward Markets 
Commission.-- 
                                                 
 
 

 
 
 
(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, 
establish a Commission to be called the Forward Markets Commission for the 
purpose of exercising such functions and discharging such duties as may be 
assigned to the Commission by or under this Act. 
  
(2) The Commission shall  consist of not less than two,  6[6][but not 
exceeding four] members appointed by the Central Government 7[7][one of them 
being nominated by the Central Government to be the Chairman thereof; and 
the Chairman and the other member or members shall be either whole -time or 
part- time as the Central  Government may direct]: 
  
 8[8][Provided that the members to be so appointed shall be persons of ability, 
integrity and standing who have shown capacity in dealing with problems 
relating to commerce or commodity markets, or in administration or who have 
special knowledge or practical experience in any matter which  renders them 
suitable for appointment on the Commission.] 
  
(3) No person shall be qualified for appointment as, or for continuing to be, a 
member of the Commission if he has, directly or indirectly, any such financial or 
other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as a member of the 
Commission, and every member shall, whenever required by the Central 
Government so to do, furnish to  it such information as it may requi re for the 
purpose of securing compliance with the provisions of this sub-section. 
  
(4) No member of the Commission shall hold office for a period of more than 
three years from the date of his appointment, and a member relinquishing his 
office on the expiry of his term shall be eligible for re-appointment. 
  
                                                 
 
 
 

 
 
 
(5) The other terms and conditions of service of members of the Commission 
shall be such as may be prescribed. 
  
4. Functions of the Commission.-  The functions of the Commission shall 
be 
(a) to advise the Central Government in respect of the recognition of or the 
withdrawal of recognition from any association or in respect of any other matter 
arising out of the administration of this Act; 
 9[9](b) to keep forward markets under observation and to take s uch action in 
relation to them as it may consider necessary, in exercise of the powers 
assigned to it by or under this Act;] 
(c) to collect and whenever the Commission thinks it necessary publish 
information regarding the trading conditions in respect of g oods to which any of 
the provisions of this Act is made applicable, including information regarding 
supply, demand and prices, and to submit to the Central Government periodical 
reports on the operation of this Act and on the working of  forward markets 
relating to such goods; 
(d) to make recommendations generally with a view to improving the 
organisation and working of  forward markets; 
(e) to undertake the inspection of the accounts and other documents of   
10[10][any recognised association or registered a ssociation or any member of 
such association] whenever it considers it necessary; and  
(f) to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be 
assigned to the Commission by or under this Act, or as may be prescribed. 
  
1 [4 A Powers of the Commission. -  
(1)  The Commission shall, in the performance of its functions, have all the 
powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), 
while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely: 
                                                 
 
 

 
 
 
(a)  Summoning and e nforcing the attendance of any person and examining 
him on oath; 
(b)  requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c)  receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d)  requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any office; 
(e)  (e)   any other matters which may be prescribed. 
  
(2) The Commission shall have the power to require any person, subject to 
any privilege which may be claimed by that person under any law for the time 
being in force, to furnish information on such points or matters as in the  opinion 
of the Commission may be useful for, or relevant to any matter under the 
consideration of the Commission and any person so required shall be deemed 
to be legally bound to furnish such information within the meaning of Sec. 176 of 
the Indian Penal code, 1860 (45 of 1860). 
  
(3) The Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court and when any 
offence described in Sections. 175, 178, 179, 180 or Sec. 228 of the Indian 
Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860), is committed in the view or presence of the 
Commission, the Commission may, after recording the facts constituting the 
offence and the statement of the accused as provided for in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) 11[11]  forward the case to a Magistrate 
having jurisdiction to try the same and the  Magistrate to whom any such case is 
forwarded shall proceed to hear the complaint against the accused as if the 
case had been forwarded to him under Section 482 of the said Code12[12]. 
  
(4) Any proceeding before the Commission shall be deemed to be a judi cial 
proceeding within the meaning of Sections. 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 (45 of 1860). 
Explanation.-  For the purpose of enforcing the attendance of witnesses, the 
                                                 
 
 

 
 
 
local limits of the Commission‘s jurisdiction shall be the limits of the t erritory of 
India.] 
  
CHAPTER III 
  
Recognised Associations 
  
5. Application for recognition of associations. 
  (1) Any association concerned with the regulation and control of forward 
contracts which is desirous of being recognised for the purposes of th is Act may 
make an application in the prescribed manner to the Central Government. 
  
(2)  Every application made under sub -section (1) shall contain such 
particulars as may be prescribed and shall be accompanied by a copy of the 
bye-laws for the regulation  and control of forward contracts and also a copy of 
the rules relating in general to the constitution of the association, and, in 
particular to-- 
(a) the governing body of such association, its constitution and powers of 
management and the manner in which its business is to be transacted; 
(b) the powers and duties of the office-bearers of the association; 
(c)  the admission into the association of various class of members, the 
qualifications of members, and the exclusion, suspension, expulsion and re -
admission of members therefrom or therein to; 
(d)  the procedure for registration of partnerships as members of the 
association and the nomination and appointment of authorised 
representatives and clerks. 
  
6 Grant of recognition to association.- 
(1) If the Cen tral Government, after making such enquiry as may be 
necessary in this behalf and after obtaining such further information, if any, as it 
may require, is satisfied that it would be in the interest of the trade and also in 

 
 
 
the public interest to grant recog nition to the association which has made an 
application under Sec. 5, it may grant recognition in such form and subject to 
such conditions as may be prescribed or specified, and shall specify in such 
recognition the goods or classes of goods with respect t o which forward 
contracts may be entered into between members of such association or through 
or with any such member. 
  
(2) Before granting recognition under sub -section (1), the Central 
Government may, by order, direct, - 
(a)  that there shall be no limit ation on the number of members of the 
association or that there shall be such limitation on the number of members 
as may be specified; 
(b)  that the association shall provide for the appointment by the Central 
Government of a person, whether a member of th e association or not as 
representative on, and of not more than three persons representing interests 
not directly represented through membership of the association as member 
or members of the governing body of such association and may require the 
association to incorporate in its rules any such direction and the conditions, if 
any, accompanying it. 
  
(3) No rules of a recognised association shall be amended except with the 
approval of the Central Government. 
  
(4) Every grant of  recognition under this sect ion shall be published in the 
Gazette of India and also in the Gazette of the State in which the principal office 
of the recognised association is situated, and such recognition shall have effect 
as from the date of its publication in the Gazette of India. 
  
7.  Withdrawal of recognition . -- If the Central Government is of opinion 
that any recognition granted to an association under the provisions of this Act 
should, in the interest of the trade or in the public interest, be withdrawn, the 

 
 
 
Central  Governme nt may, after giving a reasonable opportunity to the 
association to be heard in the matter, withdraw, by notification in the official 
Gazette, the recognition granted to the said association: 
Provided that no such withdrawal shall effect the validity of an y contract 
entered into or made before the date of the notification, and the Central 
Government may make such provision as it deems fit in the notification of 
withdrawal or in any subsequent notification similarly published for the due 
performance of any contract outstanding on that date. 
   
8. Power of Central Government to call for periodical returns or direct 
inquiries to be made. -- 
13[13][(1) Every recognised association and every member thereof shall 
furnish to the Central Government such periodical returns relating to its affairs of 
its members, or his affairs, as the case may be, as may be prescribed. 
  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section (1) where 
the Central Government considers it expedient so to do, it may by order in 
writing, --- 
(a)  call upon a recognised association to 14[14][or a member thereof]  
furnish in writing such information or explanation relating to its affairs or the 
affairs of any of its members 15[15][or his affairs, as the case may be] as the 
Central Government may require, or 
(b)  appoint one or more persons to make an enquiry in relation to the 
affairs of such association or the affairs or any of its members and submit a 
report of the result of such inquiry to the Central Government within such 
time as may be specified in the order or, in the alternative, direct the inquiry 
to be made, and the report to be submitted, by the governing body of such 
association acting jointly with one or more representative of the Central 
                                                 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Government; and  
(c)   direct the C ommission to inspect the accounts and other documents 
of any recognised association or of any of its members and submit its report 
thereon to the Central Government. 
  
(3) Where an inquiry in relation to the affairs of a recognised association or 
the affairs of any of its members has been undertaken under sub-section (2) - 
(a)  every director, manager, secretary or other officer of such 
association; 
(b)  every member of such association; 
(c)   if the member of the association is a firm, every partner, manag er, 
secretary or other officer of the firm; and 
(d)   every other person or body of persons who has had dealings in the 
course of business with any of the persons mentioned in clause (a), (b) and  
(c), 
shall be bound to produce before the authority making the inquiry, all 
such books, accounts, correspondence and other documents in his custody 
or  power relating  to, or having a  bearing on the subject matter of, such 
inquiry and also to furnish the authority with any such statement or 
information relating t hereto as may be required of him, within such time as 
may be specified. 
  
16[16][(4) Every recognised association and every member thereof shall 
maintain such books of accounts and other documents as the Commission may 
specify and the books of account and o ther documents so specified shall be 
preserved for a period not exceeding three years as the Commission may 
specify and shall be subject to inspection at all reasonable times by the 
Commission.] 
  
9. Furnishing of annual reports to the Central Government b y 
                                                 
 

 
 
 
recognised association. -- 
17[17] [(1) Every recognised association shall furnish to the Commission 
three copies of its annual report.] 
  
(2) Such annual report shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed. 
  
18[18][9 A Power of recognised associati on to make rules respecting 
grouping of members, restricting voting rights, etc  in special cases. -- 
 (1) A recognised association may make rules or amend any rules 
made by it to provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: 
19[19][(a)  The admi ssion of a firm or a Hindu undivided family as a 
member:] 
20[20][(b)  the grouping of the members of the association according to 
functional or local interests, reservation  of seats on its governing body for 
members belonging to each group and appointment of members to such 
reserved seats--- 
(i) by election exclusively by the members belonging to the group 
concerned, 
(ii)  by election by all the members of the association, 
(iii)  by election by all the members of the association from among 
person chosen by the members belonging to the group concerned for the 
purposes; 
21[21][(c)]  the restriction of voting rights in respect of any matter placed 
before the association at any meeting to those members only who, by 
reason of their functional or local interests, a re actually interested in such 
matter; 
                                                 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
22[22][(d)] the regulation of voting rights in respect of any matter 
placed before the association at any meeting so that each member may, be 
entitled to have one vote only, irrespective of his share of the paid up equ ity 
capital of the association;] 
23[23][ (e)] the restriction on the rights of a member to appoint another 
person as his proxy to attend and vote at a meeting of the association; 
24[24][(f)] the retirement at every annual general meeting of all 
directors or such number or proportion of their total number as may be 
specified in the rules; 
25[25][(g)] such incidental, consequential and supplementary matters 
as may be necessary to give effect to any of the matters specified in 
26[26][Clauses (a) to (f)]. 
  
(2) No rules of a recognised association made or amended in relation to any 
matter referred to in 27[27][Clause (a) to (g) of] sub -section (1) shall have effect 
until they have been approved by the Central Government and published by that 
Government in the officia l Gazette and, in approving the rules so made or 
amended, the Central Government may make such modification therein as it 
thinks fit, and on such publication, the rules approved by the Central 
Government shall be deemed to have been validly made, notwithst anding 
anything to the contrary contained in the Companies Act, 1956. 
  
(3) Where, before the commencement of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) 
Act, 1952, any rules have been made or amended in relation to any matter 
referred to in 28[28][clauses (b) to (e ) and (g) of] sub -section (1), the rules so 
made or amended shall not be deemed to be invalid or ever to have been 
                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
invalid merely by reason of the fact that the rules so made or amended are 
repugnant to any of the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956.] 
  
10 Power of Central Government to direct rules to be made or to make 
rules.  
(1) Whenever the Central Government considers it expedient so to do, it 
may, by order in writing, direct any recognised association to make any rules or 
to amend any rules made by the recognised association within such period as it 
may specify in this behalf. 
  
(2) If any recognised association, against whom an order is issued by the 
Central Government under sub-section (1), fails or neglects to comply with such 
order within the sp ecified period, the Central Government may make the rules 
or amend the rules made by the recognised association, as the case may be, 
either in the form specified in the order or with such modification thereof as the 
Central Government may think fit. 
  
29[29] [(3) Where, in pursuance of sub -section (2), any rules have been 
made or amended, the rule so made or amended shall be published in the 
Gazette of India, and shall, thereupon, have effect notwithstanding anything to 
the contrary contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or any other law 
for the time being in force, as if they had been made or amended by the 
recognised association concerned.] 
  
11 Power of recognised association to make bye-laws. -- 
(1) Any recognised association may, subject to th e previous approval of the 
Central Government, make bye -laws for the regulation and control of forward 
contracts. 
  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
                                                 
 

 
 
 
power, such bye-laws may provide for ---- 
(a) the opening and closing of markets and the regulation of the hours 
of trade; 
(b)   a clearing -house for the periodical settlement of contracts and 
differences thereunder, the delivery of, and payment for, goods, the passing 
on of delivery orders and for the regulation and m aintainance of such 
clearing house; 
(c)   the number and classes of contracts in respect of which 
settlements shall be made or differences paid through the clearing house; 
(d)   fixing, altering or postponing days for settlement; 
(e)   determining and decl aring market rates; including opening, 
closing, highest and lowest rates for goods; 
(f)   the terms, conditions and incidents of contracts including the 
prescription of margin requirements, if any, and conditions relating thereto, 
and the forms of contract in  writing; 
(g)   regulating the entering into, making performances, rescission and 
termination of contracts, including contracts between members or between a 
commission agent and his constituent, or between a broker and his 
constituent, or between a mem ber of the recognised association and a 
person who is not a member, and the consequences of default or insolvency 
on the part of a seller or buyer or intermediary, the consequences of a 
breach or omission by a seller or buyer and the responsibility of comm ission 
agents and brokers who are not parties to such contracts; 
(h)   the admission and prohibition of specific classes or types of goods 
or of dealings in goods by a member of the recognised association; 
(i)   the method and procedure for the settlement of claims or disputes 
including the settlement thereof by arbitration; 
(j)   the levy and recovery of fees, fines and penalties; 
(k)   the regulation of the course of business between parties to 
contracts in any capacity; 
(l)   the fixing of scale of brokerage and other charges; 

 
 
 
(m)   the making, comparing, settling and closing of bargains; 
(n)   the regulation of fluctuations in rates and prices; 
(o)   the emergencies in trade which may arise and the exercise of 
powers in such emergencies including the pow er to fix maximum and 
minimum prices; 
(p)   the regulation of dealings by members for their own account; 
(q)   the limitations on the volume of trade done by any individual 
member; 
(r)   the obligation of members to supply such information or 
explanation a nd to produce such books relating to their business as the 
governing body may require. 
  
(3)  The bye-laws made under this section may - 
(a)   specify the bye-laws the contravention of any of  which shall make 
a contract entered into otherwise than in acco rdance with the bye -laws void 
under sub-section (2) of Section 15; 
  
30[30][(aa)   specify the bye -laws the contravention  of any of which 
shall make a forward contract entered otherwise than in accordance with 
bye-laws illegal under sub-section (3 A) of Section 15;] 
(b)   provide that the contravention of any of  the bye-laws shall -- 
(i)   render the member concerned liable to fine; or 
(ii)  render the member concerned liable to expulsion or suspension 
from the recognised association or to any penalty of a  like nature not 
involving the payment of money. 
  
(4) Any bye-laws made under this section shall be subject to such conditions 
in regard to previous publication as may be prescribed and when approved by 
the Central Government, shall be published in the Gazette of India 31[31][* * * ]; 
                                                 
 
 

 
 
 
Provided that the Central Government may, in the interest of the trade or in 
the public interest, by order in writing, dispense with the condition of previous 
publication in any case.  
  
12 Power of Central Government to make,  or amend bye -laws of 
recognised association. 
(1) The Central Government may, either on a request in writing received by it 
in this behalf from the governing body of a recognised association, or if in its 
opinion it is expedient so to do, make bye -laws for  all or any of the matters 
specified in  Section 11 or amend any bye -laws made by such association 
under that section. 
  
(2) Where, in pursuance of this section, any bye -laws have been made or 
amended, the bye-laws so made or amended shall be published in the Gazette 
of India, 32[32][and shall thereupon have effect] as if they had been made or 
amended by the recognised association. 
  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section where the governing 
body of a recognised association objects to any bye -law made or amended 
under this section by the Central Government on its own motion, it may, within 
six months of the publication thereof under sub -section (2), apply to the Central 
Government for a revision thereof, and the Central Government may, after 
giving a reasonable opportunity to the governing body of the association to be 
heard in the matter, revise the bye -laws so made or amended, and where any 
bye-laws so made or amended are revised as a result of any action taken under 
this sub-section the bye -laws so revised shall be published and shall become 
effective as provided in sub-section (2). 
  
                                                 
 

 
 
 
(4) The making or the amendment or revision of any bye -laws under this 
section shall in cases be 33[33][subject to such conditions in regard to previous 
publication as may be prescribed]: 
Provided that the Central Government may, in the interest of the trade or in 
the public interest, by order in writing dispense with the condition of previous 
publication. 
  
34[34][12 A Application of amendment of bye -laws to exist ing forward 
contract.-- 
Any amendment of a  bye -law under Sec. 11 other than an amendment 
made in pursuance of clause (a) or clause (aa) of sub -section (3) of that section 
or under Section 12 shall also apply to all forward contracts entered into before 
the date of its approval by the Central Government or before the date of its 
publication in the Gazette of India, as the case may be, and remaining to be 
performed on or after the said date. 
  
12 B   Power of Commission to suspend member of recognised 
association or to prohibit him from trading.-- 
(1) If, in the interest of trade or in the public interest, the Commission 
considers it necessary to suspend a member from his membership of any 
recognised association or to prohibit such members from entering  into  any 
forward contract for the sale or purchase in his own name or through another 
member of a recognised association of any goods or class of goods, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any law for time being in force or in the 
rules or bye-laws of a recognised association, the Commission may after giving 
an opportunity to the member concerned of being heard, by order, suspend his 
membership of any association or prohibit him from entering into any such 
contract. 
  
                                                 
 
 

 
 
 
(2) An order made under sub -section (1) shall specify the period for which 
the suspension or prohibition is to have effect and such period may be extended 
from time to time but so as not to exceed three years in the aggregate. 
  
(3) No order made under sub -section (1) in respect of any memb er of a 
recognised association shall affect the validity of any forward contract entered 
into or made by with or through such member on or before the date of such 
order and remaining to be performed on or after the said date; but the 
Commission may make su ch provision as it deems fit in such order or in any 
subsequent order for the closing out of any such forward contract.] 
  
13 Power of Central Government to supercede governing body of 
recognised association.-- 
  
(1) Without prejudice to any other powers v ested in the Central Government 
under this Act, where the Central Government is of opinion that the governing 
body of any recognised association should be superceded, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time 
being in force, the Central Government may, after giving a reasonable 
opportunity to the governing body of the recognised association concerned to 
show cause why it should not be superseded, by notification in the official 
Gazette, declare the governing body of such association to be superseded for 
such period not exceeding six months  as may be specified in the notification, 
and may appoint any person or persons to exercise and perform all the powers 
and duties of the governing body, and where more persons th an one are 
appointed may appoint one of such persons to be Chairman and another of 
such person to be the Vice-Chairman. 
  
(2) On the publication of a notification in the official Gazette under sub -
section (1), the following consequences shall ensue, namely: 
(a) the members of the governing body which has been superseded 

 
 
 
shall, as from the date of the notification of supersession, cease to hold 
office as such members; 
(b) the person or persons appointed under sub -section (1) may 
exercise and perform all the powers and duties of the governing body which 
has been superseded; 
(c) all such property of the recognised association as the person or 
persons appointed under sub -section (1) may, by order in writing, specify in 
this behalf as being necessary for the purp ose of enabling him or them to 
carry out the purpose of this Act, shall vest in such person or persons. 
  
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law or the rules 
or bye-laws of the association whose governing body is superseded under  sub-
section (1), the person or persons appointed under that sub -section shall hold 
office for such period as may be specified in the notification published under 
that sub -section, and the Central Government may, from time to time by like 
notification, vary such period. 
  
(4) On the determination of the period of office of any person or persons 
appointed under this section the recognised association shall forthwith 
reconstitute a governing body in accordance with its rules: 
  
Provided that until a governing  body is so reconstituted, the person or  
persons appointed under sub -section (1) shall not withstanding anything 
contained in sub -section (1) continue to exercise and perform their powers and 
duties. 
  
(5) On the reconstitution of a governing body under s ub-section (4), all the  
property of the recognised association which had vested in, or was in the 
possession of, the person or persons appointed under sub -section (1) shall vest 
or revest, as the case may be, in the governing body so reconstituted. 
  

 
 
 
14 Power to suspend business of recognised associations.--- 
  
If in the interest of the trade or in the public interest the Central Government 
considers it expedient so to do, it may by notification in the official Gazette, 
direct a recognised association to s uspend such of its business for such period 
not exceeding seven days and subject to such conditions as may be specified in 
the notification, and may if, in the opinion of the Central Government, the 
interest of the trade or the public interest so requires by like notification extend 
the said period from time to time. 
  
Provided that where the period of suspension is likely to exceed one month, 
no notification extending the suspension beyond such period shall be issued, 
unless the governing body of the recog nised association has been given an 
opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
  
 
 
35[35][CHAPTER   III-A 
  
Registered Associations 
  
14A  Certificate of registration to be obtained by all associations.--- 
(1) No association concerned with the regulation and  control of business 
relating to forward contracts shall after the commencement of the Forward 
Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 1960 (62 of 1960) (hereinafter referred 
to as such commencement), carry on such business except under, and in 
accordance with, the conditions of a  certificate of registration granted under this 
Act by the Commission. 
  
(2) Every association referred to in sub -section (1) which is in existence at 
                                                 
 

 
 
 
such commencement, before the expiry of six months from such 
commencement, and ev ery association referred to in sub -section (1) which is 
not in existence at such commencement, before commencing such business, 
shall make an application for a certificate of registration to the Commission in 
such form and containing such particulars as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Commission may in its discretion extend from time to time 
the period of six months aforesaid up to one year in the aggregate. 
  
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed --- 
(a) to prohibit an association in existence a t such commencement 
from carrying on its business until the disposal of the application made by it 
under sub-section (2); or 
(b) to require a recognised association in existence at such 
commencement to make an application under sub -section (2); and every 
such association shall, as soon as may be after such commencement, be 
granted free of cost by the Commission a certificate of registration. 
   
14-B  Grant or refusal of certificate of  registration. --- 
On receipt of an application under Section 14 -A the Co mmission, after 
making such enquiry as it considers necessary in this behalf, may by order in 
writing grant a certificate of registration or refuse to grant it: 
Provided that before refusing to grant such certificate, the association shall 
be given an opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
  
14-C  Application of Sections 8 and 12-B to registered associations.-- 
The provisions of Sections 8 and 12 B shall apply in relation to a registered 
association as they apply in relation to a recognised association w ith the 
substitution of --- 
(i) references to the registered association, for references to the 
recognised association;   and 
(ii)   the words ―two years‖, for the words ―three years‖ in sub -section (2) 

 
 
 
of Section 12-B.] 
  
CHAPTER  IV 
  
Forward contracts & Options in Goods 
  
15. Forward contracts in notified goods illegal or void in certain 
circumstances.-- 
(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, 
declare this section to apply to such goods or class of goods and in such area s 
as may be specified in the notification, and thereupon, subject to  the provisions 
contained in Section 18, every forward contract for the sale or purchase of any 
goods specified in the notification which is entered into in the area specified 
therein oth erwise than between members of a recognised association or 
through or with any such member shall be illegal. 
  
 (2) Any forward contract in goods entered into in pursuance of  sub -
section (1) which is in contravention of any of the bye -laws specified in th is 
behalf under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of Section 11 shall be void- 
(i)   as respects the rights of any member of the recognised 
association who has entered into such contract in contravention of any such 
bye-law and also, 
(ii)  as respects the righ ts of any other person who has knowingly 
participated in the transaction entailing such contravention. 
  
(3) Nothing in sub-section (2) shall effect the right of any person other than a 
member of the recognised association to enforce any such contract or t o 
recover any sum under or in respect of such contract: 
  
Provided that such person had no knowledge that such transaction was in 
contravention of any of the bye -laws specified under clause (a) of sub -section 

 
 
 
(3) of  Section 11. 
  
36[36][(3A) Any forward co ntract in goods entered into in pursuance of sub -
section (1) which at the date of the contract is in  contravention of any of the 
bye-laws specified in this behalf under clause (aa) of sub -section 3 of Section 
11 shall be illegal.] 
  
(4) No member of a rec ognised association shall, in respect of any goods 
specified in the notification under sub -section (1), enter into any contract on his 
own account with any person other than a member of the recognised 
association unless he has secured the consent or author ity of such person and 
disclose in the note, memorandum or agreement of sale or purchase that he 
has bought or sold the goods, as the case may be, on his own account: 
  
Provided that where the member has secured the consent or authority of 
such person othe rwise than in writing he shall secure a written confirmation by 
such person of such consent or authority within three days from the date of such 
contract: 
  
Provided further that in respect of any outstanding contract entered into by a 
member with a person  other than a member of the recognised association, no 
consent or authority of such person shall be necessary for closing out in 
accordance with the bye -laws for outstanding contract, if the member discloses 
in the note, memorandum or agreement of sale or purchase in respect of such 
closing out that he has bought or sold the goods, as the case may be, on his 
own account. 
  
16 Consequences of notification under Sec. 15.- 
Where a notification has been issued under Section 15, then notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any custom, 
                                                 
 

 
 
 
usage or practice of the trade or the terms of any contract or the bye -laws of 
any association concerned relating to any contract-- 
(a) every forward contract for the sale or purchase of  any goods 
specified in the notification, 37[37][entered into on or before the date of the 
notification] and remaining to be performed after the said date and which is 
not in conformity with the provisions of Section 15, shall be deemed to be 
closed out at such rate as the Central Government may fix in this behalf and 
different rates may be fixed for different classes of such contracts: 
(b) all differences arising out of any contract so deemed to be closed 
out shall be payable on the basis of the rate fixed under clause (a) and the 
seller shall not be bound to give and the buyer shall not be bound to take 
delivery of the goods. 
   
17. Power to prohibit forward contracts in certain cases.--- 
(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazet te, 
declare that no person shall save with the permission of the Central 
Government, enter into any forward contract for the sale or purchase of any 
goods or class of goods specified in the notification and to which provisions of  
Section 15 have not been made applicable, except to the extent and in the 
manner, if any, as may be specified in the notification. 
  
(2) All forward contracts in contravention of the provisions of sub -section (1) 
entered into after the date of  publication of the notification ther eunder shall be 
illegal. 
  
(3) Where a notification has been issued under sub -section (1), the 
provisions of Section 16 shall in the absence of  anything to the contrary in the 
notification, apply to all forward contracts for the sale or purchase of any go ods 
specified in the notification 38[38][entered into on or before the date of notification] 
                                                 
 
 

 
 
 
and remaining to be performed after the said date as they apply to all forward 
contract for the sale or purchase or any goods specified in the notification under 
Section 15. 
  
18 Special provisions respecting certain kinds of forward contract.-- 
(1) Nothing contained in Chapter III or Chapter IV shall apply to non -
transferrable specific delivery contracts for the sale or purchase of any goods: 
Provided that no person  shall organise or assist in organising or be a 
member of any association in any area to which the provisions of Sec. 15 have 
been made applicable (other than a recognised association) which provides 
facilities for the performance of any non -transferable specific delivery contract 
by any party thereto without having to make or receive actual delivery to or from 
the other party to the contract or to or from any other party named in the 
contract. 
  
(2) Where in respect of any area the provisions of Section 15  have been 
made applicable in relation to forward contracts for the sale or purchase of any 
goods or class of goods, the Central Government may, by a like notification, 
declare that in the said area or any part thereof as may be specified in the 
notification all or any of the provisions of Chapter III or Chapter IV shall not 
apply to transferable specific delivery contracts for the sale or purchase of the 
said goods or class of goods either generally, or to any class of such contracts 
in particular. 
  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), if the Central 
Government is of opinion that in the interest of the trade or in the public interest 
it is expedient to regulate and  control non -transferable specific delivery 
contracts in any area, it may, by notification in the official Gazette, declare that 
all or any of the provisions of Chapters III and IV shall apply to such class or 
classes of non-transferable specific delivery contracts in such area in respect of 
such goods or class of goods as m ay be specified in the notification, and may 

 
 
 
also specify the manner in which and the extent to which all or any of the said 
provisions shall so apply. 
  
19 Prohibition of options in goods.-- 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any oth er law for the 
time being in force, all options in goods entered into after the date on which this 
section comes into force shall be illegal. 
  
(2) Any option in goods which has been entered into before the date on 
which this section comes into force and w hich remains to be  performed, 
whether wholly or in part, after the said date shall, to that extent become void. 
  
CHAPTER V 
 Penalties and Procedures 
  
39[39] [20 Penalty for contravention of certain provisions of Chapter IV. 
----  Any person who -- 
(a) (i)  in any return, statement or other document required by or 
under this Act, makes a statement which is false in any material 
particular, knowing it to be false, or wilfully omits to make a material 
statement;  or 
(ii)  without reasonable excuse (the burd en of proving which shall be 
on him) fails to furnish any return, statement or other document or any 
information or to answer any question or to comply with any requisition 
made under this Act or any rules made thereunder;  or 
(iii)  enters into any forwar d contract during the period of suspension 
of business of a recognised association in pursuance of a notification 
under Section 14;   or 
(b)  is a member of any association, other than a recognised 
association, to which a certificate of registration has no t been granted under 
                                                 
 

 
 
 
this Act; or 
(c) publishes or circulates information relating to the rate at which any 
forward contract has been entered into in contravention of any of the bye -
laws of a recognised organisation, or 
(d) organises or assists in organisi ng, or is a member of any 
association in contravention of the  provisions contained in the proviso to 
sub-section (1) of Section 18; or 
(e) enters into any forward contract or any option in goods in 
contravention of any of the provisions contained in sub -section (1) or sub -
section (3-A) or sub-section (4) of Section 15, Section 17 or Section 19;  
  
shall on conviction be punishable --- 
(i)   for a first offence, with imprisonment which may extend to one 
year or with a fine of not less than one thousand rupees, or with both; 
(ii) for a second or subsequent offence under clause (d), or under 
clause (e) [other than an offence in respect of contravention of the provisions 
of sub -section (4) of Section 15]  with imprisonment which may extend to 
one year and also with fine; provided that in the absence of special and 
adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the judgement of the 
Court, the imprisonment shall be not less than one month and the fine shall 
not be less than one thousand rupees.] 
  
21 Penalty for owning or keeping place used for entering into forward 
contracts in goods.-- 
Any person who -- 
(a) owns or keeps a place other than of a recognised association 
which is used for the purpose of entering into or making or performing, 
whether wholly or in  part, any forward contracts in contravention of any of 
the provisions of this Act and knowingly permits such place to be used for 
such purposes, or  
(b) without the permission of the Central Government organises, or 

 
 
 
assists in organising, or becomes a member of any association, other than a 
recognised association, for the purpose of assisting in entering into or 
making or performing, whether wholly or in part, any forward contracts in 
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act, or 
(c) manages, controls or assists in keeping any place other than that 
of a recognised association, which is used for the purpose of entering into or 
making or performing, whether wholly or in part, any forward contract in  
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act  or at which such contracts 
are recorded or adjusted, or rights or liabilities arising out of such forward 
contracts are adjusted, regulated or enforced in any manner whatsoever, or 
(d) not being a member of a recognised association, wilfully 
represents to , or induces, any person to believe that he is a member of a 
recognised association or that forward contracts can be entered into or 
made or performed, whether wholly or in part, under this Act through him,  
(e) not being a member of a recognised associati on or his agent 
authorised as such under the rules or bye -laws of such association, 
canvasses, advertises or touts in any manner, either for himself or on behalf 
of any other person, for any business connected with forward contracts in 
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act, or  
(f)  (f)    joins, gathers, or assists in gathering at any place, other than the 
place of business specified in the bye -laws of a recognised 
association, any person or persons for making bids or offers or for 
entering into or  making or performing, whether wholly or in part, any 
forward contracts in contravention of any of the  provisions of this Act, 
or 
(g) makes, publishes or circulates any statement or information which is 
false and which he either knows or believes to be fa lse, affecting or tending 
to affect the course of business in forward contracts in respect of goods to 
which the provisions of Section 15 have been made applicable, 40[40][or] 
                                                 
 

 
 
 
41[41][(h) manipulates or attempts to manipulate prices in respect of 
forward cont racts for the sale or purchase of  any goods specified in any 
notification under Section 15, in any area specified in that notification,] 
  
42[42][shall on conviction be punishable -- 
(i)  for a first offence, with imprisonment which may extend to two years  
or with a fine of not less than one thousand rupees, or with both; 
(ii) for a second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment which may 
extend to two years and also with fine: provided that in the absence of 
special and  adequate reasons to the contrary t o be mentioned in the 
judgment of the Court, the imprisonment shall not be less than one month 
and the fine shall not be less than one thousand rupees.] 
  
43[43][21A  Power of Court to order forfeiture of property.-- Any court 
trying an offence punishable u nder Section 20 or Section 21 may, if it thinks fit 
and in addition to any sentence which it may impose for such offence, direct that 
any money, goods or other property in respect of which the offence has been 
committed, shall be forfeited to the Central Government. 
Explanation. -- For the purpose of this section property in respect of which 
an offence has been committed, shall include deposits in a bank where the said 
property is converted into such deposits.] 
  
22 Offences by companies.-- 
(1) Where an offence has been committed by a company, every person who 
at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to 
the company for the conduct of, the business of the company, as well as the 
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
                                                 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such 
person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the 
offence was committed withou t his knowledge or that he exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), where an offence 
under this Act has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any gross negligence on the part of any director, manager, 
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or 
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable 
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purpose of this Section - 
(a) ―company‖ means any body corporate and includes a firm or other 
association of individuals; and  
 (b) ―director‖, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
 44[44][22A. Power to search and seize books of account or other 
documents.--- 
(1) Any presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class may, by 
warrant, authorise any police officer not below the rank of sub -inspector to enter 
upon and search any place where books of account or other documents relating 
to forward contracts or options in goods entered into in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act, may be reasonably suspected to be, and such police 
officer may seize any such books or documents, if in his op inion, it relates to 
any such forward contract or option in goods. 
  
(2)  The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) 45[45], 
shall so far as may be, apply to search or seizure made under sub -section (1) 
as they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of a warrant 
issued under Section 98 of the said Code. 
                                                 
 
 

 
 
 
 22-B. Presumption to be drawn in certain cases.- 
(1)  Where any books of account or documents are seized from any place 
and there are entries therein making reference to quantity, quotations, rates, 
months of delivery, receipt or payment of differences or sale or purchase of 
goods or options in goods, such books of accounts or other documents shall be 
admitted in evidence without witnesses having to appear to prove the same; 
and such entries shall be prima-facie evidence of matters, transactions and 
accounts purported to be therein recorded.  
  
(2) In any trial for an offence punishable under Section 21, it shall be 
presumed, until the contrary is proved that the place i n which the books of 
account or other documents referred to in sub -section (1) were seized, was 
used, and that the persons found therein were present, for the purpose of the 
said offence. 
  
23. Certain offences to be cognizable.--- 
Notwithstanding anything  contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
46[46][the following offences shall be deemed to be cognizable within the 
meaning of that Code, namely: 
(a) an offence falling under sub -clause (ii) of clause (a) of Section 20 in so 
far              as it relat es to the failure to comply with any requisition made under 
sub-section (3) of  Section 8; 
(b) an offence falling under clause (d) of Section 20; 
(c) an offence falling under clause (e) of Section 20 other than a 
contravention of the provisions of sub-section (3-A) or sub-section (4) of Section 
15; 
(d) an offence falling under  Section 21.] 
  
24 Jurisdiction to try offence under this Act.-- 
No court inferior to that of a  Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the 
                                                 
 

 
 
 
first class shall take cognizance of or try any offence punishable under this Act. 
  
 CHAPTER VI 
 Miscellaneous 
  
25. Advisory Committee. -- For the purpose of advising the Central 
Government in relation to any matter concerning the operation of this Act, the 
Central Government may establish an ad visory committee consisting of such 
number of persons as may be prescribed. 
  
26. Power to delegate.-- The Central Government may, by notification in the 
official Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act may, in 
such circumstances and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified  
by such officers or authority, including any State Government or officers or 
authorities thereof as may be specified in the direction. 
 27. Power to exempt.-- The Central Government may, by notific ation 
in the official Gazette, exempt, subject to such conditions and in such 
circumstances and in such areas as may be specified in the notification any 
contract or class of contracts from the operation of all or any of the provisions of 
this Act. 
  
47[47][27 A   Protection of action taken in good faith.- 
(1) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie in any Court against the Central 
Government or any member, officer or servant of the Commission for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be do ne under this Act, or any rule or 
bye-law made thereunder. 
 (2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie in any Court against the 
governing body or any member, office -bearer or servant of any recognised 
association or against any person appointed under sub-section (1) of Section 13 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done with the 
                                                 
 

 
 
 
approval, at the instance, of the Commission and in pursuance of this Act, or of 
any rule or bye-law made thereunder.] 
 28. Power to make rules.-- 
(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make 
rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the objects of this Act. 
  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for,-- 
(a) the terms and conditions of service of members of the 
Commission; 
(b) the manner in which applications for recognition may be made 
under Section 5 and levy of fees in respect thereof; 
(c) the manner in which any inquiry for the purpose of recognising any 
association may be made and the form in which recognition shall be granted; 
48[48][(cc) the manner in which the application for certificates of 
registration may be made under Section 14A and the levy of fees in respect 
of such application;] 
(d) the particulars to be contained in the annual reports of recognised 
associations; 
(e) the manner in which bye -laws to be made, amended or revised 
under this Act shall, before being so made, amended or revised, be 
published for criticism; 
(f) the constitution of t he advisory committee established under 
Section 25, the terms of office of and the manner of filling vacancies among 
members of the committee; the interval within which meetings of the 
advisory committee may be held and the procedure to be followed at such  
meetings; and the matters which may be referred by the Central 
Government to the advisory committee for advice; 
(g) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed. 
  
                                                 
 

 
 
 
49[49][(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a 
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or t he successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should 
not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, h owever, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.] 
 29 Repeal and savings.--- 
If immediately before the date on which this Act or any provision contained 
therein is made applicable to any goods or classes of goods in any State, there 
is in force in that State, any law corresponding to this Act or, as the case may 
be, to any provision contained  therein which is  applicable to those goods or 
classes of goods, that law shall stand repealed on the said date. 
Provided that the repeal shall not affect-- 
(a) the previous operation of any law so repealed or anything duly 
done or suffered thereunder; or 
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or 
incurred under any law so repealed; or 
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any 
offence committed against any law so repealed; or 
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any 
such right, privilege, obligation, lia bility, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as 
aforesaid; any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be 
instituted, continued or enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or 
punishment may be imposed as if this Act had not been passed. 
Provided further that, subject to the preceding proviso, anything done or any 
action taken (including any appointment made, notification or order issued, rule, 
                                                 
 

 
 
 
regulation, form or bye-law framed, or recognition granted)  under any such law 
shall be deemed to have be en done or taken under the corresponding 
provisions of this Act, and shall continue to be in force accordingly unless and 
until superseded by anything done or any action taken under this Act. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER – I 
INTRODUCTORY 
B. BACKGROUND 
 
 The Commodity Futures Market in India dates back to more than a century.  The 
first organized futures market was established in 1875, under the name and style of  
'Bombay Cotton Trade Association' to trade in cotton contracts, just 10 years after the 
establishment of Chicago  Board of Trade (CBOT) in USA and thus became the 2 nd 
oldest commodity exchange in the world.  Subsequently, many regional exchanges like 
Gujarat Vyapar Mandali (1900) for oilseeds, Chamber of Commerce at Hapur (1913) 
and East India Jute Association Ltd. ( 1927) for raw jute etc. came into existence.   By 
the 1930s, there were more than 300 commodity exchanges in the country dealing in 
commodities like turmeric, sugar, gur, pepper, cotton, oilseeds etc. This was followed by 
institutions for futures trading i n oilseeds, foodgrains, etc.  The futures market in India 
underwent rapid growth between the period of First and Second World Wars.  As a 
result, before the outbreak of the Second World War, a large number of commodity 
exchanges trading futures contracts i n several commodities like cotton, groundnut, 
groundnut oil, raw jute, jute goods, castorseed, wheat, rice, sugar, precious metals like 
gold and silver were flourishing throughout the country. Trading was conducted through 
both options and futures instrume nts. However, there was no market regulator and 
hence there was no uniformity in trading practices. Further, there was no structured 
clearing and settlement system.   
 
1.2 During the second world war, the colonial government suspended forward trading 
in mo st of the major commodities as a part of its war mobilization efforts to contain 
rising price expectations.  After the dawn of independence, the futures markets were put 
under the Central List of subjects under the Constitution of India.  State governments  
were no more competent to regulate or intervene in futures trading.  In its wake, the 
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 (FCR Act, 1952) was passed to regulate this 
market with Forward Markets Commission (FMC) being set up in 1953 at Mumbai as 
the regulator.  However, options which were then perceived to be risky instruments of 

 
 
 
trading, were totally banned under the Act itself.  Futures trading started to gain 
momentum in many commodities. However, in the mid-1960s, the Government imposed 
a ban on the futures trading of most of the commodities on the assumption that this led 
to inflationary conditions.   
B.  Reopening of the Forward Markets  
 
1.3 The Department of Consumer Affairs have stated that with substantial growth 
achieved in agriculture in the  closing decades of the 20 th century and India‘s strong 
emergence on the agri commodity marketing and export front, it was felt necessary to 
provide the farmers the benefit of price discovery and price risk management in 
marketing their produce and thereby  to reverse the adverse terms of trade that they 
have been suffering for their produce. The restrictions on forward trading were 
accordingly lifted in April, 2003 and 3 national electronic commodity exchanges came 
into operation in the same year.  Since th en several changes have taken place in the 
Commodity Futures Market. While the Commodity Futures Market has been liberalized 
with effect from April, 2003 and modern institutional structures are in the process of 
being evolved, the Forward Markets Commissio n (FMC) the market Regulator, is 
broadly functioning in its traditional manner. Some of the existing provisions of the FCR 
Act have also become redundant in view of the rapid expansion of the Commodity 
Futures Market. Also, the Commodity Futures Market has  been witnessing exponential 
growth in the last three years. 
There are now 21 commodity Exchanges in the country including five National 
Multi-Commodity Exchanges, located at Mumbai (2), Ahmedabad (2) and Gurgaon.  
These five national Exchanges are state -of-the art, de -mutualized and corporatized 
trading platforms with professional management from the beginning with facilities for on-
line trading across the country. At present, 113 commodities have been notified for 
trading and more than 40 commodities are actively traded. 
 
1.4 The current size of the Commodity Futures Market has crossed Rs. 100 lakh 
crore, registering a rapid Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR growth of 40%. The 
Commodity group-wise value of trade from 2003 -04 to 2010 -11 (till 31 st Jan., 2011) is 
given in the table below:  

 
 
 
                 (In Rs. Crore) 
Year Bullion Metals Energy Agri Others Total 
2003-04 3315 2134 - 123914 - 1,29,363 
2004-05 179053 618 1900 390188 - 5,71,759 
2005-06 760675 18723 181883 1192227 1614 21,55,122 
2006-07 1723348 405637 230712 1317125 104 36,76,926 
2007-08 1725952 897714 500942 941283 98 40,65,989 
2008-09 2973675 618776 1026442 627303 2760 52,48,956 
2009-10 3164152 1801636 1577882 1217949 3135 77,64,754 
2010-11 
(till 31st 
Jan., 
2011) 
4291058 
 
2182205 
 
1838000 
 
1114310 
 
28 
 
94,25601 
 
 
1.5 As stated earlier, there was no regulator and hence, no uniformity in trading 
practices, therefore, after independence, the Forward Contract (Regulation) Act, 1952 
was passed to regulate this market and the FMC was set up in 1953 as the regulator.  A 
bill to amend Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 was introduced in Rajya Sabha 
on 23rd December, 1998 and the same was referred to the Standing Committee on 
Food, Civil Supplies and Public Distribution for examination and  report.  The bill, after 
incorporating the recommendations of the Standing Committee was passed by Rajya 
Sabha on 15th December, 2003 but could not be passed by Lok Sabha due to its 
dissolution.  The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2006 was  introduced 
in Lok Sabha on 21.03.2006 and the same was again referred to the Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution for examination 
and report.  The report of the Standing Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on  
19.12.2006.  The Department has informed the Committee that the recommendation of 
the Committee were examined and incorporated in a draft note for the cabinet for 
moving official amendments to the said Bill and was circulated to all concerned 
Departments.  Their comments along with the views of the Department were 
incorporated in the Cabinet Note which was considered by the Cabinet on 3.5.2007.  

 
 
 
However, the cabinet postponed the decision thereon and advised the Ministry to carry 
out wider consultations wi th all the stakeholders including the political parties and 
thereafter submit the revised note for approval.  The Bill of 2006 was, however, 
withdrawn due to issuance of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Ordinance and the 
Ministry of Law (Legislative Department) had advised that the Bill of 2008 required to be 
consequentially amended before it was considered for passing in Lok Sabha. 
Accordingly, a Cabinet Note for moving official amendments was sent to Cabinet which 
approved the proposal with the directio n that a final decision regarding the definition of 
"commodity derivative" be taken by the Minister of Agriculture, Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution and the Minister of Finance.  However, the said Bill also lapsed 
upon the dissolution of the Fourteenth  Lok Sabha on 17.05.2009.  
 
1.6 The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2010 as introduced in    
Lok Sabha on 6th December, 2010 has now again been referred to the Committee by 
the Hon'ble Speaker on 16th December, 2010 for examination and report. 
 
C.   PRESENT POSITION OF REGULATION OF FORWARD MARKET (TRADING) 
 
1.7  There are three tiers of regulations of forward trading viz. The Central 
Government, Forward Markets Commission and the Recognised Commodity 
Exchanges/ Associations. The C entral Government broadly determines the policy as to 
commodities in which futures/forward trading is to be permitted and the recognition of 
Exchange/Association through whom such trading is to be permitted. The Forward 
Markets Commission performs the role  of approving the Rules and Regulations of the 
Exchange subject to which the trading is to be conducted, accord permission for 
commencement of trading in different contracts, monitor market conditions continuously 
and take remedial measures whenever the tr ading tends to go outside the permissible 
limits. The Recognised Exchange/Association provide the frame work of Rules and 
Regulations for conduct of trading, the place where the trading is to be conducted, 
reporting and recording of contracts, execution & settlement of contracts, forum for 
exchange of documents and payments, etc. 

 
 
 
 
D. Regulatory measures  
 
1.8 However, futures trading have the potential risk of being misused by 
unscrupulous elements.  In order to safeguard the market against such elements, 
regulatory measures as under are prescribed by the Forward Markets Commission:- 
(e) Limit on open position of an individual operator, to prevent over-trading; 
(f) Limit on intra -day price fluctuation, to prevent abrupt upswing or downswing in 
prices (commonly referred to as circuit limits); 
(g) Special margin deposits to be collected on outstanding purchases and/or sales, 
to curb excessive speculative activity, through financial restraints (by reducing 
the leverage / ability of individual operators to hold large positions);  
 
(h) During times of extreme situations of shortages, the Commission may even take 
more stringent steps, viz., skipping trading in certain deliveries of the contract, 
closing the markets for a specified period or even closing out the contract, to 
overcome such emergency situations. 
 
E. Economic functions of the futures markets 
 
1.9 In a free market economy, futures trading performs two important economic 
functions, viz., price discovery and price risk management.  Such trading in 
commodities is useful to all sectors of the economy.  The forward prices give 
advance signals of an imbalance between demand and supply.  This helps the 
government and the private sector with exposure to commodities and price 
volatility to make plans and arrangements in a shortage  situation for timely 
imports, instead of having to rush in for such imports in a crisis -like situation 
when the prices are already high.  This ensures availability of adequate supplies 
and averts spurt in prices.  Similarly, in a situation of a bumper cro p, the early 
price signals emitted by the futures market help the importers to defer or stagger 
their imports and exporters to plan exports, which protects the producers against 

 
 
 
unremunerative prices.   At the same time, it enables the importers to hedge t heir 
position against commitments made for import and exporters to hedge their 
export commitments. As a result, the export competitiveness of the country 
improves. 
 
1.10 When enquired as to what difficulties are being faced by Forward Market 
Commission at present which would be overcome by enactment of the proposed 
Amendment Bill, 2010, the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) in a written note stated as under:- 
 
viii) The Present Act does not confer upon FMC, the market regulator, various 
powers required for effective regulation of these markets. That is why the 
Government had to confer most of its powers (except for  recognition, withdrawal 
of recognition, notifying the commodities for prohibition/regulation ( under section 
17, 15 and 18) and supersession of the Board of Directors of an Exchange) to 
the Forward Markets Commission through  delegation.  The proposed 
Amendment Bill (FCR Amendment Bill 2010) seeks to provide FMC with original 
powers for effective regulation of the markets. 
ix) The penal Provisions in the present Act are inadequate for regulating the markets 
effectively.  The proposed amendments seek to provide for imposition of financial 
penalty, after adjudication, for various contraventions, such as fa ilure to furnish 
information, return, etc; failure by any person to enter into agreement with clients, 
failure to redress clients‘ grievances, insider trading, adoption of fraudulent and 
unfair trade practices, default in case of an intermediary and failur e to comply 
with the directives of FMC.  Depending on the gravity of the offences, the 
financial penalty could be as high as               Rs 25 lakh for certain offences.  As 
per the proposed provision,  the FMC will have original powers to impose 
financial penalties upto maximum of                  Rs 25 lakh (for some offences like 
insider trading, unfair practices etc. the penalty has also being linked to the 
profits made out of such transactions, etc.), whereas as per the present 
provisions, only a pen alty of Rs 1,000/ - can be imposed, that too by the 

 
 
 
competent court on conviction.  No penalty can be imposed at present by the 
FMC directly on the members or their clients. 
x) The present Act does not provide for a statutory power for registration of 
members (brokers) and other intermediaries. The registration of the 
intermediaries is essential for their effective monitoring and surveillance by the 
FMC to ensure compliance with regulatory provisions. 
xi) The present Act does not provide for corporatization and dem utualization of the 
existing Commodity Exchanges. The proposed amendments seek to provide for 
corporatization and demutualization of the Commodity Exchanges which will 
usher in separation of trading interests from ownership and management of 
Exchanges. 
xii) The present Act does not provide for an Appellate Authority.  The proposed 
amendments seek to designate Securities Appellate Tribunal (SAT) as the 
Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of F.C(R) Act.  The Amendment Bill provides 
for an appeal against the order of FMC and Adjudicating Officer before SAT and 
against the order of SAT before the Supreme Court. 
xiii) The present Act prohibits options in goods. The proposed amendment seeks to 
introduce options in goods.  This will provide the farmers with a better and more 
easily manageable risk management tool. In options, farmers are not required to 
monitor the futures prices on a day-to-day basis, nor do they have to keep paying 
or receiving margins to/from the exchanges, till the contract is settled. Besides, 
they can pr otect themselves against a fall in the prices without sacrificing the 
benefit from any potential upside. 
xiv) Post-amendment, greater participation of banks will facilitate and accelerate their 
credit provisioning against forward sales by farmers as well as bei ng aggregators 
for farmers‘ direct participation in forward trading. 
 
1.11 The Act defines ‗ready delivery contracts‘, ‗forward contracts‘ and ‗options‘ in 
goods. 
 

 
 
 
1.12 Ready delivery contracts are contracts for supply of goods and payment thereof 
where both the delivery and payment is completed within 11 days from the date of the 
contract.  Such contracts are outside the purview of the FCR Act. 
     
1.13 Forward Contracts, on the other hand, are contracts for supply of goods and 
payment, where supply of go ods or payment or both take place after 11 days from the 
date of contract or where delivery of goods is totally dispensed with, i.e., the contract is 
settled by payment of cash difference based on the movement in prices. 
 
1.14 Forward contracts other than specific delivery contracts are what are generally 
known as 'futures contracts' though the Act does not specifically define the futures 
contracts.  Such contracts can be performed either by delivery of goods and payment 
thereof or by entering into offsetti ng contracts and payment or receipt of amount based 
on the difference between the rate of entering into contract and the rate of offsetting 
contract.  Futures contracts are usually standardized, contracts where the quantity, 
quality, date of maturity, plac e of delivery are all standardized and the parties to the 
contract only decide on the price and the number of units to be traded.  Futures 
contracts are entered into through the Commodity Exchanges. 
 
 
F. Objectives of the FC(R) Amendment Bill 2010 
 
1.15 The main objectives of the FC(R) Amendment Bill 2010 are as follows: 
IV. Strengthening of the regulatory framework including enforcement and penal 
provisions for the commodity derivatives markets. 
V. Functional and Financial Autonomy for the market regulator, the Forward 
Markets Commission (FMC) to better regulate the commodity derivatives 
market. 
VI. Permitting new products, viz., options in the commodity derivative market 
which are more suitable for participants like farmers to cover their price-risks.   
 

 
 
 
G. Important Amendments Proposed to the FC(R) Act 1952:  
1.16 The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2010, inter alia, seeks to 
make amendments to the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, in respect of the 
following:– 
(a) to redefine the expression ―forward contract‖ so as to include therein ―commodity 
derivative‖ and also to define new expressions such as ―commodity derivative‖, 
―corporatisation‖, ―demutualisation‖ and ―intermediary‖ which have been used in 
the Bill; 
(b) to increase the maximum number of mem bers of the Forward Markets 
Commission from four, as at present,  to nine out of which at least three would be 
whole-time members besides the Chairman;  
(c) to confer power upon the Commission to levy fees;  
(d) to provide for constitution of a fund called the ―Fo rward Markets Commission 
General Fund‖ to which all grants, fees and all sums received by the Commission 
except penalty shall be credited, and apply the funds for meeting its expenses;  
(e) to confer power upon the Central Government to issue directions to the  
Commission on matters of policy and to supersede it in certain extreme 
circumstances;  
(f) to make provisions for corporatisation and demutualisation of recognised 
associations in accordance with the scheme to be approved by the Commission;  
(g) to make provisions for registration of members and intermediaries; 
(h) to allow trading in options in goods and commodity derivatives; 
(i) to make provision for investigation, enforcement and penalty in case of 
contravention of the provisions of the Act;  
(j) to make provision for tra nsfer of the duties and functions of a clearing house of 
an exchange to a clearing corporation;  
(k) to make provisions for exemption from payment of tax on wealth, income and 
profits or gains of the Commission; and 
(l) to make provision for appeals from the order s of the Forward Markets 
Commission and Adjudicating Officer to the Securities Appellate Tribunal for the 
purposes of the Act and from the order of the Securities Appellate Tribunal under 

 
 
 
the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 to the Supreme Court;  
(m)  to make consequential changes in the Securities and Exchange Board of India 
Act, 1992. 
 
1.17 (1)  Up-dation of existing definition and insertion of new definitions 
The Amendment Bill proposes to modify some of the existing definitions and also 
insert some new definitions so as to make the provisions of the FCR Act more relevant 
and useful in tune with the changes in the commodity derivatives market in the recent 
years.  It provides for the amendment of the definition of the expression ―forward 
contract‖ so  as to include therein ―commodity derivative‖ and also insert new 
expressions such as ―commodity derivative‖, ―corporatization‖, ―demutualization‖, 
―intermediary‖ etc which have been used in the Bill. 
 
(2)  Strengthening of Forward Markets Commission 
The Amendment Bill proposes to restructure and strengthen FMC.  Accordingly, 
the following changes in the composition and functioning of FMC are proposed: 
 Increase in the number of Members from 4 to 9 with at least three whole -time 
Members and Chairman. 
 Provisions relating to term of office and conditions of service of Chairman and 
Members of the FMC and its Officers and employees. 
 Provisions to confer power upon the Commission to recruit its Officers and 
employees so as to provide flexibility in recruiting expe rts and professionals 
belonging to commodity derivatives market. 
 Provisions to provide for constitution of ‗FMC General Fund‘ to which all grants, 
fees and all sums received by the FMC shall be credited except penalties and 
apply the funds for meeting the expenses of FMC.  The FMC will also have the 
powers to levy fees. 

 
 
 
(3)  Enhancement of the powers of the Forward Markets Commission 
The Bill proposes to enhance the powers of the FMC by devolving most of the 
existing powers of the Central Government on the FMC, such as: 
 Powers relating to recognition, withdrawal of recognition. 
 Power to supersede governing body of the recognized associations. 
Besides the Bill also proposes to confer upon the FMC additional powers, such 
as the following: 
(j) to regulate the business of associations and intermediaries; 
(k) to call for information from agencies; 
(l) to protect the interests of market participants; 
(m)to promote and regulate self-regulatory organizations; 
(n) to prohibit fraudulent and unfair trade practices; 
(o) to promote investor education and training of intermediaries; 
(p) to prohibit insider trading; 
(q) to adjudicate and make Regulations; and 
(r) to investigate intermediary or person associated with the commodity 
derivatives market. 
(4)   Corporatisation and Demutualisation of the existing Commodity Exchanges 
Provisions relating to corporatization and demutualization of the existing 
Commodity Exchanges in accordance with the scheme to be approved by the FMC, are 
proposed to be inserted on the lines of similar provisions contained in the Secu rities 
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (SCR Act). 
 

 
 
 
 
(5)   Provisions of Clearing Corporation 
The Amendment Bill also proposes to make provision for Clearing Corporation to 
which all the clearing functions of the existing clearing houses of the Exchanges will be 
transferred in a time bound manner. 
 
(6)   Registration of Members and Intermediaries 
The proposed Amendment Bill provides for registration of members and 
intermediaries associated with the commodity derivatives market.  At present, there is 
no statutory provision for registration of brokers, sub -brokers/authorised representatives 
and other intermediaries with the FMC.   The registration of the intermediaries will 
facilitate more effective monitoring of these intermediaries by the FMC.  Provision 
relating to suspension or cancellation of certificate of registration has also been 
provided in the Bill. 
 
(7)    Enhancement of penal provisions 
The existing penalty provisions in the FCR Act are grossly inadequate.  In order 
to make the penalty provisions more effective and deterrent, the existing monetary limit 
of the penalty is proposed to be enhanced to a minimum of ―rupees twenty five 
thousand‖ as against the existing provision of ―rupees one thousand only‖.  New 
provisions are proposed to be inserted t o provide for penalty, to be imposed after 
adjudication, of up to ―rupees twenty five lakhs‖ covering contraventions, such as failure 
to furnish information, return etc; failure by any person to enter into an agreement with 
clients; failure to redress clie nts‘ grievances; insider trading, fraudulent and unfair trade 
practices; default in case of an intermediary; and failure to comply with directives of the 
FMC. 
 
(8)   Provisions relating to the Appellate Tribunal and appeal to the Supreme 
Court 
The Amendment Bill proposes to make provision for designating the Securities 
Appellate Tribunal (SAT) as the Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of FCR Act.  The 

 
 
 
Amendment Bill provides for an appeal from the order of FMC and Adjudicating Officer 
to SAT and from SAT to Supreme Court under the FCR Act. 
 
(9)   Permitting trading in options in goods or commodity derivatives 
Trading in options in goods is banned under the existing provisions of the FCR 
Act.  The Amendment Bill proposes to make provisions for allowing tradi ng in options in 
goods or commodity derivatives and for this purpose, Section 19 of the FCR Act is 
proposed to be amended.  This will provide a new facility for risk management to market 
participants and other stakeholders, including farmers.   
 
(10)   Other provisions 
The Amendment Bill also provides for certain other provisions, such as the following: 
c. Exemption of FMC from payment of tax on wealth, income and profits or 
gains on the lines of SEBI. 
d. Conferring powers upon the Central Government to issue dir ections on 
matters of policy to FMC and also to supersede it if so warranted. 
H. Constitutional & Legal Frame Work 
 
1.18 The subject ―stock exchanges and futures markets‖ is under the Union List in 
Schedule VII of the Constitution of India, whereas the ―Tr ade and Commerce‖ and 
―Agriculture‖ are the subjects within the jurisdiction of States. Therefore, the regulators 
of commodities Exchanges do not have jurisdiction over spot Markets even in non -
Agricultural Commodities. Asked whether the regulator of Commo dities markets should 
have a mandate to regulate the spot markets in Commodities and the steps taken to 
resolve the issue, the Committee was informed by the Ministry that the proposed Bill 
does not seek to bring spot market and future market under the same  regulatory 
framework. The Bill deals only with commodity derivatives contracts.  However, since 
the spot markets and derivatives markets are closely linked, it is desirable that both the 
spot markets and derivatives market are under the purview of the same regulator.   
 

 
 
 
1.19 The objective and functioning of futures and spot market are completely different. 
However, some of the national commodity Exchanges are taking initiatives to set up 
national level electronic Exchanges for spot transactions for agricul tural commodities. 
Ideally, there should be convergence of spot and futures markets under a uniform 
regulatory framework for the optimization of the benefits of these reforms. 
 
1.20 Thus, the legislation to be enacted by the Parliament for bringing spot tr ading 
within the purview of the Commodity Futures Regulator can cover both inter -state 
trading as well as intra -state spot trading in the aforesaid commodities. A Bill to provide 
for regulation of electronic spot trading in commodities as aforesaid is unde r 
consideration of the Department of Consumer Affairs.  
 
 
1.21 Keeping in view the enormous importance of the Bill, especially for the farming 
community, the Committee sought the views/suggestions from 
institutions/individuals/stakeholders etc. on the prov isions of the Bill through letters and 
press release which were published in leading newspapers. The Committee also held 
discussions with the State Governments of Rajasthan, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal on the various pr ovisions of the Bill and 
took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & 
Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) in this regard. The Committee 
considered the views/suggestions furnished by various institut ions /individuals and took 
evidence to share the views of the representatives of the following 
Institutions/Organizations :- 
  (i) Confederation of Indian Industry (CII),  
(ii) Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI),  
(iii) Sarthak Advocates and Solicitors and  
(iv) PRS Legislative Research.  
 
1.22 The important points/suggestions brought  out in the written Memoranda as well 
as during Oral evidence are given as under:-  

 
 
 
 
 Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)  in their Memorandum su bmitted to the 
Committee stated that the Amendment bill proposes to permit options in commodities. 
Over a period of time, it has also been realized that options are better suited to Indian 
farmers than futures as explained further in their note.  The FCRA Amendment Bill will 
further help the farmers and consumers by making available more convenient 
instruments such as options, derivatives on weather etc.,  these instruments are 
particularly useful for farmers and others who are risk averse. Options would pr ove very 
helpful to the farmers because it would give them Price protection down side and full 
opportunity to benefit from rising price.  By entering into an option contracts, the farmers 
will get a right to sell but would not be bound to sell if the price  falls.  It will improve the 
quality of price discovery and price risk management through more effective regulation. 
They have also stated that one of the reasons for farmers to sell their produce at a 
lower price than the optimum price is insufficient pri ce information. In order to help the 
farmers to get benefit from the futures market, it is imperative that futures prices are 
disseminated at the farm -gate.  FMC and the national commodity exchanges hope to 
achieve this through the implementation of the price dissemination project.   
 Further, introduction of Newer Products/instruments such as option is also 
supported by Ace Derivatives and Commodity Exchange Ltd. as in the Memorandum 
submitted by them, it   has been stated that with a small investment outl ay, the 
farmers/Constituents would be able to hedge the price risk on their produce very 
efficiently.  Availability of Option would give a simpler alternative to the farmers.  
 
 India Pepper and Spice Trade Association (IPSTA)  in their Memorandum 
submitted to the Committee welcomed the passage of Bill since it would go a long way 
in the overall development of the future trade. They have further supported the 
substitution of the new sections viz. 12 A & 12 B for option which will give impetus for 
trading as well as reduce the risk involved in it.  
 
  In a Memorandum submitted by  Kerala Agricultural University  it has been  
stated that Future Contracts are traded in the commodity bourses in India.  Further 

 
 
 
contracts have the inherent weakness that they have unl imited potential for profit.  It is 
high time that the options must be made available to the players in the commodity 
value chain to limit their cost of transaction.  The introduction will also enhance greater 
participation by the stakeholders and infuse greater liquidity in the market.  
 
  Confederation of Indian Industry   have also stated that the commodity futures  
Market has witnessed significant growth and its complexities have increased.  It is 
imperative to increase the number of members including wh ole-time members of FMC 
to strengthen the regulatory framework of this market.  Increase in the number of 
members of the Commission would enable FMC to involve professionals from areas 
relevant to commodity and financial market for development as well as r egulation.  
Effective regulation is required to ensure that the markets are free from any kind of 
manipulation which leads to distorted price signals. They have also stated that for 
strengthening of FMC as a regulator and for effective regulations, FMC sho uld have the 
powers to constitute and expend out of the 'FMC -General Fund' in order to give it 
adequate financial autonomy.  Financial autonomy, on the lines of SEBI, is required by 
FMC for quicker and more effective implementation of its regulations, besi des focusing 
on developmental activities such as awareness, dissemination of price information, 
connecting stakeholders to the markets through innovative models which are essential 
for delivering the benefits at the grass roots level.  In the present commo dity market, 
FMC needs to employ modern technological tools and professionals to meet the 
regulatory challenges.  In order to do that, FMC needs to have independent sources of 
revenue by having General Fund and charge fee from the brokers.  Therefore, they  are 
of the view that such powers should be given to FMC.  Since FMC does not have 
adequate financial and operational autonomy at present, it has to depend on the time -
consuming Ministry's approval for taking regulatory decisions.  FMC is highly short -
staffed and not able to recruit appropriate personnel mainly due to non -availability of 
trained personnel with specific qualifications and domain knowledge.  Further, FMC can 
seek staff only on deputation basis from the government departments/semi -government 
agencies, from where either the relevant manpower is not available or they are not 
willing to join on short-term deputations/due to lower remuneration available in FMC vis -

 
 
 
à-vis the market opportunities available for such personnel outside.  Without financi al 
autonomy, it is not able to upgrade its human and technical resources for effective 
regulation of the market.  
 
  It is also stated that the administrative and financial autonomy envisaged in the 
Amendment Bill will facilitate FMC in raising its own fin ancial resources and induction of 
adequate skilled manpower to strengthen its regulatory oversight. Currently, efforts to 
take the benefits of Commodity Futures Market to the small producers are being made 
by cooperative federations such as NAFED, HAFED, R ubber Producers' Cooperatives, 
etc.  Besides, FMC has also been trying to make the market more inclusive through 
aggregating small producers.  With financial autonomy and operational independence, 
FMC will be able to undertake such market development effor ts in a more effective 
manner. With financial autonomy, the ability of FMC to undertake such market 
development efforts will be enhanced.  Besides, farmers will also be able to use options 
contracts to hedge their prices in simpler ways.  Thus, by using fu tures prices at the 
time of selling the farmer can maximize his returns.  The benefits of futures market can 
percolate to farmers if price discovery is proper and the prices so discovered are 
disseminated to farmers in such a way that farmers have easy access to such prices.  
 
 The PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry   in their memorandum have 
also stated that financial dependence on Govt. currently limits FMC's investment in 
infrastructure, technology, apart from human resources, which in turn adversely af fects 
the quality of regulation.  Regulatory autonomy is also needed for enforcing decision in 
a pro -active and quick manner.  Hence, any element of regulatory failure would be 
perceived as a failure of the future market, which would dissuade participants in the real 
sector from availing this price risk instruments.  Hence, there is an immediate 
requirements for the regulator to build its capacities and enhance its infrastructure for 
proper development and regulation of future market.  They have also favour ed new 
hedging products -Options and Weather derivatives, which can be tailored to the risk 
appetite of farmers to hedge against particular risks. 
 

 
 
 
  Geogit Credit (P) Ltd -Non Banking finance company  registered with the RBI 
as an NBFC -ND in their Memorandum  has stated that the enactment of the 
warehousing (Development and Regulation) Act of 2007 and its becoming law since 
October 2010 is a major step in the direction of improving food security and making 
available necessary funding to farmers.  They have als o stated that Commodity Futures 
Market helps for the larger participation by enabling farmers who have stock to avail 
finance and obviate distress sales. 
 
The Government of Rajasthan  suggested that  the edible commodities which 
are surplus in production should only be allowed for future trading. Future trading should 
be based upon the actual delivery, this will help to stabilize the prices during the year 
and minimize false scarcity of some commodity. In place of transaction of loss/ profit, 
there must be a ctual transaction of goods/ commodity between parties (order wise) in 
every forward contract.  In the present system forward trade is being executed by NCDX 
and MCX but government does not have much to control or to regulate them.  Although 
by this Amendme nt Bill, government is likely to control to a greater extent, as 
commission is being constituted including the members dealing with Consumer Affairs, 
Commodity Derivatives, Food and Public Distribution, Agriculture or Finance and also 
one member from RBI.  
Participation of Banks, Insurance Company and Mutual Funds  
 
1.23 When asked by the Committee about the implication if the Government open  to 
the financial players like Banks, Insurance Company and Mutual Funds, etc.  the 
Department stated that in their written reply that  active participation will also promote 
greater credit flow to farmers for post-harvest marketing.   
 
During evidence, when asked by the Committee about participation of financial 
players like Banks, Insurance Companies and Mutual funds in FMC, the Secretary, 
Department of Consumer Affairs has stated that there is no legal restriction or any bar 
on Banks, Financial Institutions and  Mutual Funds, etc. to be a Member of FMC so far 
Forward Control Regulation Act is concerned.  As per the Ac t, these financial players 
can become Member and very  well be associated in the activities of FMC.  These 

 
 
 
Financial Institutions have their own regulators/controllers  and they just have to take 
permission from their controllers/regulators who will decide  on the pros and cons of the 
investment to be made by these Financial Institutions in s, before they are given 
permission to join/invest in Future Markets. 
 
 
1.24 The Memorandum submitted by Department of Financial Studies, University 
of Delhi stated  that permitting Institutional players like Banks and Cooperative will not 
only provide more liquidity to the market but also provide better price-discovery.   
 
  During the study visit undertaken by the Committee, the Committee heard the 
views of some of the St ate Governments. The views expressed by the representatives 
of the State Governments before the Committee and through subsequent written 
communications are as under:- 
 
   
  The Government of Maharashtra were of the view that the farmers may not get 
much benefit out of the Bill.  However, the State Government in general supported  the 
early passing of the Bill in Parliament while expressing the desire that  certain issues 
such as representatives of State Governments  be nominated on the Forward Market 
Commission (FMC) by rotation, the number of days  of spot trading be increased to 30 
days from 11 days at present, stock limit imposed on direct marketers be lifted in the 
interest of the farmers etc.   
 
 The Government of Tamil Nadu were unhappy  that the State  Governments 
were not consulted before the Bill was introduced in Parliament.  They were of the view 
that the State Governments should have been given the opportunity to express their 
views while formulating the Bill.  The State Government also felt that t here was lack of 
awareness among the farmers and expressed the apprehension that too much of 
speculation could harm the farmers interest.   The State Government further desired 
that a regular consultation mechanism between the FMC and State Governments nee d 
to be put in place.   
 

 
 
 
 
 
I. Benefits to the farmers 
 
1.25 When the Committee desired to know as to what type of risks are faced by 
farmers in the pre and post harvest seasons and how will the Bill help the farmers to 
overcome those risks and to benefit t hem from the future markets, the Department of 
Consumer Affairs stated as under:- 
 
1.26 Farmers and growers benefit through the price signals emitted by the futures 
markets even if they may not directly participate in the futures market.  The futures 
markets lead to reduction in the amplitude of seasonal price variations and help the 
farmer realize somewhat better price at the time of harvest or to postpone the sale of his 
produce, in part or in full, thereby moderating market arrivals as well as the abilit y of the 
trade to monopolise price setting.  This indirectly benefits consumers as well.  This also 
helps the farmer in planning his cultivation in advance as well as to determine the kind 
of crop which he would prefer to raise, by taking advantage of the advance information 
of the future price trends of alternate crops, and probable supply and demand of various 
commodities in advance. By providing the manufacturers and the bulk consumers a 
mechanism for covering price-risks, the futures market induces them to pay higher price 
to the producers, as the need to pass on the price -risk to farmers is obviated.  The 
manufacturers are able to hedge their requirement of the raw materials  as also their 
finished products.  This results in greater competition in the m arket and ensure viability 
of the manufacturing units. 
 
1.27 During briefing, when asked how does the Department create awareness  among 
farmers, the Chairman, Forward Market Commission  stated that to create awareness 
among farmers various schemes for awa reness programmes have been sanctioned.  
Last year, they have conducted approximately 500 awareness programmes and this 
year there is plan for conducting about six hundred such programmes. 
 
1.28 The Committee would  deal with various provisions of the Bill  which need 
comments, in the subsequent Chapters. 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
 CLAUSE 3 — Amendment of the definition of Commodity Derivative 
 
 The Clause (3) proposes to amend Section 2 of the Forward Commission 
Regulation Act, 1952 containing various definitions which are as under:- 
 
Definition    In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - 
(a) ―association‖  means any body of individuals whether incorporated or 
not, constituted for the purpose of regulating and controlling the business of the 
sale or purchase of any goods; 
(b) ―commission‖ means the Forward Markets Commission established 
under sec. 3; 
(c) ―forward contract‖ means a contract for the delivery of goods  [2][* * *]  
and which is not a ready delivery contract: 
(d) ―goods‖ means every kind of movabl e property other than actionable 
claims, money and securities; 
(e)     ―Government security‖ means a Government security as defined in 
the Public Debt Act, 1944 (XVIII OF 1944); 
(f) ―non-transferable specific delivery contract‖  means a specific delivery 
contract, the rights or liabilities under which or under any delivery order, railway 
receipt, bill of lading, warehouse receipt or any other documents of title relating 
thereto are not transferable; 
(g) ―option in goods‖   means an agreement, by whatever name  called, for 
the purchase or sale of a right to buy or sell, or a right to buy and sell, goods in 
future and includes a teji, a mandi,  a teji -mandi, a galli, a put, a call or a put, and 
call in goods; 
(h) ―prescribed‖  means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(i) ―ready delivery contract‖  means a contract which provides for the 
delivery of goods and the payment of a price therefor, either immediately or 

 
 
 
within such period not exceeding eleven days after the date of the contract and 
subject to such co nditions as the Central Government may, by notification in the  
official Gazette, specify in respect of any goods, the period under such contract 
not being capable of extension by the mutual consent of the parties thereto or 
otherwise; 
 2[3] [Provided that where any such contract is performed  either wholly or in part:- 
(1) by tendering of the documents of title to the goods covered by the contract 
by any party thereto (not being a commission agent or a bank) who has acquired 
ownership of the said documents  by purchase, exchange or otherwise, to any 
other person (including a commission agent but not including a bank); or 
(2) by the realisation of any sum of money being the difference between the 
contract rate and the settlement rate or clearing rate or the r ate of any offsetting 
contract: or 
(3) by any other means whatsoever, and as a result of which the actual 
tendering of the goods covered by the contract or payment of the full -price 
therefor is dispensed with then such contract shall not be deemed to be a ready 
delivery contract. 
 
Explanation. - For the purpose of this clause. - 
(i)  ―bank‖ includes any banking company as defined in the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949 (110 of 1949), a co -operative bank as defined in the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 19 34), the State Bank of India and any of its subsidiaries 
and any corresponding new bank constituted under Sec. 3 of the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970); 
(ii) ―commission agent‖  means a person who, in the o rdinary course of 
business, makes contract for the sale or purchase of goods for others for a 
remuneration (whether known as commission or otherwise) which is determined 
in the contract itself or determinable from the terms of the contract in either case, 
only with reference to the quantity of goods or to the price therefor as stipulated 
in the contract]; 

 
 
 
 [4](j) ―recognised association‖  means an association to which recognition for 
the time being has been granted by the Central Government under Sec. 6 in 
respect of goods or classes of goods specified in such recognition; 
(jj) ―registered association‖ means an association to which for the time being a 
certificate of registration has been granted by the Commission under Sec.14-B]; 
(k) ―rules‖  with reference to the rules relating in general to the constitution and 
management of an association, includes in the case of an incorporated 
association, its Memorandum and articles of association; 
(l) ―securities‖ includes shares, scripts, stocks, bonds, debentures, d ebenture-
stocks, or other marketable securities of a like nature in or of any incorporated 
company or other body corporate and also government securities: 
(m) ―specific delivery contract‖   means a forward contract which provides for 
the actual delivery of specific qualities or types of goods during a specified future 
period at a price fixed thereby or to be fixed in the manner thereby agreed and in 
which the names of both the buyer and the seller are mentioned: 
(n) ―transferable specific delivery contract‖   means specific delivery contract 
which is not a non-transferable specific delivery contract   [5][and which is subject 
to such conditions relating to its transferability as the Central Government may by 
notification in the official Gazette, specify in this behalf. 
 
2.2 The Government have proposed to amend few existing definitions (e.g. 
―association‖, ―forward contract‖, ―ready delivery contract‖, ―specific delivery contract‖ 
and ―securities‖) and addition of various definitions (e.g ―Chairman‖, ―commodity  
derivative‖, ―corporatization‖, ―demutualization‖, ―Fund‖, ―intermediary‖, ―member‖, 
―notification‖ and ―scheme‖. 
 
2.3 Sarthak Advocates & Solicitor in their written memorandum has suggested to 
include 'option in good' in the definition of Commodity Derivatives. 
 In this context, the Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs while deposing 
before the Committee stated as under:- 

 
 
 
"options in goods are option in commodity derivatives.  They are of 
the same generic term, commodity derivatives includes option in 
goods". 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
(A)  CLAUSE 4 — ESTABLISHMENT & CONSTITUTION OF THE FORWARD 
MARKETS COMMISSION 
 
   The Clause 4 proposes to amend Section 3 of the Forward Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1952 which prescribes the procedure for Establishment and 
constitution of the Forward Markets Commission as under:— 
 
1.  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish a Commission to be called the Forward Markets Commission for the 
purpose of exercising such functions and discharging su ch duties as may be 
assigned to the Commission by or under this Act. 
 
2.  The Commission shall consist of not less than two, but not exceeding four, 
members appointed by the Central Government one of them being nominated by 
the Central Government to be the  Chairman thereof; and the Chairman and the 
other member or members shall be either whole -time as the Central Government 
may direct:  
 
Provided that the members to be so appointed shall be persons of ability, 
integrity and standing who have shown capacity in dealing with problems relating 
to commerce or commodity markets, or in administration or who have special 
knowledge or practical experience in any matter which renders them suitable for 
appointment on the commission. 
 
3.  No person shall be qualified fo r appointment as, or for continuing to be, a 
member of the Commission if he has, directly or indirectly, any such financial or 
other interest as is likely to effect prejudicially his functions as a member of the 
commission, and every member shall, whenever  required by the Central 

 
 
 
Government so do, furnish to it such information as it may require for the purpose 
of securing compliance with the provisions of this sub-section. 
 
4.  No member of the Commission shall hold office for a period of more than 
three y ears from the date of his appointment, and a member relinquishing his 
office on the expiry of his term shall be eligible for re-appointment. 
 
5.  The other terms and conditions of service of members of the Commission 
shall be such as may be prescribed. 
 
3.2  The Government has proposed to delete sub sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of 
Section 3 of the Principal Act and has proposed to substitute the following sub -
section:— 
―(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal with power subject to the provisions of 
this Act, to acquire hold and dispose of property, both moveable and immovable, 
and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.‖ 
Ministry in their written reply has informed that currently the Commodity market 
regulator functions as an attached office of the Department of Consumer Affairs. 
 
 Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)  in their memorandum suggested that to 
re-structure and strengthen the FMC and confer upon it more statutory powers on the 
lines of SEBI is indeed a right step.  It will enable FMC to play the role of an effective 
and strong regulator by ensuring that the commodity derivatives market has a healthy 
growth and the interests of various stakeholders in the commodity economy is served.  
With the help of a stronger regulator, a well regulated commodity derivatives market will 
attract participation from larger number of stakeholders, who will find this market a 
cheap and effective medium for hedging their risks .  This will result in more accurate 
price signals.  Thus, a strong regulator would also help the economy to prevent and 
manage potential crisis.  
 

 
 
 
Planning Commission in their written reply has suggested that keeping in view 
the specialized nature of acti vity performed by FMC, there is a need to impart more 
autonomy to FMC to recruit professionals having familiarity with the commodities 
derivatives market (they need not necessarily belong to these markets).  It may, 
therefore, by desirable to provide such flexibility to FMC.   
 
Planning Commission has also suggested that there is need to upgrade the legal 
and regulatory system whereby FMC can discharge its role more effectively on the lines 
of similar measures taken for Securities and Exchange Board of India.  Since the quality 
of regulation of markets  plays an important role in reducing information asymmetry, 
promoting confidence among and protecting the participants from manipulative 
practices, amendments to FCR Act are deemed necessary.   
 
Department of Financial Studies, University of Delhi in their Memorandum 
submitted to the Committee has suggested that the proposed restructuring of FMC shall 
provide the necessary autonomy and requisite teeth for effective regulation of the 
commodities market and shall  go a long way in making them more efficient.  It will help 
in speeding up the process of regulation and monitoring and make regulator more 
responsive to changing environment.  With ever increasing integration of Indian 
Commodities Market with global marke ts, it is essential that our markets get regulatory 
environment that match with global standards and approaches.  
 
Shetkari Sangathana in their Memorandum submitted to the Committee have 
appreciated the Government and the Ministry for making the Forward Ma rket 
Commission (FMC) the kind of a regulator it is today but wish the regulator to have the 
strength to act independently and efficiently as  an autonomous body with powers that  
are effective, which is essential for the further development of the Commodit y Futures 
Market: to make it more and more useful to the real economy and small/marginal 
farmers.  
  

 
 
 
In a Memorandum submitted by Kerala Agricultural University, it has been  
stated that for efficient functioning of  a regulator like SEBI is sine qua non.  
 
Ace Derivatives and Commodity Exchange Ltd. in its Memorandum submitted 
to the Committee have stated that legal framework under which Forward Market 
Commission, the Regulator, operates is grossly inadequate to enable it to continue to 
discharge its role as an effective regulator in the expanding commodities market place 
and therefore it is the need of the hour that underlying legal framework of the 
Commission be suitably strengthened at the earliest possible. They have also stated 
that FMC can contribute to the healthy development of Indian Commodity Futures 
Market on par with the best in the world.  
 
During the study visit of the Committee to Mumbai undertaken in November, 
2011, the representatives of Ace Derivatives and Commodity Exchange Ltd., in reply to 
a query informed that the current regulatory framework does not provide adequate 
financial and operational autonomy.  As per the current practice, FMC has to solely 
depend on the funds from the Central Government and administratively FMC functions 
as an  extended arm of the Central Government.  Due to lack of financial autonomy, 
FMC is unable to hire talent from the market and most of the senior staff is on 
deputation from different ministries which affects its overall efficiency.    When the 
Committee pointed out that the Government proposed to amend sub Section 2,3,4 and 
5 of Section 3 of the Act by substituting the new Section 3(2) to give FMC financial and 
administrative autonomy to meet the growing challenges in the future and enquired how 
the amendment of the Sub Section, will grant financial and administrative autonomy to 
FMC, the Committee were informed that with the proposed amendments in the bill, FMC 
would be able to have adequate manpower with requisite skill sets.  Detailed provisions 
on appoin tment, terms of office, meetings, etc. entailed in the amendments would 
further increase the operational efficiency of the regulator. With the amendment Bill, 
constitution of a separate fund would provide the much needed financial autonomy to 
FMC. 
 

 
 
 
The Multi Commodity Exchange of India Ltd. in this context  stated that the 
size, growth and development mandate of the futures market warrant an autonomous 
and strong regulator.  The regulator has to possess operational autonomy in order to 
become proactive in enforcing regulations.  At the same time, financial autonomy of the 
regulator will improve its outreach efforts to further deepen the market.  Financial 
dependence on government currently limits FMC's investment in Infrastructure, 
technology, apart from hum an resources, which in turn adversely affects the quality of 
regulation.  When enquired whether the FMC be independent of  Government like SEBI 
or not, representatives of the Bombay Commodity Exchange during interaction with the 
Committee informed that fro m operational point of view FMC should function  
independently.  This will enable them to take all administrative decisions without 
referring the same to the Ministry,  at the earliest.  
 
3.3 During evidence, when enquired why autonomy is important for the  market of 
regulator, the Representative of CII stated as under:- 
"Autonomy is needed, because regulator needs domain specialization.  They 
also need talent to be attracted from the market to really make it to this size.  If 
you compare the nearest closure  to stock exchange, current regulator, as 
department, has got roughly under 100 staff, whereas SEBI has 600 staff to 
control this.  There are eight national exchanges; five are already live and three 
are going to come; whereas in stock exchange, there are three national level and 
few others." 
 
National Commodity and Derivatives Exchange Ltd., Mumbai , in their written 
submission has also stated that since FMC is proposed to be an independent regulatory 
body, it will have to recruit professionals suited to it s requirements, on a regular basis.  
The process of recruitment through UPSC is long and in the present dynamic 
commodity market, FMC may not be able to afford delays.  Further, FMC could be in a 
better position to match the required skill and remuneration  of the candidates. In the 
present commodity market, FMC needs to employ modern technological tools and 
professionals to meet the regulatory challenges.  In order to do that, FMC need to have 

 
 
 
independent sources of revenue by having General Fund and powers  to charge fee 
from the brokers.  Therefore, they are of the view that such powers should be given to 
FMC and the proposed amendments will achieve the object of making FMC, an 
independent statutory body similar to SEBI. 
In reply to a query as to why it was  necessary to grant financial and functional 
autonomy to FMC, the Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs during  evidence 
stated that :- 
"if functioning of the Commission is not up to the mark,  the Government will have 
full right to issue instructions and whatever rules are made by the Commission 
will be subjected  to the approval of the Government." 
The Chairman, FMC, has further supplemented as under:- 
"We feel that a strong and autonomous regulator is essential for the  since the 
market has grown man ifold.  If regulator is strong, the market  participants will 
work according to rules". 
 
 (B)  CLAUSE 5 – MANAGEMENT OF COMMISSION 
 
3.5  Section 3 of the Forward Contract (Regulation) Act, 1952 deals with the 
establishment and constitution of the Forward M arket Commission. Government have 
proposed to insert new Sections 3A, 3B, 3C, 3D, 3E, 3F, 3G and 3H through the FC(R) 
Amendment Bill, 2010. It is proposed that after section 3 of the principal Act, the 
following sections shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
―3A (1)  The Commission shall consist of the following members, namely:— 
(a) a Chairman; 
 
(b) two members from amongst the officials of the Ministries or 
Departments of the Central Government dealing with Consumer Affairs, 
Commodity Derivatives, Food and Public Distribution, Agriculture or 
Finance; 
 

 
 
 
(c) one member from amongst the officials of the Reserve Bank; 
 
(d) five other members of whom at least three shall be the whole -time 
members. 
 
(2)  The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs  of 
the Commission shall vest in a board of members, which may exercise all powers 
and do all acts and things which may be exercised or done by the Commission. 
 
(3)  Save as otherwise determined, by regulations, the Chairman shall have 
powers of general superintendence and direction of the affairs of the Commission 
and may also exercise all powers and do all the acts and things which may be 
exercised or done by the Commission. 
 
(4)  The Chairman and members referred to in clauses (a) and (d) of sub -
section (1) shall be appointed by the Central Government and the members 
referred to in clauses (b) and (c) of that sub -section shall be nominated by the 
Central Government and the Reserve Bank, respectively. 
 
 (5)  The Chairman and other members referred to in cl auses (a) and (d) of 
sub-section (1) shall be persons of ability, integrity and standing who have shown 
capacity in dealing with problems relating to commodity markets or who have 
special knowledge or experience of commerce or economics or law or finance o r 
in administration or have practical experience in any matter which renders them 
suitable for appointment on the Commission. 
 
3.6  In Clause 5, the Government has also proposed to insert a new Clause 3C 
which provides that the Central Government shall remove a member from office if he— 
 
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated as insolvent; 
(b) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; 

 
 
 
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the option of the Central 
Government, involves a moral turpitude; 
(d) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his position as to 
render his continuation in office detrimental to the public interest; 
Provided that no member shall be removed under this clause unless he has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
 
  
(C) CLAUSE 9 — GRANTS BY CENTRAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
 
3.10  Clause 9 of the Bill proposes to insert a new Chapter IIA after Chapter II of the 
Principal Act. Sub-clause 4F(4) of Chapter IIA of the Bill prescribes as under:— 
 
―(4) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with 
the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Ce ntral Government 
and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of 
Parliament.‖ 
 
(D) CLAUSE 21 — REGISTRATION OF MEMBERS AND INTERMEDIARIES 
 
3.12  Section 14A of the Forward Contract (Regulation) Act, 1952 deals with procedure 
regarding certificate of registration to be obtained by all associations. The Government 
have proposed to delete Chapter IIIA (Section 14A) from the Principal Act and have 
suggested to substitute a new Chapter IIIA (Section 14A) namely, ―Registration of 
Members and Intermediaries‖. As per sub -section (3) of Section 14A, no foreign  
participant or foreign intermediary associated with the commodity derivatives market, as 
the Commission may, by notification in this behalf, specify, shall deal in forward contract 
or option in goods or option in commodity derivative except under and in accordance 
with the conditions of a certificate of registration obtained from the Commission in 
accordance with the regulations made under this Act.   

 
 
 
 
3.13 Provided that a foreign parti cipant or foreign intermediary dealing in forward 
contract or option in goods or option in commodity derivative immediately before the 
commencement of this Act, for which no certificate of registration was required prior to 
such commencement, may continue to deal in forward contract or option in goods until 
such time as rules may be made by the Central Government for such dealings or in 
case no such rules have been made until permitted as such by the Commission by 
notification. 
 
3.14 The Amendment Bill also  proposes to replace chapter –III A of the Act so as to 
provide for mandatory registration of members and intermediaries.  This empowers the 
FMC to directly regulate the members/intermediaries, rather than leaving action on 
trade abuses, manipulation etc. of the members/intermediaries to the exchanges  to the 
Economic offices wing of the respective Sate Law & Orders maintenance mechanism. 
Compulsory reservation of all market participant will restrict entry of undesirable entities 
into the commodity derivatives market. 
 
  CII in their Memorandum has stated that the Amendment Bill proposes to make 
registration of members of exchanges and other intermediaries mandatory. It also 
proposes to replace Chapter IIIA of the Act so as to provide for mandatory registrat ion 
of members and intermediaries, instead of that of associations. The registration of 
intermediaries/members is subjected to the conditions stipulated in the certificate of 
registration. Presently, FMC does not have any statutory power for registration o f 
members and other intermediaries and thus, does not have any direct power to penalise 
the wrongdoer.  With the passing of the Act the members and other intermediaries will 
be regulated by FMC.  Provision of registration of members and other intermediarie s by 
FMC would empower the FMC to directly regulate the members/intermediaries, rather 
than leaving action on trade -abuses, manipulations etc. of the members/intermediaries 
to the Exchanges or to the State police authorities. Memorandum also states that th is 
proposal is desirable in public interest as it will help bring about greater transparency 
and increase the confidence of market participants in the market. Besides, these are 

 
 
 
normal regulatory processes which are necessary for proper regulation of parti es 
involved in the commodity market. 
 
PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry in their Memorandum submitted to 
the Committee has suggested that mandatory registration of intermediaries and 
members with the FMC would lead to greater transparency and increased confidence of 
market participants in the functioning of the commodity derivatives market. Compulsory 
registration of all market participants will restrict entry of undesirable entities into the 
commodity derivatives market, timely detection of unfair trade  practices and levy of 
deterrent penalty by an empowered regulator would go a long way in improving market 
practices. 
 
(E)  CLAUSE 25 AND 26 - PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE 
 
3.16  Sub-Section (i) and (ii) of Section 20(e) states that any person who enters into 
any forward contract or any option in goods in contravention of any of the provisions 
contained in sub-section (1) or subsection (3A) or sub -section (4) of section 15, section 
17 or section 19, shall, on conviction, be punishable–  
 
(i) for a first offence,  with imprisonment which may extent to one year, or with a 
fine of not less than one thousand rupees, or with both; 
 
(ii) for a second or subsequent offence under clause(d) or under clause(e) [other 
than an offence in respect of a contravention of the prov isions of      sub -section 
(4) of section 15], with imprisonment which may extend to one year and also with 
fine: provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the 
contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, the imprisonment sh all be 
not be less than one month and the fine shall be not less than one thousand 
rupees.]  
 

 
 
 
3.17  The Government has proposed the following amendments in Section 20(e)        
(i) and (ii) of the principal Act;— 
(A) in clause(i), for the words ―one thousa nd rupees‖, the words ―twenty -five 
thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty -five lakh rupees‖ shall be 
substituted; 
 
(B) in clause(ii),— 
(i) for the words, brackets and letter ―under clause (d)‖, the words, brackets and 
letters ―under clause (d) or under clause (da)‖ shall be substituted; 
 
(ii) for the words ―one thousand rupees‖, the words ―twenty five thousand rupees‖ 
shall be substituted. 
 
3.18  Similarly in section 21(h) (i) and (ii) of the principal Act the Government has 
proposed as under,— 
 
After the words ―shall, on conviction, be punishable —‖ occurring below clause 
(h), in clauses (i) and (ii), for the words ―one thousand rupees‖, the words 
―twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty -five lakh rupees‖ 
shall be substituted. 
 
3.19 The Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) in their written reply has stated that 
market has grown in volume and complexity since the FCRA, 1952 was enacted, there 
is a need to enhance the penal provisions too.  The amendment bill proposes to 
empower FMC  to investigate and punish any person resorting to insider trading. The 
proposed financial penalties are quite deterrent. Forward Market Commission shall have 
to recruit efficient professionals and modern technology to check and investigate any 
untoward movement of prices and check any manipulation and insider trading.  As per 
the proposed provision, FMC will have original powers to impose financial penalties up 
to a maximum of Rs. 25 lakh (for some offences such as insider trading, unfair practices 
etc.  The penalty is also being linked to the profits made from such transactions).  This 

 
 
 
is a welcome change from present provisions under which, a penalty of only Rs. 1,000/ - 
can be imposed, that too through court orders.  Besides, the enhanced amounts are on 
the line of penal provisions in SEBI Act (Section 15A to 15HB).  It is further stated that 
the authority while imposing such penalties has to keep in mind the profits earned by 
the violator by the acts of violations.  Amounts of penalties have been reasonab ly 
deterrent in security market.   
 
3.20 Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) has also stated that passage of Bill will 
lead to effective monetary penalty structure for prevention of contravention, such as 
failure to furnish information, return etc., fai lure by one person to enter into agreement 
with client, failure to redress client grievances. 
 
3.21 During the recent study visit of the Committee when enquired whether it would be 
desirable not to impose such a stiff penalty for the initial period of two three years, the 
representatives of Ace Derivative and Commodity Exchange Ltd. replied that FMC has 
been regulating the Commodity Futures Market for the last few years and is now well 
versed in regulating the behavior of market intermediaries.  FMC should be empowered 
to impose stiff penalties right from the development stage of the market such that 
undesirable intermediary behavior is snubbed and prevented rather than cured once 
established.  It was stated by them that they supported the view that the pena lty be 
imposed from day one. 
 
3.22 The representatives of Indian Commodity Exchange in their  submission has 
suggested that the purpose of penalty is to act as a deterrent and prevent deviant 
behavior.  The purpose of a penalty is not to kill a business.  Principal of natural justice 
requires that punishment be commensurate with the offence.  They, therefore,  favored 
a maximum penalty of Rs.10 lakhs.  They felt that imposition of penalty should not be 
held in abeyance for the initial two to three years as it sends a wrong signal regarding 
regulators' seriousness in enforcing the rules. 

 
 
 
(F)  CLAUSE 27 —     INSIDER TRADING 
 
3.24  Clause 27 – this Clause proposes to substitute section 21A of the Forward 
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952. 
 
3.25   The Government has now proposed to insert new Sections 21A, 21B, 21C, 21D, 
21E, 21F, 21G, 21H, 21I, 21J, 21 K, in place of Section 21A of the Principal Act.   
 
3.26 Proposed Section 21D states if any insider who,— 
 
(i) either on his own behalf or on behalf of any other  person, deals in 
forward contract or option in goods or option in commodity derivative on 
any association on the basis of any unpublished price sensitive 
information; or  
   
(ii) communicates any unpublished price sensitive information to any 
person, with or without his request for such information except as required 
in the ordinary course of business or under any law; or 
 
(iii) counsels, or procures for any other person to deal in any forward 
contract or option in goods or option in commodity derivative o n the basis 
of unpublished price sensitive information, shall be liable to a penalty of 
twenty-five lakh rupees or three times the amount of profits made out of 
insider trading, whichever is higher. 
 
3.27 Section 21E. If any person indulges in fraudulent a nd unfair trade practices 
relating to forward contract or option in goods or option in commodity derivative, he shall 
be liable to a penalty of twenty five lakh rupees or three times the amount of profits 
made out of such practices, whichever is higher. 
 

 
 
 
3.28 When enquired as to what type of activities are considered as "Fraudulent and 
Unfair trade practices", the Department of Consumer Affairs stated in their written reply 
that It is not practicable to exhaustively explain the term "fraudulent and Unfair T rade 
practices" in the Act itself to ensure that all unscrupulous market participants are 
booked under the Act and penalty imposed.  Such practices and conduct can vary from 
case to case and from time to time.  Therefore, it is necessary that the term need s to be 
specified in detail which may also require expansion of its scope in the Regulations.   
 
(G)  CLAUSE 30 — INVESTIGATION 
 
3.30 The Government have proposed that after Section 22B of the Principal Act, 
Section 22C (1) shall be inserted as under:- 
 
―Where the Commission has reasonable grounds to believe that— 
 
(a) the transactions in forward contracts or option in goods or option in 
commodity derivative are being dealt with in a manner detrimental to the 
commodity market or person associated with the commodity market; or 
 
(b) any intermediary or any person associated with the commodities market has 
violated any of the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made or 
directions issued by the Commission thereunder,  
 
It may, at any time by order in writing, direct any person (hereinafter in this 
section referred to as the Investigating Authority) specified in the order to 
investigate the affairs of such intermediary or person associated with the 
commodities market and to report thereon the Commission." 
 
3.31 During evidence, the Committee enquired whether any qualification has been 
prescribed for the investigating authority, the representative of the Department of 
Consumer Affairs stated that  Appointment of Investigating Authority under the 

 
 
 
proposed section 22C(1) is an operational issue. Qualifications for appointment of 
investigating authority will be included in the Rules to be made by the 
Government. 
 
(H)  CLAUSE 33 — APPEAL TO APPELLATE TRIBUNAL  
 
3.33  The Government has proposed that after Chapter V of the Principal Act, a new 
Chapter VA may be inserted as under:— 
Chapter VA 
24B. (1) Save as provided in sub -section (2), any persons aggrieved on or after 
the commencement of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 
2006, or by an orde r of the Commission made, or the rules or regulations made 
thereunder or by an order made by an adjudicating officer under this Act may 
prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal having jurisdiction in the matter. 
 
(2) The Central Government shall specify,  by notification, the matters and places 
in relation to which the Appellate Tribunal may exercise jurisdiction. 
 
(3) No appeal shall lie to the Appellate Tribunal from an order made by the 
Commission or an adjudicated officer with the consent of the parties. 
 
(4) Every appeal under sub -section (1) shall be filed within a period of forty -five 
days from the date on which a copy of the order made by the Chairman of the 
Commission is received by and it shall be in such form and be accompanied by 
such fee as may  be prescribed; Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may 
entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period if it is satisfied that there 
was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period. 
 
3.34  The Government has proposed vide Clause 3 of th e Bill that the Appellate 
Tribunal shall be established under sub -section (l) of section 15K of the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 for adjudicating offences relating to forward trading 

 
 
 
and future trading. Asked about the reasons for not h aving a separate Appellate 
Tribunal for the Forward Markets Commission, the Department informed that the 
provisions to designate Securities Appellate Tribunal (SAT) for the purposes of FCR Act 
have been made to ensure economy, exploit synergy and also to e nsure consistency 
with other regulatory bodies such as the Securities and Exchange Board of India 
(SEBI). Strengthening of the FMC, in the wake of the present amendments, will ensure 
better regulation of the markets, and the need for appeals against FMC or ders may not 
be large.  Hence, SAT can manage the resultant load of appeals. 
 
3.35  The State Government of Gujarat has suggested that for speedy disposal of 
cases, pending with Appellate Tribunal, time limit for disposal of cases needs to be 
fixed. Asked whether any provision has been made in the Bill for disposal of cases in a 
prescribed time limit, the Ministry informed that the proposed amendments in the Act by 
way of insertion of Section 24B provides for appeal to the Appellate Authority against 
the order of the Adjudicating Officer and the sub Section (7) of Section 24B provides 
that the appeal shall be dealt with as expeditiously as possible and finally disposed of 
within six months from the date of receipt of the appeal. 
 
(I)  CLAUSE 35   —   EXEMPTION FROM TAX ON WEALTH AND INCOME 
 
3.37  Section 27 of the Forward Contract (Regulation) Act, 1952 deals with power to 
exempt and states that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, exempt, subject to such conditions and in such  circumstances and in such 
areas as may be specified in the notification, any contract or class of contracts from the 
operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act. 
 
3.38  The Government has proposed that after Section 27 A of the Principal Act, 
Section 27B shall be inserted:- 
 
―27 B. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Wealth –tax Act, 1957, the 
Income-tax Act, 1961, or any other enactment for the time being in force relating 

 
 
 
to tax on wealth, income, profits or gains, the Commission shall not  be liable to 
pay wealth -tax, income -tax or any other tax in respect of their wealth, income, 
profits or gains derived.‖ 
 
3.39 When asked as to why the FMC has been exempted from payment of Tax on 
Wealth, Income and prepaid and others, the Committee was in formed that Presently, it 
is a part of the Government. After the amendment, it would be a regulatory body like 
SEBI and not a commercial enterprise.  SEBI has been exempted from payment of 
wealth-tax, Income-tax or any other tax in respect of its wealth, i ncome, profits or gains 
derived (section 25 of SEBI Act, 1992). 
  
(J)  CLAUSE 37 — POWER TO MAKE RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
3.41 The Government have proposed vide clause 37 of the Bill that after section 28A of 
the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
―28A. (1) The Commission may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, by notification, make regulations consistent with this Act and the 
rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act‖. 

 
 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE  FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON FRIDAY,  
21st JANUARY, 2011 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1615 hrs in Committee Room ‗D‘ (Ground 
Floor), Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar -       Chairman 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
3. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
4. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
6. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
7. ShriLal Chand Kataria 
8. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
9. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
10. Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
11. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
12. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
13. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
14. Shri Sanjay Raut  
15. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P.K.Misra  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 

 
 
 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 
 
At the outset, Hon‘ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the 
Department of Consumer Affairs to the sitting of the Committee convened for briefing by 
the representatives of the Department on ―The Forward Contracts (Regulation) 
Amendment Bill, 2010 and apprised them of the provisions of Directions 55(1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker.  In his opening remarks, Hon‘ble Chairman desired that the 
Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs might enlighten the Committee about the 
salient features, aims and objectives of the Bill, the major weaknesses/shortcomings of 
the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, major stakeholders of the Bill, the volume 
and value of futures trading in the country and the status of implementation of the 
recommendations of the Committee contained in their 17 th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on 
the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2006 etc.  Thereafter, the 
representatives of the Department of Consumer Affairs made a power -point 
presentation regarding the salient features of the Bill to the Committee.  The following 
points emerged during the deliberation of the Committee:- 
(i) Need to make the future markets transparent and efficient  
(ii) Need to have an efficient and transparent price discovery mechanism 
which will benefit the farmers 
(iii) Need to create awareness amongst farmers to prevent them from 
exploitation. 
(iv) Effect of future trading on Price rise of Essential Commodities. 
(v) Direct involvement of farmers in forward trading of commercial crops. 
(vi) Forward trading and black-marketing. 
Representatives of the Department of Consumer Affairs 
      Sl No. Name  Designation  
1. Shri Rajeev Agarwal                      Secretary(Consumer Affairs) 
2. Shri B.C. Khatua Chairman (FMC) 
3. Dr. Kewal Ram Sr. Economic Advisor 
4. Shri Brij Mohan Director 

 
 
 
(vii) Amplification of powers of Chairman and Board of members and their 
regulatory rights. 
(viii) Administrative and financial autonomy of Forward Market Commission on  
the lines of SEBI. 
2. The representatives of the Department of Consumers Affairs replied to the 
various queries raised by the Members during the course of briefing. 
 
3. The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before them and 
sharing their views with the Committee. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceeding has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
__________ 
 

 
 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON FRIDAY, THE              
25th MARCH, 2011 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs .in Committee Room ‗B‘, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
        PRESENT 
      Shri Vilas Muttemwar - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
3. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
4. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
5. Shri Lal Chand Kataria  
6. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
7. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
9. Shri Lalhming Liana 
10. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
11. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
12. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
13. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.K.Misra   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma  - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 

 
 
 
 
(a) Representatives of the Confederation Indian Industry(CII):- 
 
1. Shri Jignesh Shah          - Chairman, CII National Committee on                          
      Commodities Markets & vice Chairman,       
                                              Multi Commodities Exchange of India Limited 
 
2. Shri R. Ramaseshan     -     MD &CEO, National Commodity and Derivatives
       Exchange Ltd (NCDEX) 
3. Shri D.K. Aggarwal            -   Chairman & MD, SMC Comtrade Ltd.  
4. Shri Ashok Aggarwal -     MD, Globe Capitals Markets Ltd. 
5. Shri Shiv Kumar Goel        -    Co-Founder, Bonanza Online 
6. Shri Sunil Khairnar             -    Director, Financial Technologies India Ltd 
7. Shri G Srivastava                -    Dirctor & Head – Financial Services, CII. 
8. Shri Shreeram Lakshman   -     Deputy Director (CII) 
 
(b)  Representatives of the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & 
Industry (FICCI):- 
 
1 Shri Lamon Rutten              -    MD & CEO, Mullti Commodity Exchange of  
                     India Ltd. (MCX),  Mumbai 
 2 Shri R. Ramaseshan           -    MD &CEO,    National     Commodity    and  
          Derivatives Exchange Ltd (NCDEX) 
 
(c) 
 
1. 
 Representatives of the Sarthak Advocates & solicitors:- 
 
Shri Abhishek Tripathi       -   Advocate 
 
2. 
3. 
Shri Ashish Porwal        -   Advocate 
Kum. Sudeshna Chatterjee      -   Advocate 
(d) 
1. 
2. 
Representatives of the PRS Legislative Research:- 
Dr. M. R. Madhavan                -     Head of Research 
 Kum. Sana Gangwani       -     Analyst 
 
1.  At the outset, Hon‘ble Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting 
convened for hearing the views of the representatives of CII, FICCI, Sarthak 
Advocates & solicitors and PRS Legislative Research on the Forward Contracts 
(Regulation) amendment Bill, 2010. Before the representatives of the 

 
 
 
organizations/institutions were called, the Committee briefly discussed the letter 
received from the Chief Secretary,  Government of Rajasthan wherein he expressed 
his regret for not appearing before the Committee without obtaining prior permission 
of the Chairman during their visit to Udaipur from 8 th to 9 th February, 2011. The 
Committee, however, expressed their anguish  and displeasure and desired that the 
Chief Secretary be conveyed that care should be taken to avoid such incidence in 
future and he shall have to appear before the Committee for discussion on any 
subject if and when the Committee so desires. 
 
2.  Thereafter, Hon‘ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the 
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce 
and Industry (FICCI), Sarthak Advocates & solicitors, PRS Legislative Research to 
the sitting of the Committee convened for taking their views on the Forward 
Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2010. In his opening remarks the Hon‘ble 
Chairman requested the representatives of the above mentioned 
organizations/institutions to give their candid opinion & views on the vario us 
provisions of the Bill, particularly the issues relating to giving full autonomy to the 
Forward Market Commissions, raising the number of members of FMC from 4 to 9, 
corporatization and demutualization of existing commodity exchanges, Provision for 
clearing corporation, registration of members and intermediaries, enhancement of 
penal provisions, provisions relating to the Appellate Tribunal and appeal to the 
Supreme Court, permitting trading in options in goods or commodity derivatives, etc. 
 
3. Thereafter, the representatives after introducing themselves one by one, placed 
before the Committee their considered views on the various issues raised by Hon‘ble 
Chairman in his opening remarks. Some of the important issues that emerged during 
the course of deliberation are as follows:- 
 
(i) Need for granting greater autonomy to the FMCs as a market regulator 
and its effects; 
(ii) Need for creating infrastructure like godowns and cold storage facilities; 

 
 
 
(iii) Creating awareness among the farmers for greater participation in futur es 
market and for getting price signals; 
(iv) Making the FMC a strong body for regulating the intermediaries, deciding 
the price mechanism & training the farmers; 
(v) Provisions required for facilitating international trade; and 
(vi) Exempting the FMCs from taxation, etc. 
  
4. The members of the Committee also raised supplementary queries on the 
various provisions of the bill which were explained by the representatives of the above 
mentioned organizations/ institutions to their satisfaction. 
 
5. The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee.  
 
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been kept 
on records. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
------------- 

 
 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING  COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON TUESDAY, THE             
26th JULY, 2011 
 
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1500 hrs. in Committee Room ‗C‘, Ground 
floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik, M.P. (RS)  -  Acting Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
3. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
4. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
5. Shri Lal Chand Kataria 
6. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
7. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
8. Shri Sukhdeo Singh Libra 
9. Shri Sohan Potai  
10. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
12. Shri Lalhming Liana 
13. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
14. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
15. Shri Sanjay Raut                                                                                                                                                                     
16. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.K.Misra - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Khakhai Zou - Under Secretary 

 
 
 
2.  Hon‘ble Members were informed by Joint Secretary that a telephonic 
message was received from Hon'ble Chair man stating that he would not be able to 
attend the sitting. Hon'ble Members were therefore requested to choose another 
member to act as Chairman for the sitting. Accordingly, Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
was unanimously chosen to preside over the meeting by  the Members present, in terms 
of Rule 258 (3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
Thereafter, the acting Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to discuss/consider the replies to the list of poin ts on various provisions of the 
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2010 as received from the Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance as well as the views/suggestions received from 
the General Public on the Bill. 
 
3. In his welcome address,  the acting Chairman mentioned, inter -alia, that the 
Hon'ble Speaker referred the Bill to this Standing Committee on 16th December, 2010 
for examination and report within three months. Accordingly, the Committee has held 
three sittings in connection with t he examination of the Bill i.e. on 21st January, 9th and 
25th March, 2011. The Committee also discussed the various provisions of the Bill with 
the Officials of the State Governments of Rajasthan, Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh 
during their study visit to Udai pur, Ahmedabad and Hyderabad from 8 to 12 February, 
2011. As the Committee could not complete the examination of the Bill within three 
months period that expired on 15th March, 2011, Hon'ble Speaker had kindly granted 
extension of time to submit the report  on the Bill to the Parliament till the end of the 
Monsoon Session of Parliament. 
 
4. The Committee thereafter considered the views/suggestions furnished by the 
M/o Finance and the Planning Commission on the Bill. They also considered the views 
of the general  public and various stakeholders, furnished in response to the press 
release given in the leading newspapers. Considering the complexity of the Bill and its 
wide implication on the public at large, the Committee desired to hear the views of some 
more State  governments, National Commodity Exchanges/Institutions, etc. and 

 
 
 
thereafter take the final evidence of the representatives of the Department of Consumer 
Affairs and Forward Market Commission before preparing a Report on the BIll. 
 
5. As it was not possible t o complete the examination of the Bill and present 
Report thereon to the Parliament by the end of the Monsoon Session, the Committee 
decided to seek further extension of time to present the Report to the Parliament till the 
Winter Session of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
********* 

 
 
 
ANNEXURE-IV 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON MONDAY, THE             
12th DECEMBER, 2011 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Co mmittee Room 'E', 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar  - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
3. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
4. Shri Lal Chand Kataria 
5. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
6. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
7. Shri Sohan Potai 
8. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
9. Shri Ramkishun 
10. Shri Chandulal Sahu 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
12. Shri Sanjay Raut 
13. Dr. T. N. Seema 
14. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.K.Misra   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma  - Director 
3. Ms. Amita Walia   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 

 
 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
 
1.  Shri Rajeev Agarwal  - Secretary 
2. Smt. Ganga Murthy   - Principal advisor 
3. Shri Ramesh Abhishek  - Chairman (FMC) 
4. Shri Brij Mohan   - Director 
5. Shri M. P. Krishnan   - Deputy Director (FMC) 
 
1. At the outset, Hon‘ble Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to take oral evidence of the representatives o f the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) in 
connection with examination of 'The Forward Contract (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 
2010'. Thereafter Secretary and other officials of the Department of Cons umer Affairs 
were invited to the sitting. After their welcome, the Chairman apprised them of the 
provisions of Direction 55(1) of The Directions by the Speaker.  
 
2. Hon‘ble Chairman then requested the representatives of the Department to 
explain the specific  issues that the Amendment Bill seeks to address, particularly the 
reasons for giving full autonomy to FMC, limiting the size of the transaction by the 
Commodity Exchange, implications of Commodity Futures Market opening to financial 
players like Banks, In surance Company etc, enhancement of penal provisions, 
provisions relating to the Appellate Tribunal and appeal to the Supreme Court, 
permitting trading in options in goods or commodity derivatives etc.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Secretary, Department of Consumer Af fairs explained the various 
issues raised by the Hon'ble Chairman. His replies were supplemented by the 
Chairman, FMC. The supplementary queries of the Members of the Committee were 
also responded to by the representatives of the Department.  
 
4. Some of the main issues that emerged during the deliberations of the Committee 
were as follows:- 
 

 
 
 
(i) Reasons for giving full autonomy to the Forward Markets 
Commission; 
(ii) Reasons for the exclusion of the term 'option in good' from the 
definition of Commodity Derivatives; 
(iii) Need for permitting trading in 'options in goods' ; 
(iv) Need to enhance the publicity awareness campaign being taken up 
by the Department, especially through the local language in the 
electronic media and periodic publications of magazines etc; 
(v) Need for enough provisions in the proposed Bill to take care of the 
interest of Regional Commodity Exchanges vis -à-vis the National 
Commodity Exchanges etc; 
  
5. The Hon‘ble Chairman then thanked the Secretary and other representatives of 
the Department of Consumer Affair s for their free and frank discussion while tendering 
evidence before the Committee.  The Committee also decided to convene the next 
sitting on 16th December, 2011 for consideration and adoption of the draft report on the 
"Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2010". 
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
 
 
ANNEXURE-V 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON FRIDAY, THE               
16th DECEMBER, 2011 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room ‗D‘, Ground 
floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar     -     Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
4. Shri Lal Chand Kataria 
5. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
6. Shri Ramkishun 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
7. Shri Lalhming Liana 
8. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
9. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.K.Misra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma  - Director 
3. Ms. Amita Walia - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‘ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the draft Report on 'The 
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bil l, 2010' pertaining to the Department of 
Consumer Affairs.  
3. Hon‘ble Chairman, then read out a letter addressed to him by                        
Shri Prabodh Panda, a Member of the Committee in the context of the Report under 
consideration. He directed t he Secretariat to examine the points raised by the member 

 
 
 
and submit factual comments vis-à-vis the draft Report. The Committee then decided to 
convene the next sitting on 19 th December, 2011 to consider the points raised in the 
light of the facts and then consider the draft Report for adoption. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
********* 

 
 
 
ANNEXURE-VI 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON MONDAY, THE             
19th DECEMBER, 2011 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs. in Chairman's Room No. 115 -A, First 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  Shri Vilas Muttemwar     -     Chairman 
  MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.   Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
3.   Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
4.   Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
5.   Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
6.   Shri Lal Chand Kataria 
7.   Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
8.   Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
9.   Shri Sohan Potai 
10.   Shri Purnmasi Ram 
11.   Shri Ramkishun 
12.   Shri Chandulal Sahu 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
13.   Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
14.   Shri Lalhming Liana 
15.   Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
16.   Dr. T. N. Seema 
17.   Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 

 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.    Shri P.K.Misra  - Joint Secretary 
2.   Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3.   Ms. Amita Walia  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‘ble Chairman welcomed the Member s to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the draft Report on 'The 
Forward Contract (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2010' pertaining to the Department of 
Consumer Affairs.  
3. Hon‘ble Chairman, then mentioned that at the sit ting of the Committee held on 
16th December, 2011 for consideration and adoption of the draft Report on the 'The 
Forward Contract (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2010', he had read out a letter 
addressed to him by Shri Prabodh Panda, a member of the Committee  in context of the 
Report under consideration and had directed the Secretariat to submit factual 
comments on the points raised in the letter vis-à-vis the draft Report for consideration of 
the Committee at their next sitting to be held on 19 th December, 2011 for consideration 
and adoption of the draft Report on the aforementioned Bill in the light of the points 
raised by Shri Prabodh Panda. 
4. Hon‘ble Chairman, then read out the factual comments furnished by the 
Secretariat on the points raised in the lette r of Shri Prabodh Panda. He also read out 
the amendment proposed to be made to the relevant recommendation in the light of the 
suggestions given by Shri Prabodh Panda. After some deliberations, the draft Report 
was adopted without any amendment. However, t wo other members namely Dr. Ram 
Chandra Dome (Lok Sabha) and Dr. T. N. Seema (Rajya Sabha) gave their letters of 
dissent to the Report. The Committee decided to append the letters of dissent to the 
Report. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to fina lize the aforesaid Report 
and present the same to the Parliament during the ongoing Winter Session of 
Parliament. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 *********  
 