 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2011-12) 
   
 FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA  
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
 
WAREHOUSING CORPORATIONS  
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011 
 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
AUGUST, 2012/  BHADRAPADA, 1934(Saka) 
 
(i) 
23 


 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER  
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2011-12) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
WAREHOUSING CORPORATIONS  
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011 
 
 
     Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.08.2012  
            Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.08.2012 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI  
 
 
August, 2012/  Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka) 
 
(ii) 

 
CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE……………                    
INTRODUCTION………………………………………….      
REPORT 
Chapter I
  
Introductory………………………….. 
A. Background………………………. 
B. Need for Amendment in the Warehousing Corporations Act, 
1962 
C. Objectives of the Warehousing Corporations (Amendment) 
Bill, 2011 
D. Process of Consultations held by the CWC 
E. Process of Consultations held by the Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter II A.  Amendment of Section 5 of the Act 
B.  Amendment of Section 27 of the Act 
 
Chapter III Amendment of Section 39 of the Act.  
 APPENDICES  
I The Warehousing Corporations (Amendment) Bill, 2011  
II The Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962  
 ANNEXURES  
I Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 06.06.2012…..  
II Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 18.07.2012…..  
III Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 28.08.2012  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2011-12. 
 
 Shri Vilas Muttemwar    - Chairman      
 
  MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Jaywant Gangaram Awale** 
3. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal% 
4. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
5. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
6. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary  
7. Shri Sanjay Dhotre  
8. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome  
9. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
10. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav**   
11. Shri Lal Chand Kataria  
12. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase  
13. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
14. Shri Prabodh Panda  
15. Shri Sohan Potai 
16. Shri Purnmasi Ram  
17. Shri Ramkishun 
18. Shri Chandulal Sahu (Chandu Bhaiya) 
19. Dr. Naramalli Sivaprasad* 
20. Shri E.G. Sugavanam$ 
21. Smt. Usha Verma**  
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
23. Dr. M.S. Gill 
24. Shri Vivek Gupta@@ 
25. Shri P. Kannan 
26. Shri Lalhming Liana 
27. Shri Sanjay Raut 
28. Ms. Rekha ## 
29. Dr. T.N. Seema 
30. Shri Veer Singh 
31. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki# and @ 
___________________________________________________________ 
*    Nominated w.e.f. 25.11.2011 
**  Nominated w.e.f. 03.01.2012 
$   Nominated w.e.f. 12.04.2012 
#  Vice Shri  Kanjibhai Patel, Shri   Rajniti   Prasad and Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki retired from Rajya      Sabha 
w.e.f. 02.04.2012. 
@  Nominated w.e.f. 04.05.2012. 
@@  Nominated w.e.f. 22.05.2012. 
% Nominated w.e.f. 28.06.2012. 
##  Nominated w.e.f. 11.07.2012 
(iv) 

 
 
 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
  
 1.  Shri P.K. Misra   - Joint Secretary 
 2.  Smt. Veena Sharma   - Director 
        3.  Smt. Darshna Gulati Khanduja  - Senior Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
   
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution (2011 -12) having been authorized by the Comm ittee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Twenty -third Report on “The Warehousing 
Corporations (Amendment) Bill, 2011” pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
 
2.  The Warehousing Corporations (Amendment) Bill, 2011 was introduced in        
Lok Sabha on 8 th December, 2011 and was referred to the Standing Committee on 
Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution by the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha 
under Rule 331 E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha on 
5th January, 2012 for examination and report to Parliament.  
 
3. The Bill seeks to provide financial and operational autonomy to Central 
Warehousing Corporation, a profit making CPSE, identified as a Mini-Ratna (Category – 
I) by DPE, by deleting sub -section (1) of Section 5 of the Warehousing Corporations 
Act, 1962, thereby withdrawing the Government Guarantee and absolving the Central 
Government of its responsibility of being guarantor.  
 
4. The Committee obtained written information on various provisions contained in 
the Bill from the Nodal Ministry i.e. the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution). The preliminary meeting of 
the Committee was held on 6th June, 2012 wherein the Committee was briefed about 
the various provisions of the Bill by the Nodal Ministry.  
 
5. The Committee invited the views/suggestions of the 
Individuals/Institutions/Stakeholders etc. on the various prov isions of the Bill.  The 
Committee obtained and considered the views/suggestions of the Ministry of Finance, 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Heavy 
Industries & Public Enterprises. The Committee also obtained the views/suggestions of  

 
 
various nationalized banks such as UCO Bank, Bank of Baroda, State Bank of Mysore, 
State Bank of India, Indian Overseas Bank and Central Bank of India. Besides, the 
views/suggestions of FCI, various State Warehousing Corporations, LIC , National 
Insurance Company Ltd., The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. and STC were also 
obtained. The representatives of the Department of Food and Public Distribution 
tendered oral evidence and gave clarification on the various provisions of the Bill bef ore 
the Committee at its sittings held on 18th July, 2012. The Committee considered and 
adopted the draft Report on the Bill at their sitting held on 28th August, 2012. 
  
6.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the various above mentioned 
Ministries/Individuals/Institutions/Organizations/State Warehousing Corporations etc. 
who furnished their valuable views/suggestions on the provisions of the Bill to the 
Committee. 
 
7.  The Committee also express their thanks to the representatives of Ministry of  
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution) for tendering evidence before the Committee and for furnishing the detailed 
information/material, desired in connection with the examination of the Bill. 
 
8.  For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/ recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
  
 
   New Delhi                  VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
         August, 2012                          Chairman, 
  Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka)                      Standing Committee on Food,  
                                                            Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution  
 
 
 
 
(vii) 

 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
A. BACKGROUND 
 
Central Warehousing Corp oration (CWC) was set up on 2nd March, 1957 under 
the Agricultural produce Development and Warehousing Corporation Act, 1956 which was 
subsequently replaced by Warehousing Corporation Act, 1962. The Warehousing 
Corporation Act, 1962 was enacted to provide for the incorporation and regulation of the 
Central Warehousing Corporation for the purpose of warehousing of Agricultural produce 
and certain other commodities and for matters connected therewith.   
 
1.2 The Central Warehousing Corporation established und er the said Act is a profit 
earning Public Sector Enterprise under the administrative control of the Department of 
Food and Public Distributio n. It has an authorized capital of Rs. 100 crore and paid up 
share capital of Rs. 68.02 crore.   
 
1.3 As informed by the Department of Food and Public Distribution, the functions of 
CWC are :- 
(a) To acquire, build and run warehouses in India and abroad for storage of 
agricultural inputs and produce and other notified commodities. 
(b) To provide facilities for Handlin g and Transportation of stocks to and from 
warehouses. 
 (c) To create infrastructure facilities for EXIM trade. 
(d) To act as agent of Government/Companies/Body Corporates for the 
purpose of purchase, sale, storage, distribution of stocks. 
(e) To provide Disinfestation and Pest Control services outside its warehouses.  
 (f) To provide Consultancy services in related fields. 
 
 

 
 
B. NEED FOR AMENDMENT IN THE WAREHOUSING CORPORATION S ACT, 
1962 
 
1.4  The Department of Food and Public Distribution has informed that with a view to 
providing financial and operational autonomy to the CWC, which is a profit making 
CPSE; it was identified as a Mini-Ratna (Category I) Enterprise as it fulfilled the criteria 
laid down by the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) for the purpose.  
 
The criteria for grant of Mini-Ratna Category-I Status to a CPSE is as follows:- 
(a) CPSE should have made profit for the last three years continuously. 
(b) Earned pre-tax profit of Rs. 30 crore or more in at least one of the three years 
and has a positive net worth. 
(c) Should not have defaulted in the repayment of loans or interest payment on 
any loans due to the Government. 
(d) CPSE should not depend upon budgetary support or Government guarantees 
except in special circumstances e.g. stipulations of external  donor agencies 
or budgetary support to implement Government sponsored projects. 
(e) The Board should include at least three non -official Directors in order to 
exercise enhanced delegation of authority. 
 
1.5 The Committee were informed that CWC meets the criteria for Mini-Ratna Status, 
in view of the following:- 
(a) CWC has been making profit since 1966-67. 
(b) CWC has made pre -tax profit of Rs. 30 crore or more since 1987 -88 and has 
positive net worth since inception. 
(c) CWC has not obtained any loan from the Government and there has been no 
default in repayment or loan or any interest payment on any loans due to the 
Government. 
(d) It is not dependent on any budgetary support or Government Guarantee for 
its operations or expansion. 

 
(e) The Board of Directors of CWC include three  non-official Directors since 
30.06.2010 to enable it to exercise enhanced delegation of authority. 
 
1.6 Department of Public Enterprise (DPE) agreed to  the proposal for grant of Mini-
Ratna powers to CWC subject to the condition that the Department of Food  and Public 
Distribution will delete section 5(1) of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 which 
stipulates that the shares of CWC shall be guaranteed by the Central Government as to 
the repayment of the principal and the payment of the annual dividend at  such minimum 
rate as may be fixed by the Central Government, by notification published in the Official 
Gazette, at the time of the issue of the shares. 
 
1.7 Justifying the need for award of Mini-Ratna Status to CWC, the Secretary, 
Department of Food and P ublic Distribution, while deposing before the Committee , 
stated as under:-  
'The Corporation, therefore, qualifies for the status of Mini-Ratna category. 
It qualified for this status in 1999 itself. The Mini -Ratna status will enable 
the Corporation to exer cise financial and operational autonomy for 
incurring capital expenditure, formation of joint ventures, subsidiaries and 
also HRD management powers , etc. However, the Corporation has not 
been able to use this status because of this guarantee in section 5 (1).' 
 
C.  OBJECTIVES OF THE WAREHOUSING CORPORATIONS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2011 
 
1.8 As per the Statement of Objects and Reasons, one of the essential criteria for 
award of Mini -Ratna status to a Central Public Sector Enterprise is that no financial 
support or  contingent liability on the part of the Government should be involved in 
respect of that enterprise and that it should also not depend upon any budgetary 
support or Government guarantee. 
 
1.9 The Central Warehousing Corporation has consistently paid divid end to the 
Government of India since 1957-58. The net worth of the Corporation has been positive 
from 2003 onwards. The Corporation has not taken any loan from the Central 

 
Government. It is also not dependent upon budgetary support of the Government. 
Moreover, the Government has so far given no other guarantee to the Corporation 
except for the payment of minimum guaranteed dividend as required under sub -section 
(1) of section 5 of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962. Hence, the said section 5 of 
the Act is proposed to be suitably revised with consequential changes in sections 27, 
30, 31 and 39 thereof. The guarantee referred to in the said sub -section (1) of section 5 
would be withdrawn and the Central Government would be absolved of its responsibility 
of being guarantor. 
 The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.  
 
D. PROCESS OF CONSULTATIONS HELD BY THE CWC WHILE BRINGING 
THE AMENDMENT TO THE WAREHOUSING CORPORATION ACT, 1962. 
 
1.10 The Department of Food and Public Distribution have explained in deta il the 
process of consultations held by CWC while bringing the proposed amendments  to the 
Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 which are given as under:-  
 
Department of Legal Affairs was consulted in the mat ter, on the proposal to 
delete section 5 (1) of the CWC Act, 1962 subject to vetting and consequential changes. 
It was proposed to make consequential amendments in sections 27(4), 30(2), 31(8) and 
39 of the Act. Legislative department also did not find any legal and constitutional 
objection to the aforesaid amendments and agreed to the same. The draft Cabinet note 
was prepared and circulated to the Department of Public Enterprises, Department of 
Expenditure, Planning Commission, Department of Revenue, Department of 
Commerce, Department of Economic Affairs  and Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation on 9th April, 2009. 
 
Department of Expenditure, Planning Commission, Department of Commerce, 
Department of Economic Affairs and Department of Agriculture and Cooperation 
conveyed their no objection to the prop osal. Department of Revenue stated that they 
had no comments to offer. Department of Public Enterprises stated that they had no 
objection to the proposal provided it did not affect the interests of other shareholders of 

 
CWC and also the functioning and ope rations of CWC. In view of the observations of 
Department of Public Enterprises, the matter was referred to CWC which informed that 
the matter was placed before the Annual General Meeting of shareholders of CWC held 
on 12th September, 2009 for ratification s and the General Body ratified the same, 
stating that it does not affect the interests of the shareholders and also the functioning 
and operations of CWC. 
 
As per Cabinet Secretariat's instructions for preparation of Notes for Cabinet, 
after the Minister -in-charge of a Department/Ministry has approved a note for 
submission to the Cabinet or any cabinet Committee chaired by the Prime Minister, a 
copy of the note would be forwarded to the Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister 
immediately and thereafter, comments/advice of the PMO awaited for seven working 
days. Accordingly, the Cabinet Note was also sent to Prime Minister's Office (PMO) on 
22.3.2011 with the approval of Hon'ble Minister of State (Independent Charge) for 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public D istribution. The PMO has not furnished any 
comment.  
The Cabinet note was approved by Hon'ble MOS (CAF&PD) (IC) on 18th March, 
2011 and forwarded to Cabinet Secretariat 27th April, 2011. A meeting of the Cabinet 
was held on 2nd June, 2011 in Panchavati, 7 Race Course Road, New Delhi to consider 
the case. Cabinet Secretariat vide their communication dated 8th June, 2011 have 
forwarded the minutes of the meeting approving the proposal. The same was sent to 
Legislative Department for advice. Legislative Depart ment advised to prepare a 
Statement of Objects and Reasons and a Financial Memorandum in respect of the Bill 
for vetting.  
It was further stated that as advised by Legislative Department, the Statement of 
Objects and Reasons, Financial Memorandum alongwith  a Notice of Introduction of Bill 
in Lok Sabha is submitted and the Hon'ble Minister (CA, F&PD) approved the same. 
The same was sent to Legislative Department to enable them to transmit the proofs of 
the Bill to the Lok Sabha Secretariat. 
Legislative Department vide their OM dated 17th August, 2011 had forwarded the 
corrected proof copies of a Bill (English and Hindi version) to Lok Sabha Secretariat to 

 
amend the WC Act, 1962 which was proposed to be introduced during the Eleventh 
Session of 15th Lok Sabha and endorsed a copy to this Department.  The Lok Sabha 
Secretariat referring to the proposed proviso to Section 39 had advised that the bill will 
need President's recommendations for introduction and consideration in Lok Sabha 
Secretariat. 
The recommen dations of the President under a rticle 274(1) of the 
Constitution for the introduction and consideration of the above said Bill in Lok 
Sabha was obtained and the same was conveyed to the Lok Sabha Secretariat. 
Accordingly, the said Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 8th December, 2011. 
The Bill as introduced in Lok Sabha by Hon'ble Minister was referred to 
the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution on 
5th January, 2012 by the Speaker for examination and report.  
 
E. CONSULTATIONS H ELD BY THE COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION WHILE EXAMINING THE 
AMENDMENT BILL, 2011. 
 
1.11 The Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
while examining the Amendment Bill invited comments/suggestions from various related 
Central Ministries,  Experts, Associations, Agencies, various Stakeholders such as 
State Warehousing Corporation, Nationalized Banks, Co -operative Societies, Insurance 
Companies, FCI, STC, MMTC, NAFED, IFFCO, KRIBHCO and other financia l 
institutions on this Bill. 
 
1.12 The Committee received comments from various Central Ministries viz. Ministry 
of Finance, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of 
Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises. The Committee als o received comments from 
Nationalized Banks such as State Bank of India, Bank of Baroda, UCO Bank, Indian 
Overseas Bank, Central Bank of India and various insurance companies such as Life 
Insurance Corporation of India, National Insurance Company Ltd. and the Oriental 
Insurance Company Ltd. The Committee also received comments from various State 
Warehousing Corporations, FCI, STC, etc.  

 
Majority of the stakeholders supported the proposed Amendment Bill. However, Bank of 
Baroda in their Memorandum suggested that the Central Government Guarantee should 
be continued for the investment already made till date including the investment to be 
made in future, for the uncalled capital in case of partly paid shares and further desired 
that this Central Government Guara ntee may not be made available/offered for the 
future investments in the Corporation.  
 
1.13 UCO Bank and LIC in their memoranda have not favoured the withdrawal of 
Central Government Guarantee as according to them, it will increase the risk weightage 
of their investment in the shares of the said company.  
 
1.14 When enquired as to how will the Amendment  help the CWC to have financial 
and operational autonomy, t he Committee were informed by the Department of Food 
and Public Distribution that it will entitle CWC to make expenditure as follows:- 
(a) Capital Expenditure – Can incur capital expenditure on new projects, 
modernization, purchase of equipments, etc. without Government approval 
upto Rs. 500 crore or equal to its net worth, whichever is less. 
(b) Formation of Joint Ventures and Subsidiaries – Can establish Joint Ventures 
and Subsidiaries in India with ceiling on equity investment upto 15% of the net 
worth of the PSE in one project limited to Rs. 500 crore. The overall ceiling on 
such investment in all projects  put together shall be 30% of the net worth of 
the PSE.  
 
1.15 The Committee also enquired why it is felt necessary to absolve the Central 
Government from its responsibility of being a guarantor to the Central Warehousing 
Corporation and by doing this, whe ther the Corporation would become free from 
Government Control, the Department in a written reply submitted to the Committee 
stated that CWC is now a consistently profit making enterprise. The following statement 
furnished by the Department of Food and Pub lic Distribution indicates the consistent 
rise in profitability of CWC during the last 5 years:- 
 

 
(Amount in Crore Rs.) 
Particulars 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
Turnover 686.44 776.23 849.25 987.95 1029.55 
Profit before 
Tax (PBT) 
133.80 154.76 110.44 163.88 203.73 
Profit After 
Tax (PAT) 
88.70 136.91 110.46 130.52 136.17 
Dividend 
(%) 
27 30 30 38 40 
Net Worth 1021.77 1080.24 1156.32 1140.50 1232.32 
 
1.16 The Department further stated- 
'Normally in any company investment in shares is not guara nteed for its 
repayment of principal nor for dividend. The mechanism by which Central 
Government exercises control as prescribed under various provisions of 
the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 are not being amended. As 
such, the CWC would not become fre e from Government Control in any 
way. The CWC would only get functional autonomy as available t o a Mini- 
Ratna Category-I CPSE.' 
 
 
1.17 When asked whether it has been ascertained that the proposed amendments in 
the Act will not affect the interest of the s takeholders, the Ministry informed that in the 
47th General Body Meeting held on 12.09.2009, an agenda was placed before the 
shareholders for consideration of the amendment to section 5(1) of the Warehousing 
Corporations Act, 1962 . The same was approved un animously by the shareholders 
present which included tthhee  SSttaattee  BBaannkk  ooff  IInnddiiaa,,  ootthheerr  sscchheedduulleedd  bbaannkkss,,  CCoo--ooppeerraattiivvee  
SSoocciieettiieess,,  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoommppaanniieess,,  IInnvveessttmmeenntt  ttrruussttss  aanndd  ootthheerr  ffiinnaanncciiaall  iinnssttiittuuttiioonnss,,  
rreeccooggnniisseedd  aassssoocciiaattiioonnss  aanndd  ccoommppaanniieess  ddeeaalliinngg  iinn  aaggrriiccuullttuurraall  pprroodduuccee  oorr  aannyy  nnoottiiffiieedd  
ccoommmmooddiittyy..  The proposed amendments do not affect the interests of the shareholders 
as all the activities of CWC and its expansion plans involving capital expenditure are 
met out of its internal resources. CWC is also a consisten tly dividend paying PSE 
following the dividend policy of Govt. of India, paying dividend to its shareholders much 
above the minimum guaranteed dividend prescribed by the Govt.  

 
1.18 When enquired in what way the Amendment Bill will be beneficial to the 
Warehousing Corporation, Central Government and other stakeholders, the Department 
in a written note submitted that t he proposed amendments will remove sections, which 
stand in the way of granting functional autonomy to CWC so as to enable the 
government to d elegate Mini-Ratna Category-I power to CWC relating to capital 
expenditure on new projects, mo dernization, etc. formation of joint ventures / 
subsidiaries, mergers and acquisitions, and human resources management in the 
organization. The enhanced financial  autonomy will result in better growth and physical 
and financial performance of the organization benefiting all the stakeholders. As regards 
the expansion/diversifications plans vis -a-vis the existing storage capacity of CWC , the 
Committee were informed as under:- 
(i) Operational Capacity As on 01.04.2012 
Number of Warehouses 468 
Capacity 
Constructed 
 
71.80 
Hired 10.80 
Open 14.18 
Management 4.07 
Total 100.85 Lakh MT 
Number of Bonded Warehouses 
Capacity 
65 
4.22 Lakh MT 
Number of CFSs/ICDs 36 
Capacity 15.68 Lakh MT 
Air Cargo Complexes 4 
Capacity 7361 MT 
Temprature Controlled Warehoueses 4 
Capacity 2439 MT 
 
(ii) Expansion /Diversification Plans 
(a) Creation of Additional Storage Capacity of 2.10 lakh MT during 2012-13. 
(b) Augmentation of infrastructure for EXIM Trade at Kannur and Ambad (Nasik) 

 
(c) Creation of Storage capacity for Co-operative Societies. 
(d) Creation of Liquid Tank Storage facilities at some of the existing rail connected 
facilities. 
(e) Land Customs Station at Gojadanga (West Bengal) 
(f) Creation of multi -storied warehouses in place of conventional godowns at some 
of the locations. 
(g) Formation of Warehousing Finance Company. 
 

 
 
1.19 The Warehousing Corporations (Amendment) Bill, 2011 as  introduced in 
Lok Sabha on 8th December, 2011 by the Minister of State for Cons umer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution to amend the Warehousing Corporation Act, 1962 
was referred to the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution on 5th January, 2012 for examination and report. The Committee note 
that with a view to providing financial and operational autonomy to CWC, which is 
a profit making CPSE, i t was identified as a Mini-Ratna (Category –I ) Enterprise 
as it fulfilled the criteria laid down by the Department of Public Enterprise (DPE) 
for the purpose. As per the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill, one of 
the essential criteria for award of Mini-Ratna status to a CPSE is that no financial 
support or contingent liability on the part of the Government should be involved 
and that these public sect or enterprises shall not depend upon the budgetary 
support or Government guarantees. The Committee also note that the CWC has 
been consistently paying dividend to the Government of India since 1957 -58 and 
has not taken any loan from the Government nor is d ependent on any budgetary 
support of the Government. Thus, the Bill seeks to withdraw the guarantee 
referred to in sub section (1) of s ection 5 of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 
1962 which stipulates that the shares of CWC shall be guaranteed by the Cen tral 
Government as to the repayment of the principal and the payment of the annual 
dividend at such minimum rate as may be fixed by the Central Government by 
notification published in the Official Gazette, at the time of the issues of the 
shares. The Commi ttee observe that the Government had wide -ranging 
consultations for finalizing the Amendment Bill with various Central Government 

 
Departments/Ministries viz. the Department of Expenditure, Planning 
Commission, Department of Commerce, Department of Economic  Affairs and 
Department of Agriculture & Co -operation, who have no objection to the 
proposal. A majority of the stakeholders also favoured the withdrawal of Central 
Government Guarantee. Keeping in view the importance of the Bill which wi ll 
result in bette r growth/performance of the organization  and help to diversify its 
projects/plans, thus be nefitting all the stakeholders, t he Committee recommend 
the passage of The Warehousing Corporations (Amendment) Bill , 2011 subject to 
their observations and recommend ations contained in the subsequent chapters 
of the Report. 

 
CHAPTER II 
 
(A) CLAUSE 2 — Amendment of section 5 and Deletion of section 5(1) of the 
Principal Act. 
 
The Clause 2 of the Bill proposes to amend s ection 5 of the Warehousing 
Corporations Act, 1962 as under:- 
 
Section 5 (1)of the Warehousing Corporation Act, 1962 provides as 
under:-  
 
The shares of the Central Warehousing Corporation shall be guaranteed by 
the Central Government as to the repayment of the principal and the payment of 
the annual dividend  at such minimum rate as may be fixed by the Central 
Government, by notification published in the Official Gazette, at the time of the 
issue of the shares.  
 
Section 5(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Acts mentioned in this 
sub-section, the shares of the Central Warehousing Corporation shall be deemed 
to be included among the securities enumerated in section 20 of the Indian 
Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882), and also to be approved securities for the purpose 
of the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938) and the Banking Companies Act, 1949 (10 
of 1949).' 
 
The Government in Clause (2) of the Bill proposes to delete section 5(1) of 
the Warehousing Corporation Act, 1962 and for section 5 (2) of the Warehousing 
Corporation Act, 1962, the following shall be substituted, namely:- 
 
'5. 'Notwithstanding anything contained in the Acts mentioned in this 
section, the shares of the Central Warehousing Corporation shall be 
deemed to be included among others securities enumerated in section 20 
of the Indian Trusts Act, 188 2, and also to be approved securities for the 
purpose of the Insurance Act, 1938 and the Banking Regulation Act, 
1949.' 
 
In their written submission to the Committee, the Department of Food and 
Public Distribution stated :-  
In order to encourage investmen t in the equity of the Central 
Warehousing Corporation, the Government decided to guarantee for 

 
payment of principal amount and m inimum dividend thereon as per 
section 5(1) of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962.  
 
 
The Department also stated that – 
 
'The intention of extending guarantee at the time of enactment was to 
attract investment from various stakeholders in the shares of the 
Corporation with minimal risk. The situation has changed totally. 
Investment in shares of CWC is not risky any more.'  
 
2.2 Department of Public Enterprise ( DPE) agreed to the proposal for grant of Mini-
Ratna powers to CWC subject to the condition that the Department of Food and P ublic 
Distribution will delete s ection 5(1) of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 which 
stipulates that the shares of CWC shall be guaranteed by the Central Government as to 
the repayment of the principal and the payment of the annual dividend at such minimum 
rate as may be fixed by the Central Government by notification published in the Official 
Gazette, at the time of the issue of the shares.  
2.3 It was brought to the notice of the Committee by Bank of Baroda that the 
investment by the Bank in the Corporation as fully or partly paid shares is having SLR 
Status and if the Central Government guara ntee is withdrawn, the investment will lose  
the SLR Status. They, therefore, suggested that Central Government Guarantee should 
be continued for the investment already made till date, including the investment to be 
made in future for the uncalled capital i n case of partly paid shares and this Central 
Government Guarantee may not be made available/offered for future investment.  
2.4 Asked to comment on the above suggestion of Bank of Baroda, the Ministry 
stated as under:- 
'CWC was conferred Mini-Ratna Status way back in 1999. However, the Mini 
Ratna powers could not be delegated to it in view of the Government Guarantee 
provided under Section 5(1) of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 for 
payment of dividend on CWC shares. 
The Statutory Liquidity Ratio (S LR) is the amount of liquidity ratio such as cash, 
precious metals or other approved securities that a financial institution must 
maintain in its reserves. 

 
CWC is a consistently profit making and dividend paying PSU. It is paying 
dividend at a rate much higher than the guaranteed rate of dividend (i.e. 3.5% for 
the shares issued up to 26th March, 1977 and @ 5.5% for the shares issued up 
to 23rd July, 1986). Therefore, the provision under Section 5(1) of the 
Warehousing Corporation Act, 1962 towards guarante ed dividend is not 
required.' 
2.5 The following Statement indicates the dividend paid by CWC during the past 5 
years :- 
Sl.  
No. 
Year  Rate of Dividend  Dividend paid to the Central Government 
(Rs. in lakh) 
1. 2006-07 27% 1010.47 
2. 2007-08 30% 1122.75 
3. 2008-09 30% 1122.75 
4. 2009-10 38% 1422.15 
5. 2010-11 40% 1497.00 
 
 
2.6 The Committee pointed out that  SBI, that have around 21% equity holding in the 
CWC for 175439 shares have apprehended that the shares presently guaranteed by the 
Central Government and qualify as approved securities as per Banking Company Act, 
1949 may lose the status of approved securities consequent upon withdrawal of 
Government Guarantee  and asked to comment , the Ministry stated that Section 5 as 
stated in Clause 2 of the propo sed amendment bill provides that 'Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Acts mentioned in this section, the shares of the Central 
Warehousing Corporation shall be deemed to be included among other securities 
enumerated in section 20 of the Indian Trust  Act, 1938 and the Banking Regulation Act, 
1949.' 
2.7 The section 5 of the Banking Regulations Act, 1949 defines approved securities 
as under:- 

 
''approved securities means – (i) securities in which a trustee may invest money 
under clause (a), clause (bb), clause (c) or clause (d) of section 20 of the Indian Trusts 
Act, 1882 (2 of 1882); 
(ii) such of the securities authorized by the Central Government under clause (f) 
of section 20 of the Indian Trust Act, 1882 (2 of 1882), as may be prescribed. 
Therefore, the SBI shareholding in the equity of CWC shall continue to qualify as 
approved security as per Banking Regulations Act, 1949. 
2.8 The Committee further asked the Ministry to comment on the apprehension of 
SBI that  the investment of the SBI would be exposed  to credit risk and would attract 
capital charge corresponding to the risk -weight mapped to the rating of the investment. 
The Ministry in reply stated that the fears of the SBI are unfounded in view of section 
5(1) of the Warehousing Corporations (Amendmen t) Bill, 2011 which makes the shares 
of CWC as approved security. Moreover, the Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC) 
is a profitable PSU and declaring handsome dividend to its shareholders and 
investment in its shares yield good returns.  
2.9 The Committe e observed that as  the CWC is an unlisted company, the 
investment of the company is illiquid. Further, the restrictions on transfer of the shares 
of the investors as per Section 4(4) of The Warehousing Corporations Act  makes exit 
even more difficult. When asked to comment, the Ministry stated that though the shares 
of CWC are unlisted but as per section 4(4) of Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962, the 
shares are transferable to the existing shareholders. Hence, CWC's shares are not 
illiquid as the same are t ransferable to the existing shareholders. Further, the CWC has 
been regularly declaring handsome dividend to its shareholders for the last so many 
years, no shareholder would like to part with such shares. However, SBI has a right to 
exit by transferring i ts shares to other existing shareholders who will be happy to buy 
the same. In this context, the Ministry also stated that the proposal of amending the Act 
was supported by the repr esentative Director of State Bank of India, when the proposal 
was considered by the Board of Directors of CWC.  
2.10 When asked whether the corporation offers a 'Buy Back' of the shares on 
mutually acceptable terms or alternatively makes arrangements to list the shares on the 
bourses so that the investor is given an opportunity t o redeem the investment, the 

 
Ministry informed that there is no provision in the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 
for 'Buy Back' of the shares or for listing of shares on the Stock Exchange. However, the 
shares are transferable to the existing shareholde rs as per section 4(4) of the 
Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962, which gives an opportunity to the investors to 
redeem their investment.  

 
 
2.11 The Committee observe that to encourage investment in the equity of the 
CWC, the Government decided to guarant ee for payment of principal amount and 
the m inimum dividend thereon as per s ection 5(1) of the Warehousing 
Corporation Act, 1962. As informed by t he Secretary, Department of Food and 
Public Distribution during eviden ce, the C orporation has been consistentl y 
making profits since 1966-67 and continuously paying dividend at a very high rate 
to the shareholders. The Corporation is also carrying out all its 
operations/expansions from internally generated resources without any 
budgetary support from Government of  India. Taking into consideration all such 
factors, the Department of Public Enterprises (D PE) has identified it as a Mini-
Ratna (Category – I) Enterprise. For award of Mini-Ratna Status to a Central 
Public Sector Enterprise, no financial support or contingent liability on the part of 
the Government should be involved in respect of that enterprise and that can be 
achieved by deleti ng the s ection 5(1) of the Act, thereby withdrawing the 
Government Guarantee for payment of dividend on CWC shares. The Committee 
feel that as the Corporation  is a profit making organization since 1966 -67 and 
consistently dividend paying PSU , that too at a rate much higher than the 
guaranteed rate of dividend, the provision under Section 5(1) of the Warehousing 
Corporation Act, 196 2 towards Government guaranteed dividend and repayment 
of principal is not required. The Committee note that b y acquiring Mini Ratna 
Category I status, the Corporation will be able to  exercise financial and 
operational autonomy for incurring capital expend iture on new projects such as 
diversification and creation of more infrastructure and storage space, formation 

 
of joint ventures, subsidiaries and also have HRD Management powers  such as 
appointment, transfer, posting of Board Level Executives , etc.  It w ill entitle the 
Corporation to incur capital expenditure on new projects, modernization, 
purchase of equipments , etc. without Government approval upto Rs. 500 crores 
and it may establish joint venture and subsidiaries in India with ceiling on equity 
investment up to 15% of the net worth of the Public Sector Enterprise (PSE) in 
one project limited to Rs. 500 crore. The Committee , therefore,  express 
agreement with the amendment proposed in the Bill which will subsequently 
confer Mini-Ratna Status to the Corporation. The Committee, however, have been 
informed that there is no provision in the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 for 
'Buy Back' of the shares or for listing of the shares on the Stock Exchange. The 
shares are, however, transferable to the existing shareholders as per section 4 (4) 
of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962, which gives an opportunity to the 
investors to redeem their investment. The Committee  desire that CWC should 
also examine offering a 'Buy Back' of the shares, on mutually acceptable terms or 
alternatively make arrangements to list the shares on the bourses so that the 
investor is given an opportunity to redeem the investment.    

 
 
 
(B)  CLAUSE 3 — Amendment of section 27 of the Act – Inserting the word State 
and State Warehousing Corporation at appropriate place.  
 
  2.12 The Clause 3 proposes to amend s ection 27 of the Principal Act which is 
given as under:- 
 
'Section 27 (4) The Bonds and debentures of a Warehousing Corporation 
may be guaranteed by the appropriate Government as to t he repayment of 
principal and the payment of interest at such rate as may be fixed by the 
appropriate Government on the recommendation of the board of directors of the 
Corporation at the time the bonds or debentures are issued.' 
 
The Government in Clause 3  proposes that in section 27 of the Principal 
Act, for sub section (4), the following sub section shall be substituted namely,  
'(4) The bonds and debentures of a State Warehousing Corporation may 
be guaranteed by the appropriate Government as to the repay ment of 
principal and the payment of interest at such rate as may be fixed by the 
appropriate Government on the recommendation of the board of directors 
of the State Warehousing Corporation at the time the bonds or debentures 
are issued.' 
 
2.13 In this context, the Ministry in a written note stated as under:- 
'The word 'Warehousing Corporation' is used to denote both the CWC as 
well as State Warehousing Corporations (SWCs). Since the proposed 
amendment is relating to withdrawal of guarantee in case of CWC, it is to make 
clear that this section is not applicable in case of CWC but remains applicable to 
SWCs. This is accomplished by inserting the words 'State' and 'State 
Warehousing', respectively in the proposed amendment at appropriate place.' 
 
 
 
 

 
 
2.14 The Committee observe that the word Warehousing Corporation is used in 
the Act to denote both the Central Warehousing Corporation ( CWC) as well as 
State Warehousing Corporation (SWCs). Since the proposed amendment is 
relating to withdrawal of guarantee in case  of CWC, the insertion of word 'State' 
and 'State Warehousing' at appropriate place will further clarify that this section 
is not applicable in case of CWC but remains applicable to SWCs. The Committee 
are in agreement to the proposed amendment in the Bill.    

 
CHAPTER III 
 
(C) CLAUSE 6 — Amendment of section 39 of the Act. 
 
3.1 The Clause 6 of the Bill proposes to amend section 39 of the Principal Act.  
Provisions of s ection 39 of the Principal Act and the amended provision as per 
Clause 6 of the Amendment Bill are given as under:- 
Provisions as per Section 39 of the 
Principal Act 
Amended Provisions of section 39 as 
per Clause 6 of the Amendment Bill 
Section 39  - For the purposes of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961, a Warehousing 
Corporation shall be deemed to be  a 
company within the meaning of that Act 
and shall be liable to income -tax and 
super-tax accordingly on its income, 
profits and gains: 
 Provided that, in the case of the 
Central Warehousing Corporation, any 
sum paid by the Central Government 
under the gua rantee given in pursuance 
of sub -section (1) of section 5 or, in the 
case of a Warehousing Corporation, any 
sum paid by the Central or State 
Government under any guarantee given 
in pursuance of sub-section (4) of section 
27 shall not be treated as income, profits 
and gains of a Warehousing Corporation, 
and any interest on the debentures or 
bonds issued by that Corporation out of 
such sums shall not be treated as 
expenditure incurred by it: 
Section 39  - For the purposes of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961, a Warehousing 
Corporation shall be deemed to be a 
company within the meaning of that Act 
and shall be liable to income -tax and 
super-tax accordingly on its income, 
profits and gains: 
         Provided that, in the case of a State 
Warehousing Corporation, any sum paid 
by the State Government under any 
guarantee given in pursuance of sub -
section (4) of section 27 shall not be 
treated as income, profits and gains of 
the State Warehousing Corporation , and 
any interest on the debentures or bonds 
issued by that Corporation out of such 
sums shall not be treated as expenditure 
incurred by it. 
Provided further that in the case of any 
debenture-holder, such portion of an 
interest as has been paid out of any such 
sum advanced by the State Government 

 
 Provided further that in the case of 
any shareholder or Debenture -holder, 
such portion of a dividend or interest as 
has been paid out of any such sum 
advanced by the Central Government 
shall be deemed to be his income from 
interest on securities declared to the 
income-tax free within the meaning of 
section 86 of that Act.' 
shall be deemed to be his income from 
interest on securities declared to be 
income-tax free, within the meaning of 
section 86 of that Act or any 
corresponding provision of law for the 
time being in force. 
 
 
3.2 The Committee observed tha t under s ection 39 of the Warehousing 
Corporations Act, 1962, a reference to s ection 86 of the Income Tax Act for exempting 
income tax on the interest earned on debentures  has been made . As informed to the 
Committee by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), in reply to a query, this 
section 86 of the Income Tax Act exempting interest on tax free securities issued by 
Central/State Government, has been omitted from the Income Tax Act w.e.f 01.04.1965.  
3.3 When the Committee asked to state as to how this particular section which has 
been omitted from the Income Tax Act, has been relied upon and referred to for 
exempting interest earned on debentures of State Warehousing Corporation in the 
Clause 6 of The Warehousing Corporati ons (Amendment) Bill , 2011, the Ministry  of 
Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution stated as under:- 
'It is right that Section 86(A) of the Income Tax Act,1961 has been omitted w.e.f 
01.04.1965. However, Section 10(15)(iv)(h) of the Income Tax Act,  1961 
provides for exemption of interest payable by any public sector company in 
respect of such bonds or debentures subject to such conditions, as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf. 
Any amendment in the Income Tax Act, 1961 is automatically applicable to the 
specific clause mentioned in the other Act.' 
 
3.4 The Ministry further agreed that any legislation having revenue implication should 
preferably be made through concerned tax legislation. However , a reference can also 
be made to the tax legislation in any other Act which may be passed by the Parliament.  
3.5 In regard to the proposed Amendment, Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Revenue have submitted to the Committee as under:- 

 
'Clause 6 of the W arehousing Corporations (Amendment) Bill, 2011 propose to 
amend section 39 of the Warehousing Corporation Act, 1962 by replacing the 
reference to Central Government and Central Warehousing Corporation with the 
State Government and State Warehousing Corporation. 
In this connection, it may be note d that in terms of the Government of 
India (Transaction of Business) Rules dated 14.01.1961, all business allotted to a 
Department under the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 
are required to be  disposed of by or under the General or special directions of 
the Minister in Charge. In particular, any proposal having revenue implication has 
to be through the concerned tax legislation and not through any other Act. 
Therefore, any exemptions with the s pecified conditions, can only be granted 
through Income-tax, 1961. 
Also, in the prop osed amendment, a reference to s ection 86 of the 
Income-tax Act has been made for exempting income tax on the interest earned 
on debentures. In this connection, it may be n oted that clause (i) and (ii) of 
Section 86 which exempted interest on tax free securities issued by Central/State 
Government has been omitted from the Income -tax Act w.e.f 1st April, 1965. 
Therefore, the reference to Section 86 of the Income -tax Act for t he purposes of 
exempting interest on debentures of State Warehousing Corporation in The 
Warehousing Corporations (Amendment) Bill, 2011 is no longer valid.  
In view of the above, the Department of Revenue suggests that Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food an d Public Distribution, through their proposed 
amendment should delete both the provisos to Section 39 of the Warehousing 
Corporation Act, 1962. If any exemption from income tax is sought for 
Warehousing Corporations, it may approach the Department of Reven ue for 
considering such proposal and for incorporation of the sa me in the Income -tax 
Act, 1961.' 

 
3.6 The Committee note that Clause 6 of The Warehousing Corporations 
(Amendment) Bill , 2011 proposes to amend s ection 39 of the Warehousing 
Corporation Act, 1 962 by replacing the reference to 'Central Government ' and  
'Central Warehousing Corporation ' with the 'State Government ' and 'State 
Warehousing Corporation '. The Committee also note that Section 86 of the 
Income Tax Act, 1961 which exempted interest on ta x-free securities issued by 
Central/State Government has been omitted from the Income Tax Act w.e.f 1 April, 
1965 and the reference to Section 86 of the Income Tax Act for the purpose of 
exempting interest on debentures of State Warehousing Corporation in The 
Warehousing Corporations (Amendment) Bill , 2011 is no longer valid.  In this 
regard, the Committee have been informed by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution  that Section 10 (15) (iv) (h) of the Income Tax Act, 
1961 provides for exemption of interest payable by any public sector company in 
respect of such bonds or debentures subject to such conditions , as the Central 
Government may by notification in the Official Gazette specify  and any 
amendment in the Income Tax Act, 1961 is automatically applicable to the specific 
clauses mentioned in the Act. The Ministry have also agreed that any proposal 
having revenue implication should preferably be made through the concerned tax 
legislation. In view of the position explained by the Minis try of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution and the Ministry of Finance, the Committee, w hile 
agreeing to the suggestion  of the Ministry of Finance given in this regard , 
recommend that both the provisos to s ection 39 of the Warehousing 
Corporations Act, 1962 should be deleted. The Committee also recommend that if 
any exemption from income tax is sought for the Warehousing Corporation, the 
Department may approach the Department of Revenue for consideration of such 
proposal and for incorporation of the same in the Income Tax Act, 1961.   
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                   VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
28 August, 2012                   Chairman, 
6 Bhadrapada, 1934(Saka)         Standing Committee on Food,  
                           Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 

 
 
   A L S S INTRODUCED IN OK ABHA 
Bill No.  57  of  2011 
THE WAREHOUSING CORPORATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962. 
B it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:— E 
1 . (1) This Act may be called the Warehousing Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2011. Short title and 
commencement. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2 . For section 5 of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 (hereinafter referred to as 58 of  1962. 5 Substitution of 
the principal Act), the following section shall be substituted, namely:— new section 
for section 5. 
"5. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Acts mentioned in this section, Certain shares 
the shares of the Central Warehousing Corporation shall be deemed to be included to be approved 
securities. among other securities enumerated in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, and 2 of 1882. 
also to be approved securities for the purpose of the Insurance Act, 1938 and the 4 of 1938. 10 
10 of 1949. Banking Regulation Act, 1949.". 

 
 
2 
3. In section 27 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 4 ), the following sub-section shall Amendment of 
section 27. be substituted, namely:— 
"( 4 ) The bonds and debentures of a State Warehousing Corporation may be 
guaranteed by the appropriate Government as to the repayment of principal and the 
payment of interest at such rate as may be fixed by the appropriate Government on the 5 
recommendation of the board of directors of the State Warehousing Corporation at the 
time the bonds or debentures are issued.". 
4. In section 30 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2 ), the proviso shall be omitted. Amendment of 
section 30. 
5. In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 8 ), the proviso shall be omitted. Amendment of 
section 31. 
6. In section 39 of the principal Act, for the provisos, the following provisos shall be 10 Amendment of 
substituted, namely:— section 39. 
"Provided that, in the case of a State Warehousing Corporation, any sum paid 
by the State Government under any guarantee given in pursuance of sub-section ( 4 ) 
of section 27 shall not be treated as income, profits and gains of the State Warehousing 
Corporation, and any interest on the debentures or bonds issued by that Corporation 15 
out of such sums shall not be treated as expenditure incurred by it: 
Provided further that in the case of any debenture-holder, such portion of an 
interest as has been paid out of any such sum advanced by the State Government shall 
be deemed to be his income from interest on securities declared to be income-tax free 
within the meaning of section 86 of that Act or any corresponding provision of law for 20 
the time being in force.". 

 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 was enacted to provide for the incorpora- 
tion and regulation of corporation for the purpose of warehousing of agricultural produce 
and certain other commodities as may be notified by the Central Government and for matters 
connected therewith. The Central Warehousing Corporation established under the said Act 
is a profit earning Public Sector Enterprise under the administrative control of the Depart- 
ment of Food and Public Distribution and a Mini-Ratna Public Sector Enterprise as declared 
by the Department of Public Enterprises. One of the essential criteria for award of Mini-Ratna 
status to a Central Public Sector Enterprise is that no financial support or contingent liability 
on the part of the Government should be involved in respect of that enterprise and that it 
should also not depend upon any budgetary support or Government guarantee. 
2. The Central Warehousing Corporation has consistently paid dividend to the 
Government of India since 1957-58. The net worth of the Corporation has been positive from 
2003 onwards. The Corporation has not taken any loan from the Central Government. It is 
also not dependent upon budgetary support of the Government. Moreover, the Government 
has so far given no other guarantee to the Corporation except for the payment of minimum 
guaranteed dividend as required under sub-section (1) of section 5 of the Warehousing 
Corporations Act, 1962. Hence, the said section 5 of the Act is proposed to be suitably 
revised with consequential changes in sections 27, 30, 31 and 39 thereof. The guarantee 
referred to in the said sub-section (1) of section 5 would be withdrawn and the Central 
Government would be absolved of its responsibility of being guarantor. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
K. V. THOMAS. 
N D ; EW ELHI 
The 10 th August, 2011. 
3 

 
 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to substitute a new section for section 5 of the Warehousing 
Corporations Act, 1962 so as to do away with the existing provision relating to the shares of 
the Central Warehousing Corporation being guaranteed by the Central Government as to the 
repayment of the principal and the payment of annual dividend. Hence, the Bill does not 
involve any financial implication. The new section does not envisage any expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India, either recurring or non-recurring. 
4 

 
 
ANNEXURE 
E W C A , 1962 XTRACTS FROM THE AREHOUSING ORPORATIONS CT 
(58 1962) OF 
* * * * * 
5. ( 1 ) The shares of the Central Warehousing Corporation shall be guaranteed by the Shares to be 
guaranteed by Central Government as to the repayment of the principal and the payment of the annual 
Central dividend at such minimum rate as may be fixed by the Central Government, by notification Government 
published in the Official Gazette, at the time of the issue of the shares. and to be 
trusted or 
approved ( 2 ) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Acts mentioned in this sub-section, 
securities. the shares of the Central Warehousing Corporation shall be deemed to be included among 
the securities enumerated in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, and also to be approved 2 of 1882. 
4 of 1938. securities for the purpose of the Insurance Act, 1938 and the Banking Companies Act, 1949. 
10 of 1949. 
* * * * * 
27. ( 1 )* * * * * Borrowing 
powers of 
Warehousing ( 4 ) The bonds and debentures of a Warehousing Corporation may be guaranteed by Corporation. the appropriate Government as to the repayment of principal and the payment of interest at 
such rate as may be fixed by the appropriate Government on the recommendation of the 
board of directors of the Corporation at the time the bonds or debentures are issued. 
* * * * * 
30. ( 1 )* * * * * Disposal of 
profits. 
( 2 ) After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation on assets and all 
other matters which are usually provided for by companies registered and incorporated 
under the Companies Act, 1956, a Warehousing Corporation may, out of its net annual 1 of 1956. 
profits, declare a dividend: 
Provided that for so long as the reserve fund is less than the paid-up share capital of 
the Central Warehousing Corporation and until there has been repaid to the Central 
Government such sum, if any, as that Government may have paid under a guarantee given in 
pursuance of sub-section ( 1 ) of section 5 or sub-section ( 4 ) of section 27, the rate of such 
dividend, in the case of the Central Warehousing Corporations, shall not exceed the rate 
granted by the Central Government under sub-section ( 1 ) of section 5. 
31. ( 1 ) * * * * * Accounts and 
audit of 
Warehousing ( 8 ) Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained in this section, the Comptroller 
Corporation. and Auditor-General  of India may, either of his own motion or on a request received in this 
behalf from the appropriate Government, undertake in respect of a Warehousing Corporation 
such audit and at such time as he may consider necessary: 
Provided that where the Central Government is required to make any payment on 
account of the guarantee given by it under sub-section ( 1 ) of section 5, such audit shall be 
undertaken by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any person authorised by him 
in this behalf. 
* * * * * 
5 

 
 
6 
39. For the purposes of the Income-tax Act, 1961, a Warehousing Corporation shall be Provisions 43 of 1961. 
relating to deemed to be a company within the meaning of that Act and shall be liable to income-tax and income-tax super-tax accordingly on its income, profits and gains: and super-tax. 
Provided that, in the case of the Central Warehousing Corporation, any sum paid by 
the Central Government under the guarantee given in pursuance of sub-section (1) of section 
5 or, in the case of a Warehousing Corporation, any sum paid by the Central or a State 
Government under any guarantee given in pursuance of sub-section (4) of section 27 shall 
not be treated as income, profits and gains of a Warehousing Corporation, and any interest 
on the debentures or bonds issued by that Corporation out of such  sums shall  not be 
treated as expenditure incurred by it: 
Provided further that in the case of any shareholder or debenture-holder, such portion 
of a dividend or interest as has been paid out of any such sum advanced by the Central 
Government shall be deemed to be his income from interest on securities declared to be 
income-tax-free within the meaning of section 86 of that Act. 
* * * * * 

  
  
  
  
  LOK  SABHA 
———— 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962. 
———— ( Prof. K.V. Thomas, Minister of  State for Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution ) GMGIPMRND—1259LS(S3)—17-08-2011. 

 
  
TThhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  AAcctt,,  11996622  
  
  
  
TThhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  RRuulleess,,  11996633  
  
  
&&  
  
  
CCWWCC  ((GGeenneerraall))  RReegguullaattiioonnss,,  11996655  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
CCEENNTTRRAALL  WWAARREEHHOOUUSSIINNGG  CCOORRPPOORRAATTIIOONN  
  
AAUUGGUUSSTT,,  22000099  
  
INDEX 
  
  
          
  
  SS..NNoo..                        SSUUBBJJEECCTT                                                                                                              PPaaggee  NNoo..  
  
  
  
11..          TThhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  AAcctt,,  11996622                    33  
  
                                                                      
  
22..            TThhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  RRuulleess,,  11996633              4411  
                                                                
  
  
33..            CCWWCC  ((GGeenneerraall))  RReegguullaattiioonnss,,  11996655                                                            6644                                                
  
  

 
  
  
  
TThhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  AAcctt,,  11996622  
  
((5588    OOFF    11996622))  
  
  
((AAss  mmooddiiffiieedd  uupp  ttoo  tthhee  99tthh  JJaannuuaarryy,,  22000088))  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 
  
  
  
  
GGOOVVEERRNNMMEENNTT  OOFF  IINNDDIIAA  
  
MMIINNIISSTTRRYY  OOFF  LLAAWW  &&  JJUUSSTTIICCEE  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
LLIISSTT  OOFF  AAMMEENNDDIINNGG  AACCTTSS  
  
  
  
11..  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  ((  AAmmeennddmmeenntt))  AAcctt,,  11996633  ((  3344  ooff  11996633))..  
22..  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  ((  AAmmeennddmmeenntt))  AAcctt,,  11997766  ((  4422  ooff  11997766))..  
33..  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  ((  AAmmeennddmmeenntt))  AAcctt,,  11998899  ((  3377  ooff  11998899))..  
44..  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  ((  AAmmeennddmmeenntt))  AAcctt,,  22000011  ((  2233  ooff  22000011))..  
55..  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  ((  AAmmeennddmmeenntt))  AAcctt,,  22000055  ((  4455  ooff  22000055))..  
  
  

 
  
  
  
  
  
LLIISSTT  OOFF  AABBBBRREEVVIIAATTIIOONNSS  UUSSEEDD  
  
  
CCll..    …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………    ffoorr  CCllaauussee  
IInnss..    …………………………………………………………………………..…………………………..………………    ffoorr  IInnsseerrtteedd  
PP..    ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..…………    ffoorr  PPaaggee  
PPtt..    …………………………………………………………………………………………………………..……....……    ffoorr  PPaarrtt  
SS..    ……………………………………………………………………………………………………..……………………    ffoorr  SSeeccttiioonn  
SSeecc..    ……………………………………………………………………………………………………..………………..    ffoorr  SSeeccttiioonn  
SSuubbss..    …………………………………………………………………………………………………………....…………    ffoorr  SSuubbssttiittuutteedd  

 
TTHHEE  WWAARREEHHOOUUSSIINNGG  CCOORRPPOORRAATTIIOONNSS  AACCTT,,  11996622  
  
AARRRRAANNGGEEMMEENNTT  OOFF  SSEECCTTIIOONNSS  
 
CCHHAAPPTTEERR--II  
  
PPRREELLIIMMIINNAARRYY  
              
SSEECCTTIIOONNSS  
  
11..    SShhoorrtt  ttiittllee,,  eexxtteenntt  aanndd  ccoommmmeenncceemmeenntt..  
22..    DDeeffiinniittiioonnss..  
  
CCHHAAPPTTEERR--IIII  
  
TTHHEE  CCEENNTTRRAALL  WWAARREEHHOOUUSSIINNGG  CCOOPPOORRAATTIIOONN  
  
33..    TThhee  CCeennttrraall  wwaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
44..    SShhaarree  ccaappiittaall  aanndd  sshhaarreehhoollddeerrss  
55..    SShhaarreess  ttoo  bbee  gguuaarraanntteeeedd  bbyy  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  aanndd  ttoo  bbee  ttrruusstt  oorr    aapppprroovveedd  sseeccuurriittiieess    
66..    MMaannaaggeemmeenntt  ooff    CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
77..    DDiirreeccttoorrss  
88..    DDiissqquuaalliiffiiccaattiioonn  ffoorr  ooffffiiccee  ooff  DDiirreeccttoorr  ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg    CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  

 
99..    RReemmoovvaall  ooff  DDiirreeccttoorrss  ffrroomm  ooffffiiccee  
1100..    AAppppooiinnttmmeenntt  ooff  ooffffiicceerrss,,  eettcc..  aanndd  tthheeiirr  ccoonnddiittiioonnss  ooff  sseerrvviiccee..  
1111..    FFuunnccttiioonnss  ooff  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
1122..    EExxeeccuuttiivvee  CCoommmmiitttteeee  
1133..    MMeeeettiinnggss  ooff  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
1144..    GGrraannttss  aanndd  llooaannss  bbyy  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovvtt..  
1155..    CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  ttoo  mmaaiinnttaaiinn  ttwwoo  ffuunnddss  
1166..    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  ffuunndd  
1177..    GGeenneerraall  FFuunndd  
  
  
  
  
CCHHAAPPTTEERR--IIIIII  
  
SSTTAATTEE  WWAARREEHHOOUUSSIINNGG  CCOORRPPOORRAATTIIOONNSS  
  
1188..    SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  
1199..    SShhaarree  ccaappiittaall  aanndd  sshhaarreehhoollddeerrss  
2200..    MMaannaaggeemmeenntt  ooff  SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
2211..    DDiissqquuaalliiffiiccaattiioonn  ffoorr  ooffffiiccee  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorr  ooff  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
2222..    RReemmoovvaall  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  ffrroomm  ooffffiiccee..  
2233..    AAppppooiinnttmmeenntt  ooff  ooffffiicceerrss  eettcc..,,  aanndd  tthheeiirr  ccoonnddiittiioonnss  ooff  sseerrvviiccee  
2244..    FFuunnccttiioonnss  ooff  tthhee  SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  

 
2255..    EExxeeccuuttiivvee  CCoommmmiitttteeee  
  
  
CCHHAAPPTTEERR--IIVV  
  
FFIINNAANNCCEE,,  AACCCCOOUUNNTTSS  AANNDD  AAUUDDIITT  
  
2266..    SSuubbmmiissssiioonn  ooff  pprrooggrraammmmee  ooff  aaccttiivviittiieess  aanndd  ffiinnaanncciiaall  eessttiimmaatteess  
2277..    BBoorrrroowwiinngg  ppoowweerrss  ooff  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
2288..    DDeeppoossiitt  AAccccoouunntt  
2299..    IInnvveessttmmeenntt  ooff  ffuunnddss  
3300..    DDiissppoossaall  ooff  PPrrooffiittss  
3311..    AAccccoouunnttss  aanndd  aauuddiitt  ooff  wwaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
          3311AA..  RReettuurrnnss  aanndd  rreeppoorrttss..  
  
CCHHAAPPTTEERR--VV  
  
MMIISSCCEELLLLAANNEEOOUUSS  
  
3322..    VVaaccaanncciieess,,  eettcc..,,  nnoott  ttoo  iinnvvaalliiddaattee  aaccttss  aanndd  pprroocceeeeddiinnggss  ooff  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg    CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  
3333..    DDeelleeggaattiioonn  
3344..    VVoottiinngg  rriigghhttss  ooff  sshhaarreehhoollddeerrss  
3355..    DDiissppuutteess  bbeettwweeeenn  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  aanndd  SSttaattee    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
3366..    DDeeccllaarraattiioonn  ooff  ffiiddeelliittyy  aanndd  sseeccrreeccyy  

 
3377..    IInnddeemmnniittyy  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  
3388..    OOffffeenncceess  
3399..    PPrroovviissiioonnss  rreellaattiinngg  ttoo  IInnccoommee  TTaaxx  aanndd  SSuuppeerr  TTaaxx  
4400..    WWiinnddiinngg  uupp  ooff  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  
4411..    PPoowweerr  ttoo  mmaakkee  rruulleess  
4422..    PPoowweerr  ooff  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  ttoo  mmaakkee  rreegguullaattiioonnss  
4433..    RReeppeeaall  aanndd  SSaavviinnggss..  
  
  
  
TTHHEE  SSCCHHEEDDUULLEE

 
  
        TTHHEE  WWAARREEHHOOUUSSIINNGG  CCOORRPPOORRAATTIIOONNSS  AACCTT,,  11996622  
  
NNOO..  5588  OOFF  11996622  
  
AAnn  AAcctt  ttoo  pprroovviiddee  ffoorr  tthhee  IInnccoorrppoorraattiioonn  aanndd  RReegguullaattiioonn  ooff  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  ffoorr  tthhee    ppuurrppoossee  ooff    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  ooff    AAggrriiccuullttuurraall  
PPrroodduuccee    aanndd  cceerrttaaiinn  ootthheerr  ccoommmmooddiittiieess  aanndd  ffoorr  mmaatttteerrss,,  ccoonnnneecctteedd  tthheerreewwiitthh..  
  
BBee  iitt  eennaacctteedd  bbyy  PPaarrlliiaammeenntt  iinn  tthhee  TThhiirrtteeeenntthh  YYeeaarr  ooff  tthhee  RReeppuubblliicc  ooff  IInnddiiaa  aass  ffoolllloowwss::--  
  
                                                                                                      CCHHAAPPTTEERR  --II  
    
                                                                                                PPRREELLIIMMIINNAARRYY  
  
11..    ((11))        TThhiiss    AAcctt  mmaayy    bbee  ccaalllleedd  tthhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  AAcctt,,    
          11996622..**  
    
              
            ((22))      IItt  eexxtteennddss  ttoo  tthhee  wwhhoollee  ooff  IInnddiiaa  ((5588  ooff  11996622))..  ****    
  
              
            ((33))      IItt    sshhaallll  ccoommee    iinnttoo  ffoorrccee    oonn  ssuucchh    ddaattee  ##    aass  tthhee    CCeennttrraall  
        GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  mmaayy,,  bbyy  nnoottiiffiiccaattiioonn  iinn  tthhee  OOffffiicciiaall  GGaazzeettttee,,      
      aappppooiinntt..    
  
SShhoorrtt  ttiittllee,,  eexxtteenntt  aanndd  
ccoommmmeenncceemmeenntt..  
**  TThhiiss  AAcctt  hhaass  bbeeeenn  
ssuupppplleemmeenntteedd  bbyy  tthhee  WWCC  
((SSuupppplleemmeennttaarryy  ))  AAcctt,,  11996655  
((2200  ooff  11996655))  
  
****    TThhee  WWCC  AAmmeennddmmeenntt  AAcctt,,  
11998899  ((NNoo..  3377  ooff  11998899))  ddaatteedd  
2222  OOcctt  11998899    
  
##  2288tthh  MMaarrcchh,,  11996633;;  vviiddee  
GGSSRR  446633  ddaatteedd  1166..33..11996633..  
SSeeee  GGaazzaattttee  ooff  IInnddiiaa  
EExxttrraaoorrddiinnaarryy,,  PPtt..IIII..  SSeecc..  33  
((ii)),,  pp..115555..  
    22..        IInn    tthhiiss    AAcctt,,    uunnlleessss    tthhee    ccoonntteexxtt    ootthheerrwwiissee  rreeqquuiirreess,,----  
    ((aa))    ""aaggrriiccuullttuurraall    pprroodduuccee""  mmeeaannss    aannyy    ooff  tthhee    ffoolllloowwiinngg  
                                ccllaasssseess  ooff  ccoommmmooddiittiieess,,  nnaammeellyy::----    
                                ((ii))  ffooooddssttuuffffss,,  iinncclluuddiinngg  eeddiibbllee  ooiill--sseeeeddss;;  
    
                                ((iiii))  ccaattttllee    ffooddddeerr,,  iinncclluuddiinngg    ooiill--ccaakkeess  aanndd  
                                          ootthheerr  ccoonncceennttrraatteess;;  
    
                              ((iiiiii))  rraaww  ccoottttoonn,,  wwhheetthheerr  ggiinnnneedd  oorr  uunnggiinnnneedd,,  
DDeeffiinniittiioonnss..  
  

 
                                        aanndd  ccoottttoonn  sseeeedd;;    
                              ((iivv))  rraaww  jjuuttee;;  aanndd  
    
                              ((vv))  vveeggeettaabbllee  ooiillss;;  
    
                ((bb))    ""aapppprroopprriiaattee    GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt""    mmeeaannss    iinn    rreellaattiioonn    ttoo    tthhee  
                            CCeennttrraall    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  tthhee        CCeennttrraall  
                            GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt,,  aanndd  iinn  rreellaattiioonn  ttoo    aa    SSttaattee    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
                            CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  tthhee  SSttaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt;;  
  
                ((cc))  ""CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg    CCoorrppoorraattiioonn""    mmeeaannss    tthhee    CCeennttrraall  
                          WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  eessttaabblliisshheedd  uunnddeerr  sseeccttiioonn  33;;    
  
                ((dd))  ""ccoo--ooppeerraattiivvee    ssoocciieettyy""  mmeeaannss    aa  ssoocciieettyy  rreeggiisstteerreedd    oorr  
                            ddeeeemmeedd    ttoo      bbee  rreeggiisstteerreedd      uunnddeerr    tthhee      CCoo--ooppeerraattiivvee  
                            SSoocciieettiieess  AAcctt,,  11991122((22  ooff  11996622))  ,,    oorr  uunnddeerr  aannyy  ootthheerr  
                            llaaww  wwiitthh  rreessppeecctt  ttoo  ccoo--ooppeerraattiivvee  ssoocciieettiieess  ffoorr  tthhee  ttiimmee  
                  bbeeiinngg  iinn    ffoorrccee  iinn    aannyy  SSttaattee,,    wwhhiicchh  iiss  eennggaaggeedd  iinn  tthhee  
                  pprroocceessssiinngg,,  mmaarrkkeettiinngg,,    ssttoorraaggee,,  eexxppoorrtt  oorr    iimmppoorrtt    ooff  
                  aaggrriiccuullttuurraall  pprroodduuccee    oorr  aannyy    nnoottiiffiieedd  ccoommmmooddiittyy    oorr  iinn  
                  iinnssuurraannccee  bbuussiinneessss    aanndd  iinncclluuddeess    aa    ccoo--ooppeerraattiivvee    llaanndd  
                  mmoorrttggaaggee  bbaannkk;;                                                        
  
  
  
22  ooff  11991122..  
  **[[((dddd))  ""nnaattiioonnaalliisseedd    bbaannkk""  mmeeaannss    aa  ccoorrrreessppoonnddiinngg  nneeww  bbaannkk      
        ssppeecciiffiieedd    iinn      tthhee    FFiirrsstt      SScchheedduullee    ttoo    tthhee    BBaannkkiinngg          
      CCoommppaanniieess  ((AAccqquuiissiittiioonn    aanndd  TTrraannssffeerr    ooff    UUnnddeerrttaakkiinnggss))  AAcctt,,  
      11997700    ((55  ooff  11997700));;    oorr  aa  ccoorrrreessppoonnddiinngg  nneeww  bbaannkk  ssppeecciiffiieedd  iinn  
  tthhee  FFiirrsstt  SScchheedduullee  ttoo  tthhee  BBaannkkiinngg  CCoommppaanniieess  ((AAccqquuiissiittiioonn  aanndd  
  TTrraannssffeerr  ooff  UUnnddeerrttaakkiinnggss))  AAcctt,,11998800..  
  
  
**  IInnss..  BByy  AAcctt  4422  ooff  11997766,,  ss..  22..  
  
  
55  ooff  11997700..  
  
  
TThhee  WWCC  ((AAmmeennddmmeenntt))  AAcctt,,  
11998899  ddtt..  2222  OOcctt..11998899    
  

 
  
        ((ee))  ""nnoottiiffiieedd    ccoommmmooddiittyy""  mmeeaannss    aannyy  ccoommmmooddiittyy    ((ootthheerr    tthhaann        
  aaggrriiccuullttuurraall  pprroodduuccee))  wwhhiicchh  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  mmaayy,,  bbyy  
  nnoottiiffiiccaattiioonn  iinn  tthhee  OOffffiicciiaall  GGaazzeettttee,,  ddeeccllaarree  ttoo  bbee  aa  nnoottiiffiieedd    
  ccoommmmooddiittyy  ffoorr    tthhee  ppuurrppoosseess  ooff    tthhiiss    AAcctt,,  bbeeiinngg  aa  ccoommmmooddiittyy  
  wwiitthh  rreessppeecctt  ttoo  wwhhiicchh  PPaarrlliiaammeenntt  hhaass    ppoowweerr  ttoo  mmaakkee  llaawwss  bbyy  
  vviirrttuuee  ooff  eennttrryy  3333  iinn  LLiisstt  IIIIII  iinn  tthhee  SSeevveenntthh  SScchheedduullee  ttoo  tthhee  
  CCoonnssttiittuuttiioonn;;  
            
        ((ff))  ""pprreessccrriibbeedd""  mmeeaannss  pprreessccrriibbeedd  bbyy  rruulleess  mmaaddee  uunnddeerr  tthhiiss  AAcctt;;  
    
        ((gg))""rreeccooggnniisseedd    aassssoocciiaattiioonn""  mmeeaannss    aann  aassssoocciiaattiioonn  wwhhiicchh  iiss  ffoorr  tthhee    
  ttiimmee  bbeeiinngg  rreeccooggnniisseedd  bbyy  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt    uunnddeerr  
  sseeccttiioonn    66  ooff    tthhee  FFoorrwwaarrdd  CCoonnttrraaccttss  ((RReegguullaattiioonn))AAcctt,,  11995522;;  
    
        ((hh))    ""RReesseerrvvee      BBaannkk""    mmeeaannss    tthhee    RReesseerrvvee    BBaannkk    ooff    IInnddiiaa  
  ccoonnssttiittuutteedd  uunnddeerr    tthhee  RReesseerrvvee  BBaannkk  ooff  IInnddiiaa  AAcctt,,    11993344      
  
          ((ii))  ""sscchheedduulleedd    bbaannkk""    mmeeaannss  aa    bbaannkk    ffoorr    tthhee    ttiimmee    bbeeiinngg          
  iinncclluuddeedd  iinn    tthhee  SSeeccoonndd  SScchheedduullee  ttoo  tthhee  RReesseerrvvee  BBaannkk  ooff  IInnddiiaa  
  AAcctt,,    11993344,,    11[[  aanndd    iinncclluuddeess    aa  nnaattiioonnaalliisseedd    bbaannkk]];;  
  
            ((jj))  ""SSttaattee    BBaannkk""  mmeeaannss    tthhee  SSttaattee  BBaannkk  ooff  IInnddiiaa  ccoonnssttiittuutteedd  uunnddeerr  
  tthhee  SSttaattee  BBaannkk  ooff  IInnddiiaa  AAcctt,,  11995555;;  
    
          ((kk))  ""SSttaattee    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg    CCoorrppoorraattiioonn""    mmeeaannss  aa    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg                  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  ffoorr  aa  SSttaattee    eessttaabblliisshheedd  oorr    ddeeeemmeedd  ttoo    bbee  
  eessttaabblliisshheedd  uunnddeerr  tthhiiss  AAcctt;;  
  
            ((ll))  ""WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn""      mmeeaannss      aa      WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  eessttaabblliisshheedd  oorr  ddeeeemmeedd    ttoo    bbee    eessttaabblliisshheedd  uunnddeerr  
  tthhiiss  AAcctt;;  aanndd  
  
          ((mm))  ""yyeeaarr""  mmeeaannss  tthhee  ffiinnaanncciiaall  yyeeaarr..  
  
    22AA      AAnnyy  rreeffeerreennccee  iinn  tthhiiss  AAcctt  ttoo  aannyy  llaaww  wwhhiicchh  iiss  nnoott  iinn  ffoorrccee,,  oorr  aannyy    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
7744  ooff  11995522..  
  
  
  
  
22  ooff  11993344..    
  
  
  
  
22    ooff  11993344..  
    
  
  
  
  
2233  ooff  11995555..  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
CCoonnssttrruuccttiioonn  ooff  rreeffeerreenncceess  ttoo  

 
  ffuunnccttiioonnaarryy  nnoott  iinn  eexxiisstteennccee,,  iinn  aannyy  SSttaattee,,  sshhaallll,,    iinn  rreellaattiioonn  ttoo  
  tthhaatt    SSttaattee,,  bbee  ccoonnssttrruueedd  aass  aa  rreeffeerreennccee  ttoo    tthhee  ccoorrrreessppoonnddiinngg  
  llaaww  iinn    ffoorrccee,,  oorr    tthhee    ccoorrrreessppoonnddiinngg  ffuunnccttiioonnaarryy  iinn  eexxiisstteennccee,,  iinn  
  tthhaatt  SSttaattee..  
aannyy  llaaww  nnoott  iinn  ffoorrccee  oorr  aannyy  
ffuunnccttiioonnaarryy  nnoott  iinn  eexxiisstteennccee  
iinn  aannyy  SSttaattee..  
IInnsseerrttiioonn  ooff  SSeeccttiioonn  22AA  vviiddee  
tthhee  WWCC  AAmmeennddmmeenntt  AAcctt,,  
11998899ddtt..  2222  OOcctt..  11998899  
                                                                                                  CCHHAAPPTTEERR  ––IIII  
  
TTHHEE  CCEENNTTRRAALL  WWAARREEHHOOUUSSIINNGG  CCOORRPPOORRAATTIIOONN  
  
TThhee  CCeennttrraall  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
      
  
33..((11))  WWiitthh  eeffffeecctt  ffrroomm  ssuucchh  ddaattee  **  aass  tthhee  
  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  mmaayy,,  bbyy  nnoottiiffiiccaattiioonn  
  iinn  tthhee  OOffffiicciiaall  GGaazzeettttee,,    ssppeecciiffyy      iinn  tthhiiss    
  bbeehhaallff,,    tthhee  CCeennttrraall    GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt    sshhaallll    
  eessttaabblliisshh    aa    CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    bbyy    tthhee    nnaammee  ooff    
  tthhee    CCeennttrraall    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
  wwhhiicchh      sshhaallll  bbee  aa  bbooddyy  ccoorrppoorraattee  hhaavviinngg  
  ppeerrppeettuuaall  ssuucccceessssiioonn  aanndd  aa  ccoommmmoonn    sseeaall  
  wwiitthh  ppoowweerr    ttoo  aaccqquuiirree,,  hhoolldd  aanndd  ddiissppoossee  
  ooff  pprrooppeerrttyy    aanndd  ttoo    ccoonnttrraacctt,,  aanndd    mmaayy,,  
  bbyy  tthhee  ssaaiidd  nnaammee,,  ssuuee  aanndd  bbee  ssuueedd..  
  
      ((22))  TThhee  hheeaadd--ooffffiiccee  ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg    CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  sshhaallll  bbee  
  aatt    NNeeww  DDeellhhii    ****[[oorr    aatt    ssuucchh  ootthheerr  ppllaaccee  
  aass  tthhee  CCeennttrraall    GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  mmaayy,,  bbyy  
  nnoottiiffiiccaattiioonn  iinn  tthhee    OOffffiicciiaall  GGaazzeettttee,,  
  ssppeecciiffyy  ]]..        
  
**  1188tthh  MMaarrcchh,,  
11996633,,  vviiddee  GG..SS..RR..  
446644,,  ddaatteedd  
1166..0033..11996633,,  sseeee  
GGaazzeettttee  ooff  IInnddiiaa,,  
EExxttrraaoorrddiinnaarryy,,  PPtt..  
IIII,,  sseecc..  33((ii)),,  pp..115555..  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
****IInnss..  BByy  AAcctt  3344  ooff  
11996633,,  ss..22..  
SShhaarree  ccaappiittaall  aanndd  
sshhaarreehhoollddeerrss..  
  
          44..((11))  TThhee    aauutthhoorriisseedd    sshhaarree  ccaappiittaall  ooff    tthhee  
  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  sshhaallll  bbee  
  **  oonnee  hhuunnddrreedd  ccrroorreess  ooff  rruuppeeeess    ddiivviiddeedd  
  iinnttoo    tteenn  hhuunnddrreedd  tthhoouussaanndd  sshhaarreess  ooff  tthhee  
  ffaaccee  vvaalluuee  ooff  oonnee  tthhoouussaanndd  rruuppeeeess  eeaacchh;;  
  aannyy  sshhaarreess  rreemmaaiinniinngg  ttoo  bbee  iissssuueedd  mmaayy  bbee  
  
  
**  NNoottiiffiiccaattiioonn  NNoo..  
338811  DDaatteedd  2255tthh  
NNoovveemmbbeerr,,  11998811..  
  
  
  
  

 
  iissssuueedd,,  wwiitthh  tthhee  ssaannccttiioonn  ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ffrroomm  ttiimmee  ttoo  ttiimmee,,  aass  aanndd  
  wwhheenn  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  mmaayy  ddeeeemm  ffiitt::  
    
            **[[PPrroovviiddeedd  tthhaatt  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  
  mmaayy,,  ffrroomm  ttiimmee  ttoo  ttiimmee,,    bbyy  oorrddeerr  nnoottiiffiieedd  
  iinn    tthhee  OOffffiicciiaall    GGaazzeettttee,,  iinnccrreeaassee  tthhee  
  aauutthhoorriisseedd  SShhaarree  ccaappiittaall  ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  ttoo  ssuucchh  eexxtteenntt  
  aanndd  iinn  ssuucchh  mmaannnneerr  aass  tthhaatt  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  
  mmaayy  ddeetteerrmmiinnee..]]  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
**  IInnss..  BByy  AAcctt  4422  ooff  
11997766,,  ss..  33  
    ((22))  **[[TThhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  sshhaallll,,  aafftteerr  dduuee  
  aapppprroopprriiaattiioonn  mmaaddee  bbyy  PPaarrlliiaammeenntt  bbyy  llaaww  
  ffoorr  tthhee  ppuurrppoossee,,]]  ssuubbssccrriibbee  ffoorr  ffoorrttyy    
  ppeerrcceenntt  ooff  tthhee  sshhaarree  ccaappiittaall  iissssuueedd  aatt  aannyy  
  ttiimmee  aanndd  tthhee  rreemmaaiinniinngg  ssiixxttyy    ppeerr  cceenntt  ooff  
  tthhee  sshhaarree  ccaappiittaall  mmaayy  bbee  ssuubbssccrriibbeedd  ffoorr,,  
  wwiitthhiinn  ssuucchh  ppeerriioodd    aanndd  iinn  ssuucchh  
  pprrooppoorrttiioonn  aass  mmaayy  bbee  ssppeecciiffiieedd  bbyy  tthhee  
  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt,,  bbyy  tthhee  ffoolllloowwiinngg  
  iinnssttiittuuttiioonnss,,  nnaammeellyy::--    
  
                    ((aa))  tthhee  SSttaattee  BBaannkk;;    
                    ((bb))  ootthheerr  sscchheedduulleedd  bbaannkkss;;    
                    ((cc))  ccoo--ooppeerraattiivvee  ssoocciieettiieess;;    
                      ((dd))iinnssuurraannccee      ccoommppaanniieess,,    iinnvveessttmmeenntt          
                      ttrruussttss    aanndd    ootthheerr  ffiinnaanncciiaall              
                        iinnssttiittuuttiioonnss;;    
                    ((ee))    rreeccooggnniisseedd      aassssoocciiaattiioonnss    aanndd      
            ccoommppaanniieess    ddeeaalliinngg    iinn  aaggrriiccuullttuurraall          
            pprroodduuccee  oorr  aannyy  nnoottiiffiieedd  ccoommmmooddiittyy..                                        
  
**  SSuubbss..  BByy  ss..33..  
iibbiidd..  

 
                          ((33))      IIff    aannyy  ppoorrttiioonn    ooff  tthhee    ssiixxttyy  ppeerr  cceenntt  ooff  tthhee  sshhaarree                            
  ccaappiittaall  rreeffeerrrreedd    ttoo      iinn    ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((22))    rreemmaaiinnss            
  uunnaallllootttteedd,,    iitt    mmaayy    bbee  ssuubbssccrriibbeedd  ffoorr  bbyy  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt    aanndd  tthhee  SSttaattee  BBaannkk  iinn  ssuucchh  pprrooppoorrttiioonn  aass    
  mmaayy  bbee    aaggrreeeedd  uuppoonn  bbeettwweeeenn  tthheemm  aanndd  iinn  ddeeffaauulltt  ooff  
  ssuucchh  aaggrreeeemmeenntt,,  aass  mmaayy  bbee  ddeetteerrmmiinneedd  bbyy  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt..  
  
  
    ((44))        TThhee  sshhaarreess  ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  sshhaallll  
  nnoott  bbee  ttrraannssffeerraabbllee  eexxcceepptt  ttoo  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  
  **[[tthhee  SSttaattee  BBaannkk  oorr  aannyy  ootthheerr  sscchheedduulleedd  bbaannkk]],,  aannyy  
  iinnssuurraannccee  ccoommppaannyy,,  aannyy  iinnvveessttmmeenntt  ttrruusstt  oorr  ootthheerr  
  ffiinnaanncciiaall  iinnssttiittuuttiioonn    oorr  aannyy    ccoo--ooppeerraattiivvee  ssoocciieettyy    oorr    
  aannyy  rreeccooggnniisseedd  aassssoocciiaattiioonn  oorr  ccoommppaannyy  ddeeaalliinngg  iinn  
  aaggrriiccuullttuurraall  pprroodduuccee  oorr  aannyy  nnoottiiffiieedd      ccoommmmooddiittyy,,  iinn  
  aaccccoorrddaannccee  wwiitthh  tthhee  rreegguullaattiioonnss  mmaaddee  bbyy  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  uunnddeerr  tthhiiss    AAcctt..  
  
  
  
  
**  SSuubbss..  BByy  AAcctt  4422  ooff  
11997766,,  ss..33,,  ffoorr  cceerrttaaiinn  
wwoorrddss..  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
SShhaarreess  ttoo  bbee  gguuaarraanntteeeedd  
bbyy  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  
aanndd  ttoo  bbee  ttrruusstt  oorr  
aapppprroovveedd  sseeccuurriittiieess..  
  55..((11))    TThhee  sshhaarreess  ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
  sshhaallll  bbee  gguuaarraanntteeeedd  bbyy  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  aass  ttoo    
  tthhee  rreeppaayymmeenntt    ooff  tthhee  pprriinncciippaall  aanndd    tthhee  ppaayymmeenntt  ooff  tthhee  
  aannnnuuaall    ddiivviiddeenndd  aatt    ssuucchh    mmiinniimmuumm    rraattee    aass    mmaayy    bbee    
  ffiixxeedd    bbyy    tthhee    CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt,,  bbyy  nnoottiiffiiccaattiioonn  
  ppuubblliisshheedd  iinn  tthhee  OOffffiicciiaall  GGaazzeettttee,,  aatt  tthhee  ttiimmee  ooff  tthhee  
  iissssuuee  ooff  tthhee  sshhaarreess..  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    ((22))  NNoottwwiitthhssttaannddiinngg  aannyytthhiinngg  ccoonnttaaiinneedd  iinn  tthhee  AAccttss  
  mmeennttiioonneedd  iinn  tthhiiss  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn,,    tthhee  sshhaarreess    ooff  tthhee    
  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  sshhaallll  bbee    ddeeeemmeedd  ttoo    
  bbee  iinncclluuddeedd    aammoonngg  tthhee    sseeccuurriittiieess  eennuummeerraatteedd    iinn  
  sseeccttiioonn  2200  ooff  tthhee  IInnddiiaann  TTrruussttss  AAcctt,,  11888822  ((22  ooff  11888822)),,  
  aanndd  aallssoo  ttoo  bbee  aapppprroovveedd  sseeccuurriittiieess    ffoorr  tthhee    ppuurrppoossee  ooff  
  tthhee  IInnssuurraannccee  AAcctt,,  11993388  ((44  ooff  11993388))  aanndd  tthhee  BBaannkkiinngg  
  CCoommppaanniieess  AAcctt,,  11994499  ((1100  ooff  11994499))..  
    
  
  
  
  
  

 
  66..((11))      TThhee  ggeenneerraall  ssuuppeerriinntteennddeennccee  aanndd    mmaannaaggeemmeenntt  ooff    tthhee  
  aaffffaaiirrss    aanndd  bbuussiinneessss    ooff    tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg    
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  sshhaallll  vveesstt  iinn    aa  bbooaarrdd    ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  wwhhoo,,  
  wwiitthh    tthhee  aassssiissttaannccee    ooff  aann    EExxeeccuuttiivvee  CCoommmmiitttteeee    aanndd  aa    
  mmaannaaggiinngg  ddiirreeccttoorr,,  mmaayy  eexxeerrcciissee  aallll  tthhee  ppoowweerrss  aanndd  
  ddiisscchhaarrggee      aallll    tthhee  ffuunnccttiioonnss    wwhhiicchh  mmaayy    bbee  eexxeerrcciisseedd  
  oorr  ddiisscchhaarrggeedd  bbyy  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
  uunnddeerr  tthhiiss  AAcctt..  
MMaannaaggeemmeenntt  ooff  
CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
  
      ((22))    TThhee    bbooaarrdd  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  sshhaallll    aacctt    oonn    bbuussiinneessss    
  pprriinncciipplleess  hhaavviinngg  rreeggaarrdd  ttoo    ppuubblliicc    iinntteerreesstt    aanndd    sshhaallll    
  bbee    gguuiiddeedd    bbyy    ssuucchh  iinnssttrruuccttiioonnss  oonn    qquueessttiioonnss  ooff    
  ppoolliiccyy  aass    mmaayy  bbee    ggiivveenn  ttoo  tthheemm  bbyy  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt..  
  
  
      ((33))        IIff    aannyy  ddoouubbtt  aarriisseess  aass  ttoo  wwhheetthheerr  aa  qquueessttiioonn  iiss  oorr  iiss  nnoott  
  aa  qquueessttiioonn  ooff    ppoolliiccyy,,  tthhee    ddeecciissiioonn  ooff    tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  sshhaallll  bbee  ffiinnaall..  
                                                        
  
  
  
  
  
  
  77..((11))    TThhee  bbooaarrdd  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  rreeffeerrrreedd  ttoo  iinn  sseeccttiioonn  66    sshhaallll  
  ccoonnssiisstt  ooff  tthhee  ffoolllloowwiinngg,,  nnaammeellyy::----  
    
          ((aa))  ssiixx  ddiirreeccttoorrss  ttoo  bbee  nnoommiinnaatteedd  bbyy  tthhee  CCeennttrraall      
            GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt;;    
  
        **  ((bb))  OOmmiitttteedd            
              
          ((cc))  oonnee  ddiirreeccttoorr  ttoo  bbee  nnoommiinnaatteedd  bbyy  tthhee  SSttaattee  BBaannkk;;  
    
          ((dd))  oonnee  ddiirreeccttoorr  ttoo  bbee  eelleecctteedd  bbyy  ootthheerr  sscchheedduulleedd  bbaannkkss;;  
    
          ((ee))  oonnee  ddiirreeccttoorr  ttoo  bbee  eelleecctteedd  bbyy  ccoo--ooppeerraattiivvee  ssoocciieettiieess;;  
    
        ((ff))  oonnee    ddiirreeccttoorr  ttoo  bbee    eelleecctteedd    bbyy    iinnssuurraannccee                
          ccoommppaanniieess,,  iinnvveessttmmeenntt  ttrruussttss    aanndd    ootthheerr    ffiinnaanncciiaall    
          iinnssttiittuuttiioonnss,,  rreeccooggnniisseedd    aassssoocciiaattiioonnss      aanndd                  
      
        DDiirreeccttoorrss  
  
  
  
  
  
  
**  NNoottiiffiiccaattiioonn  nnoo..  5511  
ddtt..1166  SSeepptt..22000055  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 
          ccoommppaanniieess      ddeeaalliinngg    iinn  aaggrriiccuullttuurraall  pprroodduuccee  oorr      
          nnoottiiffiieedd  ccoommmmooddiittiieess;;  
    
        **((ffff))  tthhrreeee  ddiirreeccttoorrss  ttoo  bbee  aappppooiinntteedd  bbyy  tthhee  CCeennttrraall        
                GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt..  
  
          ((gg))  aa  mmaannaaggiinngg  ddiirreeccttoorr,,  aappppooiinntteedd  bbyy  tthhee  CCeennttrraall        
          GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  iinn  ccoonnssuullttaattiioonn  wwiitthh    tthhee    ddiirreeccttoorrss        
          rreeffeerrrreedd  ttoo    iinn  ccllaauusseess  ((aa))  ttoo  ((ff))::  
    
  PPrroovviiddeedd  tthhaatt    tthhee  tthhrreeee    ddiirreeccttoorrss  ttoo    bbee  eelleecctteedd    uunnddeerr                
  ccllaauusseess  ((dd)),,  ((ee))    aanndd  ((ff))    mmaayy,,  ffoorr    tthhee  ffiirrsstt  ccoonnssttiittuuttiioonn  ooff    
  tthhee  bbooaarrdd    ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss,,  bbee  nnoommiinnaatteedd  bbyy  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  iinn  ssuucchh  mmaannnneerr  aass  ttoo  ggiivvee  rreepprreesseennttaattiioonn    
  ttoo  eeaacchh    ccllaassss  ooff  iinnssttiittuuttiioonnss  ((wwhheetthheerr  tthheeyy  hhaavvee  
  bbeeccoommee  sshhaarreehhoollddeerrss    ooff  tthhee    CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  oorr    nnoott))  
  rreeffeerrrreedd  ttoo  iinn  tthhoossee  ccllaauusseess,,  bbuutt    aa  ddiirreeccttoorr    ssoo  
  nnoommiinnaatteedd  sshhaallll  hhoolldd  ooffffiiccee  oonnllyy  uunnttiill  hhee  iiss  rreeppllaacceedd    bbyy  
  aa  ddiirreeccttoorr  eelleecctteedd  aass  pprroovviiddeedd  iinn  tthhaatt  ccllaauussee,,  aanndd  tthhee  
  ddiirreeccttoorr  ssoo  eelleecctteedd  sshhaallll  hhoolldd  ooffffiiccee  oonnllyy  ffoorr  ssoo  lloonngg  aass  
  tthhee  ddiirreeccttoorr  rreeppllaacceedd  wwoouulldd  hhaavvee  hheelldd  ooffffiiccee  hhaadd  hhee  nnoott  
  bbeeeenn  rreeppllaacceedd..  
  
  
  
  
  
**NNoottiiffiiccaattiioonn  nnoo..  5511  
ddtt..1166  SSeepptt..22000055  
  ((22))        TThhee  ddiirreeccttoorrss  rreeffeerrrreedd  ttoo  iinn  ccllaauusseess  ((dd)),,  ((ee))  aanndd  ((ff))  ooff  
  ssuubb--  sseeccttiioonn  ((11))  sshhaallll  bbee  eelleecctteedd  iinn  tthhee  pprreessccrriibbeedd  
  mmaannnneerr..  
  
  ((33))            IIff,,  wwiitthhiinn  tthhee  ppeerriioodd  pprreessccrriibbeedd  iinn  tthhiiss  bbeehhaallff,,  oorr  wwiitthhiinn  
    SSuucchh  ffuurrtthheerr  ppeerriioodd  aass  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  mmaayy  
  aallllooww,,  tthhee  iinnssttiittuuttiioonnss  rreeffeerrrreedd  ttoo  iinn  ccllaauussee  ((dd))  oorr  ccllaauussee  
  ((ee))  oorr  ccllaauussee  ((ff))  ooff  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((11))    ffaaiill  ttoo    eelleecctt  aa  
  ddiirreeccttoorr,,  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  mmaayy  nnoommiinnaattee  aa  
  ddiirreeccttoorr  ttoo  ffiillll  tthhee  vvaaccaannccyy..  
  
    
  ((44))        TThhee    bbooaarrdd  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  sshhaallll    hhaavvee  aa    CChhaaiirrmmaann  wwhhoo    
  sshhaallll  bbee  aappppooiinntteedd  bbyy  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ffrroomm  
  
  
  

 
  aammoonngg  tthhee  ddiirreeccttoorrss..  
    
**  ((44AA))    TThhee  ddiirreeccttoorrss  aappppooiinntteedd  uunnddeerr  ccllaauussee((ffff))  ooff  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  
  ((11))  sshhaallll  bbee  eennttiittlleedd  ttoo  rreecceeiivvee  ssuucchh  ssaallaarryy  aanndd  
  aalllloowwaanncceess  aass  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
  mmaayy,,  wwiitthh  tthhee  aapppprroovvaall  ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  
  ddeetteerrmmiinnee..  
  
  
  
  
**NNoottiiffiiccaattiioonn  nnoo..  5511  
ddtt..1166  SSeepptt..22000055  
    ((55))  TThhee  mmaannaaggiinngg  ddiirreeccttoorr  sshhaallll----    
  
  
              ((aa))  eexxeerrcciissee  ssuucchh  ppoowweerrss    aanndd  ppeerrffoorrmm    ssuucchh  dduuttiieess    aass    
  tthhee  bbooaarrdd  ooff      ddiirreeccttoorrss    oorr      tthhee    CCeennttrraall      WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  mmaayy  eennttrruusstt  oorr  ddeelleeggaattee  ttoo  hhiimm;;  aanndd  
  
    
              ((bb))  rreecceeiivvee  ssuucchh  ssaallaarryy    aanndd    aalllloowwaanncceess    aass    tthhee    CCeennttrraall  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  mmaayy,,  wwiitthh  tthhee  aapppprroovvaall  ooff  tthhee  
  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt,,  ffiixx..  
  
  
  ((66))            TThhee    ddiirreeccttoorrss  ooff    tthhee  CCeennttrraall    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
  ootthheerr  tthhaann  tthhee    mmaannaaggiinngg  ddiirreeccttoorr    sshhaallll  bbee    eennttiittlleedd  ttoo    
  rreecceeiivvee  bbyy  wwaayy  ooff  rreemmuunneerraattiioonn  ssuucchh    ssuummss  aass    tthhee  
  CCeennttrraall    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    mmaayy,,  wwiitthh  tthhee  
  aapppprroovvaall  ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt,,  ffiixx::  
  
  PPrroovviiddeedd  tthhaatt    nnoo  ooffffiicciiaall    ddiirreeccttoorr  sshhaallll  bbee  eennttiittlleedd  ttoo  
  rreecceeiivvee  aannyy  rreemmuunneerraattiioonn    ootthheerr  tthhaann  tthhee  aalllloowwaanncceess,,  iiff  
  aannyy,,  aaddmmiissssiibbllee  ttoo  hhiimm  uunnddeerr  tthhee  rruulleess  rreegguullaattiinngg  hhiiss  
  ccoonnddiittiioonnss  ooff  sseerrvviiccee..  
  
      
  ((77))            TThhee  tteerrmm  ooff    ooffffiiccee  ooff,,    aanndd  tthhee    mmaannnneerr  ooff    ffiilllliinngg  ccaassuuaall    vvaaccaanncciieess  aammoonngg  tthhee  
ddiirreeccttoorr  sshhaallll  bbee  ssuucchh  aass  mmaayy  bbee    pprreessccrriibbeedd..  
  
    
DDiissqquuaalliiffiiccaattiioonn  ffoorr  ooffffiiccee  
ooff    ddiirreeccttoorr  ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
88..    AA  ppeerrssoonn    sshhaallll  bbee    ddiissqquuaalliiffiieedd    ffoorr    bbeeiinngg  cchhoosseenn  aass,,    aanndd  
ffoorr    bbeeiinngg,,  aa  ddiirreeccttoorr  ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn----  
  

 
    
  ((ii))  iiff    hhee  iiss    ffoouunndd  ttoo    bbee  aa    lluunnaattiicc  oorr  bbeeccoommeess  ooff  uunnssoouunndd  
mmiinndd;;  oorr  
  
            ((iiii))  iiff    hhee    iiss,,    oorr  aatt    aannyy    ttiimmee    hhaass    bbeeeenn,,    aaddjjuuddiiccaatteedd  
  iinnssoollvveenntt  oorr    hhaass  ssuussppeennddeedd  ppaayymmeenntt  ooff  hhiiss  ddeebbttss  oorr  
  hhaass  ccoommppoouunnddeedd  wwiitthh  hhiiss  ccrreeddiittoorrss;;  oorr  
  
            ((iiiiii))  iiff    hhee  iiss    oorr  hhaass    bbeeeenn    ccoonnvviicctteedd    ooff  aannyy  ooffffeennccee    
  iinnvvoollvviinngg  mmoorraall  ttuurrppiittuuddee    aanndd  sseenntteenncceedd    iinn    rreessppeecctt    
  tthheerreeooff    ttoo    iimmpprriissoonnmmeenntt  ffoorr    nnoott  lleessss  tthhaann  ssiixx  mmoonntthhss,,  
  uunnlleessss  aa  ppeerriioodd  ooff  ffiivvee  yyeeaarrss  hhaass  eellaappsseedd  ffrroomm  tthhee  ddaattee  
  ooff  eexxppiirryy  ooff  tthhee  sseenntteennccee;;  oorr  
  
              ((iivv))  iiff  hhee  hhaass  bbeeeenn  rreemmoovveedd  oorr  ddiissmmiisssseedd  ffrroomm  tthhee  sseerrvviiccee  
  ooff  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  oorr  aa  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  oowwnneedd  aanndd  ccoonnttrroolllleedd  
  bbyy  tthhee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt;;  oorr  
  
  
          **  ((vv))  eexxcceepptt    iinn  tthhee  ccaassee  ooff  tthhee  ddiirreeccttoorrss  aappppooiinntteedd  uunnddeerr  
  ccllaauussee  ((ffff))  ooff  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((11))  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  77  aanndd  tthhee  
  mmaannaaggiinngg  ddiirreeccttoorr,,  iiff  hhee  iiss  aa  ssaallaarriieedd    ooffffiicciiaall        ooff      tthhee    
  CCeennttrraall      WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  oorr  aannyy  SSttaattee  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn;;  oorr  
  
  
**NNoottiiffiiccaattiioonn  nnoo..  5511  
ddtt..1166  SSeepptt..22000055  
              ((vvii))  iiff    hhee    iiss    ppeerrssoonnaallllyy    iinntteerreesstteedd    iinn    aannyy    ssuubbssiissttiinngg  
  ccoonnttrraacctt  mmaaddee    wwiitthh,,  oorr  iinn  aannyy  wwoorrkk  bbeeiinngg  ddoonnee  ffoorr  tthhee  
  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  eexxcceepptt  aass  aa  
  sshhaarreehhoollddeerr((ootthheerr  tthhaann    aa    ddiirreeccttoorr))    iinn    aannyy    ppuubblliicc    
  ccoommppaannyy    aa  ddeeffiinneedd  iinn  tthhee  CCoommppaanniieess  AAcctt,,  11995566  ((11  ooff  
  11995566))::    
  
  PPrroovviiddeedd  tthhaatt  wwhheerree  aannyy  ssuucchh  ppeerrssoonn  iiss  aa  sshhaarreehhoollddeerr,,  
  hhee  sshhaallll  ddiisscclloossee  ttoo  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  tthhee  nnaattuurree  aanndd  eexxtteenntt  ooff  sshhaarreess  hheelldd  bbyy  
  hhiimm  iinn  ssuucchh  ccoommppaannyy..  
  
RReemmoovvaall  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  ffrroomm  
ooffffiiccee..  
      
  
    99..  ((11))  TThhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  mmaayy,,    aatt    aannyy    ttiimmee    iinn    
  ccoonnssuullttaattiioonn    wwiitthh    tthhee    CCeennttrraall    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  rreemmoovvee  tthhee  mmaannaaggiinngg  ddiirreeccttoorr  ffrroomm  ooffffiiccee  
  aafftteerr  ggiivviinngg  hhiimm  aa    rreeaassoonnaabbllee    ooppppoorrttuunniittyy    ooff  sshhoowwiinngg    
  ccaauussee  aaggaaiinnsstt    tthhee    pprrooppoosseedd  rreemmoovvaall..    
  
  
              ((22))  TThhee    bbooaarrdd  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  mmaayy    rreemmoovvee  ffrroomm  ooffffiiccee  aannyy  
  ddiirreeccttoorr  wwhhoo——  
  
                    ((aa))  iiss  oorr  hhaass  bbeeccoommee  ssuubbjjeecctt  ttoo  aannyy  ooff  tthhee          
          ddiissqquuaalliiffiiccaattiioonnss    mmeennttiioonneedd  iinn  sseeccttiioonn  88;;  oorr    
      
                    ((bb))  iiss    aabbsseenntt  wwiitthhoouutt    lleeaavvee  ooff    tthhee  bbooaarrdd  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss      
          ffoorr  mmoorree  tthhaann    tthhrreeee    ccoonnsseeccuuttiivvee    mmeeeettiinnggss  ooff    tthhee    
          bbooaarrdd  wwiitthhoouutt  ccaauussee    ssuuffffiicciieenntt  iinn    tthhee  ooppiinniioonn  ooff                                
          tthhee  bbooaarrdd,,    ttoo  eexxoonneerraattee  hhiiss  aabbsseennccee..    
  
  
AAppppooiinnttmmeenntt  ooff  ooffffiicceerrss,,  
eettcc..,,  aanndd  tthheeiirr  ccoonnddiittiioonnss  
ooff  sseerrvviiccee..  
      
  
  
1100..  ((11))    TThhee  CCeennttrraall    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    mmaayy    aappppooiinntt    
  ssuucchh  ooffffiicceerrss  aanndd    ootthheerr    eemmppllooyyeeeess  aass    iitt  ccoonnssiiddeerrss    
  nneecceessssaarryy    ffoorr    tthhee  eeffffiicciieenntt  ppeerrffoorrmmaannccee  ooff  iittss  
  ffuunnccttiioonnss..  
    
            ((22))  EEvveerryy  ppeerrssoonn  eemmppllooyyeedd  bbyy  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  uunnddeerr  tthhiiss    AAcctt  sshhaallll    bbee  ssuubbjjeecctt    ttoo  ssuucchh    
  ccoonnddiittiioonnss  ooff  sseerrvviiccee  aanndd  sshhaallll  bbee    eennttiittlleedd  ttoo    ssuucchh    
  rreemmuunneerraattiioonn    aass    mmaayy    bbee  ddeetteerrmmiinneedd    bbyy  rreegguullaattiioonnss  
  mmaaddee  bbyy  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  uunnddeerr  tthhiiss  AAcctt..    
  
    

 
  1111..    SSuubbjjeecctt  ttoo  tthhee  pprroovviissiioonnss  ooff  tthhiiss  AAcctt,,  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  mmaayy——  
  
      ((aa))    aaccqquuiirree  aanndd    bbuuiilldd    ggooddoowwnnss    aanndd    wwaarreehhoouusseess    aatt    
              ssuucchh  ssuuiittaabbllee  ppllaacceess  iinn  IInnddiiaa  **  oorr  aabbrrooaadd  aass  iitt    
              tthhiinnkkss  ffiitt;;          
  
  ((bb))  rruunn    wwaarreehhoouusseess  ffoorr  tthhee  ssttoorraaggee  ooff  aaggrriiccuullttuurraall      
            pprroodduuccee,,  sseeeeddss,,  mmaannuurreess,,  ffeerrttiilliizzeerrss,,    aaggrriiccuullttuurraall    
            iimmpplleemmeennttss  aanndd  nnoottiiffiieedd    ccoommmmooddiittiieess  ooffffeerreedd    bbyy      
            iinnddiivviidduuaallss,,    ccoo--ooppeerraattiivvee  ssoocciieettiieess  aanndd  ootthheerr      
            iinnssttiittuuttiioonnss;;  
    
  ((cc))  aarrrraannggee    ffaacciilliittiieess  ffoorr    tthhee  ttrraannssppoorrtt    ooff    aaggrriiccuullttuurraall    
            pprroodduuccee,,    sseeeeddss,,      mmaannuurreess,,    ffeerrttiilliizzeerrss,,    aaggrriiccuullttuurraall  
            iimmpplleemmeennttss  aanndd    nnoottiiffiieedd    ccoommmmooddiittiieess    ttoo    aanndd        
            ffrroomm  wwaarreehhoouusseess;;  
  
  ((dd))  ssuubbssccrriibbee    ttoo  tthhee    sshhaarree  ccaappiittaall  ooff  aa  SSttaattee          
          WWaarreehhoouussiinngg    CCoorrppoorraattiioonn;;  
    
          ((ee))  aacctt    aass  aaggeenntt    ooff  tthhee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ffoorr  tthhee  ppuurrppoosseess  ooff  
            tthhee  ppuurrcchhaassee,,      ssaallee,,        ssttoorraaggee      aanndd        ddiissttrriibbuuttiioonn      
            ooff  aaggrriiccuullttuurraall    pprroodduuccee,,  sseeeeddss,,  mmaannuurreess,,    ffeerrttiilliizzeerrss,,                  
            aaggrriiccuullttuurraall  iimmpplleemmeennttss  aanndd  nnoottiiffiieedd  ccoommmmooddiittiieess;;    
  
  **  ((eeaa))  eenntteerr  iinnttoo,,  wwiitthh  tthhee  pprreevviioouuss  aapppprroovvaall  ooff  tthhee      
        CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeennttss  jjooiinntt  vveennttuurreess  wwiitthh  aannyy          
        ccoorrppoorraattiioonn  eessttaabblliisshheedd  bbyy  oorr  uunnddeerr  aannyy  CCeennttrraall  AAcctt  
      oorr  aannyy  SSttaattee  AAcctt  oorr  wwiitthh  aannyy  ccoommppaannyy  ffoorrmmeedd  aanndd  
  rreeggiisstteerreedd  uunnddeerr  tthhee  CCoommppaanniieess  AAcctt,,  11995566  iinncclluuddiinngg  
  ffoorreeiiggnn  ccoommppaannyy  oorr  tthhrroouugghh  iittss  ssuubbssiiddiiaarryy  ccoommppaanniieess,,  
  ffoorr  ccaarrrryyiinngg  oouutt  tthhee  ppuurrppoosseess  ooff  tthhiiss  AAcctt..  
  
    EExxppllaannaattiioonn,,--------  FFoorr  tthhee  ppuurrppoosseess  ooff  tthhiiss  ccllaauussee,,  tthhee  
FFuunnccttiioonnss  ooff  CCeennttrraall  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
  
  
**  TThhee  WWCC  AAmmeennddmmeenntt  
AAcctt,,  2233  ooff  22000011  ddtt..  2299  
AAuugg..22000011  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
11  ooff  11995566  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 
  eexxpprreessssiioonn  ――  FFoorreeiiggnn  ccoommppaannyy‖‖  SShhaallll  hhaavvee  tthhee  mmeeaanniinngg  
  aassssiiggnneedd  ttoo  iitt  uunnddeerr  ccllaauussee  ((2233AA))  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  22  ooff  tthhee  
  IInnccoommee  --TTaaxx  AAcctt,,  11996611;;  
  
      **  ((eebb))  eessttaabblliisshh  ssuubbssiiddiiaarryy  ccoommppaanniieess;;  aanndd                                                      
                                                                        
          ((ff))  ccaarrrryy  oouutt  ssuucchh  ootthheerr  ffuunnccttiioonnss  aass  mmaayy  bbee  pprreessccrriibbeedd..  
  
  
4433  ooff  11996611  
  1122..((11))    TThheerree    sshhaallll    bbee    aann    EExxeeccuuttiivvee  CCoommmmiitttteeee  ooff    tthhee  
  CCeennttrraall    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  wwhhiicchh  sshhaallll  ccoonnssiisstt  
  ooff——  
  
        **  ((aa))  tthhee    CChhaaiirrmmaann  ooff  tthhee    bbooaarrdd    ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss;;  
    
          ((bb))  tthhee  mmaannaaggiinngg  ddiirreeccttoorr;;  aanndd  
            ((cc))  ttwwoo    ootthheerr  ddiirreeccttoorrss    cchhoosseenn  bbyy    tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  iinn  
  tthhee  pprreessccrriibbeedd  mmaannnneerr..  
                                                                                                                                        
        ((22))  TThhee  CChhaaiirrmmaann  ooff  tthhee  bbooaarrdd  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  sshhaallll  bbee    tthhee  
  CChhaaiirrmmaann  ooff    tthhee  EExxeeccuuttiivvee  CCoommmmiitttteeee..    
                
          ((33))  SSuubbjjeecctt  ttoo  tthhee  ggeenneerraall  ccoonnttrrooll,,  ddiirreeccttiioonn  aanndd  
  ssuuppeerriinntteennddeennccee  ooff  tthhee  bbooaarrdd  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss,,  tthhee  
  EExxeeccuuttiivvee  CCoommmmiitttteeee  sshhaallll  bbee  ccoommppeetteenntt  ttoo  ddeeaall    wwiitthh  
  aannyy    mmaatttteerr    wwiitthhiinn    tthhee    ccoommppeetteennccee    ooff    tthhee    CCeennttrraall  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
  
EExxeeccuuttiivvee  CCoommmmiitttteeee..  
  
  
  
  
**NNoottiiffiiccaattiioonn  nnoo..  5511  
ddtt..1166  SSeepptt..22000055  
  1133..((11))  TThhee  aannnnuuaall  ggeenneerraall  mmeeeettiinngg  ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  ((hheerreeiinnaafftteerr  rreeffeerrrreedd  ttoo  aass  tthhee  aannnnuuaall  
  ggeenneerraall  mmeeeettiinngg))  sshhaallll  bbee  hheelldd  eevveerryy  yyeeaarr  eeiitthheerr  aatt  iittss  
  hheeaadd--  ooffffiiccee  oorr    aatt  aannyy  ootthheerr  ooffffiiccee  ooff  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
  wwiitthhiinn  ssiixx  mmoonntthhss  ooff  tthhee  cclloossee    ooff  tthhee  ffiinnaanncciiaall  yyeeaarr,,  
  aanndd  aannyy  ootthheerr  ggeenneerraall  mmeeeettiinngg  mmaayy  bbee  ccoonnvveenneedd  bbyy  tthhee  
  bbooaarrdd  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  aatt  aannyy  ootthheerr  ttiimmee..  
    
  
  MMeeeettiinnggss  ooff  tthhee  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
  
  
  

 
            ((22))TThhee  sshhaarreehhoollddeerrss  pprreesseenntt  aatt  tthhee  aannnnuuaall  ggeenneerraall  
  mmeeeettiinngg  sshhaallll  bbee  eennttiittlleedd  ttoo  ddiissccuussss  tthhee  aannnnuuaall  
  aaccccoouunnttss,,  tthhee  rreeppoorrtt  ooff  tthhee  bbooaarrdd  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  oonn    tthhee  
  wwoorrkkiinngg    ooff  tthhee    CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  dduurriinngg    tthhee  yyeeaarr    uunnddeerr  
  rreeppoorrtt,,  aass    wweellll  aass    tthhee  aauuddiittoorr‘‘ss    rreeppoorrtt  oonn  tthhee  aannnnuuaall  
  bbaallaannccee--sshheeeett  aanndd  aaccccoouunnttss..  
    
            ((33))  TThhee  bbooaarrdd  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  sshhaallll,,  oonn    tthhee  rreeqquuiissiittiioonn    ooff  oonnee--tthhiirrdd  ooff  
  tthhee  nnuummbbeerr  ooff  sshhaarreehhoollddeerrss  ooff  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  ccaallll  aa  
  ssppeecciiaall  mmeeeettiinngg  ooff  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
    
            ((44))  TThhee  rreeqquuiissiittiioonn  ffoorr    aa  ssppeecciiaall  mmeeeettiinngg  uunnddeerr  ssuubb--
  sseeccttiioonn  ((33))  sshhaallll  ssttaattee    tthhee  oobbjjeecctt    ooff  tthhee    mmeeeettiinngg,,  aanndd    
  sshhaallll  bbee    ssiiggnneedd  bbyy  tthhee  rreeqquuiissiittiioonniissttss  aanndd    ddeeppoossiitteedd  aatt    
  tthhee  hheeaadd--ooffffiiccee  ooff  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  aanndd  mmaayy    ccoonnssiisstt  ooff    
  sseevveerraall  ddooccuummeennttss  iinn  lliikkee  ffoorrmm  eeaacchh  ssiiggnneedd  bbyy  oonnee  oorr  
  mmoorree  rreeqquuiissiittiioonniissttss..  
    
            ((55))IIff  tthhee  bbooaarrdd    ooff    ddiirreeccttoorrss    ooff    tthhee    CCeennttrraall    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  ddoo  nnoott  pprroocceeeedd  wwiitthhiinn  ttwweennttyy--oonnee  ddaayyss  
  ffrroomm  tthhee  ddaattee  ooff  tthhee  rreeqquuiissiittiioonn  bbeeiinngg    ssoo  ddeeppoossiitteedd    ttoo  
  ccaauussee    tthhee  ssppeecciiaall  mmeeeettiinngg  ttoo    bbee  ccaalllleedd,,  tthhee  
  rreeqquuiissiittiioonniissttss,,  oorr    aa  mmaajjoorriittyy    ooff  tthheemm,,  mmaayy,,  tthheemmsseellvveess  
    ccaallll  tthhee    mmeeeettiinngg,,  bbuutt  iinn  eeiitthheerr  ccaassee,,  tthhee  mmeeeettiinngg  ssoo  
  ccaalllleedd  sshhaallll  bbee  hheelldd  wwiitthhiinn    tthhrreeee    mmoonntthhss    ffrroomm    tthhee    
  ddaattee    ooff    tthhee    ddeeppoossiitt    ooff    tthhee  rreeqquuiissiittiioonn..  
    
            ((66))  TThhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  sshhaallll  oobbsseerrvvee  
  ssuucchh  rruulleess  ooff  pprroocceedduurree    iinn  rreeggaarrdd  ttoo  tthhee  ttrraannssaaccttiioonn  ooff  
  bbuussiinneessss  aatt  iittss  mmeeeettiinnggss  ((iinncclluuddiinngg  tthhee  qquuoorruumm  aatt    
  mmeeeettiinnggss))  aass  mmaayy  bbee  pprroovviiddeedd  bbyy  rreegguullaattiioonnss    mmaaddee  bbyy    
  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  uunnddeerr    tthhiiss  AAcctt..  

 
              1144..((11))  TThhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  mmaayy,,  aafftteerr  dduuee  
  aapppprroopprriiaattiioonn  mmaaddee  bbyy  PPaarrlliiaammeenntt  bbyy  llaaww  iinn  tthhiiss  
  bbeehhaallff,,    ppaayy  ttoo    tthhee    CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
  ffoorr  tthhee  ppuurrppoosseess  ooff  eeiitthheerr  ffuunndd  mmaaiinnttaaiinneedd  bbyy  tthhee  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn----  
    
      ((aa))  bbyy    wwaayy  ooff  ggrraannttss,,  ssuucchh  ssuummss    ooff    mmoonneeyy    aass    tthhee      CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  
mmaayy  ccoonnssiiddeerr  nneecceessssaarryy;;  aanndd  
  
                    ((bb))  bbyy  wwaayy  ooff    llooaannss,,  ssuucchh  ssuummss  ooff  mmoonneeyy  oonn  ssuucchh  
  tteerrmmss    aanndd  ccoonnddiittiioonnss  aass  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  mmaayy  
  ddeetteerrmmiinnee..    
    
            ((22))  WWhheenn  mmaakkiinngg  aa  ppaayymmeenntt  uunnddeerr  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((11)),,  tthhee  
  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  sshhaallll  ssppeecciiffyy  tthhee  ffuunndd  ffoorr  tthhee  
  ppuurrppoosseess  ooff  wwhhiicchh  tthhee  ppaayymmeenntt  iiss  mmaaddee..  
  
GGrraannttss  aanndd  llooaannss  bbyy  tthhee  
CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt..  
      
  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  ttoo  mmaaiinnttaaiinn  
ttwwoo  ffuunnddss..  
      
  
1155..    TThhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  sshhaallll  mmaaiinnttaaiinn  ttwwoo  
  sseeppaarraattee  ffuunnddss,,  nnaammeellyy::----  
    
((aa))  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  FFuunndd  ((hheerreeiinnaafftteerr    
  rreeffeerrrreedd  ttoo  aass  tthhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  FFuunndd));;  aanndd  
  
          ((bb))  tthhee  GGeenneerraall  FFuunndd..      
  

 
  
  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  FFuunndd..  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  1166..  ((11))  TToo    tthhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  FFuunndd  sshhaallll  bbee  ccrreeddiitteedd----  
    
          ((aa))  aallll  mmoonneeyyss  aanndd    ootthheerr    sseeccuurriittiieess    ttrraannssffeerrrreedd    ttoo    
  tthhee    CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  uunnddeerr  ccllaauussee  ((cc))  
  ooff  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn((22))  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  4433;;  
    
          ((bb))  ssuucchh    ggrraannttss    aanndd    llooaannss    aass    tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  wwaayy  mmaakkee  ffoorr  tthhee  ppuurrppoosseess  ooff  tthhee  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  FFuunndd;;  aanndd  
    
          ((cc))  ssuucchh    ssuummss  ooff    mmoonneeyy  aass    mmaayy,,    ffrroomm    ttiimmee    ttoo    ttiimmee,,    
  bbee  rreeaalliizzeedd  oouutt    ooff  tthhee    llooaannss  mmaaddee    ffrroomm  tthhee    
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  FFuunndd  oorr      ffrroomm  iinntteerreesstt  oonn  llooaannss    oorr    
  ddiivviiddeennddss    oonn  iinnvveessttmmeennttss  mmaaddee  ffrroomm  tthhaatt  ffuunndd..  
    
              ((22))  TThhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  FFuunndd  sshhaallll  bbee  aapppplliieedd----  
    
((aa))  ffoorr  aaddvvaanncciinngg  llooaannss    ttoo  SSttaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeennttss  oonn      
        ssuucchh  tteerrmmss  aanndd  ccoonnddiittiioonnss    aass  tthhee    CCeennttrraall  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  mmaayy  ddeeeemm    ffiitt  ffoorr    tthhee    
  ppuurrppoossee  ooff    eennaabblliinngg    tthheemm  ttoo  ssuubbssccrriibbee  ttoo    tthhee  sshhaarree  
  ccaappiittaall  ooff    SSttaattee    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss;;  
  
  ((bb))  ffoorr    aaddvvaanncciinngg  llooaannss    aanndd  ggrraannttiinngg    ssuubbssiiddiieess    ttoo    
SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  oorr  ttoo  SSttaattee    
GGoovveerrnnmmeennttss    oonn  ssuucchh  tteerrmmss    aanndd  ccoonnddiittiioonnss    aass  tthhee    
CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  mmaayy  ddeeeemm  ffiitt  ffoorr  tthhee  
ppuurrppoossee  ooff  pprroommoottiinngg  tthhee  wwaarreehhoouussiinngg  aanndd  ssttoorraaggee  ooff                    
aaggrriiccuullttuurraall  pprroodduuccee  aanndd  nnoottiiffiieedd    ccoommmmooddiittiieess,,  
ootthheerrwwiissee    tthhaann  tthhrroouugghh    ccoo--  ooppeerraattiivvee  ssoocciieettiieess;;  
  
  **[[((cc))  ffoorr  mmeeeettiinngg  tthhee  eexxppeennsseess  iinnccuurrrreedd  iinn  rreellaattiioonn  ttoo  
  tthhee  ttrraaiinniinngg  ooff  ppeerrssoonnnneell,,  oorr  ppuubblliicciittyy  aanndd  pprrooppaaggaannddaa,,  
  ffoorr  tthhee    ppuurrppoossee    ooff  pprroommoottiinngg    wwaarreehhoouussiinngg  aanndd    
  ssttoorraaggee    ooff  aaggrriiccuullttuurraall  pprroodduuccee  aanndd  nnoottiiffiieedd  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
**  IInnss..  BByy  AAcctt  4422  ooff  11997766,,  
ss..44..    
  
  

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
GGeenneerraall  FFuunndd..  
  ccoommmmooddiittiieess;;  
  
    ((dd))    ffoorr      mmeeeettiinngg    tthhee      eexxppeennsseess,,    iinncclluuddiinngg    tthhee    ssaallaarryy,,  
  aalllloowwaanncceess  aanndd    ootthheerr  rreemmuunneerraattiioonn    ooff  tthhee  ooffffiicceerrss  aanndd  
  ootthheerr  eemmppllooyyeeeess,,      iinnccuurrrreedd      iinn      rreellaattiioonn      ttoo      tthhee    
  aaddmmiinniissttrraattiioonn  ooff  tthhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  FFuunndd..]]  
  
1177..  ((11))  TToo  tthhee  GGeenneerraall  FFuunndd  sshhaallll  bbee  ccrreeddiitteedd----  
    
          ((aa))  aallll  ssuummss  rreecceeiivveedd  bbyy  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  ootthheerr  tthhaann    tthhoossee  rreeffeerrrreedd    ttoo  iinn    ssuubb--
  sseeccttiioonn    ((11))    ooff  sseeccttiioonn  1166;;  aanndd  
    
          ((bb))  ssuucchh  ggrraannttss  aanndd  llooaannss  aass  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  
  mmaayy  mmaakkee  ffoorr  tthhee  ppuurrppoosseess  ooff  tthhee  GGeenneerraall  FFuunndd..  
              
  ((22))  TThhee  GGeenneerraall  FFuunndd  sshhaallll  bbee  aapppplliieedd----  
    
          ((aa))    ffoorr      mmeeeettiinngg    tthhee      ssaallaarryy,,      aalllloowwaanncceess      aanndd    ootthheerr  
  rreemmuunneerraattiioonn  ooff  tthhee  ooffffiicceerrss  aanndd  ootthheerr  eemmppllooyyeeeess  ooff  tthhee                  
  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn;;  
                                                                                                                        
  ((bb))  ffoorr  mmeeeettiinngg  tthhee  ootthheerr  aaddmmiinniissttrraattiivvee    eexxppeennsseess  ooff    
  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn;;  aanndd  
    
          ((cc))  ffoorr  ccaarrrryyiinngg  oouutt  tthhee  ppuurrppoosseess  ooff  tthhiiss  AAcctt;;  
    
              **[[PPrroovviiddeedd  tthhaatt  tthhee  GGeenneerraall    FFuunndd    sshhaallll    nnoott    bbee    
  aapppplliieedd    ffoorr  mmeeeettiinngg  tthhee    eexxppeennsseess  rreeffeerrrreedd  ttoo  iinn  ccllaauussee  
  ((cc))  oorr  ccllaauussee  ((dd))  ooff  ssuubb--  sseeccttiioonn  ((22))  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  1166..]]  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
**        55..  IIbbiidd..  
  
  
  
CCHHAAPPTTEERR  IIIIII  
  
SSTTAATTEE  WWAARREEHHOOUUSSIINNGG  CCOORRPPOORRAATTIIOONNSS      
1188..  ((11))  TThhee  SSttaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  mmaayy,,  bbyy    nnoottiiffiiccaattiioonn    iinn  tthhee    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 
  
  
  
  
SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss..  
      
  
  OOffffiicciiaall  GGaazzeettttee  aanndd  wwiitthh  tthhee  aapppprroovvaall  ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
  wwaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  eessttaabblliisshh    aa  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  ffoorr  tthhee  SSttaattee  uunnddeerr  ssuucchh  nnaammee  aass  mmaayy  bbee  
  ssppeecciiffiieedd  iinn  tthhee  nnoottiiffiiccaattiioonn..  
  
        ((22))  AA  SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  eessttaabblliisshheedd  uunnddeerr  
  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((11))  sshhaallll    bbee  aa    bbooddyy  ccoorrppoorraattee    bbyy  tthhee    
  nnaammee  nnoottiiffiieedd  uunnddeerr  tthhaatt  ssuubb--  sseeccttiioonn,,  hhaavviinngg    
  ppeerrppeettuuaall  ssuucccceessssiioonn  aanndd  aa  ccoommmmoonn  sseeaall,,  wwiitthh  ppoowweerr  
  ttoo  aaccqquuiirree,,  hhoolldd  aanndd  ddiissppoossee  ooff  pprrooppeerrttyy  aanndd  ttoo  
  ccoonnttrraacctt,,  aanndd  mmaayy,,  bbyy  tthhee  ssaaiidd  nnaammee,,  ssuuee  aanndd  bbee  ssuueedd..  
                ((33))  TThhee  hheeaadd--ooffffiiccee  ooff  aa  SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
  sshhaallll  bbee  aatt  ssuucchh    ppllaaccee  wwiitthhiinn    tthhee  SSttaattee    aass  mmaayy    bbee  
  nnoottiiffiieedd    iinn  tthhee  OOffffiicciiaall  GGaazzeettttee..    
  
              ((44))  NNoottwwiitthhssttaannddiinngg  aannyytthhiinngg  ccoonnttaaiinneedd  iinn  ssuubb--
  sseeccttiioonnss  ((11)),,  ((22))  aanndd  ((33)),,    iitt  sshhaallll    nnoott  bbee    nneecceessssaarryy    
  ffoorr    tthhee    SSttaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt    ttoo  eessttaabblliisshh  aa  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  uunnddeerr  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((11))  wwhheerree,,  uunnddeerr  
  ccllaauussee  ((gg))  ooff  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((22))  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  4433,,    aa  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    iiss  ddeeeemmeedd  ttoo    bbee  eessttaabblliisshheedd  ffoorr  tthhaatt  
  SSttaattee  uunnddeerr  tthhiiss  AAcctt..    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  1199..  ((11))  TThhee  aauutthhoorriizzeedd  ccaappiittaall  ooff  aa  SSttaattee    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    sshhaallll  bbee    ssuucchh  ssuumm  nnoott  eexxcceeeeddiinngg  ttwwoo  
  ccrroorreess  ooff  rruuppeeeess  aass  mmaayy  bbee  pprreessccrriibbeedd,,  ddiivviiddeedd  iinnttoo  
  sshhaarreess  ooff  tthhee  ffaaccee  vvaalluuee  ooff    oonnee  hhuunnddrreedd    rruuppeeeess  eeaacchh,,    
  ooff  wwhhiicchh    ssuucchh  nnuummbbeerr    aass  mmaayy    bbee  ddeetteerrmmiinneedd    bbyy    tthhee    
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn      iinn  ccoonnssuullttaattiioonn    wwiitthh    tthhee    SSttaattee  
  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  sshhaallll  bbee  iissssuueedd    iinn  tthhee    ffiirrsstt  iinnssttaannccee    aanndd  
  tthhee  rreemmaaiinniinngg  sshhaarreess    mmaayy    bbee  iissssuueedd,,  ffrroomm  ttiimmee  ttoo  
  ttiimmee,,  aass  aanndd  wwhheenn  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  mmaayy  ddeeeemm    ffiitt    aafftteerr    
  ccoonnssuullttaattiioonn    wwiitthh    tthhee    CCeennttrraall    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  aanndd  wwiitthh  tthhee  ssaannccttiioonn  ooff  tthhee  SSttaattee  
  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt::  
SShhaarree  ccaappiittaall  aanndd  
sshhaarreehhoollddeerrss  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 
  
    **[[PPrroovviiddeedd  tthhaatt  iinn  rreessppeecctt  ooff  aannyy  SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  tthhee    CCeennttrraall    GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt    mmaayy,,    aafftteerr  
  ccoonnssuullttaattiioonn    wwiitthh    tthhee    SSttaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ccoonncceerrnneedd,,  
  ffrroomm  ttiimmee    ttoo  ttiimmee  aanndd  bbyy  oorrddeerr  nnoottiiffiieedd  iinn  tthhee  OOffffiicciiaall  
  GGaazzeettttee,,  iinnccrreeaassee  tthhee  mmaaxxiimmuumm  lliimmiitt  ooff  tthhee  aauutthhoorriisseedd  
  ccaappiittaall  aaffoorreessaaiidd  ttoo    ssuucchh  eexxtteenntt  aanndd  iinn  ssuucchh  mmaannnneerr  
  aass  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  mmaayy  ddeetteerrmmiinnee..]]  
    
    ((22))  OOff    tthhee  sshhaarree  ccaappiittaall  iissssuueedd  iinn  tthhee  ffiirrsstt  iinnssttaannccee  aanndd  
  ooff  aannyy  ssuubbsseeqquueenntt  iissssuuee    ooff  ssuucchh  ccaappiittaall,,  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  sshhaallll,,  iinn  aannyy  ccaassee  wwhheerree  tthhee  
  SSttaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  hhaass  ssuubbssccrriibbeedd  ffoorr  ffiiffttyy  ppeerr  cceenntt..  ooff  
  ssuucchh  ccaappiittaall,,  ssuubbssccrriibbee  ffoorr  tthhee  rreemmaaiinniinngg  ffiiffttyy  ppeerr  cceenntt  
  ooff  tthhee  ccaappiittaall..    
  
  
**  IInnss..  BByy  AAcctt  4422  ooff  11997766,,  
ss..66..  
  2200..  ((11))    TThhee  ggeenneerraall  ssuuppeerriinntteennddeennccee    aanndd  mmaannaaggeemmeenntt    ooff  tthhee    
  aaffffaaiirrss    ooff    aa  SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  sshhaallll  vveesstt  
  iinn  aa  bbooaarrdd  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  wwhhiicchh  sshhaallll  ccoonnssiisstt  ooff  tthhee  
  ffoolllloowwiinngg,,  nnaammeellyy::----  
    
  ((aa))  ffiivvee  ddiirreeccttoorrss    nnoommiinnaatteedd    bbyy    tthhee    CCeennttrraall  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  ooff  wwhhoomm  oonnee  sshhaallll  bbee  
  nnoommiinnaatteedd  iinn  ccoonnssuullttaattiioonn  wwiitthh  tthhee  SSttaattee  BBaannkk  aanndd  oonnee  
  aatt  lleeaasstt  sshhaallll  bbee  aa  nnoonn--ooffffiicciiaall;;  
  
  ((bb))  ffiivvee  ddiirreeccttoorrss  nnoommiinnaatteedd  bbyy  tthhee  SSttaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt;;  
  aanndd  
  
  ((cc))  aa  mmaannaaggiinngg  ddiirreeccttoorr,,    aappppooiinntteedd    bbyy  tthhee  SSttaattee  
  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  iinn  ccoonnssuullttaattiioonn  wwiitthh    tthhee    ddiirreeccttoorrss    
  rreeffeerrrreedd  ttoo    iinn  ccllaauusseess  ((aa))    aanndd  ((bb))    aanndd  uunnddeerr  
  iinnttiimmaattiioonn  ttoo**  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
    
      ((22))  TThhee  CChhaaiirrmmaann  ooff  tthhee  bbooaarrdd  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  sshhaallll  bbee  
MMaannaaggeemmeenntt  ooff  aa  ssttaattee  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
**TThhee  WWCC  AAmmeennddmmeenntt  
AAcctt,,  22000011  ddtt..  2299  AAuugg  
22000011((  2233  ooff  22000011))  

 
  aappppooiinntteedd  bbyy  tthhee  SSttaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ffrroomm  aammoonngg  tthhee  
  ddiirreeccttoorrss  ooff  tthhee  SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  uunnddeerr  
  iinnttiimmaattiioonn  ttoo  tthhee    CCeennttrraall    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
  
            ((33))  TThhee  mmaannaaggiinngg  ddiirreeccttoorr  sshhaallll----  
    
((aa))  eexxeerrcciissee  ssuucchh  ppoowweerrss    aanndd  ppeerrffoorrmm    ssuucchh  dduuttiieess    
            aass    tthhee  bbooaarrdd  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  oorr  tthhee  SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg                  
            CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  mmaayy  eennttrruusstt  oorr  ddeelleeggaattee  ttoo  hhiimm;;  aanndd  
  
  ((bb))    rreecceeiivvee    ssuucchh    ssaallaarryy    aanndd    aalllloowwaanncceess  aass    tthhee    SSttaattee  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  mmaayy,,  iinn    ccoonnssuullttaattiioonn  wwiitthh  
  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg    CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,    aanndd  wwiitthh    
  tthhee  pprreevviioouuss    aapppprroovvaall  ooff  tthhee  SSttaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt,,  ffiixx..  
    
            ((44))  TThhee  bbooaarrdd  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss    sshhaallll    aacctt    oonn    bbuussiinneessss    
  pprriinncciipplleess  hhaavviinngg    rreeggaarrdd  ttoo    ppuubblliicc    iinntteerreesstt    aanndd    sshhaallll    
  bbee    gguuiiddeedd    bbyy    ssuucchh  iinnssttrruuccttiioonnss    oonn    qquueessttiioonnss  ooff    
  ppoolliiccyy  aass    mmaayy  bbee    ggiivveenn  ttoo  tthheemm  bbyy  tthhee  SSttaattee    
  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  oorr  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
    
            ((55))  IIff    aannyy  ddoouubbtt  aarriisseess  aass  ttoo  wwhheetthheerr  aa  qquueessttiioonn  iiss  oorr  iiss  
  nnoott  aa  qquueessttiioonn  ooff    ppoolliiccyy,,  oorr,,    iiff  tthhee    SSttaattee    GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt    
  aanndd    tthhee    CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  ggiivvee  
  ccoonnfflliiccttiinngg  iinnssttrruuccttiioonnss,,  tthhee  mmaatttteerr  sshhaallll  bbee    rreeffeerrrreedd  ttoo    
  tthhee  CCeennttrraall    GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  wwhhoossee    ddeecciissiioonn  tthheerreeoonn  sshhaallll    
  bbee  ffiinnaall..  
    
        ((66))  TThhee    ddiirreeccttoorrss  ooff  aa  SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  
  ootthheerr  tthhaann  tthhee  mmaannaaggiinngg    ddiirreeccttoorr,,    sshhaallll  bbee    eennttiittlleedd    ttoo    
  rreecceeiivvee    bbyy    wwaayy    ooff  rreemmuunneerraattiioonn  ssuucchh  ssuummss  aass  mmaayy  bbee  
  pprreessccrriibbeedd::  
    
  PPrroovviiddeedd  tthhaatt    nnoo  ooffffiicciiaall    ddiirreeccttoorr  sshhaallll  bbee  eennttiittlleedd  ttoo  
  rreecceeiivvee  aannyy  rreemmuunneerraattiioonn  ootthheerr  tthhaann  aannyy  aalllloowwaanncceess  

 
  aaddmmiissssiibbllee  ttoo  hhiimm  uunnddeerr  tthhee  rruulleess  rreegguullaattiinngg  hhiiss  
  ccoonnddiittiioonnss  ooff  sseerrvviiccee..  
    
            ((77))  TThhee    tteerrmm  ooff    ooffffiiccee  ooff,,    aanndd  tthhee    mmaannnneerr  ooff    ffiilllliinngg  
  ccaassuuaall  vvaaccaanncciieess  aammoonngg,,  ddiirreeccttoorrss  sshhaallll  bbee  ssuucchh  aass  
  mmaayy  bbee  pprreessccrriibbeedd..  
        
DDiissqquuaalliiffiiccaattiioonn  ffoorr  ooffffiiccee  
ooff  ddiirreeccttoorr  ooff  tthhee  
ccoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
2211..  AA  ppeerrssoonn  sshhaallll    bbee  ddiissqquuaalliiffiieedd    ffoorr  bbeeiinngg    cchhoosseenn  aass,,    aanndd  
  ffoorr  bbeeiinngg,,  aa  ddiirreeccttoorr  ooff  aa  SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn----      
        ((ii))  iiff    hhee  iiss    ffoouunndd  ttoo    bbee  aa    lluunnaattiicc  oorr  bbeeccoommeess  ooff  
  uunnssoouunndd    mmiinndd;;  oorr  
        ((iiii))  iiff    hhee    iiss,,    oorr  aatt    aannyy    ttiimmee    hhaass    bbeeeenn,,    aaddjjuuddiiccaatteedd  
  iinnssoollvveenntt  oorr    hhaass  ssuussppeennddeedd  ppaayymmeenntt  ooff  hhiiss  ddeebbttss  oorr  
  hhaass  ccoommppoouunnddeedd  wwiitthh  hhiiss  ccrreeddiittoorrss;;  oorr  
    
          ((iiiiii))  iiff    hhee  iiss    oorr  hhaass    bbeeeenn    ccoonnvviicctteedd    ooff    aannyy    ooffffeennccee  
  iinnvvoollvviinngg  mmoorraall  ttuurrppiittuuddee    aanndd  sseenntteenncceedd    iinn    rreessppeecctt                  
  tthheerreeooff  ttoo    iimmpprriissoonnmmeenntt  ffoorr    nnoott  lleessss  tthhaann  ssiixx  mmoonntthhss,,  
  uunnlleessss  aa  ppeerriioodd  ooff  ffiivvee  yyeeaarrss  hhaass  eellaappsseedd  ffrroomm  tthhee  ddaattee                  
  ooff  eexxppiirryy  ooff  tthhee  sseenntteennccee;;  oorr  
    
  ((iivv))  iiff  hhee  hhaass    bbeeeenn  rreemmoovveedd    oorr  ddiissmmiisssseedd    ffrroomm  sseerrvviiccee  
  ooff  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  oorr  aa  ccoorrppoorraattiioonn  oowwnneedd  aanndd  
  ccoonnttrroolllleedd  bbyy  tthhee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt;;  oorr  
  
          ((vv))  eexxcceepptt    iinn  tthhee  ccaassee  ooff  tthhee  mmaannaaggiinngg  ddiirreeccttoorr,,  iiff  hhee  iiss    
  ssaallaarriieedd      ooffffiicciiaall        ooff  **  aa  SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn;;  oorr  
    
        ((vvii))  iiff  hhee  iiss  ppeerrssoonnaallllyy  iinntteerreesstteedd  iinn  aa  ssuubbssiissttiinngg  
  ccoonnttrraacctt  mmaaddee  wwiitthh,,    oorr  iinn    aannyy  wwoorrkk    bbeeiinngg  ddoonnee  ffoorr,,  
  tthhee  SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  eexxcceepptt  aass  aa  
  sshhaarreehhoollddeerr  ((ootthheerr  tthhaann  aa    ddiirreeccttoorr))  iinn    aannyy  ppuubblliicc    
  ccoommppaannyy  aass  ddeeffiinneedd  iinn  tthhee  CCoommppaanniieess  AAcctt,,  11995566  ((11  ooff  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
**TThhee  WWCC  AAmmeennddmmeenntt  
AAcctt,,22000011  ddtt..  2299  AAuugg  22000011((  
2233  ooff  22000011))  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
RReemmoovvaall  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  ffrroomm  
ooffffiiccee  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  11995566))::  
    
              PPrroovviiddeedd  tthhaatt  wwhheerree  aannyy  ssuucchh  ppeerrssoonn  iiss  aa  sshhaarreehhoollddeerr,,  
  hhee  sshhaallll  ddiisscclloossee  ttoo    tthhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg    CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  tthhee  
  nnaattuurree  aanndd  eexxtteenntt  ooff  tthhee  sshhaarreess  hheelldd  bbyy  hhiimm  iinn  ssuucchh  
  ccoommppaannyy..  
  
2222..  ((11))  TThhee  SSttaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  mmaayy,,  aatt  aannyy  ttiimmee,,  **  uunnddeerr  
  iinnttiimmaattiioonn  ttoo    tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,    
  rreemmoovvee  tthhee    mmaannaaggiinngg  ddiirreeccttoorr  ffrroomm  ooffffiiccee  aafftteerr  ggiivviinngg  
  hhiimm  aa  rreeaassoonnaabbllee  ooppppoorrttuunniittyy  ooff  sshhoowwiinngg  ccaauussee  aaggaaiinnsstt  
  tthhee  pprrooppoosseedd  rreemmoovvaall..  
          
  ((22))  TThhee    bbooaarrdd  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  mmaayy    rreemmoovvee  ffrroomm  ooffffiiccee  aannyy  
  ddiirreeccttoorr  wwhhoo----  
    
          ((aa))  iiss  oorr  hhaass  bbeeccoommee  ssuubbjjeecctt  ttoo  aannyy  ooff  tthhee  
  ddiissqquuaalliiffiiccaattiioonnss  mmeennttiioonneedd  iinn  sseeccttiioonn  2211;;  oorr  
  
          ((bb))  iiss    aabbsseenntt  wwiitthhoouutt    lleeaavvee  ooff    tthhee  bbooaarrdd  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  
  ffoorr  mmoorree  tthhaann    tthhrreeee    ccoonnsseeccuuttiivvee    mmeeeettiinnggss  ooff    tthhee    
  bbooaarrdd        wwiitthhoouutt  ccaauussee    ssuuffffiicciieenntt,,  iinn  tthhee  ooppiinniioonn  ooff  tthhee  
  bbooaarrdd,,  ttoo  eexxoonneerraattee  hhiiss  aabbsseennccee..  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
**TThhee  WWCC  AAmmeennddmmeenntt  AAcctt,,  
22000011  ddtt..  2299  AAuugg  22000011((  2233  
ooff  22000011))  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
AAppppooiinnttmmeenntt  ooff  ooffffiicceerrss,,  
eettcc..,,  aanndd  tthheeiirr  ccoonnddiittiioonnss  
ooff  sseerrvviiccee..  
      
  
2233..  ((11))  AA  SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  mmaayy  aappppooiinntt  ssuucchh  
  ooffffiicceerrss  aanndd  ootthheerr  eemmppllooyyeeeess  aass  iitt  ccoonnssiiddeerrss  nneecceessssaarryy  
  ffoorr  tthhee  eeffffiicciieenntt  ppeerrffoorrmmaannccee  ooff  iittss  ffuunnccttiioonnss..  
  
  
  
  ((22))  EEvveerryy  ppeerrssoonn  eemmppllooyyeedd  bbyy  aa  SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  uunnddeerr  tthhiiss  AAcctt  sshhaallll  bbee  ssuubbjjeecctt  ttoo  ssuucchh  
  ccoonnddiittiioonnss  ooff  sseerrvviiccee  aanndd  sshhaallll  bbee  eennttiittlleedd  ttoo  ssuucchh  
  rreemmuunneerraattiioonn  aass  mmaayy  bbee  ddeetteerrmmiinneedd  bbyy  rreegguullaattiioonnss  
  mmaaddee  bbyy  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  uunnddeerr  tthhiiss  AAcctt..  
  

 
  
FFuunnccttiioonnss  ooff  tthhee  SSttaattee  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
  
2244..    SSuubbjjeecctt  ttoo  tthhee  pprroovviissiioonnss  ooff  tthhiiss  AAcctt,,  aa  SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  mmaayy----  
    
((aa))  aaccqquuiirree  aanndd  bbuuiilldd  ggooddoowwnnss  aanndd  wwaarreehhoouusseess  aatt  
ssuucchh  ppllaacceess  wwiitthhiinn  tthhee  SSttaattee  aass  iitt  mmaayy,,  **  aafftteerr  
ccoonnssuullttaattiioonn  wwiitthh    tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  
ddeetteerrmmiinnee;;  
    
                ((bb))    rruunn      wwaarreehhoouusseess    iinn    tthhee    SSttaattee    ffoorr    tthhee    ssttoorraaggee    ooff  
                  aaggrriiccuullttuurraall    pprroodduuccee,,  sseeeeddss,,  mmaannuurreess,,    ffeerrttiilliizzeerrss,,  
                  aaggrriiccuullttuurraall  iimmpplleemmeennttss  aanndd  nnoottiiffiieedd  ccoommmmooddiittiieess;;  
  
  ((cc))  aarrrraannggee    ffaacciilliittiieess  ffoorr    tthhee  ttrraannssppoorrtt    ooff    aaggrriiccuullttuurraall  
  pprroodduuccee,,    sseeeeddss,,      mmaannuurreess,,    ffeerrttiilliizzeerrss,,    aaggrriiccuullttuurraall  
  iimmpplleemmeennttss    aanndd    nnoottiiffiieedd    ccoommmmooddiittiieess    ttoo    aanndd    ffrroomm  
  wwaarreehhoouusseess;;  
  
  ((dd))  aacctt    aass  aann    aaggeenntt  ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  oorr  ooff    tthhee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ffoorr  tthhee  ppuurrppoosseess  ooff  
  tthhee  ppuurrcchhaassee,,  ssaallee,,    ssttoorraaggee  aanndd    ddiissttrriibbuuttiioonn,,      ooff      
  aaggrriiccuullttuurraall  pprroodduuccee,,    sseeeeddss,,      mmaannuurreess,,    
  ffeerrttiilliizzeerrss,,    aaggrriiccuullttuurraall  iimmpplleemmeennttss  aanndd  nnoottiiffiieedd  
  ccoommmmooddiittiieess;;    
  
  **((ddaa))  eenntteerr  iinnttoo,,  wwiitthh  tthhee  pprreevviioouuss  aapppprroovvaall  ooff  tthhee  ssttaattee  
  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt,,  JJooiinntt  vveennttuurreess  wwiitthh  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn;;  aanndd  
  
          ((ee))  ccaarrrryy  oouutt  ssuucchh  ootthheerr  ffuunnccttiioonnss  aass  mmaayy  bbee  
  pprreessccrriibbeedd..    
  
  
  
  
  
**TThhee  WWCC  AAmmeennddmmeenntt  
AAcctt,,22000011  ddtt..  2299  AAuugg  
22000011((  2233  ooff  22000011))  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
**TThhee  WWCC  AAmmeennddmmeenntt  
AAcctt,,  22000011  ddtt..  2299  AAuugg  
22000011  
  
  

 
        2255..    ((11))    TThheerree    sshhaallll    bbee    aann    EExxeeccuuttiivvee  CCoommmmiitttteeee  ooff  aa  SSttaattee  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  wwhhiicchh  sshhaallll  ccoonnssiisstt  ooff----  
    
          ((aa))  tthhee  CChhaaiirrmmaann  ooff  tthhee  bbooaarrdd  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss;;  
    
          ((bb))  tthhee  mmaannaaggiinngg  ddiirreeccttoorr;;  aanndd  
    
          ((cc))  tthhrreeee  ootthheerr  ddiirreeccttoorrss    cchhoosseenn  iinn  tthhee  pprreessccrriibbeedd  
  mmaannnneerr,,  ooff  wwhhoomm  oonnee  sshhaallll    bbee  aa  ddiirreeccttoorr  rreeffeerrrreedd  ttoo  iinn  
  ccllaauussee  ((aa))  ooff  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((11))  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  2200..  
    
            ((22))  TThhee    CChhaaiirrmmaann  ooff  tthhee  bbooaarrdd  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  sshhaallll  bbee  tthhee  
  CChhaaiirrmmaann  ooff  tthhee  EExxeeccuuttiivvee  CCoommmmiitttteeee  
  
            ((33))  SSuubbjjeecctt  ttoo  aannyy  ggeenneerraall  oorr  ssppeecciiaall  ddiirreeccttiioonnss  aass  tthhee  
  bbooaarrdd  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  mmaayy,,  ffrroomm  ttiimmee  ttoo  ttiimmee,,  ggiivvee,,  tthhee  
  EExxeeccuuttiivvee  CCoommmmiitttteeee  sshhaallll  bbee  ccoommppeetteenntt  ttoo  ddeeaall  wwiitthh  
  aannyy  mmaatttteerr  wwiitthhiinn  tthhee  ccoommppeetteennccee  ooff  tthhee  SSttaattee  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
  
  
EExxeeccuuttiivvee  CCoommmmiitttteeee..  
  
  CCHHAAPPTTEERR  ––  IIVV  
  
FFIINNAANNCCEE,,  AACCCCOOUUNNTTSS  AANNDD  AAUUDDIITT  
  
  2266  ((11))  EEvveerryy  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  sshhaallll  pprreeppaarree  bbeeffoorree  
  tthhee  ccoommmmeenncceemmeenntt  ooff    eeaacchh  yyeeaarr    aa  ssttaatteemmeenntt  ooff  
  pprrooggrraammmmee  ooff  iittss  aaccttiivviittiieess  dduurriinngg  tthhee  ffoorrtthhccoommiinngg  yyeeaarr  
  aass  wweellll  aass  aa  ffiinnaanncciiaall  eessttiimmaattee  iinn  rreessppeecctt  tthheerreeooff..  
    
            ((22))  AA  ssttaatteemmeenntt  pprreeppaarreedd  uunnddeerr  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((11))  sshhaallll,,  nnoott  
  llaatteerr  tthhaann  tthhrreeee    mmoonntthhss  bbeeffoorree    tthhee  ccoommmmeenncceemmeenntt  ooff  
  eeaacchh  yyeeaarr,,  bbee  ssuubbmmiitttteedd  ffoorr  aapppprroovvaall----  
    
          ((aa))  iinn  tthhee  ccaassee    ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
SSuubbmmiissssiioonn  ooff  
pprrooggrraammmmee  ooff  aaccttiivviittiieess  
aanndd  ffiinnaanncciiaall  eessttiimmaatteess..  
  

 
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  ttoo  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt;;  
    
          ((bb))  iinn  tthhee  ccaassee  ooff  aa  SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  ttoo  
  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg      CCoorrppoorraattiioonn      aanndd      tthhee    
  SSttaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt..  
    
  
      ((33))  TThhee  ssttaatteemmeenntt  aanndd    tthhee  ffiinnaanncciiaall    eessttiimmaattee  ooff    aa  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  rreeffeerrrreedd  ttoo  iinn    ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((11))  
  mmaayy,,  wwiitthh  tthhee  aapppprroovvaall  ooff  tthhee    CCeennttrraall    GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt    iinn    
  tthhee    ccaassee    ooff    tthhee    CCeennttrraall    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  oorr      
  wwiitthh  tthhee      aapppprroovvaall  ooff  tthhee    CCeennttrraall    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  aanndd      tthhee  SSttaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  iinn  tthhee    ccaassee    ooff    
  aa    SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  bbee  rreevviisseedd  bbyy  tthhee  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..    
  
  
    2277    ((11))      AA  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  mmaayy,,  iinn  ccoonnssuullttaattiioonn  
  wwiitthh    tthhee  RReesseerrvvee  BBaannkk  aanndd  wwiitthh  tthhee  pprreevviioouuss  
  aapppprroovvaall  ooff  tthhee    aapppprroopprriiaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt,,  iissssuuee    
  aanndd  sseellll  bboonnddss  aanndd    ddeebbeennttuurreess  ccaarrrryyiinngg  iinntteerreesstt  ffoorr  tthhee  
  ppuurrppoossee  ooff  rraaiissiinngg    ffuunnddss::  
    
              PPrroovviiddeedd  tthhaatt  tthhee  ttoottaall  aammoouunntt  ooff  bboonnddss  aanndd  
  ddeebbeennttuurreess    iissssuueedd  aanndd  oouuttssttaannddiinngg  aanndd    ooff  tthhee    ootthheerr  
  bboorrrroowwiinngg  ooff    tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  sshhaallll  nnoott  aatt  aannyy  ttiimmee  
  eexxcceeeedd    tteenn  ttiimmeess  tthhee  aammoouunntt  ooff  tthhee  ppaaiidd--uupp  sshhaarree  
  ccaappiittaall  aanndd  tthhee  rreesseerrvvee  ffuunndd  ooff  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
  
  
  
BBoorrrroowwiinngg  ppoowweerrss  ooff  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
  

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
2233  ooff  11995555  
            ((22))  AA  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    mmaayy,,  ffoorr    tthhee  ppuurrppoossee  ooff  
  ccaarrrryyiinngg  oouutt  iittss  ffuunnccttiioonnss  uunnddeerr  tthhiiss  AAcctt,,  bboorrrrooww  
  mmoonneeyy----  
    
          ((ii))  ffrroomm  tthhee  RReesseerrvvee  BBaannkk,,  oorr  
    
          ((iiii))  ffrroomm  tthhee  SSttaattee  BBaannkk,,  ffoorr    ssuucchh  ppeerriiooddss  ffoorr  wwhhiicchh,,  
  aanndd  uuppoonn    aannyy    ooff    tthhee    sseeccuurriittiieess    aaggaaiinnsstt  wwhhiicchh,,  iitt    iiss  
  aauutthhoorriisseedd  ttoo    aaddvvaannccee  aanndd    lleenndd    mmoonneeyyss,,    uunnddeerr    tthhee  
  pprroovviissiioonnss  ooff    **[[tthhee  SSttaattee  BBaannkk  ooff  IInnddiiaa  AAcctt,,  11995555  oorr]]  
    
          ((iiiiii))  ffrroomm  aannyy  SScchheedduulleedd  bbaannkk,,  oorr  
    
          ((iivv))  ffrroomm  ssuucchh  iinnssuurraannccee  ccoommppaannyy,,  iinnvveessttmmeenntt  ttrruusstt  oorr  
  ootthheerr  ffiinnaanncciiaall  iinnssttiittuuttiioonn  aass  mmaayy  bbee  aapppprroovveedd  bbyy  tthhee  
  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  iinn  tthhiiss  bbeehhaallff..  ****  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
**  SSuubbss..  BByy  AAcctt  4422  ooff  
11997766,,  ss..77,,  ffoorr  tthhee  SSttaattee  
BBaannkk  ooff  IInnddiiaa  AAcctt,,  11995555  
  
  IInnss..  BByy  ss..77,,  iibbiidd..  
NNoottiiffiiccaattiioonn  nnoo..  5511  ddtt..1166  
SSeepptt..22000055    
  
****2277  IInnss..  CCoommppss..  
NNoottiiffiieedd  vviiddee..  NNoo..880033  ddtt..  
2222  SSeepptt..22000044  
    ((33))  SSuubbjjeecctt    ttoo  tthhee    pprroovviissoo    ttoo    ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn    ((11)),,    tthhee    
  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    mmaayy  bboorrrrooww    mmoonneeyy  
  ffrroomm  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  aanndd  aa    SSttaattee  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg    CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  mmaayy    bboorrrrooww  mmoonneeyy  ffrroomm  
  tthhee  SSttaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  aanndd  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  oonn  ssuucchh  sseeccuurriittiieess  aanndd  oonn  ssuucchh  tteerrmmss    aanndd  
  ccoonnddiittiioonnss    aass  mmaayy    bbee  aaggrreeeedd  uuppoonn  bbeettwweeeenn  tthhee  
  bboorrrroowwiinngg  ccoorrppoorraattiioonn  aanndd  tthhee  lleennddeerr,,  iinn  eeaacchh  ccaassee..    
  
  
    ((44))  TThhee    bboonnddss  aanndd  ddeebbeennttuurreess  ooff  aa  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  mmaayy  bbee  gguuaarraanntteeeedd  bbyy    tthhee  aapppprroopprriiaattee  
  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt    aass  ttoo    tthhee    rreeppaayymmeenntt    ooff  pprriinncciippaall  aanndd    
  tthhee  ppaayymmeenntt  ooff  iinntteerreesstt  aatt  ssuucchh  rraattee  aass  mmaayy  bbee  ffiixxeedd  bbyy  
  tthhee  aapppprroopprriiaattee    GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  oonn  tthhee  rreeccoommmmeennddaattiioonn    
  ooff  tthhee    bbooaarrdd    ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  ooff    tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    aatt  tthhee  
  ttiimmee  tthhee  bboonnddss  oorr  ddeebbeennttuurreess  aarree  iissssuueedd..  
  
  

 
DDeeppoossiitt  AAccccoouunntt  2288..        AAllll  mmoonneeyyss  bbeelloonnggiinngg  ttoo  aa  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
sshhaallll    bbee  ddeeppoossiitteedd  iinn  tthhee  RReesseerrvvee  BBaannkk  oorr  tthhee  SSttaattee  
BBaannkk  **[[oorr  aannyy  nnaattiioonnaalliizzeedd  bbaannkk]]  oorr  ssuubbjjeecctt  ttoo  aannyy            
rruulleess  mmaaddee    uunnddeerr  tthhiiss  AAcctt..  iinn  ****[[aannyy  ootthheerr  sscchheedduulleedd  
bbaannkk]]  oorr  ccoo--  ooppeerraattiivvee  bbaannkk..    
  
  
**IInnss..  BByy  AAcctt  4422  ooff  11997766,,  
ss..88  
****  SSuubbss..  BByy  ss..88,,  iibbiidd,,  ffoorr  
‗‗aannyy  sscchheedduulleedd  bbaannkk‖‖  
IInnvveessttmmeenntt  ooff  ffuunnddss..  
  2299..  AA  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  mmaayy  iinnvveesstt  iittss  ffuunnddss  iinn  tthhee  
  sseeccuurriittiieess  ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  oorr  aannyy  SSttaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  oorr  iinn  
  ssuucchh  ootthheerr  mmaannnneerr  aass  mmaayy  bbee  pprreessccrriibbeedd  bbyy  tthhee  
  aapppprroopprriiaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt..  
  
  
DDiissppoossaall  ooff  pprrooffiittss..  
      
  
3300..  ((11))  EEvveerryy  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  sshhaallll  eessttaabblliisshh  aa  
  rreesseerrvvee  ffuunndd  oouutt  ooff  iittss  aannnnuuaall  nneett  pprrooffiittss..  
    
            ((22))    AAfftteerr      mmaakkiinngg    pprroovviissiioonn      ffoorr    bbaadd    aanndd    ddoouubbttffuull  
  ddeebbttss,,  ddeepprreecciiaattiioonn  oonn    aasssseettss    aanndd    aallll    ootthheerr    mmaatttteerrss    
  wwhhiicchh    aarree    uussuuaallllyy  pprroovviiddeedd  ffoorr    bbyy    ccoommppaanniieess    
  rreeggiisstteerreedd    aanndd    iinnccoorrppoorraatteedd    uunnddeerr    tthhee  CCoommppaanniieess  
  AAcctt,,  11995566,,    aa  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  mmaayy,,  oouutt  ooff  iittss  
  nneett  aannnnuuaall  pprrooffiittss,,  ddeeccllaarree    aa  ddiivviiddeenndd::  
    
              PPrroovviiddeedd  tthhaatt  ffoorr  ssoo    lloonngg  aass    tthhee  rreesseerrvvee  ffuunndd  iiss  lleessss  
  tthhaann  tthhee  ppaaiidd--uupp  sshhaarree  ccaappiittaall  ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  aanndd  uunnttiill  tthheerree  hhaass    bbeeeenn  
  rreeppaaiidd  ttoo  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ssuucchh  ssuumm,,  iiff  aannyy,,  aass  
  tthhaatt  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt    mmaayy  hhaavvee  ppaaiidd  uunnddeerr  aa  gguuaarraanntteeee  
  ggiivveenn  iinn  ppuurrssuuaannccee  ooff  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((11))    ooff  sseeccttiioonn    55  oorr    
  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((44))    ooff  sseeccttiioonn  2277,,  tthhee  rraattee  ooff    ssuucchh    
  ddiivviiddeenndd,,    iinn    tthhee    ccaassee    ooff    tthhee    CCeennttrraall    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  sshhaallll  nnoott  eexxcceeeedd  tthhee  rraattee    gguuaarraanntteeeedd    bbyy    
  tthhee    CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  uunnddeerr  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((11))  ooff  
  sseeccttiioonn  55..  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
11    ooff  11995566  
AAccccoouunnttss  aanndd  aauuddiitt  ooff  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
      
  
3311..  ((11))    EEvveerryy  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    sshhaallll  mmaaiinnttaaiinn    
  pprrooppeerr    aaccccoouunnttss  aanndd  ootthheerr  rreelleevvaanntt  rreeccoorrddss  aanndd  
  pprreeppaarree  aann  aannnnuuaall  ssttaatteemmeenntt  ooff  aaccccoouunnttss  iinncclluuddiinngg  tthhee  
  

 
  pprrooffiitt    aanndd  lloossss  aaccccoouunntt  aanndd  tthhee  bbaallaannccee  sshheeeett  iinn  ssuucchh  
  ffoorrmm  aass  mmaayy  bbee  pprreessccrriibbeedd::  
    
              PPrroovviiddeedd  tthhaatt,,      iinn    tthhee    ccaassee    ooff      tthhee    CCeennttrraall      
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  tthhee  aaccccoouunnttss  rreellaattiinngg    ttoo  tthhee    
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  FFuunndd    aanndd  tthhee  GGeenneerraall  FFuunndd  sshhaallll  bbee  
  mmaaiinnttaaiinneedd  sseeppaarraatteellyy..  
  
        ((22))  TThhee  aaccccoouunnttss  ooff  aa  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  sshhaallll  bbee  
  aauuddiitteedd  bbyy  aann  aauuddiittoorr  dduullyy  qquuaalliiffiieedd    ttoo  aacctt    aass  aann    
  aauuddiittoorr  ooff    ccoommppaanniieess  uunnddeerr  sseeccttiioonn  222266  ooff  tthhee  
  CCoommppaanniieess  AAcctt,,  11995566  ..  
    
  
  
11    ooff  11995566  
                ((33))  TThhee  ssaaiidd  aauuddiittoorr  sshhaallll  bbee  aappppooiinntteedd  bbyy    tthhee    
  aapppprroopprriiaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  oonn  tthhee  aaddvviiccee  ooff  tthhee    
  CCoommppttrroolllleerr  aanndd    AAuuddiittoorr--GGeenneerraall  ooff  IInnddiiaa..  
  
              ((44))  TThhee  aauuddiittoorr  sshhaallll  bbee  ssuupppplliieedd  wwiitthh  aa    ccooppyy  ooff    tthhee  
  aannnnuuaall  bbaallaannccee  sshheeeett    aanndd  tthhee  pprrooffiitt  aanndd    lloossss  aaccccoouunntt    
  ooff    tthhee    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  aanndd  iitt  sshhaallll  bbee  hhiiss  
  dduuttyy  ttoo  eexxaammiinnee  tthheemm  ttooggeetthheerr  wwiitthh  tthhee  aaccccoouunnttss  aanndd    
  vvoouucchheerrss  rreellaattiinngg    tthheerreettoo,,  aanndd    hhee  sshhaallll    hhaavvee    aa    lliisstt  
  ddeelliivveerreedd  ttoo  hhiimm  ooff  aallll  bbooookkss  kkeepptt  bbyy  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
  aanndd  sshhaallll  aatt  aallll  rreeaassoonnaabbllee    ttiimmeess    hhaavvee    aacccceessss    ttoo    tthhee    
  bbooookkss,,    aaccccoouunnttss    aanndd    ootthheerr  ddooccuummeennttss  ooff  tthhee  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  aanndd  mmaayy  rreeqquuiirree  ffrroomm  aannyy  ooffffiicceerr  ooff    tthhee  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    ssuucchh  iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn    aanndd  eexxppllaannaattiioonnss  aass  tthhee  
  aauuddiittoorr  mmaayy  tthhiinnkk  nneecceessssaarryy  ffoorr  tthhee  ppeerrffoorrmmaannccee  ooff  hhiiss  
  dduuttiieess  aass  aauuddiittoorr..  
    
            ((55))  TThhee    aauuddiittoorr  sshhaallll    mmaakkee  aa    rreeppoorrtt  ttoo  tthhee  sshhaarreehhoollddeerrss  
  oonn  tthhee  aaccccoouunnttss  eexxaammiinneedd    bbyy  hhiimm    aanndd  oonn    tthhee  aannnnuuaall    
  bbaallaannccee  sshheeeett    aanndd    tthhee  pprrooffiitt  aanndd    lloossss  aaccccoouunntt    aanndd  iinn    
  eevveerryy  ssuucchh    rreeppoorrtt,,  hhee    sshhaallll    ssttaattee  wwhheetthheerr  iinn  hhiiss  
  ooppiinniioonn  tthhee  aaccccoouunnttss  ggiivvee  aa  ttrruuee  aanndd  ffaaiirr  vviieeww----  
  

 
    
  ((aa))iinn    tthhee  ccaassee    ooff  tthhee    bbaallaannccee  sshheeeett,,  ooff  tthhee  ssttaattee  ooff  tthhee    
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn''ss  aaffffaaiirrss  aatt  tthhee  eenndd  ooff  iittss  ffiinnaanncciiaall  yyeeaarr,,                    
  aanndd  
    
          ((bb))  iinn    tthhee  ccaassee    ooff  tthhee    pprrooffiitt  aanndd  lloossss  aaccccoouunntt,,    ooff    tthhee  
  pprrooffiitt  oorr  lloossss  ffoorr  iittss  ffiinnaanncciiaall  yyeeaarr,,  aanndd  iinn  ccaassee  hhee  hhaass  
  ccaalllleedd  ffoorr  aannyy  eexxppllaannaattiioonn  oorr  iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn  ffrroomm  tthhee  
  ooffffiicceerrss,,  wwhheetthheerr  iitt  hhaass  bbeeeenn  ggiivveenn  aanndd  wwhheetthheerr  iitt  iiss  
  ssaattiissffaaccttoorryy..  
    
            ((66))  TThhee  aapppprroopprriiaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  mmaayy,,  aafftteerr  ccoonnssuullttaattiioonn  
  wwiitthh  tthhee  CCoommppttrroolllleerr  aanndd  AAuuddiittoorr--GGeenneerraall  ooff  IInnddiiaa  aatt  
  aannyy  ttiimmee  iissssuuee  ddiirreeccttiioonnss  ttoo  tthhee  aauuddiittoorr  rreeqquuiirriinngg    hhiimm  
  ttoo  rreeppoorrtt  ttoo  tthhee  aapppprroopprriiaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  uuppoonn  tthhee    
  aaddeeqquuaaccyy  ooff    mmeeaassuurreess  ttaakkeenn  bbyy  aa  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  ffoorr  tthhee    pprrootteeccttiioonn      ooff    iittss    sshhaarreehhoollddeerrss    
  aanndd    ccrreeddiittoorrss    oorr    uuppoonn    tthhee  ssuuffffiicciieennccyy    ooff      hhiiss    
  pprroocceedduurree    iinn    aauuddiittiinngg  tthhee    aaccccoouunnttss    ooff    tthhee  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  aanndd  mmaayy  eennllaarrggee  oorr  eexxtteenndd  tthhee  ssccooppee  ooff  tthhee  
  aauuddiitt  oorr  ddiirreecctt  tthhaatt  aa  ddiiffffeerreenntt  pprroocceedduurree  iinn  aauuddiitt  mmaayy  
  bbee  aaddoopptteedd  oorr  ddiirreecctt  tthhaatt  aannyy    ootthheerr  eexxaammiinnaattiioonn    mmaayy  
  bbee  mmaaddee  bbyy  tthhee  aauuddiittoorr  iiff  iinn  tthhee  ooppiinniioonn  ooff  tthhee  
  aapppprroopprriiaattee  ggoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ppuubblliicc  iinntteerreesstt  ssoo  rreeqquuiirreess..  
  
            ((77))  AA  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    sshhaallll  sseenndd  aa  ccooppyy  ooff  eevveerryy  
  rreeppoorrtt  ooff  tthhee  aauuddiittoorr  ttoo  tthhee  CCoommppttrroolllleerr  aanndd  AAuuddiittoorr--
  GGeenneerraall  ooff  IInnddiiaa  aanndd  ttoo  tthhee  CCeennttrraall    GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  aatt    
  lleeaasstt  oonnee  mmoonntthh  bbeeffoorree  iitt  iiss  ppllaacceedd  bbeeffoorree  tthhee  
  sshhaarreehhoollddeerrss..                                    
    
            ((88))    NNoottwwiitthhssttaannddiinngg    aannyytthhiinngg    hheerreeiinnbbeeffoorree    ccoonnttaaiinneedd    
  iinn    tthhiiss  sseeccttiioonn,,  tthhee    CCoommppttrroolllleerr  aanndd    AAuuddiittoorr--GGeenneerraall  
  ooff  IInnddiiaa  mmaayy,,  eeiitthheerr  ooff  hhiiss  oowwnn    mmoottiioonn  oorr    oonn  aa    rreeqquueesstt  
  rreecceeiivveedd    iinn  tthhiiss    bbeehhaallff    ffrroomm    tthhee  aapppprroopprriiaattee    
  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt,,  uunnddeerrttaakkee    iinn      rreessppeecctt    ooff  aa    

 
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  ssuucchh  aauuddiitt  aanndd  aatt  ssuucchh  ttiimmee  
  aass  hhee  mmaayy  ccoonnssiiddeerr  nneecceessssaarryy::  
      
      PPrroovviiddeedd  tthhaatt    wwhheerree  tthhee    CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt    iiss  
  rreeqquuiirreedd  ttoo  mmaakkee  aannyy  ppaayymmeenntt    oonn  aaccccoouunntt  ooff  tthhee  
  gguuaarraanntteeee  ggiivveenn  bbyy  iitt  uunnddeerr  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((11))  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  55,,    
  ssuucchh  aauuddiitt  sshhaallll  bbee  uunnddeerrttaakkeenn  bbyy  tthhee  CCoommppttrroolllleerr  aanndd  
  AAuuddiittoorr--GGeenneerraall    ooff  IInnddiiaa    oorr  aannyy  ppeerrssoonn  aauutthhoorriisseedd  bbyy  
  hhiimm  iinn  tthhiiss  bbeehhaallff..  
          
    ((99))      TThhee    CCoommppttrroolllleerr  aanndd    AAuuddiittoorr--GGeenneerraall  ooff  IInnddiiaa  aanndd  
  aannyy  ppeerrssoonn  aauutthhoorriisseedd  bbyy  hhiimm  iinn  ccoonnnneeccttiioonn  wwiitthh  tthhee  
  aauuddiitt  ooff  tthhee  aaccccoouunnttss  ooff  aa  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    
  sshhaallll  hhaavvee    tthhee  ssaammee    rriigghhttss,,  pprriivviilleeggeess    aanndd  aauutthhoorriittyy  
  iinn    ccoonnnneeccttiioonn    wwiitthh  ssuucchh    aauuddiitt    aass    tthhee    CCoommppttrroolllleerr    
  aanndd  AAuuddiittoorr--GGeenneerraall    hhaass    iinn    ccoonnnneeccttiioonn    wwiitthh    tthhee    
  aauuddiitt  ooff    GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  aaccccoouunnttss  aanndd    iinn  ppaarrttiiccuullaarr,,    
  sshhaallll    hhaavvee    tthhee  rriigghhtt    ttoo    ddeemmaanndd    tthhee  pprroodduuccttiioonn  ooff    
  bbooookkss,,  aaccccoouunnttss,,  ccoonnnneecctteedd  vvoouucchheerrss  aanndd  ootthheerr  
  ddooccuummeennttss  aanndd  ppaappeerrss  aanndd  ttoo  iinnssppeecctt  tthhee  ooffffiiccee  ooff  tthhee  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
    
    1100))    TThhee  aannnnuuaall  aaccccoouunnttss  ooff  aa  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg    CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
ttooggeetthheerr  wwiitthh  tthhee    aauuddiitt  rreeppoorrtt  tthheerreeoonn  sshhaallll  bbee  ppllaacceedd  
bbeeffoorree    tthhee  aannnnuuaall  ggeenneerraall  mmeeeettiinngg    ooff  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
wwiitthhiinn  ssiixx  mmoonntthhss  ooff  tthhee  cclloossee  ooff  tthhee  ffiinnaanncciiaall  yyeeaarr..  
  ((  
  ((1111))  EEvveerryy    aauuddiitt  rreeppoorrtt  uunnddeerr  tthhiiss  sseeccttiioonn  sshhaallll  bbee  
  ffoorrwwaarrddeedd  ttoo  tthhee  aapppprroopprriiaattee    GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  wwiitthhiinn    aa  
  mmoonntthh  ooff  iittss  bbeeiinngg  ppllaacceedd  bbeeffoorree  tthhee    aannnnuuaall      ggeenneerraall    
  mmeeeettiinngg  aanndd    tthhaatt    GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt    sshhaallll    aass    ssoooonn  
  tthheerreeaafftteerr  aass  mmaayy  bbee  ccaauussee  tthhee  ssaammee  ttoo  bbee  llaaiidd  bbeeffoorree  
  bbootthh  HHoouusseess  ooff  PPaarrlliiaammeenntt  oorr  tthhee  LLeeggiissllaattuurree  ooff  tthhee  
  SSttaattee,,  aass  tthhee  ccaassee  mmaayy  bbee..  

 
              
**  3311  AA..    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg    CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    sshhaallll  ffuurrnniisshh    ttoo      tthhee      aapppprroopprriiaattee  
GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt    ssuucchh    rreettuurrnnss,,    ssttaattiissttiiccss,,    aaccccoouunnttss  aanndd    ootthheerr    iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn    wwiitthh  
rreessppeecctt    ttoo    iittss      pprrooppeerrttyy    oorr  aaccttiivviittiieess  aass  tthhaatt  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  mmaayy,,  ffrroomm    ttiimmee  ttoo  
ttiimmee,,  rreeqquuiirree..    
    
  
  
RReettuurrnnss  aanndd  rreeppoorrttss..  
      
**IInnss..bbyy  AAcctt  4422  ooff  11997766,,  
ss..99..  
    
CCHHAAPPTTEERR  ––  VV  
  
MMIISSCCEELLLLAANNEEOOUUSS  
  
3322..      NNoo  aacctt    oorr  pprroocceeeeddiinngg    ooff  aa    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
  sshhaallll    bbee  iinnvvaalliidd    bbyy    rreeaassoonn    oonnllyy  ooff  tthhee  eexxiisstteennccee  ooff  
  aannyy  vvaaccaannccyy  aammoonngg  iittss  ddiirreeccttoorrss  oorr  aannyy  ddeeffeecctt  iinn  tthhee  
  ccoonnssttiittuuttiioonn  tthheerreeooff..  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
VVaaccaanncciieess,,  eettcc..,,  nnoott  ttoo  
iinnvvaalliiddaattee  aaccttss  aanndd  
pprroocceeeeddiinnggss  ooff  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss..  
      
  
  3333..    AA  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg    CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  mmaayy,,    bbyy    ggeenneerraall    oorr        
ssppeecciiaall    oorrddeerr    iinn  wwrriittiinngg,,    ddeelleeggaattee  ttoo  tthhee  SSeeccrreettaarryy  oorr  
  ootthheerr  ooffffiicceerr  ooff  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  ssuubbjjeecctt    ttoo  ssuucchh    
  ccoonnddiittiioonnss  aanndd    lliimmiittaattiioonnss,,  iiff  aannyy,,  aass    mmaayy  bbee    ssppeecciiffiieedd  
  iinn    tthhee    oorrddeerr,,    ssuucchh    ooff    iittss    ppoowweerrss    aanndd  ffuunnccttiioonnss  
  uunnddeerr    tthhiiss  AAcctt    aass  iitt    mmaayy  ddeeeemm  nneecceessssaarryy  ffoorr  tthhee  
  eeffffiicciieenntt  ppeerrffoorrmmaannccee  ooff  iittss  ffuunnccttiioonnss..  
          
  DDeelleeggaattiioonn..  
  
  3344..            IInn  aannyy    mmeeeettiinngg    ooff    tthhee  sshhaarreehhoollddeerrss  ooff  aa  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
    CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  eevveerryy  mmeemmbbeerr  sshhaallll  hhaavvee  oonnee  vvoottee  iinn  
  rreessppeecctt    ooff  eeaacchh  sshhaarree  hheelldd  bbyy  hhiimm  iinn  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
      
VVoottiinngg    rriigghhttss  
sshhaarreehhoollddeerrss    
  3355..          IIff  tthheerree  iiss  aannyy  ddiiffffeerreennccee  ooff  ooppiinniioonn  bbeettwweeeenn  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn      aanndd  aa      SSttaattee      WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  rreeggaarrddiinngg  tthheeiirr  rreessppeeccttiivvee  ffuunnccttiioonnss  aanndd  
  ppoowweerrss  uunnddeerr  tthhiiss  AAcctt,,  ssuucchh  ddiiffffeerreennccee  sshhaallll  bbee  rreeffeerrrreedd  
  ttoo  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  wwhhoossee  ddeecciissiioonn  tthheerreeoonn  
  sshhaallll  bbee  ffiinnaall..  
  
DDiissppuutteess  bbeettwweeeenn  
CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  aanndd  SSttaattee  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
      
  

 
  3366..      EEvveerryy  ddiirreeccttoorr,,  aauuddiittoorr,,  ooffffiicceerr  oorr    ootthheerr  eemmppllooyyeeee    ooff  aa  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  sshhaallll,,  bbeeffoorree  eenntteerriinngg  uuppoonn    
  hhiiss  dduuttiieess,,    mmaakkee  aa  ddeeccllaarraattiioonn  ooff  ffiiddeelliittyy  aanndd  sseeccrreeccyy  iinn  
  tthhee  ffoorrmm  sseett  oouutt  iinn  tthhee  SScchheedduullee..  
  
DDeeccllaarraattiioonn  ooff  ffiiddeelliittyy  
aanndd  sseeccrreeccyy..  
  3377..  ((11))  EEvveerryy  ddiirreeccttoorr  ooff  aa  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  sshhaallll  bbee  
  iinnddeemmnniiffiieedd  bbyy  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  ccoonncceerrnneedd  aaggaaiinnsstt  aallll  
  lloosssseess  aanndd  eexxppeennsseess  iinnccuurrrreedd  iinn  tthhee  ddiisscchhaarrggee  ooff  hhiiss  
  dduuttiieess  eexxcceepptt  ssuucchh  aass  aarree  ccaauusseedd  bbyy  hhiiss  oowwnn  wwiillllffuull  aacctt  
  oorr  ddeeffaauulltt..  
  
IInnddeemmnniittyy  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss..  
      
  
            ((22))  AA  ddiirreeccttoorr  ooff  aa  wwaarreehhoouussiinngg    CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  sshhaallll    
  nnoott  bbee  rreessppoonnssiibbllee  ffoorr    aannyy  ootthheerr    ddiirreeccttoorr    oorr    ffoorr    aannyy    
  ooffffiicceerr    oorr    ootthheerr  eemmppllooyyeeee  ooff    tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    oorr  ffoorr    
  aannyy  lloossss  oorr  eexxppeennssee  rreessuullttiinngg  ttoo  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    bbyy  tthhee    
  iinnssuuffffiicciieennccyy  oorr    ddeeffiicciieennccyy  ooff    vvaalluuee  ooff,,  oorr  ttiittllee  ttoo,,    aannyy  
  pprrooppeerrttyy  oorr  sseeccuurriittyy  aaccqquuiirreedd  oorr  ttaakkeenn  oonn  bbeehhaallff  ooff  tthhee  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  iinn  ggoooodd  ffaaiitthh,,  oorr  bbyy  tthhee  wwrroonnggffuull  aacctt  ooff  aannyy  
  ppeerrssoonn  uunnddeerr  oobblliiggaattiioonn  ttoo  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  oorr  bbyy  
  aannyytthhiinngg  ddoonnee  iinn  ggoooodd  ffaaiitthh  iinn  tthhee  eexxeeccuuttiioonn  ooff  tthhee  
  dduuttiieess  ooff  hhiiss  ooffffiiccee  oorr  iinn  rreellaattiioonn  tthheerreettoo..      
  
  
    3388..((11))  WWhhooeevveerr,,    wwiitthhoouutt  tthhee    ccoonnsseenntt  iinn  wwrriittiinngg  ooff  aa  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,    uusseess  tthhee    nnaammee  ooff    tthhaatt  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    iinn    aannyy  pprroossppeeccttuuss  oorr    aaddvveerrttiisseemmeenntt,,  
  sshhaallll    bbee  ppuunniisshhaabbllee    wwiitthh    iimmpprriissoonnmmeenntt  wwhhiicchh  mmaayy  
  eexxtteenndd  ttoo    ssiixx  mmoonntthhss,,  oorr  wwiitthh  ffiinnee  wwhhiicchh  mmaayy  eexxtteenndd  ttoo  
  oonnee  tthhoouussaanndd  rruuppeeeess,,  oorr  wwiitthh  bbootthh..  
  
OOffffeenncceess..  
  
          ((22))  NNoo    ccoouurrtt  sshhaallll    ttaakkee  ccooggnniizzaannccee    ooff  aannyy    ooffffeennccee  
  uunnddeerr    ssuubb--  sseeccttiioonn  ((11))    ootthheerrwwiissee  tthhaann    oonn  aa    ccoommppllaaiinntt  
  iinn    wwrriittiinngg  bbyy  aann  ooffffiicceerr  aauutthhoorriisseedd  iinn  tthhiiss  bbeehhaallff  bbyy  tthhee  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  ccoonncceerrnneedd..    
  
  

 
PPrroovviissiioonnss  rreellaattiinngg  ttoo  
iinnccoommee--ttaaxx  aanndd  ssuuppeerr--
ttaaxx..  
    
3399..      FFoorr    tthhee  ppuurrppoosseess  ooff    tthhee  IInnccoommee--ttaaxx    AAcctt,,  11996611    ,,  aa    
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  sshhaallll  bbee  ddeeeemmeedd  ttoo    bbee  aa  
  ccoommppaannyy  wwiitthhiinn  tthhee  mmeeaanniinngg  ooff  tthhaatt  AAcctt  aanndd  sshhaallll  
  bbee  lliiaabbllee  ttoo  iinnccoommee--ttaaxx  aanndd  ssuuppeerr--ttaaxx  aaccccoorrddiinnggllyy  oonn  iittss  
  iinnccoommee,,  pprrooffiittss  aanndd  ggaaiinnss::    
  
4433  ooff      11996611  
    PPrroovviiddeedd  tthhaatt,,      iinn    tthhee    ccaassee    ooff      tthhee    CCeennttrraall      
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,    aannyy    ssuumm  ppaaiidd    bbyy    tthhee    
  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt    uunnddeerr    tthhee  gguuaarraanntteeee  ggiivveenn    iinn  
  ppuurrssuuaannccee    ooff  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn    ((11))  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  55  oorr,,  iinn  tthhee  
  ccaassee  ooff  aa  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,    aannyy  ssuumm    ppaaiidd  bbyy    
  tthhee    CCeennttrraall    oorr    aa    SSttaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  uunnddeerr    aannyy  
  gguuaarraanntteeee  ggiivveenn  iinn  ppuurrssuuaannccee    ooff  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((44))  ooff  
  sseeccttiioonn  2277  sshhaallll  nnoott  bbee  ttrreeaatteedd  aass  iinnccoommee,,  pprrooffiittss  aanndd  
  ggaaiinnss  ooff  aa    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  aanndd  aannyy    iinntteerreesstt  
  oonn  tthhee  ddeebbeennttuurreess  oorr  bboonnddss  iissssuueedd  bbyy    tthhaatt  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    
  oouutt  ooff    ssuucchh  ssuummss  sshhaallll  nnoott  bbee  ttrreeaatteedd  aass  eexxppeennddiittuurree  
  iinnccuurrrreedd  bbyy  iitt::  
    
  
    PPrroovviiddeedd  ffuurrtthheerr    tthhaatt    iinn    tthhee  ccaassee    ooff    aannyy    sshhaarreehhoollddeerr    
  oorr  DDeebbeennttuurree--hhoollddeerr,,  ssuucchh  ppoorrttiioonn  ooff  aa  ddiivviiddeenndd  oorr  
  iinntteerreesstt  aass  hhaass  bbeeeenn  ppaaiidd  oouutt  ooff  aannyy  ssuucchh  ssuumm  
  aaddvvaanncceedd  bbyy  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  sshhaallll  bbee  ddeeeemmeedd  
  ttoo  bbee  hhiiss  iinnccoommee  ffrroomm  iinntteerreesstt  oonn  sseeccuurriittiieess  ddeeccllaarreedd  ttoo  
  tthhee  iinnccoommee--ttaaxx--ffrreeee  wwiitthhiinn  tthhee  mmeeaanniinngg  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  8866  ooff  
  tthhaatt  AAcctt..  
  
  
WWiinnddiinngg  uupp  ooff  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss..  
      
  
4400..  NNoo  pprroovviissiioonn  ooff  llaaww  rreellaattiinngg  ttoo  tthhee  wwiinnddiinngg  uupp  ooff  
  ccoommppaanniieess  oorr  ccoorrppoorraattiioonnss  sshhaallll  aappppllyy  ttoo  aa  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  aanndd  aannyy  ssuucchh  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
  sshhaallll  nnoott  bbee  ppllaacceedd  iinn  lliiqquuiiddaattiioonn  ssaavvee  bbyy  oorrddeerr  ooff  tthhee  
  aapppprroopprriiaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  aanndd  iinn  ssuucchh  mmaannnneerr  aass  iitt  mmaayy  
  ddiirreecctt..  
    
  
PPoowweerr  ttoo  mmaakkee  rruulleess..  
  4411..  ((11))  TThhee    aapppprroopprriiaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  mmaayy,,  bbyy  nnoottiiffiiccaattiioonn    
  
  

 
    iinn  tthhee  OOffffiicciiaall  GGaazzeettttee,,  mmaakkee  rruulleess  ttoo  ccaarrrryy  oouutt  tthhee  
  ppuurrppoosseess  ooff  tthhiiss  AAcctt..  
  
          ((22))  WWiitthhoouutt  pprreejjuuddiiccee  ttoo  tthhee  ggeenneerraalliittyy  ooff  tthhee  ffoorreeggooiinngg  
    ppoowweerr;;  ssuucchh    rruulleess  mmaayy  pprroovviiddee  ffoorr----  
    
((aa))  tthhee  aaddddiittiioonnaall  ffuunnccttiioonnss  wwhhiicchh  aa  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  mmaayy  ppeerrffoorrmm;;  
    
((bb))  tthhee    mmaannnneerr  ooff    nnoommiinnaattiioonn  aanndd  eelleeccttiioonn  ooff  tthhee  
ddiirreeccttoorrss  ooff  tthhee    CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg    CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  
aanndd  tthhee  ppeerriioodd  wwiitthhiinn  wwhhiicchh    ssuucchh    ddiirreeccttoorrss    sshhaallll    
bbee    nnoommiinnaatteedd    oorr  eelleecctteedd;;  
    
((cc))    tthhee  tteerrmm  ooff  ooffffiiccee  ooff,,  aanndd  tthhee  mmaannnneerr  ooff  ffiilllliinngg  
ccaassuuaall  vvaaccaanncciieess    aammoonngg,,    aanndd  tthhee    rreemmuunneerraattiioonn  
ppaayyaabbllee  ttoo,,  tthhee  ddiirreeccttoorrss  ooff  aa  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn;;  
  
    ((dd))  tthhee    mmaannnneerr    ooff    cchhoooossiinngg    ddiirreeccttoorrss    oonn  tthhee                    
            EExxeeccuuttiivvee    CCoommmmiitttteeee  ooff  aa  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg                  
            CCoorrppoorraattiioonn;;  
    
  
    ((ee))  tthhee  aauutthhoorriisseedd  ccaappiittaall    ooff    aa  SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg    
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  **[[wwiitthhiinn  tthhee  mmaaxxiimmuumm    lliimmiitt  ssppeecciiffiieedd  
  bbyy  oorr    uunnddeerr  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((11))  ooff  sseeccttiioonn    1199]];;  
        
  ((ff))  tthhee    ffoorrmm  ooff    tthhee  aannnnuuaall  ssttaatteemmeenntt  ooff    aaccccoouunnttss  aanndd  
  tthhee  bbaallaannccee--sshheeeett  ttoo      bbee    pprreeppaarreedd      bbyy      aa      
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn;;  
    
    ((gg))  tthhee    ddeeppoossiitt  ooff  mmoonneeyyss  ooff  aa  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  iinn  aa  sscchheedduulleedd  bbaannkk  oorr  aa  ccoo--ooppeerraattiivvee  
  bbaannkk;;  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
**SSuubbss..  BByy  AAcctt  4422  ooff  
11997766,,  ss..1100,,  ffoorr  
cceerrttaaiinn  wwoorrddss..  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 
    
                                        ((hh))    tthhee      mmaannnneerr    ooff      iissssuuiinngg    sshhaarreess      ooff  aa  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  tthhee    ccaallllss  ttoo    bbee  mmaaddee  iinn  
rreessppeecctt  tthheerreeooff,,      aanndd  aallll  ootthheerr    mmaatttteerrss  iinncciiddeennttaall      ttoo                                  
tthhee    iissssuuee    ooff    sshhaarreess;;  
  
    ****[[((ii))  tthhee    ffoorrmm  aanndd  mmaannnneerr  iinn    wwhhiicchh  rreettuurrnnss,,    
  ssttaattiissttiiccss,,  aaccccoouunnttss  aanndd    ootthheerr  iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn  aarree  ttoo  bbee    
  ffuurrnniisshheedd,,  uunnddeerr  sseeccttiioonn  3311AA,,  bbyy  aa  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn;;]]  
    
  ******[[((jj))]]    aannyy  ootthheerr    mmaatttteerrss  wwhhiicchh    hhaass    ttoo    bbee    oorr    mmaayy    
  bbee    pprreessccrriibbeedd..  
  
  
  
  
  
  
****IInnss..  BByy  ss..  1100..  IIbbiidd..  
  
  
  
  
  
******CCll..  ((ii))  wwaass  
rreelleetttteerreedd  aass  ccll..  ((jj))  bbyy  
ss..  1100,,  iibbiidd..  
  
    ((33))  EEvveerryy  rruullee  mmaaddee  bbyy  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  uunnddeerr  
tthhiiss  sseeccttiioonn  sshhaallll  bbee  llaaiidd  aass  ssoooonn  aass  mmaayy  bbee  aafftteerr  iitt  iiss  
mmaaddee,,  bbeeffoorree  eeaacchh  HHoouussee  ooff  PPaarrlliiaammeenntt  wwhhiillee  iitt  iiss    iinn  
sseessssiioonn    ffoorr  aa  ttoottaall  ppeerriioodd  ooff  tthhiirrttyy  ddaayyss  wwhhiicchh  mmaayy    bbee  
ccoommpprriisseedd    iinn  oonnee    sseessssiioonn  oorr    iinn  ttwwoo  oorr  mmoorree  
ssuucccceessssiivvee  sseessssiioonnss,,  aanndd    11[[iiff  bbeeffoorree    tthhee  eexxppiirryy    ooff    tthhee    
sseessssiioonn    iimmmmeeddiiaatteellyy    ffoolllloowwiinngg  tthhee  sseessssiioonn}}  oorr  tthhee      
ssuucccceessssiivvee  sseessssiioonnss    aaffoorreessaaiidd,,    bbootthh  HHoouusseess    aaggrreeee  iinn  
mmaakkiinngg    aannyy  mmooddiiffiiccaattiioonn    iinn  tthhee    rruullee  oorr  bbootthh    HHoouusseess  
aaggrreeee  tthhaatt  tthhee  rruullee  sshhoouulldd  nnoott  bbee  mmaaddee,,  tthhee    rruullee  
sshhaallll  tthheerreeaafftteerr  hhaavvee  eeffffeecctt  oonnllyy    iinn  ssuucchh  mmooddiiffiieedd  ffoorrmm  
oorr  bbee  ooff  nnoo  eeffffeecctt,,  aass  tthhee  ccaassee  mmaayy  bbee;;  ssoo  hhoowweevveerr  tthhaatt    
aannyy  ssuucchh  mmooddiiffiiccaattiioonn    oorr    aannnnuullmmeenntt    sshhaallll    bbee  
wwiitthhoouutt  pprreejjuuddiiccee    ttoo  tthhee    vvaalliiddiittyy  ooff  aannyytthhiinngg  
pprreevviioouussllyy  ddoonnee  uunnddeerr  tthhaatt  rruullee..    
  
  
PPoowweerr  ooff  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  ttoo  mmaakkee  
rreegguullaattiioonnss..  
  
4422..  ((11))  AA  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg    CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    mmaayy,,  wwiitthh    tthhee    pprreevviioouuss    
  ssaannccttiioonn    ooff  tthhee  aapppprroopprriiaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt,,    bbyy  
  nnoottiiffiiccaattiioonn  iinn  tthhee  OOffffiicciiaall  GGaazzeettttee,,  mmaakkee  rreegguullaattiioonnss    
  

 
  nnoott    iinnccoonnssiisstteenntt  wwiitthh    tthhiiss    AAcctt    aanndd    tthhee    rruulleess    mmaaddee  
  tthheerreeuunnddeerr  ttoo  pprroovviiddee  ffoorr  aallll  mmaatttteerrss  ffoorr  wwhhiicchh  
  pprroovviissiioonn  iiss  nneecceessssaarryy  oorr  eexxppeeddiieenntt    ffoorr  tthhee    ppuurrppoosseess  ooff    
  ggiivviinngg  eeffffeecctt  ttoo  tthhee  pprroovviissiioonnss  ooff  tthhiiss  AAcctt..  
  
        ((22))  IInn  ppaarrttiiccuullaarr,,  aanndd  wwiitthhoouutt  pprreejjuuddiiccee  ttoo  tthhee  
  ggeenneerraalliittyy  ooff  tthhee  ffoorreeggooiinngg  ppoowweerr,,  ssuucchh  rreegguullaattiioonnss  mmaayy  
  pprroovviiddee  ffoorr----  
    
    ((aa))  tthhee  ccoonnddiittiioonnss  ooff    sseerrvviiccee    ooff,,  aanndd    tthhee    
  rreemmuunneerraattiioonn    ppaayyaabbllee  ttoo,,    tthhee  ooffffiicceerrss    aanndd    ootthheerr    
  eemmppllooyyeeeess    ooff    aa    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn;;  
    
    ((bb))  tthhee    mmaannnneerr  iinn    wwhhiicchh,,  aanndd    tthhee    ccoonnddiittiioonnss    ssuubbjjeecctt    
  ttoo  wwhhiicchh,,  sshhaarreess    ooff  tthhee    CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg    
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  mmaayy  bbee  ttrraannssffeerrrreedd;;  
  
  
      ((cc))    tthhee      mmaannnneerr    iinn      wwhhiicchh    mmeeeettiinnggss      ooff  aa    
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  aanndd  tthhee  EExxeeccuuttiivvee  
  CCoommmmiitttteeee  tthheerreeooff  sshhaallll    bbee  ccoonnvveenneedd,,    tthhee  ffeeeess    ffoorr  
  aatttteennddiinngg  ssuucchh  mmeeeettiinnggss  aanndd      tthhee  pprroocceedduurree  ttoo  bbee  
  ffoolllloowweedd  tthheerreeaatt;;  
  
    ((dd))  tthhee    dduuttiieess  aanndd    ccoonndduucctt  ooff    ooffffiicceerrss  aanndd  eemmppllooyyeeeess  
  ooff    aa    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn;;  
  
  
    ((ee))    tthhee    ppoowweerrss    aanndd    dduuttiieess    wwhhiicchh  mmaayy    bbee    eennttrruusstteedd    
  oorr  ddeelleeggaatteedd  ttoo    tthhee  mmaannaaggiinngg    ddiirreeccttoorr  ooff  aa    
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg      CCoorrppoorraattiioonn;;  
    
  ((ff))  ggeenneerraallllyy,,    tthhee  eeffffiicciieenntt    ccoonndduucctt  ooff    tthhee  aaffffaaiirrss    ooff  aa                  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
    
  

 
    ((33))  TThhee    aapppprroopprriiaattee    GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt    mmaayy,,    bbyy    nnoottiiffiiccaattiioonn    
  iinn    tthhee  OOffffiicciiaall  GGaazzeettttee,,  rreesscciinndd  aannyy  rreegguullaattiioonn  wwhhiicchh  iitt  
  hhaass  ssaannccttiioonneedd  aanndd  tthheerreeuuppoonn  tthhee  rreegguullaattiioonn  sshhaallll  
  cceeaassee  ttoo  hhaavvee  eeffffeecctt..    
  
RReeppeeaall  aanndd  ssaavviinnggss..  
      
  
4433..  ((11))  WWiitthh    eeffffeecctt  ffrroomm  tthhee  ddaattee  oonn  wwhhiicchh  tthhee  CCeennttrraall    
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  iiss  eessttaabblliisshheedd    uunnddeerr  sseeccttiioonn  
  33,,  tthhee  AAggrriiccuullttuurraall    PPrroodduuccee  ((DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  aanndd  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg))    CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  AAcctt,,  11995566    ((2288  ooff  11995566)),,  iinn  
  ssoo  ffaarr  aass  iitt  hhaass  nnoott  bbeeeenn  rreeppeeaalleedd  bbyy  tthhee  NNaattiioonnaall  CCoo--
  ooppeerraattiivvee  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  AAcctt,,  11996622    ((2266  ooff  
  11996622)),,  sshhaallll  ssttaanndd    rreeppeeaalleedd::  
    
            ((22))  NNoottwwiitthhssttaannddiinngg  ssuucchh  rreeppeeaall,,----  
    
  ((aa))  tthhee  sshhaarreess  aallllootttteedd  aanndd  tthhee  sshhaarree  cceerrttiiffiiccaatteess  iissssuueedd  
  bbyy    tthhee  CCeennttrraall    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    eessttaabblliisshheedd  
  uunnddeerr  tthhee  rreeppeeaalleedd    AAcctt  ((hheerreeiinnaafftteerr    rreeffeerrrreedd  ttoo  aass  tthhee  
  ssaaiidd  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn))  sshhaallll    bbee  ddeeeemmeedd  ttoo  hhaavvee  bbeeeenn  
  aallllootttteedd  aanndd  iissssuueedd  bbyy    tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    
  eessttaabblliisshheedd  uunnddeerr  sseeccttiioonn  33  ooff  tthhiiss  AAcctt  aass  iiff  tthhiiss  AAcctt  
  hhaadd    bbeeeenn  iinn  ffoorrccee  oonn  tthhee  ddaayy  oonn  wwhhiicchh  tthhee  sshhaarreess  wweerree    
  aallllootttteedd  aanndd    tthhee  sshhaarree    cceerrttiiffiiccaatteess  wweerree  iissssuueedd;;    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
      ((bb))  eevveerryy    sshhaarreehhoollddeerr  ooff    tthhee  ssaaiidd  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  sshhaallll  
  bbeeccoommee  tthhee    hhoollddeerr    ooff  aass    mmaannyy    sshhaarreess    iinn    tthhee    
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    eessttaabblliisshheedd    uunnddeerr      sseeccttiioonn    33  ooff    tthhiiss    AAcctt    
  aass    aarree  eeqquuiivvaalleenntt  iinn    nnuummbbeerr  aanndd    vvaalluuee  ttoo    tthhee  
  sshhaarreess  hheelldd  bbyy  hhiimm  iinn  tthhee  ssaaiidd  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn;;  
      ((cc))    aallll    mmoonneeyyss    aanndd    ootthheerr  sseeccuurriittiieess    bbeelloonnggiinngg    ttoo    tthhee  
  NNaattiioonnaall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  FFuunndd  wwhhiicchh,,                  
iimmmmeeddiiaatteellyy  bbeeffoorree  tthhee  ssaaiidd  ddaattee,,  wwaass  mmaaiinnttaaiinneedd  bbyy  
tthhee  ssaaiidd  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    sshhaallll  ssttaanndd    ttrraannssffeerrrreedd    ttoo    aanndd    
bbee  mmaaiinnttaaiinneedd  bbyy  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  eessttaabblliisshheedd  uunnddeerr  
sseeccttiioonn  33  ooff  tthhiiss  AAcctt;;  
  

 
  
  ((dd))    aannyytthhiinngg    ddoonnee    oorr    aannyy  aaccttiioonn  ttaakkeenn    ((iinncclluuddiinngg    
aannyy  aappppooiinnttmmeenntt,,  nnoommiinnaattiioonn,,  ddeelleeggaattiioonn,,  rruullee  oorr  
rreegguullaattiioonn    mmaaddee))  uunnddeerr    tthhee  rreeppeeaalleedd  AAcctt  sshhaallll,,  iinn    ssoo      
ffaarr  aass  iitt  iiss    nnoott  iinnccoonnssiisstteenntt    wwiitthh  tthhee      pprroovviissiioonnss  ooff    
tthhiiss  AAcctt,,  bbee    ddeeeemmeedd  ttoo  hhaavvee  bbeeeenn  ddoonnee  oorr  ttaakkeenn  uunnddeerr  
tthhiiss  AAcctt;;    
  
  
    ((ee))  eevveerryy    sshhaarree  hheelldd    bbyy  tthhee    ssaaiidd  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    iinn  aa    
  SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  uunnddeerr  tthhee  rreeppeeaalleedd  AAcctt  
  sshhaallll  bbee  ddeeeemmeedd    ttoo      bbee  aa      sshhaarree    hheelldd      bbyy    tthhee    
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn                  eessttaabblliisshheedd    uunnddeerr      sseeccttiioonn    33  ooff    tthhiiss    
  AAcctt    iinn    tthhee  ccoorrrreessppoonnddiinngg  SSttaattee    WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn    ddeeeemmeedd  ttoo  bbee  eessttaabblliisshheedd  uunnddeerr  tthhiiss  AAcctt;;  
  
  
    ((ff))  aallll    rriigghhttss,,  lliiaabbiilliittiieess  aanndd  oobblliiggaattiioonnss    ooff    tthhee    ssaaiidd                  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn,,  wwhheetthheerr    aarriissiinngg  oouutt    ooff  aannyy    ccoonnttrraacctt    oorr                  
  ootthheerrwwiissee,,    sshhaallll      bbee    tthhee      rriigghhttss,,    lliiaabbiilliittiieess    aanndd                  
  oobblliiggaattiioonnss  rreessppeeccttiivveellyy  ooff  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  eessttaabblliisshheedd                  
  uunnddeerr  sseeccttiioonn  33  ooff  tthhiiss  AAcctt;;    
  
  
    ((gg))  aa    SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  eessttaabblliisshheedd  ffoorr  aa  
  SSttaattee  uunnddeerr  tthhee    rreeppeeaalleedd    AAcctt  sshhaallll  bbee  ddeeeemmeedd  ttoo  bbee  
  tthhee  SSttaattee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg    CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  eessttaabblliisshheedd    ffoorr    
  tthhaatt    SSttaattee  uunnddeerr  tthhiiss  AAcctt..  
  
    
  
  
  
  

 
  
  
TTHHEE  SSCCHHEEDDUULLEE  
  
((SSeeee  sseeccttiioonn  3366))  
  
DDEECCLLAARRAATTIIOONN  OOFF  FFIIDDEELLIITTYY  AANNDD  SSEECCRREECCYY  
    
            II,,  ____________________________________________________  ddeeccllaarree  tthhaatt  II  wwiillll  ffaaiitthhffuullllyy,,  ttrruullyy  aanndd  ttoo  tthhee  bbeesstt  ooff  mmyy  jjuuddggmmeenntt,,  sskkiillll  aanndd  aabbiilliittyy  
eexxeeccuuttee  aanndd  ppeerrffoorrmm  tthhee    dduuttiieess  wwhhiicchh  aarree  rreeqquuiirreedd    ooff  mmee    aass  aa  ddiirreeccttoorr,,  ooffffiicceerr,,  eemmppllooyyeeee  oorr  aauuddiittoorr  ((aass    tthhee  ccaassee  mmaayy  
bbee))  ooff  tthhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  aanndd  wwhhiicchh  pprrooppeerrllyy  rreellaattee  ttoo  tthhee  ooffffiiccee  oorr  ppoossiittiioonn  iinn  tthhee  ssaaiidd  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  hheelldd  bbyy  
mmee..  
    
    II  ffuurrtthheerr  ddeeccllaarree  tthhaatt    II  wwiillll    nnoott  ccoommmmuunniiccaattee    oorr  aallllooww    ttoo  bbee  ccoommmmuunniiccaatteedd    ttoo      aannyy  ppeerrssoonn    nnoott    lleeggaallllyy  eennttiittlleedd    
tthheerreettoo    aannyy  iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn  rreellaattiinngg  ttoo  tthhee  aaffffaaiirrss  ooff  tthhee  ssaaiidd  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  nnoorr  wwiillll  II  aallllooww  aannyy    ssuucchh  ppeerrssoonn  ttoo  iinnssppeecctt    oorr  
hhaavvee    aacccceessss  ttoo  aannyy    bbooookkss    oorr  ddooccuummeennttss  bbeelloonnggiinngg    ttoo,,  oorr    iinn  tthhee  ppoosssseessssiioonn  ooff,,  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  aanndd  rreellaattiinngg  ttoo  tthhee  
bbuussiinneessss  ooff  tthhee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
    
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                    SSiiggnnaattuurree  
  
    
                                                                                                                                                    SSiiggnnaattuurree  
  
    
                                                                                                                                                    SSiiggnnaattuurree  
    
    SSiiggnneedd  bbeeffoorree  mmee  
    
    DDaattee  
  
      

 
      
    
  
              
LLIISSTT  OOFF  AAMMEENNDDMMEENNTTSS  
 
 
11..  TThhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  AAcctt  ((AAmmeennddmmeenntt))  AAcctt,,  11998899  ((3377  ooff  11998899))  
ddaatteedd  2222nndd  OOccttoobbeerr,,  11998899  
  
   
AAnn  AAcctt  ffuurrtthheerr  ttoo  aammeenndd  tthhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  AAcctt,,  11996622..  
 
BBee  iitt  eennaacctteedd  bbyy  tthhee  PPaarrlliiaammeenntt  iinn  tthhee  FFoorrttiieetthh  
yyeeaarr  ooff  tthhee  RReeppuubblliicc  ooff  IInnddiiaa  aass  ffoolllloowwss::--  
 
11..    TThhiiss  AAcctt  mmaayy  bbee  ccaalllleedd  tthhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  ((AAmmeennddmmeenntt))  AAcctt,,  11998899..  
  
  
SShhoorrtt  ttiittllee..  
  
5588  
OOff  
11996622  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
4400  ooff  
11998800  
22..  IInn  SSeeccttiioonn  11  ooff  tthhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  
  AAcctt,,  11996622((hheerreeiinn  aafftteerr  rreeffeerrrreedd  ttoo  aass  tthhee  
  pprriinncciippaall  AAcctt)),,  iinn  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((22)),,  tthhee  wwoorrddss  
  ――eexxcceepptt‖‖  tthhee  SSttaattee  ooff  JJaammmmuu  aanndd  KKaasshhmmiirr  
  sshhaallll  bbee  oommiitttteedd..    
  
33..  IInn  sseeccttiioonn  22  ooff  tthhee  pprriinncciippaall  AAcctt,,  iinn  ccllaauussee  ((dddd)),,  
  tthhee  ffoolllloowwiinngg  sshhaallll  bbee  aaddddeedd  aatt  tthhee  eenndd,,  
  nnaammeellyy::--  
  ――oorr  aa  ccoorrrreessppoonnddiinngg  nneeww  bbaannkk  ssppeecciiffiieedd  iinn  tthhee  
  FFiirrsstt  SScchheedduullee  ttoo  tthhee  BBaannkkiinngg  CCoommppaanniieess  
  ((AAccqquuiissiittiioonn  aanndd  TTrraannssffeerr  ooff  UUnnddeerrttaakkiinnggss))  AAcctt,,  
  11998800..‖‖    
  
44..      IInn  CChhaapptteerr  II  ooff  tthhee  pprriinncciippaall  AAcctt,,  aafftteerr  sseeccttiioonn  
AAmmeennddmmeenntt  ooff  
SSeeccttiioonn  11  
  
  
  
  
AAmmeennddmmeenntt  ooff  SSeeccttiioonn  22  
  
  
  
  
IInnsseerrttiioonn  ooff  nneeww  sseeccttiioonn  22AA..  
  
  
  
CCoonnssttrruuccttiioonn  ooff  rreeffeerreenncceess  
ttoo  aannyy  llaaww  nnoott  iinn  ffoorrccee  oorr  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 
  22    ooff  tthhee  ffoolllloowwiinngg  sseeccttiioonn  sshhaallll  bbee  iinnsseerrtteedd,,  
  nnaammeellyy::--  
  
22AA,,  AAnnyy  rreeffeerreennccee  iinn  tthhiiss  AAcctt  ttoo  aannyy  llaaww  
wwhhiicchh  iiss  nnoott  iinn  ffoorrccee  oorr  aannyy  ffuunnccttiioonnaarryy  nnoott  
iinn  eexxiisstteennccee,,  iinn  aannyy  SSttaattee  sshhaallll,,  iinn  rreellaattiioonn  
ttoo  tthhaatt  SSttaattee,,  bbee  ccoonnssttrruueedd  aass  aa  rreeffeerreennccee  ttoo  
tthhee  ccoorrrreessppoonnddiinngg  llaaww  iinn  ffoorrccee,,  oorr  tthhee  
ccoorrrreessppoonnddiinngg  ffuunnccttiioonnaarryy  iinn  eexxiisstteennccee,,  iinn  
tthhaatt  SSttaattee..    
  
aannyy  ffuunnccttiioonnaarryy  nnoott  iinn  
eexxiisstteennccee  iinn  aannyy  SSttaattee..  
22..    OOrrddeerr  ddaatteedd  2255tthh  NNoovveemmbbeerr,,  11998811      
    
GG..SS..RR..  661166((EE))..    
IInn  eexxeerrcciissee  ooff  tthhee  ppoowweerrss  ccoonnffeerrrreedd  bbyy  tthhee  pprroovviissoo  
ttoo  ssuubbsseeccttiioonn((11))  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  44  ooff  tthhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  AAcctt,,  11996622((5588  ooff  11996622)),,  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  hheerreebbyy  iinnccrreeaasseess  tthhee    aauutthhoorriizzeedd  
sshhaarree  ccaappiittaall  ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  ttoo  oonnee  hhuunnddrreedd  ccrroorreess  ooff  rruuppeeeess  
ddiivviiddeedd  iinnttoo  tteenn  hhuunnddrreedd  tthhoouussaanndd  sshhaarreess  ooff  tthhee  
ffaaccee  vvaalluuee  ooff  oonnee  tthhoouussaanndd  rruuppeeeess  eeaacchh..    
  
  
  
  
  
33..    TThhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  ((AAmmeennddmmeenntt))  AAcctt,,  22000011  ddaatteedd  2299tthh  
AAuugguusstt,,  22000011  ((  2233  ooff  22000011  ))  
  
GG..SS..RR..  880077((EE))..------  IInn  eexxeerrcciissee  ooff  tthhee  ppoowweerrss  ccoonnffeerrrreedd  bbyy  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn((22))  ooff  
SSeeccttiioonn  11  ooff  tthhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  ((AAmmeennddmmeenntt))  AAcctt,,  22000011((2233  ooff  
22000011)),,  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  hheerree  bbyy  aappppooiinnttss  tthhee  11sstt  ddaayy  ooff  NNoovveemmbbeerr,,  
22000011  aass  tthhee  ddaattee  oonn  wwhhiicchh  tthhee  ssaaiidd  AAcctt  sshhaallll  ccoommee  iinnttoo  ffoorrccee..  
  
  
  TThhee  ffoolllloowwiinngg  AAcctt  ooff  PPaarrlliiaammeenntt  rreecceeiivveedd  tthhee  
aasssseenntt  ooff  tthhee  PPrreessiiddeenntt  oonn  tthhee  2299tthh  AAuugguusstt,,  22000011  
aanndd  iiss  ppuubblliisshheedd  ffoorr  ggeenneerraall  iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn::----  
 
AAnn  AAcctt  ffuurrtthheerr  ttoo  aammeenndd  tthhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 
CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  AAcctt,,  11996622..  
  
BBEE  iitt  eennaacctteedd  bbyy  PPaarrlliiaammeenntt  iinn  tthhee  FFiiffttyy--sseeccoonndd  
YYeeaarr  ooff  tthhee  RReeppuubblliicc  ooff  IInnddiiaa  aass  ffoolllloowwss::----  
  
11..  ((11))  TThhiiss  AAcctt  mmaayy  bbee  ccaalllleedd  tthhee  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  ((AAmmeennddeedd))  
AAcctt,,  22000011..  
22..  ((22))  IItt  sshhaallll  ccoommee  iinnttoo  ffoorrccee  oonn  ssuucchh  ddaattee  
aass  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  mmaayy,,  bbyy  
nnoottiiffiiccaattiioonn  iinn  tthhee  OOffffiicciiaall  GGaazzeettttee  
aappppooiinntt..    
  
22..  IInn  sseeccttiioonn  1111  ooff  tthhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  AAcctt,,  11996622((hheerreeiinnaafftteerr  rreeffeerrrreedd  
ttoo  aass  tthhee  pprriinncciippaall  AAcctt)),,------  
  
((aa))  iinn  ccllaauussee  ((aa)),,  aafftteerr  tthhee  wwoorrddss  ――iinn  IInnddiiaa‖‖,,  
tthhee  wwoorrddss  ――oorr  aabbrrooaadd‘‘  sshhaallll  bbee  iinnsseerrtteedd..    
  
((bb))  iinn  ccllaauussee  ((cc)),,  tthhee    wwoorrdd  ――aanndd‖‖  ooccccuurrrriinngg  
aatt  tthhee    eenndd  sshhaallll  bbee  oommiitttteedd..  
  
((cc))  aafftteerr  ccllaauussee  ((ee)),,  tthhee  ffoolllloowwiinngg  ccllaauusseess  
sshhaallll  bbee  iinnsseerrtteedd,,  nnaammeellyy::--    
  
――((eeaa))  eenntteerr  iinnttoo,,  wwiitthh  tthhee  pprreevviioouuss  aapppprroovvaall  ooff  tthhee  
CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt,,  jjooiinntt  vveennttuurreess  wwiitthh  aannyy  
ccoorrppoorraattiioonn  eessttaabblliisshheedd  bbyy  oorr  uunnddeerr  aannyy  CCeennttrraall  
AAcctt  oorr  aannyy  SSttaattee  AAcctt  oorr  wwiitthh  aannyy  ccoommppaannyy  ffoorrmmeedd  
aanndd  rreeggiisstteerreedd  uunnddeerr  tthhee  CCoommppaanniieess  AAcctt,,  11995566  
iinncclluuddiinngg  ffoorreeiiggnn  ccoommppaannyy  oorr  tthhrroouugghh  iittss  
ssuubbssiiddiiaarryy  ccoommppaanniieess,,  ffoorr  ccaarrrryyiinngg  oouutt  tthhee  
ppuurrppoosseess  ooff  tthhiiss  AAcctt..    
  
  
  
  
  
SShhoorrtt  ttiittllee  aanndd  
ccoommmmeenncceemmeenntt  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
        
  
  
  
  
  
  AAmmeennddmmeenntt  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  1111  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 
EExxppllaannaattiioonn  ––  FFoorr  tthhee  ppuurrppoosseess  ooff  tthhiiss  ccllaauussee,,  tthhee  
eexxpprreessssiioonn  ――ffoorreeiiggnn  ccoommppaannyy‖‖  sshhaallll  hhaavvee  tthhee  
mmeeaanniinngg  aassssiiggnneedd  ttoo  iitt  uunnddeerr  ccllaauussee  ((2233AA))  ooff  
sseeccttiioonn  22  ooff  tthhee  IInnccoommee  TTaaxx  AAcctt,,  11996611;;  
  
((eebb))  eessttaabblliisshh  ssuubbssiiddiiaarryy  ccoommppaanniieess;;  aanndd‖‖..  
  
33..  IInn  sseeccttiioonn  2200  ooff  tthhee  pprriinncciippaall  AAcctt,,----  
  
((aa))  iinn  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn((II)),,  iinn  ccllaauussee((cc)),,  ffoorr  tthhee  
wwoorrddss  ――wwiitthh  tthhee  pprreevviioouuss  aapppprroovvaall  ooff‖‖  tthhee  
wwoorrddss  ――uunnddeerr  iinnttiimmaattiioonn  ttoo‖‖  sshhaallll  bbee  
ssuubbssttiittuutteedd;;  
  
((bb))    iinn  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((22)),,  ffoorr  tthhee  wwoorrddss  ――wwiitthh  tthhee  
pprreevviioouuss  aapppprroovvaall  ooff  ‖‖,,  tthhee  wwoorrddss  ――uunnddeerr  
iinnttiimmaattiioonn  ttoo‖‖  sshhaallll  bbee  ssuubbssttiittuutteedd..  
  
44..  IInn  SSeeccttiioonn  2211,,  ooff  tthhee  pprriinncciippaall  AAcctt,,  iinn  ccllaauussee  
((vv)),,  tthhee  wwoorrddss  ――tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  oorr‖‖  sshhaallll  bbee  oommiitttteedd..  
  
55..  IInn  sseeccttiioonn  2222  ooff  tthhee  pprriinncciippaall  AAcctt,,  iinn  ssuubb--
sseeccttiioonn((II)),,  ffoorr  tthhee  wwoorrddss  ――wwiitthh  tthhee  pprreevviioouuss  
aapppprroovvaall  ooff,,‖‖  tthhee  wwoorrddss  ――uunnddeerr  iinnttiimmaattiioonn  ttoo‖‖  
sshhaallll  bbee  ssuubbssttiittuutteedd..  
  
66..  IInn  sseeccttiioonn  2244  ooff  tthhee  pprriinncciippaall  AAcctt,,----  
  
((aa))  iinn  ccllaauussee  ((aa)),,  ffoorr  tthhee  wwoorrddss  ――wwiitthh  tthhee  
pprreevviioouuss  aapppprroovvaall  ooff‖‖  tthhee  wwoorrddss  ――aafftteerr  
ccoonnssuullttaattiioonn  wwiitthh‖‖  sshhaallll  bbee  ssuubbssttiittuutteedd;;    
  
((bb))    iinn  ccllaauussee((dd)),,  tthhee  wwoorrddss  ――aanndd‖‖  ooccccuurrrriinngg  
  
  
  
  
  
11  ooff  11995566  
  
  
  
  
  
  
4433  ooff  11996611  
  
  
  
  
  
  
AAmmeennddmmeenntt  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  2200..  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
AAmmeennddmmeenntt  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  2211..  
  
  
  
AAmmeennddmmeenntt  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  2222..  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 
aatt  tthhee  eenndd  sshhaallll  bbee  oommiitttteedd;;    
  
((cc))    aafftteerr  ccllaauussee  ((dd)),,  tthhee  ffoolllloowwiinngg  ccllaauussee  sshhaallll  
bbee  iinnsseerrtteedd,,  nnaammeellyy;;--  
  
――((ddaa))  eenntteerr  iinnttoo,,  wwiitthh  tthhee  pprreevviioouuss  aapppprroovvaall  ooff  tthhee  
SSttaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt,,  jjooiinntt  vveennttuurreess  wwiitthh  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn;;  aanndd‖‖..  
  
  
  
AAmmeennddmmeenntt  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  2244..  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
44..    NNOOTTIIFFIICCAATTIIOONN  ddaatteedd  2222nndd  SSeepptteemmbbeerr,,  22000044    
    
SS..OO..  11002244((EE))  ––  IInn  eexxeerrcciissee  ooff  tthhee  ppoowweerrss  ccoonnffeerrrreedd  bbyy    
ccllaauussee  ((iivv))  ooff  ssuubb  sseeccttiioonn  ((22))  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  2277  ooff  tthhee  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  AAcctt,,  11996622  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
GGoovvtt..  hheerreebbyy  aapppprroovveess  tthhee  ffoolllloowwiinngg  iinnssuurraannccee  
ccoommppaanniieess,,  wwhhiicchh  hhoolldd  aa  vvaalliidd  CCeerrttiiffiiccaattee  ooff  
RReeggiissttrraattiioonn  wwiitthh  tthhee  IInnssuurraannccee  RReegguullaattoorryy  aanndd  
DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  AAuutthhoorriittyy  ((IIRRDDAA)),,  ttoo  bbee  tthhee  iinnssuurraannccee  
ccoommppaanniieess  ffrroomm  wwhhiicchh  aa  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  ccoorrppoorraattiioonn  
mmaayy  bboorrrrooww  mmoonneeyy  ffoorr  tthhee  ppuurrppoossee  ooff  ccaarrrryyiinngg  oouutt  
iittss  ffuunnccttiioonnss  uunnddeerr  tthhee  ssaaiidd  AAcctt,,  nnaammeellyy;;--  ((CCooppyy  ooff  
NNoottiiffiiccaattiioonn  eenncclloosseedd))  
  
11..  LLiiffee  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  ooff  IInnddiiaa..  
22..  AAlllliiaannzz  BBaajjaajj  LLiiffee  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoommppaannyy  
LLiimmiitteedd..  
33..  BBiirrllaa  SSuunn--LLiiffee  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoommppaannyy  LLiimmiitteedd..  
44..  HHDDFFCC  SSttaannddaarrdd  LLiiffee  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoommppaannyy  
LLiimmiitteedd..  
55..  IICCIICCII  PPrruuddeennttiiaall  LLiiffee  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoommppaannyy  
LLiimmiitteedd..  
66..  IINNGG  VVyyssyyaa  LLiiffee  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoommppaannyy  LLiimmiitteedd..  
    

 
77..  MMaaxx  NNeeww  YYoorrkk  LLiiffee  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoommppaannyy  
LLiimmiitteedd..  
88..  MMeettLLiiffee  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoommppaannyy  LLiimmiitteedd..  
99..  OOmm  KKoottaakk  MMaahhiinnddrraa  LLiiffee  IInnssuurraannccee  
CCoommppaannyy  LLiimmiitteedd..  
1100..  SSBBII  LLiiffee  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoommppaannyy  LLiimmiitteedd..  
1111..  TTAATTAA  AAIIGG  LLiiffee  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoommppaannyy  LLiimmiitteedd..  
1122..  AAMMPP  SSaammmmaarr  aassssuurraannccee  CCoommppaannyy                          
LLiimmiitteedd..  
1133..  DDaabbuurr  CCGGUU  LLiiffee  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoommppaannyy  PPrriivvaattee  
LLiimmiitteedd..  
1144..  NNaattiioonnaall  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoommppaannyy  LLiimmiitteedd..  
1155..  NNeeww  IInnddiiaa  AAssssuurreennccee  CCoommppaannyy  LLiimmiitteedd..  
1166..  OOrriieennttaall  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoommppaannyy  LLiimmiitteedd..  
1177..  UUnniitteedd  IInnddiiaa  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoommppaannyy  LLiimmiitteedd..  
1188..  BBaajjaajj  AAlllliiaannzz  GGeenneerraall  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoommppaannyy  
LLiimmiitteedd..  
1199..  IICCIICCII  LLoommbbaarrdd  GGeenneerraall  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoommppaannyy  
LLiimmiitteedd..  
2200..  IIFFFFCCOO--TTookkiioo  GGeenneerraall  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoommppaannyy  
CCoommppaannyy  LLiimmiitteedd..  
2211..  RReelliiaannccee  GGeenneerraall  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoommppaannyy  
LLiimmiitteedd..  
2222..  RRooyyaall  SSuunnddaarraamm  AAlllliiaannccee  IInnssuurraannccee  
CCoommppaannyy  LLiimmiitteedd..  
2233..  TTAATTAA  AAIIGG  GGeenneerraall  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoommppaannyy  
LLiimmiitteedd..  
2244..  CChhoollaarrnnaannddaallaamm  GGeenneerraall  IInnssuurraannccee  
CCoommppaannyy..  
2255..  EExxppoorrtt  CCrreeddiitt  GGuuaarraanntteeee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn..  
2266..  HHDDFFCC  CChhuubbbb  GGeenneerraall  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoommppaannyy  
LLiimmiitteedd..  
2277..  GGeenneerraall  IInnssuurraannccee  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  ooff  IInnddiiaa..  
  

 
  
55..    TThhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  ((AAmmeennddmmeenntt))  AAcctt,,  22000055  ((4455  ooff  22000055))  
ddtt..  1155tthh  SSeepptteemmbbeerr,,  22000055  
  
((  GG..SS..RR..  665577((EE))..------  IInn  eexxeerrcciissee  ooff  tthhee  ppoowweerrss  ccoonnffeerrrreedd  bbyy  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn((22))  ooff  
SSeeccttiioonn  11  ooff  tthhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  ((AAmmeennddmmeenntt))  AAcctt,,  22000055((4455  ooff  
22000055)),,  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  hheerree  bbyy  aappppooiinnttss  tthhee  1155tthh    ddaayy  ooff  NNoovveemmbbeerr,,  
22000055  aass  tthhee  ddaattee  oonn  wwhhiicchh  tthhee  ssaaiidd  AAcctt  sshhaallll  ccoommee  iinnttoo  ffoorrccee..))  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
5588  ooff  
11996622  
  
TThhee  ffoolllloowwiinngg  AAcctt  ooff  PPaarrlliiaammeenntt  rreecceeiivveedd  tthhee  aasssseenntt  
ooff  tthhee  PPrreessiiddeenntt  oonn  tthhee  1155tthh  SSeepptteemmbbeerr,,  22000055  aanndd  
iiss  hheerreebbyy  ppuubblliisshheedd  ffoorr  ggeenneerraall  iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn::--  
    
AAnn  AAcctt  ffuurrtthheerr  ttoo  aammeenndd  tthhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  AAcctt,,  11996622..  
  
BBEE  iitt  eennaacctteedd  bbyy  PPaarrlliiaammeenntt  iinn  tthhee  FFiiffttyy--ssiixxtthh  
YYeeaarr  ooff  tthhee  RReeppuubblliicc  ooff  IInnddiiaa  aass  ffoolllloowwss::--  
  
11..((11))  TThhiiss  AAcctt  mmaayy  bbee  ccaalllleedd  tthhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  ((AAmmeennddeedd))  AAcctt,,  22000055..  
  
((22))  IItt  sshhaallll  ccoommee  iinnttoo  ffoorrccee  oonn  ssuucchh  ddaattee  aass  tthhee  
CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  mmaayy,,  bbyy  nnoottiiffiiccaattiioonn  iinn  tthhee  
OOffffiicciiaall  GGaazzeettttee,,  aappppooiinntt..    
  
  
22..  IInn  sseeccttiioonn  77  ooff  tthhee  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonnss  
AAcctt,,  11996622((hheerreeiinnaafftteerr  rreeffeerrrreedd  ttoo  aass  tthhee  pprriinncciippaall  
AAcctt)),,  
  ((aa))  IInn  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((11)),,------    
ii))  CCllaauussee  ((bb))  sshhaallll  bbee  oommiitttteedd;;  
iiii))  AAfftteerr  ccllaauussee  ((ff)),,  tthhee  ffoolllloowwiinngg  ccllaauussee  sshhaallll  
bbee  iinnsseerrtteedd,,  nnaammeellyy::------  
  
  
  
  
  
  
SShhoorrtt  ttiittllee  aanndd  
ccoommmmeenncceemmeenntt..  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
AAmmeennddmmeenntt  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  77  
  
  
  
  

 
  ――((ffff))  tthhrreeee  ddiirreeccttoorrss  ttoo  bbee  aappppooiinntteedd  bbyy  tthhee  
CCeennttrraall  GGoovvtt..‖‖  
  
bb))    SSuubb  sseeccttiioonn  ((44)),,  tthhee  wwoorrddss  ――aanndd  aa  VViiccee--
CChhaaiirrmmaann‖‖  sshhaallll  bbee  oommiitttteedd;;    
  
cc))      aafftteerr  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((44)),,  tthhee  ffoolllloowwiinngg  ssuubb--
sseeccttiioonn  sshhaallll  bbee  iinnsseerrtteedd,,  nnaammeellyy::--  
  
――((44AA))  TThhee  ddiirreeccttoorrss  aappppooiinntteedd  uunnddeerr  ccllaauussee  ((ffff))  
ooff  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((ll))  sshhaallll  bbee  eennttiittlleedd  ttoo  rreecceeiivvee  
ssuucchh  ssaallaarryy  aanndd  aalllloowwaanncceess  aass  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  mmaayy,,  wwiitthh  tthhee  
aapppprroovvaall  ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt,,  
ddeetteerrmmiinnee..‖‖    
  
33..IInn  sseeccttiioonn  88  ooff  tthhee  pprriinncciippaall  AAcctt,,  iinn  ccllaauussee  ((vv)),,  
ffoorr  tthhee  wwoorrddss  ――tthhee  mmaannaaggiinngg  ddiirreeccttoorr‖‖,,  tthhee  
wwoorrddss,,  bbrraacckkeettss,,  lleetttteerrss  aanndd  ffiigguurreess  ――tthhee  
ddiirreeccttoorrss  aappppooiinntteedd  uunnddeerr  ccllaauussee  ((ffff))  ooff  ssuubb--
sseeccttiioonn  ((ll))  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  77  aanndd  tthhee  mmaannaaggiinngg  
ddiirreeccttoorr‖‖  sshhaallll  bbee  ssuubbssttiittuutteedd..  
  
  
44..IInn  sseeccttiioonn  1122  ooff  tthhee  pprriinncciippaall  AAcctt,,------  
  
aa))  IInn  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn((ll)),,  iinn  ccllaauussee  ((aa)),,  tthhee  wwoorrddss  
――aanndd  tthhee  VViiccee--CChhaaiirrmmaann‖‖  sshhaallll  bbee  oommiitttteedd;;  
bb))  ffoorr  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((22)),,  tthhee  ffoolllloowwiinngg  ssuubb--
sseeccttiioonn  sshhaallll  bbee  ssuubbssttiittuutteedd,,  nnaammeellyy::----  
  
――((22))  TThhee  CChhaaiirrmmaann  ooff  tthhee  bbooaarrdd  ooff  ddiirreeccttoorrss  
sshhaallll  bbee  tthhee  CChhaaiirrmmaann  ooff  tthhee  EExxeeccuuttiivvee  
CCoommmmiitttteeee‖‖..  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
AAmmeennddmmeenntt  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  88  
  
  
  
  
  
  
AAmmeennddmmeenntt  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  1122  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
AAmmeennddmmeenntt  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  2277  

 
55..IInn  sseeccttiioonn  2277  ooff  tthhee  pprriinncciippaall  AAcctt,,  iinn  ssuubb--
sseeccttiioonn  ((22)),,  iinn  ccllaauussee  ((iiiiii)),,  ffoorr  tthhee  wwoorrddss  
‗‗nnaattiioonnaalliizzeedd  bbaannkk‖‖  tthhee  wwoorrddss  ――sscchheedduulleedd  
bbaannkk‖‖  sshhaallll  bbee  ssuubbssttiittuutteedd..    
  
66..  NNOOTTIIFFIICCAATTIIOONN  DDaatteedd  3300..1111..22000066  
  
    
  GG..SS..RR..  773322((EE))..--IInn  eexxeerrcciissee  ooff  tthhee  ppoowweerrss  ccoonnffeerrrreedd  
bbyy  SSeeccttiioonn  4411  ooff  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  AAcctt,,  
11996622  ((5588  ooff  11996622)),,  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  hheerreebbyy  
mmaakkeess  tthhee  ffoolllloowwiinngg  rruulleess  ffuurrtthheerr  ttoo  aammeenndd  tthhee  
CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  RRuulleess,,  11996633,,  
nnaammeellyy::------  
  
11..((11))  TThheessee  rruulleess  mmaayy  bbee  ccaalllleedd  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn((AAmmeennddeedd))  RRuulleess,,  
  22000066..  
  
        ((22))  TThheeyy  sshhaallll  ccoommee  iinnttoo  ffoorrccee  oonn  tthhee  ddaattee  ooff  
  tthheeiirr    ppuubblliiccaattiioonn  iinn  tthhee  OOffffiicciiaall  GGaazzeettttee..  
  
22..  IInn  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  RRuulleess,,  
11996633,,  ffoorr  rruullee  33,,  tthhee  ffoolllloowwiinngg  rruullee  sshhaallll  bbee  
ssuubbssttiittuutteedd,,  nnaammeellyy::----  
  
  ――((  33))  NNoommiinnaattiioonn  ooff  DDiirreeccttoorrss::  ––    
  
TThhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovvtt..  sshhaallll  nnoommiinnaattee  tthhee  ffoolllloowwiinngg  
ppeerrssoonn  aass  ddiirreeccttoorr  uunnddeerr  ccllaauussee  ((aa))  ooff  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  
((11))  ooff  SSeeccttiioonn  77‖‖..  NNaammeellyy::--  
  
((ii))  ttwwoo  ooffffiicceerrss  nnoott  bbeellooww,,  tthhee  rraannkk  ooff  JJooiinntt  
SSeeccrreettaarryy  ttoo  tthhee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ooff  IInnddiiaa  iinn  
tthhee  MMiinniissttrryy  ooff  CCoonnssuummeerr  AAffffaaiirrss,,  FFoooodd  
aanndd  PPuubblliicc  DDiissttrriibbuuttiioonn  ((DDeeppaarrttmmeenntt  ooff  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 
FFoooodd  aanndd  PPuubblliicc  DDiissttrriibbuuttiioonn));;  
((iiii))  ffoouurr  nnoonn--ooffffiicciiaall  ddiirreeccttoorrss,,  sseelleecctteedd  bbyy  
tthhee  SSeeaarrcchh  CCoommmmiitttteeee  aass  eennvviissaaggeedd  iinn  
tthhee  gguuiiddeelliinneess  iissssuueedd  bbyy  tthhee  DDeeppaarrttmmeenntt  
ooff  PPuubblliicc  EEnntteerrpprriisseess..‖‖  
  
  
77..  NNOOTTIIFFIICCAATTIIOONN  1155tthh  NNoovveemmbbeerr,,  22000066      
    
GG..SS..RR..  770044((EE))..--  IInn  eexxeerrcciissee  ooff  tthhee  ppoowweerrss  ccoonnffeerrrreedd  
bbyy  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((11))  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  4411  ooff  tthhee  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  AAcctt,,  11996622((5588  ooff  11996622,,  
tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  hheerreebbyy  mmaakkeess  tthhee  
ffoolllloowwiinngg  rruulleess  ffuurrtthheerr  ttoo  aammeenndd  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  RRuulleess,,  11996633,,  nnaammeellyy::----  
  
11..((ii))  TThheessee  rruulleess  mmaayy  bbee  ccaalllleedd  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  ((AAmmeennddmmeenntt))  RRuulleess,,  
22000066..  
  
  
((iiii))  TThheeyy  sshhaallll  ccoommee  iinnttoo  ffoorrccee  oonn  tthhee  ddaattee  ooff  tthheeiirr  
ppuubblliiccaattiioonn  iinn  tthhee  OOffffiicciiaall  GGaazzeettttee..  
  
22..  IInn  rruullee  44  ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  RRuulleess,,  11996633,,  ffoorr  SSuubb--rruullee((33))  tthhee  
ffoolllloowwiinngg  ssuubb--rruullee  sshhaallll  bbee  ssuubbssttiittuutteedd,,  nnaammeellyy::------  
  
――((33))  AA  ddiirreeccttoorr  eelleecctteedd  uunnddeerr  ccllaauussee((dd)),,  ccllaauussee((ee))  oorr  
ccllaauussee  ((ff))  ooff  SSuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((11))  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  77,,  sshhaallll  hhoolldd  
ooffffiiccee  ffoorr  aa    ppeerriioodd  ooff  tthhrreeee  yyeeaarrss  ffrroomm  tthhee  ddaattee  ooff  
hhiiss  eelleeccttiioonn  oorr  uunnttiill  aa  ssuucccceessssoorr  iiss  eelleecctteedd  iinn  hhiiss  
ppllaaccee,,  wwhhiicchheevveerr  iiss  llaatteerr..‖‖  
  
    
  
88..  NNOOTTIIFFIICCAATTIIOONN  ddaatteedd  1122tthh  JJuunnee,,  22000077      

 
    
GG..SS..RR..  442233((EE))..--  IInn  eexxeerrcciissee  ooff  tthhee  ppoowweerrss  ccoonnffeerrrreedd  
bbyy  ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((11))  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  4411  ooff  tthhee  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  AAcctt,,  11996622  ((5588  ooff  11996622,,  
tthhee  CCeennttrraall  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  hheerreebbyy  mmaakkeess  tthhee  
ffoolllloowwiinngg  rruulleess  ffuurrtthheerr  ttoo  aammeenndd  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  RRuulleess,,  11996633,,  nnaammeellyy::----  
  
11..((ii))  TThheessee  rruulleess  mmaayy  bbee  ccaalllleedd  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  
  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  ((AAmmeennddmmeenntt))  
  RRuulleess,,  22000077..  
  
((iiii))  TThheeyy  sshhaallll  ccoommee  iinnttoo  ffoorrccee  oonn  tthhee  ddaattee  ooff  
tthheeiirr  ppuubblliiccaattiioonn  iinn  tthhee  OOffffiicciiaall  GGaazzeettttee..  
  
22..  IInn  rruullee  44  ooff  tthhee  CCeennttrraall  WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  RRuulleess,,  11996633,,------  
  
((aa))  ffoorr  SSuubb--rruullee((11)),,  tthhee  ffoolllloowwiinngg  ssuubb--rruullee  sshhaallll  bbee  
ssuubbssttiittuutteedd,,  nnaammeellyy::------  
  
――((11))  TThhee  tteerrmm  ooff  ooffffiiccee  ooff  tthhee  nnoonn--ooffffiicciiaall  ddiirreeccttoorrss  
aanndd  ooffffiicciiaall  ddiirreeccttoorrss  nnoommiinnaatteedd  uunnddeerr  ccllaauussee  ((aa))  ooff  
ssuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((11))  ooff  sseeccttiioonn  77  sshhaallll  bbee  tthhrreeee  yyeeaarrss  
ffrroomm  tthhee  ddaattee  ooff  tthhee  nnoommiinnaattiioonn  ooff  ssuucchh  ddiirreeccttoorrss;;  
  
  
  
  
    
((bb))  SSuubb  RRuullee  ((22))  sshhaallll  bbee  oommiitttteedd..  
    
  

 
    
((cc))    ffoorr  ssuubb--rruullee  ((33)),,  tthhee  ffoolllloowwiinngg  SSuubb  RRuullee  sshhaallll  bbee  
ssuubbssttiittuutteedd,,  nnaammeellyy::--  
  
――((33))  AA  ddiirreeccttoorr  nnoommiinnaatteedd  uunnddeerr  ccllaauussee  ((  CC  ))  ooff  
SSuubb--sseeccttiioonn  ((11))  ooff  SSeeccttiioonn  77  sshhaallll  hhoolldd    
ooffffiiccee  ffoorr  aa  ppeerriioodd  ooff  tthhrreeee  yyeeaarrss  ffrroomm  tthhee  ddaattee  ooff  
hhiiss  nnoommiinnaattiioonn  oorr  uunnttiill  aa  ssuucccceessssoorr  iiss  nnoommiinnaatteedd  
iinn  hhiiss  ppllaaccee,,  wwhhiicchheevveerr  iiss  llaatteerr..‖‖  
    
  
  
  
99..  
  
  
MMiinn..  llrr..  NNoo..  99--77//22000066--SSGG  ddtt..  1100..0011..22000088  
    
    
RReegguullaattiioonn  nnoo..  1100  ooff  CCWWCC  ((GGeenneerraall))  RReegguullaattiioonn,,  
11996655::    
  
RReevviissiioonn  iinn  ppaayymmeenntt  ooff  ssiittttiinngg  ffeeee  ttoo  tthhee  nnoonn--
ooffffiicciiaallss  ppaarrtt  ttiimmee  ddiirreeccttoorr  oonn  tthhee  BBooaarrdd  ooff  CCeennttrraall  
WWaarreehhoouussiinngg  CCoorrppoorraattiioonn  iiss  RRss..  22,,000000..0000  PPeerr  
SSiittttiinngg  ffoorr  aatttteennddiinngg  mmeeeettiinnggss  ooff  tthhee  BBooaarrdd  aanndd  RRss..  
11,,550000..0000  ffoorr  aatttteennddiinngg  mmeeeettiinnggss  ooff  ssuubb  ccoommmmiitttteeeess  
ooff  BBOODD  aanndd  EECC  eettcc..    
    
  
  
  
  
  
 
              

MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2011 -12) HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, THE 6th JUNE, 2012 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Commi ttee Room No. 'G -074', 
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaywant Gangaram Awale 
3. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
4. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
6. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
7. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav 
8. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
9. Shri Sohan Potai 
10. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
11. Shri Chandulal Sahu 
12. Smt. Usha Verma 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Sanjay Raut 
14. Dr. T. N. Seema 
15. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.K.Misra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou - Under Secretary 
 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution  (Department of Food and Public Distribution) 

 
 
1. Shri Sudhir Kumar   - Secretary 
2. Shri Girish Shankar   - Joint Secretary  
3. Shri B. B. Pattanaik   - Managing Director (CWC) 
4. Shri V. R. Gupta    - Director (Finance)  
5. Shri Amit Mehta    - Director (FCI)  
6. Shri N. K. Grover   - General Manager (Fin.)  
7. Shri P. K. Goswami   - Secretary (CWC)  
 
 
At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman we lcomed the members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened for briefing by the representatives of the M/o 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (D/o Food and Public 
Distribution) on the Warehousing Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2011. 
Thereafter S ecretary and other officials of the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution were invited to the sitting of the Committee. After their welcome, the 
Chairman apprised them of the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the Directions by 
the Speaker.  
 
2. Hon’ble Chairman, in his welcome speech, requested the representatives 
of the Department to brief the Committee on various issues such as the salient 
features of the Bill, the major weaknesses/shortcomings in the existing 
Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962, the majo r stakeholders of the Bill,   
benefits of grant of Mini Ratna status to CWC, etc.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Secretary, Department of Food and Public Distribution 
briefed the Committee on the various issues related to the Bill with the help of a 
Power point Presenta tion. He also addressed the issues raised by the Hon’ble 
Chairman. The supplementary queries of the Members of the Committee were 
also responded to by the representatives of the Department. 
 
4. The following are some of the important points that emerged durin g the 
deliberations of the Committee:- 
 

 
(i) Need to grant autonomy to CWC thereby delegating it more 
powers; 
(ii) Benefits of Mini Ratna status to CWC; 
(iii) Need to enhance the warehousing facilities available to the farmers 
in various States; 
(iv) Details of the amendments proposed and their purpose, etc; and 
(v) The benefits that would accrue to the stakeholders/general public 
by the passing of this proposed Bill; etc. 
5. The Hon’ble Chairman then thanked the Secretary and other 
representatives of the Department of Food and Pub lic Distribution for free and 
frank discussion and also for briefing the Committee properly. The Committee 
decided to convene the next sitting of the Committee on 19.06.2012. 
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2011 -12) HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, THE 18th JULY, 2012 
 
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1235 hrs. in Committee Room No. 'C', Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaywant Gangaram Awale 
3. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
4. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
6. Shri Ram Chandra Dome 
7. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
8. Shri Pratabrao Ganpatrao Jadhav 
9. Shri Lal Chand Kataria 
10. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
11. Shri Prabodh Panda 
12. Shri Sohan Potai 
13. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
14. Shri Ramkishun 
15. Shri Chandulal Sahu 
16. Shri E.G.Sugavanam 
17. Smt. Usha Verma 
18. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
19. Smt. T.Ratna Bai 
20. Dr. M.S. Gill 
21. Shri P.Kannan 
22. Shri Lalhming Liana 
23. Shri Sanjay Raut 
24. Shri Veer Singh 
25. Dr. T.N.Seema 
26. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. K. Misra   - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Veena Sharma  - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 

 
Representatives of the Mi nistry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution  (Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
 
1. Shri Sudhir Kumar   - Secretary 
2. Shri Naveen Prakash  - Joint Secretary (P&FC) 
3. Shri B. B. Pattanaik   - Managing Director, CWC 
4. Shri V. R. Gupta   - Director (Finance), CWC 
 
At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting. 
Thereafter, the Secretary and other officials of the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution were invited to the sitting of the Committee. After welcoming them, the  
Hon’ble Chairman apprised them of the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the Directions by 
the Speaker. The Committee, then, took evidence of the representatives of the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution in connection with the examination of 'The 
Warehousing Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2011'. Hon’ble Chairman, in his welcome 
speech, raised various important issues such as offer regarding Buy-Back of the Shares 
by the Corporation, conversion of partly paid shares into fully paid shares, a reference 
to Section 86 of the Income Tax Act which was made in Section 39 of the Warehousing 
Corporation Act, 1962 for exempting income tax on the interest earned on debentures 
which has already been omitted from Income-Tax Act w.e.f 1st April, 1965 , etc.  
 
2. Thereafter, the Secretary, Department of Food and Public Distribution addressed 
to the concerns raised by the Hon’ble Chairman in his opening remarks. The issues 
raised by Hon’ble Chairman were further supplemented by the members of the 
Committee. 
 
3. The fol lowing are some of the important points that emerged during the 
deliberations of the Committee:- 
 
(i) Benefits of Mini Ratna status to CWC and other Stakeholders; 
(ii) Need for construction of additional storage facilities in the country;  
(iii) Need for in creasing the procureme nt of foodgrains in the country; 
and  
(iv) Rotting of foodgrains for want of storage facilities etc.  

 
  
4. The representatives of the Department responded to the queries raised by 
the Chairman and the members on the aforesaid issues. 
 
5. The Hon’ble Chairman then thanked the Secretary and other 
representatives of the Department of Food and Public Distribution for their free 
and frank discussion.  
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY -SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2011-12) HELD ON 
TUESDAY, THE 28TH AUGUST, 2012 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Room No. 115 -A, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
3. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
4. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
5. Shri Lal Chand Kataria 
6. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
7. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
8. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Smt. T.Ratna Bai 
10. Shri Vivek Gupta 
11. Lalhming Liana 
12. Shri Sanjay Raut 
13. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Veena Sharma  - Director 
2. Ms. Amita Walia   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 
 

 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed th e Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration a nd adoption of the draft Report  on 'The 
Warehousing Corporations (Amendment) Bill, 2011' pertaining to the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution ( Department of Food and Public 
Distribution).   
3. In his opening remarks , Hon’ble Chairman highlighted the important 
recommendations contained in the draft Report and requested the Members to suggest 
amendment/modification, if any, in the recommendations . Thereafter, a fter d ue 
deliberation, the Committee unanimously adopted the draft Report without any 
amendment/modification.   
4.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman to  finalize the aforesaid Report 
and present the same to Parliament during the current Session of Parliament. 
5. The Chairman also mentioned that the tenure of the present Committee comes to 
an end on 30th August, 2012, and the Committee held 21 sittings and presented 7 
Reports to the Parliament. Hon'ble Chairman also thanked all the Members of the 
Committee for the valuable contribution made by them to the Committee. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
********* 
 
 