 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND                       
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION  
(2011-2012) 
 
   FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained 
in the Thirteenth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2011-2012) of 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2012  /   Bhadra, 1934 (Saka) 
22 


 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD,  
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND 
 PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2010-2011) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained 
in the  Thirteenth Report of the Committee  on Demands for Grants  (2011-2012) of 
the Ministry of  Consumer Affairs, Food  and Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)}  
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.082012    
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on  30.08.2012 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2012  /   Bhadra, 1934 (Saka) 
 
  


 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
 
Composition of the Committee ………………………………………… (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………... (v) 
 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………… 01 
 
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
 accepted by the Government…………………………… 23 
  
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
 the Government‟s replies………………………………... 47 
 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
 replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee ……………………………………….. 48 
 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
 which final replies of the Government are  
still awaited……………………………………………… 50 
   
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the 17th sitting of the Committee held on  51 
29st June, 2012.  
 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report  
of the Committee ………………………………………..  53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2011-12. 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar    - Chairman     
         MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Jaywant Gangaram Awale** 
3. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal% 
4. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
5. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
6. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary  
7. Shri Sanjay Dhotre  
8. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome  
9. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
10. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav**   
11. Shri Lal Chand Kataria  
12. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase  
13. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
14. Shri Prabodh Panda  
15. Shri Sohan Potai 
16. Shri Purnmasi Ram  
17. Shri Ramkishun 
18. Shri Chandulal Sahu (Chandu Bhaiya) 
19. Dr. Naramalli Sivaprasad* 
20. Shri E.G. Sugavanam$ 
21. Smt. Usha Verma** 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
23. Dr. M.S. Gill 
24. Shri Vivek Gupta 
25. Shri P. Kannan 
26. Shri Lalhming Liana 
27. Shri Sanjay Raut 
28. Ms. Rekha## 
29. Dr. T.N. Seema 
30. Shri Veer Singh 
31. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki@ 
___________________________________________________________ 
*   Nominated w.e.f. 25.11.2011 
** Nominated w.e.f. 03.01.2012 
$ Nominated w.e.f. 12.04.2012 
# Vice Shri Kanjibhai Patel and Shri Rajniti Prasad  retired from Rajya Sabha  w.e.f. 02.04.2012. 
@ Retired from Rajya Sabha  w.e.f. 02.04.2012  and renominated to the Committee w.e.f. 04.05.2012 
% Nominated w.e.f. 28.06.2012. 
## Nominated w.e.f. 11.07.2012 
(iii)

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. K. Misra  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma  - Director 
3. Shir Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 
4. Ms. Bhavna Tanwar - Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, The Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution (2011-2012) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Twenty Second  Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Thirteenth Report of 
the Committee (2010-11) (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011 -2012) of 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distrib ution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs). 
  
2. The Thirteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on   
5th August, 2011. The Government have furnished their replies indicating Action Taken 
on the recommendations contained in the Report on 27th September, 2011. The draft 
Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 29th June, 
2012. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.   
   
 
 
  
 
  NEW DELHI                      VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
  29 June, 2012___                  Chairman 
  08 Ashadha, 1934 (Saka)             Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
  

 
 
CHAPTER -I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on  Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on 
“Demands for Grants (2011-2012)” pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
1.2 The Thirteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 05 August, 2011. It contained 18 observations/ recommendations. Action Taken 
Notes in respect of all the 18 observations/recommendations contained in the Report have 
been received and these have been categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations /recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government : 
  
Serial Nos. – 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18 
(Paragraph Nos. – 2.14, 2.15, 3.14, 3.18, 3.28, 3.29, 3.32, 3.39, 4.7 , 
5.14, 6.8, 6.9, 7.9, 7.10 and 8.17) 
      (Chapter –II, Total 15) 
 
(ii) Observations/recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
 
Serial Nos. 3  
(Paragraph Nos. - 3.7) 
      
      (Chapter –III, Total 1) 
 
  

 
 
(iii) Observations /recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
 
Serial Nos. 5 and 7 
(Paragraph Nos. – 3.15 and 3.19)  
 
      (Chapter – IV, Total 2)   
 
(iv) Observations /recommendations in respect of which the interim 
replies of the Government have been received. 
    
 (Chapter – V, Total 0) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the replies in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this R eport be furnished 
to the Committee within three months from the presentation of the Report.  
 
1.4 The Committee strongly emphasize that utmost importance should be given 
to the implementation of Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In case where it is not possible for the Government to implement the 
recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported 
to the Committee in time with reasons for non-implementation. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
the recommendations. 
  

 
 
A. Need to make full utilization of funds to ensure timely implementation of 
Schemes/Programmes/Projects by the States/UTs 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.14) 
 
1.6  The Committee in their earlier report had recommended as below:- 
 
“The Committee are  disturbed to note that the Department has not been able to 
fully utilize the Budgetary Allocation for Plan Schemes continuously during the last 3 
years.  During the year 2010-11, the BE of Rs. 220.00 crore was reduced to Rs. 198 crore 
at RE and the Depart ment could utilize Rs. 150.92 crore only, which includes Rs. 61.14 
crore authorized in favour of other Ministries/Departments.  The Committee further note 
that on Non-Plan Schemes, the BE of Rs. 255.20 crore during 2010-11 was sharply raised 
to Rs. 504.90 crore at RE stage but the Department could actually spend Rs. 213.15 crore 
only.  The reasons given by the Department for their failure to make full utilization of 
Budgetary Allocation year after year such as submission of incomplete proposals by 
some State Governments; reduction in programmes for grant to States due to low receipt 
of Utilisation Certificates, etc, are not convincing to the Committee.  The Department has 
also stated that payment of pending bills on subsidy to PSUs for import of pulses was t he 
reason for the sharp enhancement of allocation under non plan schemes for 2010 -11 at 
RE stage i.e. from Rs. 255.20 crore (BE) to Rs. 504.94 crore (RE). The Committee are 
not convinced with the argument as they feel that it could have been anticipated at  the 
time of Budget preparation itself.  The Committee are of the view that such repeated 
failures to make full utilization of allocated funds every year and sharp increase/decrease 
of allocation at RE stage indicates lack of proper planning on the part of  the Department. 
Further, the reported shortcomings on the part of some State Governments also could 
have been avoided if the Department had maintained strict vigil and supervision on the 
implementation of the schemes/programmes/projects by the State Gover nments on a 
regular basis.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should make 
proper assessment of their requirement of funds for both Plan and Non -Plan Schemes at 
the time of budgetary preparation itself and make sincere efforts to make full utilization 
of funds to ensure timely completion of all the schemes/programmes/projects being 
implemented by the States both under Plan and Non-Plan Schemes.”  
  
1.7  In their action taken reply the Ministry have stated as under:- 
 
“At the time of budgetary preparation, all efforts are made to assess the 
requirement of funds on the basis of need of the funds for both plan and non -plan 
schemes of the Department.   Past experience and committed liability, if any, are also 
kept in mind while proposing the quantum of amount for budgetary requirement and all 
possible efforts are made to ensure full utilization of allocation  and Schemes/ 
programmes/ projects are timely completed. 
 
2. During the year 2010-11 the BE of Rs. 220 crores was red uced to Rs. 198 
crores out of which the Department has utilized 187.92 crores, which is 94.91% of the 
RE.  As regards non-plan the BE of Rs. 255.20 crores was increased to Rs. 504.94 crores 
at RE stage out of Rs. 500.28 crores, ie. 99.07% against the RE wa s utilized during thbe 
year 2010-11.  As regard the reimbursement of subsidy claims of PSUs the BE of 200.00 

 
 
crores was increased to Rs. 450.00 crores at  RE stage during the 2010-11. The reason for 
the sharp enhancement of funds allocated under Non -plan sc heme for 2010 -11 from 
Rs.200.00 crore at BE to Rs.450.00 crore at RE could not be anticipated at the BE stage 
as the re -imbursement of subsidy amount depends on the quantity of pulses actually 
imported and supplied by the designated agencies and the actual  claims submitted by 
them. During 2010 -11, the actual Expenditure incurred was Rs.450.00 crore   as against 
the enhanced amount allocated at Rs.450.00 crore at RE stage. Thus this Department had 
made full utilization of funds allocated at RE stage during 2 010-11 under the Non -plan 
scheme.” 
 
 
  

 
 
1.8  While noting that the Department was not able to utilize the budgetary 
allocations for Plan Schemes continuously during the last three years and there was 
a sharp increase in BE for Non Plan Schemes at RE stage, the Committee had 
recommended that the Depar tment should make proper assessment of their 
requirement of funds for both Plan and Non -Plan Schemes at the time of budgetary 
preparation itself and make sincere efforts to make full utilization of funds to ensure 
timely completion of all the schemes/progr ammes/projects being implemented by 
the States both under Plan and Non -Plan Schemes. In their action taken reply, the 
Government have stated that there was 94.91% and 99.07% utilization of funds 
during the year    2010 -11 under Plan Schemes and Non Plan Sc hemes, respectively. 
Further they have stated that the  reason for the sharp enhancement of funds 
allocated under Non -plan scheme for 2010 -11 from Rs.200.00 crore at BE to 
Rs.450.00 crore at RE could not be anticipated at the BE stage as the re -
imbursement of subsidy amount depends on the quantity of pulses actually 
imported and supplied by the designated agencies and the actual claims submitted 
by them. The Committee, therefore, hope that the Department would make accurate 
assessment of the requirement of f unds for both Plan and Non -Plan schemes at the 
BE stage itself and ensure full utilization of allocated funds in the coming years also 
while strictly monitoring and supervising the implementation of the 
schemes/programmes/projects by the State Governments. 
  

 
 
  
B. Need to give  special attention towards proper implementation of 
Schemes/Programmes in the North Eastern Region. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.2, Para No. 2.15) 
 
1.9  The Committee in their original report had recommended as below:- 
“The Committee also note that while on the one hand the Department could not fully 
utilize the allocated funds in both Plan and Non -Plan Schemes for the last three years, it 
incurred NIL expenditure in respect of the schemes for the benefit of NE Region.  This 
reflects gross negligence on the part of the Department towards the socio -economic 
development of the people of the NE Region, who are comparatively less developed in all 
human development indicators. The Committee are surprised to note that though there is 
lack of infra structure in all sectors such as transport, power, telecommunication, 
education, etc. in the NE Region as compared to other regions of the country, the 
Department does not contemplate any special schemes/projects for the region during the 
current financial  year. The Committee are also not convinced with the Department‟s 
contention that no need has been felt for formulation of special schemes/projects for the 
NE Region in respect of Consumer Protection, as the existing schemes, being 
implemented throughout the country, already cover all the States in the country including 
NE Region & States having underdeveloped areas. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Department should give special attention towards implementation of 
the schemes/programmes/projects of the Department in the NE region for the benefit of 
the people of the Region''.   
  
1.10  The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
“The department of Consumer Affairs have incurred for the North Eastern Region 
an amount  of Rs. 24.20 crores against the revised allocation of Rs. 20.09 crores 
(Statement enclosed) which is however 10% more than the originally allocated funds of 
Rs. 22.00 crores for the year 2010 -11.  The department has fulfilled its responsibility 
towards the socio-economic development of the People of the NE Region. 
 
Department has started telecasting/broadcasting weekly serial on dramatized 
versions of Consumer Forum judgments.  There are being aired in local languages in 
entire North East stations and are in additional to usual pan-India campaign.'' 
 
 
 

 
 
1.11  In their original report, the Committee had strongly recommended that the 
Department should give special attention towards the implementation of the 
schemes/projects/programmes of the Department in the North -Eastern Region for 
the benefit of the people of th e region. The Government in their action taken reply 
have stated that a total amount of Rs. 24.20 crores against the revised allocation of 
Rs. 20.09 crores which is 10% more than originally allocated funds for the year 
2010-11 have been expended for the No rth-Eastern Region, thus, fulfilling their 
responsibility towards the socio -economic development of the people of the region. 
While appreciating that the Department have incurred 10% more than the 
originally allocated funds for the year 2010 -11, the Commit tee feel that socio -
economic needs of the people cannot be fulfilled by one stroke of benevolent act.  
The Committee, therefore, would urge the Department to continue to give special 
attention towards implementation of the schemes/projects/programmes to th e 
North-Eastern Region and also apprise of the Committee of the full details of the 
schemes/programmes/projects undertaken by them with Rs. 24.20 crores in the year 
2010-11 and the resultant benefits to the people.   
 

 
 
C. Need to speed up the disposal of t he pending cases in the  National 
Commission, State Commissions and District Fora. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4, Para No. 3.14) 
 
1.12  The Committee in their earlier report observed as follows:- 
“The Committee note that apart from the National Commission at New Delhi, 35 
State Commissions and 629 District Fora are functioning in the country to protect the 
rights of the consumers and render quick and inexpensive redressal to their grievances.  
The Committee are however unhappy to note that a large number of cases are pending 
disposal in these Fora, i.e. 8643 cases in the National Commission, 103341 in State 
Commissions and 252639 in the District Forums as on 09.02.2011, which indicates that 
the grievances of a large number of consumers remain to be addressed. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Central Government, in coordination with the State 
Governments/UT Administrations, should make earnest efforts to dispose of the pending 
cases in the National Commission, State Commissions and District Forums in a time 
bound manner so as to achieve the objective of quick redressal of grievances of the 
consumers, for which these Fora were set up.” 
 
1.13  The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
“The National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission is empowered under 
the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 to exercise administrative control over the State 
Commissions and through the State Commissions over the District Fora  with respect to 
calling for reports on filing and disposal of cases, monitoring the same and giving 
instructions in general to ensure that the objectives of the Act are best served.  Disposal 
of pending cases in Consumer Fora is an important issue which i s being monitored.  This 
issue is also discussed in the Conference with States/UTs organised by the National 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission as well as meetings organised by the 
Department of Consumer Affairs.  The  State Commissions have been direc ted to make 
utmost efforts to dispose of pending cases in the State Commissions and District Fora.  
The State Governments are also advised to fill up vacant posts of Presidents and 
Members in the Consumer Fora in their States expeditiously so that Consumer  Fora are 
not rendered non-functional resulting in increase of pending cases.        
 While monitoring Periodical (Monthly &  Quarterly) Reports called for from 
States/UTs, the Department of Consumer Affairs also advises the State Governments to 
rectify the shortcomings observed, including disposal of pending cases.  
 The observations of the Standing Committee have also been con veyed to all the 
Chief Secretaries of States/UTs at the level of Secretary, Consumer Affairs vide D.O. 
letter dated 26 th August, 2011 followed by D.O. reminder for strict compliance of the 
recommendations of the Standing Committee in their States/UTs.” 

 
 
 
1.14  Expressing their unhappiness about the large number of cases pending with 
the National Commission, State Commission s and District Fora, the Committee had 
recommended that the Central Government should make earnest efforts in 
coordination with State Gov ernments/UT Administrations to dispose of pending 
cases in the National Commission, State Commissions and District Fora in a time 
bound manner. In their action taken reply, the Government have stated that 
disposal of pending cases in Consumer Fora is being  monitored and also discussed 
in the Conference with States/UTs organised by the National Consumer Disputes 
Redressal Commission as well as meetings organised by the Department of 
Consumer Affairs. Further, the State Commissions have been directed to make 
utmost efforts to dispose of pending cases in the State Commissions and District 
Fora.  It is also stated that the observations of the Standing Committee have been 
conveyed to the States/UTs at the level of Secretary vide D.O. and followed by D.O. 
reminder for strict compliance. The Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised 
of the concrete action taken by the State Governments/UT Administrations in 
pursuant to their recommendation and the number of cases disposed of by the 
National Commission/State Commissions/District Fora as a result thereof. 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
D. Need to fix time frame to fill up vacant posts of the Presidents and Members 
in the State Commissions and District Fora. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.5, Para No. 3.15) 
 
1.15  The Committee had recommended in their earlier report as below:-  
 
“The Committee are concerned that despite the efforts made by the Central/State 
Governments, posts of as many as 4 Presidents and 14 Members in State Commissions 
and 61 Presidents and 264 M embers in the District Fora are still lying vacant, rendering 
many State Commissions and District Forums non -functional. The Committee note that 
though the State Governments are responsible to fill up the vacancies in the State 
Commissions and District For a, yet the Central Government has been requesting State 
Governments to take advance action for filling up of expected vacancies. The President 
of the National Commission also writes letters to the Chief Ministers of State 
Governments from time to time. The  Committee are disturbed to note that despite all 
these steps, a large number of vacancies still exist. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Department should ascertain the reasons for existence of the 
vacancies in the State Commissions an d District Fora and persuade the State 
Governments to fill up the vacancies expeditiously.  The Committee suggest that a time 
frame of three months may be fixed for the State Governments to fill up the vacancies 
failing which the Central Government may app oint any person having the necessary 
qualifications and experience to the post of Presidents in the State Commissions/District 
Fora so that they do not remain non-functional.”  
 
1.16  In their action taken reply the Ministry have stated that:- 
 
"The matter has been taken up at the level of Secretary, Consumer Affairs with all 
the Chief Secretaries of States/UTs.  This issue is also discussed in the Conferences with 
States/UTs organised by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, as well 
as the D epartment of Consumer Affairs from time to time and the State Governments 
have been advised to take advance action for filling up all the vacant posts.     
This issue is also monitored by this Department through Periodical (Monthly & 
Quarterly) Reports called for from States/UTs."  
 
 
  

 
 
1.17  While noting that despite efforts made by the Government,  many posts of 
Presidents and Members were lying vacant in State Commissions and District Fora,  
the Committee in their original report had strongly recommend ed that the 
Department should ascertain the reasons for existence of the vacancies in the State 
Commissions and District Fora and persuade the State Governments to fill up the 
vacancies expeditiously. The Committee had further suggested to fix a time frame o f 
3 months for the State Governments to fill the existing vacancies to the post of 
President in State Commission/District Fora so as to keep them functional. The 
Government in their action taken reply have stated that t he matter has been taken 
up at the le vel of Secretary, Consumer Affairs with all the Chief Secretaries of 
States/UTs.  This issue is also discussed in the Conferences with States/UTs 
organized by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, as well as the 
Department of Consumer Affair s from time to time and the State Governments 
have been advised to take advance action for filling up all the vacant posts. This 
issue is also monitored by this Department through Periodical (Monthly & 
Quarterly) Reports called for from States/UTs . The Com mittee are not convinced 
with the stereo typed reply of the Government as they find that a number of posts of 
President and Members in many State Commissions and District Fora  are still lying 
vacant. Further, the Committee are disturbed to note that the D epartment have 
kept silent on their recommendation to ascertain the reasons for existence of 
vacancies in the State Commissions and District Fora and to appoint any person to  
the post of President in the State Commission/District Fora  by the Central 
Government after fixing a time frame of three months, so as to keep them 
functional.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that the 
Department should ascertain the specific reasons for existence of vacancies in the 

 
 
Consumer Fora  and persuade the State/ UTs to fix a time frame of three months to 
fill-up these vacancies so that they are not rendered non-functional.  The Committee 
also desire that the States/UTs may be impressed upon the need to fill up the vacant 
posts in the Consumer Fora ur gently through high level meetings, in order to 
provide quick justice delivery to the consumers. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the concrete action taken in this regard by the Government.  
 
  

 
 
 
E. Need to expedite the process of constitution of State Consumer Protection 
Council (SCPC) and District Consumer Protection Council (DCPC) in all the 
States and UTs  
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.7 Para No. 3.19) 
 
 
1.18  The Committee had recommended as below:- 
 
“The Committee note that the Consumer Protection  Cell is an ongoing scheme 
that render secretarial assistance to the Department in administering the Consumer 
Protection Act including holding of meetings of the Central Consumer Protection 
Council.  The Committee observe that the State Consumer Protection  Councils as well as 
the District Consumer Protection Councils have not been constituted in the States of 
Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, J&K, Jharkhand, Tripura & Uttarakhand.  The States 
of Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Prad esh have not given 
information as to whether they have constituted SCPCs/DCPCs or not.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should obtain the information from all the 
States/UTs regarding constitution of SCPCs/DCPCs and persuade the rem aining 
States/UTs to constitute SCPC/DCPCs in their States/UTs in the interest of the 
consumer.”   
 
 
1.19  The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
“Shortcomings observed in the Quarterly Performance Reviews (QPRs) received 
from States/UTs including non -constitution of SCPCs and DCPCs and non furnishing of 
information in this regard are  being taken up with the State Governments periodically.  
However, this recommendation of the Standing Committee has been taken up 
with the concerned State Governments at the level of Secretary (CA)."  
 
 
  

 
 
1.20  Noting that the State Consumer Protection Council (SCPC) and District 
Consumer Protection Council (DCPC) are not constituted in the States/UTs of 
Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, J&K, Jharkhand, Tripura & Uttarakhand  and 
the States of Haryana, Punjab, Ra jasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu  and Uttar Pradesh 
had not given information as to whether they have constituted SCPCs/DCPCs , the 
Committee in their original report had recommended that the Department should 
obtain information from all States/UTs regarding cons titution of State Consumer 
Protection Council (SCPC)/ District Consumer Protection Council (DCPC) and 
persuade the remaining States/UTs to constitute the same in the interest of the 
consumers. In their action taken reply, the Government have stated that th e 
shortcomings observed in the Quarterly Performance Reviews (QPRs) received 
from States/UTs including non -constitution of SCPCs and DCPCs and non 
furnishing of information in this regard are  being taken up with the State 
Governments periodically. They have further stated that the recommendation of the 
Committee has been taken up with the concerned State Governments at the level of 
Secretary (CA), but have not indicated about the outcome thereof. The Committee 
are not satisfied with the reply as it appears  to reflect the casual attitude towards 
their recommendation on the part of the Government. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that the Government should 
obtain accurate information from all States/UTs regarding the  constitution of 
SCPCs/DCPCs and impress upon  the remaining States/UTs to constitute 
SCPCs/DCPCs in their respective States/UTs expeditiously. 
 
 
 

 
 
F. Need to expedite the process of acquiring land and construction of 
Secondary/Working Standard Laboratories/Calibration towers. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.12, Para No. 4.7) 
 
1.21  In their original report the Committee had recommended as under:-  
 
“The Committee note that in order to strengthen the State enforcement machinery 
in a holistic way, a new scheme with an outlay of Rs. 143.286 crore is being implemented 
by the Department during 2009 -2012 under strengthening of weights & measures 
infrastructures of States/UTs .  So far Grant -in-Aid of Rs. 38.37 crore has been given to 
24 States/UTs for construction of Secondary/working Standard Laboratories/Calibration 
towers for testing of tank lorries and Rs. 36.98 crore was spent towards machinery and 
equipments.  The Committee observe that out of the 24 States/UTs to whom Grant-in-Aid 
has been given for construction of Secondary/Working Standard Laboratories/Calibration 
towers, the construction work is yet to be started in most cases.  The Committee also find 
that acquiring of land is in process in the States of Andhra Pradesh and Kerala whereas 
land has been just identified in the States of Assam, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, 
Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Tripura.  In the remaining States/UTs also, the 
construction work are progressing at various stages only.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Department should follow up with all the States/UTs so as to expedite the 
process of acquiring land as well as construction of the Secondary/Working Standard 
Laboratories/Calibration towers in all the States/UTs.” 
 
1.22  The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as below:- 
 
“The Department has been regularly following up with the State 
Governments/UTs to expedite the process of acquiring land and constructing building 
through letters and video conferences."  
 
 
  

 
 
1.23  While observing that out of 24 States/UTs to whom Grant -in-aid was given 
for construction of Secondary/Working Standard Laboratories/Calibration towers , 
the work was yet to begun in most States/UTs, the Committee had desired that the 
Department should follow up with all States/UTs so as to expedite the process of 
acquiring land as well as construction of Secondary/Working Standard 
Laboratories/Calibration towers. The Government in their reply has nonchalantly 
stated that they have been following with the States/UTs to expedite the process of 
acquiring land and constructing building through letters and video conferences. The 
Committee deplore the casual at titude of the Government towards their important 
recommendation. The Department should have indicated the concrete follow -up 
action taken by them in the matter. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Government to apprise  the Committee about the full details of work done, 
corrective measures taken, projects initiated etc. in this regard. 

 
 
G. Need to make Futures Trading more beneficial for the small/marginal 
farmers. 
   Recommendation (Sl. No.16, Para No. 7.9) 
 
1.24  The Committee in their original report had recommended as below:-  
 
“The Committee note that the Department of Consumer Affairs/FMC had 
commissioned a study during the year 2010 to ascertain the percentage of small and 
marginal farmers benefited from Futures/Forward Trading in the count ry. The scope of 
the study was to ascertain the benefits accruing to the farmers directly or indirectly 
through price discovery and price risk management through the commodity futures 
market and it covered about 10 essential commodities in various States. It is understood 
that the report was expected to be submitted in April, 2011. Hoping that the report might 
have been submitted by now, the Committee urge the Department/FMC to study the 
findings of the study thoroughly and share the same with all the State s/UTs for the 
benefit of the farmers.” 
  
 1.25  The Ministry in their reply have stated as under:- 
 
"The  NABCONS (NABARD Consultancy Services) have submitted the draft 
final report in April, 2011 of conducting a study primarily aimed at assessing the bene fits 
accruing to small and marginal farmers from forward/futures trading in nine commodities 
and suggesting measures to increase farmers participation in the futures market.  The 
major findings of the study are: 
 
(a) Awareness Level:  Majority of the small  / marginal farmers [SF / MF] are 
generally aware of the existence of the future markets due to its publicity in 
various popular media like newspapers / TV etc.  However, the general awareness 
about the forward markets is not leading to effective participa tion of the SF / MF 
in these markets.  The study has indicated that 88% of the respondents perceived 
the commodity futures market as beneficial for them in terms of getting better 
price realization for their produce. 
(b) Source of Information:  Fellow farm ers, inputs dealers and traders are the 
most popular sources of price information to the SF/MF.  The wide -spread 
awareness programmes being conducted by the FMC and various commodity 
exchanges are also aiding in improving the awareness of the SF/MF. 
(c ) Sowing / Selling Decision: Availability of water (expected monsoon 
performance), credit, other inputs, etc. were the major factors on which the 
farmers based their sowing decisions.  The respondents considered the then -
prevailing prices of the concerned com modities for their sowing decision.  Since 
the SF/MF generally have a low holding power for the harvested crops, they were 
not able to defer their sales after harvesting in expectation of better prices in the 
future. 
(d) Better Price Realization:  All the respondents had received an increased 
price vis -à-vis that in the previous year and this may be an indirect benefit of 
commodity trading to them. 

 
 
 
(e) Use of Warehouses:  It was observed that the concept of storing agri -
produce in the warehouses by the farmers for better prices in the future or the use 
of warehouse receipts for credit had not yet percolated to the SF / MF in any 
significant measure.  The SF / MF are mostly subsistence farmers who are forced 
to sell immediately after harvest. 
(f) Trader‟s Participation in Forward Markets: There is fairly good 
knowledge about futures trading and national level exchanges among traders and 
processors.  However, their participation level is low, may be   because of the 
inadequate understanding about the dynami cs of futures prices.  As a result, their 
participation is mostly for speculative purpose based on instinct or technical 
advice given by brokers on TV / Newspapers. 
(g) Dependence on Moneylenders/Traders/Commission Agents: 40% of the 
total sample number of  the SF / MF had availed trade credit from petty traders / 
commission agents.  The rate of interest charged by the petty traders was in the 
range from 24% to 36%.  In most cases, the produce of the farmers was pledged 
with the trader(s) that had doubled up as the moneylender(s). 
(h) Display of Ticker Boards: Only the educated and well -informed farmers 
based their sowing and selling decisions on the prices displayed in the ticker 
boards.  Besides, such Boards were not there in all the markets that were cover ed 
under the study.  The farmers among the sample group who had participated in 
one of the awareness programmes organized by FMC were found to be aware of 
the significance of the prices shown on the electronic ticker boards and were 
making its effective use to bargain with the traders for getting better prices. 
(i) Banking Support:  The Scales of Finance (SOF) for most of the 
commodities were found to be inadequate and need to be revised.  In the absence 
of timely and adequate credit, the SF/MF had no optio n but to resort to local 
moneylenders.  Further, any participation in commodity futures trading requires 
substantial fund requirement for holding the stock, to meet margin requirement, 
etc. which small and even big growers could hardly afford. 
The Forward Markets Commission is thoroughly studying the findings of 
the study and shall thereafter share the same with all States / UTs for the benefit 
of  farmers.” 
 
  

 
 
1.26  In their original Report, the  Committee had noted that the Department of 
Consumer Affairs/FMC had commissioned a study during the year 2010 to 
ascertain the percentage of smal l and marginal farmers benefiting  from 
Futures/Forward Trading in the country  and urged them to study the findings 
thoroughly and share it with all the States/UTs for the benefit of farmers. The 
Government in their reply have stated that NABCONS (NABARD Consultancy 
Services) have submitted the draft final report in April, 2011 and the FMC is 
studying the findings of the Report to be shared with the States/UTs. The 
Committee hope that the FMC would thoroughly study the findings of NABCONS 
Report expeditiously and share the same with all the States/UTs for the benefit of 
the farmers without any further delay.  
  

 
 
H. Need to fill up the v acant posts of Officers/Staff in the Forward Markets 
Commission. 
 
   Recommendation (Sl. No.17, Para No. 7.10) 
 
1.27 The Committee in their earlier report had recommended as below:- 
"The Committee are  surprised to note that the Forward Markets Commission 
having a sanctioned strength of 135 Officers/Staff, is presently functioning with a 
manpower of only 80 Officers/Staff with a vacancy of 55 Officers/Staff.  It is stated that 
the Department as well as the Commission have been making efforts to fill up the vacant 
posts time and again.  However, due to non -availability of suitable candidates, lack of 
adequate incentives, non -extension of deputation period etc., the 
Department/Commission have not been able  to fill up all the vacancies in the 
Commission.  The Committee are of the view that existence of such a large number of 
vacancies in a small organization like the FMC would adversely affect the functioning of 
the Commission.  The Committee, therefore, rec ommend that the Department of 
Consumer Affairs and the Forward Markets Commission should earnestly make sincere 
efforts to find suitable candidates and fill up all the vacancies in the Commission on 
priority."    
1.28 The Ministry in their reply have stated as under:- 
 
"The steps taken by the FMC to augment its manpower position and the 
challenges faced by it in this regard are given below:-  
 
a) 39 temporary Group A posts were created in the year 2004 and continued 
on year to year basis.  Action to fill up the vacant posts of the 39 temporary Group 
A posts has been taken up by the Commission time and again.   The 
advertisements were published for filling up the vacant posts during the year 
2005, 2006 -07, 2008 and 2009. However, it has been difficult to fill  up the 
vacancies to these posts due to lukewarm response for the posts in general; non -
availability of suitable candidate fulfilling the requirements for various 
disciplines, of the posts of Director/DS/DD; non -joining the posts by candidates 
even after s election; non -extension of the period of deputation of the appointed 
officers  by the parent organization and the consequent repatriation of  the officers 
to the parent organization; and inability to attract suitable professional candidates 
for the posts due to lack of adequate incentives.  During the year 2009, 13 officers 
i.e. 8 Director/DS and 5 DD were selected.  However, only 4 Directors and 1 DD 
joined the post. 
b) Apart from the 39 temporary Group A posts, the Commission has got 12 
IES cadre posts of  EA/Director/DD/AD.  Out of the 10 posts of DD/AD, only 2 
posts of DD and one post of AD has been filled up by the IES cadre and the 
remaining 7 posts are vacant.  The IES Cadre has been requested to fill up the 
vacant posts time and again. 
 

 
 
c) The Group B  and Group C posts of Economic Officer, Stenographers are 
vacant due to officers holding higher posts on deputation/temporary basis; 
repatriation of officer after completion of deputation period; non -availability of 
eligible candidates in spite of repeated advertisement and circulation of vacancy. 
Despite all the efforts being made to fill up the vacant posts, the Commission has 
not been able to appoint suitable persons to the vacant posts.  Nearly 40% of the 
sanctioned posts have remained vacant.  
FMC has again invited application from eligible officers to fill up 2 posts of 
Directors, 8 posts of Deputy Directors and two posts of Assistant Directors on deputation 
through advertisement in the Employment News dated September 2, 2011." 
  

 
 
1.29 While noting that  the FMC is functioning with 80 officers/staff  as against the 
sanctioned strength of 135, the Committee had recommended that the Department 
of Consumer Affairs and the Forward Markets Commission should make earnest 
efforts to find suitable candidates and fill up all the vacancies in the Commission on 
priority. In their action taken reply, the Government have stated that they have  
been advertising to fill up the vacant posts every year and yet due to reasons of non-
availability of suitable candidates, lack of adequate incentives, non -extension of 
deputation period , etc. nearly 40% of the posts have remained vacant. The 
Committee find that though the Department/FMC have made several attempts to 
fill up the vacancies in FMC, yet all vacant posts have not been filled up. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Department/FMC to take more vigorous and 
continuous steps to fill up the vacant posts at the earliest.  
  

 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
  ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.12, Para No. 2.14) 
 
2.1 The Committee are disturbed to note that the Department has not been able to fully 
utilize the Budgetary Allocation for Plan Schemes continuously during the last 3 years.  
During the year 2010-11, the BE of Rs. 220.00 crore  was reduced to Rs. 198 crore at RE 
and the Department could utilize Rs. 150.92 crore only, which includes Rs. 61.14 crore 
authorized in favour of other Ministries/Departments.  The Committee further note that 
on Non-Plan Schemes, the BE of Rs. 255.20 cror e during 2010-11 was sharply raised to 
Rs. 504.90 crore at RE stage but the Department could actually spend Rs. 213.15 crore 
only.  The reasons given by the Department for their failure to make full utilization of 
Budgetary Allocation year after year such as submission of incomplete proposals by 
some State Governments; reduction in programmes for grant to States due to low receipt 
of Utilisation Certificates, etc, are not convincing to the Committee.  The Department has 
also stated that payment of pending bills on subsidy to PSUs for import of pulses was the 
reason for the sharp enhancement of allocation under non plan schemes for 2010 -11 at 
RE stage i.e. from Rs. 255.20 crore (BE) to Rs. 504.94 crore (RE). The Committee are 
not convinced with the argument a s they feel that it could have been anticipated at the 
time of Budget preparation itself.  The Committee are of the view that such repeated 
failures to make full utilization of allocated funds every year and sharp increase/decrease 
of allocation at RE stage indicates lack of proper planning on the part of the Department. 
Further, the reported shortcomings on the part of some State Governments also could 
have been avoided if the Department had maintained strict vigil and supervision on the 
implementation of the schemes/programmes/projects by the State Governments on a 
regular basis.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should make 
proper assessment of their requirement of funds for both Plan and Non -Plan Schemes at 
the time of budgetary pr eparation itself and make sincere efforts to make full utilization 
of funds to ensure timely completion of all the schemes/programmes/projects being 
implemented by the States both under Plan and Non-Plan Schemes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 At the time of budgetary preparation, all efforts are made to assess the requirement of 
funds on the basis of need of the funds for both plan and non -plan schemes of the 
Department.   Past experience and committed liability, if any, are also kept in mind while 
proposing the quantum of amount for budgetary requirement and all possible efforts are 
made to ensure full utilization of allocation  and Schemes/ programmes/ projects are 
timely completed. 
 
2. During the year 2010 -11 the BE of Rs. 220 crores was reduced to Rs. 19 8 crores 
out of which the Department has utilized 187.92 crores, which is 94.91% of the RE.  As 
regards non-plan the BE of Rs. 255.20 crores was increased to Rs. 504.94 crores at RE 
stage out of Rs. 500.28 crores, ie. 99.07% against the RE was utilized dur ing thbe year 

 
 
2010-11.  As regard the reimbursement of subsidy claims of PSUs the BE of 200.00 
crores was increased to Rs. 450.00 crores at RE stage during the 2010 -11.   The reason 
for the sharp enhancement of funds allocated under Non -plan scheme for 201 0-11 from 
Rs.200.00 crore at BE to Rs.450.00 crore at RE could not be anticipated at the BE stage 
as the re -imbursement of subsidy amount depends on the quantity of pulses actually 
imported and supplied by the designated agencies and the actual claims subm itted by 
them. During 2010 -11, the actual Expenditure incurred was Rs.450.00 crore   as against 
the enhanced amount allocated at Rs.450.00 crore at RE stage. Thus this Department had 
made full utilization of funds allocated at RE stage during 2010 -11 under the Non-plan 
scheme. 
File No. H-11012/13/2011-P&C Dated  27/09/2011 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution,  
Department of Consumer Affairs  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.2, Para No. 2.15) 
 
2.3 The Committee also note  that while on the one hand the Department could not fully 
utilize the allocated funds in both Plan and Non -Plan Schemes for the last three years, it 
incurred NIL expenditure in respect of the schemes for the benefit of NE Region.  This 
reflects gross negl igence on the part of the Department towards the socio -economic 
development of the people of the NE Region, who are comparatively less developed in all 
human development indicators. The Committee are surprised to note that though there is 
lack of infrastru cture in all sectors such as transport, power, telecommunication, 
education, etc. in the NE Region as compared to other regions of the country, the 
Department does not contemplate any special schemes/projects for the region during the 
current financial yea r. The Committee are also not convinced with the Department‟s 
contention that no need has been felt for formulation of special schemes/projects for the 
NE Region in respect of Consumer Protection, as the existing schemes, being 
implemented throughout the country, already cover all the States in the country including 
NE Region & States having underdeveloped areas. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Department should give special attention towards implementation of 
the schemes/programmes/projects of the Department in the NE region for the benefit of 
the people of the Region. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.4   The department of Consumer Affairs have incurred for the North Eastern Region 
an amount of Rs. 24.20 crores  against the revised allocation of Rs. 20.09 crores 

 
 
(Statement enclosed) which is however 10% more than the originally allocated funds of 
Rs. 22.00 crores for the year 2010 -11.  The department has fulfilled its responsibility 
towards the socio-economic development of the People of the NE Region. 
 
Department has started telecasting/broadcasting weekly serial on dramatized versions of 
Consumer Forum judgments.  There are being aired in local languages in entire North 
East stations and are in additional to usual pan-India campaign. 
 
File No. H-11012/13/2011-P&C Dated  27/09/2011 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 3.14) 
 
2.5  The Committee note that apart from the National Commission at New Delhi, 35 
State Commissions and 629 District Fora  are functioning in the country to protect the 
rights of the consumers and render quick and inexpensive redressal to their grievances.  
The Committee are however unhappy to note that a large number of cases are pending 
disposal in these Fora, i.e. 8643 cas es in the National Commission, 103341 in State 
Commissions and 252639 in the District Forums as on 09.02.2011, which indicates that 
the grievances of a large number of consumers remain to be addressed. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Central G overnment, in coordination with the State 
Governments/UT Administrations, should make earnest efforts to dispose of the pending 
cases in the National Commission, State Commissions and District Forums in a time 
bound manner so as to achieve the objective of  quick redressal of grievances of the 
consumers, for which these Fora were set up. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6  The National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission is empowered under the 
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 to exercise administrative control ov er the State 
Commissions and through the State Commissions over the District Fora with respect to 
calling for reports on filing and disposal of cases, monitoring the same and giving 
instructions in general to ensure that the objectives of the Act are best served.  Disposal 
of pending cases in Consumer Fora is an important issue which is being monitored.  This 
issue is also discussed in the Conference with States/UTs organised by the National 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission as well as meetings organis ed by the 
Department of Consumer Affairs.  The  State Commissions have been directed to make 
utmost efforts to dispose of pending cases in the State Commissions and District Fora.  

 
 
The State Governments are also advised to fill up vacant posts of President s and 
Members in the Consumer Fora in their States expeditiously so that Consumer Fora are 
not rendered non-functional resulting in increase of pending cases.      
    
 While monitoring Periodical (Monthly & Quarterly) Reports called for from 
States/UTs, the Department of Consumer Affairs also advises the State Governments to 
rectify the shortcomings observed, including disposal of pending cases.  
 
 The observations of the Standing Committee have also been conveyed to all the Chief 
Secretaries of States/UTs  at the level of Secretary, Consumer Affairs vide D.O. letter 
dated 26th August, 2011 followed by D.O. reminder for strict compliance of the 
recommendations of the Standing Committee in their States/UTs.  
 
File No. H-11012/13/2011-P&C Dated  27/09/2011 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
   
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 3.18) 
 
2.7  The Committee observe that a number of projects such as computerization and 
computer networking of Consumer Fora in the country (CONFONET), construction of 
building of the National Commission, strengthening of the infrastructure of new NCDRC 
Building and strengthening of Consumer Fora are being implemented by the Department 
for improving the functioning of Consumer Fora.  The Committee regret that all these 
schemes are yet to be completed and particularly, the project „CONFONET‟ which was 
launched during th e 10th Plan period in March, 2005 at a cost of Rs. 48.65 crore and 
extended to 11th Plan period, has not been completed so far.  The construction of 
Building of the National Commission being constructed at INA, New Delhi at the 
estimated cost of Rs. 19.91 crore is also still to be completed.  The Committee are of the 
view that such inordinate delays in completion of schemes hampers the smooth 
functioning of the Consumer Fora. The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to 
impress upon the NIC to expedite the work and ensure total computerization of all the 
Consumer Fora in the country during the year 2011 -12.  The Committee further 
recommend that the Department should ensure that the works relating to the projects of 
construction of building of the Nationa l Commission and strengthening the infrastructure 
of NCDRC Building are also completed in time since the entire funds have been released 
to CPWD. 
Reply of the Government 
 

 
 
2.8  1. Under „CONFONET‟ scheme, hardware have been supplied to all the 629 
locations.  301 Technical Support Personnel have also been posted for providing 
technical support and training.  377 locations are uploading cause lists and 363 locations 
are uploading judgments across the country. In addition, case status for 19 State 
Commissions & 231 District Fora are available online. It is proposed to cover another 
100 Consumer Fora within March, 2012. Thus, an overall progress has been made by 
NIC under CONFONET scheme.  
  
2. The construction and strengthening of the infrastructure of new NCDR C building 
has been completed and NCDRC has started functioning from its new premises with 
effect from 17.08.2011. 
 
File No. H-11012/13/2011-P&C Dated  27/09/2011, Ministry of Consumer Affairs,  
Food & Public Distribution Department of Consumer Affairs  
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 3.28) 
 
2.9  The Committee note that the Consumer Welfare Fund, set up by the Department 
of Revenue in 1992, is being operated by the Department of Consumer Affairs to provide 
financial assistance to promote and protect the welfare of the consumers, create consumer 
awareness and strengthen consumer movement in the country.  A sum of Rs. 122.15 crore 
has been credited to the fund and an expenditure of Rs. 69.19 crore has been incurred till 
31.01.2011 with the recommendation of an Inter -Ministerial Standing Committee 
constituted for the purpose.  The Committee further note that to conduct corporative 
testing of products and services, various NGOs and the State Government of Kerala have 
been sanctioned funds recently viz. Voice Society New Delhi (Rs. 225.25 lakhs), 
Federation of Consumer Association, West Bengal (Rs. 2.08 crore), Council for Business 
Practices, Mumbai (Rs. 80.00 lakhs), Consumer Education Research Centre, Ahmedabad 
(Rs. 1.82 crore), Concert Chennai (Rs. 336 lakhs) and project from Government of 
Kerala (Rs. 2 5.44 lakhs). The Committee hope that the Department would properly 
monitor the utilisation of funds released to all these NGOs.  The Committee further 
recommend that all these NGOs should be asked to furnish audited statement of accounts 
regarding proper utilization of the funds released to them. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10  The Department will strictly monitor utilization of funds by NGOs and ensure that 
audited accounts and utilization certificates are duly submitted. 
 
File No. H-11012/13/2011-P&C Dated  27/09/2011 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
  
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.9, Para No. 3.29) 
 

 
 
2.11  The Committee also note that a land mark project namely the National Consumer 
Helpline (NCH) was launched on 15.03.2005 in collaboration with the  University of 
Delhi at a cost of Rs. 3.13 crore.  Phase –II of the project at a cost of Rs. 3.78 crore from 
the year 2010 has been extended after evaluation by an independent agency.  The 
Committee further note that another project viz Consumer Online Resource  & 
Empowerment (CORE) project, which is a web -based consumer awareness & protection 
programme to identif y consumer problems and redress them through Information 
Technology Method has been initiated by the Ministry with a total budgetary outlay of 
Rs. 3.50 crore.  The Committee hope that both the National Consumer Helpline as well as 
the CORE Project, if impl emented, would go a long way in addressing the problems of 
the consumers and also strengthen the consumer movement in the country to a great 
extent.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department should make 
sincere efforts to complete t hese projects on time within the budgetary allocation, in the 
interest of the consumers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.12  The Department will make all efforts to complete the projects on time within 
budgetary allocation.  
 
File No. H-11012/13/2011-P&C Dated  27/09/2011 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 3.32) 
 
2.13  The Committee note that State Consumer Helpline Scheme, which will be 
implemented as partnership efforts between the States and active VCOs of the States will 
extend service in the regional language of the State concerned besides Hindi and English.  
.  So far 20 States/UTs have been sanctioned funds from the Consumer Welfare Fund. 
Three proposals for setting up of State Consumer Helplines received from State of 
Uttarakhand and UTs of Puducherry and Dadra Nagar Haveli are under active 
consideration of the Department.  The Committee, however, regret to note that out of the 
20 States/UTs that have been released the grant, the balance 50% of 1st year recurring 
funds has been released to only 5 States so far and the 2nd installment has been released 
to only 1 Sta te.  The Committee feel that unless the funds are released to the States/UTs 
on time, the project will get delayed and the consumers of the States/UTs would be 
deprived of the benefits of the scheme.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Department 
to persuade the State Governments/UT Administration to submit utilization certificates 
and   release the allocated funds to all the States/UTs so as to enable them to complete the 
State Consumer Helpline Scheme without delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.14  The Dep artment is pursuing vigorously with all State Govts./UTs to provide 
Utilization Certificates.  Wherever proposals for setting up State  Helplines have not been 

 
 
received, efforts are being made to elicit such proposals. Secretary(CA) has also taken a 
meeting with the defaulting State Govts. and UTs on 28.7.2011 
 
File No. H-11012/13/2011-P&C Dated  27/09/2011 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs  
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 3.39) 
  
2.15  The Committee note that under the scheme for consumer awareness, Government 
had approved Rs. 409.00 crore in the XIth Plan period. The Committee are happy to note 
that on account of advance planning the actual expenditure under the scheme til 
31.12.2010 was Rs. 67.36 crore which represents 80.17% of BE (Rs. 84.02 crore) and 
83.50% of RE (Rs. 80.67 crore). The Committee, however, regret to observe that the 
Department could not make full utilization of the funds under the Consumer Education & 
Training HRD/Capacity Building during last year.  Considering the fact that every citizen 
is a consumer irrespective of his or her status, and protecting his interest is of utmost 
importance, the Committee strongly recommend that the Department should make 
vigorous efforts to fully utilise the Budgetary Allocation for Consumer Awareness during 
the year 2011 -12. The Committee further desire that the Department should, in 
consultation with other Ministries/Departments of the Central and State Governments 
make every effort to  educate the consumer about their rights and responsibilities 
particularly to the consumers living in remote, rural and hilly areas. 
  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.16  The Empowered Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary (CA) is 
periodically reviewing the consumer awareness scheme as well as progress of 
expenditure of fuller utilization of budgetary allocations. 
 
According to the guidance Department has already coordinated with different Ministries/ 
Departments which have a  consumer interface e such as Ministry of Power (Bureau of 
Energy Efficiency) Department of Pharmaceuticals, Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority, Ministry of Tourism, Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation, Department of Tele Communication (TRAI) Departme nt of Banking (Reserve 
Bank of India) Department of Chemical & Fertilizers, Department of Post, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution, Department of Agriculture & Cooperation and has released 
countrywide various advertisements in Print, outdoor and elec tronic media on the various 
consumer related themes.  Recently Department has launched Campaign on Right to 
Information Act and AADHAR (Unique identification Authority).  The 
Recommendations of the committee are noted for future campaigns also. 
 
File No. H-11012/13/2011-P&C Dated  27/09/2011 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs  
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 4.7) 
 
2.17  The Committee note that in order to strengthen the State enforcement machinery 
in a holistic way, a new scheme with an outlay of Rs. 143.286 crore is being implemented 
by the Department during 2009 -2012 under strengthening of weights & measures 
infrastructures of States/UTs.  So far Grant -in-Aid of Rs. 38.37 crore has been given to 
24 States/UTs for construction of Secondary/working Standard Laboratories/Calibration 
towers for testing of tank lorries and Rs. 36.98 crore was spent towards machinery and 
equipments.  The Committee observe that out of the 24 States/UTs to whom Grant-in-Aid 
has been given for construction of Secondary/Working Standard Laboratories/Calibration 
towers, the construction work is yet to be started in most cases.  The Committee also find 
that acquiring of land is in process in the States of Andhra Pradesh and Ker ala whereas 
land has been just identified in the States of Assam, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, 
Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Tripura.  In the remaining States/UTs also, the 
construction work are progressing at various stages only.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Department should follow up with all the States/UTs so as to expedite the 
process of acquiring land as well as construction of the Secondary/Working Standard 
Laboratories/Calibration towers in all the States/UTs. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.18  The Department has been regularly following up with the State Governments/UTs 
to expedite the process of acquiring land and constructing building through letters and 
video conferences.  
 
File No. H-11012/13/2011-P&C Dated  27/09/2011 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.23 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.13, Para No. 5.14) 
 
2.19  The Committee are  concerned to note that except a few items, the prices of the 
essential commodities such as pulses and edible oils have shown a rising trend over the 
prices prevailing during the past year.  The committee note that the prices Monitoring 
Cell studies and an alyses the trend of major commodities of international and domestic 
market from various sources and the information collected along with the status report 
are placed before the High Level Meetings such as Committee of Secretaries (COS) and 
Cabinet Committe e on Prices (CCP) which are held regularly.  Further, the Prime 
Minister and the Union Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution had 

 
 
advised the State Governments to check the rise in prices of essential commodities 
through a set of administrative and regulatory measures.  Despite all these measures taken 
by the Central and State Governments, the prices of most of the essential commodities 
did not show a declining trend.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department 
should take more  stringent measures to control the prices of essential commodities and 
chalk out effective strategies in consultations with other Departments, Traders and FMC 
to ensure that the prices of essential commodities are kept in check. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.20  Government has already taken various steps to check the rise in prices of essential 
commodities. The retail prices of some of the essential commodities have shown steady 
to declining trend in the case of atta, pulses such as moong dal. While the reta il prices of 
rice, wheat, sugar, potato, pulses such as tur dal, urad dal, masoor dal  had shown 
marginal increase; in the case of edible oils, vegetables such as onion had shown an 
increasing trend over the last one year as observed in 4 metros viz. Delhi , Mumbai, 
Kolkata and Chennai. In the case of edible oils, 50% of our requirements are imported to 
meet the demand supply mismatch. Therefore, domestic prices are also susceptible to the 
changes in the international prices. Weather and seasonal factors aff ects the prices of 
vegetables. The details of the retail prices of essential commodities during the last one  
year in 4 metros viz. Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai are given in  Annexure -I. The 
steps taken by the Government to check the rise in prices o f essential commodities are 
given in Annexure II. 
 
 The Price Monitoring Cell (PMC) of the Department of Consumer Affairs 
monitors the retail and wholesale prices of 22 essential commodities viz rice, wheat, atta, 
gram dal, arhar dal, moong dal, urad dal, masoor dal, tea, sugar, salt, potato, onion, 
vanaspati, groundnut oil, mustard oil, milk, soya oil, palm oil, sunflower oil, gur and 
tomato based on the information furnished by the State Governments/UTs on a daily 
basis from 49 centres of the country. Any variation, especially an increase in prices at the 
wholesale/retail level, is immediately taken note of and the State Food and Civil Supplies 
Department concerned is contacted for details thereof. 
 
 There is an inter -ministerial consultation mechanism at the highest level to 
contain the price rise.   Data and information related to domestic prices, import & export, 
international prices, acreage, weather, production, demand and other issues are analysed 
by the PMC and included in the agenda notes prepared f or the high level committee 
meetings. Ministry of Agriculture is entrusted with the task of compiling/computing 
estimates of acreage, yield and production in respect of agricultural commodities. 
Officials of the Department of Consumer Affairs interact with  Ministry of Agriculture in  
various forums, including various meetings convened  to review/monitor prices, where all 
possible short, medium and long -terms measures to contain prices are discussed.  An 
official of Department of Consumer Affairs also attend s weekly meetings on Crop 
Weather Watch Group of the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation.  This Group 
discusses issues relating to production, yield, acreage, weather outlook, prices situation, 
fertilizers and reservoir status etc. Report on the Tren d of domestic spot and futures 
prices on Gram, Wheat, Maize, Mustard Seed, Potato etc are sent by FMC which helps in 
analysis of the future trends of the behaviour of prices.  

 
 
 
 The prevailing price situation as well as other factors which have impact on 
prices, both in domestic and international markets are studied and brought to the notice of 
high level committees, such as Committee of Secretaries (COS), Cabinet Committee on 
Prices (CCP), Empowered Group of Ministers (EGOM) through agenda notes prepared 
for their meetings. Thus effective strategies and appropriate actions are taken based on 
the inputs received from various Departments of the Government.  
 
  

 
 
Annexure I 
Retail prices of selected essential commodities at selected centres  
(Rs per qtl) 
    Commodity current date 1 Year Back   Absolute Variation 
Centre   09/09/2011 9/9/2010 Over 1 Year 
Rice         
DELHI 24 23 1 
MUMBAI 21 21 0 
KOLKATA 21 20 1 
CHENNAI 22 21 1 
Wheat         
DELHI 15 14 1 
MUMBAI 23 21 2 
KOLKATA NR NR NR 
CHENNAI 22 22 0 
Atta $       
DELHI 16 16 0 
MUMBAI 21 24 -3 
KOLKATA 16 16 0 
CHENNAI 23 23.5 -0.5 
Gram  Dal       
DELHI 46 35 11 
MUMBAI 48 38 10 
KOLKATA 44 32 12 
CHENNAI 45 35.5 9.5 
Tur Dal        
DELHI 71 70 1 
MUMBAI 73 70 3 
KOLKATA 56 58 -2 
CHENNAI 65 66.5 -1.5 
Urad Dal       
DELHI 76.5 72 4.5 
MUMBAI 80 79 1 
KOLKATA 58 70 -12 
CHENNAI 68 80 -12 
Moong Dal       
DELHI 75 78.5 -3.5 
MUMBAI 76 84 -8 
KOLKATA 70 75 -5 
CHENNAI 65 75 -10 
Masoor Dal       
DELHI 56 54 2 
MUMBAI 58 57 1 
KOLKATA 42 48 -6 
CHENNAI 45 46 -1 
            

 
 
  
Current Date 
  
Absolute Variation Commodity 1 Year Back   
  
9/9/2011 
    
Centre  9/9/2010 Over 1 Year 
Sugar        
DELHI 33 31 2 
MUMBAI 33 30 3 
KOLKATA 32 30 2 
CHENNAI 31 28.5 2.5 
Milk @       
DELHI 27 24 3 
MUMBAI 36 28 8 
KOLKATA 22 21 1 
CHENNAI 20.5 20.5 0 
Groundnut Oil       
DELHI 128 122 6 
MUMBAI 127 80 47 
KOLKATA 120 110 10 
CHENNAI 100 90 10 
Mustard Oil       
DELHI 81 71 10 
MUMBAI 90 80 10 
KOLKATA 78 62 16 
CHENNAI 83 72 11 
Vanaspati       
DELHI 78 63 15 
MUMBAI 89 63 26 
KOLKATA 60 52 8 
CHENNAI 78 58 20 
Soya Oil       
DELHI 83 66 17 
MUMBAI 76 NR NR 
KOLKATA 74 54 20 
CHENNAI NR NR NR 
Sunflower       
DELHI 93 79 14 
MUMBAI 86 NR NR 
KOLKATA 90 64 26 
CHENNAI 81 64 17 
Palm Oil       
DELHI NR NR NR 
MUMBAI 64 NR NR 
KOLKATA 65 52 13 
CHENNAI 61 49 12 
                      Current Date   Absolute Variation 

 
 
Commodity 1 Year Back   
  
9/9/2011 
    
Centre  9/9/2010 Over 1 Year 
Gur       
DELHI 37 37 0 
MUMBAI 47 NR NR 
KOLKATA NR NR NR 
CHENNAI 44 41 3 
Tea Loose       
DELHI 164 148 16 
MUMBAI 194 179 15 
KOLKATA 100 100 0 
CHENNAI 260 240 20 
Salt Pack I       
DELHI 14 12 2 
MUMBAI 14 12 2 
KOLKATA 8 8 0 
CHENNAI 14 12 2 
Potato       
DELHI 15 11 4 
MUMBAI 15 13 2 
KOLKATA 8 7 1 
CHENNAI 14.5 14 0.5 
Onion       
DELHI 23 19 4 
MUMBAI 20 14 6 
KOLKATA 22 16 6 
CHENNAI 14.25 15 -0.75 
Tomato       
DELHI 21 33.5 -12.5 
MUMBAI 15 NR NR 
KOLKATA 22 NR NR 
CHENNAI 15 12 3 
Source: State Civil Supplies Department;  NR- Not Reported 
 
  

 
 
Annexure II 
Steps taken by the Government to contain price rise in essential Commodities are 
listed below: 
 
1.   Fiscal Measures 
 
(i)   Reduced import duties to zero – for rice and wheat, onion and pulses , edible oils 
(crude) and to 7.5% for refined & hydrogenated oils & vegetable oils. 
 
(ii)    NDDB has been allowed to Import of 30000 tonnes of skimmed Milk Powder and  
Whole milk powder and 15000 MT of Butter, Butter Oil and Anhydrous Milk Fat 
at zero% concessional  duty  under Tariff  Rate Quota for the year 2011-12 . 
 
(iii)   Allowed sugar mills on 17.04.2009 to import duty -free raw sugar under Open   
General License (O.G.L.).  Later this facility was extended to private trade on job 
basis.   
 
(iv)   Allowed STC/MMTC/PEC and NAFED on 17.04.2 010 to import duty -free 
white/refined    sugar initially with a cap of 1 million tons.  Later on, duty -free 
import was also allowed by other Central / State Government Agencies and 
private trade without any cap on the quantity.  
 
2.   Administrative Measures 
(i)   Removed levy obligation in respect of all imported raw sugar and white/refined 
sugar.  
 
(ii)   Banned export of non -basmati rice and wheat until further orders, edible oils 
(except coconut oil and forest based oil) and pulses (except Kabuli chana and 
organic pulses up to a maximum of 10000 tonnes per year). 
 
(iii)   Export of edible oils permitted in branded consumer packs of up to 5 kgs subject 
to a limit of 10,000 tonnes. 
  
(iv)   Export of milk powders(including skimmed milk powder, whole milk powder, 
dairy whitener and infant milk food), Casein and Casein products has been 
prohibited with effect from 18.02.2011. 
 
(v)   Effected no change in Tariff Rate Values of edible oils; 
 
(vi)   Extended stock limit orders in the case of pulses, paddy and rice, edible oil, edible 
oilseeds and sugar. 
 
 (vii)   The export of all varieties of onions is prohibited w.e. f 9th September, 2011 till 
further orders. The MEP of non-Basmati rice was at USD 850 per MT;  
 
(viii)   Maintained the Central Issue Price (CIP) for rice (at Rs 5.65 per kg for BPL and 
Rs 3 per kg for AAY) and wheat (at Rs 4.15 per kg for BPL and Rs 2 per kg for 
AAY) since 2002. 

 
 
(ix)   Suspension of Futures trading in Rice, urad and Tur by the Forward Market 
Commission in the year 2007 -08 continues during 2010 -11.  Futures trading in 
sugar were suspended wef 27.5.2009 up to 30.9.2010. However the future trading 
in sugar has since been resumed, with effect from 27.12.2010. 
(x)   Proportion of sugar production requisitioned as levy sugar was increased from 10 
to 20% for 2009-10 sugar seasons. However, for 2010-11 sugar season, the levy 
obligation has been reduced to 10%. 
  
(xi)   Government has allocated 25 lakh tonnes of wheat and 20 lakh tonnes o f rice 
under OMSS (D) 2011 for the period of January, 2011 to September 2011. 
 
(xii)   25 lakh tonnes of food grains have been allocated on 6.1.2011 to all States/UTs 
for BPL families at BPL issue prices for distribution upto 30.9.2011. 
 
(xiii)   An additi onal adhoc allocation of 50 lakh tonnes of foodgrains  made on 16 th 
May, 2011 to all State/UTs  for BPL families at BPL issue price for distribution 
during the current year up to March, 2012. 
 
(xiv)   An additional adhoc allocation of 25 lakh tonnes of foo dgrains made on 6.1.2011 
to all States/UTs for APL families @ Rs. 8.45 per kg for wheat and Rs. 11.85 per 
kg for rice for distribution upto 30.9.2011. 
 
(xv)   In addition, adhoc allocation of 50 lakh tonnes of foodgrains  made on 30 th June, 
2011 to APL fam ilies raising thereby monthly APL allocation upto 15 kg per 
family per month in 20 States and 35 kg per family per month in 4 North Eastern 
States, Sikkim and 2 hilly states of Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand  where it 
was less than that quantity for a pe riod of ten months from June 2011 to March 
2012. 
 
(xvi) Scheme for distribution of subsidized imported pulses through State 
Governments/UTs with subsidy of Rs 10/- kg for distribution @ 1 kg per month.  
 
(xvii) Scheme for distribution of subsidized importe d edible oils through State 
Governments/UTs with subsidy of Rs.15/ - kg for distribution to ration card 
holders @ liter   per ration card per month.  
 
File No. H-11012/13/2011-P&C Dated  27/09/2011 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 6.8) 
 
2.21  The Committee note that the State Governments/UT Administrations have been 
delegated the powers to prevent hoarding and black -marketing of essential commodities 
under the provisions of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and the Prevention of 
Black-marketing and Maintenance of Essential Commodities Act, 1980.  The Committee 
are surprised to note that despite the standing orders issued by the Government to all 
States Governments/UT Administration to submit monthly reports, only 6 States viz. 

 
 
Gujarat, Tamil N adu, Orissa, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh and Chhattisgarh have 
furnished the information regarding detention orders issued by them during the years 
2008, 2009 and 2010 and the remaining States/UTs have not furnished any such 
information. The Committee are dismayed to note that the Department does not appear to 
have taken any action against the defaulting States/UTs.  The Committee feel that though 
States Governments have been delegated the powers for enforcement of Essential 
Commodities Act., 1995 and Preve ntion of Black -marketing and Maintenance of 
Supplies of Essential Commodities Act. 1980, it is the responsibility of the Central 
Government to monitor the proper enforcement of the Acts which they are hardly doing 
which is evident from the fact that only 6  States have been submitting the monthly 
reports. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department of 
Consumer Affairs should strictly monitor the enforcement of the Acts by the State 
Governments/UT Administration so as to check the prices of essential commodities. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.22  The enforcement of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 lies with the State 
Governments/Union Territories.  The State Governments/UT Administrations have been 
delegated powers to take necessary acti on under the provisions of both “The Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 and “The Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of 
Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980”, to prevent mal -practices in essential 
commodities. States/UTs have been requested re peatedly from time to time to take 
necessary action under both the Acts to prevent hoarding and smuggling.  
 
            The Central Government has been taking various measures to persuade the State 
Governments/UT Administrations to effectively implement t he provisions of Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955.  These include d.o.letters, conferences with Food 
Secretaries/Chief Secretaries of States/UTs including Video Conferences.  
 
             Four Video Conferences have been held with Food Secretaries of all S tates/UTs 
from 06.11.2009 onwards urging them to take action against unscrupulous elements to 
curb malpractices. 
 
 The MOS (I/C),CAF&PD had written to  the Chief Ministers of all the States/UTs 
vide his letter dated 23.09.2009 and 21.12.2009 wherein he had reiterated the requirement 
of strict enforcement of the provisions of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and the  
Prevention of Bla ckmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities 
Act, 1980 against unscrupulous elements indulging in malpractices.  The Chief Ministers 
of some of the States have indicated the action taken by them towards implementing the 
provisions of bo th these Acts.  Some more State Governments have acknowledged the 
receipt of these letters and informed that they were having the matter looked into.  
 
         Secretary (CA) has written on 9 th July 2010 to  Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs 
to indicate the experience arising out of implementation of Essential Commodities Act, 
1955 and  Prevention of  Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential 
Commodities Act, 1980.  

 
 
            During the Video Conferences  held under the Chairmanship of Secretary(CA) on 
28th  and 29th January, 2010, some of the State Governments were of the opinion that 
the  Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential 
Commodities Act, 1980 was draconian and hence they w ere not using it  or using it  
sparingly.  They could not therefore send the concerned Action Taken Reports 
under this Act. 
 
            Vide letter dated 05.01.2010 all Chief Secretaries were requested to organize 
special drives against hoarding and send factual reports. 
 
             A Conference of CMs was held on 06.02.2010  presided over by the Prime 
Minister to consider measures to insulate the poor and vulnerable from adverse price 
movements.  As a follow up, a Core Group of some CMs and concerned Ce ntral 
Ministers met under the Chairmanship of Hon‟ble Prime Minister on 08.04.2010 and 
recommended inter alia setting up of a Working Group on Consumer Affairs (under the 
Chairmanship of CM Gujarat with CMs of Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra 
as its Members) to suggest strategies/ plan of action for reducing the gap between 
farmgate and retail prices and recommend measures for  amendment to and better 
implementation of the Essential Commodities Act,1955.  These include the improvement 
of distribut ional efficiency, reducing intermediation costs, promoting State intervention 
for retailing essential commodities at reasonable prices and enforcement of Statutory 
provisions with a view to meeting both short and long term goals. The Working Group on 
Consumer Affairs has submitted its report on 02.03.2011. 
 
         In January,2011 Video Conferences were held by Cabinet Secretary/Secretary with 
Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs reiterating the need for enforcement of the provisions 
of EC Act and PBM Act t o curb malpractices and provide adequate supplies of essential 
commodities at affordable prices and if required use State intervention and facilitate 
alternate arrangements for augmenting supplies of essential commodities. 
 
           MOS(I/C),CAF&PD has a lso written to Chief Ministers of all States/UTs on this 
issue vide letter dt.04.02.2011. 
 
           MOS (I/C), CAF&PD had convened a meeting of the Ministers of Food/PD/ 
Consumer Affairs of South Zone on  03.02.2011 at Thiruvananthapuram (Kerala) inter -
alia, to take measures to control rise in prices and ensure adequate availability of essential 
commodities at affordable prices for consumers. Similar meetings were also  held on 
Zonal basis for North Zone (on 07.02.2011 at New Delhi), East Zone (on 14.02.2 011 at 
Kolkatta) and West Zone (on 17.02.2011 at Mumbai). 
 
File No. H-11012/13/2011-P&C Dated  27/09/2011 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 6.9) 
 
2.23  The Committee also find that the number of raids conducted, numbers of persons 
arrested, prosecuted and convicted as well as the value of goods confiscated during the 
years 2008, 2009 and 2010 are very negligible.  The Committee observe that the number 
of Persons convicted was only 161 against 4539 persons prosecuted during the year 2010 
which is indicative of the fact that the State Governments/UT Administrations are not 
serious in this regard. The Committee, therefore, urge the Department of Consumer 
Affairs to impress upon all the State Governments/UT Administrations to conduct more 
raids in order to check hoarding and black -marketing of essential commodities to avoid 
artificial scarcity of goods and prevent rise in prices of essential commodities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.24  The Central Government by virtue of Section-5 of the Essential Commodities Act, 
1955 have delegated powers to State Governments/UTs to ensure availability and supply 
of essential commodities to the consumers.  Accordingly   the St ate Governments/UTs 
have issued control orders under Section -3 of the said Act for regulating the distribution 
of essential commodities.  It also empowers the District Collectors/District Magistrates to 
take necessary action under Essential Commodities Act , 1955 like searching premises of 
the dealers/traders and seizing of essential commodities illegally hoarded so as to avoid 
malpractices  in respect of such essential commodities.  Therefore, the District 
Authorities conduct regular raids on such premises where essential commodities  are 
stored.  Such raids are being carried out very frequently and therefore the number of raids 
are very high.  During such searches if some malpractices are noted, the stocks are seized 
and thereby confiscated under the powers  conferred under Section 6(A) of the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955.  Considering the gravity of such malpractices the District 
Authorities lodge FIRs in the respective Police Stations and thereafter the cases are 
moved to the Courts for decision.  It is for the Court to decide on convicting the person 
found indulging in malpractices of essential commodities or to acquit him.  It is however, 
seen that the number of convictions by the Courts are normally very less in numbers.  
Therefore, there is a big gap between the number of raids conducted by the State 
Governments and the convictions made by the Courts.                                                            
 
           The Central Government has been taking various measures to persuade the State 
Governments/UT Administrations to effectively implement the provisions of Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955.  These include d.o.letters, conferences with Food 
Secretaries/Chief Secretaries of States/UTs, including Video Conferences.  
 
             Four Video Con ferences have been held with Food Secretaries of all States/UTs 
from 06.11.2009 onwards urging them to take action against unscrupulous elements to 
curb malpractices. 
 
 MOS (I/C), CAF&PD had written to  the Chief Ministers of all the States/UTs 
vide his letter dated 23.09.2009 and 21.12.2009 wherein he had reiterated the requirement 
of strict enforcement of the provisions of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and the  
Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities 
Act, 1980 against unscrupulous elements indulging in malpractices.  The Chief Ministers 
of some of the States have indicated the action taken by them towards implementing the 

 
 
provisions of both these Acts.  Some more State Governments have acknowledged the 
receipt of these letters and informed that they were having the matter looked into.  
 
         Secretary (CA) has written on 9th July 2010 to  Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs 
to indicate the experience arising out of implementation of Essential Commodities A ct, 
1955 and  Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential 
Commodities Act, 1980.  
  
                  During the Video Conferences  held under the Chairmanship of Secretary(CA) 
on 28th  and 29th January, 2010, some of the State Go vernments were of the opinion that 
the  Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential 
Commodities Act, 1980 was draconian and hence they were not using it  or using it  
sparingly.  They could not therefore send the concerned Action Taken Reports under this 
Act.Vide letter dated 05.01.2010 all Chief Secretaries were requested to organize special 
drives against hoarding and send factual reports. 
 
             A Conference of CMs was held on 06.02.2010, which was presided over by the 
Prime Minister to consider measures to insulate the poor and vulnerable from adverse 
price movements.  As a follow up, a Core Group of some CMs and concerned Central 
Ministers met under the Chairmanship of Hon‟ble Prime Minister on 08.04.2010 and 
recommended inter alia setting up of a Working Group on Consumer Affairs (under the 
Chairmanship of CM Gujarat with CMs of Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra 
as its Members) to suggest strategies plan of action for reducing the gap between 
farmgate and retail  prices and recommend measures for  amendment to and better 
implementation of the Essential Commodities Act,1955.  These include the improvement 
of distributional efficiency, reducing intermediation costs, promoting State intervention 
for retailing essenti al commodities at reasonable prices and enforcement of Statutory 
provisions with a view to meeting both short and long term goals. The Working Group on 
Consumer Affairs has submitted its report on 02.03.2011. 
 
    In January,2011 Video Conferences were hel d by Cabinet Secretary/Secretary 
with Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs reiterating the need for enforcement of the 
provisions of EC Act and PBM Act to curb malpractices and provide adequate supplies of 
essential commodities at affordable prices and if r equired use State intervention and 
facilitate alternate arrangements for augmenting supplies of essential commodities. 
 
MOS (I/C),CAF&PD has also written to Chief Ministers of all States/UTs on this issue 
vide letter dt.04.02.2011. 
  
          MOS (I/C), CAF&PD had convened a meeting of the Ministers of Food/PD/ 
Consumer Affairs of South Zone on  03.02.2011 at Thiruvananthapuram (Kerala) inter -
alia, to take measures to control rise in prices and ensure adequate availability of essential 
commodities at affordable prices for consumers. Similar meetings were also  held on 
Zonal basis for North Zone (on 07.02.2011 at New Delhi), East Zone (on 14.02.2011 at 
Kolkatta) and West Zone (on 17.02.2011 at Mumbai). 
 
File No. H-11012/13/2011-P&C Dated  27/09/2011 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 

 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 7.9) 
  
2.25  The Committee note  that the Department of Consumer Affairs/FMC had 
commissioned a study during the year 2010 to ascertain the percentage of small and 
marginal farmers benefited from Futures/Forward Trading in the country. The scope of 
the study was to ascertain the benefits  accruing to the farmers directly or indirectly 
through price discovery and price risk management through the commodity futures 
market and it covered about 10 essential commodities in various States. It is understood 
that the report was expected to be subm itted in April, 2011. Hoping that the report might 
have been submitted by now, the Committee urge the Department/FMC to study the 
findings of the study thoroughly and share the same with all the States/UTs for the 
benefit of the farmers. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.26  The  NABCONS (NABARD Consultancy Services) have submitted the draft final 
report in April, 2011 of conducting a study primarily aimed at assessing the benefits 
accruing to small and marginal farmers from forward/futures trading in nine commo dities 
and suggesting measures to increase farmers participation in the futures market.  The 
major findings of the study are: 
 
 (a) Awareness Level:  Majority of the small / marginal farmers [SF / MF] are 
generally aware of the existence of the future mark ets due to its publicity in various 
popular media like newspapers / TV etc.  However, the general awareness about the 
forward markets is not leading to effective participation of the SF / MF in these markets.  
The study has indicated that 88% of the respon dents perceived the commodity futures 
market as beneficial for them in terms of getting better price realization for their produce. 
 
 (b) Source of Information:  Fellow farmers, inputs dealers and traders are the most 
popular sources of price information t o the SF/MF.  The wide -spread awareness 
programmes being conducted by the FMC and various commodity exchanges are also 
aiding in improving the awareness of the SF/MF. 
 
  (c ) Sowing / Selling Decision: Availability of water (expected monsoon 
performance), credit, other inputs, etc. were the major factors on which the farmers based 
their sowing decisions.  The respondents considered the then -prevailing prices of the 
concerned commodities for their sowing decision.  Since the SF/MF generally have a low 
holding power for the harvested crops, they were not able to defer their sales after 
harvesting in expectation of better prices in the future. 
 
 (d) Better Price Realization:  All the respondents had received an increased price vis -
à-vis that in the previous year and this may be an indirect benefit of commodity trading to 
them. 
 
 (e) Use of Warehouses:  It was observed that the concept of storing agri -produce in 
the warehouses by the farmers for better prices in the future or the use of warehouse 
receipts for credit had not yet percolated to the SF / MF in any significant measure.  The 
SF / MF are mostly subsistence farmers who are forced to sell immediately after harvest. 

 
 
 
 (f) Trader‟s Participation in Forward Markets: There is fairly good knowledge about 
futures trading and national level exchanges among traders and processors.  However, 
their participation level is low, may be   because of the inadequate understanding about 
the dynamics of futures prices.  As a result, their participation is mostly for specu lative 
purpose based on instinct or technical advice given by brokers on TV / Newspapers. 
 
 (g) Dependence on Moneylenders/Traders/Commission Agents: 40% of the total 
sample number of the SF / MF had availed trade credit from petty traders / commission 
agents.  The rate of interest charged by the petty traders was in the range from 24% to 
36%.  In most cases, the produce of the farmers was pledged with the trader(s) that had 
doubled up as the moneylender(s). 
 
 (h) Display of Ticker Boards: Only the educated  and well -informed farmers based 
their sowing and selling decisions on the prices displayed in the ticker boards.  Besides, 
such Boards were not there in all the markets that were covered under the study.  The 
farmers among the sample group who had partici pated in one of the awareness 
programmes organized by FMC were found to be aware of the significance of the prices 
shown on the electronic ticker boards and were making its effective use to bargain with 
the traders for getting better prices. 
 
 (i) Banking Support:  The Scales of Finance (SOF) for most of the commodities were 
found to be inadequate and need to be revised.  In the absence of timely and adequate 
credit, the SF/MF had no option but to resort to local moneylenders.  Further, any 
participation in  commodity futures trading requires substantial fund requirement for 
holding the stock, to meet margin requirement, etc. which small and even big growers 
could hardly afford. 
 
 The Forward Markets Commission is thoroughly studying the findings of the 
study and shall thereafter share the same with all States / UTs for the benefit of  farmers. 
 
File No. H-11012/13/2011-P&C Dated  27/09/2011 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.26 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 7.10) 
 
2.27  The Committee are  surprised to note that the Forward Markets Commission 
having a sanctioned strength of 135 Officers/Staff, is presently functioning with a 
manpower of only 80 Officers/Staff with a vacancy of 55 Officers/Staff.  It is stated that 
the Department as well as the Commission have been making efforts to fill up the vacant 
posts time and again.  However, due to non -availability of suitable candidates, lack of 
adequate incentives, non -extension of deputation period etc., the 
Department/Commission have not been able  to fill up all the vacancies in the 
Commission.  The Committee are of the view that existence of such a large number of 
vacancies in a small organization like the FMC would adversely affect the functioning of 
the Commission.  The Committee, therefore, rec ommend that the Department of 
Consumer Affairs and the Forward Markets Commission should earnestly make sincere 
efforts to find suitable candidates and fill up all the vacancies in the Commission on 
priority.    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.28  The steps taken by the FMC to augment its manpower position and the challenges 
faced by it in this regard are given below:-  
 
a) 39 temporary Group A posts were created in the year 2004 and continued on year 
to year basis.  Action to fill up the vacant posts of the 39 temporary Group A posts has 
been taken up by the Commission time and again.   The advertisements were published 
for filling up the vacant posts during the year 2005, 2006-07, 2008 and 2009. However, it 
has been difficult to fill up the vacancies to these posts due to lukewarm response for the 
posts in general; non -availability of suitable candidate fulfilling the requirements for 
various disciplines, of the posts of Director/DS/DD; non -joining the posts by candidates 
even after selection; non -extension of the period of deputation of the appointed officers  
by the parent organization and the consequent repatriation of  the officers to the pa rent 
organization; and inability to attract suitable professional candidates for the posts due to 
lack of adequate incentives.  During the year 2009, 13 officers i.e. 8 Director/DS and 5 
DD were selected.  However, only 4 Directors and 1 DD joined the post. 
 
b) Apart from the 39 temporary Group A posts, the Commission has got 12 IES 
cadre posts of EA/Director/DD/AD.  Out of the 10 posts of DD/AD, only 2 posts of DD 
and one post of AD has been filled up by the IES cadre and the remaining 7 posts are 
vacant.  The IES Cadre has been requested to fill up the vacant posts time and again. 
 
c) The Group B and Group C posts of Economic Officer, Stenographers are vacant 
due to officers holding higher posts on deputation/temporary basis; repatriation of officer 
after completion of deputation period; non -availability of eligible candidates in spite of 
repeated advertisement and circulation of vacancy. 
 
  Despite all the efforts being made to fill up the vacant posts, the Commission has 
not been able to appoint suitable persons to the vacant posts.  Nearly 40% of the 
sanctioned posts have remained vacant.  
 

 
 
  FMC has again invited application from eligible officers to fill up 2 posts of 
Directors, 8 posts of Deputy Directors and two posts of Assistant Directors on deputat ion 
through advertisement in the Employment News dated September 2, 2011. 
 
File No. H-11012/13/2011-P&C Dated  27/09/2011 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.29 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para No. 8.17) 
 
2.29  The Committee note that since the Super Bazar  (The Cooperative Store Ltd.) was 
continuously running on loss, the Central Registrar of Societies, Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation, after following due procedure, ordered its winding up on 
05.07.2002. Accordingly, the Liquidator, after ascertain ing claims of all creditors and 
claimants initiated action for the winding up.  The Committee further note that while 
disposing of the Special Leave Petition filed by Super Bazer Karmachari Dalit Sangh, 
Hon‟ble Supreme Court, on 26.09.2002 had directed tha t steps be taken for revival of the 
Super Bazar.  The Department of Consumer Affairs therefore, appointed three 
Administrators of the Super Bazar and subsequently, about 965 employees of the Super 
Bazar also joined duties.  The Committee further note that renovation work of some 
shops, completion of fire fighting measures in Connought Place Building are under 
process and the dues of NDMC, DDA and MCD have since been paid.  The Committee 
further note that no time limit has been given by the Hon‟ble Supreme C ourt for the 
revival of Super Bazar.  However, the Board of Directors has been elected to manage the 
day to day affairs of the Super Bazar.  The Committee are of the view that since Super 
Bazar is supposed to operate in the entire country to provide standa rd goods at 
competitive prices, the Department may expedite all the remaining works and procedures 
and revive the Super Bazar at the earliest for the benefit of the consumers at large. They 
also desire that it must be ensured that the Super Bazar has the r equisite infrastructure 
and financial capacity, before it is handed over to a Group or Society for management. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.30  On 26.02.2009 the Hon‟ble Supreme Court accepted the report of Evaluation 
Committee in its entirety and awarded t he bid to M/s Writers & Publishers for revival of 
Super Bazar.  The Directions were given to the Central Registrar of Cooperative Societies 
and Official Liquidator to take steps for revival of Super Bazar.  Accordingly these two 
functionaries are taking st eps in terms of the provisions of Multi State Cooperative 
Society Act 2002.  The New Management of Super Bazar has also been elected on 
15.10.2010 as per the directions of Hon‟ble Supreme Court.  Being a Multi -State 
Cooperative Society, the day to day affa irs of the society are managed by their Board of 
Directors, which can decide for starting business operations in the entire country to 
provide standard goods at competitive prices under the aforesaid Act.  Further in 

 
 
compliance of the order dated 14.3.2011  passed by Hon;ble Supreme Court,  the Central 
Registrar of Cooperative Societies issued directions to Super Bazar for completion of a 
time bound revival process, payment of liabilities and submission of accounts etc.    
. 
 
File No. H-11012/13/2011-P&C Dated  27/09/2011 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 

 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S 
 REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3.7) 
 
3.1  The Committee note that the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 had been amended 
thrice in 1991, 1993 and 2002 in order to protect the interest of the consumers. The Act is 
proposed to be further amended to widen and amplify its scope.  However, the 
Committee are perturbed to note that in spite of the existence of various provisions in the 
Act for protecting their interest, the consumers are often exploited by manufacturers, 
traders and service providers who have knowledge of market and possess manipulative 
skills. The Committee, therefore, consider that the proposed further amendment of the 
Act is a step in the right direction as it seeks to widen and amplify the scope of some of 
the provisions of the Act, facilitate faster disposal of cases, rationalize the qual ification 
and procedure of selection of Presidents and Members of the National/Sate Commissions 
and District Fora, etc. The Committee further note that the proposal for amendment of the 
Act has been concurred by the Ministry of Law and Justice and the fina l draft version of 
the Cabinet Note has been sent to PMO for comments, after incorporating the comments 
received from 65 Central Government Ministries/Departments, all the 28 States and 7 
Union Territories and the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commi ssion. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly urge the Department to complete all the procedures and 
formalities in this regard and make earnest efforts to introduce the Bill during the 
forthcoming Session of the Parliament. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2  The Cabinet, in its meeting held on 30.08.2011, have already approved the Bill on 
Amendments to Consumer Protection Act, 1986 which is proposed to be introduced in  
the Parliament in the forthcoming Winter Session.  
 
File No. H-11012/13/2011-P&C Dated  27/09/2011 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
 
  
  

 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 3.15) 
 
4.1  The Committee are concerned that despite the efforts made by the Central/State 
Governments, posts of as many as 4 Presidents and 14 Members in State Commissions 
and 61 Presidents and 264 Members in the District Fora  are still lying vacant, rendering 
many State Commissions and District Forums non -functional. The Committee note that 
though the State Governments are responsible to fill up the vacancies in the State 
Commissions and District Fora, yet the Central Governme nt has been requesting State 
Governments to take advance action for filling up of expected vacancies. The President 
of the National Commission also writes letters to the Chief Ministers of State 
Governments from time to time. The Committee are disturbed to  note that despite all 
these steps, a large number of vacancies still exist. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Department should ascertain the reasons for existence of the 
vacancies in the State Commissions and District Fora and persuad e the State 
Governments to fill up the vacancies expeditiously.  The Committee suggest that a time 
frame of three months may be fixed for the State Governments to fill up the vacancies 
failing which the Central Government may appoint any person having the necessary 
qualifications and experience to the post of Presidents in the State Commissions/District 
Fora so that they do not remain non-functional. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2  The matter has been taken up at the level of Secretary, Consumer Affairs wit h all 
the Chief Secretaries of States/UTs.  This issue is also discussed in the Conferences with 
States/UTs organised by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, as well 
as the Department of Consumer Affairs from time to time and the State Gove rnments 
have been advised to take advance action for filling up all the vacant posts.     
 
This issue is also monitored by this Department through Periodical (Monthly & 
Quarterly) Reports called for from States/UTs.  
 
File No. H-11012/13/2011-P&C Dated  27/09/2011 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.17 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
  

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 3.19) 
 
4.3  The Committee note that the Consumer Protection Cell is an ongoing scheme that 
render secretarial assistance to the Department in administering the Consumer Protection 
Act including holding of meetings of the Central Consumer Protection Council.  The 
Committee observe that the State Consumer Protection Councils as well as the District 
Consumer Protection Councils have not been constituted in the States of Assam, Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Delhi, J&K, Jharkhand, Tripura & Uttarakhand.  The States of Haryana, 
Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh have not given information as 
to whether they have constituted SCPCs/DCPCs or not.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should obtain the information from all the States/UTs 
regarding constitution of SCP Cs/DCPCs and persuade the remaining States/UTs to 
constitute SCPC/DCPCs in their States/UTs in the interest of the consumer. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.4  Shortcomings observed in the Quarterly Performance Reviews (QPRs) received 
from States/UTs including non-constitution of SCPCs and DCPCs and non furnishing of 
information in this regard are  being taken up with the State Governments periodically.  
 
 However, this recommendation of the Standing Committee has been taken up 
with the concerned State Governments at the level of Secretary (CA).  
 
File No. H-11012/13/2011-P&C Dated  27/09/2011 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.20 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
  

 
 
  
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI               VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
29 June, 2012                    Chairman 
08 Ashadha, 1934 (Saka)      Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
  

 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION (2011-12) HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 29TH JUNE, 2012 
The Committee sat from 1 600 hrs. to 1 635 hrs. in Chairman's Room No. 
'115-A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki  - Acting Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
3. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
4. Shri Lal Chand Kataria 
5. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
6. Shri Prabodh Panda 
7. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
8. Shri Ramkishun 
9. Smt. Usha Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
11. Shri Vivek Gupta 
12. Shri Sanjay Raut 
13. Dr. T. N. Seema 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P. K. Misra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 

 
 
2. As the Hon‟ble Chairman could not attend the sitting due to his indisposition, the 
Members present unanimously chose Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki to preside the sitting in 
terms of the provisions under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha. Ther eafter, the Acting Chairman welcome  the Members to the 
sitting of the Committee convened for consideration a nd adoption of the draft Report  on 
action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 
Thirteenth Report of the Comm ittee (2010-11) on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) of the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  (Department of Consumer 
Affairs).  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report and a fter due 
deliberation, the Committee unanimously adopted the draft Report with minor changes.  
4.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the aforesaid Report and 
present the same to Parliament. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
********* 

 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON  
THE OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE  
FIFTH REPORT OF THIS STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD,  
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations:-            18 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government :- 
 
Recommendation Nos.:- 2.14, 2.15, 3.14, 3.18, 3.28, 3.29, 3.32, 
3.39, 4.7, 5.14, 6.8, 6.9, 7.9, 7.10 and 8.17 
    Total: 15 
Percentage: 83.33% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government:- 
 
 Recommendation Nos. 3.7      
     Total: 01 
Percentage: 5.56% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:- 
 
  Recommendation Nos. 3.15 and 3.19    
  Total: 02 
Percentage: 11.11% 
   
 
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect of which the replies of 
the Government are still awaited:- 
   Recommendation Nos.:- Nil 
 Total: 00 
Percentage: 00.00% 
 
 