 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND                       
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION  
(2011-2012) 
 
   FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained 
in the Ninth Report of the Committee (2009-10) on the subject “Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS) – Hallmarking of Jewellery” pertaining to the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 (Department of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
 
 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
May, 2012  /   Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 
19 


 
 
NINTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD,  
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND 
 PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained 
in the Ninth Report of the Committee (2009-10) on the subject “Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS) – Hallmarking of Jewellery” pertaining to the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 (Department of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.05.2012    
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 16.05.2012 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
May, 2012 /  Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 
  


 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
 
Composition of the Committee ………………………………………… (ii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………... (iv) 
 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………… 01 
 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
 accepted by the Government…………………………… 20 
  
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
 the Government’s replies………………………………... 31 
 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
 replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee ……………………………………….. 32 
 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
 which final replies of the Government are  
still awaited……………………………………………… 36 
   
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the 13th sitting of the Committee held on  38 
9th May, 2012.  
 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Ninth Report  
of the Committee (2009-10) ……………………………  -- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2011-12. 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar    - Chairman    
  
         MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Jaywant Gangaram Awale** 
3. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
4. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary  
6. Shri Sanjay Dhotre  
7. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome  
8. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
9. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav**   
10. Shri Lal Chand Kataria  
11. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase  
12. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
13. Shri Prabodh Panda  
14. Shri Sohan Potai 
15. Shri Purnmasi Ram  
16. Shri Ramkishun 
17. Shri Chandulal Sahu (Chandu Bhaiya) 
18. Dr. Naramalli Sivaprasad* 
19. Shri E.G. Sugavanam$ 
20. Smt. Usha Verma**  
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
23. Dr. M.S. Gill 
24. Shri P. Kannan 
25. Shri Lalhming Liana 
26. Shri Sanjay Raut 
27. Dr. T.N. Seema 
28. Shri Veer Singh 
29. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki@ 
30. Vacant# 
31. Vacant# 
___________________________________________________________ 
*   Nominated w.e.f. 25.11.2011 
** Nominated w.e.f. 03.01.2012 
$ Nominated w.e.f. 12.04.2012 
#  Vice Shri Kanjibhai Patel and Shri Rajniti Prasad  retired from Rajya Sabha  w.e.f. 02.04.2012. 
@ Retired from Rajya Sabha  w.e.f. 02.04.2012  and renominated w.e.f. 04.05.2012 
(ii)

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. K. Misra  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma  - Director 
3. Shir Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 
4. Ms. Bhavna Tanwar - Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, The Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution (2011-2012) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Nineteenth Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the 
Committee (2009-10) (Fifteenth Lok Sabha ) on the subject “Bureau of Indian Standards 
(BIS) – Hallmarking of Jewellery” pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution  (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
  
2. The Ninth Report of the Committee  (2009-10) was presented to Lok Sabha and 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 31st August, 2010. The Government have furnished their replies 
indicating Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Report on                
30th November, 2010. The draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at 
their sitting held on 9th May, 2012. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Governmen t on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.   
   
 
 
  
 
  NEW DELHI                      VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
  09 May, 2012___                  Chairman 
  19 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka)             Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
  

 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on the 
subject “Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) – Hallmarking of Jewellery” pertaining to the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs). 
 
1.2 The Ninth Report was pres ented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 31 st August, 2010. It contained 14 observations/ recommendations. Action 
Taken Notes in respect of all the 14 observations/recommendations contained in the 
Report have been received and these have been categorized as follows:- 
(i) Observations /recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government : 
Serial Nos. – 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, 10, 11, 13 and 14.  
(Paragraph Nos. – 2.18, 3.18, 3.19, 4.11, 6.4, 7.8, 7.9, 9.3 and 9.4). 
      (Chapter –II, Total 9) 
(ii) Observations/recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
Serial No. - 4 
(Paragraph No. – 3.20) 
 (Chapter –III, Total 1 ) 
(iii) Observations /recommendations in respect of which replies of  the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
Serial Nos. -  7, 8 and 12. 
(Paragraph Nos. – 5.7, 5.8 and 8.8)  
      (Chapter – IV, Total 3) 

 
 
(iv) Observations /recommendations in respect of which the interim 
replies of the Government have been received. 
   Serial No. - 5 
   (Paragraph No. – 4.10) 
 (Chapter – V, Total 1) 
1.3 The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the one 
Observation/Recommendation for which only interim reply has been received from  
the Government as reproduced in Chapter V as well as the replies to the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report be furnished 
to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
1.4 The Committee strongly emp hasize that utmost importance should be given 
to the implementation of Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In case where it is not possible for the Government to implement the 
recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the ma tter should be reported 
to the Committee in time with reasons for non-implementation. 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
the recommendations. 
  

 
 
 A. Need to increase the amount of financial assistance and also simplify the 
procedure for release of funds to set up recognized Assaying and 
Hallmarking Centres 
Recommendation (Sl. No.2, Para No. 3.18) 
1.6 The Committee in their original report observed as follows:- 
"The Committee are disturbed to note that so far only 1 47 BIS recognized 
Assaying & Hallmarking centres to assess the purity of gold jewellery have been 
set up in the country, that too mostly in big  and metropolitan cities of seventeen 
States. The consumers of the remaining States/UTs, especially in the speci al 
category States of Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and other States such as 
Bihar and Goa are completely deprived of the benefits of the Scheme. The reasons 
put forward by the Ministry that the quantum of jewellery being produced in other 
States/UTs is not sufficient to generate adequate response from entrepreneurs to 
set up centres are not acceptable to the Committee. The Committee feel that the 
Scheme has not been taken up with the seriousness it deserves.  The Committee 
find that in order to encoura ge the entrepreneurs to set up Assaying & 
Hallmarking Centres, the scheme for extension of financial assistance to 
entrepreneurs  to the extent of 15% of the cost of machinery and equipment 
required for setting up of the Centres, subject to a maximum of     Rs.15 lakhs 
(30% of cost of machinery and equipment subject to maximum of Rs.30 lakhs for 
Centres in North Eastern Region, special category States of Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu & Kashmir and Uttarakhand and rural areas of the country) has been 
introduced by the government.  The Committee are dismayed to note that despite 
the central assistance given by the government, not many centres have been set up 
in the country and only one centre each has come up in the States /UT of Punjab, 
Haryana, Chhatisgarh, Jharkhand and Chandigarh.   
The Committee feel that apparently, the central assistance of Rs.15 lakh 
(Rs.30 lakhs for the North Eastern Region and special category States) does not 
seem to be sufficient to encourage the entrepreneurs to set up these centres. Th e 
Committee were informed during examination of the Subject that the total 
investment on land, building and machinery for a Hallmarking Centre comes to 
about Rs.120 lakhs.  As such, an assistance to the tune of Rs.15 lakhs, that too 
released in two installments – one after setting up of the centre and the other after 
successful operation of the centre for one year, is certainly not sufficient to attract 
the entrepreneurs to set up the centres. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry should assess  the viability of the centres and also liberalize the scheme 
by increasing the amount of central assistance and simplifying the procedure for 
release of funds so that more entrepreneurs come forward to set up these centres, 
not only in the big cities but also in the rural and hilly areas." 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1.7 The ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
"The scheme since its inception has been liberalized as follows: 
1. The financial assistance @ 15% of the cost of equipment and machinery subject 
to a ceiling of Rs. 15 lakh per centre was enhanced to 30% of cost of machinery 
and equipment with a maximum of Rs. 30 lakh for NE Region, Special Category 
States of Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand and rural areas 
of the country.  Applications for  setting up of such centres with central assistance 
in these areas are being considered even if they are not in response to 
advertisements seeking Expressions of Interests.  Now an entrepreneur can apply 
for subsidy for an Assaying & Hallmarking Centre in these areas at any time of 
the year for which perpetual invitation of BIS website has been hosted.  
 As a result of the above liberalization six applications for setting up of 
Assaying & Hallmarking Centres at deficient locations have been received by BIS 
and are under process. 
2. Physical targets of the scheme were increased from the originally approved 50 
centres to facilitate setting up of such centres at locations where no centre exists 
(deficient locations). 
3. In deference to the suggestions of the Honorabl e Parliamentary Standing 
Committee, a proposal for upward revision of subsidy for setting up of Assaying 
and Hallmarking Centres is under consideration of the Government.  
 A proposal to involve Public Sector Undertakings for the first time to set 
up Assay ing and Hallmarking Centres at different locations with enhanced 
financial incentive is under examination."  
 

 
 
1.8 While noting that despite the financial assistance given by the Government 
not many Assaying & Hallmarking Centres had been set up in the cou ntry, t he 
Committee in their original report had desired that the Ministry should assess the 
viability of the centres and also liberalize the scheme so as to increase the amount of 
central assistance and also simplify the procedure for release of funds to encourage 
the entrepreneurs to set up more Assaying and Hallmarking Centres.  In their 
action taken reply the Government has stated that as a result of liberalisation of the 
scheme and enhancement of financial assistance per centre from 15% to 30% of cost 
of machinery and equipment for NE Region & special category States of J&K, 
Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand & rural areas, six applications for setting up of 
such Centres have been received and are under process.   Further, another proposal 
to involve Public Sector Undertakings for setting up of such centres at different 
locations with enhanced financial incentive is under examination. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the decision taken by the Government on these 
proposals and also the detailed actio n taken in this regard.  The Committee also 
hope that the Government would continue to make efforts to encourage more 
entrepreneurs to set up Assaying and Hallmarking Centres in the country especially 
in the rural and hilly areas. 
  

 
 
B. Need for better uti lization of funds and speedy setting up of Assaying and 
Hallmarking Centres 
Recommendation (Sl. No.5, Para No.  4.10) 
1.9 The Committee in their original report noted as follow:- 
"The Committee note with concern the uneven pattern of the budget estimates and 
expenditure, i.e. the funds released to BIS and the amount actually utilized by BIS 
during the last three years.  In the year 2007 -08, as against BE of Rs.4 crores,  
funds released to BIS were Rs.1 crore and the amount actually utilized by it was 
Rs.0.32 crores.  In the year 2008 -09, against  the BE of Rs.3 crores, Nil amount 
was released to BIS,  whereas in the year 2009 -10, BE was reduced to merely 
Rs.1 crore out of which only 0.81crore was released to BIS and only 0.58 crores 
was actually utilized by BIS as on 31st December, 2009.  The reasons put forward 
by the Department that under utilization of funds has been due to lack of demand 
for assistance, are unacceptable to the Committee.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that this trend merely indicates t he lack of seriousness on the part of the 
Ministry to implement this very important scheme, to protect the interest of the 
consumers.   The Committee deplore the slackness and improper planning on the 
part of the Government to spend the funds. The Committe e recommend that the 
Department should give adequate publicity to such Schemes so as to create 
interest among the consumers and educate them about the benefits of purchasing 
only hallmarked jewellery.  Further, as earlier stated, the Department should also  
explore the possibility of liberalizing the scheme of providing financial assistance 
for setting up of Assaying & Hallmarking Centres so as to motivate more and 
more entrepreneurs to set up Assaying & Hallmarking Centres in the remaining 
18 States/UTs of the Country."  
1.10  The Ministry in their reply explained as given below:- 
"Expenditure on the scheme is directly proportional to the subsidy claims received 
from entrepreneurs who set up such centres.  As indicated above, under utilization 
of funds has b een due to lack of demand for assistance.  With a view to increase 
the popularity of the scheme, the following proposals are being examined: 
1. In addition to the normal publicity being given to the scheme through print 
and electronic media and programmes lik e nukud natak etc. all over the 
country, a proposal to undertake a special campaign at a cost of about Rs. 1 
crore for publicizing the scheme of hallmarking through DAVP is under 
consideration of the Government  
2. Further upward revision of financial assista nce so as to motivate more and 
more entrepreneurs to set up Assaying & Hallmarking Centres is under 
consideration of the Government. 
3. Involvement of PSUs in setting up of the centers with enhanced subsidy is 
also under consideration of the Government."  
 

 
 
1.11 While deploring the Department for improper planning which resulted into  
underutilisation  of funds during the years 2007-08, 2008 -09 and 2009 -10, the 
Committee had recommended to give adequate publicity to such schemes to educate 
consumers about the benefits of purchasing of hallmark of jewellery.  The 
Department in their action taken reply have stated that in addition to the normal 
publicity, a proposal to undertake special campaign at a cost of about Rs. 1 crore for 
publicizing the Schemes through D AVP is under their active consideration.  The 
Committee desire that the proposal be finalized expeditiously so as to give wide 
publicity to the Scheme to educate the consumer s about the benefit s of purchasing 
hallmarked jewellery.  

 
 
C. Need for efficient e valuation of the procedure for providing central 
assistance to Assaying and Hallmarking Centres 
Recommendation (Sl. No.6, Para No. 4.11) 
1.12 The Committee in their earlier report observed as under:- 
"The Committee are disturbed to note that there is a gre at shortfall in the 
achievement of physical targets as well, over the last three years. As against the 
targets of setting up of 37, 27 and 26 Assaying & Hallmarking Centres, the 
achievement was only 11, 7 and 3 during the years 2007 -08, 2008-09 and 2009 -
10, respectively. Further, the targets in respect of conducting training programmes 
for artisans and Assaying & Hallmarking personnel were also not achieved for the 
said period. The Department  themselves have conceded that implementation of 
the scheme has n ot been upto the expected level and have admitted that against 
the target for setting up of a total of 50 Assaying & Hallmarking Centres under 
central assistance during the 11 th Five Year Plan, only 23 could be set up and 
recognized by BIS.   
 The Committe e find that to review the financial and physical 
performances, the Department, as suggested by the Planning Commission, is 
undertaking an evaluation study shortly to assess the effectiveness or otherwise of 
the scheme, the reasons for lack of interest on t he part of entrepreneurs to avail 
assistance to set up centres and suggest measures for its effective implementation. 
The Committee feel that the performance of the Scheme should have been 
reviewed much earlier and remedial steps taken in order to improve its 
performance.  The Committee observe that the performance of the Scheme was 
unsatisfactory not for want of funds but due to the lack of proper planning on the 
part of the Department.  The Committee strongly deplore the lack of 
professionalism on the par t of the Department of Consumer Affairs, who could 
not take timely action to spend the money and achieve the financial as well as 
physical targets under the Scheme. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Department should make proper planning to ensure achievement of physical 
targets during 2010 -11.  The Committee also desire that the evaluation study 
should be undertaken urgently and based on the assessment and outcome of the 
study, necessary modifications may be made in the scheme so as to make it more  
effective.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard." 
 
 
1.13 The Ministry in their action taken reply stated as under:- 
 
"The hallmarking scheme has two components - one operated by BIS under its 
normal certification act ivity without any subsidy element and the other with 
Government subsidy.  The total number of recognized hallmarking centers in the 
country at present is 159 (including the 23 centres set up with Government 
subsidy).  While the hallmarking scheme as a whol e has made considerable 
progress, it is the component with Government subsidy that has not made the 
expected progress.  Assaying and Hallmarking Centres are set up by entrepreneurs 

 
 
on commercial considerations and Government or BIS has no role in deciding 
their location.  Government's subsidy scheme is intended to encourage 
entrepreneurs to set up such centres,  particularly in remote, inaccessible and rural 
areas in the country where they normally do not set up the centres on commercial 
considerations.  Lack of response from them, even with financial assistance, may 
be based on their assessment that the centres may not be viable due to much lower 
level of consumption of gold jewellery in such areas.  The scheme is likely to get 
a boost and a large number of  Assaying and Hallmarking Centres are bound to 
come up once hallmarking is introduced on a mandatory basis, for which the BIS 
Act is proposed to be amended.  
The central assistance scheme, after its introduction, has been reviewed and 
liberalized on differ ent occasions based on the recommendations of its 
Implementation Committee.  The last such liberalization was done in November, 
2009.  An Evaluation study is also being undertaken through an outside agency 
with the following terms of reference: 
(a) Evaluation of the procedure for providing central assistance to Gold 
Hallmarking and Assaying Centres across the country. 
(b) Whether financial assistance under the scheme act as an incentive for Gold 
Assaying and Hallmarking Centres. 
(c) Whether consumers are aware of the b enefits of Hallmarking/Assaying 
Centres. 
(d) Efficacy of training provided to artisans and whether such training has 
helped in improving their skills.  
(e) Identify problems of the Assaying and Hallmarking Centres, if any, in 
carrying out their operating and sugge st appropriate solutions to overcome 
these problems.  
(f) Evaluate reasons for slow progress of Scheme and satisfactory progress in 
certain States. 
(g) Comments on effectiveness of the Scheme and suggest measures to make 
implementation of the Scheme more effective. 
     Final report of the study is yet to be made available by the agency.  
Suitable follow-up action will be taken once the Report is available." 
 

 
 
1.14 While noting that there was a great shortfall in the achievement of physical 
targets over the last th ree years in setting up of Assaying  & Hallmarking Centres, 
the Committee had desired that the Department should make proper planning to 
ensure achievement of physical targets during 2010 -11.  The Government in their 
action taken reply have stated, inter-alia, that the scheme is likely to get a boost and 
large number of Assaying & Hallmarking Centres are bound to come up once 
Hallmarking of Jewellery is made mandatory.  The Department further stated that 
an evaluation study is being undertaken by an outside agency and suitable follow-up 
action will be taken when the final report of the agency is available.  The Committee 
would like to urge the Department to expedite submission of the final report by the 
agency and apprise them of the main findings of the repo rt alongwith follow -up 
action taken by them.  

 
 
D. Need for early introduction of the Bill to amend the BIS Act, 1986  
Recommendation (Sl. No.7, Para No. 5.7) 
1.15 The Committee in their earlier report observed as follows:- 
"The Committee are deeply concern ed to note the delay in the implementation of 
Mandatory Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery Scheme which was proposed to be 
implemented w.e.f. 1 st January, 2008 in a phased manner i.e.in the four metro 
cities of Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkatta and Chennai in the first p hase and in the rest of 
the country, later.  As informed by the Department of Consumer Affairs, the 
Scheme could not be introduced so far for want of an enabling legislative 
framework for its implementation under the BIS Act, 1986. The Committee have 
been informed that the amendments in the Act as approved by the Law Ministry 
were sent for Cabinets approval.  The Cabinet Committee has opined that since 
the concerned Departments namely, the Department of Industrial Policy and 
Promotion, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Commerce were consulted 
long back, they may again be consulted, after which the matter will again be 
placed before the Cabinet.  The Committee are not convinced with the reasons 
advanced by the Ministry for the delay in making necess ary amendments in the 
Act. The Committee feel this to be on account of slackness on the part of the 
Government and lack of seriousness on their part to implement the scheme in the 
right earnest.  
 The Committee feel that until and unless the Hallmarking of  gold 
jewellery is made mandatory, the scheme will not have the desired result of 
protecting the interest of the consumers by preventing sale of inferior quality of 
gold, promoting export competitiveness and developing India as a leading gold 
market centre in the world.  The Committee observe that due to increase in the 
purchasing power of the middle and upper -middle classes, there is an increasing 
market for gold jewellery.  Even the people of small towns and villages often 
invest their hard earned savings  in gold jewellery as a hedge against inflation and 
difficult times. All such consumers rightly deserve to get insurance of their 
investment in gold, which is possible only if the Hallmarking of gold jewellery is 
made mandatory. 
 During examination of the Subject it was brought to the notice of the 
Committee that BIS market surveys in 2002 had revealed a 10 -15% adulteration 
in 22 carat jewellery which at today’s gold prices, will be estimated to 20 
thousand crores per annum of loss to the consumers.  The ma tter thus deserves 
serious consideration.  The Committee, therefore, strongly re commend the 
Department to take up the matter with utmost seriousness and finalize the 
modalities of the Bill for its early introduction in the Parliament so as to bring 
Hallmarking of Jewellery under mandatory certification.  As regards operational 
issues arising out of the making of Hallmarking of Jewellery mandatory, the 
Government may constitute a High Powered Committee to tackle those issues.  
However, in no case, the introduction of the Bill should be delayed." 
  
 

 
 
1.16 The Ministry in their action taken reply informed as follows:- 
"The draft Bill for amendment of the BIS Act, 1986 is presently under scrutiny in 
the Ministry of Law & Justice.  Once the Bill is vetted by that Ministry, approval 
of the Cabinet would be sought.  A Bill for amendment of the Act is likely to be 
introduced during the next Session of the Parliament.  Necessary follow up action 
for introduction of mandatory hallmarking of gold jewellery articles would  be 
taken after amendment of the Act." 

 
 
1.17 Expressing deep concern for the prolonged delay in the implementation of 
the Mandatory Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery Scheme which was initially proposed 
to be implemented w.e.f. 1 January, 2008 in a phased manne r in the four Metro 
Cities, the Committee had noted that the Scheme could not be implemented for want 
of enabling legislative frame work under the BIS Act, 1986. The Committee had 
accordingly, recommended the Department to take up the matter with utmost 
seriousness and finalise the modalities for the amendment Bill to the BIS Act, 1986 
and also constitute a High Powered Committee to take the operational issues for 
making hallmarking of Gold Jewellery mandatory.  The Government in their action 
taken reply ha ve stated that the draft Bill for amendment of BIS Act, 1986 is 
presently under scrutiny in the Ministry of Law & Justice.  Once the Bill is vetted 
by that Ministry, approval of the Cabinet would be sought . Necessary follow up 
action for introduction of ma ndatory hallmarking of gold jewellery articles would 
be taken after amendment of the Act.  The Committee find that the BIS 
(Amendment) Bill, 2012 has since been introduced in Lok Sabha on 3 rd May, 2012. 
The Committee hope that the Department would take necessary follow up action for 
introduction of mandatory hallmarking of Gold Jewellery articles in the country 
once the BIS (Amendment) Bill, 2012 is passed by Parliament and would also 
constitute a High Powered Committee to look into the operational issues fo r making 
hallmarking of Gold Jewellery mandatory. 

 
 
E. Need to protect the Consumers from the exorbitant making charges being 
levied by the Gold jewellers 
Recommendation (Sl. No.8, Para No. 5.8) 
1.18 The Committee in their original report observed as follows:- 
"The Committee also note that though the jewelers selling hallmarked jewellery 
give an assurance of purity, yet they charge exorbitant making charges which puts 
heavy burden on the consumer in the guise of providing quality assurance.  The 
Committee are dismayed to note that BIS has no control on the situation whereby 
the customers are being exploited by the BIS certified jewelers.  In this regard, the 
Committee were informed during evidence that it is a bilateral issue between the 
jeweler and the custo mer and BIS has no role to play, which the Committee do 
not find convincing.  The Committee feel that in order to regulate the making 
charges, a law may necessarily be required.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that BIS should look into this aspect and  evolve a system to regulate 
the making charges to ensure that a ceiling is imposed thereon.  As certain 
amendments in the BIS Act, 1986 are already under consideration of the 
Government, the Committee desire that necessary amendments may be made to 
this effect also in the  BIS Act, so as to give protection to the consumer." 
1.19  The Government in their action taken reply stated as below:- 
"As per its Preamble, the BIS Act 1986 is an Act to provide for the establishment 
of a Bureau for the harmonious devel opment of the activities of standardization, 
marking and quality certification of goods and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  So the issue of regulating the making charges by imposing a 
ceiling thereon does not come within the purview of the Act."  

 
 
1.20 Expressing concern over the exorbitant making charges being imposed on 
the consumers by the jewellers the Committee had recommended that BIS should 
look into the issue and evolve a system to regulate the making charges to ensure that 
a ceiling is imposed thereon. The Government in their Action taken reply have 
stated that the issue of regulating the making charges does not come within the 
purview of the BIS Act. The Committee are not agreeable with the view of the 
Ministry as they feel that protecting the interests of consumer is of utmost 
importance and for this the scope of the BIS Act can be widened, if necessary by 
making an amendment to the BIS Act. The Committee therefore urge the 
Government to consider inclusion of provision to re gulate the making charges and 
imposing a ceiling thereon in the Bill to amend the BIS Act, 1986 since been  
introduced in Lok Sabha on 3 rd May, 2012 , so that the consumers are protected 
from being exploited by the Jewellers.   

 
 
F. Need to strengthen the mon itoring mechanism by involving independent 
agencies, if required.  
Recommendation (Sl. No.12, Para No. 8.8) 
1.21 The Committee during their earlier scrutiny and report noted as follows:- 
"The Committee are dismayed to note that the Government has no monito ring 
mechanism for enforcement of the Scheme as no raids are stated to have been 
conducted by the BIS enforcement machinery on BIS licensed Jewellery shops 
selling hallmarked jewellery despite the fact that instances of jewelers deceiving 
buyers by selling  inferior quality of gold jewellery against the declared purity 
have been found in the different parts of the country.  
 The plea of the Government that  BIS conducts  market surveillance on 
certified jewellers as per documented guidelines and, therefore, does not take 
raids at licensed  premises, is not acceptable to the Committee.  The Committee 
are further disturbed to note that BIS has very limited resources and machinery to 
enforce the Scheme.  The Committee are of the opinion that unless there is stri ct 
monitoring of the scheme people will not have faith on the genuineness of the 
dealers and will not opt for Hallmarked jewellery which will affect the 
performance of the scheme.  The Committee, therefore, desire that BIS should 
strengthen its monitoring mechanism by conducting regular surveys and 
inspections, particularly of the BIS certified shops, so that the fraudulent dealers 
are identified and punished.  Names of such dealers should be notified and 
publicized for the information of general public.  T his will also instill the feeling 
of security and boost the confidence of the consumers. They may also explore the 
possibility of involvement of independent agencies in such a process, if required." 
 
1.22 The Ministry in their action taken reply stated as follows:- 
"Monitoring mechanism of jewellery shops selling hallmarked jewellery is ensured 
by BIS through a two pronged approach: 
(i) Samples of hallmarked jewellery are drawn for independent testing from 
randomly selected BIS licensees each year by the branch office of BIS. 
(ii) A complaint redressal mechanism is in place to safeguard the interest of 
consumers who invest their hard earned saving in gold jewellery.  
 During the last 3 years (upto February, 2010) 760 samples of jewellery 
were collected by BIS, out of  which 50 samples failed to conform to the claimed 
standards.  Action as per the scheme has been taken against the defaulting 
jewellers." 
 

 
 
1.23 While observing that the Government has no monitoring mechanism for 
enforcement of the scheme for hallmarking o f Gold Jewellery, the Committee had 
desired that the BIS should strengthen its monitoring mechanism by conducting 
regular surveys and inspections, particularly of the BIS certified shops by involving 
independent agencies, if required.  In their action taken reply, the Government have 
not mentioned any efforts made in this regard but merely stated that Samples of 
hallmarked jewellery are drawn for independent testing for randomly selected BIS 
licenses each year.  During the last three years 760 samples of je wellery were 
collected by BIS i.e. from 2008-2010 out of which 50 samples failed to conform to the 
claimed standards, etc and action as per the Scheme has been taken against them. 
The Committee are not satisfied with the reply which does not address their main 
recommendation.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Government should 
take necessary steps to strengthen its monitoring mechanism to identify and punish 
the fraudulent dealers.  They would also like to be apprised about the action taken 
in case of 50 samples who did not conform to the claimed standards.  
 

 
 
G. Need to fill up all vacant posts in 'BIS'. 
Recommendation (Sl. No.13, Para No. 9.3) 
1.24 The Committee in their original report had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee are shocked to n ote that as many as 140 Scientific Posts and 47 
Non Scientific Posts are lying vacant in BIS. They are further  disturbed to note 
that 93 Scientific Posts and 172 Non Scientific Posts are deemed to have lapsed 
due to their remaining vacant for more than on e year.  Further, for 33 Scientific 
Posts and 17 Non Scientific Posts, the recruitment process is in progress.  The 
Committee deplore the inaction on the part of BIS due to which a large number of 
posts rendered lapsed. 
 The Committee are of the opinion th at large number of vacancies in any 
institution hampers its proper functioning.  In case of BIS, it is evident from the 
fact that due to shortage in manpower, they are not able to provide proper 
surveillance and enforcement over the Scheme.  The Committee wonder that with 
such a large number of vacancies, how will BIS discharge its duties effectively 
and achieve the avowed objectives to the entire satisfaction of the consumers. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that prompt action may be taken by BIS to fill up the 
vacant posts.  Suitable action may also be taken at a higher level to reactivate and 
revive the posts which were lapsed due to remaining vacant for more than one 
year." 
 
1.25 In their action taken reply the Ministry have stated as below:- 
" BIS has completed the process that was underway for filing up of current 
vacancies in Scientific Cadre posts at the level of Scientist -B. As against 54 
vacancies notified, only 28 candidates were found suitable.  The process of 
recruitment for filing up of the rem aining 26 vacant posts and anticipated 
vacancies at the level of Scientist-B till September, 2011 has been initiated. 
As regards revival of posts that have lapsed due to their remaining vacant 
for more than a year, it is stated that pending reassessment of  the manpower 
requirements of the Bureau by a Committee constituted for the purpose, 74 
scientific posts and 50 non-scientific posts have already been revived and BIS has 
been requested to take urgent action to fill them up." 

 
 
1.26 The Committee in its ori ginal report observed that 140 Scientific Posts and 
47 Non Scientific Posts were lying vacant in BIS.   Further a large number Scientific 
Posts and Non Scientific Posts were deem ed to have lapsed due to remaining  vacant 
for more than a year. The Committee o bserved that due to shortage of manpower , 
BIS was not able to discharge its duties to the satisfaction of the consumers and 
desired that BIS should take prompt action to fill up the vacant posts and also take 
suitable action to reactivate and revive the po sts which were lapsed due to 
remaining vacant for more than a year.  In their action taken reply, the Government 
has stated that against 54 vacancies notified, only 28 candidates were found suitable 
and the process for recruitment of remaining 26 vacant po sts has been initiated.  It 
is further stated that the BIS has been requested to take urgent action to fill up 74 
scientific posts and 50 non scientific posts which have already been revived.  The 
Committee desire that the Government should take proactive steps and vigorously 
pursue filling up of vacant posts in BIS. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the steps taken by the Government/BIS in this regard.  

 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.1, Para No. 2.18) 
2.1 The Committee note that Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) as the National 
Standards Body is formulating need based Indian Standards in line with the national 
priorities.  The scheme of Hallmarking of gold jewellery was lau nched by BIS, in April, 
2000 to provide third party assurance to consumers on the purity of gold jewellery or its 
fineness.  Under the scheme, a jeweler has to obtain Hallmarking license from BIS to get 
his jewellery hallmarked from the BIS recognized Assa ying & Hallmarking Centres and 
to ensure the purity of jewellery received from artisans by following a systematic quality 
assurance system. 
  The Committee observe that the number of jewelers who have taken license under 
the scheme has gone up from 186 as on 31st March, 2010 to 7185 as on 31 st December, 
2009. However, the Committee feel that the progress is not at all satisfactory considering 
the fact that the scheme was launched about 10 years ago and there are about 33 lakh 
jewelers in the country. Appare ntly, sincere efforts have not been made by the 
government to bring more jewelers under the ambit of BIS Hallmarking Jewellery 
Scheme.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should make vigorous 
efforts to motivate/encourage more number of j ewelers throughout the country to obtain 
the hallmarked license from BIS for getting their jewellery hallmarked so that more 
number of people enjoy the benefits of the Scheme.  
Reply of the Government 
2.2 With a view to motivate/encourage more number of je wellers to obtain 
hallmarking licence from BIS for getting their jewellery hallmarked, the scheme was 
reviewed and rationalized by BIS as under: 
1. Procedures for grant and operation of licence has been simplified 
2. Fee structure has been rationalized and made jeweller friendly 
3. Time taken for grant of licence has been substantially reduced  
4. Tenure of jeweler  licence has been increased from one to three years 
 43 Jewellers' awareness programmes were held in 2009 -10.  To further convince 
the Jewellers about the a dvantages of the scheme, more such programmes are planned to 
be held during the year all over the country.  
 In reference to the suggestions of the Honorable Standing Committee, the scheme 
is proposed to be widely publicized to empower the consumers with k nowledge about the 
benefits of hallmarking. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. 14/1/2010-BIS 
 Dated 30th November, 2010).] 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 3.18) 
2.3 The Committee are di sturbed to note that so far only 147 BIS recognized 
Assaying & Hallmarking centres to assess the purity of gold jewellery have been set up in 
the country, that too mostly in big  and metropolitan cities of seventeen States. The 
consumers of the remaining S tates/UTs, especially in the special category States of 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and other States such as Bihar and Goa are 
completely deprived of the benefits of the Scheme. The reasons put forward by the 
Ministry that the quantum of jewellery be ing produced in other States/UTs is not 
sufficient to generate adequate response from entrepreneurs to set up centres are not 
acceptable to the Committee. The Committee feel that the Scheme has not been taken up 
with the seriousness it deserves.  The Commi ttee find that in order to encourage the 
entrepreneurs to set up Assaying & Hallmarking Centres, the scheme for extension of 
financial assistance to entrepreneurs  to the extent of 15% of the cost of machinery and 
equipment required for setting up of the C entres, subject to a maximum of     Rs.15 lakhs 
(30% of cost of machinery and equipment subject to maximum of Rs.30 lakhs for Centres 
in North Eastern Region, special category States of Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & 
Kashmir and Uttarakhand and rural areas of t he country) has been introduced by the 
government.  The Committee are dismayed to note that despite the central assistance 
given by the government, not many centres have been set up in the country and only one 
centre each has come up in the States /UT of P unjab, Haryana, Chhatisgarh, Jharkhand 
and Chandigarh.   
The Committee feel that apparently, the central assistance of Rs.15 lakh (Rs.30 
lakhs for the North Eastern Region and special category States) does not seem to be 
sufficient to encourage the entrepr eneurs to set up these centres. The Committee were 
informed during examination of the Subject that the total investment on land, building 
and machinery for a Hallmarking Centre comes to about Rs.120 lakhs.  As such, an 
assistance to the tune of Rs.15 lakhs ,  that too released in two installments – one after 
setting up of the centre and the other after successful operation of the centre for one year, 
is certainly not sufficient to attract the entrepreneurs to set up the centres. The 
Committee, therefore, des ire that the Ministry should assess the viability of the centres 
and also liberalize the scheme by increasing the amount of central assistance and 
simplifying the procedure for release of funds so that more entrepreneurs come forward 
to set up these centres, not only in the big cities but also in the rural and hilly areas. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.4  The scheme since its inception has been liberalized as follows: 
1. The financial assistance @ 15% of the cost of equipment and machinery subject 
to a ceiling of Rs.  15 lakh per centre was enhanced to 30% of cost of machinery and 
equipment with a maximum of Rs. 30 lakh for NE Region, Spl. Category States of 
Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand and rural areas of the 
country.  Applications for setting up o f such centres with central assistance in these 
areas are being considered even if they are not in response to advertisements seeking 
Expressions of Interests.  Now an entrepreneur can apply for subsidy for an Assaying 

 
 
& Hallmarking Centre in these areas a t any time of the year for which perpetual 
invitation of BIS website has been hosted.  
 As a result of the above liberalization six applications for setting up of Assaying 
& Hallmarking Centres at deficient locations have been received by BIS and are 
under process. 
2. Physical targets of the scheme were increased from the originally approved 50 
centres to facilitate setting up of such centres at locations where no centre exists 
(deficient locations). 
3. In deference to the suggestions of the Honorable Parliamenta ry Standing 
Committee, a proposal for upward revision of subsidy for setting up of Assaying and 
Hallmarking Centres is under consideration of the Government.  
A proposal to involve Public Sector Undertakings for the first time to set up Assaying 
and Hallmarking Centres at different locations with enhanced financial incentive, is 
under examination.  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. 14/1/2010-BIS 
 Dated 30th November, 2010).] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.3, Para No. 3.19) 
2.5  The Committee are unhappy to note that no Assaying & Hallmarking Centre has 
so far come up in the North Eastern Region and remote and backward a reas despite 
central assistance of Rs.30 lakh being given for the purpose. The plea of the Government 
that as per the World Gold Council data for gold offtake, Assam, Chhatisgarh, Himachal 
Pradesh and Orissa put together account for only 4.5% of the total gold consumed in the 
country and gold consumers in other North Eastern States, Jammu & Kashmir, 
Uttrakhand and Goa are insignificant, is  not convincing to the Committee. The 
Committee feel that keeping in view the interests of the consumers of North Easte rn 
Region and special category States, sincere efforts were required to be made to encourage 
the entrepreneurs to set up centres in these areas. 
 The Committee note that in response to a recent advertisement released by BIS in 
34 National Dailies inviting expressions of interest from interested entrepreneurs for 
setting up of such centres in special category States, rural areas where no Assaying   & 
Hallmarking Centres exist, six entrepreneurs have expressed interest in setting up of 
Assaying & Hallmarking Centres. 
 The Committee hope that these cases will be finalized expeditiously for setting up 
of the Assaying & Hallmarking Centres in North Eastern region, the special category 
States and rural areas without further delay. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.6 In principle approval has been accorded to all the 6 entrepreneurs who had applied in 
response to the advertisement.  Current status of these applications is as under: 
1. One centre at Patna has already been set up and recognized by BIS. 
2. One centre at Jodhpur ah s reached the stage for assessment and subsequent 
recognition by BIS.  
3. Two centres at Tirur and Kalagi are in the process of being setting up.  They 
are not yet ready for assessment by BIS. 
4. Necessary action is also being taken on the remaining two applicat ions at 
Cuttack & Siliguri.  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. 14/1/2010-BIS 
Dated 30th November, 2010).] 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 4.11) 
2.7 The Committee are disturbed to note that  there is a great shortfall in the 
achievement of physical targets as well, over the last three years. As against the targets of 
setting up of 37, 27 and 26 Assaying & Hallmarking Centres, the achievement was only 
11, 7 and 3 during the years 2007 -08, 2008-09 and 2009 -10, respectively. Further, the 
targets in respect of conducting training programmes for artisans and Assaying & 
Hallmarking personnel were also not achieved for the said period. The Department  
themselves have conceded that implementation  of the scheme has not been upto the 
expected level and have admitted that against the target for setting up of a total of 50 
Assaying & Hallmarking Centres under central assistance during the 11 th Five Year Plan, 
only 23 could be set up and recognized by BIS.   
 The Committee find that to review the financial and physical performances, the 
Department, as suggested by the Planning Commission, is undertaking an evaluation 
study shortly to assess the effectiveness or otherwise of the scheme, the reasons for l ack 
of interest on the part of entrepreneurs to avail assistance to set up centres and suggest 
measures for its effective implementation. The Committee feel that the performance of 
the Scheme should have been reviewed much earlier and remedial steps taken in order to 
improve its performance.  The Committee observe that the performance of the Scheme 
was unsatisfactory not for want of funds but due to the lack of proper planning on the part 
of the Department.  The Committee strongly deplore the lack of profes sionalism on the 
part of the Department of Consumer Affairs, who could not take timely action to spend 
the money  and achieve the financial as well as physical targets under the Scheme. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should make prope r planning to ensure 
achievement of physical targets during 2010 -11.  The Committee also desire that the 
evaluation study should be undertaken urgently and based on the assessment and outcome 
of the study, necessary modifications may be made in the scheme so as to make it more 
effective.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.8  The hallmarking scheme has two components - one operated by BIS under its 
normal certification activity without any s ubsidy element and the other with Government 
subsidy.  The total number of recognized hallmarking centers in the country at present is 
159 (including the 23 centres set up with Government subsidy).  While the hallmarking 
scheme as a whole has made considerable progress, it is the component with Government 
subsidy that has not made the expected progress.  Assaying and Hallmarking Centres are 
set up by entrepreneurs on commercial considerations and Government or BIS has no 
role in deciding their location.  Go vernment's subsidy scheme is intended to encourage 
entrepreneurs to set up such centres,  particularly in remote, inaccessible and rural areas 
in the country where they normally do not set up the centres on commercial 
considerations.  Lack of response from  them, even with financial assistance, may be 
based on their assessment that the centres may not be viable due to much lower level of 
consumption of gold jewellery in such areas.  The scheme is likely to get a boost and a 
large number of Assaying and Hallm arking Centres are bound to come up once 
hallmarking is introduced on a mandatory basis, for which the BIS Act is proposed to be 
amended.  

 
 
The central assistance scheme, after its introduction, has been reviewed and 
liberalized on different occasions based  on the recommendations of its Implementation 
Committee.  The last such liberalization was done in November, 2009.  An Evaluation 
study is also being undertaken through an outside agency with the following terms of 
reference: 
(a) Evaluation of the procedure fo r providing central assistance to Gold 
Hallmarking and Assaying Centres across the country. 
(b) Whether financial assistance under the scheme act as an incentive for Gold 
Assaying and Hallmarking Centres. 
(c) Whether consumers are aware of the benefits of Hallmark ing/Assaying 
Centres. 
(d) Efficacy of training provided to artisans and whether such training has 
helped in improving their skills.  
(e) Identify problems of the Assaying and Hallmarking Centres, if any, in 
carrying out their operating and suggest appropriate solu tions to overcome 
these problems.  
(f) Evaluate reasons for slow progress of Scheme and satisfactory progress in 
certain States. 
(g) Comments on effectiveness of the Scheme and suggest measures to make 
implementation of the Scheme more effective. 
     Final report of the study is yet to be made available by the agency.  Suitable 
follow-up action will be taken once the Report is available.  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. 14/1/2010-BIS 
 Dated 30th November, 2010).] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9 Para No. 6.4) 
2.9  The Committee note that an evaluation study of the Scheme of Hallmarking of 
Gold Jewellery has been given to an independent agency to study and evaluate inter alia, 
the procedure for providing central assistance to Assaying & Hallmarking Centres; 
whether the assistance acts as an incentives for the centres; the reasons for slow progress 
of the scheme and to sugge st measures to make its implementation more effective.  The 
study to be conducted in metro cities of Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai would 
gauge the level of awareness among the consumers about the purity of gold jewellery, the 
role of hallmarking and i mportance of purchasing hallmarked jewellery and would also 
cover rural areas. The Committee feel that such an evaluation study should have been 
conducted much earlier after watching the performance of the Scheme in the first two 
years of the 11 th Five Year Plan to know the reasons for its slow progress and to take 
consequential measures to make its implementation more effective.  The Committee 
deplore the lackadaisical manner of implementing the scheme by the Ministry. The 
Committee hope that as the presen t study would cover the consumers representing 
different socio economic categories on stratified  sampling  basis in each location, it 
would help to identify the problems and shortcomings in the Scheme.  The Committee 
desire that based on the findings and outcome of the study, suitable modifications may be 
made in the Scheme to make it more effective. 
Reply of the Government 
2.10  Noted for compliance when the outcome of the study becomes available.  It is, 
however, pointed out here that the Scheme, after i ts introduction, has been reviewed and 
liberalized on different occasions, based on the recommendations of its Implementation 
Committee.  The last such review was done in November, 2009 and based on that the 
scheme was further liberalized by extending the enhanced subsidy admissible for North 
Eastern Region and Special Category States to rural areas in the country, consideration of 
requests for setting up of the Centres in North Eastern Region, Special Category States 
and rural areas even when such requests  are not in response to advertisements seeking 
Expressions of Interest, removing the earlier approved ceiling on the number of centres to 
be set up under the central assistance scheme, etc.  Some other liberalization is under 
examination of the Government.   
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. 14/1/2010-BIS  
Dated 30th November, 2010).] 
  

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.10, Para No. 7.8) 
2.11  The Committee note that to create awareness among the consu mers about the 
benefits of Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery, BIS  releases advertisements both in print and 
electronic media in English and local languages and organize awareness programmes at 
regular intervals across the country including rural and remote ar eas, to make the scheme 
popular. The BIS has organized 240 awareness programmes during the last four years. 
The Committee find that as per the study conducted by an empanelled agency of Planning 
Commission in 59 Districts of 12 States, `Jago Grahak Jago’ m ulti-media publicity 
campaign, both in print and electronic media, has resulted in an increased awareness 
amongst consumers.  The Committee, however, feel that a lot more  needs to be done to 
make the scheme popular and make the people aware about the bene fits of the Scheme.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that BIS should organize more awareness programmes 
to educate the people at large about the benefits of Gold/silver Hallmarking. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.12  Consumer  Awareness Programmes are regularl y conducted by BIS which, 
besides other topics, also include hallmarking for generating awareness among 
consumers about the benefits of purchasing hallmarked jewellery.  During 2009 -10, 76 
such Consumer Awareness Programmes were conducted by BIS, in additi on to 43 
exclusive Jewellers Awareness Programmes.  BIS has planned more Consumer 
Awareness Programmes all over the country during the current financial year.  Talk 
shows, live interactions with consumers etc. are also being undertaken on electronic 
media to make the people aware of the benefits of hallmarking.  
  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. 14/1/2010-BIS 
 Dated 30th November, 2010).] 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 7.9) 
2.13  The Committee further note that `Nukkad Nataks’ organized by the BIS for the 
benefit of consumers have not yet been organized in rural and remote areas.  The 
Committee feel that unless the Scheme is widely popularized and consumers of rural, 
remote and hilly  areas are made aware of the benefits of the Hallmarking of Jewellery, 
they cannot come forward to opt for the Hallmarked jewellery, thereby defeating the very 
purpose of the Scheme. 
 The Committee feel that people tend to learn quickly and easily with the  help of 
such street plays and therefore, recommend that `Nukkad Natak’ and other awareness 
programmes may be organized by BIS in rural, remote and hilly areas also so as to spread 
the reach of the Scheme to the farthest corners of the country and interest s of the 
consumers in small towns and villages who invest their hard earned savings in gold 
jewellery are protected. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.14  The recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee has been noted and efforts will be 
made to comply with it. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. 14/1/2010-BIS 
 Dated 30th November, 2010).] 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 9.3) 
2.15 The Committee are shocked to note that as many as 140 Scientific Pos ts and 47 
Non Scientific Posts are lying vacant in BIS. They are further  disturbed to note that 93 
Scientific Posts and 172 Non Scientific Posts are deemed to have lapsed due to their 
remaining vacant for more than one year.  Further, for 33 Scientific Po sts and 17 Non 
Scientific Posts, the recruitment process is in progress.  The Committee deplore the 
inaction on the part of BIS due to which a large number of posts rendered lapsed. 
 The Committee are of the opinion that large number of vacancies in any 
institution hampers its proper functioning.  In case of BIS, it is evident from the fact that 
due to shortage in manpower, they are not able to provide proper surveillance and 
enforcement over the Scheme.  The Committee wonder that with such a large number o f 
vacancies, how will BIS discharge its duties effectively and achieve the avowed  
objectives to the entire satisfaction of the consumers. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that prompt action may be taken by BIS to fill up the vacant posts.  Suitable action  may 
also be taken at a higher level to reactivate and revive the posts which were lapsed due to 
remaining vacant for more than one year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.16  BIS has completed the process that was underway for filing up of current 
vacancies in S cientific Cadre posts at the level of Scientist -B. As against 54 vacancies 
notifies, only 28 candidates were found suitable.  The process of recruitment for filing up 
of the remaining 26 vacant posts and anticipated vacancies at the level of Scientist -B till 
September, 2011 has been initiated. 
As regards revival of posts that have lapsed due to their remaining vacant for more 
than a year, it is stated that pending reassessment of the manpower requirements of the 
Bureau by a Committee constituted for the pur pose, 74 scientific posts and 50 non -
scientific posts have already been revived and BIS has been requested to take urgent 
action to fill them up. 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. 14/1/2010-BIS 
 Dated 30th November, 2010).] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.26 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.14, Para No.  9.4) 
2.17 The Committee note that a Grievances Redressal Cell has been set up by BIS 
which deals wit h the grievances relating to purity of gold jewellery.  While noting that 
only three complaints were received from the consumers during the last three years, the 
Committee feel that there is a lack of awareness amongst the consumers about existence 
of such a Cell in BIS.  The Committee feel that unless the people are made aware about 
the existence of a Cell which is looking into their grievances relating to purity of gold, 
setting up of such a Cell would be a futile exercise.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that besides creating awareness about benefits of Hallmarked Jewellery, the 
consumers should simultaneously be made aware about the existence of the Grievances 
Redressal Cell and also about the procedure for making complaints thereunder, so that 
greater number of consumers approach the Cell and get their grievances redressed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.18 Complaint redressal mechanism is an integral part of consumer awareness 
programmes where emphasis is given for creating awareness amongst the consum ers.  
Existence of grievances redressal cell in BIS is also publicized during the consumer 
awareness programmes.  
Recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee has been noted for further follow -up 
action.  
  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. 14/1/2010-BIS 
 Dated 30th November, 2010).] 

 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S 
REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4, Para No. 3.20) 
3.1  The Committee note with concern that in case the hallmarking of jewellery is 
made mandatory, adequate infrastructure to assess the purity of gold jewellery is not 
available in the country. The Committee agree with the proposal of the Government to 
make the hallmarking of jewellery mandatory in the four metropolitan cities of Delhi, 
Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai in the first phase and in the rest of the country later, as 
they find that to assess the purity of jewellery produced in the 4 metro cities, ther e are 
adequate number of centres.  The Committee, however, desire that simultaneously the 
Department should also take vigorous steps to set up Assaying & Hallmarking Centres in 
other parts of the Country so that when the Scheme is made mandatory, sufficien t 
infrastructure is available to assess the purity of jewellery. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2  Action for setting up of Assaying and Hallmarking Centres where no such centre 
exists is  being taken under the Scheme of central assistance.  Upward revision o f the 
subsidy element and involvement of PSUs also in the process are under active 
consideration of the Government.  The scheme is also being publicized more vigorously 
to increase awareness among jewellers and consumers about the benefits of hallmarking. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. 14/1/2010-BIS 
 Dated 30th November, 2010).] 

 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.7, Para No.  5.7) 
4.1 The Committee are deeply concerned to note the delay in the implementation of 
Mandatory Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery Scheme which was proposed to be 
implemented w.e.f. 1 st January, 2008 in a phased manner i.e.in the four metro cities of 
Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkatta and Chennai in the first phase and in the rest of the country, 
later.  As informed by the Department of Consumer Affairs, the Scheme could not be 
introduced so far for want of an enablin g legislative framework for its implementation 
under the BIS Act, 1986. The Committee have been informed that the  amendments in the 
Act as approved by the Law Ministry were sent for  Cabinets approval.  The Cabinet 
Committee has opined that since the conc erned Departments namely, the Department of 
Industrial Policy and Promotion, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Commerce 
were consulted long back, they may again be  consulted, after which the matter will again 
be placed before the Cabinet.  The C ommittee are not convinced with the reasons 
advanced by the Ministry for the delay in making necessary amendments in the Act. The 
Committee feel this to be on account of slackness on the part of the Government and lack 
of seriousness on their part to implement the scheme in the right earnest.  
 The Committee feel that until and unless the Hallmarking of gold jewellery is 
made mandatory, the scheme will not have the desired result of protecting the  interest of 
the consumers by preventing sale of inferior qu ality of gold, promoting export 
competitiveness and developing India as a leading gold market centre in the world.  The 
Committee observe  that due to increase in the purchasing power of the middle and 
upper-middle classes,  there is an increasing market f or gold jewellery.  Even the people 
of small towns and villages often invest their hard earned savings in gold jewellery as a 
hedge against inflation and difficult times. All such consumers rightly deserve to get 
insurance of their investment in gold, whic h is possible only if the Hallmarking of gold 
jewellery is made mandatory. 
 During examination of the Subject it was brought to the notice of the Committee 
that BIS market surveys in 2002 had revealed a 10-15% adulteration in 22 carat jewellery 
which at today’s gold prices, will be estimated to 20 thousand crores per annum of loss to 
the consumers.  The matter thus deserves serious consideration.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend the Department to take up the matter with utmost 
seriousness and f inalise the modalities of the Bill for its early introduction in the 
Parliament so as to bring Hallmarking of Jewellery under mandatory certification.  As 
regards operational issues arising out of the making of Hallmarking of Jewellery 
mandatory, the Gover nment may constitute a High Powered Committee to tackle those 
issues.  However, in no case, the introduction of the Bill should be delayed. 
  

 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 The draft Bill for amendment of the BIS Act, 1986 is presently under scrutiny in 
the Ministry of Law & Justice.  Once the Bill is vetted by that Ministry, approval of the 
Cabinet would be sought.  A Bill for amendment of the Act is likely to be introduced 
during the next Session of the Parliament.  Necessary follow up action for introductio n of 
mandatory hallmarking of gold jewellery articles would be taken after amendment of the 
Act. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. 14/1/2010-BIS 
 Dated 30th November, 2010).] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.17 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.8, Para No.  5.8) 
4.3 The Committee also note that though the jewelers selling hallmarked jewellery 
give an assurance of purity, yet they charge exorbitant making charges which puts heavy 
burden on the consumer in the guise of providing quality assurance.  The Committee are 
dismayed to note that BIS has no control on the situation whereby the customers are 
being exploited by the BIS certified jewelers.  in this rega rd, the Committee were 
informed during evidence that it is a bilateral issue between the jeweler and the customer 
and BIS has no role to play, which the Committee do not find convincing.  The 
Committee feel that in order to regulate the making charges, a l aw may necessarily be 
required.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that BIS should look into this aspect 
and evolve a system to regulate the making charges to ensure that a ceiling is imposed 
thereon.  As certain amendments in the BIS Act, 1986 are alrea dy under consideration of 
the Government, the Committee desire that necessary amendments may be made to this 
effect also in the  BIS Act, so as to give protection to the consumer. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.4 As per its Preamble, the BIS Act 1986 is an Act  to provide for the establishment 
of a Bureau for the harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking 
and quality certification of goods and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  So the issue of regulating the making charges by imposing a ceiling thereon does 
not come within the purview of the Act.   
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. 14/1/2010-BIS 
 Dated 30th November, 2010).] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.20 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.12, Para No. 8.8) 
 4.5 The Committee are dismayed to note that the Government has no monitoring 
mechanism for enforcement of the Scheme as no raids are stated to have been cond ucted 
by the BIS enforcement machinery on BIS licensed Jewellery shops selling hallmarked 
jewellery despite the fact that instances of jewelers deceiving buyers by selling inferior 
quality of gold jewellery against the declared purity have been found in the different parts 
of the country.  
 The plea of the Government that  BIS conducts  market surveillance on certified 
jewellers as per documented guidelines and, therefore, does not take raids at licensed  
premises, is not acceptable to the Committee.  The C ommittee are further disturbed to 
note that BIS has very limited resources and machinery to enforce the Scheme.  The 
Committee are of the opinion that unless there is strict monitoring of the scheme people 
will not have faith on the genuineness of the deal ers and will not opt for Hallmarked 
jewellery which will affect the performance of the scheme.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that BIS should strengthen its monitoring mechanism by conducting regular 
surveys and inspections, particularly of the BIS cert ified shops, so that the fraudulent 
dealers are identified and punished.  Names of such dealers should be notified and 
publicized for the information of general public.  This will also instill the feeling of 
security and boost the confidence of the consumers. They may also explore the possibility 
of involvement of independent agencies in such a process, if required. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.6 Monitoring mechanism of jewellery shops selling hallmarked jewellery is ensured 
by BIS through a two pronged approach: 
(j) Samples of hallmarked jewellery are drawn for independent testing from 
randomly selected BIS licencees each year by the branch office of BIS. 
(ii) A complaint redressal mechanism is in place to safeguard the interest of 
consumers who invest their hard earned saving in gold jewellery.  
 During the last 3 years (upto February, 2010) 760 samples of jewellery were 
collected by BIS, out of which 50 samples failed to conform to the claimed standards.  
Action as per the scheme has been taken against the defaulting jewellers.   
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. 14/1/2010-BIS 
 Dated 30th November, 2010).] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.23 of Chapter-I of the Report)  

 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 4.10) 
5.1 The Committee note with concern the uneven pattern of the budget estimates and 
expenditure, i.e. the funds released to BIS and the amount actually utilized by BIS during 
the last three years.  In the year 2007 -08, as against BE of Rs.4 crores,  funds released to 
BIS were Rs.1 crore and the amount actually utilized by it was Rs.0.32 crores.  In the 
year 2008-09, against  the BE of Rs.3 crores, Nil amount was released to BIS,  whereas in 
the year 2009-10, BE was reduced to merely Rs.1 crore out of which only 0.81crore was 
released to BIS and only 0.58 crores was actually utilized by BIS as on 31 st December, 
2009.  The reasons put forward by the Department that under utilization of funds has 
been due to lack of demand for assistance,  are unacceptable to the Committee.  The 
Committee are of the opinion that this trend merely indicates the lack of seriousness on 
the part of the Ministry to implement this very important scheme, to  protect the interest 
of the consumers.   The Committee deplore the slackness and improper planning on the 
part of the Government to spend the funds. The Committee recommend that the 
Department should give adequate publicity to such Schemes so as to create interest 
among the consumers and educate them about the benefits of purchasing only hallmarked 
jewellery.  Further, as earlier stated, the Department should also explore the possibility of  
liberalizing the scheme of providing financial assistance for setting up of Assaying & 
Hallmarking Centres so as to motivate more and more entrepreneurs to set up Assaying & 
Hallmarking Centres in the remaining 18 States/UTs of the Country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
5.2 Expenditure on the scheme is directly proportional to the subsidy claims received 
from entrepreneurs who set up such centres.  As indicated above, under utilization of 
funds has been due to lack of demand for assistance.  With a view to inc rease the 
popularity of the scheme, the following proposals are being examined: 
1. In addition to the normal publicity being given to the scheme through print and 
electronic media and programmes like nukud natak etc. all over the country, a 
proposal to undert ake a special campaign at a cost of about Rs. 1 crore for 
publicizing the scheme of hallmarking through DAVP is under consideration of 
the Government  

 
 
2. Further upward revision of financial assistance so as to motivate more and more 
entrepreneurs to set up Assaying & Hallmarking Centres is under consideration of 
the Government. 
3. Involvement of PSUs in setting up of the centers with enhanced subsidy is also 
under consideration of the Government.  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. 14/1/2010-BIS 
 Dated 30th November, 2010).] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
 
 
NEW DELHI               VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
09 May, 2012                    Chairman 
19 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka)      Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
  

 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
MINUTES OF THE T HIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION (2011-12) HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 9TH MAY, 2012 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 153 5 hrs. in Committee Room  'C', 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Jaywant Gangaram Awale 
3. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
4. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
5. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
7. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
8. Shri Sohan Potai 
9. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
10. Shri Chandulal Sahu 
11. Smt. Usha Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Lalhming Liana 
13. Dr. T. N. Seema 
14. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P. K. Misra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 

 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration a nd adoption of the draft Report  on action taken 
by the Governmen t on the observations/recommendations contained in the Ninth Report 
of the Committee (2009 -10) on the subject "Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) – 
Hallmarking of Jewellery" of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Con sumer Affairs ). In his opening remarks Hon’ble 
Chairman highlighted the important recommendations contained in the draft Report. 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report and a fter due 
deliberation, the Committee unanimously adopted the draft Report with minor changes.  
4.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the aforesaid Report and 
present the same to Parliament. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
********* 
 
 
  

 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON  
THE OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE  
NINTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD,  
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2009-10) 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations:-            14 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government :- 
 
Recommendation Nos. 2.18, 3.18, 3.19, 4.11, 6.4, 7.8, 7.9, 9.3 and 
9.4 
    Total: 09 
Percentage: 64.29% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not 
desire to p ursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government:- 
 
 Recommendation No. 3.20      
     Total: 01 
Percentage: 7.14% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:- 
 
  Recommendation Nos.  5.7, 5.8 and 8.8    
  Total: 03 
Percentage: 21.43% 
   
 
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect of which the replies of 
the Government are still awaited:- 
   Recommendation No. 4.10 
 Total: 01 
Percentage: 7.14% 
 