  
 
 
 
      STANDING  COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD,CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION 
    (2009-2010) 
 
          FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY  OF   CONSUMER   AFFAIRS, 
FOOD    AND   PUBLIC   DISTIRBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
{Action  Taken   by   the   Government   on   the    observations/recommendations 
contained    in   the Twenty-seventh Report  (14th  Lok Sabha)  of   the  Committee 
on „Price Rise of  Essential   Commodities – Causes   and  Effects    with   Special 
 Emphasis   on Import of Wheat and Enforcement of Prevention of Black-Marketing 
and Maintenance  of  Supply  of   Essential Commodities  Act, 1980‟)  Ministry  of 
 Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
 
FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SBHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DLEHI 
19th November, 2009/ 28 Kartika , 1931 (Saka) 
1 

  
 
FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY  OF   CONSUMER   AFFAIRS, 
FOOD    AND   PUBLIC   DISTIRBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
{Action   Taken by   the   Government   on   the     observations/recommendations 
contained   in   the Twenty-seventh Report (14th  Lok  Sabha)  of   the   Committee 
on „Price   Rise  of Essential   Commodities – Causes   and  Effects  with   Special 
 Emphasis    on Import of Wheat and Enforcement of Prevention of Black-Marketing 
and  Maintenance  of  Supply  of  Essential  Commodities  Act, 1980‟)  Ministry  of 
 Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs} 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 25.11.2009 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on    25.11.2009 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SBHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DLEHI 
19th November, 2009/ 28 Kartika, 1931 (Saka) 
 
 
 

  
CONTENTS 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE……………………………………………………      ii 
 
 INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………………..      iv 
 
 
CHAPTER  I Report.  1 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations/recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government.  
 
40 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
Observations/recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies. 
 
94 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Observations/recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the committee. 
 
97 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
Observations/recommendations in respect of which the final replies 
of the Government are still awaited.  
 
107 
 
 
  
APPENDICES 
 
 
I  
Minutes of the sixth sitting of the Committee held on                    
16th November, 2009. 
113 
 
II 
Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty -seventh Report of the 
Committee. 
 
114 
 
                                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER   
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION  (2009-2010). 
 
 
 Shri Vilas Muttemwar    - Chairman      
 
  MEMBERS 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Jaywant Gangaram Awale  
3. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
5. Shri Tara Chand Bhagora 
6. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
8. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
9. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
10. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
11. Shri Lalchand Kataria 
12. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
13. Shri Sohan Potai 
14. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
15. Shri Dinubhai Solanki 
16. Shri Laxman Tudu 
17. Shri D. Venugopal  
18. Shri Madhusudan Yadav 
19. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
23. Shri Lalhming Liana 
24. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
25. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
26. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu 
27. Shri Matilal Sarkar 
28. Shri Veer Singh 
29. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
 
(ii) 

  
 
   Secretariat 
 
  
1. Shri P.K. Misra    -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt.  Veena Sharma    -  Director 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad    -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Khakhai Zou    -  Executive Officer 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution (2009 -2010) having been authorized by the Committee to 
submit the Report on their behalf, present the First Report on  action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty seventh Report of 
the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on „Price Rise of Essential Commodities 
– Causes and Effects with Special Emphasis on Import of Wheat and 
Enforcement of Prevention of Black -Marketing and Maintenance of Supply of 
Essential Commodities Act, 1980‟ of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
  
2. The Twenty -seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 23 rd December, 2008. The Government furnished replies indicating 
action taken on the recomm endations contained in the Report on                      
30th June, 2009. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at 
their sitting held on 16th November, 2009.  
 
3. An     analysis    of    the    action   taken   by   the   Government on t he 
recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix-II. 
 
  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                       VILAS MUTTEMWAR 
19th November, 2009           Chairman 
28 Kartika 1931 (Saka)          Standing Committee on Food,  
  Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution   
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

  
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty seventh Report (14th Lok 
Sabha) on the subject “ Price   Rise of  Essential   Commodities – Causes   and  
Effects  with   Special Emphasis on Import of Wheat and Enforcement of 
Prevention of Black -Marketing and  Maintenance  of  Supply  of   Essential 
Commodities  Act, 1980”  pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
 
1.2 The Twenty -seventh Report of the Committee was presented to             
Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sa bha on 23rd December, 2008. It contained 32 
recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 32 recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received and categorized as follows: - 
 
(i) Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Serial Nos. –4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 14, 16, 18, 19, 23, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31 and 32.   
 
(Paragraph Nos. – 3.10, 4.14, 5.18, 5.19, 6.17, 8.13, 9.14, 10.12, 11.15, 
11.16, 12.24, 13.28, 13.29, 13.30, 13.32, 13.33 and 13.34) 
(Chapter –II Total :   17) 
 
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies received from the Government: 
Serial Nos.   2, 20 and 25. 
 
(Paragraph Nos.  – 2.9, 12.21 and 12.26). 
(Chapter –III, Total :  3) 
 
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Govern ment have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
Serial Nos.  – 1, 3, 5, 17, 24 and 29. 
 
(Paragraph Nos.  – 2.8, 3.9, 4.13, 11.14, 12.25 and 13.31). 
(Chapter –IV Total :  6) 
 
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which the final replies of the Government 
are still awaited: 
Serial Nos.  – 10, 11, 13, 15, 21 and 22. 
 
(Paragraph Nos.  – 7.11, 7.12, 8.14, 9.15, 12.22 and 12.23). 
(Chapter –V, Total :   6) 

  
1.3 In their Twenty-seventh Report the Committee had recommended various 
measures to con tain the rising prices of Essential Commodities and also to 
regulate the production, storage, distribution, etc. of foodgrains and other 
essential commodities.  The various observations/recommendations of the 
Committee in this regard were as follows:-  
 
(i) The Essential Commodities Act, 2006 should be amended to read 
as “foodstuffs including pulses, edible oilseeds and oils”. 
 
(ii) The Department of Consumer Affairs should review the working of 
the Price Monitoring Cell and adopt strategy to watch the market 
trend of prices.  
 
(iii) The Department should give directions for holding the sittings of the 
High Powered Price Monitoring Board (HPPMB) at fixed intervals. 
  
(iv) The Department in consultation with other concerned Departments 
should chalk out long -term strategy to in sulate the prices in the 
country from international price fluctuations.  
 
(v) The Government should give highest priority to provide the small 
and marginal farmers the opportunity for assured and remunerative 
marketing of their produce at the time of harvesting.  
 
(vi) The Central Government should persuade the State Governments to 
implement the various development programmes/schemes to 
increase the production of Agricultural Produce.  
 
(vii) Strongly recommended that the Government should think of ways 
and means to make available disposable drip system within the 
reach of every farmer that would result in water conservation for 
surety of irrigation. 
 
(viii) Government should take steps to procure wheat directly from the 
farmers by giving remunerative prices. 
 
(ix) The State Governmen ts/UTs that have not exempted foodgrains 
from VAT, should be persuaded to exempt foodgrains from VAT. 
 
(x) The Government should remove restrictions on the Inter -state 
movement of agricultural commodities and introduce single uniform 
tax pattern across the States, especially on foodgrains.   
 
(xi) The Government should give priority to acquire only barren and 
waste lands not exceeding 10% of the total land acquired under the 
SEZs.  
 
 
 

  
 
(xii) The issue of diversion of foodgrains should be tackled with utmost 
seriousness by conducting a joint special meeting by officials of FCI 
and State Government, where offtake is abnormally high.  
 
(xiii) The menace of hoarding and black -marketing of essential 
commodities should be taken up at the highest level by the 
Government and the State Govts./UT Administrations should 
implement stock hoarding limit in letter and spirit.  
 
(xiv) The Government should amend the penal provisions of the Essential 
commodities Act in cons ultation with the States/UTs so that the 
offenders do not escape for want of requisite provisions in the law.  
 
(xv) The Committee emphasised the need for strengthening of 
enforcement machinery and to direct State Governments/UT 
Administrations to conduct regul ar raids to discourage hoarders and 
black marketers. 
 
(xvi) The State Governments should supply information of detention 
cases within the prescribed time limit as per the Act. 
 
(xvii) The National Multi Commodity Exchanges should be spread all over 
India and should not be centralized in a particular area/zone.  
 
(xviii) A study/survey be conducted to ascertain the percentage of small 
and marginal farmers who have been benefited from future/forward 
trading.  
 
(xix) The bill to amend the Future Contract Act be passed expeditiously 
so as to strengthen the regulatory framework of FMC. 
 
(xx) The ban on trading of essential commodities in future market should 
continue.  
 
(xxi) The export of petroleum products be allowed only after the domestic 
requirements are met.  
 
(xxii) The effect of reduction in the pri ce of crude oil should percolate 
down to the consumers and consequently the prices of four major 
petroleum products viz. Petrol, Diesel, Kerosene and LPG be further 
reduced.  
 
(xxiii) The Government should take up the matter of uniform tax pattern in 
right earnest  at the highest levels in the State governments and 
make the sales/VAT taxes uniform throughout the country. 
 
(xxiv) The Ministry should launch massive awareness campaign in the 
country to check the misuse of LPG Cylinders for other purposes.  

  
 
(xxv) The Government should make concerted efforts so that all the oil 
marketing companies as well as the distributing agencies strictly 
adhere to the guidelines and the distribution agencies found 
violating the norms of LPG Cylinders delivery system should be 
punished.  
 
 
1.4 The Committee desire that the action taken notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and the final 
replies in respect of the recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this 
report for which only interim replies have be en furnished to the Committee 
be furnished within three months of the presentation of the Report. 
 

  
1.5  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations, which need reiteration or merit comments.   
 
(A) Need to amend Section 3(iii) of the Essential Commodities Act, 2006. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1 Para No. 2.8). 
 
1.6 The Committee had recommended vide Para No. 2.8 in their 27 th Report 
as under:- 
 “The Committee note that under the Essential Commodities 
(Amendment) Act, 2006, only seven commodities have been retained as 
essential commodities. The Government considers four aspects to declare 
the commodity as essential viz. (i) the demand and supply position of the 
commodity during the last 4 -5 years and specific  shortage, if any; (ii) 
whether any control/regulation has been resorted to during the last five 
years or so; (iii) supply trends so as to indicate if private variation was far 
above the normal rate of inflation; and (iv) import/export policy profile of 
the commodity.  Once the commodity is declared as essential, under the 
provision of section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, the Government 
may issue orders inter -alia to (a) regulate by licenses, permits or 
otherwise the production or manufacture of that  commodity; (b) control the 
price at which it may be bought or sold;  (c) regulate by licenses, permits 
or otherwise its storage, transport, distribution, disposal, acquisition use or 
consumption; (d) prohibit its withholding from sale. The Committee also 
note that pulses have already been included as essential commodities 
under the nomenclature „Foodstuffs” and, therefore, the Department of 
Consumer Affairs does not feel the need to declare it as essential 
commodity separately.  The Committee feel that the due to less production 
of pulses, the country has to import pulses in a large quantity every year to 
meet the consumer demand.  In the opinion of the Committee the word 
“pulses” should be clearly mentioned in the seven commodities which 
have been declared  as essential.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that Section 3 (iii) of the Essential Commodities Act, 2006, should be read 
as “foodstuffs including pulses, edible oilseeds and oils”.   
 
1.7 The Department in their action taken reply have stated as below:- 
 
“If any new commodities other than those seven commodities listed 
in Schedule to the Essential Commodities (Amendment) Act, 2006 are to 
be declared as „essential‟ under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955,  the 
provisions laid down in Section 2 A of the Es sential Commodities Act, 
1955 have to be followed.  Section 2A(2) provides that “ Subject to the 
provisions of sub-section (4), the Central Government may, if it is satisfied 
that it is necessary so to do in the public interest and for reasons to be 
specified in the notification published in the Official Gazette, amend the 
Schedule so as to- 
 

  
(a) add a commodity to the said Schedule; 
(b) remove any commodity from the said Schedule, in consultation with 
the State Government. 
 
Pulses already stand included as essenti al commodities under the 
nomenclature “Foodstuffs”.  Therefore, there is no need to declare pulses 
as essential commodities separately.  Already orders have been issued 
under the Essential Commodities Act which enable State Governments to 
fix stock limits for pulses”. 
 
 

  
1.8 The Committee in their original Report had desired that pulses 
should be clearly mentioned as an essential commodity keeping in view the 
fact that the country has to import pulses in large quantity every year to 
meet the consumer demand.  Accordingly, the Committee had 
recommended that the Essential Commodities Act, 2006 should be 
amended suitably so as to indicate the word “pulses” separately in the list 
of seven commodities which have been declared as essential.  However, 
the Committee are unhappy to note  that the Government in their action 
taken reply have merely stated that pulses already stand included as 
essential commodity under the nomenclature “Foodstuffs”, which is a 
mere repetition of the reply earlier furnished to the Committee at the time of 
examination of the subject. The Committee are of the considered opinion 
that once a commodity is declared as essential, the Government can issue 
orders to regulate its production or manufacture and also its storage, 
transport and distribution, etc.  The Minis try, instead of taking any steps to 
amend the Essential Commodities Act to this effect has merely given the 
repetitive reply which the Committee are not inclined to accept. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Government should take necessary 
steps to amend the Essential Commodities Act, 2006 so that section 3 (iii) 
of the Act should read “foodstuffs including pulses, edible oilseeds and 
oils”. 
 

  
(B) Need to review the working of the Price Monitoring Cell. 
 
  Recommendation (Sl. No. 3 Para No. 3.9) 
 
 
1.9 The Committee had recommended in their earlier Report as below:- 
 
“The Committee have been informed that the Price Monitoring Cell (PMC) 
in the Department of Consumer Affairs monitors the prices of                  
14 commodities namely rice, wheat, atta, gram, tur/arhar, tea, milk, sugar, 
vanaspati, mustard oil, groundnu t oil, potato, onion and salt, their 
availability and related development on national and international level 
and prepare a weekly note for being placed before the Cabinet Committee 
on Prices.  This Cell recommends appropriate necessary action to check 
the rise in prices.  The Committee find that the Government has not been 
able to check the rise in prices of essential Commodities specially wheat, 
pulses and edible oil which have risen manifold in the past few years 
which in the opinion of the Committee is lack of foresightedness on the 
part of Price Monitoring Cell.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Department of Consumer Affairs should review the working of Price 
Monitoring Cell and adopt a strategy to watch the market trend of prices 
which are likely to rise in future, so that there is no shortage of Essential 
Commodities in the market.    
 
1.10. In their action taken reply, the Department have stated that:- 
 
“Price Monitoring Cell in the Department of Consumer Affairs is entrusted 
inter alia with the task of monitoring the prices and availability of essential 
commodities in the country.  Prices of essential commodities are largely 
affected by supply factors as well as international price movements.  
There has been rise in the prices of essentia l commodities all over the 
world owing to various factors such as decline in global production, 
diversion of food to feed and bio fuel production, increase in freight cost, 
as well as increase in demand. The spiraling crude oil price last year was 
manifest in record high prices in agricultural commodities.  Although the 
volatility observed in international markets in 2008 was not experienced to 
the same extent in India, the high dependence on imports in the case of 
edible oils (where more than 40% of the re quirements are imported) and 
pulses makes the domestic prices of these commodities vulnerable to the 
international price movements.  In the case of wheat India remains largely 
insulated, owing to high domestic production. 
 
The sharp swings in the prices of  commodities that occurred in the 
year 2008 are not easily predictable. However, in general, the Price 
Monitoring Cell studies the international and domestic market trends of 
major commodities from various sources and this information is 
incorporated in th e Notes prepared for the High Level meetings that are 
held regularly to enable the Committees to arrive at considered policy 
decisions.   Consequently, various measures adopted by the Government, 

  
both fiscal and administrative, have helped to moderate the wide 
fluctuations of prices and to insulate the common man to the extent 
feasible. 
 
The long term strategy for improving the domestic availability of 
essential commodities is to increase domestic production. In the short run 
various measures were taken as indicated in para-2 above”. 

  
1.11 The Committee in their original report had observed that the 
Government could not check the rise in prices of the 14 commodities, the 
prices of which are monitored by the Price Monitoring Cell (PMC) in the 
Department of Co nsumer Affairs, especially wheat, pulses and edible oils  
and which have risen manifold in the past few years.  The Committee had 
opined that the reasons for constant rise in prices of essential 
commodities was due to lack of foresightedness on the part of  the Price 
Monitoring Cell and had, therefore, recommended to review its working. 
The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have indicated that rise in prices 
of essential commodities is affected by supply factors as well as 
international price movements. T he Committee are dismayed to observe 
that though the PMC studies the international and domestic market trends 
of major commodities from various sources which are incorporated in the 
Notes prepared for High Level Meetings, the rise in prices of essential 
commodities including vegetables continue unabated. The fiscal and 
administrative measures adopted by the Government consequently, have 
also not helped to contain the problem of rise in prices of essential 
commodities. As a matter of fact the Committee find that the Government 
has not taken the recommendations of the Committee seriously. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the 
working of the Price Monitoring Cell may be reviewed seriously and also 
suitable measures may be ado pted to watch the market trend of prices and 
timely action taken to check the rise in prices of essential commodities to 
ensure their availability in the market at reasonable prices. 
 

  
(C) Need to chalk out a long-term strategy 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.5 Para No. 4.13) 
 
1.12. The Committee vide Para No. 4.13 recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee express their concern over the rising trend in the prices of 
most of the essential commodities during the last two years. Prices of 
commodities in the physical market are governed by demand and supply 
sectors prevailing in the market. The Committee have noted that mismatch 
between demand and supply is the main contributor to the hike in prices of 
essential commodities specifically the foodgrains. The Committee have 
been given to understand that the rise in domestic prices is owing to the 
combined effect of the factors such as growing demand on account of 
increase in population and income, hardening of international prices, 
changes in consumption, diversion of foodgrains for fuel, adverse weather 
and climate change, increase in crude oil prices , improvement in income 
and living standards and increase in freight rate.  
 
The Committee note that various steps have been taken by the 
Government to contain the price rise which include measures like 
augmenting domestic supplies of wheat and pulses thro ugh imports at 
reduced rates of duty and ban on imports; and reduction in import duty on 
edible oils etc. The Government has also imposed stock limits for wheat, 
pulses, edible oil, oilseeds and rice. On the monetary side, RBI has 
increased CRR by .25 points on two occasions to reduce money supply in 
the market to reduce inflationary pressures on prices. For improving 
productivity and production in the medium -term in the agricultural sector, 
the Government have taken initiatives such as National Food Securi ty 
Mission and Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana. The Committee note that 40 
per cent of the edible oil requirement of the country is met by the imports 
which is susceptible to international pressures on price front. Therefore, its 
impact is felt on the price rise of the edible oils in domestic sector also. 
The Committee feel that although the Government is vigilant about the 
adverse impact of price rise on the economy of the country culminating 
into inflationary trends yet the measures taken by the Government are not 
proving to be effective in bringing down the prices of the essential 
commodities. The Committee desire that the Department in consultation 
with other concerned Departments should chalk out a long -term strategy 
to meet such a situation so that it do es not assume gigantic proportions, 
affecting the development and growth of the country. They should also 
take such steps that would insulate the prices in the country from 
international price fluctuations”.  
 
1.13.     The Department in their reply stated as below: 
 
“This Department has already communicated to M/o Agriculture and 
Department of Food about the recommendations of Standing Committee 
on long -term strategy for improving productivity and production in the 

  
agricultural sector. As stated under repl y to para 3.9, the Indian market is 
fairly insulated from international price fluctuations. The prices of essential 
commodities in the domestic market have not followed the steep rise in 
international prices during the first half of 2008, owing to the slew  of 
measures-monetary, fiscal and administrative-announced by Government, 
which did not allow pass through of the high prices of international market.  
In addition, vulnerable sections of the population have been protected.  
The CIP of wheat and rice has n ot been raised since 2002.  Recently, 
imported edible oil and pulses have also been included for distribution to 
State Governments for PDS”. 
 
  

  
1.14 The Committee are unhappy over the casual approach adopted by 
the Government in treating the specific reco mmendation of the Committee 
to chalk out a long -term strategy in consultation with other concerned 
Departments for improving productivity and production of foodgrains in 
the country. The Department of Consumer Affairs have washed their hand 
off by simply p assing on the recommendation to the Department of 
Agriculture and Department of Food without taking any follow -up action on 
their part. The Committee deplore this attitude of the Department of 
Consumer Affairs and feel that merely passing of their recommen dation 
will not give any tangible results. While reiterating their recommendation, 
the Committee would like to be apprised of the long -term strategy chalked 
out by the Department of Consumer Affairs and the follow -up action taken 
by the Department of Agric ulture and Department of Food for improving 
productivity and production of foodgrains in the country. 
 
 

  
(D) Need to implement the various welfare programmes/schemes/ 
projects. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7 Para No. 5.18) 
 
1.15. The Committee in their earlier Report had recommended as below:- 
 
“From the Statement of demand and estimated production of foodgrains, 
the Committee observed that the production of foodgrains during the last 
five years was less as compared to their demand. For example, in     
2002-03, the demand of rice was 86.59 million tonnes whereas the 
production was only 71.82 million tonnes. Similarly, during 2004 -05, the 
demand of rice was 89.24 million tonnes but the production was 83.13 
million tonnes. In the case of wheat, pulses and oilseeds , the production 
was less than the demand in the country for the last five years. The 
reasons for less production of foodgrains are stated to be increase in 
population and diversion of agricultural land for non -agricultural purpose 
such as urbanization, ro ads, industries etc. In order to increase the 
production of agricultural produce, the Government of India has been 
implementing a number of schemes viz. Integrated Cereals Development 
Programme (ICDP), Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and 
Maize (ISOPOM). The Department of Agricultural and Cooperation has 
also taken a number of initiatives to enhance the production of foodgrains 
during 2007 -08 which includes two major programmes namely, The 
National Food Security Mission (NFSM) and Rashtriya K rishi  Vikas 
Yojana (RKVY) to incentivize the states to invest more in agricultural and 
allied sectors. A National Policy for Farmers 2007 has also been approved 
for economic well being of farmers. The National Rainfed Area Authority 
(NRAA) has been operat ionalized to coordinate and address the problem 
of rainfed agriculture. Besides, a Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme 
(WBCIS) has been introduced in addition to National Agricultural 
Insurance Scheme to cover the farmers‟ risk. The Committee are of the 
opinion that unless and until these schemes and programmes are 
implemented in letter and spirit, the situation will remain unchanged. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should make 
sincere efforts to persuade the State Governments to imp lement the 
aforesaid programmes /schemes/ projects to maintain sustainable 
agricultural production to meet the requirement of increasing population in 
the country”. 
 
 
1.16 The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“Integrated Cereals Development Programme is a component of 
the Macro Management Programme, a Centrally Sponsored Scheme of 
the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation. This scheme provides 
flexibility to the States to develop and pursue activities on the basis of their 
regional priority through their Work Plan. 
  

  
 In the year 2008 -09, Macro Management of Agriculture (MMA) 
Scheme has been revised to improve its efficacy in 
supplementing/complementing the efforts of the States towards 
enhancement of agricultural production and productivity.  The revised 
MMA scheme comprises 11 sub -schemes relating to crop production and 
natural resource management. 
 
On the basis of the major cropping systems followed in the country, 
schemes for three cereal -based major cropping systems like Rice  Based 
Cropping system; Wheat Based Cropping System; and Coarse Cereals 
Based Cropping System were formulated.  These included (i) Integrated 
Cereals Development Programme in Rice Based Cropping Systems Areas 
(ICDP-Rice), (ii) Integrated Cereals Developmen t Programme in Wheat 
Based Cropping Systems Areas (ICDP-Wheat); and (ii) Integrated Cereals 
Development Programme in Coarse Cereals Based cropping Systems 
Areas (ICDP-Coarse Cereal). However, assistance to all the cereal crops 
will be provided under all the schemes.  
 
 In order to give a boost to the production of pulses and oilseeds to 
meet the food and nutritional security, a new component of Integrated 
Crop Production Programmes for Pulses, Oilseeds and Maize has been 
included as one of the Crop Producti on Programmes under the revised 
Macro Management of Agriculture Scheme.  However, to avoid 
overlapping it has been decided that the crop production programme for 
pulses, oilseeds and maize under the revised MMA scheme will only be 
implemented in the area n ot covered under the Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme of Integrated scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil palm and Maize 
(ISOPOM). 
 
  In view of the stagnating food grain production and increasing 
consumption need of the growing population, the NDC in its 53 rd meeting 
held on 29th May, 2007  adopted a resolution to enhance the production of 
rice, wheat and pulses by 10 million, 8 million and 2 million tonnes 
respectively by 2011. 
 
  Accordingly, on 16 th August, 2007 Government has approved the 
„National Food Security M ission (NFSM)‟ a Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
to operationalize the resolution passed by the NDC.  It has three 
components - (i) National Food Security Mission – Rice (NFSM -Rice);    
(ii) National Food Security Mission – Wheat (NFSM -Wheat); and            
(iii) National Food Security Mission – Pulses (NFSM-Pulses). The Mission 
aims at increasing production of rice, wheat and pulses through a set of 
measures such as area expansion, productivity enhancement in selected 
districts; restoring soil fertility; creat ing employment opportunities; and 
enhancing farm level economy to restore the confidence of the farmers of 
the targeted districts.  The NFSM -Rice would be implemented in 133 
Districts, NFSM-wheat in 138 districts and NFSM-Pulses in 168 Districts. 
 

  
The scheme aims to target the select districts in the country by 
making available the developed technologies to the farmers through a 
series of planned interventions. A close monitoring mechanism at various 
levels would ensure that these interventions reac h the targeted 
beneficiaries.  
 
Under the Mission, 305 districts will be covered; 20 million hectares 
of rice, 13 million hectares of wheat and 4.5 million hectares of pulses are 
included in these districts that roughly constitute about 50 per cent of 
cropped area for wheat and rice. For pulses, an additional 20 per cent 
cropped area would be created.  
 
  There is a major shift in approach to target low producing districts as 
against the high productivity districts. The highest productivity districts are 
reaching a plateau in productivity and exploitation of natural resources is 
now overstretched. The opportunity of a quantum jump in productivity in 
these districts is very low. As against this, the gap in potential yield and 
actual yield in eastern and centr al States is very wide even though there is 
very good irrigation coverage. The districts identified for rice and wheat 
contribute about  37.33 percent and 42.6 percent of the national production 
of the respective crops with an average productivity level of   1714 kg/ha 
and  2339 kg/ha. If the productivity of these districts increases to the level 
of national average i.e. 2127 kg/ha for rice and 2671 kg/ha for wheat, the 
gain in production would be about 10.0 million tons in rice and 8.0 million 
tons in wheat  and 2.0 million tones of pulses  from identified districts. The 
pattern of assistance for three components of the Mission is given 
(annexure IV).  
 
Government has also approved a new State Plan Scheme of 
Additional Central Assistance (ACA) for agriculture  and allied sectors, 
namely, Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) has been launched during 
2007-08, with a view to reorient the current agricultural development 
strategies, to meet the needs of the farmers and for fresh efforts by the 
Central and State Governments to rejuvenate agriculture so as to achieve 
4% annual growth during the 11 th Five Year Plan,  with an envisaged 
outlay of Rs. 25,000/- crore for the 11th Five Year Plan. 
 
        The broad objective of RKVY is to incentivize the States to increase 
public investment to achieve 4% growth rate in agriculture and allied 
sectors in the 11th Five Year Plan.  The new scheme requires the States to 
prepare District and State Agricul ture Plans and to increase or at least 
maintain the percentage share of expenditure in the agriculture and allied 
sectors in the State Plan.  The allocation of funds to the States is based 
on the net un -irrigated area, gross state domestic product in agric ulture 
and allied sectors to be attained by the end of the 11 th Five Year Plan, and 
increase in the State Plan expenditure in agriculture and allied sectors.  
The ACA is made available to the States as 100% grant. The States have 
been provided flexibility and autonomy in the process of selection, 
planning, approval and execution of schemes.  The State Level 

  
Sanctioning Committee (SLSC) headed by the Chief Secretary approves 
the projects under RKVY.  The distribution of the funds among the States 
is in two streams – Stream-I and Stream-II.  Under Stream-I, at least 75% 
of the RKVY funds are made available for specific projects as part of the 
State and District Plans.  Under Stream -II, upto 25% of the total RKVY 
funds to a State are made available for strengthening existing State Sector 
schemes.  The funds are routed through the State Agriculture Department, 
which is the nodal Department for the scheme. 
 
 Under the Scheme, the following broad activities have been 
identified for focus attention - Integrated Deve lopment of Food Crops, 
including coarse cereals, minor millets and pulses; Agriculture 
Mechanization; Soil Health and Productivity; Development of Rainfed 
Farming Systems; Integrated Pest Management; Market Infrastructure; 
Horticulture; Animal Husbandry, D airying and Fisheries; Concept to 
Completion Projects that have definite timelines; Support to Institutions 
that promote Agriculture and Horticulture, etc.; Organic and Bio -fertilizers; 
and Innovative Schemes. These activities are only indicative in nature. 
 
 The Scheme has been operationalized with effect from         
August, 2007 and has evoked a good response from the States during 
2007-08 with 22 States holding the meetings of the SLSC headed by the 
Chief Secretary to clear the projects.  During the yea r 2007-08 an amount 
of Rs.1246.89 crore including  Rs.48 crore @ Rs. 10 lakh per district for 
preparation of District Agriculture Plan(DAP) was released to States under 
the RKVY.   
 
 For the current fiscal a revised outlay of Rs.2891.70 crore has been 
provided under the RKVY.  An amount of Rs.1863.77 crore has been 
released to eligible States.  This includes Rs.6.40 crore @ Rs.10 lakh per 
district for preparation of District Agriculture Plans to five States and three 
UTs.  State -wise allocation and release of funds under RKVY during  
2007-08 and 2008-09 is at (Annexure-V). 
 
Further in order to provide flexibility to the States in implementation 
based on regionally differentiated approach, to promote crop 
diversification and to provide focused approach to the  programmes, a 
Centrally Sponsored Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oilpalm and 
Maize (ISOPOM) is being implemented from 1.4.2004 in 14 major oilseeds 
and pulses growing States.  
 
As a result of concerted efforts, the production of oilseeds 
increased from 25.19 million tones in 2003 -04 to 28.82 million tones in 
2007-08. This was brought about not only by increase in area but also by 
improving the productivity from 1064 kg. to 1086 kg. per hectare during 
the above period. There has been a record produc tion of 28.82 million 
tones of oilseeds in the country during 2007-08 (4th Advance Estimate). 
 
 

  
The pulses production in the country increased from 14.91 million 
tones in 2003 -04 to 15.11 million tones in 2007 -08.  There has been a 
record production of 15. 11 million tones of pulses during 2007 -08 (4 th 
Advance Estimate).  Despite a record production of oilseeds and pulses 
during 2007 -08, the production of these crops is less than the domestic 
demand in the country  
 
  In order to make implementation the ISOP OM more effective, the 
States are advised to enhance the production of major Oilseeds and 
Pulses in potential areas. The States have also been advised to bring 
additional area in potential regions of the States under oilseeds and 
pulses through intercroppi ng and use of rice fallows. To monitor the 
implementation of ISOPOM, the scheme is reviewed by the Department 
by organizing regional meetings and filed implementation through National 
Level Monitoring Teams (NALMOTs). Beside this, the Scheme is also 
monitored through State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC) under the 
Chairmanship of the Secretary (Agriculture) of States”. 
 
 

  
1.17 The Committee find that the Government have taken various 
measures to increase the production of foodgrains by improving the 
efficacy of the „Micro Management of Agriculture (MMA)‟ Scheme. They 
also find that though the Planning Commission has been liberal ly 
allocating a huge fund to increase the production of agriculture produce, 
the Government could not release more than half of the funds to 
States/UTs for implementation of the schemes namely (i) National Food 
Security Mission (NFSM) and (ii) Rashtriya Kr ishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY).  In 
this regard, the Committee regret to observe that during 2008 -09, out of the 
total allocation of Rs.1164.05 crore, only Rs.659.40 crore was released  
under the National Food Security Mission (NFSM).  In the case of Rastriya 
krishi Vikas Yojna (RKVY), out of a total allocation of Rs. 3165.67 crore, 
only Rs.1863.77 crore was released during the years 2007 -08 and 2008 -09.  
The Committee are of the view that  in order to derive maximum benefits of 
the schemes, it is essential that the allocated funds are released and 
utilized in time.  The Committee take a serious view of the matter and 
stress upon the Department of Consumer Affairs to seriously take up the 
matter with the Department of Agriculture for timely release of funds 
allocated under the aforesaid schemes for increase in the production of 
foodgrains in the country.   
 

  
(E) Need to increase foodgrains production 
 
  Recommendation (Sl. No. 9 Para No. 6.17) 
 
1.18. The Committee in their earlier Report observed as follow:- 
  
“The Committee observe that the Government of India is fully committed 
to provide food security to every citizen in the country. Due to less 
production of wheat in the country in 2006 -07, there was reduction in 
wheat stock in the Central Pool. The Committe e have been informed that 
at the start of RMS 2007 -08, i.e. as on 01/04/07, the stock of wheat in the 
Central Pool was 45.6 lakh tonnes against the buffer norms of 40 lakh 
tonnes. The procurement of wheat in RMS 2007 was only 111 lakh tonnes 
against the re quirement of 150 lakh tonnes for the TPDS and other 
welfare schemes. In order to make up the shortfall as well as to keep the 
prices stable and ensure adequate buffer stock, the Government took 
decision to import wheat for the Central Pool. The custom duty  on import 
of wheat was reduced to zero and a ban on export of wheat and rice was 
imposed. Accordingly, in 2006 -07, a quantity of 54.540 lakh metric tonnes 
of wheat was imported from Australia, Canada, CIS, France, Argentina 
and Hungary. Besides, a quantit y of 13.06 lakh metric tonnes was 
contracted for the year 2007-08.  
 
The Committee find that despite putting a ban on export of wheat 
and rice and reduction of custom duty in the import of pulses to zero, the 
Government could not succeed in curbing the pri ce rise of essential 
commodities. However, consequent upon the ban on export of wheat, the 
prices of wheat declined by 3.92 per cent during this period. The 
Committee fail to understand the reasons for import of wheat in 2007 -08 
when the availability of wh eat in the country exceeded the demand. In the 
opinion of the Committee, the Government could not take timely steps to 
address the issues viz. high open market prices, less than targeted 
production, less market arrivals, negative market sentiments and more  
private participation which contributed to less procurement of wheat. With 
the high rate of inflation, the prices of foodstuffs have risen considerably 
and the consumers are hit from all sides. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government shoul d make sincere and timely efforts 
to address the aforementioned issues. In this regard, the Government 
should also take steps for procurement of wheat directly from the farmers 
by giving them remunerative prices. To increase the production of 
foodgrains in the country, the farmers should also be encouraged to adopt 
modern methods and modern technology of agriculture. The Government 
should also ensure that the buffer stocks of foodgrains especially wheat 
and rice in the Central Pool do not fall below the buf fer norms so as to 
meet any eventualities in future”.  
 
 
 

  
1.19. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“A 1. As regards encouraging farmers to adopt modern methods and 
modern technology of agriculture, the Deptt. of Agriculture & C ooperation 
has been implementing the following programmes. 
 
a.   Support to State Extension Programmes for Extension 
Reforms – This Scheme launched during 2005 -06, aims at making 
extension system farmer driven and farmer accountable by way of new 
institutional arrangements for technology dissemination in the form of an 
Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) at district level to 
operationalize the extension reforms.  ATMA will has active participation of 
farmers / farmer groups, NGOs, Krishi Vigyan  Kendras, Panchayati Raj 
Institutions and other stakeholder operating at district level and below.  
581 districts level ATMAs have been established. Gender concerns are 
being mainstreamed by mandating that 30% of resources on programmes 
and activities are allocated for women farmers and extension 
functionaries. Since inception, out of total 49 lakh farmers‟ beneficiaries, 
13.96 lakh women farmers (28.49%) have participated in various 
extension activities under the scheme.   
 
b.   Mass Media Support to Agriculture: This scheme is focusing on 
two initiatives.  The first is use of Doordarshan infrastructure for providing 
agriculture related information and knowledge to the farming community.  
180 Narrow casting Centres, 18 Regional Centres and 1 National C entre 
of Doordarshan Kendras telecast agricultural programmes for 30 minutes, 
five days a week. Programmes of Regional Kendras and some 
Narrowcasting centres are being repeated the next day on respective 
Regional Satellite Channel.  Audio/ Video spots on em erging issues viz. 
Rabi/Kharif campaign,   Kisan Call Centre, Kisan Credit Card  etc. are also  
publicized  through the programme using free commercial time. Live „Crop 
Seminars‟ on DD involving farmers and experts have also been organized. 
 
The other comp onent of the mass media initiative is use of 96 FM 
Transmitter of AIR to broadcast area specific agricultural programme with 
30 minutes radio transmission in the evening six days a week.  
 
c. Kisan Call Centers  – The scheme was launched on 
21stJanuary„04 to provide agricultural information to the farming 
community through toll free telephone lines. A country wide common 
eleven digit number „1800 -800-1551‟ has been allocated for KCC. The 
replies to the queries of the farming community are being given in 21 local 
languages. Calls are attended from 6.00 am to 10.00 pm on all 7 days of 
the week.  Since inception of the scheme, over 30.78 lakh calls have been 
received upto 31st December, 2008. 
2.  The government is also taking steps to  minimize procurement and t o 
ensure that stocks of essential foodgrains do not fall below the buffer 
stock norms.  Whenever necessary imports are also being resorted to, in 
orders to supplement domestic production”. 

  
1.20 In their original report, the Committee had observed that ther e was 
reduction of wheat stock in the Central Pool and had, therefore, 
recommended that the Government should take timely steps which 
included procurement of wheat directly from                                                                                                     
the farmers by giving them remunerative prices to address various issues 
such as high open market prices, less than targeted production, less 
market arrivals and more private participation. The Committee find from the 
action taken rep ly that the Department of Consumer Affairs have not 
responded to the important issue of direct procurement from farmers 
raised by the Committee in their recommendation.  The Committee 
deplores this attitude of the Department.  The Committee are of the view  
that if the foodgrains are procured from the farmers directly at 
remunerative prices, the farmers would be motivated and thereby increase 
production of foodgrains by adopting modern methods and technology in 
agriculture.  While reiterating their earlier r ecommendation the Committee 
are of the firm view that the Department of Consumer Affairs should make 
all necessary arrangements to procure foodgrains directly from the farmers 
by giving them remunerative prices. 
 
 

  
 
(F) Need to pass Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill 
 
  Recommendation (Sl. No. 12 Para No. 8.13) 
 
1.21. The Committee in their earlier Report had recommended as below:- 
 
“The Committee are concerned to note that the availability of agricultural 
land is decreasing mainly due to increase in the pop ulation and diversion 
of agricultural land for non -agricultural purposes such as urbanization, 
roads, industries etc. The Committee have been informed that the land is 
being acquired for setting up Special Economic Zones (SEZs) to generate 
employment throu gh industries. Till now, the Government have given 
approval to 404 projects under SEZ for about 54,280 hectares land from 
23 States/UTs out of which 95 approvals are in respect of State Industrial 
Development Corporation of State Government Agencies involv ing land 
areas of approximately 2000 hectares. The Committee note that the 
Empowered Group of Ministers (EGOM) had discussed some important 
issues relating to SEZ viz (i) Norms for disposal of pending applications for 
SEZ; (ii) Fixing of minimum as well as  maximum limit of land required for 
multi-product SEZs; (iii) Reformulation of a comprehensive Land 
Acquisition Act; and (iv) Working out a comprehensive Resettlement and 
Rehabilitation Policy.  
 
  The Committee further note that to maintain the sustainabl e 
agricultural production to meet the requirement of agricultural production 
in the country, the Ministry of Agriculture has formulated a 19 Action 
Points of National Land Use Policy Outline (NLPOS) for prevention of 
diversion of agricultural land for non agricultural purposes by the State 
Governments. The Committee are of the opinion that   setting up of large 
number of SEZ will affect not only agriculture adversely but also threaten 
food security and will undermine availability of resources for developmen t. 
Industrialization is good for the prosperity of the country but not at the cost 
of agricultural land. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government 
should not give the formal approval without obtaining a certificate from the 
State Government to the effect that waste land/degraded land/barren land 
was not available in the district for setting up of SEZ in the particular areas 
of State. The State Government should identify wasteland for 
development in lieu of agricultural land being acquired. The Co mmittee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should give priority to acquire 
only barren and waste lands not exceeding 10% of the total land required 
under the SEZ. In case of utilization of agricultural land, if required for the 
purpose, the State Governments should try to compensate the agricultural 
land by improving the productivity of other agricultural lands. Further, they 
should try to locate other barren land and develop them into agriculturally 
sound productive land and formulate a Land Use Pol icy to minimize and 
regulate the conversion of agricultural land for other uses. The Committee 
are aware that the Land Acquisition Bill, 2007 is pending in Lok Sabha for 
discussion. The Committee desire that in the meantime the Government 

  
should frame mode l rules under the Land Acquisition Act for early 
implementation of the Act”.  
 
1.22 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
“The land and its management are under the exclusive legislative and 
administrative jurisdiction of the States as provided in Entry No. 18 of List 
of II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.  Acquisition 
of land for industrial or for development purposes including Special 
Economic Zones (SEZs) is being done by the concerned State 
Government. 
 
 However, Ministry of Commerce and Industry has been requested 
that prime agricultural land should not be acquired for establishing SEZs 
and these Zones need to be established envariably on wastelands.  In 
unavoidable situations, if it is necessary to acquir e agricultural land for a 
SEZ, the requiring body must develop equal area of wastelands 
simultaneously so that the loss of agricultural land could be compensated 
(copy of the letter enclosed). 
 The Department of Land Resources, Ministry of Rural Developmen t 
has formulated a revised National Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policyt 
(NRRP), 2007, which was approved by the Cabinet on 11 th October, 2007, 
and the same have been published in the Gazette of India dated 31 st 
October, 2007.  The para 1.4 of NRRP, 200 7 inter-alia envisages that as 
far as possible, projects may be set up on wasteland, degraded land or 
un-irrigated land.  Acquisition of agricultural land for non-agricultural use in 
the project may be kept to the minimum, multi -cropped land may be 
avoided to the extend possible for such purposes, and acquisition of 
irrigated land, if unavoidable, may be kept to the minimum.   
  The Land Acquisition (amendment) Bill, 2007 was introduced in the 
Lok Sabha on 6 th December, 2007 and it is referred to the Standi ng 
Committee on Rural Development for examination.  The Committee has 
presented its Thirty -ninth Report, covering the Land Acquisition 
(amendment) Bill, 2007, to the Lok Sabha on 21.10.08 and laid the same 
in Rajya Sabha on the same date. 
 In this Report, the Committee has made detailed observations on 
the Bill and has made a number of recommendations. These 
recommendations have been examined and views of the Department 
firmed up.  The official amendment to the Bill has been developed by this 
Department in consultation with the Ministry of Law.  These official 
amendments were considered by the Cabinet and the revised Bill has 
been passed by the Lok Sabha on 25 th February, 2009 and sent to Rajya 
Sabha for consideration.  However, the Bill has been lapsed due to 
dissolution of the Fourteenth Lok Sabha.  This Bill is under consideration 
of the Government.  

  
 This Department had requested to Ministry of Agriculture to take 
necessary action to convene the meeting of the National Land Use and 
Conservation Board (NLB C), so that the issues relating to conversion of 
agriculture land for non-agriculture purposes including SEZ, formation of a 
National Land Use Policy, etc. could be discussed.  However, Ministry of 
Agriculture vide their note No. I -50/2008-NLM-I dated 24 th July, 2008 that 
Planning Commission has discontinued the National Land Use and 
Conservation Board vides their D.O. letter No. 11021/2/2003 -Afr. Dated 
13th August, 2004.  This Department has again requested to Ministry of 
Agriculture for the taking necessa ry action for revival of the National Land 
Use and conservation Board on 19th Febraury, 2009”.   
 

  
1.23 The Committee in its earlier report had observed that agricultural 
land was being acquired for setting up Special Economic Zone (SEZ) to 
generate employment through industries and had recommended that the 
Government should formulate a Land Use Policy to deal with the issues 
relating to conversion of agricultural land for other uses. The Committee 
have been informed that the Land Acquisition (Amendme nt) Bill, 2007, as 
revised by the Cabinet was passed by the Lok Sabha on 25th February, 2009 
and sent to Rajya Sabha for consideration but the same has lapsed due to 
dissolution of the Fourteenth Lok Sabha.  Since the Bill deals with 
important matters rela ting to acquisition of land for setting up of the 
Special Economic Zone (SEZ), etc. the Committee recommend that the 
Government should make sincere efforts to re -introduce the Land 
Acquisition (Amendment) Bill during the next Session of Parliament. The 
Department of Food and Public Distribution should vigorously pursue the 
matter with the Department of Agriculture for revival of National Land Use 
and Conservation Board to enable them to decide the issue relating to 
conversion of agriculture land for non -agricultural purpose, including SEZ 
and formulation of Land Use Policy. 
 

  
(G) Need to amend penal provisions of Essential Commodities Act, 1955 
& Prevention of Black -marketing of Essential Commodities and 
Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17 Para No. 11.14) 
 
1.24   The Committee had recommended as below:- 
“The Committee note that the Department of Consumer Affairs is 
entrusted with the responsibility to prevent unethical trade practices like 
hoarding and blackmarketing through two Acts viz. The Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 and Prevention of Blackmarketing of Essential 
Commodities and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 
1980. Action against hoarders and blackmarketers is undertaken by t he 
State Governments under the provision of these acts. The Department of 
Consumer Affairs from time to time takes views of the State 
Governments/UTs to know whether there is any lacuna in the Acts due to 
which most of the unscrupulous persons go scot free  despite serious 
offences. From the information furnished by the Government, the 
Committee find that despite a large number of raids conducted by the 
enforcement machinery of State Governments/UT Administration, the 
number of persons prosecuted and convict ed were very minimal which 
may be due to shortcomings in the Acts. The Secretary, Department of 
Consumer Affairs during evidence stated that the provisions of the Acts 
are adequate provided these are implemented properly with vigour. 
However, he admitted that due to technology used by miscreants, they try 
to get out of the clutches of the law. The Committee feel that since the 
number of persons arrested and convicted under the Acts are on the rise, 
indicating the corresponding rise in cases of hoarding and blackmarketing, 
there is inadequacy in the provisions of the Acts to take action against 
unscrupulous persons indulging in hoarding and blackmarketing of 
essential commodities. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that the Government should make am endments in the penal provisions of 
the Acts in consultation with the States/UTs so that the offenders do not 
escape for want of the requisite provision in the law”. 
 
1.25 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
“In the  Report of t he Standing Committee, the Committee had desired 
that in view of the low convictions in such cases, the Department should 
examine whether there is any lacunae in the Act due to which most of 
them go scot free despite serious offences.  The outcome of the 
examination alongwith the suggestions of the  of the Department for 
bringing in any new amendment to meet the situation may be reported to 
the Committee within six months of the presentation of this report to the 
Parliament.  Accordingly, Secretary (CA) had vide his D.O.letter dated 16th 
June, 2008 addressed to the Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs, 
requested the State Governments to give their views on the 

  
recommendation made by the Committee .  However, only 17 States had 
responded to this letter and non e of the States had suggested any review 
or amendment of the existing provisions of the Essential Commodities Act 
and the Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of 
Essential Commodities Act.  Accordingly, the Lok Sabha Secretariat had 
been informed that the available provisions are adequate, if properly 
implemented, to achieve the desired objectives.  Hence the need for 
further amendment in the penal provisions of the Acts is not required at 
present”. 

  
1.26 The Committee are distressed to note that the Government could not 
obtain the suggestions/views from more than 17 States as to whether there 
was any lacuna in the penal provisions of the „Prevention of Black 
Marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 
1980‟ due to  which most of unscrupulous persons go scot free despite 
serious offences. It is a matter of serious concern that the Department did 
not consider it necessary to obtain the views of other States/UTs as to why 
there was low conviction as compared to the num ber of raids conducted 
and cases registered by the Enforcement Team of the States. The 
Committee are of the view that due to minor loopholes/infirmities etc. in the 
Act, the cases are dismissed in the Court of Law on flimsy grounds. The 
Committee desire that the Government should act with greater seriousness 
and make sincere efforts to amend the Act to make it more stringent so that 
the offenders do not escape for want of the requisite provision in the law. 
 

  
(H) Need to ensure compliance of State Govts/UT Administrations 
           in furnishing information to the Central Government 
 
Recommendation (Sl. Nos. 18&19 Para Nos. 11.15&11.16.9) 
 
1.27    The Committee in their earlier report had recommended as below:- 
“The Committee note that Essential Commodities  Act, 1955 and 
Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential 
Commodities Act, 1980 empowers the State Governments/UTs to take 
action against the unscrupulous persons indulging in hoarding and 
blackmarketing of essential commodities.  From the information furnished 
by the Department of Consumer Affairs, the Committee find that during 
2008, the rate of conviction of the persons arrested is very low as 
compared to the persons prosecuted for violation of the Essential 
Commodities Act, 195 5. Out of 1,76,350 persons arrested during this 
period, 3416 persons were prosecuted and only 770 persons were 
convicted. It is more surprising that in Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Kerala 
and Uttar Pradesh where 12,367, 22,867, 58, 346 and 19,869 respectively 
raids were conducted but not a single person was convicted. In respect of 
Punjab, 20,584 raids were convicted but only 15 persons were arrested 
and out of 4 prosecution, only one person was convicted under the said 
Acts. The Committee are not satisfied wit h the argument of Department of 
Consumer Affairs that the enforcement of the Essential Commodities Acts 
lies with the State Governments and Union Territories to take action 
against the hoarders and blackmarketers. In the opinion of the Committee, 
the Central Government cannot shrink with its responsibility for the proper 
implementation of the Acts. According to the Department, going by the 
„NIL‟ reports sent by some State Governments/UTs, it can be presumed 
that these State Governments/UTs might not have co nducted any raids or 
not have detained any persons for indulging in malpractices in essential 
commodities. The Committee deplore the lackadaisical approach of State 
Governments/UTs in either not furnishing any „monthly action taken 
reports‟ or by giving „N IL‟ reports. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Department should strengthen its enforcement 
machinery and direct the State Government/UTs to conduct regular raids 
to catch hold the hoarders and blackmarketers who create artificial 
scarcity leading to price rise and to ensure that the persons arrested are 
prosecuted strictly in accordance with the law of land. It will also help the 
Government to keep check over the rising in prices of essential 
commodities.  
   The Committee note that as per Section 3 of the „Prevention of 
Black-Marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities 
Act, 1980‟, the State Governments/UTs are required to report the details 
of detention cases to the Central Government within 7 days from the date 
of ap proval of detention case by the State Governments/UTs. The 
Committee find that only 5 State Governments have furnished information 
in this regard to the Department of Consumer Affairs during the year 2007 
and 2008 (upto 18.09.2008). The Committee are of th e view that other 

  
State Governments have not furnished any information so it may be 
construed that except 5 State Governments/UTs, other State 
Governments/UTs have not made any detention under the Act. It appears 
to the Committee that the remaining States/ UTs are not serious in the 
implementation of the Acts and, therefore, Department of Consumer 
Affairs is being kept in the dark by most of the State Governments by not 
abiding by Section 3 of the aforesaid Act. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the S tate Governments should be persuaded to supply 
the information of detention cases within the prescribed time limit as per 
the Act”.  
 
1.28 The Ministry in their reply have stated as under:- 
“The enforcement of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 lies with 
the State Governments/ Union Territories. The State Governments/UT 
Administrations have been delegated powers to take necessary action 
under the provisions of both “The Essential Commodities Act, 1955” and 
“The Prevention of Blackmarketing of Essential Com modities Act, 1980”, 
to prevent mal -practices in    essential   commodities.    Besides, Central 
Government  is also regularly monitoring actions being taken by various 
States/UTs under the aforementioned two Acts. 
       Directions have been given to Stat es/UTs from time to time to take 
necessary actions under both the Acts to prevent hoarding and smuggling.      
Secretary (Consumer Affairs) had,  vide his d.o. letter dt. 14.06.2007 
advised Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs,  to strengthen the 
enforcement machinery to prevent mal practices in essential commodities 
and take necessary action against the unscrupulous persons indulging in 
hoarding and blackmarketing of essential commodities. In addition to the 
above the recommendations of the Committee contai ned in its  24 th  
Report  on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of  Department of Consumer 
Affairs, have also been communicated to the State Governments/UTs vide 
Secretary (Consumer Affairs)‟s d.o. letter No.2/1/2008 -ECR&E dated 
16.06.2008 for taking immediate a ction to check price rise in essential 
commodities and keep this Department posted with the action taken by 
them. For this purpose this Department has asked all state 
Governments/UT Administrations to submit monthly reports to the Central 
Government (this Department) indicating the action taken under the 
provisions of these two Acts.  Conferences with the Secretaries of 
Consumer Affairs, Food & Civil Supplies Departments of all States/UTs 
are held by this Department periodically in which all the State 
Governments/UT Administrations are emphasized upon to take necessary 
actions under the provisions of these two Acts to check hoardings, 
smugglings etc. of essential commodities by unscrupulous 
traders/persons. Another meeting with State Secretaries has been hel d on 
16th June, 2008 in which it has been emphasized upon them to take all 
necessary measures    to prevent hoarding and blackmarketing which lead 
to non -availability of essential commodities coupled with rise in prices. 
Further, periodical video conferenc es are also arranged with States/UTs 

  
under the chairpersonship of Additional Secretary (Consumer Affairs) 
wherein the need for taking effective action under these two Acts by the 
States/UTs is reiterated.  So far seven such video conferences have been 
held between May, 2006 and May, 2008.  This was also taken up in the 
Chief Secretaries conference held under the chairmanship of Cabinet 
Secretary on 22.04.2008.   
 
Moreover vide this Department‟s d.o. letter Nos.13(1)/2007 -ECR&E 
dated 15.12.2008 and 23.12.2008 the State Governments/UT 
Administrations were requested, inter -alia, to furnish the action taken 
reports in time  and also furnish reasons for low prosecution/conviction 
vis-à-vis the number of arrests.  It is seen that on ly 15 States/UTs have 
responded of which 10 of them have not given any specific reason.  The 
following 5 State Governments/UTs have given the specific reasons  
indicated as under: 
 
(i). ANDHRA PRADESH :  As per Section 6( C ) (2), if a person, against 
whom prosecution has been launched the stock confiscated has to be 
returned or the value thereof should be paid.  Therefore, prosecutions are 
launched only depending upon the gravity of offence where there is a 
good case for getting conviction.  Secondly, all t he enforcement official 
under various control orders do not have any powers to arrest and  hence 
the seizure is only effected.  However, whenever any Police Officer or the 
officers having Magisterial powers inspect, the arrests are resorted to.  
Even in the Court of Law, depending upon the merits as viewed by them,  
the conviction are ordered through the case presented properly. 
  
(ii). MADHYA PRADESH:  As per the Public Distribution System(Control) 
Order, 2001, the powers of search and seizure by designate d authorities 
as laid down in clause 10 are  yet to be notified by the State Government.  
Presently, the TPDS in the State is governed by the M.P. Public 
Distribution System Scheme, 1991.  Although the number of cases 
involving irregularities are substanti al, the cases detected after due 
process of law, are only compounded by the designated authorities. 
 
(iii).TAMIL NADU:   In Tamil Nadu matters relating to Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 and several control orders made thereunder are 
dealt with and enforced  jointly by the Civil Supplies CID, regular police 
force and officials of the revenue and Civil Supplies and Consumer 
Protection Department.  Close  vigil  and  watch  by  officials  and  
formation  of check posts at State Borders are some of the effective  
measures towards prevention of smuggling of essential commodities.  
These measures helped to prevent commission of offences to a 
considerable extent.  In addition to prosecution under the Essential 
Commodities Act, several habitual offenders are detained under the 
Prevention of Black Marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential 
Commodities Act, 1980 resulting in considerable reduction of offences 
under the Essential Commodities Act 1955.  Most cases which are minor 
in nature involving very meager qua ntity of essential commodities are 

  
dealt under Section 6(A) of E.C. Act by District Collectors without initiating 
prosecution before Court.  Unlike criminal cases, the enforcing officials 
under the Essential Commodities Act have to play dual role namely (1 ) to 
launch prosecution before the court of law and (2) to initiate 6(A) 
proceedings before the District Collector.  As both these jobs are equally 
laborious and time consuming, the officials find it difficult to concentrate on 
detection of offences under Essential Commodities Act.  Further, police 
officials, while invoking the Prevention of Black Marketing and 
Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980 have to 
often attend the Collectors office.  Advisory Board and High Courts which 
is time consuming and laborious. 
 
 After completion of investigation, final reports are filed before the 
Magistrate Courts.  Magistrates deal with these cases along with other 
criminal cases.  Due to heavy pendency of cases, Magistrate Courts are 
not able to give  priority to the disposal of cases under the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955.  Since offences under the Essential Commodities 
Act impacts on food security, speedy trial is a must.  However trial in 
Essential Commodities Act cases commence long after they a re charged 
and filed in court.  If speedy trial is ensured, more conviction is possible. 
   
(iv)  ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ADMINISTRATION:   The reason for low 
prosecution/conviction vis-à-vis the number of arrests for the incidents of 
diversion of PDS foodgrain s and black marketing are almost nil in this UT 
due to the fact that the entire population of the UT is covered under the 
PDS.  The unique topography of the Islands coupled with the absence of 
any manufacturing unit making bye -products i.e. Maida, Sooji et c. of PDS 
grains helps in imposing an automatic check over the diversion and black 
marketing of PDS items in these Islands.  There has been no 
arrests/prosecution as per available records for violation under the 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and Preventi on of Black Marketing Act, 
1980 in this UT. 
 
(v) LAKSHADWEEP UNION TERRITORY ADMINISTRATION:  The Union 
Territory of Lakshadweep is very small UT where Public Distribution 
System is chanalised through a net work of Co -operative Societies which 
are under the  supervision of the Administration, which does not leave 
scope for malpractice.  The Administration is also involved in the function 
of the Cooperative Societies (Fair Price Shops) by posting the Chief 
Executives in the Cooperative Societies.  Every fortni ghtly, monthly and 
annually verification of the Fair Price Shops are also being conducted. The 
UT consists of 10 inhabited islands, the population of which varies from 
250 persons to 10,000 people.  There is hardly any private shop which is 
running with te nure of more than one lakh.  These are only small petty 
shops.  Therefore there is no scope for any malpractice. Hence no 
persons have been arrested, prosecuted or convicted for violation of 
Essential Commodities Act. 
 

  
  In addition to the above  the recom mendations of the Committee 
contained in its  27 th  Report  on Price Rise of Essential Commodities - 
Causes  and  Effects  with  special  emphasis  on  import  of  wheat  and 
enforcement of Prevention of Black Marketing and Maintenance of Supply 
of Essential Commodities Act, 1980 have  also been communicated to the 
State Governments/UTs vide Secretary (Consumer Affairs)‟s d.o. letter 
No.2/7/2007-ECR&E dated 09.02.2009 for  taking immediate action to 
supply the information of detention cases with the prescrib ed time limit as 
per the Act.  As deplored by the Standing Committee the lackadaisical 
approach of  the State Governments/UTs in either not furnishing any 
„Monthly Action Taken Reports” or by giving „Nil” Reports have also been 
communicated to them. These letters and the observations/ 
recommendations of the Committee as communication to the State 
Government/UTs would give the necessary  impetus to them  to move the 
pace of implementation of the two Acts”. 
 

  
1.29 Not being satisfied with the performance of the „Prevention of Black -
marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 
1980, the Committee had recommended:- 
(i) To conduct regular raids to apprehend  the hoarders and black 
marketers who create artificial scarcity leading to price rise 
and to ensure that the persons arrested are prosecuted in 
accordance with the Law of the Land (Para11.15). 
(ii) The State Governments should be persuaded to supply the 
information of detention cases within the prescribed time limit 
as per the Act. (Para 11.16) 
The Committee note with grave concern that the Department did not take 
the matter seriously and issued general directions to the States/UTs to take 
necessary action to prevent hoarding and smuggling. They, however, failed 
to persuade the State Government/U Ts to report the details of cases to the 
Central Government within a prescribed time. The Department also failed in 
coordinating with the States/UTs and in monitoring their functions as out of 
35 States/UTs, only 5 States/UTs namely Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, 
Tamil Nadu, Union Territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands and 
Lakshadweep have furnished the reasons for low prosecution/conviction 
viz-a-viz the number of arrest. The Committee feel that merely sending 
communications to the State Governments/U Ts would not serve the 
purpose. The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation 
would like the Department to take concerted measures at the highest level 
and inform the Committee about them. 
 
 

  
(I) Need to introduce fresh Forward Market Commission Bill 
 
  Recommendation (Sl. No. 24 Para No. 12.25) 
 
1.30. The Committee had recommended as below:- 
 
“The Committee note that the Commission had very little regulatory work 
and limited enforcement machinery as there were hardly any major 
commodities under future trading till about 10 year back. The Committee 
was informed that there were certain pre -requisites for an efficient and 
transparent future market. According to FMC, a bill has been introduced in 
Parliament to amend the Future Contract Act to strengthen the regulatory 
framework and confer autonomy on the regulator. The Committee hope 
that the bill is passed expeditiously in the Parliament and the FMC is 
conferred with requisite autonomy so that the regulatory framework is 
strengthened. 
 
1.31  The Ministry in their action taken reply stated that the passage of the 
F.C(R)Amendment Bill would strengthen the regulatory framework and confer the 
desired autonomy on the FMC. The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment 
Ordinance 2008 has lapsed with  dissolution of fourteenth Lok Sabha.  
Government will take necessary steps to introduce fresh Bill  in 15th Lok Sabha. 
 
 

  
1.32 The Committee regret to note that the regulatory framework of the 
Forward Market Commission could not strengthened and the desir ed 
autonomy conferred due to non passing of Forward Contract (Regulation) 
Amendment Bill, 2008 due to dissolution of the 14 th Lok Sabha. The 
Committee are aware of the fact that the Forward Contraction (Regulation) 
Amendment Bill was introduced in Lok Sabh a in 2008 to convert the 
ordinance to an Act. However, the Bill could not be taken up by the House 
and the ordinance lapsed on 7 th April, 2008. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that in order to strengthen and re -structure FMC, the Government 
should take ur gent necessary steps to re -introduce the Forward Contract 
(Regulation) Amendment Bill during the next Session of Parliament. 
 

  
 
(J) Need to launch massive awareness campaign 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 29 Para No. 13.31) 
 
1.33 The Committee in their earlier report had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee find that there is rampant misuse of LPG for other 
purposes.  According to the Ministry the oil marketing companies and the 
Government were very much aware of the problem and they were 
constantly inspecting the premises of the dealers and ta king punitive 
action against dealers whenever the misuse was revealed to them.  The 
Committee also note that the Ministry is going to launch a massive 
campaign against misuse.  The representative of the Ministry admitted 
during evidence that there was boun d to be some misuse.  The Ministry 
attributed the differential pricing of LPG as the main reason for the misuse 
of LPG Cylinders and so the temptation to use domestic LPG cylinders in 
the hotels or for marriage functions was very high.  The Committee desir e 
the Ministry to launch massive awareness campaign in the country to 
check the misuse of LPG cylinders for other purposes and take strong 
punitive action against the persons found involved in such activities”.  
 
1.34. The Ministry in their action taken re ply have stated that the Government 
have issued advertisements cautioning the public that use of Domestic LPG 
cylinders for non -domestic purposes is illegal, dangerous and against national 
interest.  Through these advertisements, cooperation of the general  public has 
also been sought to report any irregularity/ malpractice to the Public Sector Oil 
Marketing Companies. 
 

  
1.35 The Committee in their earlier recommendation had raised serious 
concern over the rampant misuse of domestic LPG cylinders for non 
domestic purposes and use in hotels, marriage functions, etc. and 
recommended that strong punitive action should be taken against the 
persons and officials found involved in such activities. The Government in 
their action taken reply stated that the advertise ments have been issued 
cautioning the public that use of domestic LPG cylinders for non -domestic 
purpose is illegal, dangerous and against national interest. The Committee 
doubt whether merely issue of advertisement cautioning the public against 
misuse of domestic LPG Cylinder without any follow up action will give any 
fruitful result. The Committee desire that the Government should take 
necessary follow up action to check the misuse of LPG cylinders and 
ensure that the guidelines for use of domestic LPG Cy linder are strictly 
enforced by the agency/dealer and penal action taken against the 
supplying agency or persons found violating the guidelines. 
  

  
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 3.10) 
 
2.1 The Committee note that High Powered Price Monitoring Board (HPPMB) 
set up by the Department of Consumer Affairs regularly monitors the price 
situation in the market. The Committee, however, are dismayed to note that no 
meeting of  HPPMB was held during the last two years which clearly indicates 
that the Government is not at all serious towards the interests of consumer 
welfare.  The Committee feel that when common man is hit badly in the situation 
of uncontrolled price rise, it is the responsibility of the Government to set up a 
mechanism to regularly monitor the price situation and take remedial steps. The 
Committee fails to understand as to what purpose will be served by merely 
setting up of HPPMB if it does not hold meetings for such a long period. The 
Committee, therefore recommend that  the Department should give directions to 
HPPMB to hold sittings at a fixed interval so that the Government may take 
timely action to check the price rise of Essential Commodities.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 In order to regularly monitor the price situation and take appropriate 
remedial steps Government has set up High Level Committees such as the High 
Powered Price Monitoring Board (HPPMB) and Committee of Secretaries (CoS).  
The last meeting of the HPPMB was held on March 4, 2009 and the CoS on June 
10, 2009.  Although the meetings of HPPMB were not held frequently, the 
meetings of the CoS have been held regularly.  In fact meetings of the CoS have 
often been held on a weekly/ daily basis to m onitor the prices of essential 
commodities and to advocate immediate action / intervention by the Departments 
/ Ministries concerned. From time to time suitable recommendations are also 
made by COS for consideration of Cabinet/ Cabinet Committee on Prices.   By 
this mechanism Government has been able to take timely expedient action. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 

  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 4.14) 
 
 
2.3 The Committee further note that less production of agricultural produce 
whether it is oil, pulses or wheat also contributes to the rise in prices of these 
commodities. The Committee note that the Planning Commission has constituted 
a Working Gr oup on crop husbandary, agricultural inputs, demand and supply 
projections and agricultural statistics for the Eleventh Five Year Plan. The 
Working Group has given the demand and supply projections for each year of the 
plan for foodgrains, oilseeds, sugarc ane, cotton, jute and mesta. From the 
statement of gap between demand and production of different kinds of 
foodgrains, it has been observed that there will be gap between the production 
and demand of the agricultural produce in the Eleventh Five Year Plan.  The 
Committee feel that to increase agricultural production, there is need to improve 
the condition of soil, its nutrient content, water management and to grow 
alternative crops. In the opinion of the Committee, the Agricultural Ministry should 
organize l atest researches, adopt new technologies and measures to raise 
agricultural production i.e. wheat, rice, oilseeds and pulses. The Government 
should make arrangements for telecasting the new technology for production of 
foodgrains on electronic media on the  pattern of   „Krishi Darshan‟. As suggested 
by Central Organization for Oil, Industry and Trade (COOIT), use of vegetable oil 
for bio -fuel should not be permitted as long as local production of these oils is 
short to meet the country‟s demand for food. Th e Committee, at the same time, 
also desire that conversion of vegetable oil, soya oil to bio fuel should be 
restricted; instead bio diesel plant should utilize only oil from non -edible oilseeds 
from plants grown on wasteland. The Committee, therefore, reco mmend that to 
increase supply, agriculture should be made a profitable avocation and the 
Government should give highest priority to provide the small and marginal 
farmers, opportunity for assured and remunerative marketing of their produce at 
the time of h arvesting. The nodal ministry should also direct Agriculture Ministry 
and Agriculture Research Institutes and Universities to take up the responsibility 
for providing necessary inputs, particularly seeds of appropriate varieties and the 
nutrients needed for a good and healthy crop.   
 
Reply of Government 
Improvement of soil and its nutrient contents etc. 
 
2.4 M/o Agriculture is implementing a Scheme namely "National Project on 
Management of Soil Health & Fertility". Under the scheme there is a provision for  
financial assistance for setting up of new static and mobile soil testing 
laboratories under the State Governments as well as under Private/NGOs and 
cooperative sector including Fertilizer Industry under the PPP Mode in the 
country.  The proposals are inv ited through State Project Sanctioning –cum – 
Monitoring Committee (PSMC). 
 
2.5 M/o Agriculture is also providing financial assistance to educate farmers 
about soil health and soil fertility through organizing Farmer's Fair, Front line 
Field Demonstrations  through several agencies and adopting the villages by 

  
State Soil Testing Laboratories (STLs) for demonstration on soil test based 
balanced use of fertilizers in the country. 
 
Efforts taken by the Government  to facilitate better price realization by the 
farmers 
 
2.6 In order to facilitate better price realization by the farmers through 
improved marketing opportunities at the time of harvesting, Government has 
taken a number of initiatives to implement market reforms in agriculture. 
Government of India has f ormulated a Model Agricultural Produce Marketing 
(Development & Regulation) Act (APMC Act)  and circulated to all the States/UTs 
in 2003 for making necessary amendments in their respective APMC Acts for 
bringing efficiency in the existing marketing systems and allowing the private 
markets and development of alternative marketing channels, such as, direct 
marketing, contract farming, e-trading etc.  The details of the progress of reforms 
are given in the enclosed Annexure- I.  To facilitate the implementation  of 
amended provisions, the Central Government has also formulated Model APMC 
Rules and circulated to the States/ UTs for adoption in November, 2007. So far, 
the State Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, 
Maharashtra, Orissa, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana and Karnataka have notified 
their amended APMC Rules whereas Madhya Pradesh and Haryana have 
partially amended the rules.  
 
Contract Farming: In our country contract farming has considerable potential 
where small and marginal farmers can n o longer be competitive without access 
to modern technologies and support. The contractual agreement with the farmer 
provides access to production services and credit as well as knowledge of new 
technology.  Pricing arrangements can significantly reduce th e risk and 
uncertainty of market place.  
 
2.7 Small-scale farmers are often reluctant to adopt new technologies 
because of the possible risks and costs involved. In contract farming, private 
agribusiness will usually offer improved methods and technologies  because it 
has a direct economic interest in improving farmers' production to meet its needs. 
In many instances, the larger companies provide their own extension support to 
contracting farmers to ensure that production is according to the specification. 
Skills the farmer learns through contract farming may include record keeping, 
improved methods of applying chemicals and fertilizers and knowledge of the 
importance of quality and of the demands of export markets. 
 
2.8 In order to the arrangements of contact farming, a Model law on marketing 
has been formulated by the Government of India keeping these requirements in 
view and circulated to State Governments for considering suitable amendments 
in their concerned Act to bring in required agricultural market re forms. This law 
inter-alia provides for an institutional arrangement for registration of sponsoring 
companies, recording of Contract Farming Agreement, indemnity to farmers‟ land 
and lays down a time bound dispute resolution mechanism. Since agriculture 
marketing is a State subject, it is for the State Governments to amend the APMC 
Act, wherever required.  

  
  
Implementation of Price Support Scheme: Government‟s price policy for 
agricultural commodities seeks to ensure remunerative prices to the growers for 
their produce. The price policy seeks to evolve a balanced and integrated price 
structure in the perspective of the overall needs of the economy. Towards this 
end, the Government announces each season, Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) 
for major agricultural commodities. The designated central nodal agencies 
intervene in the market for undertaking procurement operations with the objective 
that the market prices do not fall below the MSPs fixed by the Government.  
 
2.9 During the period 2004 -05 to 2008 -09, the MSP of various commodities 
have been increased substantially. A comparative table showing the MSPs of 
major crops with increase (%) during 2004-05 to 2008-09 is given hereunder: 
 
Crop Increase in MSP 
2004-05 2008-09 2008-09 over 
2004-05 (%) 
  Paddy(Grade A) 590 880 49.2 
Wheat 640 1080 68.8 
Barley 540 680 25.9 
Jowar & Bajra 515 840 63.1 
Maize 525 840 60.0 
Arhar 1390 2000 43.9 
Moong & Urad 1410 2520 78.7 
Groundnut 1500 2100 40.0 
Soyabean 1000 1390 39.0 
 
Market intervention Scheme:  Government is also implementing Market 
Intervention Scheme (MIS) on the request of the State/ UT Government for 
procurement of agricultural and horticultural commodities not covered under the 
Price Support Scheme with the aim to provide remunerative price s to the 
farmers. Under this Scheme growers of these commodities are protected from 
making distress sale in the event of bumper crop when prices fall to below the 
economic level/ cost of production. Procurement under MIS is made by the 
NAFED as a Central N odal Agency and by the State Designated Agencies. 
Losses, if any, incurred by the procuring agencies are shared by the Central 
Government and the concerned State Government on 50:50 basis (75:25 in case 
of North -Eastern States). However, the amount of loss  to be shared between 
Central Government and the concerned State Government is restricted to 25%  
of the procurement cost. Profit, if any, earned by the procuring agencies is 
retained by them. Details of implementation of MIS from 1999 -2000 to 2008-09 is 
given in Annexure II. 
 
Marketing Research and Information Network (AGMARKNET): The Ministry 
of Agriculture has also launched the IT based Central Sector Scheme of 
Marketing Research and Information Network in March, 2000 to establish a 
nation-wide information network by providing electronic connectivity to important 
Agricultural Produce Markets spread all over the country, State Agricultural 

  
Marketing Boards and Directorates. The scheme was introduced with the 
objective to collect and disseminate prices and market related data for its efficient 
and timely utilization by the producers, traders and consumers to derive 
maximum advantage out of their sales and purchases, and to increase efficiency 
of marketing by effective improvement in the existing market information system.   
 
Efforts taken by the Government for raising agricultural production 
 
2.10 (i) Seed production for raising wheat production:  State-wise improved 
wheat varieties have been developed. The recommended varieties for different 
production conditions across different wheat growing states are presented as 
follows. Breeder seed production of high yielding and disease resistant wheat 
varieties are being promoted and obsolete varieties are being avoided.  
 
Irrigated, timely sown Irrigated, late sown Rainfed, timely 
sown 
Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, Rajasthan (except Kota and Udaipur divisions) 
and Western UP (except Jhansi division), parts of J&K (Jammu and 
Kathua distt.) and parts of HP (Una dist. and Paonta valley) and 
Uttaranchal (Tarai region) 
DBW 17, PBW 502, PBW 
343, WH 542 
UP 2382 & UP 2554 - 
(for tarai area of 
Uttranchal)  
PDW 291(D), PDW 251 
(D), WH 896 (D), PDW 
233 (D) 
DBW 16, PBW 37 3, RAJ 
3765, UP 2425, PBW 226, 
PBW 509 (for Punjab only) 
UP 2526 & up 2565 - (for 
tarai area of Uttranchal) 
PBW 396, PBW 
299,  
WH 533 
Eastern UP, Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa, West Bengal, Assam and plains of 
NE States. 
K 0307, HD 2733, HD 
2824, HP 1761, PBW  
443, HUW 468, K 9107, 
NW 1012 
DBW 14, NW 2036,  HW 
2045, NW 1014,  HD 2643,  
HP 1744, HUW 234 Unnath 
Halna (K 9423) –(for eastern 
UP only) 
K 8962, K 8027, 
MACS 6145, HD 
2888 
 
Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Kota and Udaipur divisions of 
Rajasthan and Jhansi division of Uttar Pradesh 
GW 366, GW 322, GW 
273 Lok 1 
HI 8498 (D),  HI 8381(D)  
 
HD 2864, MP 4010, DL 788-
2,   Lok 1 
HI 1531, HI 1500,  
HW 2004, JWS 17, 
WH 147  
HD 4672(D), HD 
8627(D)# 
#suitable for 
resistriced irrigated 
condition also 
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Goa, plains of Tamil Nadu 

  
Irrigated, timely sown Irrigated, late sown Rainfed, timely 
sown 
GW 322, RAJ 4037,  
NIAW 917 Triambak 
(NIAW 301) – (for 
Maharashtra only) 
CoW(W)-1 (for Tamil 
Nadu only) 
MACS 2846 (D),  
DDK 1009 (Dic), 
DDK1025 (Dic.) 
RAJ 4083, PBW 533, HD 
2833, NIAW 34, HUW 510 
HD 2781, K 9644, 
AKDW 2997-16 (D) 
Western Himalayan regions of J&K (except Jammu and Kathua distt.); 
H.P. (except Una and Paonta Valley); Uttaranchal (except Tarai area); 
Sikkim and hills of West Bengal and N.E. States 
VL 804, HS 240, VL 738 HS 420, HS 295 HS375(summer 
sowing), SKW 196, 
VL 832  & HS 365 
(high altitudes), VL 
616, VL 829 (early 
sowing), DT 46 
(Triticale), TL 2942 
(Triticale) 
Hilly areas of Tamil Nadu and Kerala comprising the Nilgiri and Palni hills 
of southern plateau. 
HUW 318, HW 1085, HW 
2044 
  
Moderate salinity and sodicity areas of north western , north eastern 
plains as well as central India 
KRL 1-4, KRL19 (for 
salinity/alkalinity 
conditions) 
- - 
         
(D) Durum wheat (Dic.) – Dicoccum wheat 
 
(ii)  Seed production for raising rice production: State-wise improved varieties 
and hybrids have been developed. 
i. About 850 varieties and hybrids released for different agro -climatic 
situations and presently more then one million area is under hybrid rice 
cultivation. 
ii. Export q uality basmati rice varieities such as Pusa Basmati -1, Pusa 
Sugandh-4 etc. and hybrids (Pusa RH-10) etc. released. 
iii. Integrated Pest Management, Integrated Nutrient Management and also 
System for Rice Intensification (SRI) have been developed for enhancing 
the efficiency of inputs. 
iv. Rapid advances in rice biotechnology since nineties culminating in whole 
genome sequencing, development of efficient transformation protocols 
and effective gene linked markers hold unforeseen potential in rice 
improvement for the future.  Two of the varieties identified this year viz, 

  
Rice Bio 226 (IET 19046) and Pusa 1460 -01-32-6-7-67 (IET 18990, 
released) are product of this Marker Aided Selection Technology. In these, 
the genes of interest are put into any desired  variety witho ut changing its 
other original qualities through molecular marker assisted back cross 
breeding. 
 
v. So far, thirty three hybrids have been released for commercial cultivation 
in the country. Among these 25 have been released from the public sector 
while the r emaining eight viz., PHB-71, 6201, 6444, RH -204, Suruchi -
5401, Ganga, JKRH -2000 and PA 6219 have been developed and 
released by the private sector.  Out of the thirty three hybrids, twenty two 
have been released by the State Variety Release Committees, whi le the 
eleven viz., PHB -71, 6201, 6444, RH -204,  Suruchi 5401, Ganga, JKRH -
2000, PA 6129 (private) and Pusa RH -10, KRH-2, DRRH-2 (public bred)  
have been released by the Central Variety Release Committee (CVRC).  
The most popular hybrids and their area are listed as under: 
 
Popular released hybrids and their area of adaptation 
 
S. 
No. 
Hybrid  Released for 
1 PA 6444 U.P, Tripura, Orissa, A.P, Karnataka, Maharastra 
and Uttarakhand 
2. PHB 71 Haryana,U.P, Tamilnadu, A.P, Karnataka and 
Punjab 
3. KRH-2 Pondicherry, Bihar,Karnataka,T.N, Tripura, 
Maharastra, Haryana, Orissa,Uttarkand, 
Rajasthan,West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh 
4. Pusa RH-10 Haryana, Delhi,U.P and  Uttarkhand 
5. Suruchi Haryana, A.P, Gujarat, Orissa, Chattisgarh, 
Karnataka and Maharastra 
6. JKRH-2000 West Bengal, Bihar and Orissa 
7. DRRH-2 Haryana, T.N, West Bengal, Uttarakhand 
8. PSD-3 Uttarakhand 
9. Sahyadri Maharastra 
10 CORH-3 Tamilnadu 
11. Ajay and 
Rajalakshmi 
Orissa 
12. JRH-4 and 5 Madhya Pradesh 
 
 (iii)  For raising production of oilseed & pulses  
 
 Under the National Agricultural Research System (ICAR and 
Universities) several high yielding varieties and hybrids in different 
oilseed and pulses crops have been developed and released. 
 Location specific crop production technologies for different agro 
ecologies have been developed. 
 Oilseeds and pulses are being popularized in non-traditional areas. 

  
 Resistance breeding specifically for biotic and abiotic stresses is being 
prioritized. 
 Development o f cytoplasmic male sterility based hybrids in mustard, 
safflower and pigeonpea has opened new area for development of 
high yielding hybrids.  Two mustard hybrids and one pigeonpea hybrid 
is released. 
 Improved varieties and crop management technologies in p ulses and 
oilseeds are being demonstrated through front line demonstrations for 
enhancement of productivity. 
 
 
2.11 Further keeping in view the projections of requirement of oilseeds for 
production of edible oils and pulses during 11 th five year plan, the Government of 
India has taken several steps to increase the production and productivity of these 
crops in the country.  
 
2.12 The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation is implementing a 
Centrally Sponsored Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize 
(ISOPOM) in 14 major oilseeds and pulses growing States w.e.f. 1.4.2004. In 
order to provide flexibility to the States in implementation based on regionally 
differentiated approach, to promote crop diversification and to provide focused 
approach to the programmes, the four erstwhile schemes of Oilseed Production 
Programme(OPP), Oil Palm Development Programme (OPDP), National Pulses 
Development Programme(NPDP) and Accelerated Maize Development 
Programme (AMDP) have been merged into a Centrally Sp onsored Integrated 
Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oilpalm and Maize (ISOPOM) which is being 
implemented from 2004-05.  
 
2.13 Under the scheme, financial assistance is provided for purchase of 
breeder seed, production of foundation seed, production and distrib ution of 
certified seed, distribution of seed minikits, distribution of plant protection 
equipments, weedicides, supply of rhizobium culture/phosphate solubilising 
bacteria, distribution of gypsum/pyrite/ liming/dolomite, distribution of sprinkler 
sets and  water carrying pipes, publicity,  training of farmers and extension 
workers etc. to encourage farmers to grow pulses on a large scale.  In order to 
disseminate information on improved production technologies amongst the 
farmers, block demonstrations and I ntegrated Pest Management (IPM) 
demonstrations are organized through State Departments of Agriculture and 
Frontline Demonstrations through ICAR.   
 
2.14 Further, the scheme implementing States have been advised to earmark 
the funds under Scheduled Caste Pl an (SCP), Tribal Sub -Plan (TSP) and 
Women farmers, as per the policy of the Government,  for extending  the benefits 
of the scheme  to these sections  of  the society so that small and marginal 
farmers also use the incentives provided under ISOPOM.  
 
2.15 The scheme provides support for transfer of technology to the farmers 
through organizing block demonstrations, Frontline Demonstrations on latest 
technologies, training to the farmers , training of extension workers, farmers fairs 

  
etc.  The assistance is a lso provided to the States for publicity of the programme 
and technologies through various media including electronic media. To 
improve/sustain the health of the soil, the assistance is also given to the farmers 
for application of gypsum/pyrite/liming/dolo mite, micronutrients besides water 
saving devices like sprinklers  for oilseeds and pulses and drip irrigation systems  
for oil palm cultivation for optimum use of water for  these crops. 
 
2,16 In addition, National Food Security Mission (NSFM) -Pulses and Rashtriya 
Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) have been launched in 2007 -08 and Macro 
Management of Agriculture (MMA) (Revised) in 2008 -09 to increase the 
production and productivity of oilseeds and pulses. 
 
2.17 As a result of concerted efforts of the Government, the production of 
oilseeds increased from 25.19 million tones in 2003 -04 to 28.82 million tones in 
2007-08. This was brought about not only by increase in area but also by 
improving the productivity from 1064 kg. to 1086 kg. per hectare during the 
above pe riod. There has been a record production of 28.82 million tones of 
oilseeds in the country during 2007-08 (4th Advance Estimate). 
  
 2.18 The pulses production in the country increased from 14.91 million tones in 
2003-04 to 15.11 million tones in 2007 -08.  There has been a record production 
of 15.11 million tones of pulses during 2007-08 (4th Advance Estimate).   
Resource conservation technologies developed 
 
2.19 •  Resource conservation technologies like zero tillage reduces the cost 
of  cultivation (about Rs 2500 per ha), advances the time of wheat 
sowing requires less water for first irrigation and results in less 
infestation of Phalaris minor which is serious problem in North western 
India.  
 
 The Furrow Irrigated Raised Bed Planting Sys tem (FIRBS) is another 
resource conservation technology which saves seed and nitrogen (25 
percent) as well as water (25-35 percent).   
 Laser leveler is another technology which helps in resource 
conservation specially water helps in better crops stands and  precision 
farming. 
Location specific Technologies developed 
  
2.20 The DAC has also developed various location specific technologies 
encompassing cropping /farming system models, integrated water and nutrient 
management packages, resource conservation tec hnologies, reclamation 
technologies for acidic and saline/alkaline soils and participatory watershed 
management to boost the crop production in different agro -ecological situations 
of the country. The technological interventions could bridge -up the existi ng 
productivity gap to a considerable extent. The relevant technological 
interventions for different states have been published crop wise ( namely “State - 

  
Specific  Technological Interventions for Higher Agricultural growth” ). The 
technologies are dissemi nated through Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), institute -
village link programme and state extension agencies by arranging frontline 
demonstrations on the farmers‟ fields, trainings, farmers' fairs, exhibitions, 
goshthis, documentary films, extension publications and mass media etc.  
 
2.21 The information on new technology is regularly shared with Doordarshan 
& AIR for coverage of the same in their programmes under the scheme Mass 
Media Support to Agricultural Extension.  
 
Introduction of new/high yielding varities of seeds 
 
2.22 Introduction of new/high yielding varieties of seeds is the mandate of the 
Department of Agriculture Research and Education/ ICAR/ State Agricultural 
Universities. Breeder Seed Production is a indent driven process where different 
states are submitting their indent to department of Agriculture and Cooperation 
after compilation which is being forwarded to ICAR for production of breeder 
seed of different crops.  The breeder seed is used to produce foundation seed 
than certified seed which is being supplied to the farmers.   
 
2.23 The statement of breeder seed produced during last 5 years is given 
below.  Year -wise details of breeder seed produced of different field crops may 
kindly be perused vide annexure-III. 
 
Sl. 
No.  
Year  Indent  Production  
1. 2003-04 25316.80 40228.86 
2. 2004-05 29491.75 43413.05 
3. 2005-06 34783.54 50260.08 
4. 2006-07 46078.32 52913.19 
5. 2007-08 59530.28 71622.82 
 
2.24 In addition to above, more than 20,000 quintals breeder seed is produced 
yearly for State released Varieties directly by centres as per indent of their 
respective states. 
 
2.25 The production of foundation and certified seed is through state agencies 
and in this respect ICAR has been able to produce breeder seed as per the 
requirement of the government and often in excess of the requirement placed.  
The Government continues to sponsor seed produced in the public system. 
 

  
2.26 The breeder seed of high yielding varieties and parental lines of hybrids 
are also being supplied to State Governme nts and other organizations for 
production of foundation and certified seeds, which is supplied to farmers of the 
country for growing different crops. 
  
2.27 In addition to above, State Agricultural Universities and ICAR Institutes are 
supplementing the qu ality seed production by way of growing truthfully leveled 
seed of high yielding varieties of different crops. 
 
2.28 Besides, the quality seed is also produced at farmers field under 
participatory seed production programme by breeder seed production center s of 
National Seed Project (Crops). 
 
2.29 The M/o Agriculture  is also implementing, a Central Sector Scheme 
„Development and Strengthening of Infrastructure Facilities for Production and 
Distribution of Quality Seeds‟. The scheme is being implemented from the year 
2005-06 on all India basis aiming at making available quality seed of various 
crops to the farmers at affordable price and in time. The major thrust under this 
scheme is to upgrade the quality of farmer-saved seed, which is about 80-85% of 
the tot al seed used for crop production programme by providing financial 
assistance for distribution of foundation/certified seeds at 50% cost of the seed of 
crops for production of certified/quality seeds and hybrids and for training on 
seed production and techn ology to the farmers. Besides, credit linked back -
ended capital subsidy is provided to the private sector at the rate of 25% of the 
project cost subject to a maximum of Rs. 25.00 lakh on seed infrastructure 
development. The State Seed Testing Laboratories,  State Seed Corporations, 
Central Seed Testing Laboratories are strengthened to ensure the quality of 
seeds. Financial assistance is also provided for creation/strengthening of  
infrastructure facilities for production and distribution of quality seeds. Th e 
implementation of the scheme during the Tenth Five Year Plan has been 
evaluated by the Indian Institute of Management, Calcutta, who has generally 
appreciated the scheme. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 

  
Annexure-I 
 
Latest Status of Market Reforms in Agriculture through APMC Act Amendments 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Stage of Reforms 
 
Name of States/ Union Territories 
1. States/ UTs where reforms to 
APMC Act have been done as 
suggested. 
 
Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Assam, Chattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand,  Karnatka, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Nagaland, 
Orissa, Rajasthan,  Sikkim, Tripura 
  
2. States/ UTs where reforms to 
APMC Act has  been done 
partially  
a)  by amending APMC Act/ 
resolution 
 
 
a) Direct Marketing: 
NCT of Delhi 
b) Contract Farming: 
Haryana, Punjab and Chandigarh 
c) Private Markets: 
Punjab and Chandigarh 
 
3. States/ UTs where there is no 
APMC Act and hence not 
requiring reforms 
Kerala, Manipur, Bihar*, Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu 
and Lakshadweep 
 
4. States/ UTs where APMC Act 
already provides for the 
reforms 
 
Tamil Nadu 
5. States/ UTs where 
administrative action is 
initiated for the reforms  
 Mizoram, Meghalaya, Haryana, J&K, 
Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, NCT 
of Delhi and Pondicherry    
 
 
* APMC Act is repealed w.e.f. 1.9.2006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
Annexure-II  
MIS IMPLEMENTED FROM 1999-2000 to 2008-2009 
 
SL.  
No. 
Name of 
Commodity 
State  Year  Procurement 
Price (MIP) 
(Rs. per Qtl.) 
Procure-
ment 
Target  
(in MTs)  
Actual 
procure-
ment  
(in MTs)  
Value of 
Qty. 
Procured 
(Rs. lakh) 
1. Oilpalm Andhra  
Pradesh 
1999-2000 
1.1. to 31.12.2000 
275 65000 65000 1820.00 
2. Oilpalm Karnataka 1999-2000 
18.2. to 17.8.2000 
275 5000 3189 89.31 
3. Onion  Maharashtra 1999-2000 
20.1 to 29.2.2000 
250 65000 65000 2600.00 
4. Kinno/ 
Malta/ 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
1999-2000 
10.12.99 to 15.2.2000 
425 (B grade) 
365 (C grade) 
200 148 9.91 
5. Galgal Himachal 
Pradesh 
1999-2000 
10.12.99 to 15.2.2000 
250  150 85 3.00 
6 Apple 
(Kinnaure) 
Himachal  
Pradesh 
2000-2001 
15.9. to 14.10.2000 
1000  
(A grade) 
16000 1982 239.47 
7. Potato Punjab 2000-01 
15.2. to 31.3.2001 
200 17000 NIL NIL 
8. Apple 
(culled) 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
2000-2001  
15.7. to 15.11.2000 
375 44,000 44,000 2222.00 
9. Red  
Chillies 
Andhra  
Pradesh 
2001-2002 
20.3. to 30.6.2001 
2400 15,000 602 167.95 
10 Oilpalm Andhra  
Pradesh 
2001-2002  
 1.3. to 31.10.2001 
275 1,05,000 37,824 1059.07 
11. Oilpalm Karnataka 2001-2002  
1.04. to 31.12.2001 
275 8,000 2489 69.71 
12. Arecanut Goa 2001-2002 
1.05. to 31.7.2001  
7300 208 171 137.43 
13. Arecanut  Karnataka 2002-2003  
25.6. to 31.10.2002 
6000 10,000 3097 1978.59 
14. Arecanut A&N Islands 2002-2003  
1.6. to 31.10.2002 
5500 3250 204 111.73 
15. Potato Uttar  
Pradesh 
2002-2003  
22.2. to 25.4.2003 
190 1,00,000 885 21.02 
16. Ginger Mizoram 2003-2004 
1.4 to 30.6.2003  
400 15,000 15,000 669.00 
17. Potato West Bengal 2003-2004  
7.4.to 6.5.2003 
200 20,000 8275 194.94 
18. Chillies Andhra  
Pradesh 
2003-2004 
3.3.to 29.6. 2004 
2650 30,000 27910 8319.97 
19. Potato Uttar  
Pradesh 
2003-2004 
15.2.to 30.4.2004 
195 1,00,000 NIL NIL 
20. Orange Rajasthan 2003-2004 
15.2.to 30.3.2004 
244 5,000 NIL NIL 
21. Coriander 
seed 
Rajasthan 2003-2004  
29.3.to 28.5.2004 
1450 2000 594 104.00 

  
22. Cumin seed Rajasthan 2003-2004  
29.3 to 28.4.2004 
5200 2000 NIL NIL 
23. Ginger Mizoram 2004-2005 
15.4.to 15.6.2004 
500 5900 5900 346.36 
24. Onion Rajasthan 2004-2005 
11.6.to 25.7.2004 
280 5000 26 0.89 
25. Hatkora Mizoram 2004-2005 
17.8. to 16.9.2004 
450 1410 1410 79.24 
26. Apples  
‘C’ Grade 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
2004-2005 
1.8. to 31.10.2004 
400 32500 32500 1354.69 
27. Apples  
‘C’ Grade 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
2004-2005 
15.10. to 31.12.2004  
300 45000 NIL NIL 
 
SL.  
No. 
Name of 
Commodity 
State  Year  Procurement 
Price (MIP) 
(Rs. per Qtl.) 
Procure-
ment 
Target  
(in MTs)  
Actual 
procure-
ment  
(in MTs)  
Value of Qty. 
Procured 
(Rs. Lakh) 
28. Ginger Mizoram 2004-2005 
1.2. to 15.03.2005 
500 6400 6400 375.26 
29. Black Pepper Kerala 2004-2005  
15.2. to  
15.4. 2005 
7000 5050 4755 3804.00 
30. Chillies Andhra  
Pradesh 
2004-2005 
23.3. to 31.5.2005 
Premium  2700 
Common  2500 
30,000 9581 2722.14 
31. Garlic Rajasthan 2005-2006 
10.5. to 10.6.2005 
700 2000 NIL NIL 
32. Onion Rajasthan 2005-2006 
1.6. to  
31.7. 2005 
250 5000 NIL NIL 
33. Apples 
‘C’ grade 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
2005-2006 
1.8.to 31.10.2005 
425 50,000 22362 1185.18 
34.    - do - Uttarakhand     - do - 350 10,000 NIL NIL 
35. Malta Uttarakhand 2005-2006 
15.12. to 15.2.2006 
400 8,000 NIL NIL 
36. Hatkora Mizoram 2005-2006 
1.10.to 10.11.2005 
450 1700 1700 95.54 
37. Chilli Mizoram 2005-2006 
15.2. to 15.3.2006 
2800 1250 1250 388.65 
38. Onion Rajasthan 2006-2007 
29.5.to 28.6.2006 
280 5000 NIL NIL 
39. Apples  
‘C’ grade 
Uttarakhand 2006-2007 
1.9. to 30.11.2006 
425 1000 NIL NIL 
40. Malta Uttarakhand 2006-2007 
1.9. to 30.11.2006 
425 2000 NIL NIL 
41. Ginger Mizoram 2007-2008 
5.5.07 to 4.6.2007 
500 20,194 20,194 1009.70 
42. Chilli Mizoram 2007-2008 
10.6. to 10.7.2007 
2800 4250 4250 1261.82 
43. Passion Fruit Mizoram 2007-2008 
10.6. to 10.7.2007 
700 8000 8000 692.00 
44. Apples 
‘C’ grade 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
2007-2008 
1.8.to 31.10.2007 
450 27,000 27,000 1518.75 

  
45.    - do - Uttarakhand 2007-2008 
20.8.to 20. 09.2007 
450 1,500 115 5.17 
46. Malta  
‘C’ grade 
Uttarakhand 2007-2008 
4.12.07 to 31.01.08 
500 2,000 116 6.46 
47. Onion Karnataka 2007-2008 
1.1.08 to 31.1.08 
450 30,000 NIL NIL 
48. Potato Uttar Pradesh 2008-2009 
8.4.08 to 7.5.2008  
250 1,00,000 Information 
awaited 
-- 
49. Chilli Mizoram 2008-2009 
21.4.08 to 21.5.08 
2800 1810 1810 633.50 
50. Potato West Bengal 2008-2009 
12.5.08 to 11.6.08  
230 1,00,000 Information 
awaited 
-- 
51. Passion Fruit Mizoram 2008-2009 
10.7. to 10.8.2008 
700 9000 9000 787.50 
52. Apples 
‘C’ grade 
Uttrakhand 2008-2009 
1.8. to 31.8.2008 
450 1500 17 0.76 
53. Apples  
‘C’ grade 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
2008-2009 
01.8 to 30.9.2008 
450 38,000 28451 1280.29 
54. Malta 
‘C’ grade 
Uttrakhand 2008-2009 
1.11. to 31.12.2008 
525 1600 69 3.62 
55. Chow Chow 
(Iskut) 
Mizoram 2008-2009 
15.10. to 15.12.08 
450 6450 3180 143.10 
56. Ginger Nagaland 2008-2009 
03.2. to 2.3.2009 
500 15000 Information 
awaited 
 

 61 
           Annexure-III 
BREEDER SEED INDENT & PRODUCTION OF DIFFERENT CROPS  
DURING 2003-04 TO 2007-08 
 
                                                                                                                           
(Production in quintals) 
CROPS 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 
 
2006-07 2007-08 
 Indent Prodn. Indent Prodn. Indent Prodn. Indent Prodn. Indent Prodn. 
Wheat 
7279.70 12498.80 9808.90 13502.20 
 
10906.02 16407.00 13451.80 14863.42 21460.56 26204.13 
Paddy 867.24 1518.35 1199.41 2571.53 
 
1574.67 2849.77 2076.24 3405.11 2490.73 3923.40 
Sorghum 32.58 105.47 36.64 86.55 
 
35.48 181.74 30.10 96.98 22.25 97.55 
Maize 30.58 116.58 64.70 115.96 
 
88.11 136.94 83.10 172.45 99.54 145.88 
Barley 189.25 443.10 313.00 701.33 
 
362.55 851.61 1338.85 1915.50 1810.85 2316.83 
Pearl 
millet 
12.89 15.12 12.31 12.69 
 
15.01 35.49 20.28 16.18 16.19 39.85 
Small 
millet 
5.87 13.10 5.72 24.94 
 
5.99 14.93 5.28 19.33 2.92 31.63 
Pulse 
Crops 
4764.40 6745.78 4967.75 7120.90 
 
5535.93 6865.40 7348.48 9382.98 9947.76 11234.00 
Jute/ 
S&M 
8.89 8.31 7.37 5.23 
 
7.85 10.08 11.61 14.12 10.53 13.94 
Cotton 70.93 262.90 112.62 196.47 
 
197.24 454.02 60.23 217.29 161.63 176.53 
Forage 
Crops 
385.27 385.67 387.5 515.35 389.84 706.65 456.44 1043.10 930.64 1401.60 
Oilseed 
crops 
11669.20 18115.68 12515.78 18559.90 
 
15664.78 21755.45 21195.41 21766.73 22576.68 26037.48 
Total 25316.80 40228.86 29491.75 43413.05 
 
34783.54 50260.08 46078.32 52913.19 59530.28 71622.82 
 

 62 
Recommendation (Sl. No.7 Para No. 5.18) 
 
2.30 From the Statement  of demand and estimated production of foodgrains, 
the Committee observed that the production of foodgrains during the last five 
years was less as compared to their demand. For example, in 2002 -03, the 
demand of rice was 86.59 million tonnes whereas the pr oduction was only 71.82 
million tonnes. Similarly, during 2004 -05, the demand of rice was 89.24 million 
tonnes but the production was 83.13 million tonnes. In the case of wheat, pulses 
and oilseeds, the production was less than the demand in the country fo r the 
last five years. The reasons for less production of foodgrains are stated to be 
increase in population and diversion of agricultural land for non -agricultural 
purpose such as urbanization, roads, industries etc. In order to increase the 
production of  agricultural produce, the Government of India has been 
implementing a number of schemes viz. Integrated Cereals Development 
Programme (ICDP), Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize 
(ISOPOM). The Department of Agricultural and Cooperatio n has also taken a 
number of initiatives to enhance the production of foodgrains during 2007 -08 
which includes two major programmes namely, The National Food Security 
Mission (NFSM) and Rashtriya Krishi  Vikas Yojana (RKVY) to incentivize the 
states to inv est more in agricultural and allied sectors. A National Policy for 
Farmers 2007 has also been approved for economic well being of farmers. The 
National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA) has been operationalized to coordinate 
and address the problem of rainfed agriculture. Besides, a Weather Based Crop 
Insurance Scheme (WBCIS) has been introduced in addition to National 
Agricultural Insurance Scheme to cover the farmers‟ risk. The Committee are of 
the opinion that unless and until these schemes and programmes ar e 
implemented in letter and spirit, the situation will remain unchanged. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should make sincere 
efforts   to   persuade  the  State Governments to  implement    the   aforesaid 
programmes /schemes/ proje cts to maintain sustainable agricultural production 
to meet the requirement of increasing population in the country. 
 
Reply of Government 
2.31 Integrated Cereals Development Programme is a component of the 
Macro Management Programme, a Centrally Sponsored Scheme of the 
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation. This scheme provides flexibility to the 
States to develop and pursue activities on the basis of their regional priority 
through their Work Plan. 
  
2.32 In the year 2008 -09, Macro Management of Agriculture (MMA) Scheme 
has been revised to improve its efficacy in supplementing/complementing the 
efforts of the States towards enhancement of agricultural production and 
productivity.  The revised MMA scheme comprises 11 sub -schemes relating to 
crop production and natural resource management. 
 
2.33 On the basis of the major cropping systems followed in the country, 
schemes for three cereal -based major cropping systems like Rice Based 
Cropping system; Wheat Based Cropping System; and Coarse Cereals Based  
Cropping System were formulated.  These included (i) Integrated Cereals 

 63 
Development Programme in Rice Based Cropping Systems Areas (ICDP -Rice), 
(ii) Integrated Cereals Development Programme in Wheat Based Cropping 
Systems Areas (ICDP -Wheat); and (ii) Inte grated Cereals Development 
Programme in Coarse Cereals Based cropping Systems Areas (ICDP -Coarse 
Cereal). However, assistance to all the cereal crops will be provided under all 
the schemes.  
 
2.34 In order to give a boost to the production of pulses and oi lseeds to meet 
the food and nutritional security, a new component of Integrated Crop 
Production Programmes for Pulses, Oilseeds and Maize has been included as 
one of the Crop Production Programmes under the revised Macro Management 
of Agriculture Scheme.  However, to avoid overlapping it has been decided that 
the crop production programme for pulses, oilseeds and maize under the 
revised MMA scheme will only be implemented in the area not covered under 
the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Integrated scheme of O ilseeds, Pulses, Oil 
palm and Maize (ISOPOM). 
 
 2.35 In view of the stagnating food grain production and increasing 
consumption need of the growing population, the NDC in its 53 rd meeting held 
on 29th May, 2007 adopted a resolution to enhance the productio n of rice, wheat 
and pulses by 10 million, 8 million and 2 million tonnes respectively by 2011. 
 
2.36 Accordingly, on 16 th August, 2007 Government has approved the 
„National Food Security Mission (NFSM)‟ a Centrally Sponsored Scheme to 
operationalize the resolution passed by the NDC.  It has three components - (i) 
National Food Security Mission – Rice (NFSM-Rice); (ii) National Food Security 
Mission – Wheat (NFSM -Wheat); and (iii) National Food Security Mission – 
Pulses (NFSM-Pulses). The Mission aims at increasing production of rice, wheat 
and pulses through a set of measures such as area expansion, productivity 
enhancement in selected districts; restoring soil fertility; creating employment 
opportunities; and enhancing farm level economy to restore the confidence of 
the farmers of the targeted districts.  The NFSM -Rice would be implemented in 
133 Districts, NFSM-wheat in 138 districts and NFSM-Pulses in 168 Districts. 
 
2.37 The scheme aims to target the select districts in the country by making 
available the developed technologies to the farmers through a series of planned 
interventions. A close monitoring mechanism at various levels would ensure that 
these interventions reach the targeted beneficiaries.  
 
2.38 Under the Mission, 305 districts will be covered; 20 million hectares of 
rice, 13 million hectares of wheat and 4.5 million hectares of pulses are included 
in these districts that roughly constitute about 50 per cent of cropped area for 
wheat and ri ce. For pulses, an additional 20 per cent cropped area would be 
created.  
 
2.39 There is a major shift in approach to target low producing districts as 
against the high productivity districts. The highest productivity districts are 
reaching a plateau in pr oductivity and exploitation of natural resources is now 
overstretched. The opportunity of a quantum jump in productivity in these 

 64 
districts is very low. As against this, the gap in potential yield and actual yield in 
eastern and central States is very wide  even though there is very good irrigation 
coverage. The districts identified for rice and wheat contribute about  37.33 
percent and 42.6 percent of the national production of the respective crops with 
an average productivity level of  1714 kg/ha and  2339  kg/ha. If the productivity 
of these districts increases to the level of national average i.e. 2127 kg/ha for 
rice and 2671 kg/ha for wheat, the gain in production would be about 10.0 
million tons in rice and 8.0 million tons in wheat and 2.0 million tones  of pulses  
from identified districts.  The pattern of assistance for three components of the 
Mission is given at Annexure IV. 
 
2.40 Government has also approved a new State Plan Scheme of Additional 
Central Assistance (ACA) for agriculture and allied sect ors, namely, Rashtriya 
Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) has been launched during 2007 -08, with a view to 
reorient the current agricultural development strategies, to meet the needs of the 
farmers and for fresh efforts by the Central and State Governments to 
rejuvenate agriculture so as to achieve 4% annual growth during the 11 th Five 
Year Plan,  with an envisaged outlay of Rs. 25,000/- crore for the 11th Five Year 
Plan. 
 
2.41 The broad objective of RKVY is to incentivize the States to increase 
public investment t o achieve 4% growth rate in agriculture and allied sectors in 
the 11th Five Year Plan.  The new scheme requires the States to prepare District 
and State Agriculture Plans and to increase or at least maintain the percentage 
share of expenditure in the agric ulture and allied sectors in the State Plan.  The 
allocation of funds to the States is based on the net un -irrigated area, gross 
state domestic product in agriculture and allied sectors to be attained by the end 
of the 11 th Five Year Plan, and increase in the State Plan expenditure in 
agriculture and allied sectors.  The ACA is made available to the States as 
100% grant. The States have been provided flexibility and autonomy in the 
process of selection, planning, approval and execution of schemes.  The Stat e 
Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC) headed by the Chief Secretary approves 
the projects under RKVY.  The distribution of the funds among the States is in 
two streams – Stream-I and Stream -II.  Under Stream -I, at least 75% of the 
RKVY funds are made availa ble for specific projects as part of the State and 
District Plans.  Under Stream-II, upto 25% of the total RKVY funds to a State are 
made available for strengthening existing State Sector schemes.  The funds are 
routed through the State Agriculture Departm ent, which is the nodal Department 
for the scheme. 
 
2.42 Under the Scheme, the following broad activities have been identified for 
focus attention - Integrated Development of Food Crops, including coarse 
cereals, minor millets and pulses; Agriculture Mecha nization; Soil Health and 
Productivity; Development of Rainfed Farming Systems; Integrated Pest 
Management; Market Infrastructure; Horticulture; Animal Husbandry, Dairying 
and Fisheries; Concept to Completion Projects that have definite timelines; 
Support to Institutions that promote Agriculture and Horticulture, etc.; Organic 
and Bio-fertilizers; and Innovative Schemes. These activities are only indicative 
in nature. 

 65 
 
2.43 The Scheme has been operationalized with effect from August, 2007 and 
has evoked a g ood response from the States during 2007 -08 with 22 States 
holding the meetings of the SLSC headed by the Chief Secretary  to clear the 
projects.  During the year 2007 -08 an amount of Rs.1246.89 crore including  
Rs.48 crore @ Rs. 10 lakh per district  for p reparation of District Agriculture 
Plan(DAP) was released to States under the RKVY.   
 
2.44 For the current fiscal a revised outlay of Rs.2891.70 crore has been 
provided under the RKVY.  An amount of Rs.1863.77 crore has been released  
to eligible States.  This includes Rs.6.40 crore @ Rs.10 lakh per district           
for preparation of District Agriculture Plans to five States and three UTs.  State -
wise allocation and release of funds under RKVY during 2007 -08 and 2008 -09   
is at Annexure-V. 
 
2.45 Further in order to provide flexibility to the States in implementation 
based on regionally differentiated approach, to promote crop diversification and 
to provide focused approach to the programmes, a Centrally Sponsored 
Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pul ses, Oilpalm and Maize (ISOPOM) is being 
implemented from 1.4.2004 in 14 major oilseeds and pulses growing States.  
 
2.46 As a result of concerted efforts, the production of oilseeds increased from 
25.19 million tones in 2003 -04 to 28.82 million tones in 2 007-08. This was 
brought about not only by increase in area but also by improving the productivity 
from 1064 kg. to 1086 kg. per hectare during the above period. There has been 
a record production of 28.82 million tones of oilseeds in the country during  
2007-08 (4th Advance Estimate). 
 
2.47 The pulses production in the country increased from 14.91 million tones 
in 2003 -04 to 15.11 million tones in 2007 -08.  There has been a record 
production of 15.11 million tones of pulses during 2007 -08 (4 th Advance 
Estimate).  Despite a record production of oilseeds and pulses during 2007 -08, 
the production of these crops is less than the domestic demand in the country  
 
 2.48 In order to make implementation the ISOPOM more effective, the States 
are advised to enhance the production of major Oilseeds and Pulses in potential 
areas. The States have also been advised to bring additional area in potential 
regions of the States under oilseeds and pulses through intercropping and use 
of rice fallows. To monitor the implementati on of ISOPOM, the scheme is 
reviewed by the Department by organizing regional meetings and filed 
implementation through National Level Monitoring Teams (NALMOTs). Beside 
this, the Scheme is also monitored through State Level Sanctioning Committee 
(SLSC) under the Chairmanship of the Secretary (Agriculture) of States. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 
 
Comments of the Committee 

 66 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.17 of Chapter – I of the Report) 

 67 
ANNEXURE - IV 
 
Allocation and Release of funds under NFSM during 2008-09 as on 10.2.2009 (Rs. in Crore) 
State Rice Wheat Pulses Publicity Other 
Expend
iture at 
central 
level 
Tota
l 
alloc
. 
Total 
amoun
t 
release
d 
Alloca
tion 
Release Allocation Release Allocation Release Allocation Release Alloca
tion 
Release 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
36.69 20.16 0.00 0.00 68.34 23.00 1.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 106.03 44.16 
Assam 32.43 15.45 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.20 0.20 0.00 0.00 32.63 15.65 
Bihar 39.28 18.77 40.87 9.12 29.46 16.24 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 109.61 44.13 
Chhattisgarh 35.30 22.69 0.00 0.00 52.22 32.96 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 87.52 55.66 
Gujarat 4.45 2.76 9.48 2.43 7.21 3.04 0.41 0.10 0.00 0.00 21.55 8.33 
Haryana 0.00 0.00 25.53 3.33 1.68 0.75 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 27.21 4.08 
Jharkhand 12.77 9.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.30 0.30 0.00 0.00 13.07 9.80 
Karnataka 19.39 15.36 0.00 0.00 15.92 9.55 0.50 0.50 0.00 0.00 35.81 25.41 
Kerala 1.89 1.51 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.89 1.51 
Madhya  
Pradesh 
20.89 14.16 42.85 26.18 50.83 24.05 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 114.58 64.38 
Maharashtra 15.06 12.16 19.51 9.99 42.78 24.91 1.53 1.25 0.00 0.00 78.88 48.31 
Orissa 40.02 30.60 0.00 0.00 28.93 19.99 0.81 0.70 0.00 0.00 69.76 51.29 
Punjab 0.00 0.00 41.09 24.62 4.10 1.78 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 45.19 26.40 
Rajasthan 0.00 0.00 28.05 8.41 12.53 3.56 1.48 0.75 0.00 0.00 42.06 12.71 
Tamil Nadu 41.18 23.54 0.00 0.00 6.14 2.02 0.50 0.50 0.00 0.00 47.82 26.05 
Uttar Pradesh 33.74 44.89 120.07 76.33 38.43 20.70 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 192.24 141.92 
West Bengal 49.02 32.32 5.69 1.60 15.69 9.89 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 70.39 43.81 
Total  382.11 263.88 333.14 162.02 374.27 192.42 6.73 5.30 0.00 0.00 1096.24 623.62 
IIPR, Kanpur 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.40 3.15 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.40 3.15 
ICRISAT 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.61 0.47 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.61 0.47 
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.38 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.38 1.00 
NSC-seed 
Minikit 
0.00 0.00 7.12 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.12 0.03 
SFCI-Seed 
Minikit 
0.00 0.00 6.52 0.31 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 6.52 0.31 
S.S.Cs-Seed 
Minikit 
0.00 0.00 0.16 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.16 0.00 
SFCI for 
Pulses seed 
Production 
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 20.78 10.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 20.78 10.00 
Publicity at 
central level 
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 20.00 20.00 0.00 0.00 20.00 20.00 
Other 
Expenditure 
at Central 
level  
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.84 0.82 5.84 0.82 
Grand Total 382.11 263.88 346.94 162.36 402.44 207.05 26.73 25.30 5.84 0.82 1164.05 659.40 
 
 

 68 
 
 
Annexure-V 
State-wise Allocation and Release of Funds under RKVY during 2007-08 & 2008-09        
(Rs. Crores) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the State  2007-08 
2008-09(as on  
31st Jan. 09)   
Allocation  Release Allocation  Release    
1 2 3 4 5 6    
1 Andhra Pradesh  93.13 61.08 316.57 297.17    
2 Arunachal Pradesh# 2.85 1.90 6.88      
3 Assam*   23.77 0.00 142.62 72.81    
4 Bihar 64.02 57.77 148.54 148.54    
5 Chhatisgarh   60.54 52.96 116.48 59.94    
6 Goa # 2.29 1.70 6.91      
7 Gujarat 53.71 49.81 243.39 243.39    
8 Haryana 23.12 21.52 74.00 39.5    
9 Himachal Pradesh 17.39 16.17 15.11 15.11    
10 Jammu & Kashmir*  # 6.85 0.00 16.17 1.20 **  
11 Jharkhand 61.66 55.68 58.62 10.46    
12 Karnataka 171.97 154.30 316.57 314.14    
13 Kerala 61.41 55.40 60.11 30.06    
14 Madhya Pradesh 110.01 101.62 146.05 60.03    
15 Maharashtra 142.20 128.20 269.63 24.20    
16 Manipur * # 1.35 0.00 4.14 0.90 **  
17 Meghalaya 7.00 6.37 13.53 6.77    
18 Mizoram  * # 1.05 0.00 4.29 0.80 **  
19 Nagaland 9.45 3.19 13.89 0.99    
20 Orissa 46.59 39.30 115.44 47.73    
21 Punjab 39.85 36.05 87.52 43.76    
22 Rajasthan 71.68 55.76 233.75 116.88    
23 Sikkim 2.77 2.77 11.37 5.68    
24 Tamil Nadu 188.21 153.60 140.38 70.19    
25 Tripura 4.69 4.16 34.02 16.08    
26 Uttar Pradesh 116.15 103.90 316.57 158.29    
27 Uttarakhand  30.54 28.25 20.60      
28 West Bengal 60.87 54.93 147.38 76.01    
  Total States 1475.12 1246.39 3080.53 1860.63    
  UTs            
1 A & N Islands 9.52 0.00 6.43 0.41    
2 Chandigarh 0.22 0.00 2.2 0.14    
3 D& N Haveli # 0.25 0.00 0.61 0.00    
4 Daman & Diu     1.42 0.26    
5 Delhi # 0.56 0.10 1.83 0.00    
6 Lakshadweep 0.92 0.00 12.08 1.13    
7 Pondicherry # 3.13 0.40 6.67 0.00    

 69 
  Total UTs 14.58 0.50 31.24 1.94    
  District Agricultural Plan 10.30   53.90      
  NIRD, ISEC, IEG        1.00    
  Contingency        0.20    
  Grand Total  1500.00 1246.89 3165.67 1863.77    
        
* These States were ineligible for accessing funds under RKVY during 2007-08.                                                                                                
# These States/UTs are ineligible for accessing funds under RKVY during 2008-09.                                                                                          
** Funds have been released for preparation of DAPs @ Rs.10 lakh per district.  
 

 70 
Recommendation (Sl. No.8 Para No. 5.19) 
 
2.49 The Committee are constrained to note that despite the various 
measures undertaken by the Government, the production of oilseeds in the 
country has not increased. Although the area under oilseeds has increased from 
18.91 million hectare in 1980 -81 to 22.64 million hectares in 2006 -07 and the 
production of oilseeds has increased from 20.66 million tonnes in 2001 -02 to 
24.89 million tonnes in 2006 -07, still the dependency on import to meet the 
requirement of oilseed in the country cannot be negated. Taking note of the 
indigenous production and im ports alongwith the overall demand and supply 
position of oilseeds and edible oil in the country, the Committee feel that there is 
an urgent need to pay more attention to R&D for improved varieties of seeds 
and improved technologies for production of oilse eds. Farmers should be made 
aware of the R&D technology and given incentives for opting of production of 
oilseeds through result oriented scheme/plan. The Committee feel that to bridge 
the gap between demand and supply of edible oil, the increase in produc tion of 
oilseeds is desirable. To reduce the dependency on imported edible oils, efforts 
for developing improved high -yielding varieties of oilseeds through Seed 
Corporation of India need to be geared up. For this, Government should make a 
policy to make a vailable good quality seeds at cheaper rates and educate 
farmers about latest methods of agriculture. So far the water conservation and 
irrigation is concerned, scope of drip irrigation should be extended.  The 
Committee therefore, strongly recommend that Government should think of 
ways and means to make available disposable drip system within the reach of 
every farmer that would result in water conservation and there will be surety of 
irrigation.  Result -oriented action should also be taken to promote and 
popularize the use of non -traditional secondary source of edible oil. The 
Committee urge upon the Government to make available high yielding seeds 
and fertilizers in time to boost small farmers‟ crop production capacity. 
 
Reply of Government 
2.50 Introduction of new/high yielding varieties of seeds  is the mandate of 
the Department of Agriculture Research and Education/ICAR/State Agricultural 
Universities. However, the Deptt. of Agriculture & Cooperation is implementing a 
Central Sector Scheme „Development and Strengthing of Infrastructure Facilities 
for Production and Distribution of Quality Seeds‟ is being implemented from the 
year 2005 -06 on all India basis aiming at making available quality seed of 
various crops to the farmers at affordable price and in t ime. The major thrust 
under this scheme is to upgrade the quality of farmer -saved seed, which is 
about 80 -85% of the total seed used for crop production programme by 
providing financial assistance for distribution of foundation/certified seeds at 
50% cost of the seed of crops for production of certified/quality seeds and 
hybrids and for training on seed production and technology to the farmers. 
Besides, credit linked back -ended capital subsidy is provided to the private 
sector at the rate of 25% of the proj ect cost subject to a maximum of Rs. 25.00 
lakh on seed infrastructure development. The State Seed Testing Laboratories, 
State Seed Corporations, Central Seed Testing Laboratories are strengthened 
to ensure the quality of seeds. Financial assistance is als o provided for 
creation/strengthening of  infrastructure facilities for production and distribution 

 71 
of quality seeds. The implementation of the scheme during the Tenth Five Year 
Plan has been evaluated by the Indian Institute of Management, Calcutta who 
has generally appreciated the scheme 
 
2.51 As regards extention of scope for drip irrigation the Government of India 
has launched a Centrally Sponsored Scheme on Micro Irrigation during 10 th 
Plan period for installation of drip sprinkler irrigation system fo r both horticulture 
and non-horticulture crop. Oilseeds are also covered under this scheme as non -
horticulture crop.  The scheme envisages 40% assistance from Government of 
India, 10% from State Government and the remaining 50% of the cost of the 
system to be borne by the farmers either through his or her own resources or by 
availing soft loan from financial institutions.  All categories of farmers are 
eligible for taking benefit of this scheme.   During this year (2008-09) there is 
a budget allocation of Rs .480.00 crore to cover 4.00 laky ha. area under micro 
irrigation (drip & sprinkler system) for different crops including oil seed excluding 
oil palm. 
 
 2.52 To reduce dependency on imported edible oils, the Government of 
India has modified ISOPOM during th e XIth plan period as under to facilitate 
assistance for cultivation of oilseeds: 
 
a. The financial assistance on production and distribution of certified seeds of 
oilseeds and pulses has been enhanced from Rs.500/-qtl. to Rs.1000/- qtls. 
and from Rs.800/ qtl . to Rs.1200/ qtls. respectively under modified 
ISOPOM during XI plan. 
b. In addition to  NSC & SFCI, new seed producing agencies viz. NAFED, 
KRIBHCO & IFFCO have been designated as Central seed producing and 
distributing agencies of oilseeds, pulses & maize crops under modified  
ISOPOM during XI plan  
c.  In order to provide a level playing field to the private sector seed producing 
agencies vis.a.vis  public sector seed producing agencies, the benefit of 
distribution subsidy has also been extended to private  sector seed 
producing agencies subject to seeds being certified and that distribution 
undertaken through State Governments. 
   d.  Enhancement/rationalization of subsidy on demonstration, sprinkler sets, 
rhizobium cultures, irrigation pipes besides inclusion of new components 
i.e. supply of improved farm implements and micronutrients. 
 
2.53 Further, with a view to augment the s upply of edible oil through palm oil 
and also to exploit the potential of oilpalm in the country, a Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Dr. K.L. Chadha to re -assess the scope of oilpalm cultivation, 
was constituted by the Department of Agriculture & Cooper ation in November, 
2005. The Committee in its report, submitted to DAC, has identified 10.36 lakh 
ha. as potential area for oilpalm plantation and has recommended that 2.24 lakh 
ha. be brought under oilpalm cultivation in the 11th Five Year Plan.   
 
2.54 During last 3 years of Xth  Five Year Plan and in first two years of XI plan, 
Oilpalm Development Programme is being implemented as a component of 
restructured Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oilpalm and Maize 

 72 
(ISOPOM) in the states of Andhra Pradesh , Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, 
Goa, Gujarat, Orissa, Tripura, Assam & Mizoram to achieve the area expansion 
targets.  An area expansion 75840 ha has been achieved from 2004-05 to 2008-
09 (till Nov, 2008) under ISOPOM. 
 
2.55 To educate farmers about the l atest methods of agriculture  farmers 
are given training and demonstration on the latest methods of farming/modern 
technology through the following programmes of the Department of Agriculture 
& Cooperation 
1. Support to State Extension Programmes for Extens ion 
Reforms – This Scheme launched during 2005 -06, aims at making 
extension system farmer driven and farmer accountable by way of new 
institutional arrangements for technology dissemination in the form of an 
Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA)  at district level to 
operationalize the extension reforms.  ATMA will has active participation 
of farmers / farmer groups, NGOs, Krishi Vigyan Kendras, Panchayati Raj 
Institutions and other stakeholder operating at district level and below.  
581 districts level ATMAs have been established. Gender concerns are 
being mainstreamed by mandating that 30% of resources on 
programmes and activi8ties are allocated for women farmers and 
extension functionaries. Since inception, out of total 49 lakh farmers‟ 
beneficiaries, 13.96 lakh women farmers (28.49%) have participated in 
various extension activities under the scheme.   
 
2. Mass Media Support to Agriculture : This scheme is focusing on 
two initiatives.  The first is use of Doordarshan infrastructure for providing 
agriculture related information and knowledge to the farming community.  
180 Narrow casting Centres, 18 Regional Centres and 1 National Centre 
of Doordarshan Kendras telecast agricultural programmes for 30 minutes, 
five days a week. Programmes of Regional Kendras and some 
Narrowcasting centres are being repeated the next day on respective 
Regional Satellite Channel.  Audio/ Video spots on emerging issues viz. 
Rabi/Kharif campaign,   Kisan Call Centre, Kisan Credit Card  etc. are 
also  publicized  through the programme using free commercial time. Live 
„Crop Seminars‟ on DD involving farmers and experts have also been 
organized. 
 
The other component of the mass media initiative is use of 96 FM 
Transmitter of AIR to broadcast area specific agricultural programme with 
30 minutes radio transmission in the evening six days a week.  
 
3. Kisan Call Centers  – The scheme was launched on 
21stJanuary„04 to provide agricultural information to the farming 
community through toll free telephone lines. A country wide common 
eleven digit number „ 1800-800-1551‟ has been allocated for KCC. The 
replies to the queries of the farming community are being  given in 21 
local languages. Calls are attended from 6.00 am to 10.00 pm on all 7 
days of the week.  Since inception of the scheme, over 30.78 lakh calls 
have been received upto 31st December,2008. 

 73 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 

 74 
Recommendation (Sl. No.9 Para No. 6.17) 
 
2.56 The Committee observe that the Government of India is fully committed 
to provide food security to every citizen in the country.  Due to less production of 
wheat in the country in 2006 -07, there was reduction in wheat stock in the 
Central Pool. The Committee have been informed that at the start of RMS     
2007-08, i.e. as on 01/04/07, the stock of wheat in the Central Pool was 45.6 
lakh tonnes against the buffer norms of 40 lakh tonnes. The procurement of 
wheat in RMS 2007 was only 111 lakh tonnes against the requirement of 150 
lakh tonnes for the TPDS and other welfare schemes. In order to make up the 
shortfall as well as to keep th e prices stable and ensure adequate buffer stock, 
the Government took decision to import wheat for the Central Pool. The custom 
duty on import of wheat was reduced to zero and a ban on export of wheat and 
rice was imposed. Accordingly, in 2006 -07, a quanti ty of 54.540 lakh metric 
tonnes of wheat was imported from Australia, Canada, CIS, France, Argentina 
and Hungary. Besides, a quantity of 13.06 lakh metric tonnes was contracted for 
the year 2007-08.  
 
  The Committee find that despite putting a ban on export of wheat and rice 
and reduction of custom duty in the import of pulses to zero, the Government 
could not succeed in curbing the price rise of essential commodities. However, 
consequent upon the ban on  export of wheat, the prices of wheat declined by 
3.92 per cent during this period. The Committee fail to understand the reasons 
for import of wheat in 2007 -08 when the availability of wheat in the country 
exceeded the demand. In the opinion of the Committ ee, the Government could 
not take timely steps to address the issues viz. high open market prices, less 
than targeted production, less market arrivals, negative market sentiments and 
more private participation which contributed to less procurement of wheat . With 
the high rate of inflation, the prices of foodstuffs have risen considerably and the 
consumers are hit from all sides. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government should make sincere and timely efforts to address the 
aforementioned issue s. In this regard, the Government should also take steps 
for procurement of wheat directly from the farmers by giving them remunerative 
prices. To increase the production of foodgrains in the country, the farmers 
should also be encouraged to adopt modern methods and modern technology of 
agriculture. The Government should also ensure that the buffer stocks of 
foodgrains especially wheat and rice in the Central Pool do not fall below the 
buffer norms so as to meet any eventualities in future.  
 
Reply of Government 
2.57  As regards encouraging farmers to adopt modern methods and modern 
technology of agriculture, the Deptt. of Agriculture & Cooperation has been 
implementing the following programmes. 
a.   Support to State Extension Programmes for Extension 
Reforms – This Scheme launched during 2005 -06, aims at making 
extension system farmer driven and farmer accountable by way of new 
institutional arrangements for technology dissemination in the form of an 
Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) at district l evel to 
operationalize the extension reforms.  ATMA will has active participation of 

 75 
farmers / farmer groups, NGOs, Krishi Vigyan Kendras, Panchayati Raj 
Institutions and other stakeholder operating at district level and below.  581 
districts level ATMAs h ave been established. Gender concerns are being 
mainstreamed by mandating that 30% of resources on programmes and 
activities are allocated for women farmers and extension functionaries. 
Since inception, out of total 49 lakh farmers‟ beneficiaries, 13.96 la kh 
women farmers (28.49%) have participated in various extension activities 
under the scheme.   
 
b.   Mass Media Support to Agriculture : This scheme is focusing on 
two initiatives.  The first is use of Doordarshan infrastructure for providing 
agriculture r elated information and knowledge to the farming community.  
180 Narrow casting Centres, 18 Regional Centres and 1 National Centre of 
Doordarshan Kendras telecast agricultural programmes for 30 minutes, five 
days a week. Programmes of Regional Kendras and s ome Narrowcasting 
centres are being repeated the next day on respective Regional Satellite 
Channel. Audio/ Video spots on emerging issues viz. Rabi/Kharif 
campaign,   Kisan Call Centre, Kisan Credit Card  etc. are also  publicized  
through the programme  using free commercial time. Live „Crop Seminars‟ 
on DD involving farmers and experts have also been organized. 
 
The other component of the mass media initiative is use of 96 FM 
Transmitter of AIR to broadcast area specific agricultural programme with 
30 minutes radio transmission in the evening six days a week.  
 
c. Kisan Call Centers  – The scheme was launched on 
21stJanuary„04 to provide agricultural information to the farming community 
through toll free telephone lines. A country wide common eleven digit 
number „ 1800-800-1551‟ has been allocated for KCC. The replies to the 
queries of the farming community are being given in 21 local languages. 
Calls are attended from 6.00 am to 10.00 pm on all 7 days of the week.  
Since inception of the scheme, over 30.78 la kh calls have been received 
upto 31st December,2008. 
2.58   The government is also taking steps to  minimize procurement and to 
ensure that stocks of essential foodgrains do not fall below the buffer stock 
norms.  Whenever necessary imports are also being resorted to, in orders to 
supplement domestic production. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.20 of Chapter – I of the Report)

 76 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12 Para No. 8.13) 
 
 
2.59 The Committee are concerned to note that the availability of agricultural 
land is decreasing mainly due to increase in the population and diversion of 
agricultural land for non -agricultural purposes such as urbanization, roads, 
industries etc. The Committee have been informed that the land is being 
acquired for setting up Special Economic Zones (SEZs) to generate 
employment through industries. Till now, the Government have given ap proval 
to 404 projects under SEZ for about 54,280 hectares land from 23 States/UTs 
out of which 95 approvals are in respect of State Industrial Development 
Corporation of State Government Agencies involving land areas of 
approximately 2000 hectares. The Co mmittee note that the Empowered Group 
of Ministers (EGOM) had discussed some important issues relating to SEZ viz (i) 
Norms for disposal of pending applications for SEZ; (ii) Fixing of minimum as 
well as maximum limit of land required for multi-product SEZs; (iii) Reformulation 
of a comprehensive Land Acquisition Act; and (iv) Working out a comprehensive 
Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy.  
 
 
  The Committee further note that to maintain the sustainable agricultural 
production to meet the requirement of  agricultural production in the country, the 
Ministry of Agriculture has formulated a 19 Action Points of National Land Use 
Policy Outline (NLPOS) for prevention of diversion of agricultural land for non 
agricultural purposes by the State Governments. The Committee are of the 
opinion that   setting up of large number of SEZ will affect not only agriculture 
adversely but also threaten food security and will undermine availability of 
resources for development. Industrialization is good for the prosperity of t he 
country but not at the cost of agricultural land. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the Government should not give the formal approval without obtaining a 
certificate from the State Government to the effect that waste land/degraded 
land/barren land was not available in the district for setting up of SEZ in the 
particular areas of State. The State Government should identify wasteland for 
development in lieu of agricultural land being acquired. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government sh ould give priority to acquire only 
barren and waste lands not exceeding 10% of the total land required under the 
SEZ. In case of utilization of agricultural land, if required for the purpose, the 
State Governments should try to compensate the agricultural land by improving 
the productivity of other agricultural lands. Further, they should try to locate 
other barren land and develop them into agriculturally sound productive land 
and formulate a Land Use Policy to minimize and regulate the conversion of 
agricultural land for other uses. The Committee are aware that the Land 
Acquisition Bill, 2007 is pending in Lok Sabha for discussion. The Committee 
desire that in the meantime the Government should frame model rules under the 
Land Acquisition Act for early implementation of the Act.  
 
 
 

 77 
Reply of Government 
2.60 The land and its management are under the exclusive legislative and 
administrative jurisdiction of the States as provided in Entry No. 18 of List of II 
(State List) of the Seventh Schedule to the Constit ution.  Acquisition of land for 
industrial or for development purposes including Special Economic Zones 
(SEZs) is being done by the concerned State Government. 
 
2. However, Ministry of Commerce and Industry has been requested 
that prime agricultural land s hould not be acquired for establishing SEZs 
and these Zones need to be established envariably on wastelands.  In 
unavoidable situations, if it is necessary to acquire agricultural land for a 
SEZ, the requiring body must develop equal area of wastelands 
simultaneously so that the loss of agricultural land could be compensated 
(copy of the letter enclosed). 
 
3. The Department of Land Resources, Ministry of Rural 
Development has formulated a revised National Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Policyt (NRRP), 2007 , which was approved by the Cabinet 
on 11th October, 2007, and the same have been published in the Gazette 
of India dated 31 st October, 2007.  The para 1.4 of NRRP, 2007 inter -alia 
envisages that as far as possible, projects may be set up on wasteland, 
degraded land or un -irrigated land.  Acquisition of agricultural land for 
non-agricultural use in the project may be kept to the minimum, multi -
cropped land may be avoided to the extend possible for such purposes, 
and acquisition of irrigated land, if unavoid able, may be kept to the 
minimum.   
 
4.  The Land Acquisition (amendment) Bill, 2007 was introduced in 
the Lok Sabha on 6 th December, 2007 and it is referred to the Standing 
Committee on Rural Development for examination.  The Committee has 
presented its T hirty-ninth Report, covering the The Land Acquisition 
(amendment) Bill, 2007, to the Lok Sabha on 21.10.08 and laid the same 
in Rajya Sabha on the same date. 
 
5. In this Report, the Committee has made detailed observations on 
the Bill and has made a number  of recommendations.  These 
recommendations have been examined and views of the Department 
firmed up.  The official amendment to the Bill has been developed by this 
Department in consultation with the Ministry of Law.  These official 
amendments were consid ered by the Cabinet and the revised Bill has 
been passed by the Lok Sabha on 25 th February, 2009 and sent to Rajya 
Sabha for consideration.  However, the Bill has been lapsed due to 
dissolution of the Fourteenth Lok Sabha.  This Bill is under consideration  
of the Government.   
 

 78 
6. This Department had requested to Ministry of Agriculture to take 
necessary action to convene the meeting of the National Land Use and 
Conservation Board (NLBC), so that the issues relating to conversion of 
agriculture land for non -agriculture purposes including SEZ, formation of 
a National Land Use Policy, etc. could be discussed.  However, Ministry 
of Agriculture vide their note No. I -50/2008-NLM-I dated 24 th July, 2008 
that Planning Commission has discontinued the National Land U se and 
Conservation Board vides their D.O. letter No. 11021/2/2003 -Afr. Dated 
13th August, 2004.  This Department has again requested to Ministry of 
Agriculture for the taking necessary action for revival of the National Land 
Use and conservation Board on 19th February, 2009.   
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.23 of Chapter – I of the Report)

 79 
Recommendation (Sl No. 14 Para No. 9.14) 
 
2.61 The Committee are concerned to note that the Government has not 
been able to fulfill its commitment to help the poor in the context of rise in prices 
of essential commodities through PDS. The Committee note th at the 
Government supplies subsidized foodgrains to the poor families under Public 
Distribution System. FCI has been given the responsibility for procurement, 
storage, transportation and distribution of foodgrains to the public through a 
network of more th an 4.93 lakh Fair Price Shops (FPS).  Identification of 
beneficiaries, issue of ration cards, monitoring and supervision of FPS, rest with 
the State Governments/UTs. Under Antodaya Anna Yojana (AAY), foodgrains to 
the poorest of the poor families at a high ly subsidized rate i.e. Rs. 2 per kg for 
wheat and Rs. 3 per kg for rice is supplied. The Committee find that although 
the Government has formulated and is following the strategy to issue 
foodgrains, edible oils and pulses at subsidized rates to the BPL, A AY and APL 
families, yet it has not been able to help the poorer sections of the society due to 
the shortcomings in the functioning of PDS. The Committee strongly 
recommend that 20% of the poor persons who are above poverty line i.e. just 
above BPL should be considered for supply of PDS foodgrains at subsidized 
rates. One of the menace in the proper functioning of PDS is the leakage and 
diversion of foodgrains at large scale, which fact has also been corroborated in 
the evaluation study conducted by NCAER. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that to stop the leakage and diversion of foodgrains, Government 
should introduce Vehicle Movement System to track the delivery of foodgrains to 
Fair Price Shops (FPS). The Government should also persuade the St ates/UTs 
to strengthen its enforcement machinery to take action in case of diversion and 
leakage of foodgrains. The Committee are of the view that the very purpose of 
supply of foodgrains at highly subsidized prices is defeated if the benefit of 
TPDS does not reach to the intended persons of AAY, BPL and APL families 
and are diverted to open market for sale at higher rates. The Committee feel 
that although the management and operation of PDS is the joint responsibility of 
Central and State Governments conce rned, yet it is the Central Government 
which procures and allocates the foodgrains to the State Governments which in 
turn distribute foodgrains through their agencies within their respective States. It 
is, therefore, the responsibility of the Central Gover nment to devise a 
mechanism to obviate the diversion of foodgrains meant for distribution to 
poorer people of the society. The Committee, therefore, emphasize that the 
issue of diversion of foodgrains should be tackled with utmost seriousness and 
recommend that to check the diversion of foodgrains, a joint special audit by 
officials of FCI and State Governments should be conducted in the event of 
offtake being abnormally high. 
 
Reply of Government 
2.62 As regards the recommendation of the committee that 20%  of the poor 
persons who are above poverty line i.e. just above BPL should be considered for 
supply of PDS foodgrains at subsidized rates, it is stated that as informed in the 
earlier reply of the Department, allocations of foodgrains to States and Union 

 80 
Territories for APL category are made by the Department depending upon their 
availability in the Central Pool after meeting the commitments of allocations for 
BPL and AAY categories and other welfare scheme.  
2. While allocations of foodgrains for the APL c ategory were made in 
larger quantities in earlier years to liquidate surplus stocks of foodgrains 
in the Central Pool, with lower procurement and resultant reduced 
availability of rice and wheat in the Central Pool from 2006 -07 onwards, 
their allocations f or the APL category were rationalized.  Allocations to 
States & UTs were made by linking them with levels of offtake during 
previous years.  However, whenever quantities of foodgrains available in 
the Central Pool could accommodate, additional allocations have also 
been made for the APL category.  With these rationalized allocations, the 
State & UT Governments were expected to carry out a similar exercise so 
as to distribute the revised allocations to the more needy of the APL 
families.  
3. With record high  procurement of wheat during the Rabi Marketing 
Season 2008-09 and higher procurement of rice during KMS 2007 -08, for 
additional allocations for the APL category, larger quantities of wheat and 
rice became available in the central pool during later part of  financial year 
2008-09.  In view of this and considering the recommendation of the 
Standing Committee for modifying the APL allocations to cover at least 
20% of the population covered under this category, the Government has 
taken a decision in March, 2009  to allocate further additional quantities of 
rice and wheat for the APL category so as to ensure allocation of at least 
10 kg. of foodgrains per APL family per month in all States & Union 
Territories to cover the total number of APL families as per March,  2000 
estimates of population.  
4. It may be stated that the total number of APL families in the 
country as per the population estimate of March, 2000 was 11.52 crore.  
So, if 20% of these families, namely 2.30 crore APL families are to be 
covered even with a scale of allocation of 35 kg. of foodgrains per family 
per month, the monthly required allocations would be of 8.05 lakh tons of 
foodgrains.  The Government has decided, in March, 2009, to make 
allocation of foodgrains to ensure distribution of at leas t 10 kg. of 
foodgrains per APL family per month to all APL families in all States & 
UTs.  This would require monthly allocation of only 11.52 lakh tons.  
However, the actual monthly allocations of rice and wheat to States & 
UTs for the APL category from Ma rch, 2009 are of 15.36 lakh tons.  
Therefore, out of the present allocations made to States & UTs, they can 
distribute foodgrains even upto 35 kg. per APL family per month to more 
than 20% of the total APL families in each of the States & UTs.  
5. As regar ds the recommendation of the Committee that 
Government should introduce Vehicle Movement System to track the 
delivery of foodgrains to Fair Price Shops (FPS), to stop the leakage and 
diversion of foodgrains, this Department has issued directions to State &  
UT Governments, vide this Department letter No.9(12)/2006/PD -II dated 
2.11.2006, for displaying Banners/Boards, on vehicles transporting PDS 
commodities from central godowns to the Fair Price Shops indicating that 

 81 
the vehicles are carrying PDS commodities .   Such Banners/Boards  
should be  written/printed  in black  ink  and as far as possible, should be 
in the local language and should be displayed prominently on the wind 
shield as well as the rear end of the truck/vehicle carrying PDS articles.  
With the  display of these details, public awareness gets generated, the 
action of transportation of PDS commodities becomes transparent and 
thus chances of diversion get reduced.   
6. In addition, this Department has launched an Innovative Scheme 
of installing Glo bal Positioning System (GPS) devices on vehicles 
carrying TPDS foodgrains, for curbing leakages/diversion of foodgrains 
meant for Public Distribution System during their transportation. Under 
the scheme, on pilot basis, the State Governments of Chhattishga rh, 
Tamil Nadu and Government of NCT of Delhi have been released a sum 
of Rs.45 lakhs for installation of GPS sets on vehicles carrying PDS 
foodgrains in these States.  During implementation of pilot scheme, its 
feasibility in tracking movement of vehicles  will get tested.  On the basis 
of implementation of the pilot scheme in above States/UTs, if it is found to 
be successful, the scheme will be rolled over to other States/UTs for 
installation of GPS sets on vehicles carrying PDS foodgrains.  
7. As regards conducting of Joint Special Audit by officials of FCI and 
State Governments in the event of offtake being abnormally high, it is 
submitted that offtake details of TPDS allocations of rice and wheat in 
States & UTs over a period of two years and  nine month s i.e. from April, 
2006 to December, 2008, have been examined in detail.  During this 
period, APL allocations were rationalized.  The offtake levels have not 
been abnormally high in any State/UT.  As a result, the need has not 
arisen for taking up joint sp ecial inspection/audit by teams of FCI and 
State Government officers. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 
 

 82 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16 Para No. 10.12) 
 
2.63 The Committee note that the Central Government has taken a number of 
steps to control the prices of essential commodities. One of the major initiatives 
taken by the Government was to issue Wheat (Stock Declaration by Companies 
or Firms or Individuals)  Order, 2007 through which it was made mandatory for 
any company, individual to file return if they purchase wheat in excess of 50,000 
metric tonnes.  So far as implementation of these orders is concerned it has 
been mentioned that only 17 State Government s/UTs have either issued stock 
limits for all the five items or wheat and pulses. 5 States/UTs have issued 
licensing requirements/stock declarations).  7 States are considering to issue 
stock limit orders.  7 States/UTs have decided not to issue stock limi t orders. 
The remaining 4 States/UTs have not responded at all.  The Secretary, 
Department of Consumer Affairs admitted during evidence that there is some 
amount of hoarding because except six, the other States have not taken steps 
to put the stock hoarding limit of wheat. In the opinion of the Committee, a large 
number of multi national companies or private traders have entered into the 
market in a big way and are purchasing huge quantity of wheat over and above 
Minimum Support Price (MSP) fixed by the Gov ernment. They procure wheat in 
excess of their requirement which leads to profiteering, hoarding and 
blackmarketing of wheat. The Committee feel that only filing the return by the 
individual or traders or companies will not give any tangible result to curb  the 
hoarding of wheat by them. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
matter should be taken at the highest level of the remaining States to implement 
the stock hoarding limit in letter and spirit to fight the menace of hoarding       
and blackmarke ting of essential commodities thereby helping in curbing the        
price rise.  
 
Reply of Government 
2.64 It is submitted that two different orders, are issued by Department of 
Consumer Affairs and the other by Department of Food and Public Distribution 
are being referred to in this para. 
 
2.65 The Orders issued by Department of Consumer Affairs relates to keeping 
in abeyance the provisions of Central Orders dated 15.02.2002 and 16.06.2003 
thereby causing State Governments/UT Administrations to impose stoc k limits 
on specific commodities viz. wheat, pulses, rice, edible oils, edible oilseeds, and 
paddy to prevent hoarding and blackmarketing of essential commodities with a 
view to keep the prices and availability in check.  So far as implementation of 
these orders is concerned it is mentioned that only 18 State Governments/UTs  
have either issued stock limits for all the five items or wheat and pulses only or 
have issued only licensing requirements/ stock declaration (of these 18, 13 
States/UTs have actually issued stock limit Orders/ in the process of iss uing, 5 
States/UTs have issued licensing requirements/stock declarations 
 
2.66 As per information provided, Department of Food & Public Distribution 
had issued a notification under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 on 1 st 
March, 2007 according to which a ny company or firm or individual which 
purchased wheat beyond 50,000 tonnes during 2007 -08 were to furnish to the 

 83 
Central Government, a return indicating the name/address of the company, 
quantity of wheat purchased, etc.  During RMS 2007 -08, ten (10) Compa nies 
filed the declarations under the Wheat (Stock Declaration by Companies or Firm 
or Individuals) Order, 2007”.  
 
2.67 The recommendation of the Steering Committee have been 
communicated to the State Governments for suitable action as per letter dated 
9.2.2009 addressed to all State Governments.   
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 

 84 
Recommendation (Sl. Nos. 18 & 19 Para No. 11.15 & 11.16) 
 
2.68    The Committee note that Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and 
Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential 
Commodities Act, 1980 empowers the State Governments/UTs to take action 
against the unscrupulous persons indulging in hoarding and  blackmarketing of 
essential commodities. From the information furnished by the Department of 
Consumer Affairs, the Committee find that during 2008, the rate of conviction of 
the persons arrested is very low as compared to the persons prosecuted for 
violation of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955. Out of 1,76,350 persons 
arrested during this period, 3416 persons were prosecuted and only 770 
persons were convicted. It is more surprising that in Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Kerala and Uttar Pradesh where 12,367,  22,867, 58, 346 and 19,869 
respectively raids were conducted but not a single person was convicted. In 
respect of Punjab, 20,584 raids were convicted but only 15 persons were 
arrested and out of 4 prosecution, only one person was convicted under the said 
Acts. The Committee are not satisfied with the argument of Department of 
Consumer Affairs that the enforcement of the Essential Commodities Acts lies 
with the State Governments and Union Territories to take action against the 
hoarders and blackmarketers. I n the opinion of the Committee, the Central 
Government cannot shrink with its responsibility for the proper implementation of 
the Acts. According to the Department, going by the „NIL‟ reports sent by some 
State Governments/UTs, it can be presumed that these State Governments/UTs 
might not have conducted any raids or not have detained any persons for 
indulging in malpractices in essential commodities. The Committee deplore the 
lackadaisical approach of State Governments/UTs in either not furnishing any 
„monthly action taken reports‟ or by giving „NIL‟ reports. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Department should strengthen its 
enforcement machinery and direct the State Government/UTs to conduct regular 
raids to catch hold the hoarders and blackmarketers who create artificial scarcity 
leading to price rise and to ensure that the persons arrested are prosecuted 
strictly in accordance with the law of land. It will also help the Government to 
keep check over the rising in prices of essential commodities.  
2.69   The Committee note that as per Section 3 of the „Prevention of Black -
Marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980‟, 
the State Governments/UTs are required to report the details of detention cases 
to the Central  Government within 7 days from the date of approval of detention 
case by the State Governments/UTs. The Committee find that only 5 State 
Governments have furnished information in this regard to the Department of 
Consumer Affairs during the year 2007 and 20 08 (upto 18.09.2008). The 
Committee are of the view that other State Governments have not furnished any 
information so it may be construed that except 5 State Governments/UTs, other 
State Governments/UTs have not made any detention under the Act. It appear s 
to the Committee that the remaining States/UTs are not serious in the 
implementation of the Acts and, therefore, Department of Consumer Affairs is 
being kept in the dark by most of the State Governments by not abiding by 
Section 3 of the aforesaid Act. T he Committee, therefore, recommend that the 

 85 
State Governments should be persuaded to supply the information of detention 
cases within the prescribed time limit as per the Act.  
Reply of Government 
 
2.70 The enforcement of the Essential Commodities Act, 195 5 lies with the 
State Governments/ Union Territories. The State Governments/UT 
Administrations have been delegated powers to take necessary action under the 
provisions of both “The Essential Commodities Act, 1955” and “The Prevention 
of Blackmarketing of Essential Commodities Act, 1980”, to prevent mal-practices 
in    essential   commodities.    Besides, Central Government  is also regularly 
monitoring actions being taken by various States/UTs under the aforementioned 
two Acts. 
 
2.71 Directions have been given to States/UTs from time to time to take 
necessary actions under both the Acts to prevent hoarding and smuggling.      
Secretary (Consumer Affairs) had,  vide his d.o. letter dt. 14.06.2007 advised 
Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs,  to strengthen the enforcement machinery to 
prevent mal practices in essential commodities and take necessary action 
against the unscrupulous persons indulging in hoarding and blackmarketing of 
essential commodities. In addition to the above  the recommendations of the 
Committee contained in its  24 th  Report  on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of  
Department of Consumer Affairs, have also been communicated to the State 
Governments/UTs vide Secretary (Consumer Affairs)‟s d.o. letter No.2/1/2008 -
ECR&E dated 16.06.2008 for taki ng immediate action to check price rise in 
essential commodities and keep this Department posted with the action taken by 
them. For this purpose this Department has asked all state Governments/UT 
Administrations to submit monthly reports to the Central Gov ernment (this 
Department) indicating the action taken under the provisions of these two Acts.  
Conferences with the Secretaries of Consumer Affairs, Food & Civil Supplies 
Departments of all States/UTs are held by this Department periodically in which 
all t he State Governments/UT Administrations are emphasized upon to take 
necessary actions under the provisions of these two Acts to check hoardings, 
smugglings etc. of essential commodities by unscrupulous traders/persons. 
Another meeting with State Secretarie s has been held on 16 th June, 2008 in 
which it has been emphasized upon them to take all necessary  measures    to 
prevent hoarding and blackmarketing which lead to non -availability of essential 
commodities coupled with rise in prices. Further, periodical video conferences 
are also arranged with States/UTs under the chairpersonship of Additional 
Secretary (Consumer Affairs) wherein the need for taking effective action under 
these two Acts by the States/UTs is reiterated.  So far seven such video 
conferences have been held between May, 2006 and May, 2008.  This was also 
taken up in the Chief Secretaries conference held under the chairmanship of 
Cabinet Secretary on 22.04.2008.   
 
 
 2.72 Moreover vide this Department‟s d.o.letter Nos.13(1)/2007 -ECR&E dated 
15.12.2008 and 23.12.2008 the State Governments/UT Administrations were 

 86 
requested, inter-alia, to furnish the action taken reports in time  and also furnish 
reasons for low prosecution/conviction vis-à-vis the number of arrests.  It is seen 
that only 15 States/UTs have responded of which 10 of them have not given any 
specific reason.  The following 5 State Governments/UTs have given the 
specific reasons  indicated as under: 
 
(i).ANDHRA PRADESH :  As per Section 6( C ) (2), if a person, against 
whom prosecution has been launched the stock confiscated has to be 
returned or the value thereof should be paid.  Therefore, prosecutions are 
launched only depending upon the gravity of offence where there i s a 
good case for getting conviction.  Secondly, all the enforcement official 
under various control orders do not have any powers to arrest and  hence 
the seizure is only effected.  However, whenever any Police Officer or the 
officers having Magisterial po wers inspect, the arrests are resorted to.  
Even in the Court of Law, depending upon the merits as viewed by them,  
the conviction are ordered through the case presented properly. 
 
  
(ii). MADHYA PRADESH:  As per the Public Distribution System(Control) 
Order, 2001, the powers of search and seizure by designated authorities 
as laid down in clause 10 are  yet to be notified by the State Government.  
Presently, the TPDS in the State is governed by the M.P.Public 
Distribution System Scheme, 1991.  Although the number of cases 
involving irregularities are substantial, the cases detected after due 
process of law, are only compounded by the designated authorities. 
 
 
(iii).TAMIL NADU:   In Tamil Nadu matters relating to Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 and several con trol orders made thereunder are 
dealt with and enforced jointly by the Civil Supplies CID, regular police 
force and officials of the revenue and Civil Supplies and Consumer 
Protection Department.  Close  vigil  and  watch  by  officials  and  
formation  of  check posts at State Borders are some of the effective 
measures towards prevention of smuggling of essential commodities.  
These measures helped to prevent commission of offences to a 
considerable extent.  In addition to prosecution under the Essential 
Commodities Act, several habitual offenders are detained under the 
Prevention of Black Marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential 
Commodities Act, 1980 resulting in considerable reduction of offences 
under the Essential Commodities Act 1955.  Most ca ses which are minor 
in nature involving very meager quantity of essential commodities are 
dealt under Section 6(A) of E.C.Act by District Collectors without initiating 
prosecution before Court.  Unlike criminal cases, the enforcing officials 
under the Essential Commodities Act have to play dual role namely (1) to 
launch prosecution before the court of law and (2) to initiate 6(A) 
proceedings before the District Collector.  As both these jobs are equally 
laborious and time consuming, the officials find it di fficult to concentrate 
on detection of offences under Essential Commodities Act.  Further, 
police officials, while invoking the Prevention of Black Marketing and 

 87 
Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980 have to 
often attend the Collectors office.  Advisory Board and High Courts which 
is time consuming and laborious. 
 
 After completion of investigation, final reports are filed before the 
Magistrate Courts.  Magistrates deal with these cases along with other 
criminal cases.  Due to heavy pen dency of cases, Magistrate Courts are 
not able to give priority to the disposal of cases under the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955.  Since offences under the Essential 
Commodities Act impacts on food security, speedy trial is a must.  
However trial in Esse ntial Commodities Act cases commence long after 
they are charged and filed in court.  If speedy trial is ensured, more 
conviction is possible. 
 
 
(iv)  ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ADMINISTRATION:   The reason for 
low prosecution/conviction vis -à-vis the number of ar rests for the 
incidents of diversion of PDS foodgrains and black marketing are almost 
nil in this UT due to the fact that the entire population of the UT is 
covered under the PDS.  The unique topography of the Islands coupled 
with the absence of any manufa cturing unit making bye -products i.e. 
Maida, Sooji etc. of PDS grains helps in imposing an automatic check 
over the diversion and black marketing of PDS items in these Islands.  
There has been no arrests/prosecution as per available records for 
violation u nder the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and Prevention of 
Black Marketing Act, 1980 in this UT. 
 
 
(v) LAKSHADWEEP UNION TERRITORY ADMINISTRATION:  The 
Union Territory of Lakshadweep is very small UT where Public 
Distribution System is chanalised through a net work of Co -operative 
Societies which are under the supervision of the Administration, which 
does not leave scope for malpractice.  The Administration is also involved 
in the function of the Cooperative Societies (Fair Price Shops) by posting 
the Chief Executives in the Cooperative Societies.  Every fortnightly, 
monthly and annually verification of the Fair Price Shops are also being 
conducted. The UT consists of 10 inhabited islands, the population of 
which varies from 250 persons to 10,000 people.  The re is hardly any 
private shop which is running with tenure of more than one lakh.  These 
are only small petty shops.  Therefore there is no scope for any 
malpractice. Hence no persons have been arrested, prosecuted or 
convicted for violation of Essential Commodities Act. 
 
  In addition to the above  the recommendations of the Committee 
contained in its  27 th  Report  on Price Rise of Essential Commodities - 
Causes  and  Effects  with  special  emphasis  on  import  of  wheat  and 
enforcement of Prevention of  Black Marketing and Maintenance of 
Supply of Essential Commodities Act, 1980 have  also been 
communicated to the State Governments/UTs vide Secretary (Consumer 

 88 
Affairs)‟s d.o. letter No.2/7/2007 -ECR&E dated 09.02.2009 for  taking 
immediate action to suppl y the information of detention cases with the 
prescribed time limit as per the Act.  As deplored by the Standing 
Committee the lackadaisical approach of the State Governments/UTs in 
either not furnishing any „Monthly Action Taken Reports” or by giving „Nil ” 
Reports have also been communicated to them. These letters and the 
observations/recommendations of the Committee as communication to 
the State Government/UTs would give the necessary impetus to them to 
move the pace of implementation of the two Acts. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.29 of Chapter – I of the Report)

 89 
Recommendation (Sl No. 23 Para No. 12.24) 
 
2.73 The Committee find that the creation of awareness among the farmers 
and related bodies and organizations was one of the major activities of the 
commission. The Committee has been informed that the benefits of future 
markets have not tickled down to the small and marginal farmers in a big way 
mainly due to their ignorance and lack of awareness and non -availability of 
appropriate infrastructure. The Committee has also been informed that the FMC 
is collaborating with the commodity exchanges, agr icultural universities etc. to 
launch awareness campaigns to create awareness amongst the farmers and in 
the financial year 2007 -08, FMC has conducted 114 awareness programmes 
out of which 75 were exclusively for farmers. While the Committee appreciate 
the steps taken by FMC to spread awareness among the farmers, it is not 
enough and a lot more is needed to be done so that the benefits of future 
market could reach the level of small and marginal farmers in a big way. 
 
Reply of Government 
2.74 The FMC fully appreciates the concerns of the Committee with regard to 
the awareness programmes.  Organising awareness programmes across the 
country for the benefit of farmers and various other stake holders requires huge 
resources in terms of finances and manpower. How ever, despite various 
constraints the number of awareness programmes organised by the Forward 
Markets Commission has increased from 55 in 2006 -07 to 114 in 2007 -08. 
During 2008 -09 (till December, 2008), the number of awareness programmes 
organised has been  107. 65 -70 % of these programmes are now devoted to 
farmers. Besides FMC has also organised various capacity building 
programmes. In this regard, the Commission is taking help of the following 
organizations who have rural connectivity. 
 
1. NABARD 
2. NIAM 
3. VAMNICOM 
4. AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES 
5. MANAGE 
6. IRMA etc. 
  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 
 

 90 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 26 Para No. 13.28) 
2.75 The Committee note that the total production of crude oil by two major oil 
companies i.e. by ONGC and Oil India Limited was 30.14 million metric tonnes 
during 2005-06, 31.513 million metric tonnes during 2006 -07 and 31.362 million 
metric tonnes during 2007 -08.  The Committee was informed during evidence 
that around 80 per cent of our requirement was met through imports.  The 
Committee further note that the Government has permitted export of all other 
petroleum products except LPG and Kerosene.  The Committee are surprised to 
note that on the one hand about 80 per cent of our petroleum requirement is met 
by imports and on the other hand permission is granted to some oil companies 
to export these products for profit depending upon geographic locations. The 
argument put forth by the Ministry that crude oil is imported at a particular price 
and is exported after value addition is not acceptable to the Committee. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the export of petroleum products be 
allowed only after the domestic requirements are met.  
 
Reply of Government 
2.76 In the year 2007 -08, domestic production of crude oil (including 
condensate) was 34.11 Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) and the imports of crude 
oil were 121.67 MMT.  There is a surplus refining capacity i n the country today.  
As against the total domestic consumption of petroleum products of 128.94 
MMT during 2007 -08, the country produced 149.89 MMT of refined petroleum 
products, with the private sector refineries contributing 40.92 MMT.  Therefore, 
the surplus products have necessarily to be exported. During 2007 -08, 39,327 
Thousand Metric Tonne (TMT) of petroleum products worth Rs.107,603 crores 
were exported as against product imports of 22,716 TMT worth Rs.61,504 crore 
during the previous year.   
 
2.77 The Kandla Special Economic Zone, under the Ministry of Commerce 
and Industry, Government of India in February, 2007 converted the Domestic 
Tariff Area (DTA) unit of Reliance Industries Limited at Jamnagar into a 100% 
Export Oriented Unit (EOU) under the E OU Scheme of Foreign Trade Policy.  
Under the provisions of the EOU Scheme, the Jamnagar Unit of RIL was to 
export its entire production excluding the following products: 
 
(i) Kerosene and LPG, which cannot be exported without the specific 
permission of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas; and 
(ii) The products which are allowed for sale in DTA under EOU 
scheme for a period of 5 years from the date of commencement of 
production. 
 
2.78 Accordingly, Jamnagar unit of RIL has thus been exporting its product s, 
barring Kerosene and LPG, under the EOU Scheme of Foreign Trade Policy 
formulated by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry.  RIL had approached this 
Ministry on some occasions for permission to export their LPG production but 
permission was not given in the public interest. 
 

 91 
2.79 The major factor contributing to the import of Petrol & Diesel by the Public 
Sector Oil Marketing Companies is an increase in their domestic demand.  Also, 
some imports and exports of Petrol & Diesel are necessitated due to the 
stipulations of the Auto Fuel Policy, which has laid down strict emission norms 
for auto fuels being used in the country.  Similarly, for products other than Petrol 
& Diesel, exports and imports are found necessary on ground of technical 
specifications of products, and their suitability in Indian conditions. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 
 

 92 
Recommendation (Sl No. 27 Para No. 13.29) 
 
2.80 The Committee note that the prices of crude oil in the International 
Market came down substantially from $147 per barrel to around less than $40 
per barrel but the prices of petroleum products viz Diesel, Petrol, Kerosene and 
LPG had not been reduced and t he benefits of the decrease in prices of crude 
oil in International Market did not percolate down to the domestic consumers.  
The Committee was informed that the under -recoveries of the oil companies are 
estimated to be around Rs. 1,24,000 crores on comple tion of the whole year.  
The huge under -recoveries of the oil companies was stated to be the main 
reason for not decreasing the prices in domestic market despite decrease in the 
price of crude oil in the International market. The substantial devaluation of  
Indian currency i.e. Rupee as compared to dollar was another reason attributed 
by the Ministry for not decreasing the prices of petroleum products in the 
domestic market.  However, the Government has recently reduced the prices of 
petrol and diesel in dom estic market by Rs. 5 per litre and Rs. 2 per litre 
respectively but the prices of LPG remained unchanged. The Committee feel 
that the minimal reduction in prices is not enough and more needs to be done 
keeping in view the fact that the prices of crude oil  in International Market still 
has a reducing trend and recommend that the effect of reduction in the price of 
crude oil should percolate down to the consumers and consequently the prices 
of four major petroleum products viz. Petrol, Diesel, Kerosene and L PG be 
further reduced in proportion to the reduction in the price of crude oil in the 
International Market and the Public Sector Oil Marketing companies be 
compensated whenever there is  an increase in the price of crude oil so as to  
offset the losses to be suffered by the oil companies.  
 
Reply of Government 
2.81 International prices of crude oil and petroleum products have remained 
volatile in the recent past. The Indian basket of crude oil, which averaged 
$79.25 / bbl during 2007 -08, went up to an unprecedented level of $142.04 per 
barrel on 3rd July‟2008 before declining sharply, due to fall in demand on 
account of economic recession in major oil consuming countries. The average 
price of Indian basket of crude oil came down to $ 46.02/ bbl. in Marc h‟09. 
However, the average price of Indian basket of crude oil for the year 2008 -09 
was $ 83.57/bbl. 
 
2.82 As the retail prices of sensitive petroleum products were not revised in 
line with the increase in international prices, it resulted in huge under -recoveries 
to the Public Sector Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs).  
 
2.83 With the decline in the international prices of crude and product prices 
since August‟08, the total gross under -recoveries of Public Sector OMCs during 
2008-09 are now estimated to be aro und Rs.1,03,181 crores. Considering the 
financial position of the OMCs, Government has decided that the entire under -
recoveries on the sale of sensitive petroleum products during 2008 -09 shall be 
compensated through price discounts by upstream oil PSUs and  issue of Oil 
Bonds by the Government.   
 

 93 
2.84 In view of the recent decline in the international oil prices, the 
Government has reduced the RSPs of the sensitive petroleum products on two 
occasions as indicated below (at Delhi), with corresponding reducti ons in the 
rest of the country :   
 
 Effective from 6.12.2008 – Petrol by Rs.5/ - per litre and Diesel by Rs.2/ - 
per litre; and 
 Effective from 29.1.2009 – Petrol by Rs.5/ - per litre, Diesel by Rs.2/ - per 
litre and Domestic LPG by Rs.25/- per cylinder. 
 
The r etail selling price of PDS Kerosene has not been revised since      
March 2002. 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 

 94 
Recommendation (Sl No. 28 Para No. 13.30) 
 
2.85 The Committee further note that State Level Taxes form a substantial 
part of the retail selling price of Petrol and Diesel.  The rates of taxation vary 
widely from State to State from 18% to 33% in case of Petrol and from 8.8% to 
26% in case of Diesel.  According to the Ministry they were constantly writing to 
the State Governments to reduce the sales tax so as to make it uniform 
throughout the country. No State Government can charge more than 4% as Tax 
on Kerosene and LPG. The Government is t rying this in case of Petrol and 
Diesel. The Committee are not satisfied with the version of the Ministry that they 
are constantly writing to the States to reduce the Sales/VAT Tax and 
recommend that the Government should take up the matter in right earnes t at 
the higher levels in the State Governments and make the taxes uniform 
throughout the country as has been done in case of Kerosene and LPG.  
 
Reply of Government 
2.86 The Central Government, on its part, has taken a number of measures to 
rationalize th e Taxes and Duties on Petrol and Diesel, to keep the consumer 
prices of these products within reasonable limits.  From 5.6.2008, Customs Duty 
on crude oil has been reduced from 5% to NIL and on Petrol and Diesel from 
7.5% to 2.5%.  The ad -valorem portion of Excise Duty on unbranded Petrol and 
Diesel has also been done away with, with effect from 1.3.2008.  The specific 
Excise Duty on unbranded Petrol and Diesel was also reduced by Re.1/ - per 
litre w.e.f. 5.6.2008. 
 
2.87 The subject matter of Sales Tax comes  under the purview of the State 
Governments.  However, in order to cushion the burden of the price hike in 
these products effected on 5 th June 2008, the matter of reduction of Sales Tax 
was taken up with the State Governments and they were requested to bri ng 
down the State Taxes on the sale of Petrol/Diesel.  Many State Governments 
responded and reduced the Sales Tax on these products. As regards the 
Committee‟s recommendation to „make the State level taxes on Petrol and 
Diesel uniform throughout the countr y as has been done in case of Kerosene 
and LPG‟, it is submitted that with effect from 19.4.2006, the Central 
Government included Domestic LPG in the „Declared Goods‟ category under the 
Central Sales Tax Act, thereby ensuring a maximum Sales Tax/VAT rate o f 4% 
across the country.  The subject of conferring „Declared Goods‟ status on any 
goods/products comes under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Finance. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 

 95 
Recommendation (Sl No. 30 Para No. 13.32) 
 
2.88 The Committee find that according to the comprehensive study 
conducted by National Council for Applied Economic Research (NCAER) the 
leakage in kerosene was about 38.6%  of total sale of PDS Kerosene.  The 
Committee also find that at times the cylinders of domestic LPG were delivered 
underweight.  According to the Ministry constant checks were conducted by Oil 
Marketing Companies in their bottling plants and the cylinders  were weighed.  
The representative of the Ministry was candid during evidence in admitting that 
in spite of all that it was happening.  He also admitted during evidence that the 
system was not immune to malpractices.  The Committee take a serious view of 
the situation prevailing and recommend that the Government take stringent 
measures to check the malpractices of diversion of kerosene and underweight 
of gas cylinders and make foolproof measures to make the system immune to 
such malpractices.  
 
Reply of Government 
2.89 The possibility of black marketing / diversion of subsidized PDS Kerosene 
Oil and Domestic LPG cylinders by some unscrupulous elements cannot be 
ruled out due to the wide gap between the retail selling prices of these 
subsidized products and their market price. 
 
2.90 Distribution of PDS Kerosene is under the control of the respective State 
Governments.  As per Kerosene Control Order, action can be taken by State 
Governments against any person who is selling or using PDS Kerosene for a 
purpose other than the intended use as per the Control Order. 
 
2.91 In order to prevent diversion of PDS Kerosene, the field officers of the 
Public Sector Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) inspect the Kerosene 
Dealerships once in a quarter and senior level officers i nspect the Dealerships 
once in a year.  During the inspection, they check for the following malpractice: 
 
 Non-observance of Government/Company regulations. 
 Over charging. 
 Unauthorized purchase. 
 Stock variation. 
 
2.92 In case of any irregularity, action is taken as per the Marketing Discipline 
Guidelines.  They also ensure that the Dealers uplift Kerosene as per the 
schedule.  In addition, the State Civil Supplies authorities carry out inspection at 
Kerosene Dealerships to ensure that the product uplifted is  delivered to the fair 
price shops. 
 
2.93 Checking malpractices of diversion of PDS Kerosene is a continuous 
process and this Ministry keeps on reviewing the steps taken by the OMCs to 
curb its adulteration from time to time.  
 

 96 
2.94 The officials of the OM Cs carry out random checks at LPG Distributors‟ 
godowns, delivery points, as well as en -route, to ensure that no misuse takes 
place.  The Distributors of OMCs are under strict instructions to check the 
weight of cylinders at their godowns before delivery, and only the cylinders with 
the specified weight are to be delivered to the customers.  The Distributors have 
also been instructed to ensure that the seals are verified & shown to the 
customers at the time of delivery.  In case any under -weight cylinder is received 
by the customer, such cylinders are replaced free of charge by the OMCs. 
 
2.95 OMCs have introduced different colours for domestic and non -domestic 
LPG cylinders for controlling the diversion of Domestic LPG for        
unauthorized use. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 

 97 
Recommendation (Sl No. 31 Para No. 13.33) 
 
 
2.96 The Committee was informed by the Ministry that the subsidies on 
kerosene and domestic LPG were to be phased out in three to five years time.  
The Government reviewed the position of fiscal subsidies on kerosene and LPG 
in October, 2007 and extended the scheme till 31  March, 2010.  The Committee 
find that the subsidy provided by the Government on kerosene and domestic 
LPG was  Rs. 2.45 per litre and Rs. 67.75 per cylinder respectively in the year 
2002-03 which was reduced to Rs. 0.82 per litre and Rs. 22.58 per cylinder 
during 2007 -08.  According to the Ministry the intention of t he Government at 
that time was to come to market related prices and remove all subsidy element.  
During evidence also the Ministry admitted that the subsidy element has 
decreased.  The Committee was assured that BPL families will continue to get 
kerosene a t the subsidized rates.  The Committee are not convinced with the 
reasoning of the Ministry and recommend that the BPL families who constitute 
about 26% of the population be provided domestic LPG also at the subsidized 
rates, the subsidies on LPG and keros ene be increased and the oil companies 
be compensated by way of oil bonds etc.  
 
Reply of Government 
2.97 At present, the prices of PDS Kerosene and Domestic LPG are 
subsidized.  On every 14.2 kg cylinder of Domestic LPG, the Government gives 
a subsidy of Rs.22.58 whereas the OMCs incur an under -recovery of Rs.87.99 
(as of May, 2009). Price of PDS Kerosene has not been increased since March‟ 
2002 and is very low, compared to the other countries in the region. 
 
2.98 With the decline in the international pric es of Crude oil and product 
prices, the Government has reduced the price of Domestic LPG by Rs.25/ - per 
14.2 kg cylinder with effect from 29 th January, 2009.  Considering the difficult 
financial position of the OMCs, Government has decided that during the year 
2008-09, the entire under-recoveries on the sale of sensitive petroleum products 
shall be compensated through sharing by upstream oil PSUs and issue of Oil 
Bonds by the Government. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 

 98 
Recommendation (Sl No. 32 Para No. 13.34) 
 
2.99 Another malpractice found by the Committee was that the LPG cylinders 
were not delivered on time and were sold at higher price.  According to the 
Ministry whenever complaints in this regard were received by them those were 
attended to.  The Committee was informed that there were marketing discipline 
guidelines issued by the Ministry and all the oil marketing companies were 
bound to follow those guidelines. The Committee feel that merely issuance of 
guidelines will not sufficient as still such cases are rampant. The Committee are 
of the view that the monitoring mechanism in this regard needs to be 
strengthened. The Committee, therefor e, desire the Government to make 
concerted efforts in this direction so that all the oil marketing companies as well 
as the distributing agencies strictly adhere to the guidelines and further the oil 
distribution agencies who are not delivering the LPG cyl inders within the 
stipulated time or found selling at higher price are strictly punished. The 
Committee further desire that the oil companies should provide LPG cylinders to 
the distributing agencies in proportion to the number of consumers registered 
with them to avoid blackmarkeing of LPG cylinders. The Committee would like to 
be informed of the steps taken in this direction. 
 
Reply of Government 
2.100 The possibility of black marketing / diversion of subsidized Domestic LPG 
cylinders by some unscrupulous  elements cannot be ruled out due to the wide 
gap between the retail price of LPG for domestic use and the market price for 
commercial LPG. 
 
2.101 Public Sector Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) have detected 1112 
cases of diversion/overcharging of LPG by the  LPG Distributors in the country 
during the last three years and from April 2008 to December 2008.  Action 
against the erring Distributors was taken as per provisions of the Marketing 
Discipline Guidelines (MDS)/Distributorship Agreement. 
 
2.102 In order to stop black marketing/diversion of Domestic LPG cylinders, the 
Government has enacted “Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Regulation of Supply and 
Distribution) Order 2000” and formulated “Marketing Discipline Guidelines, 
2001” which provide for penal action agains t LPG Distributors, indulging in 
diversion/black marketing of LPG. 
 
2.103 Whenever OMCs receive complaints, these are investigated and if the 
complaint is established, suitable action is taken against the LPG Distributor (s) 
in accordance with the provisions of the Marketing Discipline Guidelines (MDG).  
MDG provide for following action against the Distributor:- 
 
- Fine of Rs.20,000 plus the price of LPG diverted, at commercial rates, 
for 1st offence. 
- Fine of Rs.50,000 plus the price of LPG diverted, at comme rcial rates, 
for 2nd offence. 
- Termination of the Distributorship for 3rd offence. 

 99 
 
2.104 In addition to the action taken by the OMCs, State Governments are 
empowered under the LPG (Regulation of Supply & Distribution) Order 2000 
promulgated under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 to take action against 
black marketing/diversion of Domestic LPG.  Similarly, the Weights and 
Measures Departments of the States / UTs initiate legal action against the LPG 
Distributors found black marketing /diverting the D omestic LPG cylinders.  The 
State Governments have been alerted from time to time to take steps against 
the black marketing /diversion of Domestic cylinders for unauthorized usage. 
 
2.105 Government have issued advertisements cautioning the public that use of 
Domestic LPG for non -domestic purposes is illegal, dangerous and against 
national interest.  Through these advertisements, cooperation of the general 
public has also been sought to report any irregularity / malpractice to the OMCs. 
 
2.106 The officials  of OMCs carry out random checks at LPG Distributors 
godowns, delivery points, as well as en -route to ensure that no misuse takes 
place.  The Distributors of OMCs are under strict instructions to check the 
weight of cylinders at their godowns before delive ry, and only cylinders with the 
specified weight are to be delivered to the customers.  The Distributors have 
also been instructed to ensure that the seals are verified & shown to the 
customers at the time of delivery.  In case any under -weight cylinder is received 
by the customer, such cylinders are replaced free of charge by the OMCs. 
 
2.107 OMCs have introduced different colours for domestic and non -domestic 
LPG cylinders for controlling the diversion of Domestic LPG for unauthorized 
use. 
 
2.108 The prod uct demand of the LPG Distributors is assessed by Public 
Sector Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) and a supply plan is drawn, per month 
basis, for each Distributor.  The demand plan is based not only on the number of 
customers attached to the LPG Distributors  but also on new connection 
releases, consumption pattern, backlog of the market etc.  However, in case a 
Distributor requires additional loads, it is also provided after ensuring 
genuineness of such demand. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 
 

 100 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT‟S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2 Para No. 2.9) 
3.1 The Committee further note that “Onion” was declared as essential 
Commodity vide Central Notification dated 29.6.1999 which was subsequently 
removed from the list of essential commodities vide Central notification dated 
25.11.2004.  The Committee are concerned to note that onion is the commodity 
which is used in every household whethe r rich or poor throughout the year.  
There are instances in the past when due to short supply of onion in the market, 
the Government had decided to distribute the onion through Super Bazar and 
Kendriya Bhandar on control rate.  The Committee are not convin ced with the 
arguments put forth by the Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs that 
Onion cannot be declared as essential commodity as it comes under the 
category of vegetable.  The Committee have observed that at times the prices of 
onion are much high  as compared to other vegetables in the market.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that in view of the gap in the production and 
demand and supply of onion, the Government should review its decision taken 
on 25.11.2004 and include the onion in the list of e ssential commodities to 
check hoarding and black -marketing and also to make available the onion to 
consumer at a reasonable prices.   
 
Reply of Government 
3.2 “Onion” was declared as essential commodity vide Central Notification 
dated 29.06.1999 and subseq uently removed from the list of essential 
commodities vide Central Notification dated 25.11.2004. The decision to remove 
“Onion” from the list of essential commodities was taken as part of the policy 
evolved by the Committee comprising of some Union Minist ers and Chief 
Ministers constituted during the Conference of Chief Ministers on “WTO and 
Agriculture” held on 21 st May, 2001. The said Committee had decided to 
dismantle all unnecessary and redundant controls on movement and 
distribution, particularly of a gricultural commodities, under the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955. 
 
 3.3 The question of notifying Onion prices is being separately examine.  
However, Government have been taking measures to contain rise in prices of 
onion whenever the need arose by increasing Minimum Export Price (MEP) and 
by arranging distribution of onion through Super Bazar, Mother Dairy, Kendriya 
Bhandar outlets. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 

 101 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20 Para No. 12.21) 
 
3.4 The Committee note that there were 3 National Multi Commodity 
Exchanges out of which 2 were situated in Mumbai and one at Ahmedabad. 
According to FMC, some more applications were in the process for recognition 
as National Multi Commodity Exchanges. The Committee desire that the 
National Multi Commodity Exchanges should be spread all over India and 
should not be limited to a particular area/zone and recommend that the 
recognition to other parties for National Multi Commodity Exchanges be 
accorded without any further loss of time. 
 
Reply of Government 
3.5 At present, there are 22 Commodity Exchanges including three with 
National Status recognized for forward trading in commodities.  The 
Forward Markets Commission has prescribed guidelines dated 24 th May, 
2008 for setting up of Commodity Exchanges with national status. In 
response to the press note, only one application for recognition of 
Commodity Exchanges with national status has been received so far and 
the same has been processed. The exchange proposes to set up its 
office in National Capital Region of Delhi.   There is no application 
pending with the Commission for setting up of a National Exchange at 
present. It may however, be  mentioned th at all the National Exchanges, 
though situated at Bombay and Ahmedabad, are accessable from any 
part of the country through a network of members spread over whole of 
the country and the electronic connectivity provided through internet/v -
sat. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 

 102 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 25 Para No. 12.26) 
 
3.6 The Committee note that pursuant to the recommendations of the 
Committee, the Government imposed a ban on trading of agricultural/essential 
commodities in the futures market from February, 2007. The Chairman, FMC 
informed the Committee during evidence that the ban on trading of these 
commodities in the futures market was still in operation. The Committee was 
surprised to find in the press the very next day, that the ban on trading of these 
commodities would be lifted after November, 2008. The Committee take a very 
serious view in this matter and recommend that the ban on trading of essential 
commodities should continue.   
 
Reply of Government 
 3.7 Futures markets are only a platform for price discovery and price risk 
management through hedging.  The trad ing in standardised futures contracts 
are essentially financial instruments which are the medium for these price 
discovery and hedging functions. The prices of the underlying physical 
commodities are governed by the supply and demand factors in the economy . 
The regulator, through enforcement of the regulatory measures and constant 
monitoring and corrective actions, ensures that futures prices are true reflection 
of the fundamental supply and demand factors. The futures market gives an 
advance price signal o f the expected price at future points of time on the basis 
of expected supply and demand at those points of time, based on which one can 
decide the course of action to be taken by him.  The Abhijit Sen Committee (an 
expert committee appointed by the Government of India under the chairmanship 
of Planning Commission Member Prof. Abhijit Sen to examine whether futures 
market was responsible for rise in the prices of essential commodities)  in its 
report submitted in April 2008, did not find futures markets res ponsible for the 
increase of the prices of essential commodities. A recent study by the Indian 
Institute of Management, Bangalore on wheat, rice, tur and urad also does not 
indicate any such influence of futures trading on the rise in the prices of such 
commodities. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 

 103 
CHAPTER –IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1 Para No. 2.8) 
4.1 The Committee note that under the Essential Commodities (Amendment) 
Act, 2006, only seven commodities have been retained as essential 
commodities. The Government considers four aspects to declare the commodity 
as essential viz. (i) the demand and supply position of the commodity during the 
last 4 -5 years and specific shortage, if any; (ii) whether any control/regulation 
has been resorted to during the last five years or so; (iii) supply trends so as to 
indicate if private variation was far above the normal rate of inflation; and (iv) 
import/export policy profile of the commodity.  Once the commodity is declared 
as essential, under the provision of section 3 of the Essential Commodities Ac t, 
the Government may issue orders inter -alia to  (a) regulate by licenses, permits 
or otherwise the production or manufacture of that commodity; (b) control the 
price at which it may be bought or sold;  (c) regulate by licenses, permits or 
otherwise its s torage, transport, distribution, disposal, acquisition use or 
consumption; (d) prohibit its withholding from sale. The Committee also note 
that pulses have already been included as essential commodities under the 
nomenclature „Foodstuffs” and, therefore, t he Department of Consumer Affairs 
does not feel the need to declare it as essential commodity separately.  The 
Committee feel that the due to less production of pulses, the country has to 
import pulses in a large quantity every year to meet the consumer de mand.  In 
the opinion of the Committee the word “pulses” should be clearly mentioned in 
the seven commodities which have been declared as essential.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that Section 3 (iii) of the Essential 
Commodities Act, 2006, should be  read as “foodstuffs including pulses, edible 
oilseeds and oils”.   
 
Reply of Government 
4.2 If any new commodities other than those seven commodities listed in 
Schedule to the Essential Commodities (Amendment) Act, 2006 are to be 
declared as „essential‟ under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955,  the 
provisions laid down in Section 2 A of the Ess ential Commodities Act, 1955 
have to be followed.  Section 2A(2) provides that “ Subject to the provisions of 
sub-section (4), the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that it is necessary 
so to do in the public interest and for reasons to be specifi ed in the notification 
published in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule so as to- 
 
(c) add a commodity to the said Schedule; 
 
(d) remove any commodity from the said Schedule, in consultation with the 
State Government.” 

 104 
 
4.3  Pulses already stand included as e ssential commodities under the 
nomenclature “Foodstuffs”.  Therefore, there is no need to declare pulses as 
essential commodities separately.  Already orders have been issued under the 
Essential Commodities Act which enable State Governments to fix stock l imits 
for pulses 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter – I of the Report)

 105 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3 Para No. 3.9) 
 
4.4 The Committee have been informed that the Price Monitoring Cell (PMC) 
in the Department of Consumer Affairs monitors the prices of 14 commodities 
namely rice, wheat, atta, gram, tur/arhar, tea, milk, sugar, vanaspati, mustard 
oil, groundnut oil, potato, on ion and salt, their availability and related 
development on national and international level and prepare a weekly note for 
being placed before the Cabinet Committee on Prices.  This Cell recommends 
appropriate necessary action to check the rise in prices.  The Committee find 
that the Government has not been able to check the rise in prices of essential 
Commodities specially wheat, pulses and edible oil which have risen manifold in 
the past few years which in the opinion of the Committee is lack of 
foresightedness on the part of Price Monitoring Cell.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department of Consumer Affairs should review the working 
of Price Monitoring Cell and adopt a strategy to watch the market trend of prices 
which are likely to rise i n future, so that there is no shortage of Essential 
Commodities in the market.    
 
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
4.5 Price Monitoring Cell in the Department of Consumer Affairs is entrusted 
inter alia with the task of monitoring the prices and availability of ess ential 
commodities in the country.  Prices of essential commodities are largely affected 
by supply factors as well as international price movements.  There has been rise 
in the prices of essential commodities all over the world owing to various factors 
such as decline in global production, diversion of food to feed and bio fuel 
production, increase in freight cost, as well as increase in demand. The spiraling 
crude oil price last year was manifest in record high prices in agricultural 
commodities.  Although  the volatility observed in international markets in 2008 
was not experienced to the same extent in India, the high dependence on 
imports in the case of edible oils (where more than 40% of the requirements are 
imported) and pulses makes the domestic prices  of these commodities 
vulnerable to the international price movements.  In the case of wheat India 
remains largely insulated, owing to high domestic production. 
 
 
4.6 The sharp swings in the prices of commodities that occurred in the year 
2008 are not easi ly predictable. However, in general, the Price Monitoring Cell 
studies the international and domestic market trends of major commodities from 
various sources and this information is incorporated in the Notes prepared for 
the High Level meetings that are he ld regularly to enable the Committees to 
arrive at considered policy decisions.    Consequently, various measures 
adopted by the Government, both fiscal and administrative, have helped to 
moderate the wide fluctuations of prices and to insulate the common man to the 
extent feasible. 
 

 106 
4.7 The long term strategy for improving the domestic availability of essential 
commodities is to increase domestic production. In the short run various 
measures were taken as indicated in para-2 above. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter – I of the Report) 

 107 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5 Para No. 4.13) 
 
 
4.8 The Committee express their concern over the rising trend in the prices of 
most of the essential commodities during the last two years. Prices of 
commodities in the physical market are governed by demand and supply sectors 
prevailing in the market. The Com mittee have noted that mismatch between 
demand and supply is the main contributor to the hike in prices of essential 
commodities specifically the foodgrains. The Committee have been given to 
understand that the rise in domestic prices is owing to the combined effect of the 
factors such as growing demand on account of increase in population and 
income, hardening of international prices, changes in consumption, diversion of 
foodgrains for fuel, adverse weather and climate change, increase in crude oil 
prices, improvement in income and living standards and increase in freight rate.  
 
  The Committee note that various steps have been taken by the 
Government to contain the price rise which include measures like augmenting 
domestic supplies of wheat and pulses thr ough imports at reduced rates of duty 
and ban on imports; and reduction in import duty on edible oils etc. The 
Government has also imposed stock limits for wheat, pulses, edible oil, oilseeds 
and rice. On the monetary side, RBI has increased CRR by .25 poi nts on two 
occasions to reduce money supply in the market to reduce inflationary 
pressures on prices. For improving productivity and production in the medium -
term in the agricultural sector, the Government have taken initiatives such as 
National Food Secur ity Mission and Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana. The 
Committee note that 40 per cent of the edible oil requirement of the country is 
met by the imports which is susceptible to international pressures on price front. 
Therefore, its impact is felt on the price  rise of the edible oils in domestic sector 
also. The Committee feel that although the Government is vigilant about the 
adverse impact of price rise on the economy of the country culminating into 
inflationary trends yet the measures taken by the Government  are not proving to 
be effective in bringing down the prices of the essential commodities. The 
Committee desire that the Department in consultation with other concerned 
Departments should chalk out a long -term strategy to meet such a situation so 
that it d oes not assume gigantic proportions, affecting the development and 
growth of the country. They should also take such steps that would insulate the 
prices in the country from international price fluctuations.  
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
4.9   This Department has already communicated to M/o Agriculture and   
Department of Food  about the recommendations of Standing Committee on 
long-term strategy for improving productivity and production in the agricultural 
sector.As stated under reply to para 3.9, the Indian m arket is fairly insulated  
from international price fluctuations. The prices of essential commodities in the 
domestic market have not followed the steep rise in international prices during 
the first half of 2008, owing to the slew of measures -monetary, fis cal and 
administrative-announced by Government, which did not allow pass through of 

 108 
the high prices of international market.  In addition, vulnerable sections of the 
population have been protected.  The CIP of wheat and rice has not been raised 
since 2002.  Recently, imported edible oil and pulses have also been included 
for distribution to State Governments for PDS. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter – I of the Report) 

 109 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17 Para No. 11.14) 
 
4.10 The Committee note that the Department of Consumer Affairs is 
entrusted with the responsibility to prevent unethical trade p ractices like 
hoarding and blackmarketing through two Acts viz. The Essential Commodities 
Act, 1955 and Prevention of Blackmarketing of Essential Commodities and 
Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980. Action against 
hoarders and blackm arketers is undertaken by the State Governments under 
the provision of these acts. The Department of Consumer Affairs from time to 
time takes views of the State Governments/UTs to know whether there is any 
lacuna in the Acts due to which most of the unscru pulous persons go scot free 
despite serious offences. From the information furnished by the Government, 
the Committee find that despite a large number of raids conducted by the 
enforcement machinery of State Governments/UT Administration, the number of 
persons prosecuted and convicted were very minimal which may be due to 
shortcomings in the Acts. The Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs 
during evidence stated that the provisions of the Acts are adequate provided 
these are implemented properly with vig our. However, he admitted that due to 
technology used by miscreants, they try to get out of the clutches of the law. The 
Committee feel that since the number of persons arrested and convicted under 
the Acts are on the rise, indicating the corresponding ris e in cases of hoarding 
and blackmarketing, there is inadequacy in the provisions of the Acts to take 
action against unscrupulous persons indulging in hoarding and blackmarketing 
of essential commodities. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
the Government should make amendments in the penal provisions of the Acts in 
consultation with the States/UTs so that the offenders do not escape for want of 
the requisite provision in the law.  
 
Reply of Government 
 
 4.11 In the Report of the Standing Committee, the Committee had desired that 
in view of the low convictions in such cases, the Department should examine 
whether there is any lacunae in the Act due to which most of them go scot free 
despite serious offences.  The outcome of the examination a longwith the 
suggestions of the  of the Department for bringing in any new amendment to 
meet the situation may be reported to the Committee within six months of the 
presentation of this report to the Parliament.  Accordingly, Secretary (CA) had 
vide his D. O.letter dated 16 th June, 2008 addressed to the Chief Secretaries of 
all States/UTs, requested the State Governments to give their views on the 
recommendation made by the Committee .  However, only 17 States had 
responded to this letter and none of the Sta tes had suggested any review or 
amendment of the existing provisions of the Essential Commodities Act and the 
Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential 
Commodities Act .  Accordingly, the Lok Sabha Secretariat had been informed 
that the available provisions are adequate, if properly implemented, to achieve 

 110 
the desired objectives.  Hence the need for further amendment in the penal 
provisions of the Acts is not required at present. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.26 of Chapter – I of the Report)

 111 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 24 Para No. 12.25) 
 
4.12 The Committee note that the Commission had very little regulatory 
work and limited enforcement machinery as there were hardly any major 
commodities under future trading till about 10 year back. The Committee was 
informed that there were certain pre -requisites for an efficient and tra nsparent 
future market. According to FMC, a bill has been introduced in Parliament to 
amend the Future Contract Act to strengthen the regulatory framework and 
confer autonomy on the regulator. The Committee hope that the bill is passed 
expeditiously in the  Parliament and the FMC is conferred with requisite 
autonomy so that the regulatory framework is strengthened. 
 
 
Reply of Government 
 4.13 The passage of the F.C(R)Amendment Bill would strengthen the 
regulatory framework and confer the desired autonomy on the FMC. The 
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Ordinance 2008 has lapsed with 
dissolution of fourteenth Lok Sabha.  Government will take necessary steps to 
introduce fresh Bill  in 15th Lok Sabha. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.32 of Chapter – I of the Report)

 112 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 29 Para No. 13.31) 
 
4.14 The Committee find that there is rampant misuse of LPG for other 
purposes.  According to the Ministry the oil marketing companies and the 
Government were very much aware of the problem and they were constantly 
inspecting the premises of the dealers and taking punitive action against deale rs 
whenever the misuse was revealed to them.  The Committee also note that the 
Ministry is going to launch a massive campaign against misuse.  The 
representative of the Ministry admitted during evidence that there was bound to 
be some misuse.  The Ministry  attributed the differential pricing of LPG as the 
main reason for the misuse of LPG Cylinders and so the temptation to use 
domestic LPG cylinders in the hotels or for marriage functions was very high.  
The Committee desire the Ministry to launch massive a wareness campaign in 
the country to check the misuse of LPG cylinders for other purposes and take 
strong punitive action against the persons found involved in such activities.  
 
Reply of Government 
4.15 Government have issued advertisements cautioning the public that use of 
Domestic LPG cylinders for non -domestic purposes is illegal, dangerous and 
against national interest.  Through these advertisements, cooperation of the 
general public has also been sought to report any irregularity / malpractice to the 
Public Sector Oil Marketing Companies. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.35 of Chapter – I of the Report)

 113 
CHAPTER –V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10 Para No. 7.11) 
5.1 The Committee note that as per entry no. 54 of the State list of the 
Seventh Schedule to the Consti tution of India, the Taxation on Sale and 
Purchase within a State of goods, including essential commodities, is a State 
subject. The Committee observe that there is a large scale variation in levying of 
various taxes like Mandi Tax, DEMI, IDF, VAT by the S tate Governments. The 
concept of Value Added Tax (VAT) was introduced with a view to having a 
harmonized tax structure in respect of all commodities. The rates of VAT for 
various commodities were accordingly agreed to be uniform across the States 
by the Em powered Committee of State Finance Ministers. The Empowered 
Committee of State Finance Ministers had initially decided to keep the VAT rate 
of foodgrains at 4%. Subsequently, the EC itself provided the flexibility to the 
States in this regard which resulted in some States levying tax on foodgrains like 
rice and wheat, while some others have exempted these items from levy of VAT. 
Consequently, 11 States namely, Chhattigarh, NCT of Delhi, Gujarat, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Madhya Pra desh, Pudducherry 
and West Bengal have exempted foodgrains from VAT. State Government of 
Tamil Nadu has exempted foodgrains except wheat which is being taxed at 2%. 
The Committee strongly recommend that the remaining States/UTs should be 
persuaded to exemp t the foodgrains from VAT provided that the State 
Government be consulted and the difficulties of the States be resolved before 
making such exemptions.  
Reply of Government 
5.2 VAT/Sales Tax, being a tax on sale or purchase of goods within a State, 
is State subject as per Entry 54 of the State List of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution.  Mandi Tax and Local Municipal Tax like entry tax, octroi are also 
levied and collected by States.  An Empowered Committee of State Finance 
Ministers (EC) has been con stituted for taking decisions on all matters relating 
to State VAT/Commercial Tax etc.  The Union Government is only a facilitator in 
this tax reform process.  Hence a copy of the Recommendations/observations 
contained in Chapter VII regarding “Imposing of  Tax on Essential Commodities” 
has been forwarded to Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers for 
consideration/taking necessary action.   
 
 The Union Government and the Empowered Committee of State Finance 
Ministers are working towards introducing t he Goods and Services Tax which is 
likely to considerably reduce the multiplicity of taxes. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 
 

 114 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11 Para No. 7.12) 
 
5.3 The Committee further note that all the taxes like Sales Tax, Local 
Municipal Taxes and other market taxes have been merged with VAT except the 
Central Sales Tax (CST) which is levied by the Central Government on sale or 
purchase of goods in the course of inter -State Trade and Commerce. The 
Government proposes to phase out the CST by 1.04.2010. The Committee do 
not appreciate the multiple tax pattern like Mandi Tax, Sales Tax, Local 
Municipal Tax like entry tax, octroi tax and toll tax levied on the foodgrains which 
ultimately lead to increase in the prices of essential commodities. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should remove 
restrictions on the inter -State movement on agricultural commodities and 
introduce single uniform tax pattern across the States on essential commodities 
especially on foodgrains.  
 
Reply of Government 
5.4 VAT/Sales Tax, being a tax on sale or purchase of goods within a State, 
is State subject as per Entry 54 of the State List of the Se venth Schedule of the 
Constitution.  Mandi Tax and Local Municipal Tax like entry tax, octroi are also 
levied and collected by States.  An Empowered Committee of State Finance 
Ministers (EC) has been constituted for taking decisions on all matters relating  
to State VAT/Commercial Tax etc.  The Union Government is only a facilitator in 
this tax reform process.  Hence a copy of the Recommendations/observations 
contained in Chapter VII regarding “Imposing of Tax on Essential Commodities” 
has been forwarded to Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers for 
consideration/taking necessary action.   
 
 The Union Government and the Empowered Committee of State Finance 
Ministers are working towards introducing the Goods and Services Tax which is 
likely to considerably reduce the multiplicity of taxes. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 

 115 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13 Para No. 8.14) 
 
5.5 The Committee further note th at Ministry of Rural Development is not 
maintaining the data of waste land which has been converted into agricultural 
land rather they depend only on the information provided by the State 
Governments. The Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development have promi sed 
during evidence that they will try to compile and calculate the data of agricultural 
land from State Governments which have been converted into agricultural land. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Lan d Resources) should collect the data of waste land 
converted into agricultural land from all the States/UTs which would help the 
Government to take the desired initiatives for food security for large population 
of the country and have a fair idea of conver sion of agricultural land into other 
uses. 
 
Reply  of Government 
5.6 Department of Land Resource has requested the concerned State 
Governments  to furnish information on the wasteland converted into agricultural 
land in the project areas funded by Department of Land Resource.  The 
information will be provided on receipt of the same from the State Governments. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 

 116 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15 Para No. 9.15) 
 
5.7 The Committee further note that the Government contemplates to 
strengthen the Public Distribution System (PDS) by setting up  a new scheme 
viz. „Non-Formal Public Distribution System‟ to spruce up supplies of essential 
commodities at control price. The scheme will be implemented through State 
Civil Supplies Corporations and Consumers‟ Marketing Federations by 
increasing availability of commodities during period of price increase. While 
appreciating the efforts made by the Government to spruce up supplies of 
essential commodities at control price during price increase, the Committee 
desire that the scheme of Non -formal PDS should be introduced and 
implemented in the current financial year itself.   
 
Reply of Government 
 5.8 For strengthening the capacity of State Civil Supplies 
Corporations/Consumers Marketing Federations, in consultation with Planning 
Commission, the Department  of Food & Public distribution has prepared a Non -
Plan Scheme for “Non -Formal Public D istribution System”.  However, the 
scheme is yet to be approved. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 

 117 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21 Para No. 12.22) 
 
5.9 In this connection, the Committee also note that the National Board of 
Trade (NBOT), Indore was declared the best Commodity Exchange during the 
National Conference of Commodity Exchanges held on 2 nd September, 2003 on 
the basis of volume of trade. The NBOT h as not yet been declared a National 
Multi Commodity Exchange. According to the Ministry, the NBOT had achieved 
the highest turnover amongst the existing single commodity exchanges. The 
Committee understood that NBOT has put in place fully automated online 
system long ago. Being a duly approved demutualised set up, NBOT deserve a 
fair and better treatment because it pioneered the concept of the most efficient, 
transparent trading, clearing, settlement and delivery mechanism. The 
Committee strongly recommend that NBOT be recognized as a National Multi 
Commodity Exchange as per the old guidelines in the national interest and the 
paid up capital criteria of Rs. 100 crore as stipulated under New Guidelines 
should not be made applicable to the existing commodity e xchanges who are 
otherwise satisfying the other guidelines stipulated in the guidelines.  
 
Reply of Government 
5.10 The Forward Markets Commission would be finalizing the guidelines for 
upgradation of the Regional Exchanges to the status of National Exchan ges. 
The views of the Committee for not prescribing the criteria of Rs.100 crores 
networth would be taken into consideration. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 

 118 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22 Para No. 12.23) 
 
 
5.11 The Committee note that the Government of India launched the Price 
Dissemination Project during the Eleventh Five Year Plan in order to facilitate 
the farmers to increase the bargaining capacity and to provide information of 
prices for their product in pre -sowing and pre-harvesting period. The Committee 
was also informed that the dissemination of future prices would enable farmers 
to understand the economic significance of the futures market and h elp them to 
make use of price signals emanating on a real time basis. According to FMC, 
the task of placing the ticker board in areas having farmers‟ footfalls is 
stupendous and would be implemented with the support of various organizations 
having reach to the farmers. In the first phase, around 1,000 agmarknet APMCs 
spread over 18 States which already have agmarknets computer hardware and 
internet connectivity have been identified for placement of Price Sticker Boards. 
It will be extended to all mandis in all States in the following years. The 
Committee recommend that the Price Sticker Boards which have been identified 
be commissioned without any further delay for the benefit of the farmers. FMC 
should also make concerted efforts to install the Price Sticke r Boards to all the 
mandis in all the States of the country in the coming years. The Committee also 
desire that a study/survey be conducted to ascertain the percentage of small 
and marginal farmers who have been benefited from future/forward trading as 
according to FMC, no such study has yet been carried out by them. 
 
Reply of Government 
5.12 FMC proposes to launch the Price Dissemination Project in 180 
AGMARKNET Mandis in 10 states during 2008-09. This will be further expanded 
to cover the entire country d uring the 11 th Plan period. The process for 
identifying a suitable agency for undertaking a study to ascertain the percentage 
the small and marginal farmers who have benefited from futures / forward 
trading has been initiated. Letters in this regard have been sent to va rious 
institutions like, IIMs and Agricultural Universities and other Management 
Institutes. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No.G-11027/15/2008-P&C   Dated 30.06.2009] 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                        VILAS MUTTEMWAR 
19th November, 2009           Chairman 
28 Kartika, 1931 (Saka)          Standing Committee on Food, 
   Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 

 119 
APPENDIX – I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON 
MONDAY, 16TH NOVEMBER, 2009 
 
The Committee sat from 1200 hrs to 1310 hrs in Committee Room „62‟, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
Present 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar - Chairman 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Jaywant Gangaram Awale 
3. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
4. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
5. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
6. Shri Lal Chand Kataria 
7. Shri Puranmasi Ram 
  
Rajya Sabha 
8. Smt. T.Ratna Bai 
9. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
10. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
11. Shri Matilal Sarkar 
12. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri P.K.Misra  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft report on 
action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-seventh Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on the subject „Pr ice rise of Essential 
Commodities-Causes and Effects with special emphasis on import of wheat‟ and 
„Enforcement of Prevention of Black Marketing and Maintenance and supply of 
Essential Commodities Act, 1980‟ and adopted the same with minor 
amendments. 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the report and 
present the same to both the Houses of Parliament during the ensuing Session 
of Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
/……………./ 

 120 
APPENDIX – II 
 
(Vide introduction in the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON                
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY SEVENTH       
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS              
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
Total Number of Recommendations        32 
 
(i) Recommendations/ Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos.  – 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 14, 16, 18, 19, 23, 26, 27, 28, 
30, 31 and 32. 
 
Total                17 
 
Percentage              53 
 
(ii) Recommendations/ Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos.  – 2, 20 and 25. 
 
Total                  3 
 
Percentage                9 
 
(iii) Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 
Recommendation Nos.  – 1, 3, 5, 17, 24 and 29. 
  
Total                 6 
 
Percentage              19 
 
(iv) Recommendations/ observations in respect of which the fi nal replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
Recommendation Nos.  – 10, 11, 13, 15, 21 and 22. 
 
Total                    6 
 
 Percentage  19
   
          