  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND                       
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION  
(2011-2012) 
 
   FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report of   the Committee on the subject, "Food Subsidy 
and Its Utilisation" relating to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution)} 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 March, 2012/   Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) 
16 


  
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD,  
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND 
 PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee on the subject, "Food Subsidy 
and Its Utilisation" relating to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution)} 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on ---------    
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ----------- 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2012/   Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) 
 


  
 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
 
Composition of the Committee …………………………………………          (ii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………...          (iv) 
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………………            01 
 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government……………………………  24 
  
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
 the Government‟s replies………………………………... 46 
 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee ………………………………………..  47 
 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are  
still awaited………………………………………………  48 
   
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the 6th sitting of the Committee held on   49 
9th January, 2012 …………………………………..  
 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Eighth Report  
of the Committee ………………………………………..  51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2011-12 
 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Jaywant Gangaram Awale** 
3. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
4. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary  
6. Shri Sanjay Dhotre  
7. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome  
8. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
9. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav**   
10. Shri Lal Chand Kataria  
11. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase  
12. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
13. Shri Prabodh Panda  
14. Shri Sohan Potai 
15. Shri Purnmasi Ram  
16. Shri Ramkishun 
17. Shri Chandulal Sahu (Chandu Bhaiya) 
18. Dr. Naramalli Sivaprasad* 
19. Smt. Usha Verma ** 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
23. Dr. M.S. Gill 
24. Shri P. Kannan 
25. Shri Lalhming Liana 
26. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
27. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
28. Shri Sanjay Raut 
29. Dr. T.N. Seema 
30. Shri Veer Singh 
31. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
___________________________________________________________ 
*    Nominated w.e.f. 25.11.2011 
**  Nominated w.e.f. 03.01.2012 
 
(ii)

  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. K. Misra  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Anil Kumar  - Committee Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

  
INTRODUCTION 
  
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution (2011 -12) having been authorized  by the Committee to 
submit the Report on their behalf, present this Sixteenth Report on Action Taken 
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Eighth Report of the Committee on the subject, “Food Subsidy and Its Utilisation” 
of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food and Public Distribution). 
 
2.  The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 20 th August, 2010. The Government have furnished their replies indic ating 
Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Report on 19 th 
November, 2010.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 9th January, 2012.  
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.  
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Comments of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the text of the Report. 
  
 
  
 
  NEW DELHI                      VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
  9th January, 2012                 Chairman, 
19 Pausa 1933 (Saka)                   Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

  
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report (15th Lok Sabha) 
on the subject, “Food Subsidy and Its Utilisation” pertaining to the Ministry o f 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution). 
 
1.2 The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table      
of Rajya Sabha on 20 August, 2010. It contained 15 observations/ 
recommendations. Ac tion Taken Notes in respect of all the 15 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report have been received and 
these have been categorized as follows:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government : 
Serial Nos. – 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15.  
(Paragraph Nos. – 2.28, 2.29, 2.30, 2.32, 2.33, 3.11, 3.12, 5.8, 
6.7, 6.8, 7.7, 7.8 and 8.5). 
      (Chapter –II, Total   13) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the r eplies received from the 
Government 
 
Serial No. 4  
(Paragraph No. - 2.31) 
      (Chapter –III, Total 1)

  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration: 
 
Serial No. 9 
(Paragraph No. – 4.6)  
 
      (Chapter – IV, Total 1)   
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
interim replies of the Government have been received. 
   Serial No. Nil 
   (Paragraph Nos. – Nil) 
 
 (Chapter – V, Total Nil) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the replies in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee strongly emphasize that u tmost importance should 
be given to the implementation of Observations/Recommendations 
accepted by the Government. In case where it is not possible for the 
Government to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any 
reason, the matter should b e reported to the Committee in time with 
reasons for non-implementation. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations. 
 

  
A. Need to finalize the methodology for identification of the Rural/Urban 
Poor/BPL/AAY families in a time bound manner 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.  1, Para No. 2.28) 
 
1.6 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows: - 
 
 
"The Committee note that the amount of Food Subsidy which was           
Rs. 31,260 crore in 2007-08 has increased to Rs. 68,198 crore in 2010 -11 due to 
the increasing gap between Minimum Support Price (MSP) and Central Issue 
Price (CIP) of wheat and rice supplied to AAY, BPL and APL families under PDS. 
Various measures taken by the Government t o contain the Food Subsidy Bill 
have not shown any positive result. The Committee are surprised to note that the 
Government has no updated data of the population living below the poverty line. 
Though poverty estimates have been made by various other Commit tees, viz. 
Arjun Sengupta Committee, Saxena Committee and Tendulkar Committee, the 
requirement of foodgrains and subsidy is decided on the basis of survey 
conducted by Planning Commission which is the lowest poverty estimate in the 
country based on poverty  estimates of 1993 -94. The Committee are of the 
opinion that the distribution of foodgrains at subsidized rates involving huge 
public expenditure would be a futile exercise until and unless the benefits of the 
TPDS reach the poorest of the poor in the coun try. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should also take into account the findings of 
other committees and the existing level of income and expenditure structure for 
finalizing the poverty estimates of AAY and BPL population in a time bound 
manner for deciding the allocation of foodgrains under TPDS so that the benefits 
of food subsidy actually reach the maximum number of AAY and BPL 
population." 
  
 
1.7 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:-  
 
"Planning Commission is the nodal agency of the Government of India for 
estimating poverty at National and State levels. 
The Planning Commission constituted an Expert Group to review the 
methodology of estimation of poverty under the Chairmanship of                              
Prof. Suresh D Tendulkar in December, 2005. The Expert Group submitted its 
report in December, 2009 and the salient features of the report are as follows: 
i) The Expert Group has acknowledged the multi -dimensional nature of 
poverty and recommended that the e stimates of poverty continued to 
be based on private household consumer expenditure collected by 
National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO). 
ii) The Group has recommended to move away from anchoring the 
poverty lines to the calorie intake norm. 
iii) In line with th e decision of the National Sample Survey Organisation 
(NSSO), it has been recommended to adopt the Mixed Reference 

  
Period (MRP) based estimates of consumption expenditure as the 
basis for future poverty lines. 
iv) The Expert Group has also recommended MRP equi valent of urban 
Poverty Line Basket (PLB) corresponding to 25.7% urban headcount 
ratio as the new reference PLB. 
v) The proposed poverty lines have taken into account the adequacy of 
actual private expenditure per capita near the poverty lines on food, 
education and health by comparing them with normative expenditure 
consistent with nutritional, educational and health outcomes. 
vi) The new poverty lines have been generated for all the States including 
the north-eastern States. 
vii) On the basis of above methodology, th e all India rural poverty 
headcount ratio for 2004 -05 is estimated at 41.8%, urban poverty 
headcount ratio at 25.7% and all India level at 37.2%. 
 
 In the Mid Term Appraisal of the Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-12), it has 
been indicated that the revised p overty lines recommended by the Tendulkar 
Committee have been accepted by the Planning Commission for 2004-05. 
The Ministry of Rural Development issues guidelines for conducting of 
BPL census in rural areas. That Ministry had appointed an Expert Group for 
suggesting suitable framework and methodologies for identification of the rural 
poor.  The Expert Group under the Chairmanship of Dr. N.C. Saxena submitted 
its Report which has been considered by an inter -ministerial core group.  The 
core group has also he ld wide consultations on the subject including with the 
State Governments.  As advised by the core group, the Ministry of Rural 
Development is in the process of conducting a pre -testing study to establish the 
final methodologies for identification of the r ural poor.  For urban areas, the 
Planning Commission have set up an Expert Group headed by                             
Prof. S.R. Hashim on 13.5.2010, to recommend the detailed methodology for 
identification of families living below poverty line in the urban areas.   
Presently, the Government is also actively considering enacting a law on 
Food Security, which would address many important issues of food security and 
public distribution system". 
 

  
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.8 The Committee had recommended i n their original Report that the 
Government should also take into account the findings of other 
Committees and the existing level of income and expenditure structure for 
finalizing the poverty estimates of AAY and BPL population in a time bound 
manner for deciding the allocation of foodgrains under TPDS so that the 
benefits of food subsidy actually reach the maximum number of AAY and 
BPL population.  The Committee find from the action taken reply of the 
Department that the Planning Commission/concerned Mini stries are in the 
process of finding and finalizing methodology for identification of the 
Rural/Urban poor/BPL/AAY families.  They are also actively considering 
enacting a law on Food Security, which would address many important 
issues of Food Security and  Public Distribution System.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the further action taken by the Department 
during the intervening period and the present status of the matter.  The 
Committee would also like to know whether the Department has fixed any 
time limit to complete their action as per the recommendation of the 
Committee. 

  
B. Need to  implement the scheme to distribute equivalent amount of 
food subsidy in cash instead of subsidized foodgrains to BPL/AAY families 
expeditiously  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Para No. 2.29) 
 
1.9 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
"The Committee note that the proposal of the Department of Food and 
Public Distribution to distribute equivalent amount of food subsidy in cash, 
instead of subsidized foodgrains, to the eligible BPL and AAY families is still 
pending consideration. The Committee hope that the Department of Food and 
Public Distribution will pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance for an early 
decision on the proposal." 
 
 
1.10 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
 "The Department has prepared a draft scheme to test the feasibility of 
direct transfer of food subsidy in cash to BPL/AAY beneficiaries under TPDS.  
The scheme envisages trans fer of food subsidy in cash to BPL/AAY families 
instead of distribution of foodgrains as is being done at present.  This scheme 
has been prepared on the basis of proposals received from the State 
Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Delhi.  The draft scheme is for pilot 
implementation in five districts. 
 
 Under the draft scheme, it is proposed to disburse equivalent amount of 
food subsidy in cash instead of subsidized foodgrains to the eligible BPL & AAY 
families.  The amount of food subsidy will be de posited directly by the concerned 
district authorities in bank/post office accounts to be opened by each of the 
beneficiaries.  With the cash subsidy, the BPL/AAY families would be able to 
purchase foodgrains and sugar of their choice from open market inst ead of 
taking delivery from the fair price shops as at present.  The draft scheme is 
under examination in consultation with Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Expenditure, who have been last reminded on 14.09.2010." 
 
 
 

  
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.11 The Committee in their original report hoped the Department of Food 
and Public Distribution to pursue the proposal for payment of equivalent 
amount of food subsidy in cash to the eligible BPL and AAY families with 
the Ministry of Finance for early decision.  T he Department in their action 
taken reply  merely stated that the draft proposal is under examination in 
consultation with Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure), who 
have been last reminded on 14.09.2010. The Committee are not satisfied 
with such a general statement.  The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Department to apprise them of the details about the implementation of the 
pilot scheme in five districts such as the action taken by the District 
authorities regarding the number of BPL/AAY families in each District, the 
number of Bank/Post office accounts that have been opened by them, etc., 
within three months from the date of presentation of this Report to the 
Parliament.  The Committee be further apprised of the target date for 
completing the pilot implementation of the scheme in five districts.  
  
 
 
 
 

  
C. Need for Measures to Prevent Storage/Transit losses 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.  5, Para No. 2.32) 
 
1.12 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
 "The Committee a re unhappy to note that despite several steps taken by 
FCI to minimize the storage and transit losses, there is no reduction in such 
losses. The Committee are of the opinion that due to poor maintenance of 
godowns, a large quantity of valuable foodgrain is  lost every year. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that FCI should adopt scientific and 
modern technology for storage and ensure timely transportation of foodgrains. 
Any damage of foodgrains that occurs due to human error should be thoroughly 
investigated and responsibility fixed for such losses and the guilty officials be 
punished." 
 
 
1.13 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
"Damage to the foodgrains in FCI godowns are being investigated and 
responsibility is being fixed for such losses. As a result of various 
inspections/investigations, which have brought out the delinquents responsible 
for wastage/damage of foodgrains, details of action taken against the officials are 
as follows: 
Year  No. of officials proceeded 
against for wastage/ 
damage of foodgrains  
No. of cases 
finalized 
2007-08 31 26 
2008-09 50 43 
2009-10 28 25 
Total 109 94 
  
Timely movement of foodgrains 
 During the year 2010-11 (April to August 2010) 42.26 lakh tonnes of wheat 
& 21.49 lakh tonnes of ri ce held by FCI and State Agencies has been moved  by 
rail/road from Punjab. During the same period 24.62 lakh tones of wheat and 
5.82 lakh tones of rice held by FCI and State Agencies has been moved from 
Haryana." 
 
 

  
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.14 The Com mittee note from the action taken reply of the Department 
that the damage to the foodgrains in FCI godowns are being investigated 
and 109 Officials have been proceeded against for wastage/damage of 
foodgrains and 94 cases have been finalized during 2007 -08 to 2009-10.  It 
is also noted that during April to August 2010, 42.26 lakh tonnes of wheat 
and 21.49 lakh tonnes of rice from Punjab and 24.62 lakh tonnes of wheat 
and 5.82 lakh tonnes of rice held by FCI and State Agencies have been 
moved from Haryana.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
targets fixed and achieved by the Department with regard to inspection for 
finding out guilty officials causing losses/damage of foodgrains and also 
targets fixed and achieved with regard to timely movement of  foodgrains 
during each of the five years of XIth Five Year Plan, year -wise, along with 
reasons for shortfalls, if any for each of the above said issues at the 
earliest.  The Committee would also like to know whether the Department 
has taken any action reg arding adopting scientific and modern technology 
for storage to avoid any damage to foodgrains in godowns, as per the 
original recommendation of the Committee, within three months from the 
presentation of this Report to the Parliament. 
 

  
D. Need to  introduce modern technology such as Smart Cards/Ration 
Cards for eligible AAY/BPL families 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.  8, Para No. 3.12) 
 
1.15 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
"The Committee are perturbed to note that the Government has not 
conducted any survey to identify the poor families who do not have the ration 
cards. The Committee feel that the ration card is the only tool through which the 
poor people can get the subsidized foodgrains from Fair Price Shops. In the 
opinion of the Committee, it is the responsibility of the Government not only to 
eliminate the bogus ration cards but also to ensure that no eligible applicant is 
denied a ration card. The Committee observe that since July, 2006 Government 
has detected 174.10 lakh bogus/ineligible ration cards from 23 States but they do 
not have the data of poor persons who have not been issued the ration cards so 
far. The Committee strongly recommend that the Government should launch a 
special drive to identify and issue ra tion cards to poor families under AAY or BPL 
who have not yet been issued the cards so as to ensure that the benefit of the 
Public Distribution System reaches the intended people at the grass root level. 
The Committee feel that the use of modern technology  such as smart cards can 
go a long way in the verification of the genuineness of the card holders and 
ensuring the effectiveness of PDS." 
 
 1.16 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
"Allocation of foodgrains (wheat and rice) is m ade to States and UTs 
under Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) for 6.52 crore accepted 
number of BPL families,  based on 1993 -94 estimates of Planning Commission 
and population estimates of Registrar General of India as on 1 st March, 2000. 
However, a higher number of BPL ration cards has been issued by States/UTs, 
which is due to improper targeting of poor households and inclusion as well as 
exclusions errors.  The State/UT Governments have been directed from time to 
time to review the lists of BPL a nd AAY families to eliminate bogus/ineligible 
ration cards and to include more eligible BPL families.   All State & UT 
Governments had been further advised in August, 2009 to take up a special 
campaign from October, 2009 to December, 2009 for verification of all AAY and 
BPL ration card holders so as to detect and eliminate bogus/ineligible ration 
cards. 
 
 Further it is stated that the Department of Food and Public Distribution has 
taken up for implementation a Scheme of Smart Card based delivery of TPDS 
commodities.  The project has been launched on pilot basis in Chandigarh UT 
and State of Haryana.   After evaluation of the implementation of the scheme, the 
same will be considered to be extended to other States/UTs." 
 
 

  
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.17 In Para No. 3.12 of their original Report, the Committee had strongly 
recommended that the Government should launch a special drive to 
identify and issue ration cards to poor families under AAY or BPL who 
have not yet been issued the cards so as to ensure that the benefit of the 
Public Distribution System reaches the intended people at the grassroot 
level.  However, the Committee are disturbed to find that the Department in 
their action taken reply has not mentioned any action taken or proposed to 
be taken by them in this regard.  The Department has merely stated that all 
State/UT Governments had been advised in August 2009 to take up a 
special campaign from October 2009 to December 2009 for verification of 
all AAY and BPL ration card holders so as to detect and eliminate 
bogus/ineligible ration cards.  While the Committee have no objection to 
the Department advising all States/UTs to launch special campaign to 
eliminate bogus/ineligible AAY/BPL ration card holders, they would like the 
Department to ensure that bo nafide and eligible AAY/BPL families are 
issued ration cards in order to provide the benefit of the PDS to them.   The 
Committee, accordingly, would like to be apprised of the action taken 
regarding launching a special drive to identify and issue ration ca rds to 
poor families who have not yet been included under AAY/BPL list.  

  
E. Need for Expeditious Liquidation of the Outstanding Dues of 
States/UTs under Hill Transport Subsidy Scheme (HTS) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.  9, Para No. 4.6) 
 
1.18 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
"The Committee are disappointed to note that claim of huge amount is still 
pending with Food Corporation of India (FCI) for being paid to States/UTs on 
account of cost of transportation of foodgrai ns under Hill Transport Subsidy 
(HTS) Scheme since 2006 for one or the other reasons. The Committee observe 
that the total outstanding amount to be reimbursed is Rs. 43,14,32,404, out of 
which Rs. 1,03,52,005 is to be reimbursed to Sikkim, Rs. 7,30,08,711 to Jammu 
& Kashmir, Rs. 2,66,52,555 to Himachal Pradesh, Rs. 7,05,01,200 to Mizoram, 
Rs. 19,17,933 to Tripura and Rs. 25 crore to Arunachal Pradesh on account of 
cost of transport for lifting the foodgrains from the base depots of FCI. The 
Committee are no t happy with the situation and recommend that the 
Department/FCI should make sincere efforts for liquidation of the outstanding 
dues of these States/UTs so that they may be able to lift the foodgrains 
periodically and the poor people of the hilly and inacc essible States may also get 
the benefits of subsidized foodgrains under Hill Transport Subsidy (HTS) 
Scheme". 
  
1.19 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
"Recommendations of the Committee have been communicated to the 
Food Corporation of India for necessary action and the progress in the matter is 
being monitored and pursued regularly." 
 
 

  
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.20 While observing that claim of huge amount was pending with FCI for 
being paid to States/UTs on account of cost  of transportation of foodgrains 
under Hill Transport Subsidy (HTS) Scheme since 2006 for one or the other 
reasons, the Committee had recommended that the Department/FCI should 
make sincere efforts for liquidation of the outstanding dues of these 
States/UTs so that they may be able to lift the foodgrains periodically and 
get the benefit under the HTS Scheme. The Committee are not satisfied 
with the action taken reply of the Department which states that the 
recommendation of the Committee have been communica ted to the FCI for 
necessary action and the progress in the matter is being monitored and 
pursued regularly.  The Committee feel that merely forwarding their 
recommendation to FCI would not suffice. The Department should have 
spelt out the specific steps t aken to liquidate the outstanding dues of the 
States/UTs, which are long pending.  They have also not bothered to 
apprise the Committee about the progress made in the matter so far.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation and urge the 
Department to take vigorous steps to liquidate the outstanding dues of the 
States/UTs without further delay.  They would also wish to be apprised of 
the progress of implementation of their recommendation within three 
months from the presentation of this Report to the Parliament.   

  
F. Need for early removal of existing shortcomings in the Decentralised 
Procurement Scheme to encourage remaining States for their 
participation  
  
Recommendation (Serial No.  10, Para No. 5.8) 
 
 
1.21 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
"The Committee note that the Decentralized Procurement Scheme like 
other schemes of the Department, also suffer for want of infrastructural facilities, 
timely release of funds, submission of utilization certificate s and proper planning 
for distribution of foodgrains.  Besides, only six States have undertaken the 
scheme for procurement of wheat and ten States/UTs for rice within their States.  
In the opinion of the Committee, DCP scheme is one of the most important 
schemes being implemented with a view to lessening the burden of FCI and 
reducing the dependence on Central Government.  The Committee would, 
therefore, urge the Government to remove the above -mentioned shortcomings in 
the scheme so that the States can cont ribute towards the Central pool thereby 
enhancing the food security.  The Committee would also like the Department to 
encourage the other States who have surplus production of foodgrains to 
participate in the movement of make India hunger -free, by adopting  the 
Decentralized Procurement Scheme." 
 
 
1.22 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
 "The Scheme of Decentralised Procurement (DCP) of foodgrains was 
introduced in 1997-98 with a view to enhance the efficiency of  procurement an d 
PDS and to encourage local procurement and reduce out go of food subsidy.  In 
it, the States undertake the responsibility of procurement of foodgrains, its 
scientific storage and distribution through Targeted Public Distribution System 
(TPDS).  The surpl us of foodgrains procured by DCP States, in excess of their 
TPDS requirement is handed over to FCI for the Central Pool stocks and deficit, 
if any, is met by FCI. 
  
The decision regarding adoption of DCP system lies with the State 
Governments. The determining factors are infrastructure and resources available 
with the respective State Governments including manpower, storage and 
necessary logistics required for procurement and accordingly, State 
Government‟s readiness to undertake DCP procurement. 
  
The major infrastructure required for procurement operation is the storage 
facilities for the foodgrains.  To assist and encourage the State Governments to 
create sufficient storage space, Government of India has launched the Scheme 
for construction of godowns for  FCI – Storage requirement through private 
entrepreneurs – 2008 on 28.07.2008. 
  

  
This Department has also formulated and circulated on 08.04.2010 a 
similar scheme for creation of storage space in the DCP States.  The State 
Governments or any agency designa ted by it will assess the storage gap.  The 
storage space to be created in the DCP States would be so as to meet at least 4 
months‟ requirement of the State and a maximum of its annual TPDS/OWS 
requirement." 
 
 
 

  
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.23 The Committee in their original Report had urged the Government to 
remove the shortcomings noticed in the implementation of the 
Decentralised Procurement (DCP) Scheme and encourage other States also 
to adopt the scheme and participate in the movement of make India hun ger 
free.  In their action taken reply, the Department has stated that the major 
infrastructure required for procurement operation is the storage facilities 
for foodgrains.  To assist and encourage the State Governments to create 
sufficient storage space, Government of India has launched the Scheme for 
construction of godowns for FCI -Storage requirement through private 
entrepreneurs –2008 on 28.07.2008.  The Department has also formulated 
and circulated on 08.04.2010 a similar scheme for creation of storage space 
in the DCP States. The Committee are aware that the decision to adopt the 
DCP Scheme lies with the State Governments.  However, while appreciating 
the initiative of the Government, the Committee would like to be apprised of 
the efforts made by the Government to encourage other States to adopt the   
DCP Scheme and ensure their participation in the movement to make India 
hunger free.  

  
G. Need for Expeditious Liquidation of the Outstanding Dues against 
M/o RD and M/o HRD 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.  11, Para No. 6.7) 
 
1.24 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
"The Committee regret to note that huge amount to the tune of Rs. 
3166.24 crore is outstanding on account of food grains supplied to the Ministry of 
Rural Develo pment and Ministry of Human Resource Development at low cost 
for their welfare schemes.  Out of this, Rs. 2890.82 crore is due against the 
Ministry of Rural Development and Rs. 265.42 crore towards the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development (HRD). The Comm ittee fail to understand the 
reasons behind outstanding dues when the States/UTs are required to deposit 
the full amount of foodgrains in advance before lifting the foodgrains from the 
depots of Food Corporation of India (FCI). The Committee feel that the 
Government is not sincere in the matter of liquidation of the dues.  In the opinion 
of the Committee, the very purpose of the subsidy is defeated if the funds are not 
utilized properly for the intended purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Department of Food and Public Distribution should take up the matter 
with the Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of Human Resource 
Development at the highest level for early payment of outstanding dues so that 
the money could be utilized for the benefit of poor people." 
 
 
 
1.25 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
"FCI has informed that under SGRY and MDM schemes of Ministry of 
Rural Development (MoRD) and Ministry of Human Resource Development 
(MoHRD) respectively, foodg rains were supplied on credit sale basis and the 
cost of foodgrains is reimbursed only after submission of bills to the concerned 
Ministries. However, in case of MoRD supply of foodgrains has not been made 
since 2008-09. 
 Regarding supply of foodgrains to MoHRD under MDM scheme, the 
payment of foodgrains supplied under MDM scheme has been decentralized 
since 01.04.2010 and the payment is made by concerned Revenue District 
Authorities (RDA). 
 To liquidate the outstanding dues against MoRD and MoHRD, continuo us 
efforts are being made by this Department and FCI. " 
 
 
 

  
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.26 The Committee, while observing that a huge amount to the tune of 
Rs. 3166.24 crore outstanding on account of foodgrains supplied to the 
Ministries of Rural Developm ent and Human Resource Development 
indicated Government's non -seriousness to liquidate the dues, had 
recommended that the Department should take up the matter at the highest 
levels of the two Ministries for early payment of the outstanding dues.  
From the action taken reply, the Committee note that while the supply of 
foodgrains has not been made to Ministry of Rural Development since 
2008-09, the payment of foodgrains supplied under Mid -day Meal Scheme 
has been decentralised since 01.04.2010 and the paymen t is made by the 
concerned Revenue District Authorities (RDA). In their reply, the 
Department has also stated that in order to liquidate the outstanding dues 
against Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of Human Resource 
Development, continuous effor ts are being made by the Department and 
FCI. The Committee would, however, like to be apprised about the outcome 
of the continuous efforts being made by the Department and FCI and urge 
the Department to furnish the details of date/month/year -wise efforts made 
and results achieved in this regard within three months time from the date 
of presentation of this Report to the Parliament. 

  
H. Need to exempt Procurement of Foodgrains/Coarse Grains from 
various Taxes including VAT to reduce the Food Subsidy Bill 
 
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 13 & 14, Para Nos. 7.7 & 7.8) 
 
1.27 The Committee in their earlier report (Para 7.7 & 7.8) observed/ 
recommended as follows:- 
 
"The Committee are unhappy to note that there is no uniformity in various 
taxes like VAT, market fee, N irashrit Shulk, Infrastructure Development Tax, 
Rural Development Tax, etc. levied by respective State Governments on 
foodgrains procured for Central Pool. Some State Governments like Punjab and 
Andhra Pradesh are levying as high as 13.5% and 12.5% of taxe s, respectively 
while only 3% is being levied by the West Bengal Government. The Committee 
have been informed that levying of taxes is the prerogative of the concerned 
State Governments who generate revenue by way of taxes to meet their State 
specific requ irements. The Committee feel that imposing of heavy tax on 
foodgrains will adversely affect the procurement movement by FCI for Central 
Pool which is subsequently paid up by the Government of India as food subsidy. 
Besides, all the States have not adopted a uniform pattern of VAT on foodgrains. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution should take up the matter with the State Governments/UT 
Administration and impress upon them to re -look at their taxes and levie s on 
procurement of foodgrains to minimize the heavy burden of Food Subsidy Bill. 
The Committee also desire that the TAX/VAT should not be levied on the 
procurement of coarse grain as it is produced by the small farmers in rain -fed 
areas to meet the local requirement of the States."   
 
 
1.28 "The Committee further note that the two States namely Gujarat and 
Rajasthan have exempted wheat from levying of VAT. Similarly, there is no VAT 
on procurement of rice in seven States, namely, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnat aka, 
Kerala, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and West Bengal. The Committee are aware 
that the concept of Value Added Tax (VAT) was introduced with a view to having 
harmonized tax structure in respect of all the commodities, under which all the 
taxes like Sales Tax , Local Mandi Taxes and other market taxes have been 
merged with VAT. The Committee are of the view that levying of VAT on the 
foodgrains will ultimately lead to increase in the prices of foodgrains. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution should impress upon the remaining States to exempt the foodgrains 
from VAT and cooperate with the Central Government to reduce the Food 
Subsidy Bill." 
 
1.29 The Ministry in their action taken reply to Para 7.7 and Para 7.8 h ave 
stated as under:- 
 
 "The above recommendations of the Committee were sent to State 
Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, West 

  
Bengal, Rajasthan, Bihar, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Uttar 
Pradesh and Uttarakhand f or comments. With reference to above 
recommendations, Government of Andhra Pradesh has informed that the State 
Government has exempted the VAT on the coarsegrains.  The State Government 
has informed that in view of the heavy expenditure being borne on vari ous 
welfare schemes by the State Governments, like supply of rice @ Rs.2/per Kg 
involving huge subsidy at State level, it is not possible for them either to remove 
or to reduce the VAT percentage on rice.  The State Government has also 
expressed its inabil ity to remove the market fee, VAT on rice and RD Cess on 
paddy. State Government of Karnataka has informed that there is no VAT on 
sale of procurement of rice in Karnataka.  No response from any other State 
Govt. has been received as yet." 
 
 

  
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.30 The Committee had observed that there was no uniformity in various 
taxes like VAT, market fee, etc., and had, inter -alia, recommended that the 
Department should impress upon the State Governments to re -look at their 
various taxes and lev ies on procurement of foodgrains to minimize the 
heavy burden of Food Subsidy Bill.  The Committee had also observed that 
VAT was not levied on the procurement of rice by seven States and desired 
that VAT be exempted on procurement of foodgrains by the rem aining 
States. In their action taken reply, the Department has stated that the  above 
recommendations of the Committee were sent to State Governments of 
Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, West Bengal, 
Rajasthan, Bihar, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Ke rala, Maharashtra, Uttar 
Pradesh and Uttarakhand for their comments. With reference to above 
recommendations, Government of Andhra Pradesh has informed that the 
State Government has exempted the VAT on the coarsegrains.  The State 
Government has informed t hat in view of the heavy expenditure being 
borne on various welfare schemes by the State Government such as   
supply of rice @ Rs.2/per Kg involving huge subsidy at State level, it is not 
possible for them either to remove or to reduce the VAT percentage on rice.  
They have also expressed their inability to remove the market fee, VAT on 
rice and RD Cess on paddy.  State Government of Karnataka has informed 
that there is no VAT on sale of procurement of rice in Karnataka.  No 
response from any other State Go vernment has been received as yet.  The 
Committee, therefore, would like to be apprised of the present 
status/progress with regard to comments received from the State 
Governments along with details of efforts made by the Department to 
obtain the requisite comments from the remaining States. 

  
J. Need for Expeditious Issuance of Guidelines for identification of the 
Rural/Urban Poor/BPL Families 
  
Recommendation (Serial No.  15, Para No. 8.5) 
 
1.31 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
"The Committee note that the Government is working on a National Food 
Security Bill in pursuance to the reference on the subject contained in the 
President‟s Address to the Joint Session of Parliament on 4 th June, 2009. The 
Committee note that s ome important issues such as determination of number of 
BPL beneficiaries, scale of issue of foodgrains under the proposed Act, coverage 
under the Act to the APL category, etc. have been discussed by Empowered 
Group of Ministers (EGoM) in detail. Empowered  Group of Ministers has asked 
the Planning Commission to arrive at a formulation for estimation of poverty for 
determining the BPL numbers. The Committee feel that it is obligatory on the part 
of the Government to provide a minimum food security to all. Fo r this, the poverty 
estimates need to be revised based on the present day wage and expenditure 
level to determine the number of BPL and AAY families. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the matter may be pursued expeditiously with the Planning 
Commission for early formulation of poverty estimates so that the exact number 
of BPL and AAY families are identified. Taking into consideration the paramount 
importance of providing foodgrains to the poor, the Committee desire that sincere 
efforts may be made for i ntroduction of the aforesaid Bill in the Parliament at the 
earliest." 
 
1.32 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 "The Planning Commission is the nodal agency of the Government of India for 
estimating poverty at National and Stat e levels. Ministry of Rural Development is to 
finalize the guidelines for identification of the rural poor. An Expert Group has also been 
constituted by Planning Commission to recommend the methodology for identification of 
families living below poverty li ne in the urban areas. A study from Ministry of Urban 
Development & Poverty Alleviation on the issue is also on anvil. 
The Planning Commission, Ministry of Rural Development and Department of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation (in the Ministry of Urban Development and 
Poverty Alleviation) have already been requested to expedite the issue of framing of 
guidelines. 
 The Government is committed to the enactment of the National Food Security 
Act. After consideration of the recommendations, if any, of the National Advisory Council 
(NAC) and other stakeholders which is also deliberating on all aspects of the proposed 
law on Food Security, and based on directions of the Empowered Group of Ministers 
(EGoM), a draft Bill will be prepared and placed on the website of the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution for public scrutiny and comments." 
 

  
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.33 The Committee in their earlier Report while observing  that providing 
foodgrains to the poor is of paramount importance had desired that sincere 
efforts be made for early introduction of the National Food Security Bill in 
the Parliament while pursuing with the Planning Commission for early 
formulation of poverty estimates so as to identify the exact number of BPL 
and AAY families.  In their  action taken reply, the Department has stated 
that they have requested the Planning Commission, Ministry of Rural 
Development and Department of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation to 
expedite the issue of framing of guidelines for identification of the 
rural/urban poor/BPL families. The Department has further stated that the 
Government is committed to the enactment of the National Food Security 
Bill in the Parliament at the earliest. The National Advisory Council (NAC) 
and other stakeholders are deliberati ng on all aspects of the proposed law 
on food security and based on the direction of the Empowered Group of 
Ministers, the draft Bill will be prepared and placed on the website of the 
Department for public scrutiny and comments. The Committee are aware 
that recently the National Food Security Bill, 2011 has been introduced in 
Lok Sabha on 22.12.2011.  The Committee hope that the Government will 
make all out efforts to get the Bill passed and enacted at the earliest to fulfil 
the aspirations of millions of p eople of the nation who need to be 
reassured about their food security. 

  
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
  ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.1, Para No. 2.28) 
 
2.1 The Committee note that the amount of Food Subs idy which was           
Rs. 31,260 crore in 2007-08 has increased to Rs. 68,198 crore in 2010 -11 due to 
the increasing gap between Minimum Support Price (MSP) and Central Issue 
Price (CIP) of wheat and rice supplied to AAY, BPL and APL families under PDS. 
Various measures taken by the Government to contain the Food Subsidy Bill 
have not shown any positive result. The Committee are surprised to note that the 
Government has no updated data of the population living below the poverty line. 
Though poverty estima tes have been made by various other Committees, viz. 
Arjun Sengupta Committee, Saxena Committee and Tendulkar Committee, the 
requirement of foodgrains and subsidy is decided on the basis of survey 
conducted by Planning Commission which is the lowest povert y estimate in the 
country based on poverty estimates of 1993 -94. The Committee are of the 
opinion that the distribution of foodgrains at subsidized rates involving huge 
public expenditure would be a futile exercise until and unless the benefits of the 
TPDS reach the poorest of the poor in the country. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should also take into account the findings of 
other Committees and the existing level of income and expenditure structure for 
finalizing the poverty esti mates of AAY and BPL population in a time bound 
manner for deciding the allocation of foodgrains under TPDS so that the benefits 
of food subsidy actually reach the maximum number of AAY and BPL population. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2  Planning Commission is the nodal agency of the Government of India for 
estimating poverty at National and State levels. 
The Planning Commission constituted an Expert Group to review the 
methodology of estimation of poverty under the Chairmanship of                           
Prof. Suresh D. Tendulkar in December, 2005.  The Expert Group submitted its 
report in December, 2009 and the salient features of the report are as follows: 
(i) The Expert Group has acknowledged the multi -dimensional nature 
of poverty and recommended that the estimates of poverty 
continued to be based on private household consumer expenditure 
collected by National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO). 
(ii) The Group has recommended to move away from anchoring the 
poverty lines to the calorie intake norm. 
(iii) In line with t he decision of the National Sample Survey 
Organisation (NSSO), it has been recommended to adopt the 
Mixed Reference Period (MRP) based estimates of consumption 
expenditure as the basis for future poverty lines. 

  
(iv) The Expert Group has also recommended MRP equivalent of urban 
Poverty Line Basket (PLB) corresponding to 25.7% urban 
headcount ratio as the new reference PLB. 
(v) The proposed poverty lines have taken into account the adequacy 
of actual private expenditure per capita near the poverty lines on 
food, educa tion and health by comparing them with normative 
expenditure consistent with nutritional, educational and health 
outcomes. 
(vi) The new poverty lines have been generated for all the States 
including the north-eastern States. 
(vii) On the basis of above methodology, t he all -India rural poverty 
headcount ratio for 2004 -05 is estimated at 41.8%, urban poverty 
headcount ratio at 25.7% and All India level at 37.2%. 
 
 In the Midterm Appraisal of the Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007 -12), it has 
been indicated that the revised p overty lines recommended by the Tendulkar 
Committee have been accepted by the Planning Commission for 2004-05. 
 The Ministry of Rural Development issues guidelines for conducting of 
BPL census in rural areas. That Ministry had appointed an Expert Group for  
suggesting suitable framework and methodologies for identification of the rural 
poor.  The Expert Group under the Chairmanship of Dr. N.C. Saxena submitted 
its Report which has been considered by an inter -ministerial core group.  The 
core group has also h eld wide consultations on the subject including with the 
State Governments.  As advised by the core group, the Ministry of Rural 
Development is in the process of conducting a pre -testing study to establish the 
final methodologies for identification of the rural poor.  For urban areas, the 
Planning Commission have set up an Expert Group headed by Prof. S.R. 
Hashim on 13.5.2010, to recommend the detailed methodology for identification 
of families living below poverty line in the urban areas.   
 Presently, the Government is also actively considering enacting a law on 
Food Security, which would address many important issues of food security and 
public distribution system. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution,  
Department of Food & Public Distribution   
O.M.No.G-20017/9/2010-AC, dated 19th Nov. 2010] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.3 Please see Para No.1.8 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 

  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.2, Para No. 2.29) 
 
2.4 The Committee note that the proposal of the Department of Foo d and 
Public Distribution to distribute equivalent amount of food subsidy in cash, 
instead of subsidized foodgrains, to the eligible BPL and AAY families is still 
pending consideration. The Committee hope that the Department of Food and 
Public Distribution will pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance for an early 
decision on the proposal. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.5 The Department has prepared a draft scheme to test the feasibility of 
direct transfer of food subsidy in cash to BPL/AAY beneficiaries under TPDS.  
The scheme envisages transfer of food subsidy in cash to BPL/AAY families 
instead of distribution of foodgrains as is being done at present.  This scheme 
has been prepared on the basis of proposals received from the State 
Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Delhi.  The draft Scheme is for pilot 
implementation in five districts. 
 
 Under the draft scheme, it is proposed to disburse equivalent amount of 
food subsidy in cash instead of subsidized foodgrains to the eligible BPL & AAY 
families.  The amount of food subsidy will be deposited directly by the concerned 
district authorities in bank/post office accounts to be opened by each of the 
beneficiaries.  With the cash subsidy, the BPL/AAY families would be able to 
purchase foodgrains and suga r of their choice from open market instead of 
taking delivery from the fair price shops as at present.  The draft scheme is 
under examination in consultation with Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Expenditure, who have been last reminded on 14.09.2010. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Food & Public Distribution   
O.M.No.G-20017/9/2010-AC, dated 19th Nov. 2010] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.6 Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 

  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.3, Para No. 2.30) 
 
 
2.7 The Committee are concerned to note that there is acute shortage of 
covered space in the procuring regions i.e. Punjab, Haryana, Andhra Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh and Orissa etc. In several consuming States also, the adequate 
storage is not available. A large quantity of foodgrains lying in open are getting 
rotten but the FCI has no arrangements to keep it in the covered godowns. In a 
country where incidents of hunger and malnutrition are still reported, such 
careless losses are a  matter of serious concern. Further, intervention by Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court in the matter, underlines the gravity of the situation. The 
Committee, therefore, deplore the lackadaisical manner of handling this issue by 
Government/FCI. Though every year, the P lanning Commission very liberally 
allocates huge funds to FCI for construction of godowns, a large quantity of 
foodgrains is destroyed for want of adequate covered capacity of godowns in the 
procuring States. The Committee note that the High Level Committe e (HLC) of 
FCI has given its approval for construction of storage godowns for a capacity of 
127.65 lakh tonnes in various parts of the country, a major part being in the 
States of Punjab and Haryana. However, the proposal of HLC does not seem to 
be practic al due to the very high cost of land in these States. The Committee, 
therefore, feel that different approach needs to be followed in respect of the 
States of Punjab and Haryana which are the major wheat and rice producing 
States and where the problem of st orage occurs year after year. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Department should create storage 
capacity in these States and also in other States where non -cultivable land is 
available in a decentralized and time bound manner by using only the modern 
scientific technology. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8  It is true that due to higher procurement in the last three years, FCI and 
the State Agencies have been facing shortage of covered space. However, FCI 
has made all out efforts to hire s torage capacity from all sources. The following 
table shows the storage capacity with FCI as on 1 st September in the last 5 
years: - 
As on Storage capacity  
(in lakh MT) 
1st September 2005 250.32 
1st September 2006 246.51 
1st September 2007 240.29 
1st September 2008 246.40 
1st September 2009 277.09 
1st September 2010 308.71 

  
 It may be seen that in the last three years alone, FCI has added 68.42 
lakh MT covered storage capacity:  
Period Storage capacity added 
( in lakh MT) 
2007-2008 6.11 
2008-2009 30.69 
2009-2010 31.62 
Total 68.42 
 
 In addition to this, the Government of India has formulated a scheme for 
hiring of godowns under guarantee. This scheme has been further liberalized 
recently and it has now been decided that FCI will provide a guarante e for 10 
years.  
 
 It is not correct that Planning Commission has allocated funds liberally. In 
fact, on a scheme submitted by FCI for sanction of Rs. 234 crores for 11 th Plan 
for construction of godowns, Planning Commission had sanctioned only                   
Rs. 125 crores.  The allocation for the Plan Scheme has been inadequate.  In the 
XIth Five Year Plan Rs.149 crores was allocated against Rs.291 crores which 
was projected by the Department.  Out of an allocation of Rs. 149 crores about a 
capacity of 1.84 lakh tonnes can be created which is inadequate. 
 
 Due to high cost of land in Punjab, the Government of India has decided 
to transfer 20 lakh tonnes of capacity approved by the High Level Committee 
(HLC) under guarantee scheme from Punjab to other St ates in the following 
manner:  
Serial 
No. 
State Capacity to be shifted 
from Punjab 
(in lakh tonnes) 
1. Rajasthan 2.60 
2. Uttar Pradesh 11.48 
3. Andhra Pradesh 3.29 
4. Karnataka 4.31 
5. Gujarat 3.07 
6. Maharashtra 7.30 
7. Madhya Pradesh 2.95 
 TOTAL 35.00 
 
 The transferred capacity will be taken on „first come first serve‟ basis and 
only 20 lakh tonnes of the transferred capacity will be taken up. The assessment 
of capacity is based on the following: - 
 
a. In consuming states: Based on 4 months PDS a nd OWS 
requirement. 
 

  
b. In procurement states: Highest stock of last three years. 
c. Such requirement will be considered at 80% utilization of capacities 
after considering capacities available within a radius of 100 Kms. 
 
 The Government of India circulate d guidelines for assessment of 
additional capacity required for DCP states vide Circular No. 20 -3/2007-FC.II 
dated 08.04.2010. This circular provides for assessment of capacity on following 
basis: - 
 
1. Criteria to examine the storage needs of the State 
The quantity equivalent to 14 months allocation under TPDS and OWS will 
be retained by the State Govt. and balance quantity will be taken over by FCI. 
 
2.  Assessment of Storage capacity 
i) For each month in the year, the sum of average stock of wheat and rice in 
a month in the last three years will be calculated. 
 
ii) The highest of the sum of average stock of wheat and rice will be 
considered as the storage capacity required if it is less than 14 months 
requirement under TPDS and other welfare schemes.  If this is excess of the 
state‟s 14 months‟ requirement under TPDS and other welfare schemes, such 
excess stocks will be taken over by FCI and suitable storage capacity will be 
created by FCI for management of these stocks.  If sum of average stock is less 
than requirement of 4 months TPDS and other welfare schemes, then the 
requirement of 4 months would be considered. 
 
iii) At the micro level, the requirement of storage capacity will be assessed in 
the following manner: 
 
a)        In plain areas, the existing storage capacity within 100 kms. available with 
FCI/CWC/SWC and other State Agencies will be taken into account. 
 
b)        In hilly areas, the existing storage capacity within 50 kms available with 
FCI/CWC/SWC, other State Agencies will be taken into account. 
 
On the basis of above guidelines, the FCI has sanctioned capacity in 
various states as per details given as under: - 
                                                                                                     
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
(Figures in MT) 
 
Serial 
No. 
STATE Capacity 
approved by 
HLC 
Sanction 
Capacity 
Transferred 
out of 
Punjab 
Total 
1. Andhra Pradesh 227,000 329,000 556,000 
2. Bihar 300,000  300,000 
3. Chhattisgarh 5,000  5,000 
4. Gujarat 45,000 307,000 352,000 
5. Haryana 3,880,000  3,880,000 
6. Himachal Pradesh 142,550  142,550 
7. Jammu & Kashmir 361,690  361,690 
8. Jharkhand 175,000  175,000 
9. Karnataka 205,000 431,000 636,000 
10. Madhya Pradesh 1,40,000 295,000 435,000 
11. Kerala 15,000  15,000 
12. Maharashtra 99,500 715,000 829,500 
13. Orissa (DCP) 300,000  300,000 
14. Punjab * 7,125,000  7,125,000 
15. Rajasthan  260,000 260,000 
16. Tamil Nadu 345,000  345,000 
17. Uttarakhand 25,000  25,000 
18. Uttar Pradesh 1,533,000 1,148,000 2,681,000 
19. West Bengal(DCP) 156,600  156,600 
 Total 15,080,340 3,485,000 16,425,340 
*20 lakh tonnes capacity has been transferred out of Punjab. 
 
 A proposal for construction of storage godowns in the North East, capacity 
totaling 5.25 lakh tonnes at an estimated cost of Rs. 568 crore has been sent to 
the Ministry of Home Affairs for making a joint proposal for augmentation of 
storage capacity of foodgrains and POL items in the North Eastern States for 
sanction of Plan funds.  The additional capacities identified for creation in NE 
States are meant to ca ter to four month‟s requirement of foodgrains of PDS and 
other Welfare Schemes.   
 
 So far as Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC) is concerned, as on         
1st September, 2010, it is operating 481 warehouses with a total storage capacity 
of 103.25 lakh  MT with 88% utilisation throughout the country for storage of 
foodgrains and other notified commodities. In addition to this, as on                           
1st September, 2010, the 17 State Warehousing Corporations(SWCs) are 
operating 224.81 lakh MT sto rage capacity for storage of foodgrains and other 
commodities with utilisation of 83%.  List of warehouses is annexed at             
Annexure – I. 
 

  
 Central Warehousing Corporation has constructed 0.85 lakh MT of 
additional storage capacity during the year  2009-10(Annexure-II) and has 
planned for construction of 2.38 lakh MT storage capacity during the year              
2010-11(Annexure-III). The work on the same is going on. The SWCs have 
constructed 1.79 lakh MT of additional storage capacity during the y ear 2009-10. 
CWC and SWCs are constructing these additional godowns by themselves 
utilizing their own resources.  
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
 Department of Food & Public Distribution 
  O.M.No.G-20017/9/2010-AC, dated 19th Nov. 2010] 
 

  
 
Annexure-I 
STORAGE CAPACITY of CWC AS ON 1/9/2010 (figures in Lakh MT) 
  
STATE/UT No. of 
warehouses 
COVERED CAPACITY CAP CAPACITY GRAND 
TOTAL 
PERCENTAGE 
UTILIZATION OWNED HIRED TOTAL OWNED HIRED TOTAL 
A&N 
Islands  1  0.03  0  0.03  0  0  0  0.03  100  
AP  50  11.55  1.08  12.63  0.5  0.98  1.48  14.11  88  
Assam  6  0.64  0  0.64  0.01  0  0.01  0.65  94  
Bihar  17  0.93  0.24  1.17  0.13  0  0.13  1.3  93  
Chandigarh  1  0.11  0  0.11  0.02  0  0.02  0.13  102  
Chhattisgarh  13  1.93  0.36  2.29  0.17  0.44  0.61  2.9  82  
Delhi  10  1.13  0.22  1.35  0.15  0  0.15  1.5  134  
Goa  2  0.22  0  0.22  0.08  0.11  0.19  0.41  75  
Gujarat  28  3.72  1.06  4.78  2.51  0.42  2.93  7.71  84  
Haryana  28  3.87  1.19  5.06  0.25  0  0.25  5.31  60  
HP  3  0.07  0  0.07  0  0  0  0.07  81  
Jharkhand  3  0.34  0  0.34  0.01  0  0.01  0.35  96  
Karnataka  39  2.56  2.66  5.22  0.53  0  0.53  5.75  93  
Kerala  10  1.19  0.03  1.22  0.01  0  0.01  1.23  88  
M. P.  27  4.56  0.54  5.1  0.22  0.04  0.26  5.36  91  
Maharashtra  52  5.65  1.88  7.53  6.59  2.26  8.85  16.38  86  
Nagaland  1  0.13  0  0.13  0  0  0  0.13  100  
Orissa  12  1.49  0.05  1.54  0  2.12  2.12  3.66  100  
Pondicherry  1  0.07  0  0.07  0  0  0  0.07  54  
Punjab  25  6.11  0.47  6.58  0.2  0  0.2  6.78  95  
Rajasthan  31  2.68  1.1  3.78  0.13  0.08  0.21  3.99  99  
Tamil Nadu  25  5.42  0.15  5.57  0.73  0.01  0.74  6.31  95  
Tripura  2  0.24  0  0.24  0  0  0  0.24  92  
U.P.  51  9.76  0.29  10.05  1.52  0.06  1.58  11.63  75  
Uttarakhand  6  0.64  0.07  0.71  0  0  0  0.71  91  
West 
Bengal  37  3.56  1.47  5.03  1.33  0.16  1.49  6.52  78  
TOTAL 481  68.60  12.86  81.46  15.09  6.68  21.77  103.23  89  
 
 

  
 
Annexure – I (Contd.) 
 STORAGE CAPACITY of SWC AS ON 1/9/2010 (figures in Lakh MT)  
STATE/UT No. of 
warehouses 
COVERED CAPACITY CAP 
CAPACITY GRAND 
TOTAL 
PERCENTAGE 
UTILIZATION OWNED HIRED TOTAL OWNED 
AP  131  5.34  16.43  21.77  0.00  21.77  101  
Assam  44  2.10  0.41  2.51  0.00  2.51  73  
Bihar  42  1.45  1.13  2.58  0.00  2.58  92  
Chhattisgarh  107  5.14  5.23  10.37  0.00  10.37  97  
Gujarat  46  1.45  0.06  1.51  0.00  1.51  49  
Haryana  107  10.13  2.99  13.12  3.72  16.84  98  
Karnataka  120  6.37  4.28  10.65  0.00  10.65  92  
Kerala  59  1.80  0.31  2.11  0.00  2.11  73  
M. P.  258  11.64  19.28  30.92  1.71  32.63  93  
Maharashtra  165  11.41  0.95  12.36  0.12  12.48  63  
Meghalaya  6  0.14  0.00  0.14  0.00  0.14  80  
Orissa  60  3.95  0.14  4.09  0.00  4.09  94  
Punjab  113  24.12  29.21  53.33  5.42  58.75  95  
Rajasthan  90  7.50  0.17  7.67  0.00  7.67  92  
Tamil Nadu  59  6.23  0.22  6.45  0.00  6.45  89  
U.P.  145  23.70  8.40  32.10  0.00  32.10  75  
West 
Bengal  30  1.37  0.79  2.16  0.00  2.16  59  
TOTAL 1582  123.84  90.00  213.84  10.97  224.81  83  
 
 

  
 
Annexure-II 
Centre-wise capacity constructed by Central Warehousing Corporation  
during 2009-10 
 
SI. 
No. 
Centre State Capacity in MT 
1. Barhi  Haryana 10800 
2. Tohana  Haryana 5000 
3. Naraingarh Haryana 10000 
4. Baran Rajasthan 5000 
5. Sitapura-II Rajasthan 5000 
6. Bhatinda Punjab 23400 
7. Ropar Punjab 5000 
8. Mandigobindgarh Punjab 6200 
9. Moga-II Punjab 9600 
10. Bhatapara-II Chhattisgarh 5000 
Total 85000 
 
 
Annexure – III 
CWC’s CENTRE-WISE CONSTRUCTION PLAN FOR THE  
YEAR 2010-11 
 
Sl. No. Name of the Centre State Capacity 
(in MT) 
1. Bhatinda Punjab 11600* 
2. Bodhan Andhra Pradesh  9000 
3. Kakinada Andhra Pradesh 10000 
4. Tumkur Karnataka 13100 
5. Gadag-II Karnataka 10000 
6. Edathala Kerala 1700 
7. Kakkanad Kerala 6850 
8. CFS Kannur Kerala 3400 
9. Tuticorin Tamil Nadu 7500 
10. Virudunagar Tamil Nadu 5250* 
11. Hosur-II Tamil Nadu 15000* 
12. Cuddalore Tamil Nadu 15000* 
13. Bolangir Orissa 30000 
14. Junagarh Orissa 12000 
15. Choudhwar Orissa 3000 
16. Surat-II Gujarat 1500 
17. Akola-II Maharashtra 17400* 
18. CFS District Park D’Node Maharashtra 3600 

  
19. Gondia Maharashtra 10000 
20. Bikaner-II Rajasthan 5000 
21. Chomu Rajasthan 10000 
22. Sitapura-II Rajasthan 10000 
23. Greater Noida UP 27000 
 Grand Total 2,37,900 
(Say 2.38 lakh MT) 
*For FCI under 6 years guarantee scheme. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
Recommendation (Serial No.5, Para No. 2.32) 
 
2.9 The Committee are unhappy to note that despite several steps taken by 
FCI to minimize the storage and transit losses, there is no reduction in such 
losses. The Committee are of the opinion that due to poor maintenance of 
godowns, a large quantity of valuable foodgrain is lost every year.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that FCI should adopt scientifi c and 
modern technology for storage and ensure timely transportation of foodgrains. 
Any damage of foodgrains that occurs due to human error should be thoroughly 
investigated and responsibility fixed for such losses and the guilty officials be 
punished. 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.10 Damage to the foodgrains in FCI godowns are being investigated and 
responsibility is being fixed for such losses. As a result of various 
inspections/investigations, which have brought out the delinquents responsible 
for wastage/damage of foodgrains, details of action taken against the officials are 
as follows: 
Year  No. of officials proceeded 
against for wastage/ 
damage of foodgrains  
No. of cases 
finalized 
2007-08 31 26 
2008-09 50 43 
2009-10 28 25 
Total 109 94 
  
Timely movement of foodgrains 
 During the year 2010 -11 (April to August 2010) 42.26 lakh tones of wheat 
& 21.49 lakh tones of rice held by FCI and State Agencies has been moved  by 
rail/road from Punjab. During the same period 24.62 lakh tones of wheat and 
5.82 lakh tones of rice held by FCI and State Agencies has been moved from 
Haryana. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
 Department of Food & Public Distribution 
  O.M.No.G-20017/9/2010-AC, dated 19th Nov. 2010] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.11 Please see Para No.1.14 of Chapter-I of the Report. 

  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.6, Para No. 2.33) 
 
2.12 The Committee are not satisfied with the system of Internal Audit and 
Physical Verification of stock of foodgrains conducted by FCI, wherein the d epots 
having capacity of 10,000 MT are physically verified in a year and depots having 
less than 10,000 MT capacity are physically verified once in two years. The 
Committee are not convinced with the plea of the FCI that the physical 
verification could not  be conducted due to shortage of manpower. The 
Committee are of the opinion that the physical verification of the stock is very 
essential which should be conducted frequently so that any damage to 
foodgrains from insects, rats, moisture etc. could be timel y detected. It must be 
ensured that the foodgrains are kept in scientific manner and the rule of First 
Come and First Out (FIFO) is carefully followed. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that FCI should deploy more persons, if required, so as to 
check the stock of foodgrains kept in all their depots at least once in six months.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.13 As far as shortage of manpower is concerned, the process of recruitment 
of staff and officers is going on and after recruitment of st aff and officers as 
stated above more persons will be deployed in IA&PV Division as per the 
recommendations of the Committee. However, the stock position vis -à-vis staff 
position for the last three years is as under:- 
 
                             (Figures in lakh tones) 
 Stock Position Staff Position 
 
31.03.2008 197.54 215 
31.03.2009 355.82 204 
31.03.2010 433.04 161 
     
   
         
It is further submitted that foodgrains kept in FCI depots are checked on 
quarterly basis at the end of the each quarter by the person/officers other than 
the custodian of the stock. The matter has been discussed in the meeting of the 
COPLOT (Committee on Paper Laid on the Table of the Parliament) held on 
09.04.2010. The Committee directed C&AG to carry out physical verification. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
 Department of Food & Public Distribution 
  O.M.No.G-20017/9/2010-AC, dated 19th Nov. 2010] 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.7, Para No. 3.11) 
 
2.14 The Committee note that the Government of  India launched the Targeted 
Public Distribution System (TPDS) in June, 1997 with a view to making foolproof 
arrangements for identification of poor population for delivery of foodgrains 
through FPS at subsidized rates. The poorest of the poor person are d istributed 
the foodgrains at the lowest price i.e. Rs. 2 per kg. of wheat and Rs. 3 per kg. of 
rice under the Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) Scheme. The Government has 
adopted Nine Point Action Plan in July, 2006 to make TPDS more effective. The 
Committee reg ret to note that despite various measures taken by the 
Government to streamline and strengthen the TPDS, there is no satisfactory 
improvement in its functioning. There is error in inclusion and exclusion of 
targeted families in the list of BPL and AAY fami lies. Besides, the diversion and 
leakage of foodgrains has become a more serious problem in the States. The 
Citizen‟s Charter issued by GOI in July, 2007 to increase the transparency in the 
functioning of TPDS has not yet been adopted by all the States/UTs . In the 
opinion of the Committee, this could be attributed to weak monitoring over the 
scheme on the part of the Department and lack of coordination with the State 
Governments. Consequently, a large number of poor families are being deprived 
of the benefi ts of the subsidized foodgrains. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should make concerted efforts to implement the 
Nine Point Action Plan and closely monitor the scheme so that the AAY and BPL 
families get their due share of foodgrains . The Department should also impress 
upon all the States/UTs to follow the guidelines laid down in the revised Citizen‟s 
Charter to ensure food security to weaker sections of the society under TPDS.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.15 The Department is taking all necessary measures to closely monitor the 
implementation of Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) by State/UT 
Governments. For monitoring the implementation of the Nine Point Action Plan, 
guidelines under the Revised Citizen‟s Charter, etc., regular meetings at the level 
of Food Ministers, Food Secretaries and other officials of States/UTs is being 
held.  A Conference of State Food Secretaries on Best Practices and the 
Reforms in Public Distribution was also held on 12 -13 July, 2010 in New D elhi. 
The concern of the Committee with regard to effective implementation of the Nine 
Point Action Plan and implementation of the guidelines laid in the Revised Model 
Citizen Charter by the States/UTs is also being conveyed to the State/UT 
Governments.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
 Department of Food & Public Distribution 
  O.M.No.G-20017/9/2010-AC, dated 19th Nov. 2010] 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.8, Para No. 3.12) 
 
2.16 The Committee are perturbed to note that the Gove rnment has not 
conducted any survey to identify the poor families who do not have the ration 
cards. The Committee feel that the ration card is the only tool through which the 
poor people can get the subsidized foodgrains from Fair Price Shops. In the 
opinion of the Committee, it is the responsibility of the Government not only to 
eliminate the bogus ration cards but also to ensure that no eligible applicant is 
denied a ration card. The Committee observe that since July, 2006 Government 
has detected 174.10 lakh bogus/ineligible ration cards from 23 States but they do 
not have the data of poor persons who have not been issued the ration cards so 
far. The Committee strongly recommend that the Government should launch a 
special drive to identify and issue ration  cards to poor families under AAY or BPL 
who have not yet been issued the cards so as to ensure that the benefit of the 
Public Distribution System reaches the intended people at the grass root level. 
The Committee feel that the use of modern technology suc h as smart cards can 
go a long way in the verification of the genuineness of the card holders and 
ensuring the effectiveness of PDS.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
2.17 Allocation of foodgrains (wheat and rice) is made to States and UTs under 
Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) for 6.52 crore accepted number of 
BPL families,  based on 1993 -94 estimates of Planning Commission and 
population estimates of Registrar General of India as on 1 st March, 2000. 
However, a higher number of BPL ration cards has  been issued by States/UTs, 
which is due to improper targeting of poor households and inclusion as well as 
exclusions errors.  The State/UT Governments have been directed from time to 
time to review the lists of BPL and AAY families to eliminate bogus/inel igible 
ration cards and to include more eligible BPL families.   All State & UT 
Governments had been further advised in August, 2009 to take up a special 
campaign from October, 2009 to December, 2009 for verification of all AAY and 
BPL ration card holders so as to detect and eliminate bogus/ineligible ration 
cards. 
 
 Further it is stated that the Department of Food and Public Distribution has 
taken up for implementation a Scheme of Smart Card based delivery of TPDS 
commodities.  The project has been launche d on pilot basis in Chandigarh UT 
and State of Haryana.   After evaluation of the implementation of the scheme, the 
same will be considered to be extended to other States/UTs. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
 Department of Food & Public Distribution 
  O.M.No.G-20017/9/2010-AC, dated 19th Nov. 2010] 
 
Comments of the Committee 

  
2.18 Please see Para No.1.17 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
  Recommendation (Serial No.10, Para No. 5.8) 
 
2.19 The Committee note that the Decentralized Procu rement Scheme like 
other schemes of the Department, also suffer for want of infrastructural facilities, 
timely release of funds, submission of utilization certificates and proper planning 
for distribution of foodgrains.  Besides, only six States have under taken the 
scheme for procurement of wheat and ten States/UTs for rice within their States.  
In the opinion of the Committee, DCP scheme is one of the most important 
schemes being implemented with a view to lessening the burden of FCI and 
reducing the depen dence on Central Government.  The Committee would, 
therefore, urge the Government to remove the above -mentioned shortcomings in 
the scheme so that the States can contribute towards the Central pool thereby 
enhancing the food security.  The Committee would also like the Department to 
encourage the other States who have surplus production of foodgrains to 
participate in the movement of make India hunger -free, by adopting the 
Decentralized Procurement Scheme. 
 
 
Action taken by the Government 
  
2.20 The Scheme of Decentralised Procurement (DCP) of foodgrains was 
introduced in 1997-98 with a view to enhance the efficiency of  procurement and 
PDS and to encourage local procurement and reduce out go of food subsidy.  In 
it, the States undertake the responsibility o f procurement of foodgrains, its 
scientific storage and distribution through Targeted Public Distribution System 
(TPDS).  The surplus of foodgrains procured by DCP States, in excess of their 
TPDS requirement is handed over to FCI for the Central Pool stock s and deficit, 
if any, is met by FCI. 
  
The decision regarding adoption of DCP system lies with the State 
Governments. The determining factors are infrastructure and resources available 
with the respective State Governments including manpower, storage and 
necessary logistics required for procurement and accordingly, State 
Government‟s readiness to undertake DCP procurement. 
  
The major infrastructure required for procurement operation is the storage 
facilities for the foodgrains.  To assist and encourage th e State Governments to 
create sufficient storage space, Government of India has launched the Scheme 
for construction of godowns for FCI - Storage requirement through private 
entrepreneurs – 2008 on 28.07.2008. 
  
This Department has also formulated and circ ulated on 08.04.2010 a 
similar scheme for creation of storage space in the DCP States.  The State 
Governments or any agency designated by it will assess the storage gap.  The 
storage space to be created in the DCP States would be so as to meet at least         

  
4 months‟ requirement of the State and a maximum of its annual TPDS/OWS 
requirement. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
 Department of Food & Public Distribution 
  O.M.No.G-20017/9/2010-AC, dated 19th Nov. 2010] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.21 Please see Para No.1.23 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11, Para No. 6.7) 
 
2.22 The Committee regret to note that huge amount to the tune of Rs. 3166.24 
crore is outstanding on account of foodgrains supplied to the  Ministry of Rural 
Development and Ministry of Human Resource Development at low cost for their 
welfare schemes.  Out of this, Rs. 2890.82 crore is due against the Ministry of 
Rural Development and Rs. 265.42 crore towards the Ministry of Human 
Resource De velopment (HRD).  The Committee fail to understand the reasons 
behind outstanding dues when the States/UTs are required to deposit the full 
amount of foodgrains in advance before lifting the foodgrains from the depots of 
Food Corporation of India (FCI).  T he Committee feel that the Government is not 
sincere in the matter of liquidation of the dues.  In the opinion of the Committee, 
the very purpose of the subsidy is defeated if the funds are not utilized properly 
for the intended purpose.  The Committee, th erefore, recommend that the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution should take up the matter with the 
Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of Human Resource Development at 
the highest level for early payment of outstanding dues so that the money could 
be utilized for the benefit of poor people. 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.23 FCI has informed that under SGRY and MDM schemes of Ministry of 
Rural Development (MoRD) and Ministry of Human Resource Development 
(MoHRD) respectively, foodgrains wer e supplied on credit sale basis and the 
cost of foodgrains is reimbursed only after submission of bills to the concerned 
Ministries. However, in case of MoRD supply of foodgrains has not been made 
since 2008-09. 
 
 Regarding supply of foodgrains to MoHRD un der MDM scheme, the 
payment of foodgrains supplied under MDM scheme has been decentralized 
since 01.04.2010 and the payment is made by concerned Revenue District 
Authorities (RDA). 
  
To liquidate the outstanding dues against MoRD and MoHRD, continuous 
efforts are being made by this Department and FCI.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
 Department of Food & Public Distribution 
  O.M.No.G-20017/9/2010-AC, dated 19th Nov. 2010] 

  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.24 Please see Para No. 1.26 of Chapter-I of the Report. 

  
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 6.8) 
 
2.25 The Committee further observe that the Government has modified the 
procedure for allocation of foodgrains for other welfare schemes under which 
consolidated  bill for the foo dgrains lifted during a particular month would be 
raised by the local office of FCI at the District level by the 10 th of the succeeding 
month and the prescribed District Authority of the State Government would make 
payment within the next 20 days.  The Com mittee feel that the new procedure 
may not be effective until and unless it is implemented in letter and spirit.  The 
Committee while considering it a wise step taken by the Government, desire that 
the scheme should be closely monitored to ensure that fund s are not held up on 
account of late payment for supply of foodgrains under any welfare scheme. 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.26  Foodgrains under the other welfare schemes are being allocated on pre -
payment basis to the concerned States/UT Government s who have to deposit 
the cost of foodgrains to the FCI before lifting of foodgrains. Hence, there is no 
issue of delayed payment of cost of foodgrains under these schemes except in 
the case of MDM Scheme which is being  implemented by Department of School  
Education & Literacy,  M/o HRD.  M/o HRD, until last year, was making post -
payment in a centralized manner directly to FCI  for the foodgrains allocated 
under the scheme.  The new procedure of decentralized post -payment was 
introduced by that Ministry fro m 1 st April, 2010 under which payment for 
foodgrains lifted by the district authorities in a particular month shall be made by 
the end of the next month at district level to FCI.  
The Department of Food & Public Distribution has been insisting on lifting 
of foodgrains at the district level on prepayment basis as is the case of all other 
schemes.   However, this has not been agreed to by that Ministry.         
To implement the new procedure of payment, this Department has 
requested FCI  to closely watch paym ents to FCI at the district level and report 
on the progress. Based on the feedback received from the FCI in the next two 
months, a review would be made on the effectiveness of the decentralized post 
payment system and further action will be taken to strea mline the payment 
system.   
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
 Department of Food & Public Distribution 
  O.M.No.G-20017/9/2010-AC, dated 19th Nov. 2010] 

  
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.13, Para No.7.7) 
 
2.27 The Committee are unhapp y to note that there is no uniformity in various 
taxes like VAT, market fee, Nirashrit Shulk, Infrastructure Development Tax, 
Rural Development Tax, etc. levied by respective State Governments on 
foodgrains procured for Central Pool. Some State Governments  like Punjab and 
Andhra Pradesh are levying as high as 13.5% and 12.5% of taxes, respectively 
while only 3% is being levied by the West Bengal Government. The Committee 
have been informed that levying of taxes is the prerogative of the concerned 
State Governments who generate revenue by way of taxes to meet their State 
specific requirements. The Committee feel that imposing of heavy tax on 
foodgrains will adversely affect the procurement movement by FCI for Central 
Pool which is subsequently paid up by the Government of India as food subsidy. 
Besides, all the States have not adopted a uniform pattern of VAT on foodgrains. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution should take up the matter with the State Governmen ts/UT 
Administration and impress upon them to re -look at their taxes and levies on 
procurement of foodgrains to minimize the heavy burden of Food Subsidy Bill. 
The Committee also desire that the TAX/VAT should not be levied on the 
procurement of coarse gra in as it is produced by the small farmers in rain -fed 
areas to meet the local requirement of the States.   
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.28 The above recommendation of the Committee was sent to State 
Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Punj ab, Haryana, West 
Bengal, Rajasthan, Bihar, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Uttar 
Pradesh and Uttarakhand for comments.  With reference to above 
recommendation, Government of Andhra Pradesh has informed that the State 
Government has exempted the VAT on the coarsegrains.  The State Government 
has informed that in view of the heavy expenditure being borne on various 
welfare schemes by the State Governments, like supply of rice @ Rs.2/per Kg. 
involving huge subsidy at State level, it is not possible  for them either to remove 
or to reduce the VAT percentage on rice.  The State Government has also 
expressed its inability to remove the market fee, VAT on rice and RD Cess on 
paddy.  Response of other State Governments on the recommendation of the 
Committee has not yet been received. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
 Department of Food & Public Distribution 
  O.M.No.G-20017/9/2010-AC, dated 19th Nov. 2010] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.29 Please see Para No.1.31 of Chapter-I of the Report. 

  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.14, Para No.7.8) 
 
2.30 The Committee further note that the two States namely Gujarat and 
Rajasthan have exempted wheat from levying of VAT. Similarly, there is no VAT 
on procurement of rice in seven States, namely, Gu jarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and West Bengal. The Committee are aware 
that the concept of Value Added Tax (VAT) was introduced with a view to having 
harmonized tax structure in respect of all the commodities, under which all the 
taxes like Sales Tax, Local Mandi Taxes and other market taxes have been 
merged with VAT. The Committee are of the view that levying of VAT on the 
foodgrains will ultimately lead to increase in the prices of foodgrains. The 
Committee, therefore, recomm end that the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution should impress upon the remaining States to exempt the foodgrains 
from VAT and cooperate with the Central Government to reduce the Food 
Subsidy Bill.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.31 The above r ecommendation of the Committee was sent to State 
Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana,                
West Bengal, Rajasthan, Bihar, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, 
Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand for comments.  State Gov ernment of Karnataka 
has informed that there is no VAT on sale of procurement of rice in Karnataka.  
No response from any other State Govt. has been received as yet. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
 Department of Food & Public Distribution 
  O.M.No.G-20017/9/2010-AC, dated 19th Nov. 2010] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.32 lease see Para No.1.31 of Chapter-I of the Report. 

  
Recommendation (Serial No.15, Para No. 8.5) 
 
2.33 The Committee note that the Government is working on a National  Food 
Security Bill in pursuance to the reference on the subject contained in the 
President‟s Address to the Joint Session of Parliament on 4 th June, 2009.  The 
Committee note that some important issues such as determination of number of 
BPL beneficiaries, scale of issue of foodgrains under the proposed Act, coverage 
under the Act to the APL category, etc. have been discussed by Empowered 
Group of Ministers (EGoM) in detail. Empowered Group of Ministers has asked 
the Planning Commission to arrive at a formu lation for estimation of poverty for 
determining the BPL numbers. The Committee feel that it is obligatory on the part 
of the Government to provide a minimum food security to all. For this, the poverty 
estimates need to be revised based on the present day wage and expenditure 
level to determine the number of BPL and AAY families. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the matter may be pursued expeditiously with the Planning 
Commission for early formulation of poverty estimates so that the exact number 
of BPL and AAY families are identified. Taking into consideration the paramount 
importance of providing foodgrains to the poor, the Committee desire that sincere 
efforts may be made for introduction of the aforesaid Bill in the Parliament at the 
earliest. 
 
Action taken by the Government 
2.34 The Planning Commission is the nodal agency of the Government of India 
for estimating poverty at National and State levels. Ministry of Rural Development 
is to finalize the guidelines for identification of the rural poor. An  Expert Group 
has also been constituted by Planning Commission to recommend the 
methodology for identification of families living below poverty line in the urban 
areas. A study from Ministry of Urban Development & Poverty Alleviation on the 
issue is also on anvil. 
The Planning Commission, Ministry of Rural Development and 
Department of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation (in the Ministry of Urban 
Development and Poverty Alleviation) have already been requested to expedite 
the issue of framing of guidelines. 
 The Government is committed to the enactment of the National Food 
Security Act. After consideration of the recommendations, if any, of the National 
Advisory Council (NAC) and other stakeholders which is also deliberating on all 
aspects of the proposed law on Food Security, and based on directions of the 
Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM), a draft Bill will be prepared and placed 
on the website of the Department of Food and Public Distribution for public 
scrutiny and comments. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
 Department of Food & Public Distribution 
  O.M.No.G-20017/9/2010-AC, dated 19th Nov. 2010] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
2.35 Please see Para No.1.33 of Chapter-I of the Report. 

  
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S 
 REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.4, Para No.  2.31) 
 
3.1 The Committee note that Punjab contributes maximum amount of wheat 
and rice for the Central Pool but as the water level of the land has gone down 
considerably, the State is facing an acute shortage of water for cultivation. The 
Committee feel that deficiency in rainfall creates drought like situation in many 
parts of the country which has an adverse impact on the production of 
foodgrains. The Committee are of the opinion that adequate help needs to be 
given for upgradation and repair of canal system which is 150 years old, so as to 
stop large scale wastage of water. The Committee, while considering the 
shortage of water as a serious problem, recommend that the Department of Food 
and Public Distribution should take up the matter with other concerned agencies, 
such as the Ministry of Water Resources, to provide adequate water security and 
solve the problem of water scarcity so that pr oduction of wheat and rice is not 
affected.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
3.2 The above recommendation of the Standing Committee mainly pertains to 
Ministry of Water Resources.  They have informed that at present, two projects of 
the State namely “Relining of Sirhind Feeder from RD 119700 to RD 447927 and 
Relining of Rajasthan Feeder from RD 179000 to 496000 with estimated cost of 
Rs.489.165 crore and Rs.952.10 crore respectively are under consideration of 
Ministry of Water Resources for providing centr al assistance under the 
Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme.   Further, one more project namely 
Extension, Renovation and Modernization of Canals being fed from River Sutlej 
has been approved by the TAC with estimated cost of Rs.734.46 crore which 
could be considered for inclusion in the AIBP as per guidelines of the AIBP on 
receipt of the proposal from the Government of Punjab. 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
 Department of Food & Public Distribution 
  O.M.No.G-20017/9/2010-AC, dated 19th Nov. 2010] 

  
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.9, Para No.  4.6) 
 
4.1 The Committee are disappointed to note that claim  of huge amount is still 
pending with Food Corporation of India (FCI) for being paid to States/UTs on 
account of cost of transportation of foodgrains under Hill Transport Subsidy 
(HTS) Scheme since 2006 for one or the other reasons. The Committee observe 
that the total outstanding amount to be reimbursed is Rs. 43,14,32,404, out of 
which Rs. 1,03,52,005 is to be reimbursed to Sikkim, Rs. 7,30,08,711 to Jammu 
& Kashmir, Rs. 2,66,52,555 to Himachal Pradesh, Rs. 7,05,01,200 to Mizoram, 
Rs. 19,17, 933 to Tripur a and Rs. 25 crore to Arunachal Pradesh on account of 
cost of Transport for lifting the foodgrains from the base depots of FCI. The 
Committee are not happy with the situation and recommend that the 
Department/FCI should make sincere efforts for liquidation  of the outstanding 
dues of these States/UTs so that they may be able to lift the foodgrains 
periodically and the poor people of the hilly and inaccessible States may also get 
the benefits of subsidized foodgrains under Hill Transport Subsidy (HTS) 
Scheme.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
4.2 Recommendations of the Committee have been communicated to the 
Food Corporation of India for necessary action and the progress in the matter is 
being monitored and pursued regularly. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
 Department of Food & Public Distribution 
  O.M.No.G-20017/9/2010-AC, dated 19th Nov. 2010] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
4.3 Please see Para No.1.20 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
  

  
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-  NIL   - 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI               VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
09 January, 2012                Chairman, 
19 Pausa, 1933 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 

  
 
APPENDIX I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION HELD ON 
MONDAY, THE 9th JANUARY, 2012 
 
The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1445 hrs. in Committee Room              
No. '53', First floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar     -     Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
3. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
4. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
5. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav 
6. Shri Lal Chand Kataria 
7. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
8. Shri Gobinda Chandra Naskar 
9. Shri Prabodh Panda 
10. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
12. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
13. Shri Sanjay Raut 
14. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.K.Misra - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened for (i) consideration and adoption of the draft Action 
Taken Report of the Committee on the subject, "Food Subsidy and Its Utilization" 
pertaining to Department of Food and Public Distribution and (ii) to decide course 
of action on "The Consumer Protection (Amendment) Bill, 2011" pertaining to the 
Department of Consumer Affairs.  

  
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report and 
unanimously adopted the same without any amendments/modifications. The 
Committee after due deliberations approved the course of action to be taken on 
'The Consumer Protection (Amendment) Bill, 2011' as contained in the 
Memorandum No. 2. 
4.  The Committ ee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the aforesaid 
Report and present the same to the Parliament during the ensuing Session of 
Parliament. The Committee also decided to convene the next sitting on                  
23rd January, 2012. 
  
 The Committee then adjourned.  
********* 
 
 

  
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS  OF THE  ACTION  TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON  
THE OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE  
EIGHTH REPORT  OF  THIS  STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2009-10) 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
  
(i) Total number of Recommendations:        15 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government :- 
 
Serial Nos. – 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15.  
(Paragraph Nos. – 2.28, 2.29, 2.30, 2.32, 2.33, 3.11, 3.12, 5.8, 
6.7, 6.8, 7.7, 7.8 and 8.5). 
           (Chapter –II, Total : 13) 
Percentage: 86.66% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government:- 
 
 Serial No. 4  
   (Paragraph No. - 2.31) 
        (Chapter – III, Total :  1 ) 
Percentage:6.67% 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration:- 
Serial No. 9 
(Paragraph No. – 4.6)  
 
          (Chapter – IV, Total : 1)   
Percentage:6.67%   
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
replies of the Government are still awaited:- 
   Serial No. Nil 
   (Paragraph No. – Nil) 
(Chapter – V, Total : Nil) 
Percentage: 00.00% 