  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
              AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2012-2013) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
  
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report of   the 
Committee (2011 -12) on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) pertaining to the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs)} 
 
 
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
            December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 
25 


TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2012-2013) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report of   the 
Committee (2011 -12) on Demands for Grants (201 2-13) pertaining to the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs)} 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2012 
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 18.12.2012 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2012/ Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 
 


 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
 
Composition of the Committee …………………………………………             (iii) 
  
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………...              (v) 
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………………              1 
 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government……………………………   10 
  
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
 the Government‟s replies………………………………...   33 
 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee ………………………………………..    34 
 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are  
still awaited………………………………………………    38 
   
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting of the Committee held on    
16th November, 2012 …………………………………..             41 
 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report  
of the Committee (2011-12) ………………………………   43  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION  (2012-2013) 
 
 Shri Vilas Muttemwar    - Chairman      
 
  MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
4. Shri Kantilal Bhuria 
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary  
6. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
7. Shri Sanjay Dhotre  
8. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
9. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
10. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav   
11. Shri Sohan Potai 
12. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
13. Shri A. Sai Prathap 
14. Shri C. Rajendran 
15. Shri Purnmasi Ram  
16. Shri Chandulal Sahu (Chandu Bhaiya) 
17. Shri Adhi Sankar 
18. Shri N. Chaluvaraya Swamy 
19. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
20. Shri  Laxman Tudu 
21. Vacant* 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
23. Shri Lalhming Liana 
24. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
25. Ms. Rekha  
26. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy 
27. Dr. T.N. Seema 
28. Shri Birender Singh 
29. Shri Veer Singh 
30. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
31. Vacant 
*Shri Lalchand Kataria, M.P.  appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 28.10.2012 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. K. Misra  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Anil Kumar  - Committee Officer  
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
  
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution (2012 -13) having been authorized by the Committee to 
submit the Report on their behalf, pr esent this Twenty -Fifth Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Eighteenth Report of the Committee (2011 -12) on Demands for Grants 
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribu tion 
(Department of Consumer Affairs). 
 
2.  The Eighteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 3rd May, 2012.  The Government have furnished their replies 
indicating Action Taken on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the  
Report on 24th July, 2012.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 16th November, 2012. 
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.  
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick 
type in the text of the Report. 
  
 
  
 
New Delhi;                         VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
 16  November, 2012               Chairman, 
 25 Kartika,1934 (Saka)              Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 
 
 

1 
  
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs               
and Public Distribution d eals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report                       
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) pertaining to the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distr ibution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs). 
1.2 The Eighteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 3rd May, 2012. It contained 24 observations/ recommendations. Action Taken 
Notes in respect of all the 24 observations/recommendations con tained in the 
Report have been received and these have been categorized as follows:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
Serial Nos. –  1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17,19, 20, 21, 
                        22, 23 and 24.  
(Para. Nos. – 2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 3.28, 3.29, 3.46, 4.10, 4.11, 
5.18, 5.19, 6.14, 7.9, 7.10, 7.11, 8.15, 8.16 
and 8.17). 
           (Chapter –II, Total   17) 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the repli es received from the 
Government 
Serial No. 18  
(Para. No. – 6.18) 
              (Chapter –III, Total 1) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 

2 
 
Serial Nos. -  9, 11 and 16 
(Para. Nos. – 3.40, 3.52 and 6.13)  
             (Chapter – IV, Total 3)   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
interim replies of the Government have been received. 
   Serial Nos. - 4, 5 and 6 
   (Para. Nos. –3.25, 3.26 and 3.27) 
       (Chapter – V, Total 3) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the replies in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations for which only interim replies have been 
received from the Government as reproduced in Chapter V as well as 
replies to the  observations/recommendations contained in Chapter -I of 
this Report, be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 
 
1.4 The Committee strongly emphasize that utmost importance should 
be given to the implementation of Observations/Recommendatio ns 
accepted by the Government. In case where it is not possible for the 
Government to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any 
reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee in time with 
reasons for non-implementation. 
 
1.5 The Co mmittee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations. 
 
 
A. Need to Implement Schemes under Consumer Welfare Fund (CWF) in 
all States/UTs expeditiously 
 
 
Recommendation  (SL. NO. 9, PARA NO. 3.40) 
 
 

3 
 
1.6 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows: - 
 
"The Committee find that during XI Plan Period Actual Expenditure (on the 
Non-Plan side) in Consumer Welfare Fund remained low throughout the Plan 
period. The Committee further note that so far onl y 21 States/UTs have set up 
Consumer Welfare Fund in their States. The Committee are not in agreement 
with the views expressed by the Department that small quantum of grant appears 
to be the reason for not setting up Consumer Welfare Funds by the remaining  
States/UTs. The Committee are dismayed to note that though in case of 13 
special category States, the ratio of 'Seed money' has been enhanced to 90:10, 
the Department has furnished the details of only 7 States which have been 
sanctioned funds for creating  their own Consumer Welfare Fund.  As far as the 
Scheme for setting up of consumer clubs in Schools and Colleges is concerned, 
the Committee note that so far 7,249 consumer clubs have been sanctioned 
funds in 23 States.  The Committee are surprised to find  from the submission of 
the Ministry that the remaining States are not interested to implement the 
Scheme as the main reluctance of the States is due to their pre -occupation with 
PDS issues and lesser concern for consumer issues. The Committee not 
convinced with the view of the Department and desired the Department to find 
out the actual reasons for the reluctance shown by the remaining States/UTs for 
not implementing the Schemes under Consumer Welfare Fund. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Depa rtment should impress upon the State 
Governments/UT Administrations not only to set up Consumer Welfare Fund and 
Consumer Clubs in remaining States/UTs, but also to encourage them to avail 
the benefits of the other Schemes under Consumer Welfare Fund so as  to 
promote and protect the welfare of the consumer".     
 
 
1.7 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
"The Department has been vigorously taking up the matter of setting up of 
State Consumer Welfare Fund and Consumer Clubs with the c oncerned 
Secretaries/Chief Secretaries (CA) of the States/UTs through various 
communications requesting them to avail the benefit of these schemes under 
Consumer Welfare Fund so as to ensure speedy implementation of the schemes.  
Matter has again been take n up with remaining States/UTs through demi -official 
letter at the level of Joint Secretary". 
 

4 
 
1.8 The Committee in their original report, had desired that the 
Department should find out  the actual reasons for the reluctance shown by 
remaining States/UTs for not implementing the schemes under Consumer 
Welfare Fund (CWF). They also recommended that the Department should 
impress upon and encourage the remaining States/UTs to implement the 
said schemes and also avail benefits of other schemes under Consum er 
Welfare Fund. In their action taken reply, the Department have stated that 
they have been vigorously taking up the matter of setting up of State 
Consumer Welfare Fund and Consumer Clubs with the concerned 
Secretaries/Chief Secretaries of the States/UTs through various 
communications requesting them to avail the benefit of these schemes 
under CWF so as to ensure speedy implementation of the schemes. The 
Committee are not satisfied with the stereo -typed reply of the Department 
which is not only devoid of d etails of any concrete action taken by them as 
no specific dates and response of State Governments have been 
mentioned therein but also devoid of any outcome of vigorous efforts made 
by them. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their original recommendatio n 
and desire to be apprised of the concrete action/details of all the various 
communications made by the Department in this regard since the date of 
presentation of the original report of the Committee till furnishing of final 
action reply of the Governmen t as well as the outcome thereof in this 
regard.  

5 
 
 
B. Need to fully utilise the Allocated Funds for the Scheme, 'Programme 
for Consumer Awareness' as well as need to Educate the Consumers about 
their Rights and Responsibilities by the Department 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 11, PARA NO.  3.52) 
 
1.9 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
  
 "The Committee are happy to note that the Department is in the process of 
developing Consumer Awareness Index to ascertain the level of aw areness 
amongst the consumers.  The Committee feel that spreading consumer 
awareness is directly proportional to the effectiveness of Consumer Movement in 
the country.  The Committee hope that this initiative on the part of Department 
would bring the Consu mer Movement in the Country at the international level. 
The Committee, however, are constrained to note that Actual Expenditure under 
the Scheme Programme for Consumer Awareness has been constantly less than 
the RE during the entire XI Plan Period.  The Co mmittee, therefore, desire that 
the entire funds allocated for spreading consumer awareness in the country be 
fully utilized so as to successfully develop the Consumer Awareness Index on 
real terms and recommend the Department to take pro -active steps to e ducate 
the consumers about their rights and responsibilities so that they do not get 
carried away by misleading advertisements". 
 
 
1.10 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
"The observation of the committee has been noted for gu idance.  Extra 
efforts will be made for full utilization of allocated funds". 
 

6 
1.11 The Committee in their earlier report had noted with constraint that 
Actual Expenditure under the scheme, 'Programme for Consumer 
Awareness' has been constantly less tha n the Revised Estimates (RE) 
during the entire XI Plan period and, therefore, recommended that the 
entire funds allocated under the scheme be fully utilized. They also 
recommended the Department to take pro -active steps to educate the 
consumers about their  rights and responsibilities so that they do not get 
carried away by misleading advertisements. The Department in their action 
taken reply have stated that they have noted the observation of the 
Committee for guidance and they would make extra efforts for full 
utilization of allocated funds. The Committee  are not satisfied with the 
casual reply of the Government which is again devoid of any concrete 
action taken/proposed to be taken or mention about any pro -active steps 
taken/proposed to be taken by them t o educate the consumers about their 
rights and responsibilities. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and advice the Department to apprise them about the 
actual action taken/ proposed to be taken and the outcome thereof 
regarding both the issues recommended.  

7 
 
C. Need to simplify the Procedural Formalities for setting up Assaying 
and Hallmarking Centres and Increase the Financial Assistance for the 
AH&C Scheme 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16, Para No. 6.13) 
 
1.12 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
"The Committee note that 181 Assaying and Hallmarking Centres have 
been recognized by BIS for certifying gold jewellery articles.  As on 29 th 
February, 2012, a total of 9352 Jewellers have been cert ified by BIS for 
hallmarked gold jewellery and 558 jewellers for hallmarked silver 
jewellery/artifacts. The Committee are surprised to note that in another reply to a 
query, the Department has stated that there are 186 Assaying and Hallmarking 
Centres in t he country recognized by  the Government.  Out of these, only 39 
Hallmarking Centres are set up with the Central Assistance and the larger 
numbers of 147 Hallmarking Centres are set up without any Central Assistance. 
It is clearly evident from this fact th at either the present quantum of financial 
assistance given by the Central Government for setting up Hallmarking Centres 
is insufficient to attract the prospective entrepreneurs or the formalities for 
availing the same is too complex, if not both. It is al so stated that after 
enhancement of the subsidy in Government Scheme, the Department have 
received 42 applications, out of which 14 applications have been granted 
recognition by the Department. The Committee hope that the Department would 
consider the rema ining applications also for granting recognition at the earliest 
and facilitate the one PSU who has proposed to set up a Hallmarking Centre in 
Assam. The Committee further recommends that the Department should review 
the formalities of the Government Schem e to make it as simple as possible and 
also to suitably increase the amount of financial assistance given under the 
Hallmarking Scheme so as to attract entrepreneurs to come forward and set up 
Hallmarking Centres not only in Metropolitan Cities but also in  hilly and remote 
rural areas throughout the country".  
 
1.13 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
"In addition to the two reasons cited above (for the insignificant number of 
applicants coming under the scheme), another importan t reasons is the 
commercial viability of running the A & H Centre, i.e., the operational cost. If 
Centre is not getting enough business of testing and hallmarking the jewelleries, 
the cost of operation may exceed the income.   
 
To make the Scheme more attractive, the Govt. has reviewed  it from time 
to time  and on the basis of the  recommendations of the 9 th  Parliamentary 
Standing Committee, the rates of subsidy has been revised and substantially 
increased w.e.f. 9 December 2010 for all categories i.e. no rmal, rural areas, 
North East and special category states, with first time introduction of category of  
PSUs  with higher rates  in the Scheme. However, the recommendations of the 
committee have been noted for further consideration, during the implementati on 
in the 12th Plan".   

8 
 
1.14 The Committee in their earlier report had expressed the hope that the 
Department would consider the remaining 28 applications out of 42 
applications received to set up Assaying and Hallmarking Centres (A&HC) 
for granting recognition at the earliest. They further recommended that the 
Department should review the formalities of Government scheme to make it 
as simple as possible and also suitably increase the amount of financial 
assistance given under Hallmarking Scheme. The Dep artment in their reply 
have stated that one of the important reasons for low number of applicants 
coming under the scheme is commercial viability of running the Assaying 
and Hallmarking Centres, i.e., the operational cost exceeding the income in 
case enough business is not coming to Assaying and Hallmarking Centre. 
They have also stated that the rates of subsidy has been revised and 
substantially increased w.e.f. 9th December, 2010 and that they have noted 
the recommendation of the Committee for further con sideration during 
implementation in the 12th Plan. The Committee, however, are not satisfied 
with the incomplete reply of the Department which is silent on any concrete 
steps or action taken by the Department with respect to considering 
remaining 28 applic ations for grant of recognition as Assaying and 
Hallmarking Centres. The reply is also silent on making the procedural 
formalities simpler for setting up Assaying and Hallmarking Centres or any 
increase in the financial assistance meant for the scheme. 
  

9 
The Committee deplore this attitude of the Department and desire 
that complete reply in respect of the concrete action taken on their 
recommendation be furnished.  Considering that after passage of BIS 
(Amendment) Bill, 2012, the hallmarking of gold jewel lery would be 
mandatory and commercial viability of Assaying & Hallmarking Centres will 
also enhance, the Committee feel that the matter of increasing the financial 
assistance for setting up of Assaying & Hallmarking Centres under the 
Scheme may be viewed seriously which is all the more necessary keeping 
in view the ever increasing operational cost for running these Centres. 
While reiterating their recommendation, the Committee desire that the 
financial assistance under the Scheme should be suitably enhance d so as 
to encourage more and more entrepreneurs to come forward to set up 
Assaying & Hallmarking Centres in the Country.  
 

10 
 
CHAPTER –II 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.1, PARA NO. 2.12) 
 
2.1 The Committee note that in case of Plan Schemes BE was reduced at RE 
stage in every year of the XI Plan period.  Actual Expenditure also remained less 
than RE throughout the XI Plan Period. During 2010 -11, as against BE of Rs. 
220 crore, RE was reduced to Rs. 198 crore and the actual expenditure was 
187.92 crore.  Similarly, during 2011-12, BE of Rs. 225 crore was reduced to Rs. 
185 crore at RE stage and the expenditure was Rs. 177.97 crore (which also 
included Rs.57.60 crore authorized in favour of other Ministries/Departments). 
On the Non-Plan side also, the Committee find  that Actual Expenditure remained 
comparatively lower than BE during the initial three years of the XI Plan Period. 
The Committee feel that revising the estimates at RE stage and not utilizing even 
the revised allocated funds shows lack of proper planning on the part of the 
Department. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should 
make advance planning to make realistic projections so as to avoid fluctuations 
in allocations at RE stage and ensure that the allocated funds earmarked for 
different schemes are fully utilised during the year.    
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.2 Noted for compliance. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F. No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 

11 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.2, PARA NO. 2.13) 
 
2.3 The Committee further note with concern that percentage utilization in 
case of Plan Scheme for National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission 
was Nil during the year 2007 -08 and 2010 -11. Similarly, in other Schemes like  
Consumer Protection, HRD/ Capacity building, Consumer Helpline, percentage 
utilization declined sharply from 103.60% (in 2007 -08) to 83.92% (in 2011 -12) 
and for Setting up of Gold Hallmarking Assaying Centres in India it declined from 
117.78% (in 2010-11) to 96.97% (in 2011-12). The Committee are not convinced 
with the argument of the Department that the State Government or other 
agencies of the Central Government are responsible for the implementation of 
some schemes who sometime delay the submission of p roposals/utilisation 
certificates and certain execution agencies like CPWD and DGS&D etc. take 
their time since they have to follow long tender processes. Further, on the Non - 
Plan side also, percentage utilization for the Scheme 'Regulation of Weight and 
Measures', 'Regulation of Markets' and 'Projects under Consumer Welfare Fund' 
are not upto the expectations. Having examined trends in expenditure of the 
Department in XI Plan period, the Committee wonder how the Department is 
going to implement its new Sc hemes in the XII Plan Period under the same 
scenario. As some of the Schemes are continuous in nature, the Committee 
desire that the Department should take pre-emptive steps to complete procedural 
formalities and foresee the problems which had occurred in previous Plan Period 
so that proper methodology is adopted while implementing the ongoing schemes 
alongwith the new schemes. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Department to impress upon the State Governments and other agencies of the 
Central Governme nt to extend full co -operation in the implementation of the 
Schemes. The Department may also review their methodology of implementation 
of the Schemes at the beginning of the XII Plan period so that the Schemes do 
not suffer the same problems as faced in XI Plan period.  
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
2.4 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and the 
Department will make all efforts to receive full co operation in the implementation 
of the Schemes during XII Plan Period from State Governments and other 
agencies of the Central Government.  Advance action has been initiated for 
evaluation of the existing schemes, so as to ensure their continuation in the 12th 
Plan at an early stage.  Also, field visits of senior officers will be further intensified 
to ensure proper implementation of various schemes. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F. No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 

12 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.3, PARA NO. 2.14) 
 
2.5 The Committee are disturbed to note that there has been uneven trend in 
Quarterly Expenditure of the Department during the entire XI Plan Period which 
is attributed by the Department to procedural delays, submission of incomplete 
proposals by States/UTs/NGOs, non submission  of Utilization Certificates, 
receipt of assessment report of independent evaluation agencies etc. The 
arguments of the Department do not seem to be convincing to the Committee. 
The Committee are of the view that incurring huge expenditure towards the fag 
end of the year merely to avoid surrendering of funds should be avoided as it 
does not help in smooth implementation of the Schemes. The Committee are 
also concerned to note that  the State Governments are not furnishing Utilization 
Certificates in time in  case of Schemes like Strengthening of Consumer Fora, 
Construction of Laboratories, etc. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department should make concerted efforts to ensure that  the quarterly 
expenditure is incurred evenly as far as possible a nd avoid incurring bulk 
expenditure at the fag end of the financial year.  The Department should also 
regularly monitor the implementation of the schemes by the States/UTs and also 
persuade them for timely submission of Utilization Certificates so that all ocation 
of funds can be made to them in time. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.6 Noted for compliance. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F. No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 

13  
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.7, PARA NO. 3.28) 
 
 
2.7 The Committee are disappointed to note that despite its recommendation 
in previous Reports to fill up the vacant posts of President and Members in  
National Commission/State Commissions/District Fora for their effective 
functioning, the position has not improved much from the last year. 4 posts of 
Members in National Commission are lying vacant and 2 posts of  President and 
21 Members in the State Commission and 46 posts of President and 249 
Members in the District Fora respe ctively are also vacant. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should take immediate action to fill up 
the posts of Members in the National Commission and also impress upon the 
State Governments/UT Administrators to fill up the vacant pos ts of President and 
Members in State Commissions/District Fora at the earliest to ensure their 
smooth functioning, which consequently will lead to quick disposal of long 
pending cases in the Consumer Fora.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.8 Out of aforesaid fo ur (4) vacant posts of Members in National Consumer 
Disputes Redressal Commission (NCDRC), two candidates, who were offered 
letters of appointment, have already joined as Members (Judicial), NCDRC. One 
more candidate is likely to join as Member (Judicial),  NCDRC very shortly. The 
process of filling up of one post of Member (Non -Judicial), NCDRC is in 
advanced stage and is likely to be completed shortly. 
 
The issue regarding filling up of the posts of Presidents and Members in 
Consumer Fora in States/UTs is also discussed in the Annual Conferences with 
States/UTs organised by the NCDRC as well as in the Review Meetings 
conducted by the Department of Consumer Affairs from time to time. The State 
Governments have been advised to take action well in advance for filling up all 
the vacant posts. This issue is also regularly monitored by this Department 
through Periodical (Monthly & Quarterly) Reports received from States/UTs. 
 
This matter has again been taken up with all the Chief Secretaries of 
States/UTs. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F. No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 

14 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.8, PARA NO. 3.29) 
 
2.9 The Committee are unhappy to note that implementation of the scheme 
'Strengthening of Consumer Fora' is sometimes delayed due to non -allotment of 
land by States/UTs, procedural delays etc. and is not effectively functioning due 
to non -grant of financial assistance to States/UTs and also affected by lack of 
effective staff.  The Committee are surprised to find that the Department does not 
maintain any details of States/UTs who have not been allotted land for the 
scheme.  However, the Committee came to know that during the last plan period 
the SCF Committee had sanctioned grants to G overnment of Mizoram for 
infrastructure development and creating non -building assets as a suo -motto 
action. The Committee recommend that the Department should take sincere 
steps to avoid procedural delays in sanctioning financial assistance to 
States/UTs a nd also maintain details of the States/UTs who have not been 
allotted land under the Scheme. The Committee also hope that for the effective 
functioning of the Scheme the Department would exercise their authority of 
sanctioning grants to States/UTs on suo -motto basis as was done in the case of 
Mizoram during the last plan period. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.10 Noted for compliance. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F. No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 

15 
 
 RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.10, PARA NO. 3.46) 
 
 
2.11 The Committee note that National Consumer Helpline (NCH) Scheme is a 
continuous scheme which was formally launched on March 2005 in collaboration 
with University of Delhi. About 10,000 complai nts were received in the National 
Consumer Helpline annually out of which 35% are resolved. The Committee also 
note that the NCH do not have judicial powers to penalize. However, in order to 
strengthen the NCH, the performance of NCH was evaluated through GFK mode 
whose major recommendations were in favour of continuing the NCH Project. 
Accordingly the Department has started second phase of the Scheme 
commencing from March,2010 for a period of 3 years at a cost of Rs. 378 lakh.  
A number of important steps such as developing new software in association with 
NIC, monitoring the complaints received, providing regular counseling in English 
and Hindi, development of consumer friendly website portal etc, are being taken 
by the Department in the second phase of st rengthening the NCH. The 
Committee hope that the Department would implement the second phase of 
strengthening of NCH Scheme as per the finding of the evaluation agency i.e. 
GFK Mode and recommend that all  the States/UTs should also be sanctioned 
funds for  setting up their respective State Consumer Helplines so that the 
consumer from any part of the country could avail of the Consumer Helplines 
services. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.12 Most of the recommendations of the Evaluation Agency i.e. GFK Mode 
have been accepted by the Department.  National Consumer Helpline has been 
sanctioned funds for the  2 nd Phase of the project commencing from March, 2010 
for a period of 3 years at a cost of Rs.378 lakhs.   As recommended by the 
Committee the Department will en sure that every State/UT Government sets up 
State Consumer Helpline so that the consumer can avail benefit of this scheme.   
So far funds have been made available to 26 States/UTs for setting up State 
Consumer Helpline.  The Department has been taking up t he matter of setting up 
of State Consumer Helpline by writing letters followed by reminders at various 
levels. A meeting was also convened under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
(CA)on 28.07.2011 with the Secretaries of the remaining States/UTs so as to 
impress upon them to set up the State Consumer Helpline without further delay.  
We have again taken up the matter with remaining States/UTs through demi -
official letter at the level of Joint Secretary to expedite their reply at the earliest. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F. No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 

16  
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.12, PARA NO. 4.10) 
 
2.13 The Committee observe that a Pilot Scheme was implemented during                   
2007-10 for strengthening of Weights and Measures Infrastructure of States/UTs 
wherein for better implementation of weight and measures laws to ensure better 
consumer protection, 41 Units of Mobile Kits for testing Weighbridges and 59 
Sets of Secondary Standards Balances had been supplied to various States/UTs.  
Further, a new scheme with an outlay of Rs. 143.286 crore also has been 
approved in October 2009 to augment State's Legal Metrology Department 
infrastructure in holistic way. Under the scheme, 200 Met rological Officials of 
States/UTs have been trained at National Physical Laboratory (NPL), New Delhi, 
National Institute of Science and Technology (NIST), Orissa and Fluid Control 
Research Institute (FCRI), Kerala. The Committee hope that the performance 
and effecitveness of the 41 Mobile Kits for testing weighbridges and 59 sets of 
Secondary Standards balances supplied to various States/UTs under the pilot 
scheme might have been evaluated for replication in other parts of the country. 
While assuming that t hose 200 Metrological Officers of States/UTs who have 
been given training at various Institutes are being deployed at vantage positions, 
the Committee recommend that more Metrological Officers of the States/UTs 
should be given further training so as to bui ld sufficient human resources reserve 
to be employed for strict implementation of the Weights and Measures Laws for 
the benefit of ignorant or illiterate mass consumers throughout the country.  The 
Committee further recommend that the renovation work of II LM, Ranchi be 
expedited and completed without further delay so that the Institute becomes 
functional as a Centre of Excellence.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.14 The performance and effectiveness of the mobile kits for testing 
weighbridges was evaluated and o n the basis of the performance and 
requirement 37 number of smaller size mobile kits for testing weighbridges were 
supplied to various States/ UTs during 2009-12. 
 
 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for the training of 
more Legal Metrology Officers at National Physical Laboratory (NPL) New Delhi, 
National Institute of Training and Standardisation (NITS) Noida and Fluid Control 
Research Institute (FCRI) Kerala.  Advanced training at internationally reputed 
institutions such as PTB, Germany a nd NMO, UK is also being looked at for the 
Legal Metrology Officers under the capacity building programme.  
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and all necessary 
steps will be taken to expedite and complete the renovation work of IILM, Ranc hi 
without further delay. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F. No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 

17 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.13, PARA NO. 4.11) 
 
2.15 The Committee note that the BE, RE and AE  have always been less than               
Rs. 1 crore continuously during the years 2009 -10, 2010-11 & 2011-12 under the 
scheme "Regulation of Weights and Measures".  However, the Department has 
been allocated BE of Rs. 4.62 crore for the year 2012 -13 under the scheme. The 
Committee find that during the years 2010 -11 and 2011-12, Grant-in-Aid had not 
been given to some States viz., Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Mizoram, Punjab and West Bengal as well as UTs such as 
Chandigarh, Dadra  &  Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu, Lakshweep and Puducherry 
for the scheme "Strengthening Weights and Measures infrastructure of 
States/UTs". The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons therefore 
and also desire that Grant -in-aid be provided to the rem aining States/UTs also 
for strengthening their Weights and Measures infrastructure for better protection 
of consumer interests.  The Committee further note that the Department has 
been making efforts to give High Precision Mass Comparators, Reference 
Standards Weights, Flow Meter Testing, Force Testing, Torque Testing and 
Electro-magnetic Test Facilities to the RRSLs for better consumer protection.  
Considering that sufficient Budgetary Allocation has been made during the year 
2012-13, the Committee desire that the Department should make all out efforts to 
make full utilization of the allocated funds and ensure that the Calibration of the 
Weights and Measures of the RRSLs are improved at international standards. 
 
 
 
 
 REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
2.16 Grant-in-Aid has not been given to some States/UTs viz., Chhattisgarh, 
Mizoram, West Bengal and Puducherry during the years 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 
since these States were given Grant in Aid during 2009 -10 as per their 
requirement.   Also these States could not provide the Utilization Certificate of the 
grant in aid released during 2009 -10, which is necessary to release any further 
grant in aid.  The other States viz. Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand and 
Punjab were given Grant in Aid during 2010 -11 and 2011 -12.  UTs  such as 
Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and Lakshadweep were not 
given any Grant in Aid during the years 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 as there was no 
demand for the Grant by most of these UTs.   
 
 Grant in Aid has already been issued to 29 States/ UT s during the period 
from 2009 to2012.  As per the recommendation of the committee full efforts will 
be made to provide Grant -in-Aid to the remaining States/UTs for strengthening 
their Weights and Measures infrastructure for better protection of consumer 
interests.   
 

18 
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.   All efforts will be 
made to fully utilize the allocated funds and to ensure that the Calibration of the 
Weights and Measures of the RRSLs are improved and brought at par with 
international standards. 
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F.No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 

19 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.14, PARA NO. 5.18) 
 
2.17 The Committee note that the Department of Consumer A ffairs monitors 
the prices of essential commodities through the Price Monitoring Cell (PMC). 
Earlier the retail prices were being monitored on daily basis from 27 collection 
centres and the wholesale prices are monitored on weekly basis from 37 
collection centres across the country. The numbers of reporting centres both for 
retail as well as wholesale prices monitoring on daily basis have been increased 
to  49 centres during 2011 -12.  The number of essential commodities monitored 
was increased from 17 items  to 22 items with the addition of 4 items and 1 item 
of essential commodities during the year 2010-11 and 2011-12 respectively.  The 
PMC studies the domestic market and international trends of major commodities 
from various sources for consideration at the  High Level Meetings such as 
Committee of Secretaries (COS) and Cabinet Committee on Prices (CCP) held 
regularly. Despite all these steps and efforts made by the Department, the 
Committee find that the prices of some of the essential commodities such as 
Gram Dal, Mustard Oil, Sunflower Oil, Tea etc. continue to grow as is evident 
from the table showing details of variation in retail prices of essential 
commodities in Delhi over a period of one year as on 14.03.2012. The 
Committee are of the view that increa se in the number of collection centres and 
better analysis of the information so collected will go a long way in controlling the 
prices of essential commodities.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department should make efforts to set up more re porting centres across the 
country to improve data collection and also strengthen their monitoring 
mechanism so as to stabilize the prices of essential commodities. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.18 While agreeing with the above recommendation, it is to stat e that, one of 
the new schemes proposed is „Strengthening of the Price Monitoring Cell‟, for 
which the allocation proposed is Rs.3.00 crore for the year 2012 -13.  
Necessarily, the price data being obtained have to be made sufficiently authentic, 
representative and robust.  To facilitate this, the number of centres reporting 
prices across the country is proposed to be increased from 49 at present to about 
100 during the XII Plan Period.  During each year of the Plan Period, 10 new 
centres are proposed to be included.  As part of this initiative, the State 
Governments of Odisha and Kerala have already been requested to add three 
more centres.  After consultation with States and concerned Central Ministries, 
additional items are also proposed to be included for price monitoring. 
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F.No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 

20 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.15, PARA NO. 5.19) 
 
2.19 The Committee note that out of 49 Centres, only 28 Centres enter online 
the entry of retail and wholesale prices.  About 14 Centres send the price data by 
Fax and 5 Centres by E -mail.  To overcome the challenges of uniformity in 
transmission data mechanism and methodology for collection of data from 
States, the Department is conducting training programmes/ workshops including 
online reporting of prices for the officers of PMC and Price Reporting Cells of 
States/UTs from time to time.  The PMC subscribes the services of agencies 
such as Newswire 18 and Ag riwatch for getting latest inputs on 
national/international scenario of various commodities. The staff of PMC has also 
been trained on accessing data and reports from these websites.  
Representatives from 20 State Governments have also been  provided train ing 
for on-line entry of data in the NIC software developed for price reporting.  While 
appreciating the Department for taking all such steps, the Committee desire that 
more training programmes for the officials of PMC and Price Reporting Cells of 
the Stat es/UTs as well as workshops at National/State levels need to be 
organized/conducted frequently. The Committee further recommend that the 
existing methodology and practices of price collection in the Reporting Centres of 
States/UTs be reviewed at regular intervals with a view to effect improvements. 
 
  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.20 It is planned to strengthen the PMC at the Centre, the reporting units in 
the States as well as investing in NIC at the Central level by purchasing required 
hardware and software.   
 
The details in this regard are furnished as below:- 
 
A. Strengthening of Price Monitoring Cell at the Centre 
 
1. Organising training programmes to facilitate capacity building of existing 
manpower in PMC. 
 
2. Subscribing to the web services of Progres sional Organisations 
engaged in the field.  This is required to undertake research work related 
to availability and trend of prices of essential commodities. 
 
3. Hiring professionals (Domain experts) from the open market that may 
include Agricultural Econo mists, Statisticians and Econometricians for a 
more detailed analysis. 
 
4.  Engaging private organisations for conducting research studies and 
surveys. 

21 
 
 
B.  Strengthening of Price Monitoring Cell in States 
 
1.  By getting trained manpower employed in t he collection and tabulation of 
data at the State level.  A suitable Data Entry Operator (DEO) can be selected by 
the State Governments dedicated to price collection and monitoring that could be 
supported by the Centre whenever necessary. 
 
2.   By organizing regular workshops at the regional and national level to get 
the feedback from field workers and discuss the practical problems being faced 
in the collection and reporting of prices. 
 
3.   By providing IT infrastructure such as computers, printers and UP S etc. in 
respect of new centres to be taken up and upgradation in respect of hardware 
already given.   
 
4. By increasing the sample size in order to obtain representative sets of 
price data.  With a designated DEO at each centre, States could be encourage d 
to progressively increase the number of centres from 49 (existing) to 100 by the 
end of XII Plan.  This will enhance the robustness of the data.   
 
 Initiatives are underway for imparting training, holding workshops and 
strengthening IT infrastructure during the current year.   
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F.No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012]

22 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.17, PARA NO. 6.14) 
 
2.21 The Committee note that to bring Hallmarkin g of Gold Jewellery 
mandatory in the country, the Cabinet has approved the proposal for amendment 
of the BIS Act on 4 th January, 2012. It is stated that the salient features of the 
proposed amendment of the Act include, among others, empowering the 
Government to make mandatory standards for any product/process, making 
hallmarking of precious metal articles mandatory in phases from the present 
voluntary scheme, enable India to implement international conventions like the 
Vienna Convention which requires memb er countries to recognize the 
international mark, increase punishment from Rs. 50,000 to Rs. 5 lakh and with a 
minimum of Rs. 2 lakh  (at present there is no minimum fine), to allow BIS to 
compound offences etc. The Committee are of the view that all these  proposal 
are necessary to make Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery mandatory in the country 
with a view to ensure better protection of the interest of consumers. The 
Committee are aware that the purity and quality of Gold Jewellery is not always 
commensurate wi th the value of money paid by the customers, as the gold 
jewellery are not hallmarked by BIS authorized hallmarking Centres.  The 
Committee are of the view that displaying the rate of gold applicable for the day 
(whether the previous working day's closing or opening rate/the current market 
rate on the day of buying) which the jewellery shops should charge from the 
buyers as well as hallmarking rates being charged per ornament by BIS would go 
a long way in protecting the interests of the consumers. The Commi ttee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should issue instructions to all the 
jewellery shops in the country to mandatorily display the gold rate as well as the 
rates being charge per ornament by the BIS for hallmarking the gold jewellery so 
that the consumers are made aware of the price of gold to be paid by them.  This 
will encourage people to buy more and more BIS hallmarked jewellery.  The 
Committee further desire that the Department should expedite completion of the 
formalities and introduce the Bill to amend the BIS Act in Parliament during the 
current Budget Session.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.22 The recommendations of the Committee to issue instructions to BIS 
Licences Jewellers for displaying the hallmarking charges has been noted and 
would be complied with.  Action would also be taken to display the Gold rate for 
the day. 
  
  Action is being taken for early amendment to the BIS Act.   
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F.No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 

23 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.19, PARA NO. 7.9) 
 
 
2.23 The Committee note that the State Governments/UT Administrations have 
been delegated the powers to prevent hoarding and black -marketing of essential 
commodities under the prov isions of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and 
the Prevention of Black -marketing and Maintenance of Essential Commodities 
Act, 1980.  The Committee are surprised to note that despite the standing orders 
issued by the Government to all States Governments /UT Administration to 
submit monthly reports indicating action taken under the provisions of both the 
Acts. within 7 days of the date approval of detention orders by the State 
Governments, only 6 States viz. Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Orissa, Maharashtra, 
Andhra Pradesh and Chhattisgarh have furnished the information regarding 
detention orders issued by them during the years 2009,  2010 and 2011 and the 
remaining States/UTs have not furnished any such information. The Committee 
are neither apprised of the reasons  why the remaining States/UTs have not 
furnished the requisite information nor any action taken against the defaulting 
States/UTs.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department 
of Consumer Affairs should monitor the enforcement of these  Acts by the State 
Governments/UT Administration even more stringently and also make every 
effort to convince and persuade the remaining States/UTs to strictly enforce the 
two Acts and also to  furnish the requisite information regularly.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.24 The enforcement of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 lies with the 
State Governments/ Union Territories. The State Governments/UT 
Administrations have been delegated powers to take necessary action under the 
provisions of both “The Essential Commodities Act, 1955” and “The Prevention of 
Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 
1980”, to prevent hoarding and blackmarketing of  essential commodities.   
 
             The Central Government has been taking variou s measures to persuade 
the State Governments/UT Administrations to effectively implement the 
provisions of Essential Commodities Act, 1955 as an ongoing process.  These 
include d.o. letters, conferences with Food Secretaries/Chief Secretaries of 
States/UTs including Video Conferences.  
   
            A Conference of CMs was held on 06.02.2010, which was presided over 
by the Hon‟ble Prime Minister to consider measures to insulate the poor and 
vulnerable from adverse price movements.  As a follow up, a Core G roup of 
some CMs and concerned Central Ministers met under the Chairmanship of 
Hon‟ble Prime Minister on 08.04.2010 and recommended inter alia setting up of a 
Working Group on Consumer Affairs (under the Chairmanship of CM Gujarat with 
CMs of Andhra Prades h, Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra as its Members) to 
suggest strategies and plan of action for reducing the gap  between farmgate and  

24 
 
retail prices and recommend measures for amendment to and better 
implementation of the Essential Commodities Act,1955.  T hese include the 
improvement of distributional efficiency, reducing intermediation costs, promoting 
State intervention for retailing essential commodities at reasonable prices and 
enforcement of Statutory provisions with a view to meeting both short and lo ng 
term goals. The Working Group on Consumer Affairs has submitted its report on 
02.03.2011. 
 
         In January,2011 Video Conferences were held by Cabinet 
Secretary/Secretary with Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs reiterating the need 
for enforcement of the provisions of EC Act and PBM Act to curb malpractices 
and provide adequate supplies of essential commodities at affordable prices and 
if required use State intervention and facilitate alternate arrangements for 
augmenting supplies of essential commodities. 
 
           Hon‟ble MOS (I/C),CAF&PD has also written to Chief Ministers of all 
States/UTs on this issue vide letter dt.04.02.2011. 
  
             Hon‟ble MOS (I/C), CAF&PD had convened a meeting of the Ministers of 
Food/PD/ Consumer Affairs of Sou th Zone on  03.02.2011 at 
Thiruvananthapuram (Kerala) inter -alia, to control rise in prices and ensure 
adequate availability of essential commodities at affordable prices for consumers. 
Similar meetings were also  held on Zonal basis for North Zone (on 07. 02.2011 
at New Delhi), East Zone (on 14.02.2011 at Kolkatta) and West Zone (on 
17.02.2011 at Mumbai).  
 
           Earlier Secretary(CA) has also written vide D.O. letter dated 09.04.2012 to 
all Chief Secretaries urging, among others, to make effective use  of both the 
aforesaid Acts.  The issue of effective use of the Essential Commodities Act, 
1955 and Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of 
Essential Commodities Act, 1980 has also been highlighted by the Additional 
Secretary of this Department in a meeting held on 14.03.2012 with the concerned 
Secretaries of Food and Civil Supplies of the State Governments. 
  
         Recently Additional Secretary (CA),  Secretary (CA) vide their D.O.letter 
dated 17.04.2012 and 15.05.2012 respectively. has reiterated to the State 
Government/UTs regarding low conviction rate  under EC Act, 1955 , timely 
submission of Monthly  Action Reports and handling of PBMMSEC detention 
cases requesting to comply with the recommendations contained in the 
Eighteenth Re port of the  Parliamentary Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F. No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 

25 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.20, PARA NO. 7.10) 
 
2.25 The Committee note that the number of raids conducted, numbers of 
persons arrested, prosecuted and convicted as well as the value of goods 
confiscated during the years 2009, 2010 and 2011 are very negligible given the 
large po pulation and size of the country.  The Committee observe that the 
number of Persons convicted was only 127 against 5131 persons prosecuted in 
the year 2009, 161 against 4539 persons prosecuted during the year 2010 and 
only 30 against 4486 persons prosecuted in the year 2011 which only reflects the 
non-serious approach by the State Governments/UT Administrations with regard 
to proper enforcement of the provisions of Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and 
the Prevention of Black -marketing and Maintenance of Esse ntial Commodities 
Act, 1980.  The Committee are not satisfied with the performance of the 
States/UTs. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of 
Consumer Affairs should impress upon all the State Governments/UT 
Administrations to enforce th e provisions of these two Acts more vigorously and 
also conduct raids more frequently in order to not only curb malpractices, 
profiteering and hoarding but also to check and prevent rise in prices of essential 
commodities due to artificial scarcity of good s created by traders through 
hoarding and black-marketing of essential commodities.  
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.26 The Central Government by virtue of Section -5 of the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 have delegated powers to State Governments/UTs to 
ensure availability and supply of essential commodities to the consumers.  
Accordingly   the State Governments/UTs have issued control orders under 
Section-3 of the said Act for regulating the distribution of essential commodities.  
It also empowers the Distri ct Collectors/District Magistrates to take necessary 
action under Essential Commodities Act, 1955 like searching premises of the 
dealers/traders and seizing of essential commodities illegally hoarded so as to 
avoid malpractices  in respect of such essentia l commodities.  Therefore, the 
District Authorities conduct regular raids on such premises where essential 
commodities  are stored.  Such raids are being carried out very frequently, 
though the numbers may vary.  However, during such searches if some 
malpractices are noted, the stocks are seized and thereby confiscated under the 
powers conferred under 6(A) of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955.  
Considering the graveness of such malpractices the District Authorities lodge 
FIRs in the respective Police Stat ions and thereafter the cases are moved to the 
Courts for decision.  It is for the Court to decide on convicting the person found 
indulging in malpractices of essential commodities or to acquit him.  It is 
however, seen that the number of convictions by th e Courts are normally very 
less in numbers.  Therefore, there is a big gap between the number of raids 
conducted by the State Governments and the convictions made by the Courts. 
 

26 
 
           Moreover, going by the „NIL” reports sent by some State Govts. /UTs, it 
can be presumed that these State Govts./UTs might not have conducted any 
raids nor have detained any persons for indulging in malpractices in essential 
commodities.  In respect of those States/UTs, who have not sent any “monthly 
action taken repor t“, it would be very difficult to come to any conclusion on the 
action taken by them under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and Prevention 
of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 
1980. 
 
            Background and the steps taken by the  Central Government for  effective 
implementation of both the Acts have already been explained in reply to Point 
No.7.9 above. 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F. No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 

27 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.21, PARA NO. 7.11) 
 
2.27 The Committee note that in order to check hoarding and black -marketing 
of essential commodities, the Government has taken several steps such as 
writing letters by Hon'ble Union  Minister to all Chief Ministers of States/UTs, 
Meeting of Hon'ble Union Minster with Ministers of Food/PD/Consumer Affairs of 
States/UTs, Conference of Chief Ministers, Video Conference by Cabinet 
Secretary/Secretary with Chief Secretaries/Food Secretarie s of all States/UTs, 
imposing of stock holding limits in respect of certain essential commodities.  
While appreciating all these steps taken by the Government, the Committee, 
however, cannot but point out that much more needs to be done in order to 
check hoarding and black-marketing of essential commodities by the States/UTs 
as there are reports of rampant malpractices and corruption in different parts of 
the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should 
take up the matter with all such State Governments/UT Administrations to identify 
their problems in implementation of the provisions of the PBMMSEC Act and 
convince them to properly enforce the EC Act and PBMMSEC Act in order to 
curb malpractices, corruption, profiteering and hoardi ng of essential commodities 
by the traders. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.28 The enforcement of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 lies with the 
State Governments/ Union Territories. The State Governments/UT 
Administrations have been delegated powers to ta ke necessary action under the 
provisions of both “The Essential Commodities Act, 1955” and “The Prevention of 
Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 
1980”, to prevent hoarding and blackmarketing of  essential commodities.   
 
             The Central Government has been taking various measures to persuade 
the State Governments/UT Administrations to effectively implement the 
provisions of Essential Commodities Act, 1955.  These include d.o.letters, 
conferences with Food Secre taries/Chief Secretaries of States/UTs including 
Video Conferences.  
       . 
           Earlier Secretary(CA) has also written vide D.O. letter dated 09.04.2012 to 
all Chief Secretaries urging, among others, to make effective use of both the 
aforesaid Act s.  The issue of effective use of the Essential Commodities Act, 
1955 and Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of 
Essential Commodities Act, 1980 has also been highlighted by the Additional 
Secretary of this Department in a meeting held on 14.03.2012 with the concerned 
Secretaries of Food and Civil Supplies of the State Governments. 
                             
          Recently vide Additional Secretary (CA)‟s D.O.letter dated 17.04.2012, 
Department‟s reminder dated 04.05.2012 and  Secretary (CA)‟s D.O.letter  dated   

28 
 
15.05.2012 respectively to the State Governments/UT Administrations it has 
been requested that States/UTs may inform about the difficulties being faced in 
enforcing the Acts, hurdles in the implementation of penal provisions contained in 
the EC Act, administrative constraints in enforcing the provisions of the Acts etc.    
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F. No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 

29 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.22, PARA NO. 8.15) 
 
2.29 The Committee note that in a free market economy, futures trading 
perform two important economic functions, viz., price discovery and price risk 
management.  Keeping in view its importance to all sectors of the econo my, the 
Department of Consumer Affairs/FMC has taken major initiatives during the last 
decade such as lifting of futures trading in all commodities, recognition of 
National/Regional Commodities Exchanges, commencement of futures trading in 
gold and silver after a ban of more than four decades, improvement of regulatory 
framework and re -structuring of Forward Markets Commission etc. The Forward 
Markets Commission has also taken several regulatory initiatives during the year 
2011-12 including issue of Guidance Manual for Audit of Members of Commodity 
Futures Exchanges, finalizing a common Know Your Client (KYC) format, issue 
of Guidelines related to Investor Protection Fund, etc. The Committee hope that 
all such initiatives taken by the Department/Commission a re done in larger public 
interest and are complementary to their suggestions as contained in the report on 
the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2010 that was presented to 
the Parliament on 6th December, 2011. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.30 The inspection of members of Exchanges both by FMC and Exchanges 
has been one step which has contributed towards strengthening controls & 
ensuring transparency through better compliance. The FMC/ Exchanges have 
been conducting inspection of members on regula r basis. However, a need was 
felt to ensure that such inspections are comprehensive and cover all aspects of 
regulatory regime in place. Therefore Forward Market Commission has come out 
with Guidance Manual for Audit of Members of Commodity Futures Exchang es. 
This Guidance Manual broadly covers various aspects related to trading in 
Commodity Future Markets including regulatory aspects and provides broad 
guidelines for conducting such inspections. 
 
The Investor Protection Fund was operationalised and all the  Exchanges 
transferred a total of Rs.64.67 Crore to this Fund and separate Trusts were being 
set up to operate the Fund. This has been a very significant contribution to 
protection of investors in this market which would increase their confidence and 
hence their participation in the market increasing its breadth and depth. 
 
FMC has prescribed a common KYC form and documents to enable the 
clients to register in more than one exchange with use of the uniform KYC form 
and documents. 
 
Thus, FMC has reported tha t it has taken all such initiatives which are in 
larger public interest and are also meant to strengthen the market thus 
complementary to its suggestions as contained in the report on the                 
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2010 that was  presented to the   

30 
 
Parliament on 22 nd December, 2011 (not 6 th December, 2011). The FMC will 
continue taking such initiatives which shall further improve market integrity, 
financial integrity as well as customer protection in this market. 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F.No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 

31 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.23, PARA NO. 8.16) 
 
2.31 The Committee note that the Forward Markets Commission has an 
effective strength of 77 Officers/Staff against the sanctioned strength of 132 
Officers/Staff. The Committee find that besides there being a large number of 
vacancies, the SC/OBCs communities are also not adequately represented in 
Group A,B&C categories and the STs  are not represented at all in these 
categories of employees. The Committee note that despite the advertisements 
given several times during the last 7 years, the posts of Director/Deputy 
Secretary/Deputy Director could not be filled up due to non availabil ity of suitable 
candidates.  The Committee are of the view that existence of such a large 
number of vacancies in a small organization like the FMC would hamper its 
functioning. The Committee, therefore, strongly urge the Department/FMC to 
make further sinc ere efforts to fill up all the vacancies in all categories of posts. 
The Department/FMC should also try and recruit Officers/Staff belonging to 
SC/ST/OBC to the extent reservations are made for them as per rules.  
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.32 The recommendation of the  Committee has been noted and further action 
is being taken to fill up the vacancies in all categories of posts as per the rules. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F.No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 
 
 
 
 
 
  

32 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.24, PARA NO. 8.17) 
 
2.33 The Committee are surprised to note that despite the Regulatory 
Mechanism in FMC in place, there are reported cases of trading irregularities and 
market manipulations.  T he Committee further note that a complaint received by 
the FMC in December, 2010 relating to irregularities in National Multi Commodity 
Exchange, Ahmedabad has been investigated and certain malpractices of the 
anchor promoter of NMCE were detected for whic h appropriate directions were 
given to the Board of Exchange for taking further steps as per law. The Hon‟ble 
High Court of Gujarat, Ahmedabad set aside the order of FMC on 09.02.2012 on 
the petition by the promoter. Subsequently, the Apex Court stayed the  order of 
the High Court of Gujarat and restored FMC‟s Order on 22.03.2012 on an SLP 
filed by FMC.  It is further stated that such cases are enquired into by FMC under 
the provisions of Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 and appropriate 
action taken thereon. The Committee are of the view that those powerful traders 
indulged in malpractices have no fear of the authority conferred on FMC under 
the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 nor are they bothered about the 
fine that can be imposed on them. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Department/FMC should seriously consider that cases of malpractice noticed 
in the National/Regional Commodity Exchanges should be handed over to the 
CBI for proper and thorough investigation so that the offender s, however wealthy 
and powerful they may be, are brought to justice. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.34 The complaints of irregularities are enquired into by FMC under the 
provisions of Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952. Further, violations of 
other laws are referred to the concerned departments/organizations under Rule 
13 of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Rules, 1954. FMC has reported that in 
case it finds that the complaints are of such nature that the same require 
investigations by an external in vestigating agency, it would make such a 
recommendation to the Ministry. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F. No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 
 

33 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 18, PARA NO. 6.18) 
 
3.1 The Committee note that the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) is making 
efforts to build Human Resource Development/Capacity Building in Education 
Institutions to promote a responsible and responsive consumer movement in the 
country in line with the best practices in the developed countries. In this regard, 
efforts are being made to frame curriculum on standardization in five Sectors i.e. 
Agriculture, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Information Technology 
and Home Science.  It  is stated that once the curriculum is finalized in 
consultation with the selected universities/technical institutions and the experts 
nominated by the AICTE, UGC, etc, it will be introduced in the identified 21 
institution/universities and technical insti tutions.  The Committee are surprised to 
learn that evolution of curriculum is still in progress in consultation with the 
identified Universities/Institutes though the scheme was approved way back on                             
27th March, 2008 with an out lay of Rs 7.00 crores.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Department should look into the matter and 
expedite finalization of the scheme on top priority for being implemented from the 
next academic session. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.2 The Scheme namely Human Resource Development/Capacity Building in 
Educational Institutions was approved on 27 March 2008 for evolution of 
curriculum with an outlay of Rs.7 crores.  
 
Meetings of the Monitoring Committee were held on 08 Oct 2008, 24 July 
2009, 08 Sep 2009, 09 March 2010, 07 July 2010 & 18 Aug 2010.   
 
BIS made efforts to frame curriculum on standardization in five sectors 
namely Agriculture, Technical Sector, Food & Hotel Management Sector, IT 
Sector & Management Sector. Twenty one institut ions/universities were 
shortlisted for Pilot visits; however, based on the response received, pilot visits 
could be made to 13 institutions.  Working Groups were constituted in each 
sector and Meetings of three Working Groups viz. Agriculture Sector, Techn ical 
Sector & Management Sector were held followed by meeting of Core Group of 
Technical Sector.  Various stakeholders did not show much interest in fulfillment 
of the objective of the scheme.  It was discussed during the meeting of the 
Working Group on Co nsumer Protection for the 12 th Plan held on 19 May 2011 
that scheme is not required to be continued in the 12th Plan.   
  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F.No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 

34 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 9, PARA NO. 3.40) 
 
4.1 The Committee find that during XI Plan Period Actual Expenditure (on the 
Non-Plan side) in Consumer Welfare Fund remained low throughout the Plan 
period. The Committee further note that so f ar only 21 States/UTs have set up 
Consumer Welfare Fund in their States. The Committee are not in agreement 
with the views expressed by the Department that small quantum of grant appears 
to be the reason for not setting up Consumer Welfare Funds by the rem aining 
States/UTs. The Committee are dismayed to note that though in case of 13 
special category States, the ratio of 'Seed money' has been enhanced to 90:10, 
the Department has furnished the details of only 7 States which have been 
sanctioned funds for cr eating their own Consumer Welfare Fund.  As far as the 
Scheme for setting up of consumer clubs in Schools and Colleges is concerned, 
the Committee note that so far 7,249 consumer clubs have been sanctioned 
funds in 23 States.  The Committee are surprised t o find from the submission of 
the Ministry that the remaining States are not interested to implement the 
Scheme as the main reluctance of the States is due to their pre -occupation with 
PDS issues and lesser concern for consumer issues. The Committee not 
convinced with the view of the Department and desired the Department to find 
out the actual reasons for the reluctance shown by the remaining States/UTs for 
not implementing the Schemes under Consumer Welfare Fund. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that th e Department should impress upon the State 
Governments/UT Administrations not only to set up Consumer Welfare Fund and 
Consumer Clubs in remaining States/UTs, but also to encourage them to avail 
the benefits of the other Schemes under Consumer Welfare Fund  so as to 
promote and protect the welfare of the consumer.     
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.2 The Department has been vigorously taking up the matter of setting up of 
State Consumer Welfare Fund and Consumer Clubs with the concerned 
Secretaries/Chief Secreta ries (CA) of the States/UTs through various 
communications requesting them to avail the benefit of these schemes under 
Consumer Welfare Fund so as to ensure speedy implementation of the schemes.  
Matter has again been taken up with remaining States/UTs thr ough demi-official 
letter at the level of Joint Secretary. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F. No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
4.3 Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter – I of the Report. 

35 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.11, PARA NO. 3.52) 
 
4.4 The Committee are happy to note that the Department is in the process of 
developing Consumer Awareness Index to ascertain the level of awareness 
amongst the consumers.  The Commit tee feel that spreading consumer 
awareness is directly proportional to the effectiveness of Consumer Movement in 
the country.  The Committee hope that this initiative on the part of Department 
would bring the Consumer Movement in the Country at the interna tional level. 
The Committee, however, are constrained to note that Actual Expenditure under 
the Scheme Programme for Consumer Awareness has been constantly less than 
the RE during the entire XI Plan Period.  The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the entire funds allocated for spreading consumer awareness in the country be 
fully utilized so as to successfully develop the Consumer Awareness Index on 
real terms and recommend the Department to take pro -active steps to educate 
the consumers about their rights an d responsibilities so that they do not get 
carried away by misleading advertisements. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.5 The observation of the committee has been noted for guidance.  Extra 
efforts will be made for full utilization of allocated funds. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F. No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
4.6 Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter – I of the Report. 

36 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.16, PARA NO. 6.13) 
 
4.7 The Committee note that 181 Assaying and Hallmarking Centres have 
been recognized by BIS for certifying gold jewellery articles.  As on 29 th 
February, 2012, a total of 9352 Jewellers have been certified by BIS for 
hallmarked gold jewellery and 55 8 jewellers for hallmarked silver 
jewellery/artifacts. The Committee are surprised to note that in another reply to a 
query, the Department has stated that there are 186 Assaying and Hallmarking 
Centres in the country recognized by  the Government.  Out of  these, only 39 
Hallmarking Centres are set up with the Central Assistance and the larger 
numbers of 147 Hallmarking Centres are set up without any Central Assistance. 
It is clearly evident from this fact that either the present quantum of financial 
assistance given by the Central Government for setting up Hallmarking Centres 
is insufficient to attract the prospective entrepreneurs or the formalities for 
availing the same is too complex, if not both. It is also stated that after 
enhancement of the subsidy i n Government Scheme, the Department have 
received 42 applications, out of which 14 applications have been granted 
recognition by the Department. The Committee hope that the Department would 
consider the remaining applications also for granting recognition at the earliest 
and facilitate the one PSU who has proposed to set up a Hallmarking Centre in 
Assam. The Committee further recommends that the Department should review 
the formalities of the Government Scheme to make it as simple as possible and 
also to su itably increase the amount of financial assistance given under the 
Hallmarking Scheme so as to attract entrepreneurs to come forward and set up 
Hallmarking Centres not only in Metropolitan Cities but also in hilly and remote 
rural areas throughout the country.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.8 In addition to the two reasons cited above (for the insignificant number of 
applicants coming under the scheme), another important reasons is the 
commercial viability of running the A & H Centre, i.e., the operational co st. If 
Centre is not getting enough business of testing and hallmarking the jewelleries, 
the cost of operation may exceed the income.   
 
To make the Scheme more attractive, the Govt. has reviewed  it from time 
to time  and on the basis of the  recommendati ons of the 9 th  Parliamentary 
Standing Committee, the rates of subsidy has been revised and substantially 
increased w.e.f. 9 December 2010 for all categories i.e. normal, rural areas, 
North East and special category states, with first time introduction of category of  
PSUs  with higher rates  in the Scheme. However, the recommendations of the 
committee have been noted for further consideration, during the implementation 
in the 12th Plan.   
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F. No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 

37 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
4.9 Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter – I of the Report. 

38 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL.NO.4, PARA NO. 3.25) 
 
5.1 The Committee note that the projec t Computerization and Computer 
Networking of Consumer Fora (CONFONET) was launched during the X Plan 
period  in March, 2005 at a cost of Rs. 48.64 crore. The project had been 
extended to XI Plan with a total outlay of Rs. 25.69 crore to be implemented by 
the National Informatics Centre (NIC) on a turnkey basis.  The Committee are 
unhappy to note that as on January, 2012, out of 638 locations being covered, 
the CONFONET is operational in only 342 Consumer Fora. It is also stated that 
only 268 Consumer Fora a re uploading cause lists while only 186 Consumer 
Fora are uploading judgements.  In the opinion of the Committee, it is high time 
that the project is implemented fully which was launched way back in the year 
2005.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should 
impress upon the National Informatics Centre (NIC), the Project implementing 
agency, to expedite implementation of the project and ensure that the project is 
made operational in all the 638 Consumer Fora.  
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.2 The matter regarding  expeditious implementation of the „CONFONET‟ 
project and ensuring that the project is made operational in all the Consumer 
Fora has been taken up at the level of Secretary, Consumer Affairs with the 
Director General, National Infor matics Centre (NIC), the Project implementing 
agency. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F. No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 

39 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 5, PARA NO. 3.26) 
 
5.3 The Committee note that under the Scheme 'Strengthening of Consumer 
Fora' BE was Rs. 100.62 crore during XI Plan period, which was reduced to Rs. 
65.79 crore at RE stage.  However, actual expenditure incurred was Rs. 71.09 
crore (upto 31.03.2012) and the financial assi stance has been released by the 
Central Government to 23 States only during the entire XI Plan period. The 
Committee further note that during 2011-12, against an outlay of Rs. 19.00 crore, 
an amount of  Rs. 6.77 crore was released to only 6 States namely K erala, 
Punjab, Sikkim, Nagaland, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal. The Committee are not 
convinced with the reasons cited by the Department for incurring less 
expenditure that lesser number of States could submit proposals for financial 
assistance out of which m any proposals were incomplete and not fulfilled the 
prerequisite conditions for consideration. The Committee are concerned to note 
that the Department has not set any timeframe for States/UTs to resubmit their 
proposal in case of rejection due to incomplet e proposals. All this goes to prove 
that the Department is not serious to implement the scheme which is vital for the 
effective functioning of Consumer Fora. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Department should prescribe very clear Guidelines to be followed and 
proformas to be used by the States/UTs while submitting the proposals under the 
Scheme so that the chances of rejecting or returning the proposal for re -
submission due to incompleteness is minimized. The Department should also 
encourage the  States/UTs to avail the financial assistance and set up the 
Consumer Forums in their respective States/UTs so that  the interests of the 
Consumers are better protected.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.4 States/UTs have been requested several times to submit proposals for 
availing financial assistance under the „Strengthening Consumer Fora (SCF)‟ 
scheme. The Guidelines for the 11 th Plan scheme have since been revised and 
the same have been circulated to all the States/UTs. Further, the revised scheme 
of „Strengthening Consumer Fora (SCF)‟ for implementation during the 12 th Plan 
period as well as revised Guidelines for the same are under formulation in this 
Department. 
 
The 12 th Plan scheme would be finalized in wider consultation with the 
States/UTs. Thereafter , the revised scheme and Guidelines as finalized would 
again be circulated to all States/UTs requesting them to avail financial assistance 
under the scheme for strengthening of Consumer Fora in their States/UTs.  The 
recommendations of the committee would be taken into account so as to ensure 
maximum clarity for the benefit  of the States/UTs. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F. No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 

40 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 6, PARA NO. 3.27) 
 
5.5 The Committee are concerned to note that out of 72863 consumer 
complaints filed since inception in National Commission, 63370 have so far been 
disposed off and 9493 cases are pending.  The reasons cited by the Department 
for this are  existence of vacancies in the post of Member, NCDRC. The 
Committee further note that there is poor disposal of cases in some of the 
States/UTs namely Assam, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Orissa 
and Uttar Pradesh where percentage of disposal a re 64.24, 67.43, 69.06, 69.17, 
68.09 and 55.69 respectively the reasons again being the vacancies in these 
State Commissions/District Fora. Further the Committee were shocked to note 
that, in case of National Commission, some of the cases were pending sinc e the 
year 2000. Though all the cases were not original in nature as some of them 
were transferred cases of Ist Appeal and 2nd Appeal from State Commissions 
and District Forum respectively, the Committee feel that if this is the condition of 
National Commi ssion, the condition of State Commissions and District Fora 
would have been even worst. Further, the data maintained by the Consumer 
Fora are not giving realistic picture of the status of actual disposal of cases and 
duration of the cases pending with them  (year wise). The Committee are more 
concerned about the consumers who have been awaiting disposal of their cases 
since long time and apprehend that due to long pendency they might loose their 
faith in the system created for their own welfare. The Committe e, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should devise a uniform system to maintain 
data by the National Commission/State Commissions/District Forum in such a 
manner that it reflects the status of the cases filed, disposed off and the period of 
their pe ndency.  The cases should be further categorized as original, cases of 
First appeal and Second Appeal so that the data would give the actual status of 
cases in the Consumer Fora. The Committee further desire that steps should be 
taken for early disposal of pending cases and priority should be given in disposal 
of old cases. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.6 The matter regarding maintenance of data by the National 
Commission/State Commissions/District Forum in such a manner that it reflects 
the status of the case s filed, disposed off and the period of their pendency and  
categorization of the cases as Original, cases of First appeal and Second Appeal 
in Consumer Fora in States/UTs, steps to be taken for early disposal of pending 
cases and prioritization of disposal of old cases has been taken up at the level of 
Secretary, Consumer Affairs with the President, NCDRC. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
F. No. H-11012/1/2012-P&C, Dated 23/07/2012] 
 
 
NEW DELHI                   VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
16 November, 2012                   CHAIRMAN   
25  Kartika, 1934 (Saka)                Standing Committee on Food, 
        Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 

41 
 
APPENDIX I  MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STAND ING 
COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2012-13) HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 16th NOVEMBER, 2012 
 
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1400 hrs. in Committee Room No. 53, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
  Shri Vilas Muttemwar, M.P. -  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
5. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
6. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav 
7. Shri C. Rajendran 
8. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
RAJYA SABHA 
9. Dr. T. N. Seema 
10. Shri Birendra Singh 
11. Shri Veer Singh 
12. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
     1. Shri P. K. Misra - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou - Under Secretary 

42 
 
 At the outset, the Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members of the 
Committee to the sitting convened to hear the views and suggestion of the 
representatives of Right to Food Campaign on the various provisions of „The 
National Food Security Bill, 2011‟ and to consider and adopt the draft Report of 
the Committee (2012 -13) on the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report of the 
Committee (2011-12) on DFG (2012 -13) pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
2. xxxxxxxxxxx   xxxxxxxxxxx      xxxxxxxxx  
3. xxxxxxxxxxx   xxxxxxxxxxx      xxxxxxxxx 
4. The Hon‟ble Chairman then highlighted the important recommendations 
contained in the draft Report of the Committee (2012 -13) on the action taken by 
the Government on the observations/recommendati ons contained in the 
Eighteenth Report of the Committee (2011 -12) on DFG (2012 -13) pertaining to 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs). The Committee then took up for consideration the above 
stated draft Report. After due deliberation, the Committee unanimously adopted 
the draft Report without any amendments/modifications.  
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the aforesaid 
Report and present the same to the Parliament. 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
********* 
 

43 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS  OF THE  ACTION  TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE  EIGHTEENTH REPORT  
OF  THE  STANDING  COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION (2011-12) 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)   
(i) Total number of Recommendations:        24 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government : 
Serial Nos. –  1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17,19, 20, 
                        21, 22, 23 and 24.  
 
(Para. Nos. –   2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 3.28, 3.29, 3.46, 4.10, 4.11, 
5.18, 5.19, 6.14, 7.9, 7.10, 7.11, 8.15, 8.16 
and 8.17). 
           (Chapter –II, Total   17) 
                                                         Percentage : 70.83% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government 
Serial No. 18  
(Para  No. – 6.18) 
           (Chapter – III, Total - 1) 
Percentage : 4.17% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
Serial Nos. 9, 11 and 16   
(Para Nos. – 3.40, 3.52 and 6.13)  
            (Chapter – IV, Total -3)   
Percentage : 12.5% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
interim replies of the Government have been received. 
   Serial Nos.:- 4,5 and 6 
   (Para Nos. – 3.25, 3.26 and 3.27) 
    (Chapter – V, Total - 3) 
Percentage : 12.5 % 