 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION   
(2009-2010) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
  
 
[PRODUCTION, CONSUMPTION AND PRICING OF SUGAR]                      
 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2010/ Bhadrapada , 1932 (Saka) 
  
10 

 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2009-2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTIRBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
[PRODUCTION, CONSUMPTION AND PRICING OF SUGAR]                      
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 31.08.2010 
       Laid in Rajya Sabha on 31.08.2010 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2010/ Bhadrapada , 1932 (Saka) 


 
 
CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………. 
 
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………. 
…………(ii) 
 
……(iv) 
 
CHAPTER  I Introductory……………………………………………………… …………1 
 
CHAPTER II Production of Sugar in India…………………………………… ……….2 
CHAPTER III 
 
Consumption of Sugar …………………………………………  ……….19 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Pricing of Sugar………………………………………………….   ………..41 
CHAPTER V Sugar Development Fund…………………………………… ………52 
 
CHAPTER VI Cane Price Arrears……………………………………………   ………..67 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I 
Minutes of the Tenth sitting of the Committee held on           
4th February, 2010. 
 
…………. 
 
II 
Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting of the Committee held on           
28th June, 2010. 
 
 
…………. 
 
III 
Minutes of the Twenty fourth sitting of the Committee held on      
25th August, 2010. 
 
 
………… 
                                       
 
 
(i) 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2009-10. 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar  - Chairman    
  
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
4. Shri Tara Chand Bhagora 
5. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
6. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
7. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
8. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
9. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
10. Shri Lalchand Kataria 
11. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee* 
12. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
13. Shri Sohan Potai 
14. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
15. Shri Dinubhai Solanki 
16. Shri Laxman Tudu 
17. Shri D. Venugopal  
18. Shri Madhusudan Yadav 
19. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
23. Shri P. Kannan 
24. Shri Lalhming Liana 
25. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
26. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
27. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
28. Dr. T.N. Seema 
29. Shri Veer Singh 
30. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
31. Vacant                     
      * Nominated w.e.f. 04.08.2010 
 
(ii) 
              

 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri P.K. Mishra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma  - Director 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad  - Additional Director 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution (2009-10) having been authorized by the Committee to 
submit the Report on their behalf, present this Tenth Report on the subject 
“Production, Consumption and Pricing of Sugar ” of the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution). 
2.  The subject was selected by the Committee for examination during the 
year 2009 -10. The Committee was briefed  on the subject by the 
representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution) on 04.02.2010. The 
Committee also took oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution on 28.06.2010. 
3.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Officers of the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food and Public Distribution) for placing before them the detailed written notes 
on the subject and for furnishing the information to the Committee, desired in 
connection with the examination of the subject.  
4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to Prof. Abhijit Sen, 
Member, Planning Commission and National Federation of Cooperative Sugar 
Factories Ltd. for furnishing their views/suggestions on the subject.  
5. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
sitting held on 25th August, 2010. 
6.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the 
body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;                                 VILAS MUTTEMWAR 
25 August, 2010                                Chairman, 
 3 Bhadrapada,1932 (Saka)              Standing Committee on Food,  
                                                           Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 
 
(iv) 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
India is one of the largest producers of sugar and sugarcane in the 
world and the sugar industry is the largest agro -based industry located in 
rural India. In India, sugarcane production was about 348.2 MT whereas 
the world sugarcane production was 1743.09  MT during 2008; thus India 
contributes about 20% of the world sugarcane production and ranks 2 nd 
after Brazil (648.92 MT). As far as sugarcane area is concerned, India 
accounts for about 18% of the world area.  About 45 million sugarcane 
farmers, their dependents and a large mass of agricultural labourers are 
involved in sugarcane cultivation, harvesting and ancillary activities , 
constituting 7.5 per cent of the rural population. Maharashtra and Uttar 
Pradesh contribute more than 50 per cent share in the  country‟s sugar 
output. India is also the largest consumer of sugar in the world. 
1.2 Management of the sugar industry and management of sugar for 
public distribution is done by the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution. The activities  of the Departm ent in relation to sugar broadly 
cover:- 
(i) Regulation of the industry through the Directorate of Sugar; 
(ii) Fixation of statutory minimum prices of sugarcane payable by 
sugar factories; 
 
(iii) Development and regulation of sugar industry (including 
training in the field of sugar technology); 
 
(iv) Fixation of price of levy sugar and its supply for PDS and 
regulation of supply of free sale sugar; 
 
(v) Administration of subsidy on sugar; 
(vi) Administration of Sugar Development Fund; and 
(vii) Training and Research.  

 
 
1.3 Sugar industry is instrumental in generating sizable employment in 
the rural sector directly and indirectly through its ancillary units.  The sugar 
industry in India has been a focal point for socio -economic development in 
the rural areas by mobilizing rural resources, gene rating employment and 
higher income, transport and communication facilities. Further, many sugar 
factories (particularly in tropical region in India) have established colleges, 
medical centers , hospitals and other infrastructure for the benefit of the 
rural population. Many sugar factories have also diversified into by -
products based industries like distilleries, organic chemical plants, paper 
and medium density particle fiber (MDF) board factories and installation of 
cogeneration facilities, etc.  
1.4 The Sugar Development Fund is the main instrument through which 
financial assistance is provided to the sugar industry for effecting 
modernization and expansion of the existing mills, for bringing about 
varietal improvement and development in the cane grown in the area of the 
sugar factories, for projects for bagasse based cogeneration of power and 
for production of ethanol.  
1.5 The Committee have examined the various issues related to sugar 
and sugar industry. The detailed analysis along with the 
observations/recommendations of the Committee are given in the 
succeeding chapters of the Report.  
  

 
 
CHAPTER II 
PRODUCTION OF SUGAR IN INDIA 
 
2.1 Sugar production in India has been cyclic in nature. Every peak 
production year is followed by a low production year two or three years 
later. This is mainly due to corresponding increase or decrease in area 
under sugarcane. Due to good monsoon and increase in sugarcane area 
under cultivation, s ugar producti on from sugarcane during the sugar 
seasons 2006-2007 and 2007-08 increased substantially to 282 lakh tones 
and 263 lakh tones , respectively and the production was surplus  during 
these two years whereas the production of sugarcane / sugar  has declined 
in sugar season 2008-09 and 2009-10.  
2.2 The Department has furnished the following  Statement showing 
State-wise production of sugar for the last five sugar season i.e. 2004-05 to 
2008-09:- 
   (Figures in lakh tonnes) 
STATE 2004-2005 2005-
2006 
2006-
2007 
2007-
2008 
2008-09 (Est.)* 
PUNJAB 3.37 3.88 5.50 5.34 2.43 
HARYANA 3.98 3.88 6.77 5.99 2.29 
RAJASTHAN 0.11 0.05 0.07 0.06 0.04 
UTTARAKHAND 3.36 4.14 5.28 4.01 2.23 
UTTAR PRADESH 51.52 55.64 83.52 73.20 41.53 
MADHYA 
PRADESH 
0.78 0.94 1.48 1.74 0.49 
CHATTISGARH 0.13 0.22 0.21 0.38 0.13 
GUJARAT 8.32 12.44 13.90 13.66 10.22 
MAHARASHTRA 23.03 52.64 90.13 90.75 46.00 
BIHAR 2.70 4.19 4.83 3.36 2.22 
ASSAM 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 
ORISSA 0.87 0.52 0.65 0.63 0.30 
WEST BENGAL 0.05 0.07 0.04 0.05 0.02 
NAGALAND 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
 
 

 
 
ANDHRA 
PRADESH 
12.03 12.76 19.24 13.35 5.92 
KARNATAKA 11.32 20.09 25.42 28.39 16.75 
TAMILNADU 14.75 21.38 24.21 21.41 15.95 
PONDICHERRY 0.19 0.26 0.55 0.51 0.16 
KERALA 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 
GOA 0.09 0.11 0.19 0.15 0.09 
ALL INDIA 136.60 193.21 281.99 262.98 146.77 
 
 
2.3 When asked about basic reasons for decline in production of sugar 
in the country, the Ministry stated that less production of sugar in the sugar 
seasons 2008-09 and 2009-10 is mainly because of the following reasons: 
(a) Reported shortfall in both acreage and productivity (2008 -09) 
due to lack of adequate inputs owing to cane arrears in previous 
two seasons (since liquidated); 
(b) Decline in productivity on account of delay and deficiency of 
rains in the sou th and un -seasonal rains elsewhere in 2008 -09 
and 2009-10; 
(c) Shift in acreage from sugarcane to other foodgrains crops due to 
relatively higher minimum support price (MSP) of foodgrain 
crops; 
(d) More diversion of sugarcane to gur and khandsari units; 
(e) Higher per centage of ratoon area in overall area under 
sugarcane, lowering yield of sugarcane (2008-09); 
(f) Fall in recovery rate due to less sucrose content in sugarcane. 
 
2.4 During evidence, the representatives of Department of Food and 
Public Distribution stated as under:-  
 „Sir, there are two -three issues which the Committee might 
like to discuss and I propose to put them before you. Firstly, 
sugarcane crop is highly water intensive. Sugarcane requires 
about ten watering in a year. Can we afford that much of 
irrigation water today? We have to really look at economizing 

 
 
the availability of limited water resources. So, possibly, we 
cannot really look at encouraging sugarcane in areas which 
are water deficit. That is something which will have to be kept 
in mind. Secondly, we have to look at the overall food security 
aspect also.‟  
2.5 When asked about the steps taken to increase production of 
sugarcane and sugar, the Ministry in a note furnished to the Committee 
informed as under:- 
(a)  the Central Government has now fi xed the Fair & Remunerative 
Price (FRP) of sugarcane payable by sugar mills for 2009 -10 
sugar season at Rs.129.84 per quintal linked to a basic recovery 
rate of 9.5% subject to a premium of Rs.1.37 per quintal for 
every 0.1 percentage point increase in rec overy above that level. 
This FRP is substantially high over the Statutory Minimum Price 
(SMP) of 2008-09 sugar season which was Rs.81.18 per quintal, 
with an additional premium of Rs.0.90 for every 0.1% point 
increase in the recovery above 9%.  
 
(b) The Sustai nable Development of Sugarcane Development 
Based Cropping System (SUBACS) is one of the components of 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS). The main thrust of 
SUBACS is on the transfer of improved production technology to 
the farmers through field demonstratio ns, training of farmers, 
supply of farm implements, enhancing production of planting 
materials, efficient use of water, treatment of planting materials.  
 
 
(c) The Central Government provides concessional loans at an 
interest rate of 4% per annum given to suga r factories from 
Sugar Development Fund (SDF) for modernization of plant and 
machinery, expansion of crushing capacity, utilization of by -
products viz. baggasse for co-generation of power and molasses 
for production of ethanol, upgradation of technology an d 
sugarcane development including better irrigation facilities, 
improved seed variety, ratoon management etc. 
 
(d) A short term scheme has been announced for cane development 
in the current financial year under which loans of Rs. 1.0 to 2.5 
crore are available  to sugar factories depending upon their 
crushing capacity, for purchase of seeds, fertilizers and 
pesticides etc. This loan is expected to be passed on to the 
farmers.  
 

 
 
 
(e) To optimize processing of raw sugar alongwith cane juice to 
produce white sugar, a scheme has been introduced in the 
current financial year for loans from SDF at 4% simple interest to 
be given to sugar factories to install balancing equipment so as 
to maxi mize availability of processed sugar from imported raw 
sugar in 2009-10 sugar season.  
 
2.6 The Committee enquired whether there is any link between the 
sugarcane yield as well as sugar recoveries in the country that hampered 
the desired growth of sugarca ne cultivation in the country. T he Ministry 
stated that Under normal conditions of weather and cultivation practices, 
there is no link between sugarcane yield of a variety and sugar recovery in 
mills. Sugarcane yield is dependent on the number of millable cane per unit 
area and the average single cane weight, whereas the sugar recovery 
depends upon the sucrose content in cane. The sugar yield per hectare, is 
however, positively correlated with sugarcane yield. The weather 
aberrations like rise of temperature  in November-December, when sucrose 
accumulation in cane is at its peak, adversely affects the sugar recovery of 
a variety in mills. Similarly, rainfall just before harvesting may increase the 
cane yield and reduce sugar content in cane and, in turn, sugar recovery. 
2.7 When enquired about difficulties being faced by the farmers in 
raising the sugarcane crop, the Ministry stated as under:- 
(1) Inadequate availability of quality seed of the improved variety is a  
major problem. 
(2) Non-availability of water logged resistant varieties. 
(3) Poor sprouting initiation in winter harvested cane. 
(4) Scarcity of labour at reasonable rate. 
(5) High cost of cultivation. 
(6) Non-availability of sugarcane harvester. 

 
 
(7) Delay and untimely cane price payment when there is excess 
production of sugarcane.   
2.8 When enquired about duration of production of various varieties of 
sugarcane and steps being taken by the Ministry to encourage farmers to 
cultivate early maturing ca ne varieties, the Ministry informed that t he 
duration of production of early and middle maturing verities and of Adsali 
crop of sugarcane is given below: 
1 . Early maturing varieties  ; 10 months - tropical India :  January - 
February to October - Novemeber.- Sub-tropical India : February - March to 
December - January. 
2. Midlate maturing varieties  : 12 months. - tropical India : November -
December to October - November.-Sub-tropical India : February - March to 
January -February. 
3.Adsali crop ( Tropical India ): 18 months ( July - August to November - 
December. 
2.9 For promoting the early maturing high sugar varieties, the factories 
are providing training to the farmers to grow early maturing varieties in the 
respective zone of a sugar factory for early starting  of the factory and 
obtaining high sugar recovery. Some State Govt. (U.P., Uttarakhand, 
Punjab, Haryana etc) are giving more sugarcane price (SAP) to early 
maturing high sugar varieties for promotion of the farmers interest to adopt 
high sugar early maturi ng varieties. The cane growers are also being 
provided incentives for growing seed nursery of early maturing high sugar 
varieties. Apart from this, Ministry of Agriculture is promoting the use of 
high yielding sugarcane seed on farmers field through provid ing incentives/ 
assistance for production and use of quality seed of high yielding varieties 
by rearing of foundation and primary seed nurseries with the promotional 
assistance of Rs. 4000/ - and Rs. 2000/ - per ha , respectively. Apart from 
this, the, Minist ry of Agriculture has approved the production of tissue 

 
 
culture plantlets of high yielding varieties produced in tissue culture lab at 
VSI, Pune and UPCSR, Shahjahanpur. 
2.10 In reply to a question, the Department informed t he Committee that 
higher area under sugarcane is expected to yield a bigger harvest of 
sugarcane and consequently higher production of sugar  in the next year as 
compared to current year. Area under sugarcane cultivation during the 
ensuing crushing season i.e. 2010-11 is likely to increase by about 10-15% 
as compared to last year.  The estimates of area and production of 
Sugarcane for the year 2010 -11 have not been worked out.  However, as 
per the latest Crop Weather Watch Group Meeting, the estimated area 
sown under Sugarcane as on 18th  June, 2010 is 45.24 lakh ha. as against 
41.79 lakh ha. covered during last year (IIIrd Advance Estimates).   
2.11 When asked whether the Government has any scheme/plan to help 
the sugarcane growing farmers to enhance the production of sugarcane, 
the Minis try stated that the revised Macro Management of Agriculture 
(MMA) scheme is a flagship scheme of the Department of Agriculture & 
Cooperation to supplement/complement the efforts of the State 
Governments for enhancement of agricultural production and productivity in 
the country.  The scheme provides sufficient flexibility to the States to 
develop and pursue the programmes on the basis of their regional priorities 
and felt needs in the form of Work Plan.  Thus, the States have been given 
a free hand to finalize their sector-wise allocation as per the requirement of 
their development priorities.  The revised Macro Management of 
Agriculture Scheme consists of 10 Centrally Sponsored Scheme, which 
includes the scheme called “Sustainable Development of Sugarcane Based 
Cropping System (SUBACS)”.  The funds released under the MMA scheme 
during 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009 -10 are Rs. 1001.26 crore, Rs. 922.78 
crore and Rs. 899.25 crore (as on 10.03.2010) , respectively. Out of this, a 
sum of Rs. 2754.35 lakh, Rs. 2659.46  lakh and Rs. 3708.75 lakh has been 

 
 
approved for SUBACS during the year 2007 -08, 2008-09 and 2009 -2010 
respectively.    
2.12 When asked about concrete steps being taken by various 
stakeholders (including State Governments) to ensure that sufficient 
sugarcane crops is developed and grown in the mill area for the economic 
viability of sugar factory, the Ministry informed that Lloans from the SDF 
are given to the sugar factories for development of sugarcane in their areas 
for projects of upto Rs.6 crore, with at least 10% contribution by the 
borrower.  The scheme provides for loan for  
(1) Setting up of Heat treatment plant 
(2) Rearing of Seed Nurseries  
(3) Incentives to cultivators to switch over to improved varieties of 
sugarcane 
(4) Integrated Pest and Disease management including the cost of 
equipments, pesticides and bio pesticides  
(5) Irrigation schemes 
(6) Ratoon Management 
(7) Improvement of problematic soils through surface/sub surface 
drainage and chemical amendments and  
(8) Field Demonstrations and Extension Mechanism.   
 
2.13 In the year 2009-10, a short-term loan scheme was also announced 
for cane development loans to sugar factories for purchase of seeds, 
fertilizers and pesticides. Under this scheme 96 sugar factories have been 
disbursed loan amounting to Rs.182.30 crore upto 15.5.2010.   
2.14 To ensure the availability of sugarcane to the sugar factories, the 
Central Govt. envisages to increase the sugarcane productivity as well as 
improving the sugar recovery. A Centrally Sponsored Sche me on 
Sustainable Development of Sugarcane Based Cropping Systems 
(SUBACS) under Macro Management Mode of Agriculture is being 

 
 
implemented in major sugarcane growing states focusing on 
mechanization, availability of quality seed, transfer of technology, wa ter 
saving measures and skill upgradation of farmers and extension workers, 
etc by providing financial assistance for promotion of sugarcane. Apart 
from this, some of the State Govts as well as sugar factories are also 
taking up developmental activities in their respective state s and factory 
areas. 
2.15 In view of increase in MSP of wheat and paddy in the recent past, to 
check against further shift in area from sug arcane and with a view to 
ensuring that cultivation of sugarcane is not rendered totally unattractive 
and unprofitable vis -a-vis wheat and paddy so as to ensure adequate 
production of sugarcane and sugar, the Government has amended its 
sugarcane pricing policy to fix “Fair and Remunerative  Price” (FRP) for 
sugarcane from 2009 -10 sugar season instead of a Statutory Minimum 
Price (SMP) previously fixed by the Government.  Under FRP, the farmers 
would get upfront payment of price of sugarcane inclusive of margins on 
account of profit and risk, not earlier available under SMP.  
Gur and Khandsari Industry 
2.16 The Committee have been informed that diversion of sugarcane 
towards production of gur and khandsari ha s an adverse effect on the 
availability of sugarcane for sugar production and conseque ntly, results in 
lower sugar production with upward pressure on prices, unless this is in a 
season of surplus production of sugarcane.  However, the above industries 
do not process the major part of sugarcane produced in a season, though 
the diversion of s ugarcane for gur and khandsari is more in a year when 
sugarcane production is less and vice -versa.  This, therefore, affects sugar 
production in two ways, viz. less availability of sugarcane overall and less 
drawal (percentage of sugarcane crushed by sugar  mills against total 
estimated sugarcane produced). 

 
 
2.17 According to study conducted by National Council of Applied 
Economic Research (NCAER) relating to “Policy Reforms in the Sugar 
Sector : Implications for the Gur and Khandsari Industry” submitted in  April 
2009,  the prices paid by Alternative Sweetener Industry in most cases is 
generally lower than paid by sugar industry.  The alternative sweetener 
industry paid approximately 87-89% of the price paid by the sugar industry.  
It was observed that altern ative sweetner industry made payment to cane 
producers within a fortnight, which appeared to be the key advantage of 
supplying cane to Alternative Sweetener Industry.  The other advantage 
was that payments are made in cash as against payments made by sugar  
factories  through  cheques or bank accounts. 
2.18 According to the above said study, the per capita consumption of 
gur at all India level has come down by 50% in urban areas and by 70% in 
rural areas respectively between 1987 -89 to 2004 -05.  The decline in the 
consumption of gur at all India level is also apparent across all income 
groups.  The above changes in the pattern of sugarcane utilisation by 
sugar factories and alternative sweetener industry basically reflect the 
shifts in consumer preference and  taste towards better quality sugar 
produced by sugar factories.  According to the study, it is visible that with 
rising incomes in the future and urbanisation, there will be further decrease 
in the consumption of alternative sweeteners. At present, there is no 
control of the Government over the production, distribution and pricing of 
Gur and Khandsari.  Although, the Central Government is empowered to fix 
fair and remunerative price for the sugarcane purchased by the producer of 
khandsari sugar, the Government has not exercised this power.   
 
 
  

 
 
 
2.19 The Committee are concerned to note that the production of 
sugar has decreased from 263 lakh tones in 2007-08 to 147 lakh tones 
in 2008-09. The factors responsible for less production of sugar in the 
sugar season 2008 -09 and 2009 -10 are stated to be (i) lack of 
adequate inputs owing to cane price arrears; (ii) delay and deficiency 
of rains; (iii) diversion of sugarcane crops to other cash crops; (iv) 
less sucrose content in sugarcane . In the opinion of the Committee, 
the production of sugar and sugarcane decreased due to lack of 
foresightedness on the part of the Government which could not make 
advance planning to resolve issues leading to  decline in the 
production o f sugarcane . The Committee feel that to bridge the gap 
between the demand and supply of sugar,  increase in production of 
sugarcane is desirable.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that to reduce the dependency on imported sugar and to 
increase t he production of sugar, the Government should initiate 
appropriate public -private partnership in research and extension 
programs with particular emphasis on ratoon management, 
propagation of disease and pest resistant varieties,  water logged 
resistant vari eties, availability of quality seeds,  integrated plan 
nutrient management and judicious water management by assigning 
the lead role and responsibility to sugar mills. In addition, the 
Government should make sincere efforts to set up soil testing 
laboratories in the sugar cultivation areas to determine the fertility 

 
 
level of soil to improve the soil hea lth.  The Committee urge upon the 
Government to make available high yielding seeds and fertilizers in 
time to boost sugarcane crop production capacity.  
 
 
  

 
 
2.20 The Committee observe that despite a number of steps taken 
by the Government, there is no satisfactory improvement in 
production of sugarcane and sugar in the country. The Committee 
find that various difficulties are being faced by the farmers in raising 
the sugarcane crop such as (a) inadequate availability of quality seed 
of the improved variety ; (b) non-availability of wa ter logged resistant 
varieties; (c) poor sprouting initi ation in winter harvested cane; (d) 
scarcity of labour at reasonable rate; (e) high cost of cultivation; (f) 
non-availability of sugarcane harvester ; and (g) delay and untimely 
cane price payment. The Committee also observe that over the years, 
the level of ground water has gone down considerably, thereby 
creating irrigation problem for sugarcane growers. The Committee are 
happy to note that the Government is encouraging the farmers to 
grow early matur ing and high yielding cane varieties by providing 
incentives/assistance so that uninterrupted and regular supply of 
quality sugarcane is maintained.  The Committee desire that t he 
Government should also adopt t he drip and sprinkler irrigation 
system which is within the reach of every farmer and provide plant 
protection cover to take care of attack of pe st and diseases. The 
Committee also recommend that the nodal Ministry , in coordination 
with the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation should also 
complement the efforts of various State Governments by 
implementing the revised Macro Management of Agriculture (MMA) in 

 
 
letter and spirit for enhancing the production and productivity  of 
sugarcane in the country.  

 
 
2.21 The Committee  note that in order to make the cultivation of 
sugarcane more attractive and profitable, the Government of India 
has now amended its Sugarcane Pricing Policy and fixed the Fare and 
Remunerative Price (FRP) of sugarcane payable by sugar mills f rom 
2009-10 sugar season at Rs. 129.84  per quintal which is substantially 
higher over the  Statutory Minimum Price (SMP) of Rs. 81.18 per 
quintal announced for 2008-09. The Committee, however, feel that in 
the ground reality position is far different and the cane growers do 
not get the announced prices. The Committee feel that in the absence 
of remunerative price for sugarcane, farmers opt for other cash crops. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that adequate FRP of 
sugarcane should be fixed so as to attract farmers fo r cultivation of 
sugarcane crop, thereby ensuring  adequate production of sugar by 
the sugar mills. The Government  should fix the FRP every year in 
advance so that farmers get right price signal and ensure that 
sugarcane remain equally competitive with other food/cash crops.  
  

 
 
2.22 The Committee note that diversion of sugarcane towards 
production of Gur and Khandsari is one of the main reasons for less 
production of sugar by the sugar mills and that too in the year when 
sugarcane production is less. The Committee observe that the 
Government ha s no control over the production, distribution and 
pricing of Gur and Khandsari, which  has an adverse effect on the 
availability of sugarcane for sugar mills and consequently results in 
lower production of sugar leading to  rise in  prices. The Comm ittee, 
however, observe that consequent upon rise in income and change in 
taste, consumption of gur at all India level has come down in both 
urban and rural areas across all income groups. The Committee also 
observe that despite there bein g shifts in consumer preference, there 
is large scale diversion of sugarcane to the alternative sweetener 
industry. The Committee are of the opinion that due to failure on the 
part of the sugar mills to make timely payment for sugarcane supplied 
to them by  the farmers, there is still large-scale diversion of 
sugarcane to Gur and Khandsari units, particularly in the years of 
less production. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the sugar 
mills should purchase the sugarcane directly from farmers to check 
the diversion of sugarcane to Gur and Khandsari industries. Further, 
the Government should persuade the sugar mills to make timely 
payment of sugarcane to the farmers in cash , rather than by cheque  
or bank accounts. Besides, they should start the production of sugar 

 
 
in their mills in the beginning of the sugar season so that the famers 
are not forced to divert their produce to Gur and Khandsari units and 
they get fair price of sugarcane.  
  

 
 
CHAPTER III 
CONSUMPTION OF SUGAR 
3.1 The Committee have been informed that the levy, non -levy (free 
sale) ratio of sugar is 20:80 for the current sugar season. All the sugar mills 
have to surrender 20% of their production as levy sugar for its allotment 
through PDS. The Department has furnish ed the following details with 
regard to internal consumption/demand of sugar during the last 5 sugar 
seasons i.e. from 2004-05 to 2008-09:- 
                                                                       (Qty. in lac tons) 
S.No. Sugar Season 
 
Consumption of 
Sugar 
I  2004-05 171 
2 2005-06 183 
3 2006-07 191 
4 2007-08 205 
5 2008-09 220 
 
 As regards the demand projection for the current sugar season 
2009-10, the demand for sugar is provisionally estimated at the same level 
as that of last sugar season 2008-09 i.e. at about 220 lac tons.  
3.2 When enquired about the overall demand of sugar for distribution 
through PDS, the Department replied that a llocation of levy sugar for 
distribution under Public Distribution System ( PDS) is not made on the 
demand of the States/UTs. In February, 2001, t he Government 
restructured the supply of levy sugar in the Public Distribution System 
(PDS) and restricted its supply to BPL families except in the North Eastern 
States, Hill States and Island Territories where universal coverage was 
allowed to continue.  Accordingly, t he allotment of levy sugar is made on 
the basis of fixed State/UT quotas with effect from 1.2.2001.  Besides, a 
quantity of about 1.00 lakh MT is allotted as fixed Annual Festival quota of 

 
 
the States/UTs as per the scheduled festival requirement of the State 
Governments/UT Administrations. 
3.3 When asked about the quantity of sugar required for distributing 
under PDS in the country, the Ministry stated that the quantity of levy sugar 
required for distributing in the PDS and for supply to Army purchase 
organization (APO)/ Para Military forces is  about  28 lac tons as given 
below:  
State Governments/UTs 26 lac tons 
Festival quota 1 lac ton 
Army Purchase Organization/  
Para Military Forces 
1 lac ton 
Total  28 lac ton 
 
3.4 During evidence, the Secretary, Department of Food and Public 
Distribution gave an overview of the production and consumption of sugar 
for the last five years as under:- 
„In 2004-05 our production of sugar was 136 lakh tones and 
the consumption was 171 lakh tones; in 2005 -06, production 
went up to 193.21 lakh tones and estimated consumption was 
183.21 lakh tones. Then in 2006 -07, our production had 
peaked at 281.99 lakh tones and the consumption was about 
191 lakh tones. Then in the next year, viz. 2007 -08, our 
production was 263 lakh tones and the consumption was 
estimated at 205 lakh tones. The production in 2008 -09, the 
year that is just over, was about 146.7 lakh tones and the 
estimated consumption was 220 lakh tones. In the current 
year, we estimate a production of about 150 to 160 lakh 
tones. It is too early yet to say about it but the estimated 
requirement may be about 230 lakh tones.‟  
3.5 When enquired as to how the Government ensure that sugar 
allocated under PDS reaches to the targeted people, the Department 
stated that the Central Government is concerned onl y with the allocation of 
the levy sugar to the State Government/ UT Administration and its delivery 
by sugar mills to authorized agencies on payment of cost of levy sugar. 
Besides, for North Eastern States (e xcept Sikkim), J&K and island 

 
 
territories, the F ood Corporation of India as an agency of the Central 
Government is entrusted with the responsibility of lifting of levy sugar from 
the sugar mills and its transportation to the concerned state and delivery to 
the state agency. It is the responsibility of t he concerned State 
Government/ UT Administration that sugar allocated under PDS rea ches to 
the targeted people. 
3.6 When enquired whether the Government maintains the data of 
States where consumption is more to ensure availability of sugar in these 
States, the Committee were informed that no such data is available with 
the Ministry. The sugar mills are free to sell non -levy sugar quota to a 
sugar dealer in any State/UT, which facilitates sale of sugar to those states 
where consumption is more.  
3.7 During evidence, the Committee enquired the details of sector 
where sugar is consumed in the country, the Secretary, Departm ent of 
Food and Public Distribution stated as under:- 
„Of the total sugar which is consumed in the country, it is said 
that 62 to 65 per cent is consumed by the non -household 
sector, that is, the commercial sector, the business sector, 
etc. It means that r oughly about 35 -38 per cent is only 
consumed by the household sector. The remaining is 
consumed by the industrial or commercial users.‟  
 
3.8 The Committee pointed out that the breweries, alcohol industry, the 
whisky companies, ice -cream manufacturers, soft-drink companies, 
bakeries etc. are getting the sugar at the rate at which the common man is 
supplied and enquired whether these sectors can be prevented from taking 
sugar when there is a crisis in the country and allowed t o import sugar to 
lessen the bur den on the Government, the Secretary, Department of Food 
and Public Distribution stated that at the moment, anybody is free to buy 
any quantity from the 80 per cent sugar that is sold in the open market.   

 
 
3.9 The Secretary further added that the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution is seized with the proposal that bulk consumers should only 
purchase or procure imported white / refined sugar to meet their 
requirements. The Ministry has taken up the matter with the Department of 
Legal Affa irs in this regard.  The legal opinion on the issue is yet to be 
received from the Department of Legal Affairs.  
  

 
 
3.10 The Committee observe that the Government ha s no control 
over the distribution of non-levy sugar. Consequently, the sugar mills 
are free  to sell non -levy sugar to a ny sugar dealer in any State/UT. 
The Central Government is concerned only with the allocation of the 
20% of the sugar production by the sugar mills as levy sugar to the 
State Governments/UT Administrations and its delivery by sugar mills 
under PDS. It is surprising to the Committee that the Department has 
no details about the remaining 80% non-levy sugar consumed by the 
States/UTs, which in the opinion of the Committee is one of the 
factors responsible for hoarding of sugar and hike in its prices. The 
Committee feel that the  Government should explore the possibility of 
setting up a mechanism to have some sort of monitoring on the 
distribution of non-levy sugar so that each State/UT may get sugar as 
per their requirement.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government should devise a mechanism so as to monitor the 
distribution of non -levy sugar and impress upon the States/UTs to 
furnish the details regarding consumption of sugar by them whi ch 
will help the Government for  fair distribution  of sugar and curb the 
tendency of hoarding and blackmarketing by the unscrupulous 
traders. The Committee also recommend that the Government should 
widen the scope of PDS so that middle -class families including APL 
may get sugar at reasonable price.  

 
 
3.11 The Committee note that only 35 to 38 per cent of sugar is 
consumed by the household sector and remaining 62 to 65 per cent is 
consumed by non -household sector i.e. commercial sector/business 
sector. The Committee are dismayed to note that the Government has 
allowed the sugar mills to sell unlimited quantity of  sugar to any 
industrial organization s like breweries, alcohol industry, 
confectionery, bakeries , ice -cream manufacturers, soft-drink 
companies etc., at the same rate at which the general public is 
getting. The Committee feel that these industries never bring down 
the rates of their products even when the  price of sugar is down in 
the market and continue to make profit. The Committee are of the firm 
view that non -levy sugar should be sold to such industrial 
organizations at higher rate and not at the same p rice at which it is 
sold to the household sector particularly, when there is a scarcity of 
sugar due to less production of sugarcane and sugar. The Committee 
have been informed that the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution is seized with the proposal that bulk consumers should 
only purchase or procure imported white/refined sugar to meet their 
requirement.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Government in consultation with Ministry of Law should take quick 
decision in the matter.     

 
 
Stockholding Limits on bulk consumers of sugar 
3.12 The Central Government has imposed stockholding limit on bulk 
consumers of sugar ( using o r consuming more than ten quintals of sugar 
per month) vide notification dated 22.08.2009 providing that they shall not 
hold stocks exceeding 15 days of their requirement from domestically 
produced sugar. The notification came into effect from 19.09.2009. Vide 
notification dated 05.02.2010, the Central Government reduced the 
stockholding limit on bulk consumers from fifteen days to ten days of 
requirement, with effect from 20.02.2010. The notification dated 22.08.2009 
has now been superceded by another noti fication dated 18.05.2010 which 
has come into effect from 21.05.2010 and is valid for a period of ninety 
days. The notification dated 18.05.2010 has now restored the stockholding 
limit to fifteen days for bulk consumers. Since non -household consumers 
are, according to KPMG study commissioned by the Indian Sugar Industry 
reported to be consuming more than sixty percent of the total non -levy         
(free-sale) sugar consumed in the country, the measure is intended to make 
adequate quantities of sugar available to the household sector and sobering 
impact on prices of sugar.  
3.13 The Secretary, Department of Food and Public during briefing stated 
as under:- 
„We have taken a step in this direction by allowing them to 
import sugar at zero duty. Secondly we have imposed a stock 
holding limit on what they can get from the domestic mar ket. 
If PEPSI used 10 tonnes sugar in a day, they may be 
stocking 2,000 tonnes or even 10,000 tonnes of sugar earlier. 
But now we have said that only 15 days requirements which 
would b e only 150 tonnes, they can stock from domestic 
sugar at any point of time.‟ 
 
3.14 When pointed out that an industry has so many units and they hold 
their stock in different units and can say that they are not holding it, the 
Secretary responded:- 

 
 
„The stock holding limit is for  each industrial unit. For 
example, there is a Coco Cola unit in Mumbai and its 
consumption is 100 tonnes of sugar per day, now they 
can keep sugar for 15 days requirement. 
I think the suggestion that is coming from the 
Committee is that the stock holding limit of 15 days 
should be reduced further. 
We came up, for the first time in the history of the 
country, with a stock holding limit for these bulk 
consumers. It was imposed in August, 2009 and 
whether stock holding limit can be reduced further 
downwards, we will consider.‟ 
 
3.15 When enquired the reasons for providing flexibility for holding the 
stock of sugar while notifying the stock holding limits order, the Secretary 
stated:- 
„We have given power to the State Governments to 
relax these limits and have higher limits. It is because 
supposing in a town, you have got only ten 
wholesalers and the requirement is big, but since the 
number of wholesalers is limited, then if the State 
Government has 100 tonnes of stockholding limit fo r 
these ten wholesalers, they woul d only be able to 
stock 1,000 tonnes while the requirement of the town 
may be 2,000 tonnes or 3,000 tonnes.‟ 
 
3.16 To a query that the traders can take the benefits of the provision and 
would hold the stock as they desire, the Secretary replied:- 
„Nobody is getting the benefit. Take the example to the 
North-East. If you have got in the North -East very few 
traders and if you were to have the same stockholding 
limits as are there is Delhi where there may be many 
more traders,  you would have the problem of 
availability there. There will be a flight of goods from 
that region because an individual trader cannot keep 
more than „X‟ quantity and for ten traders the quantity 
will be 10X. But if you have got 100 traders, then it 

 
 
becomes 100X. So, the number of traders would also 
determine your requirement of stockholding limits. We 
always have to have some faith in the State 
Governments and give them flexibility so that they can 
regulate. After all, implementation has to be done by 
them.‟ 
3.17 The Committee have been informed that o n constant persuasion 
with State Governments/ UTs, twenty three States / UTs like Andhra 
Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana,  Jharkhand , Jammu & 
Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Mahara shtra, Manipur, 
Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Tripura, West 
Bengal,  Administrations of UT of Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Daman & 
Diu and  Dadra & Nagar Haveli have imposed stockholding and turnover 
limits / licensing system for suga r / khandsari dealers in their States/ UTs. 
Four States/UTs have intimated that they have examined the matter and do 
not consider it necessary to impose any stockholding limits. Seven 
States/UT have not responded, as such the reasons for not imposing the 
limits are not available.  
  

 
 
3.18 The Committee note that the Central Government has imposed 
stockholding limit on bulk consumers of sugar using or consuming 
more than ten quintals of sugar per month vide notification dated      
22 August, 2009 providing that they shall not hold stock exceeding 15 
days of their requirement from domestically pro duced sugar with a 
view to making  adequate quantities of sugar available to the 
household sector and having a sobering impact on prices of sugar. 
The Committee note with concern that only 23 States/UTs have issued 
stock holding limits, 4 States/UTs do not consider it necessary to  
impose any stockholding limit whereas seven States /UTs have not 
responded. The Committee are of the opinion that if the stock holding 
limit is not imposed in all the States, the multi -national companies 
and private traders may stock the sugar  much in excess of their 
requirement leading to profiteering, hoarding and blackmarketing of 
sugar. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the period of 
stockholding limit should be fixed in accordance with the need of the 
time and should be reduced further at the time of scarcity. State 
Governments should be impressed upon to conduct frequent raids to 
check the stock and if any company or trader is found hoarding more 
than the limit, prompt a nd strict action should be taken against them. 
The remaining States/UTs should also be impressed upon to 
implement the stock holding limit in their respective States in letter 

 
 
and spirit to fight the menace of hoarding and blackmarketing of 
sugar, thereby curbing rise in price.  
  

 
 
Buffer stock of sugar 
3.19 The concept of buffer stock of sugar is different from that of 
foodgrains. In case of sugar, the Central Government creates buffer stock 
when there is excess production of sugar which results in decline in price of 
non-levy sugar constraining the capacities of the sugar factories to pay 
cane price including cane price arrears. The quantum of buffe r stock and 
the period for which the buffer stock is to be maintained is decided having 
regard to the stock of sugar held with the sugar factories, the prospects of 
sugar production, the requirement of sugar for consumption within the 
country and export. F urther, the share of the each sugar factory is decided 
having regard to the production of the sugar or the stock held by it or 
considering the both. When there was excess production of sugar in 2006 -
07 and 2007 -08 sugar seasons, the Central Government crea ted a buffer 
stock of 50 lac tons for a period of one year ( 20 lac tons from 01.05.2007 
to 30.04.2008  and 30 lac tons from 01.08.2007 to 31.07.2008). As 
production of sugar declined considerably in 2008 -09 and 2009 -10 sugar 
seasons, there was/is no question of  creating buffer stock of sugar.   
3.20 Under the scheme of buffer stock of sugar, the sugar is not procured 
by the Central Government.  The stock of sugar is maintained by the sugar 
mills as per the allocations made by the Central Government. Under  the 
buffer subsidy scheme, the sugar factories are reimbursed the interest 
charges @ 12% or the actual interest rate charged by the bank, on the 
value of the stock held as buffer stock, whichever is lower, and insurance 
and storage charges @ 1.5% on the s ame, for the quantity maintained as 
the buffer stock from the Sugar Development Fund. This is to be utilized for 
sugarcane price payment as a first priority. In the case of sugar, the buffer 
stock is created to stabilize the prices and supply of sugar in t he open 
market, whenever, there is excess production of sugar in the country which 
results in decline in the market prices of non -levy sugar; thereby 
constraining the capacity of sugar mills to pay the cane price to sugar cane 

 
 
growers.  Further, unlike whe at and rice, the Central Government does not 
purchase and build buffer stocks of sugar with Food Corporation of 
India/State agencies. The Central Government  will have to purchase sugar 
from sugar mills/open market for building up buffer stock and bear car rying 
cost for its maintenance which would impose heavy burden on the 
Government exchequer. It is pertinent to state that the sugar mills have to 
stock sugar with them and cannot sell till release orders are issued by the 
Central Government. As such, stock s of sugar are there with the sugar 
mills to meet the demand of the people in case of natural calamities. As 
regards keeping the stocks for distribution of sugar under PDS, it is 
intimated that the sugar mills are statutorily required to keep a part of the ir 
sugar production as levy sugar (presently 20%) for distribution in PDS. 
However, the levy sugar supply under PDS is restricted to targeted 
beneficiaries. 
3.21 Regarding maintaining the buffer stock of sugar, Prof. Abhijit Sen, 
Member, Planning Commissio n, in his memorandum submitted to the 
Committee has suggested that:- 
„Nonetheless, the present amplitude of the cane/sugar cycle 
requires consideration of much larger buffer stocks and a 
deficiency calibrated buffer stock policy. Rather than relying 
on ad -hoc decisions in situations of excess production, it is 
necessary to upgrade storage conditions and capacity and 
evolve a system whereby the Government could contract with 
mills so that they are paid to build up stocks in surplus 
situations against a commitment to offer these to government 
at pre -determined prices during situations of production 
deficit‟. 
3.22 National Federation of Cooperative Sugar Factories Ltd. in their 
Memorandum submitte d to the Committee stated that: t here should be a 
permanent buffer stock of sugar, replacing the old stock with new. The 
buffer stock of sugar can either be maintained by the factories as is being 
done now or by the Government by purchasing sugar from market as is 

 
 
done in the case of whea t or can be maintained by FCI/STC which can 
build up strategic  stock by purchasing sugar from the open market in the 
years of surplus production of sugar. The Government can release this 
sugar for sale in the years of deficit sugar production. Such a syste m is in 
existence in China and is reported to be functioning very well.‟ 
  

 
 
De-control of Sugar 
 
3.23 The Committee have been informed that the Central Government 
has been following a policy of partial control and dual pricing for sugar. 
Under this policy, a certain percentage of sugar produced by sugar 
factories (raised to 20% for 2009 -10 sugar season) is requisitioned by the 
Central Government as compulsory levy at a price determined by the 
Government for every sugar season. Levy sugar is distributed under  the 
Public Distribution System (PDS) at a uniform retail issue price (at present 
Rs.13.50 per kg.) throughout the country. The non -levy sugar is allowed to 
be sold as per the monthly quota released by the Central Government 
under Regulated Release Mechani sm. Import of sugar is free subject to 
payment of customs duty, countervailing duty and education cess. Export 
of sugar is allowed subject to release orders of the Central Government . 
The policy on export / import of sugar is decided having regard to the l evel 
of production achieved / likely to be achieved in a season. 
3.24 The decontrol of sugar has two aspects viz., doing away with the 
regulated release mechanism and abolition of levy obligation on sugar 
factories. The possible advantages and disadvantages of de -control are 
given below - 
Advantages 
(i) This will enable sugar factories to sell sugar as per their commercial 
prudence. 
(ii) This will give freedom to the State Governments / UTs to procure 
sugar as per their requirement and preferred sources. 
(iii) It would simplify the system. 
(iv) It would improve financials of sugar mills, as sugar mills supply levy 
sugar to the Governments at below the cost of production, which 
would, in turn, improve the capacities of sugar mills to pay 
remunerative cane price to sugarcane growers. 

 
 
(v) It would eliminate litigation between sugar mills and the Central 
Government on levy sugar price issue. 
(vi) It will help in better price discovery in future exchanges (futures 
trading in sugar has been suspended from 27.05.2009 upto 
30.09.2010 and suspension will be revoked as and when considered 
appropriate) with higher participation of sugar factories and traders 
etc. 
Disadvantages 
(i) On decontrol of sugar, prices of sugar in the open market may 
decline initially and create problem of payment of cane prices to 
sugarcane growers.  
(ii) Sugar factories may form cartels and restrict sale of sugar in the 
open market with a view to jack up sugar prices, especially when 
there is shortfall in production of sugar.  
(iii) Procurement price of sugar for distribution in Public Distribution 
System, if continued, may increase substantially as sugar mills 
will be under no obligation to supply levy sugar at an ex -factory 
price fixed by the Central Government.  
 
3.25 Asked whether there is any demand of total de -control of sugar from 
sugar industry and what are the views of farmers on the policy of de -
control, the Committee were informed that Indian Sugar Mills Association 
(ISMA) and National Federation of Cooperative Sugar Factori es Ltd 
(NFCSFL), apex bodies of private and cooperative sugar factories in the 
country, have represented to the Government for decontrol of sugar. The 
Government is yet to take a view on their request. However, the interest of 
all the stakeholders includin g those of farmers will be kept in view as and 
when the decision on decontrol of sugar is taken. 
  

 
 
 
3.26 The Committee note that in order to mitigate the hardship of the 
sugarcane growers, the Government of India had created a buffer 
stock of 50 lakh  tones of sugar for a period of one year in 2006 -07, 
and 2007 -08 sugar season  when there was excess production of 
sugar. Subsequently, as the production of sugar declined, the 
Government did not consider it necessary to maintain the buffer 
stock of sugar. The plea of the Government that to build up the buffer 
stock of sugar, the Government have to bear carrying cost for the 
maintenance which would impose heavy burden on the Government 
exchequer is not acceptable to the Committee . The Committee 
observe that the country has imported a large quantity of sugar 
during 2008-09 when there was a heavy shortfall in production.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Government to review 
its buffer stock policy with regard to sugar. The Committee are of the 
opinion that the buffer stock of sugar is very much essential not only 
to meet the requirement of PDS , but also to meet crisis situation in 
the years of deficit sugar production . The Committee conc ur with the 
views of Prof. Abhijit Sen, Member Planning Comm ission and 
National Federation of Cooperative Sugar Factories Ltd. and desire 
that the Government should take appropriate measures to maintain a 
strategic stock of sugar.   

 
 
3.27 The Committee note that the Government of India is following a 
policy of partial control and dual pricing for sugar under which 20% of 
the levy sugar is requisitioned by the Government for distribution to 
targeted people under PDS at a price of Rs. 13.50 p er kg and rest of 
the 80% as the non -levy sugar, allowed to be sold by the sugar mills 
to States/UTs under Regulated Release Mechanism. The Committee 
are of the opinion that if entire control on the manufacturing and 
distribution of sugar is removed, the Public Distribution System (PDS) 
scheme would be adversely affected as the sugar mills would be 
under no obligation to supply levy sugar at ex -factory price fixed by 
the Central Government. Besides, sugar mills may take benefits of 
decontrol and stock sugar in their godowns with a view to jack up the 
sugar prices, especially when there is shortfall in production of sugar. 
The Committee feel that the country is already facing the problem of 
deficit production of sugar and decontrol of sugar will add fuel to the 
fire. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government 
should not adopt the concept of de-control and de-regulation of sugar  
as it may  not be in the interest of farmers as well as consumers. 
  

 
 
Import/Export of Sugar 
3.28 The data with  regard to import/export of sugar during the last five 
sugar seasons is given below: 
Import of Sugar 
Sugar Year (Oct. – Sept.) Quantity (In Lac  MTS) 
2004-05 9.77 
2005-06 0.10 
2006-07 0.005 
2007-08  0.004 
2008-09  25.18 
2009-10 (upto 3rd June) 36.36  
 
Export of Sugar 
Sugar Season (October- 
Sept.) 
Quantity  
(In Lac  MTs)  
2004-05 0.69 
2005-06 15.039 
2006-07 24.90 
2007-08 58.23 
2008-09  2.165 
2009-10 (upto February 2010) 0.183 
 
3.29 At present, the central Government does not have any plan to import 
sugar during the year 2009-10 on its account. However, Sugar 
mills/Merchant importer -exporters including State Trading Corporation of 
India Ltd (STC), Metals and Minerals Trading Corporations  Ltd (MMTC), 
Project  equipment  Corporation Ltd (PEC)  and  National Agricultural Co -
Operative Marketing Federation of India Ltd (NAFED), are free to import 
duty free raw/white and refined sugar upto 31 -12-2010 without any 
quantitative cap as per their commercial prudence.  
3.30 During evidence, the Committee pointed out that on the one hand 
the Government is importing sugar to me et shortages, on the other the 

 
 
Government is exporting the sugar. To this, the representative of 
Department of Food and Public Distribution responded that 
„There are certain bilateral agreements between India and 
neighbouring countries and other treaty obligations under 
which sugar has been allowed to be exported this year. But 
the quantities have come down drastically and it is not much, 
hardly 2 lakh tones and about 20,000 tonnes.‟  
 
3.31 The Committee pointed out that one of the reasons for less 
availability of sugar is export of sugar in large quantity and suggested that 
a clause may be inserted in the Bilateral Agreement that in the event of 
shortage, In dia may not be able to fulfill its commitment to supply sugar. 
The Additional Secretary, Department of Food & Public Distribution stated 
during evidence:- 
„Bilateral agreements are entered into by the Ministry of 
External Affairs. They take inputs from var ious Ministries. We 
also give them inputs. We have given this input. This is a very 
good suggestion that we can put a clause in case of any 
shortage. We would probably request them that we would not 
be able to export.‟ 

 
 
3.32 The Committee are pained to note that while on the one hand, 
the country faced the deficit of sugar stock in the country due to less 
production of sugarcane  in 2008-09 and 2009 -10, on the other hand, 
the country also exported sugar during this period.  The Committee 
have been informed that there were  certain bilateral agreements 
between India and neighbouring countries and treaty obligation under 
which sugar was allowed to be exported. In the opinion of the 
Committee, there should not be any obligation to ex port the sugar 
when there is crisis in the country. The Committee feel  that there is 
need to insert a clause in the Bilateral Agreement that in the event of 
acute shortage, India may not be able to fulfill its commitment to 
supply sugar to these countries. The Committee , therefore, 
recommend that the nodal ministry should take up the matter with the 
Ministry of External Affairs to put a clause in the bilateral agreements 
to exempt the country from its export obligations  in case of 
shortages.   
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER IV 
PRICING OF SUGAR 
 
4.1 Under section 3 (3C) of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, the 
price of levy sugar (up to sugar season 2008 -09) is required to be 
determined by the Central Government having regard to– 
(a) the minimum price, if any, fixed for  sugarcane by the Central 
Government under this section; 
(b) the manufacturing cost of sugar; 
(c) the duty or tax, if any, paid or payable thereon; and 
(d) a reasonable return on the capital employed in the business of 
manufacturing of sugar. 
4.2 However, Section 3(3C) of Essential Commodities Act, 1955 has 
been amended vide notification dated 22.12.2009 for determination of price 
of levy sugar from 2009-10 sugar season having regard to- 
(a) the fair and remunerative price, if any, determined by the Central 
Government as the price of sugarcane; 
(b) the manufacturing cost of sugar; 
(c) the duty or tax, if any, paid or payable thereon; and 
(d) a reasonable return on the capital employed in the business of 
manufacturing of sugar. 
Price of non-levy (free-sale sugar) 
4.3  The Central Government does not fix the price of non -levy sugar 
which is market driven and influenced by various factors like production, 
supply, demand, international prices and market sentiments & expectations 
etc. 
  

 
 
Price of raw sugar 
4.4 Raw sugar is not fit for direct human consumption; as such, it is not 
allowed to be sold in the market for consumption. Raw sugar is input for 
production of white / refined sugar.  
4.5 The Levy price of sugar for distribution under PDS throughout the 
country has been Rs.13.50 per kg. since 01.03.2002. The range of retail 
price of sugar in the four metropolitan cities viz. Delhi, Mumbai, Koklata 
and Chennai during the last three sugar seasons 2006 -07, 2007-08, 2008-
09 and 2009-10 (upto June) has been as under: 
Sugar 
season 
Delhi Mumbai Kolkata Chennai All four  
centers 
2006-07 16.00-21.00 15.50-21.00 16.00-21.00 14.00-18.00 14.00-21.00 
2007-08 16.00-22.00 16.50-21.50 16.00-17.00 14.00-21.00 14.00-22.00 
2008-09 20.00-34.00 19.50-35.00 19.50-32.00 19.00-33.00 19.00-35.00 
2009-10* 30.50-47.00 31.00-44.00 30.00-45.00 30.00-42.00 30.00-47.00 
 
4.6 When enquired about the factors responsible for rise in prices of 
sugar, the Ministry informed that the mismatch between domestic 
production and demand for   sugar is primarily responsible for rise in price 
of sugar.  However, the rise in prices in mid December, 2009 and first week 
of  January,2010, was mainly due to following reasons – 
(i) Increase in international prices of raw and white/refined 
sugar; 
(ii) Rumours of very low domestic production of sugar in the 
current sugar season; and  
(iii) Restrictions on movement and transportation of imported raw 
sugar in the State of U.P. 
 

 
 
4.7 When asked about the corrective steps taken/being taken by the 
Government to chec k the sugar prices and to increase sugar production 
and availability in the country, the Ministry stated that the Central 
Government has taken the following steps to augment domestic stocks of 
sugar and also to moderate its prices in the open market :- 
(a) Allowed duty-free import of raw sugar under Advance Authorization 
Scheme by sugar mills on ton -to-ton basis with effect from 
17.02.2009 upto 30.09.2009. 
 
(b) Allowed duty -free import of raw sugar by sugar mills under Open 
General License with effect from 17.04 .2009 and opened up to 
private trade from 31.07.2009 for being processed by domestic 
factories on job basis. Presently, this facility is in force upto 
31.12.2010.   
 
(c) Allowed duty-free import of white/refined sugar by STC/MMTC/PEC 
and NAFED upto 1 million t ons with effect from 17.04.2009 and 
opened up to other Central/State Government agencies and private 
trade in addition to existing designated agencies with effect from 
31.07.2009. Presently, this facility is in force upto 31.12.2010 with 
out any quantative cap.    
 
(d) Levy obligation has been removed in respect of all imported raw 
sugar and white/refined sugar.  The white/refined sugar has been 
also allowed to be sold at the discretion of the importing 
organizations, but sugar processed from imported raw sugar  is 
subject to accelerated releases. 
 
(e) States have been requested to waive VAT on imported white/refined 
sugar so as to make the imports competitive. 
 
(f) The levy obligation on sugar factories has been enhanced from 10% 
to 20% of production for 2009-10 sugar season only.    
 
(g) Stockholding and turnover limits on sugar dealers were imposed 
vide notification dated 12.03.2009. Further, khandsari sugar has 
been brought under the ambit of stockholding and turnover limit from 
16.07.2009.  Presently these limits are in force upto 30.09.2010.  
 
(h) An order has been issued vide notification dated 22.08.2009 
imposing stockholding on large consumers of sugar who are using 
or consuming more than ten quintals of sugar per month as a raw 
material for production or consumption or use, stipulating that such 

 
 
bulk consumers shall not hold sugar stock exceeding fifteen days of 
their requirement. The notification has come into effect  from 
19.09.2009. The stockholding limit has been lowered to ten days, 
and the revised limit has been notified on 05.02.2010 which has 
come into effect from 20.02.2010 and will continue for a period of 
180 days thereafter i.e. upto 18.08.2010.  
 
(i) Futures tr ading in sugar in domestic exchanges has been 
suspended by the Forward Markets Commission(FMC) w.e.f 27 th 
May 2009 to curb any possible speculative tendency. Currently, this 
is in force upto September, 2010. 
 
(j) Monthly quotas of non -levy sugar for sale by su gar mills in open 
market, have been sub -divided into fortnightly and periodically 
weekly targets for sale to ensure even flow of sugar into open 
market. 
 
4.8 During evidence, the representatives of Department of Food and 
Public Distribution gave overview of the price situation of sugar in the 
country as under:- 
„Sir, sugarcane being a cash crop and being linked with the 
prices of sugar in the domestic as well as international 
markets, undergoes a typically four to five year long cycle in 
India. Over the la st 50 to 60 years, we have not been really 
able to regulate it, although some efforts have been made 
lately to regulate this. So, what happens is that when the 
sugar prices are high, the farmers also get good prices for the 
cane supplied to the sugar mills  in that particular year which 
leads to the rise in area which is witnessed for the next two 
years. It is  because first they will plant more cane in that 
particular year, in which high prices are there which will yield 
a higher harvest next year for produ ction of sugar and 
sugarcane. Next year also, the same situation continues to a 
large extent which leads to carry over of the planted crop in 
the first year to the third year as ratoon crop and second year 
also similar high proportion of plantations take p lace. So, the 
rise typically lasts for two to two and a half years in the 
production cycle and that in turn leads to over abundance of 
sugar produced and in course of time, it reduces the prices of 
sugar. When this happens, there are problems in payment to  
the farmers because of the delays , etc. which takes place. 
Although there are legal provisions for quick recovery etc. of 
the arrears and that in turn also effects shifting of acreage 

 
 
from cane to other crops as had happened in some parts in 
2007-08 leadi ng to less harvest in the subsequent years. 
Now, this in turn causes great reduction in production of 
sugar. As a result of which the prices go up and again after 
another one year or two years of shortage which persists. 
The cycle repeats all over again. P resently, we are just 
coming out from a shortage situation in the last two years, the 
current year which is expiring in September also is a shortage 
year but we anticipate that the coming year starting 1 st 
October, 2010, to be a balanced year when the pric es of 
sugar will neither be too high nor the cane prices too low so 
that our production and consumption of sugar will be more or 
less balanced. But in the year thereafter in 2011 -12 starting 
from October 2011, we anticipate again a huge surplus in 
cane and  sugar production and therefore lower prices and 
attendant problems.‟  
 
4.9 The Committee pointed out that the prices of sugar in the open 
market has increased sky high but no concrete steps has been taken by 
the Department to bring down the prices. The Secretary, Department of 
Food and Public Distribution stated during briefing as under:- 
 
„We are not regulating the price. It is a free market economy, 
demand and supply driven, except for the levy sugar. For 
PDS, there is a control on prices. For others, there is no price 
control.‟ 
 
4.10 The Additional Secretary, Department of Food and Public 
Distribution also informed the Committee during evidence that they have no 
mandate to control the sugar prices. On this, the Committee enquired 
whether market interve ntion to control the prices has totally failed, the 
Additional Secretary replied:- 
„It is not correct to say that market intervention has totally 
failed. In fact, if you see the prices of the last few months, the 
sugar prices have come down. But the fact remains that we 
have to have a policy and, as the Chairman has said, we 
have to have a long-term policy. I would agree with you that 
this problem is not only with sugarcane. Even in other crops 
like potato and wheat this happens. When the farmer gets 
better price for potato one year, then everybody produces 

 
 
potato next year and then there is a glut and so the prices 
crash. Similarly, in sugarcane, if you give remunerative price 
to farmers, more and more farmers produce sugarcane and 
next year there is surplus. So, there is a need for collecting 
agricultural intelligence as to how much produ ction increase 
will take place over a long time. If you so desire and order, 
then we can have a committee of two or three Ministries and 
that committee can sit together and decide as to what 
measures can be taken so that we can stabilize the 
production are as and thereby we can also stabilize the 
prices.‟ 
 
4.11 On being suggested that for availability of sugar at a reasonable 
price to common man, the Government should increase the percentage of 
levy sugar and also to increase the coverage of the PDS so that ordinary 
consumer would be benefited, the Secretary, Department of Food and 
Public Distribution responded during evidence:- 
 
„We shall examine that. There is, of course, an element of 
pricing involved in it and perhaps subsidy too involved. But 
we would certainly look into this if it is the recommendation of 
the Committee that we cover every household.‟ 
 
4.12 The Committee pointed out that one of the reasons for rise in price 
of sugar is the hoarding and blackmarketing of sugar and asked to clarify 
the step s taken by the Govt. against the hoarding and blackmarketing 
which create artificial scarcity of sugar in the market. The Department in a 
note furnished to the Committee has stated that  to check the hoarding and 
blackmarketing of sugar which create artific ial scarcity of sugar in the 
market, the Central Government has imposed stockholding and turnover 
limit on recognized dealers of sugar and khandsari.  As per the reports 
received from the State Governments/UT Administrations, the action taken 
under the Ess ential Commodities Act, 1955 during  2008 and 2009 are as 
under:  

 
 
YEAR No. of 
raids 
No. of 
Persons 
arrested 
No. of 
Persons 
prosecuted 
No. of 
Persons 
convicted 
Value of 
goods 
confiscated 
(Rs. in Lakhs) 
2008 
 
 268775 8001 6425 790 6095.22 
2009 188119 8707 4848 118 18878.28 
 
4.13 The detention orders made by the State Governments year -wise 
and state-wise during  2008 and 2009   are given as under: 
Name of the State 2008 2009 
 
Gujarat  16  31 
Tamil Nadu 141 112 
Orissa   01  02 
Maharashtra -  02 
Andhra Pradesh   04 - 
Total 162 147 
 
4.14 The State -wise details of quantity of sugar seized and persons 
arrested, prosecuted and convicted under the   “ Essential Commodity Act  
1955” and Prevention of  Blackmarketing of Essential Commod ity Act 
during the last 2 years is as under:- 
Andhara Pradesh  – A quantity of 11517.49 quintals of sugar worth 
Rs.3.22 crore seized during the period January,09 to December,09 and 
cases have been filed against the erring sugar dealers. 
Chattisgarh  A quantity of 4,261 quintals of sugar seized.  
Karnataka -  A quantity of 996 quintals of sugar was confiscated 
from a hoarder and the case is sub-judice. 
Gujarat  - A quantity of 32309 quintals of sugar worth Rs.11.57 
crore was seized.   
Madhya Pradesh  - A quantity of 56535 quintals of sugar seized. 
Maharashtra  -  A quantity of 396114 quintals of sugar seized from 
sugar dealers out of which 181133 quintals of sugar has been confiscated. 

 
 
Punjab   - Massive raids were conducted and a quantity of 
147402.5 quintals of sugar were seized in the districts of Amriatsar, 
Ludhiana and Patilala.  
Rajasthan  -  A quantity of 7418.71 quintals of sugar was seized. 
Tamil Nadu  -  A total quantity of 1651 quintals of sugar was reported 
as excess stockholding in the districts of Ramnathapurama and Vellore.  
Uttar Pradesh         - In January,2010, 1,20,000 quintals and 4195 quintals 
of sugar were seized from Gaziabad and Hardoi respectively and cases 
have been filed against hoarders.  
The States of Assam, Bihar, Arunachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and UT  
of Daman & Diu have informed that no such case of hoarding are 
reported.  
4.15 When enquired whether the Govt. propose to strengthen the 
Enforcement Machinery to take stringent action against the hoarders and 
blackmarketers who create artificial scarcity of sugar in the market, the 
Department stated that the States/ UTs are empowered to take stringent 
action against the hoarders and blackmarketers who create artificial 
scarcity of sugar in the market and they have field machinery for this 
purpose.  The Standing Committee in its 2 nd report has also recommended 
that „ ……the Government should strengthen its enforcement 
machinery to conduct raids on the godowns of traders and take 
stringent action against them in order to check hoarding and 
blackmarketing of sug ar…..’  The said recommendation of the 
Committee has already been forwarded to the State Governments/ UT 
Administrations.  
4.16 When pointed out that the Government have no control on the 
hoarding of sugar because there is no definite law on hoarding, the people 
are not afraid of hoarding due to very little punishment for hoarding, the 
Secretary, Department of Food and Public Distribution stated during 
evidence as  under:- 

 
 
„The laws are very stringent and they are very pernicious. 
What has to be done is enforcement which has to be done by 
the State Governments. Wherever the Government has taken 
strong and effective action against hoarders, price has come 
down. In Madhya Pradesh, where they have taken action 
against hoarders, the price of sugar came down by Rs. 3 per 
kg. immediately and in Punjab and Gujarat also, price of 
sugar came down because they have taken action against 
hoarders. So what is needed is strict enforcement of the law.‟ 
 
 
 
  

 
 
4.17 The Committee express concern over the rising trend in prices 
of sugar during the last two years. The Committee have been 
informed that the mismatch between domestic production and 
demand for sugar is primarily responsible for rise in price s of sugar. 
The Committee also note from the information furnished to them that 
increase in international prices of raw and white sugar, rumours of 
very low domestic production of sugar and restriction on movement 
and transportation of imported raw sugar in  the State of U.P. 
contributed to rise in the price of sugar during the period  December 
2009 to January, 2010. The Committee find that due to various 
measures taken by the Government, the prices of sugar have come 
down to some extent b ut the prices are sti ll very high in the o pen 
market. The Committee feel that the cyclic nature of sugarcane 
production, which has been observed over the years, needs to be 
regulated. It has been observed that two to three years of very 
high/surplus production results in a glu t in the market and crash of 
sugar prices, leading to shifting in cultivation from cane to other 
crops, in turn resulting in reduced production, shortage and 
consequent rise in sugar prices again. The Committee strongly desire 
that the Government should si ncerely work for a long -term policy to 
deal with the problem. The Committee feel that with the help of 
scientifically gathered agricultural intelligence, the long -term 
production trends can be assessed and necessary steps taken to deal 

 
 
with the situation. Such a task may involve concerted efforts on the 
part of a number of Departments/Ministries. The Committee strongly 
recommend that the Government should take immediate necessary 
steps in this direction  so that long -term stabilization of sugar 
production and prices could be achieved.  
  

 
 
4.18 The Committee note with concern that the Government is not 
serious to take action against the hoarders and blackmarketers who 
create artificial scarcity in the market. From the information furnished 
by the Government, th e Committee find that the number of persons 
prosecuted and convicted under Essential Commodities Act, 1955 
and Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of 
Essential Commodities Act, 1980 is very low particularly in 2009. The 
Committee find that out of 1,88,119 raids conducted during 2009, only 
4,848 persons were prosecuted resulting in the conviction of only 118 
persons. The information furnished establishes clear slackness and 
failure on the part of the several States/UTs in taking stringent action 
against hoarders and blackmarketers who create artificial scarcity 
leading to price rise.  The Committee strongly recommend that the 
Department should work for strengthening the enforcement 
mechanism and persuade the State Governments/UTs to conduc t 
regular raids to check hoarding and blackmarketing.  

 
 
CHAPTER – V 
SUGAR DEVELOPMENT FUND 
 
5.1 The Committee have been informed that financial assistance from the 
Sugar Development Fund is provided for general growth and development of 
sugar industry as per provisions contained in section 4 of the Sugar 
Development Fund Act 1982, as amended from time to time.  Under the Sugar 
Development Fund Act, the Fund has to be utilized by the Government of India 
for the following: - 
(a) Making loans for facilitating the rehabilitation and modernization of 
any sugar factory or any unit thereof; 
 
(b) Making loans for undertaking any scheme for development of 
sugarcane in the area in which any sugar factory is situated, including 
to a potentially viable sugar undertaking.  
 
(c) Making grants for the purpose of carrying out any research project 
aimed at the promotion and development of any aspect of Sugar 
Industry. 
 
(d) Defraying expenditure to a sugar factory on internal transport and 
freight charges on export shipment of sugar with a vi ew to promoting 
its export.  
 
(e) Making loans to any sugar factory having an installed capacity of 
2500 TCD or higher to implement a project of bagasse -based co -
generation of power.  
 
(f) Making loans to any sugar factory having an installed capacity of 
2500 TCD or higher for production of anhydrous alcohol or ethanol 
from alcohol or molasses with a view to improving its viability.  
 
(g) Defraying expenditure to a sugar factory for the purpose of building 
up and maintenance of buffer stock with a view to stabilizing p rice of 
sugar. 
 
(h) Defraying expenditure for the purpose of financial assistance to sugar 
factories towards interest on loans given in terms of any scheme 
approved by the Central Government from time to time.  
 
(i) Defraying any other expenditure for the purpose of the Act. 

 
 
 
5.2 Since inception of SDF, large number of sugar factories both in the 
cooperative and in the private sector have benefited from loans under the 
scheme, which inter alia, have increased the production of cane and viability of 
the sugar mills.The overall performance of the Sugar Development Fund for the 
last three years is given below:- 
 (Rs.in lacs)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
     
5.3 As regards the modernization of sugar mills to encourage them for 
more production of sugar, the Secretary, Department of Food and Public 
Distribution stated during evidence as under:- 
 
Sl. No. Description/head of Account Expenditure 
during 2007-
08  
 
Expenditure 
during 2008-
09 
Expenditure 
during 2009-
10 
1 Administration of Sugar Development 
Fund 
38.93 998.00 971.60 
 
 
2  Rehabilitation/Modernisation of Sugar 
Mills  
12500.00 18249.27 27500.00 
3 Sugar Mills for Cane Development  
 
506.200 650.73 16000.00 
4 Sugar Factories for bagasse based 
 cogeneration power project 
15000.00 25696.00 35000.00 
5 Sugar Factories for production 
 for Anhydrous alcohol or Ethanol from 
Alcohol 
 
836.2 
 
6000.00 
 
9000.00 
6 Reimbursement of  
Internal Transport & Freight to Sugar 
Factory on                               
   
 
8032.47 
 
28500.00 
 
28500.00 
 
7 
Subsidy for maintenance of Buffer 
Stock of Sugar  
  
17618.85 27309.00 12394.00 
8 Grants-in-aid for development  of 
Sugar Industry 2408-01-02-00-31 
 
27.69 34.74 11.61 
9 Scheme for Extending Financial 
Assistance to Sugar Undertaking 2007 
 
NIL 
 
NIL 
 
37683.00   
 Total 54560.34 107437.74 167060.21 

 
 
„We have a Sugar Development Fund from which we give 
assistance to sugar mills for modernization, for increasing capacity, 
for taking up manufacture of other products like ethanol or setting up 
distilleries, and also for cogeneration of power and of course, for 
cane area development. We give assistance. This year, we opened 
two special windows. One was that we provided for a separate loan 
assistance programme for sugar mills  to be passed on immediately 
to the farmers for inputs for cane productivity. They could buy 
fertilizers, they could buy pesticides, they could look at  better seeds 
and they could look at other package or practices so that 
productivity of sugarcane, which  is already planted and which is 
being planted, improves. This loan was at a differential rate of 
interest of four per cent. Further, most of the sugar mills can process 
raw sugar only along with fresh cane juice. Normally the ratio is 
80:20, that is, 80 per cent juice and 20 per cent raw sugar except for 
those mills, which have stand alone refineries or which have coal 
fired boilers. Because if the boilers are run on furnace oil when 
bagasse is not available, it is totally unremunerative. So ,we have 
also tried to encourage sugar mills for processing raw sugar to a 
larger quantity by giving them balancing equipment – loan for 
balancing equipment is also at four per cent – so that they can 
increase the mix of raw sugar and they can  then also spread their 
cane for crushing over a longer period of time and use more of raw 
sugar simultaneously.‟ 
 
5.4 Since inception of SDF, large number of sugar factories both in the 
cooperative and in the private sector have benefited from loans under the 
scheme, which inter al ia, have increased the production of cane and viability of 
the sugar mills. 
5.5 Applications are required to be received through the State 
Governments only in cases of SDF loans for Cane Development along with 
the recommendations of the State Government co ncerned. The details of 
applications received year-wise are as under:- 
 
Year 
Number of 
Applications 
received 
No. of 
Applications 
Pending 
2007-08 7 Nil 
2008-09 10 1 
2009-10 64 39 
2010-11 8 8 
 

 
 
State-wise details of pending applications: 
2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 (upto 20.6.2010) 
UP-1 Maharashtra – 4 Tamil Nadu-1 
 Uttar Pradesh-25 Uttarakhand-1 
 Madhya Pradesh-1 Uttar Pradesh-1 
 Andhra Pradesh-1 Andhra Pradesh-2 
 Haryana-1 Maharashtra-3 
 Karnataka-5  
 Gujarat – 2  
 Total : 39 Total: 8 
 
5.6 When enquired whether Government has any mechanism to ensure 
that money sanctioned is being utilized for the purpose  for which it has 
been released, the Department in a note furnished to the Committee stated 
that implementation of projects for modernization/reh abilitation/ expansion 
of plant and machinery; bagasse based cogeneration of power projects and 
projects for production of ethanol undertaken by sugar factories, where 
SDF loans are given, are monitored on behalf of the Government by the 
Industrial Finance  Corporation of India and the National Cooperative 
Development Corporation.  The cane development scheme funded by SDF 
loan is monitored by the State Governments in which a sugar factory is 
situated.  The performance of the schemes being implemented with S DF 
assistance is also reviewed frequently by the Standing Committee of the 
SDF chaired by the Secretary of the Department.  The need for defraying 
expenditure under certain other heads like that for the maintenance of 
buffer stock and that for reimbursemen t of internal transport and freight 
charges on export shipments of sugar is monitored and reviewed in the 
Department. Utilization certificates for utilisation of the funds are taken for 
all the loans and subsidies disbursed, before any further funds are released 
to the sugar factory.  
5.7 In order to further improve the monitoring and control over 
performance of cane development schemes funded from SDF, the 

 
 
Government has further appointed agencies like IFFCO Foundation, 
National Federation of Cooperative Sugar Factories Ltd., Indian Sugar Mills 
Association and Vasant Dada Sugar Institute, Pune to monitor the same on 
behalf of the Government.  
5.8 A statement indicating details of funds of SDF to be recovered as on 
30.9.2009 from the sugar mills and total loans provided from Sugar 
Development Fund upto 28.2.2010 is as follows:- 
    (Figure in crore) 
 
5.9 When enquired about steps taken by the Government to increase 
the recovery of fund, the Ministry informed as under:- 
1) Letters have been issued from time to time  to the defaulter sugar units 
advising them to liquidate overdues to avoid legal complications. 
 
 
2)  Under SDF Rule 26, a provision has been made for restructuring of 
loans of potentially viable sick undertakings. 
 
3)  Meetings have been held with major default ers for liquidation of 
default.  
Sl 
No. 
Name of the Scheme FinancialAssistance  
provided to  sugar 
 mills from SDF upto  
28.2.2010 
Outstanding SDF dues 
to be recovered from 
sugar mills as on 
30.9.2009 
Principal     Interest 
1. Loan for cane 
development 
  686.19  26.89         25.30 
2 Loan for Modernization/ 
Rehabilitation 
2014.67 280.73       318.65 
3 Loan for Bagasse Based 
Co-generation Power 
Project 
  995.22   8.10          4.34 
4 Loan for production of 
Alcohol/Ethanol 
  162.26       -- -- 
 
TOTAL 
3858.34 315.72       348.29 

 
 
4)  SDF dues are being recovered out of claims of reimbursement of 
expenditure on export of sugar and buffer stock subsidy maintained by 
the sugar units. Upto Feb.2010 an amount of Rs.55,13,65,789/ - and 
Rs.69,78,81,282/- respectively have been recovered from defaulting 
sugar mills. 
 
5)  The recovery of SDF dues was also taken up with the Ministry of 
Finance for deductions from the Normal Central Assistance to the State 
Governments in the cases where the State Governments have 
guaranteed the repayment of loan and there is a default.  During the 
year 2008 -09, the Ministry of Finance has  adjusted/recovered 
Rs.306.31 crore of SDF dues from the Normal Central Assistance of 
the State Governments of Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and Punjab.   
Similarly, the dues of mills in 6 other states (Andhra Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Assam and West Bengal) are 
under process with the Ministry of Finance for adjusting another 
Rs.57.06 crore which are outstanding as on 28.2.2010.       
                                                                                               
6)  The Monitoring Agencies for SDF i.e. IFCI & NCDC have been advised 
to put in extra efforts for early recovery of defaults.   Till now, the 
Agency Commission to the IFCI & NCDC was paid on outstanding SDF 
Loans (Principal + Interest).  The terms and conditions of Agency 
Agreement have been changed from 2008 -09 according to which the 
payment of Agency Commission will be partly based on amount 
recovered by IFCI/NCDC . This will also encourage the IFCI/NCDC to 
make more efforts for recovery. 
 
SICK SUGAR MILLS 
5.10 The Department have furnished the following statement showing the 
State-wise and Sector -wise number of sugar mills in operation during the 
sugar season 2009-2010 (As on 31.05.2010). 
STATE COOPRATIVE 
SECTOR 
PUBLIC 
SECTOR/ 
STATE 
OWNED 
PRIVATE 
SECTOR 
TOTAL 
1 2 3 4  5 
PUNJAB 10   5 15 
HARYANA 11   3 14 
RAJASTHAN   1   1 
UTTRAKHAND 4 2 4 10 
UTTAR PRADESH 25 11 91 127 

 
 
MADHYA 
PRADESH 3   7 10 
CHATTISGARH 1     1 
GUJARAT 17   1 18 
MAHARASHTRA 109   30 139 
BIHAR     9 9 
ASSAM       0 
ORISSA 2   2 4 
WEST BENGAL     1 1 
NAGALAND       0 
ANDHRA 
PRADESH 9   26 35 
KARNATAKA 15 2 34 51 
TAMILNADU 15 2 20 37 
PONDICHERRY 1   1 2 
KERALA       0 
GOA 1     1 
ALL INDIA 223 18 234 475 
 
  

 
 
5.11 The State -wise, Sector- wise number of sick sugar mills are given 
below:- 
STATE No. of sick sugar 
mills in private 
sector as provided 
by the BIFR (As on 
June, 2010) 
No. of sick sugar 
mills in the 
cooperative sector 
as provided by the 
NABARD (as on 
31.03.08) 
Total 
        
PUNJAB 1 8* 9 
RAJASTHAN     
MADHYA 
PRADESH     
HARYANA  7* 7 
MAHARASHTRA 2 57 59 
UTTAR PRADESH 10 25 35 
UTTATRA KHAND 1 4 5 
ORISSA    0 
WEST BENGAL    0 
KERALA 1 1 2 
NAGALAND    0 
TAMILNADU 4 13 17 
KARNATAKA 2 15 17 
GUJARAT 1 7 8 
ASSAM    0 
BIHAR 1   1 
ANDHRA 
PRADESH  8 8 
     0 
ALL INDIA 23 145 168 
 
* In respect of sick sugar mills of cooperative sector in respect of 
Punjab and Haryana, the position is as on 31.03.06 as intimated by 
NABARD.       
5.12 When asked about the main causes/reasons for sickness of the 
sugar mills, the Ministry informed that t he main causes/ reasons for 
sickness of the sugar mills are non -availability of adequate raw material, 
poor recovery from sugarcane, uneconomic size, lack of modernization, up-
gradation and diversification, high cost of working capital, declaration of 

 
 
high State Advised Price (SAP) of sugarcane by some States, control of 
molasses, lack of professional management, overstaffing etc.   
5.13 As regards the  steps taken by the Government to give financial 
assistance to the sick sugar mills to revive and equip them  with modern 
machinery, the Committee was informed that  Rule 21 of Sugar 
Development Fund Rules, 1983 provides that a potentially viable sick sugar 
undertaking shall be eligible for a loan for the modernization or 
rehabilitation of plant and machinery as w ell as for sugarcane 
development. The loan from the Fund should be recommended by the 
Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction or the Committee for 
Rehabilitation as the case may be, as part of the rehabilitation scheme for 
a potentially viable si ck sugar undertaking. The scheme or project for such 
modernization or rehabilitation of its plant and machinery should be 
approved for financial assistance by a financial institution or a scheduled 
bank under its relevant scheme for a minimum of 20% of the  project cost. 
SDF loan can be given up to 60% of the project subject to the sugar mill 
contributing at least 20% of the project cost.  No application for SDF loan 
under Rule 21 has been received as yet  in this Department during the last 
three years. 
5.14 The Central Government has constituted a Committee under the 
chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Sugar) to consider proposals for 
rehabilitation of sick cooperative sugar mills. However, the concerned 
cooperative sugar mills have to prepare the rehabilitation  plan and route it 
through the State Government. No application for restructuring of SDF loan 
from the cooperative sector has been received. As such, no proposal from 
the cooperative sector has been considered by this Committee.  In case of 
private and public sector sugar mills, the proposal for sanction of loan from 
the Sugar Development Fund should be recommended by the Board for 
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR).  

 
 
5.15 When enquired as to why sick sugar industries are not utilizing the 
loan g uaranteed by SDF, the Committee was informed that  as per the 
provisions of SDF Rules, a sick undertaking is required to get a revival 
package approved by the BIFR in the case of private and public sector 
sugar factories and by the Committee on Rehabilitati on (COR) in the case 
of Co -operative sugar mills, with a component of SDF assistance in the 
package.  Loan is available from SDF both for cane development and 
rehabilitation/modernisation.  The eligibility criteria for such loan to a 
potentially viable sick unit is quite favorable to the sugar factories in so far 
as loan up to 60% of the project cost (as against 40% in normal cases) can 
be given from SDF for rehabilitation/modernisation projects and the 
moratorium period for repayment can be decided by the Central 
Government on case to case basis (against a fixed moratorium period of 8 
years in normal cases).  Similarly for cane development loan, the 10% 
contribution required to be met by the sugar factory can be met                                                                                                                                                                                
by the concerned State Government also.  The condition of approved 
revival package by BIFR/COR cannot be dispensed with in  view of the 
fundamentals of financial propriety in the use of public funds. The 
procedural formalities regarding sanction of loan is in the public domain 
and is available on the web site of the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution - www.fcamin.nic.in. 
 
  

 
 
5.16 The Committee note that Government of India has created 
Sugar Development Fund with a view to providing  loan to sugar mills 
for the  rehabilitation, modernizat ion and development of sugar 
industry, carrying out research projects and production of anhydrous 
alcohol or ethanol from alcohol or molasses as well as building up 
and maintenance of buffer stock to stabilize price of sugar. The 
Committee are concerned to note that although a huge amount is 
released from the Sugar Developm ent Fund every year both in the 
cooperative and private sector , yet a number of applications are still 
pending consideration for the year 2009 -10 and 2010 -11. The 
Committee have been informed that the Government have now 
opened two separate windows – one f or separate loan assistance 
programme for sugar mills to be passed on immediately to farmers to 
buy seeds, fertilizers and pesticides to increase the production of 
sugar and another for loan at four per cent to encourage sugar mills 
for processing raw sugar to a large quantity by giving them  balancing 
equipments. While considering it to be a right step, the Committee 
recommend that concerted efforts should be made for the disposal of 
pending applications so that the mills could utilize the funds for the 
intended purpose.  
 
  

 
 
5.17 The Committee observe that loan from SDF is not given directly 
to farmers but it is disbursed to sugar factories who in turn pass  on 
this loan to sugarcane farmers. The farmers thus remain at the mercy 
of sugar factories. The Committee find hardly any justification in 
giving the assistance for cane development schemes through sugar 
enterprises, especially when such functions are to be discharged by 
cane growers. The Committee feel tha t the farmers should be directly 
involved in such a programme. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the loan for cane development from SDF should be given directly 
to farmers  so that they may get the best benefits of the scheme. 
  

 
 
 
5.18 The Committee regret to note that despite various measures 
taken by the Government, there is no satisfactory improvement in the 
recovery of outstanding loans sanctioned to sugar mills from the 
Sugar Development Fund. The Committee observe that out of Rs. 
3858.34 crore s anctioned upto 28.02.2010, an amount of Rs. 664.01 
crore which includes Rs. 315.29 crore as principal and Rs. 348.72 
crore as interest is still outstanding to be recovered from the sugar 
mills. The Committee, therefore, recommend that concerted efforts 
should be made to step up the recovery of the entire funds with 
interest by removing all procedural obstacles coming in the way of 
recovery.  
  

 
 
5.19 The Committee note that there are 475 sugar mills in operation 
in the country and majority of them are located in Uttar Pradesh (127) 
and Maharashtra (139).  Similarly, out of 168 sick sugar mills, 59 are in 
Maharashtra and 35 in Uttar Pradesh. The main causes of sickness of 
the sugar mills are stated to be (a) non-availability of adequate raw 
material (b) poor re covery from sugarcane (c) uneconomic size        
(d) lack of modernization (e) upgradation and diversification (f) high 
cost of working capital (g) declaration of high State Adversed Price 
(SA) of sugarcane by some States (h) control of molasses (i) lack of 
professional and management, overs taffing, etc. The Committee are 
concerned to note that despite the provisions of financial assistance 
from Sugar Development Fund for rehabilitation/modernization, sick 
sugar mills are not availing the benefits of the scheme. The 
Committee are of the opinion that the Government should view  the 
revival of sugar mills seriously and  encourage them to join the 
mainstream in production of sugar in the country. The Committee feel 
that the country is already facing the problem of scarcity o f sugar 
thereby causing unexpected rise in its price in the open market. The 
Committee take a serious note of the fact that until and unless the 
causes of sickness of the sugar mills are resolved, the number of sick 
sugar mills may increase in future. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Government should improve its monitor ing 
mechanism over the Sugar Development Fund and ensure that the 

 
 
funds are released to sugar mills for their modernization so that the 
production of sugar is not hampered . The Committee also 
recommend that the Government should relax the conditions laid 
down in the rules so that maximum sick sugar mills could avail the 
benefit of the scheme.  
  

 
 
CHAPTER – VI 
 
CANE PRICE ARREARS 
  (Provisional)       
  (Provisiona
l) 
      
-   
STATEMENT SHOWING THE STATEWISE / ZONEWISE POSITION OF CANE PRICE PAYABLE, PRICE PAID AND 
BALANCE  OUTSTANDING FOR CANE PURCHASED DURING 2009-10 SEASON AS WELL AS ARREARS OF CANE PRICE AS ON 
30/041201{l ."           (FIG. IN LAKH RS.)  
          -  
 TOTAL           
 PRICE     %AGEOF  ARREARS OF CANE    
 PAYABLE   BALANCE  PRICE AS ON    
 FOR CANE  CANE 
PRICE  
CANE PRICE  BALANCE  30/04/2010 OR THE     No. OF 
FACTORIES   PURCHASED  PAID UPTO   PAYABLE AS  PRICE  LATEST AVAILABLE    
STATE/ZONE  DURING  30/04/2010   ON  PAYABLE  DATE FOR SEASON    
 FOR 2009-
10  
30/04/2010  OVER    
 2009·10  SEASON  FOR 2009-10  TOTAL      
 SEASON      
 UPTO   SEASON  PAYABLE  2008·09     2007-08 &    REPORTED    
TOTAL   30/04/2010        EARLIER    
PUNJAB  42,368.56  42,357.82   10.74  0.03  0.00  0.00  16  23  
HARYANA  50,970.30  50,333.57   636.73  1.25  0.00  0.00  5  16  
RAJASTHAN  835.01  606.70   228.31  27.34  0.00  0.00  0  3  
WEST UP  477,760.70  412,280.41   65,480.29  13.71  0,00  391.74  36  37  
CENTRAL UP  525,867.25  491,666.90   34,200.35  6.50  0.00  1,170.07  52  58  
EAST UP  311,709.32  310,921.74   787.58  0.25  81.46  6,162.78  43  61  
TOTAL UP  1,315,337.27  1,214,869.05  100,468.22  7.64  81.46  7,724.59  131  156  
UTTARAKHAND  31,516.26  25,631.27   5,884.99  18.67  0.00  629.73  I  10  
MADHYA-PRADESH  5,838.70  5,749.12   89.58  1.53  0.00  1,061.67  0  16  
CHATTISGARH  0.00  0.00   0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0  I  
soum GUJARAT  137,924.94  107,481.33   30,443.61  22.07  0.00  1,197.61  17  18  
SAURASHTRA  7,576.34  7,462.34   114.00  1.50  0.00  0.00  2  5  
TOTAL GUJARA T  145,501.28  114943.67   30,557.61  21.00  0.00  1,197.61  19  23  
SOUTH MAHARASHTRA  388,859.75  386,131.02   2,728.73  0.70  0.00  250.41  47  48  
NORTH MAHARASHTRA  232,682.58  230,862.29   1,820.29  0.78  36.12  1,604.98  78  91  
CENT·MAHARASHTRA  495,767.14  493,327.49   2,439.65  0.49  0.00  195.97  55  61  
TOTAL MAHARASHTRA  1,117,309.47  1,110,320.80   6,988.67  0.63  36.12  2,051.36  180  200  
NORTH BIHAR  53,842.46  53,283.41   559.05  1.04  20.71  3,853.87  14  25  
SOUTH BIHAR  0.00  0.00   0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0  3  
TOTAL BIHAR  53,842.46  53,283.41   559.05  1.04  20.71  3,853.87  14  28  
ASSAM  0.00  0.00   0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0  3  
ANDHRA PRADESH  109,712.74  99,507.83   10,204.91  9.30  0.00  3,309.32  38  43  
KARNATAKA  447,734.00  409,000.00   38,734.00  8.65  146.00  2,624.00  60  63  
TAMILNADU  175,056.57  161,082.36   13,974.21  7.98  24.54  215.94  40  45  
KERALA  0.00  0.00   0.00  0.00  0.00  384.74  0  2  
ORISSA  3,291.76  3,251.23   40.53  1.23  0.00  0.00  I  8  

 
 
WEST BENGAL  588.00  582.30   5.70  0.97  0.00  0.00  0  3  
NAGALAND  0.00  0.00   0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0  I  
PUDUCHERRY  2,300.31  2,300.31   0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  2  2  
GOA  1,403.39  1,403.39   0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  I  I  
._ .. '.,'-          
ALL INDIA TOTAL  3,503,606.08  3,295,222.83  208,383.25  5.95  308.83  23,052.83  508  647  
         • •••••••• NIC -FCA INFOSYS DIVISION •••••••••  
 
6.2 The Committee have been informed that the basic reasons for not 
making timely payment to the sugarcane growers by the mill owners are 
that in the years of high production of sugar, sugar prices decline which 
constrains the capacities of sugar mills to pay cane price in time and 
leading to cane price arrears. One of the reasons for high production of 
sugarcane and sugar is the scarcit y induced high prices of sugarcane and 
sugar in years of deficit production which incentivises higher plantation and 
leads to bumper production of sugar in subsequent years leading to steep 
price drop. High cost of production of sugar due to high sugarcane  prices 
and low recovery rates, render independent exports (without state support) 
uneconomical to sugar mills, which is also compounded by decline in 
international prices due to India‟s large weight in world sugar production. 
High State Advised Prices pro viding state price support for growing 
sugarcane in comparatively expensively producing areas of sugarcane, 
also compounds the problem of cane arrears in those States. Lack of 
growth in productivity of sugarcane in the last two decades and 
consequently low  output per unit of area, affects the income of farmers 
leading to increasing demands for enhanced prices, and adding to the 
problem of arrears in years with low sugar prices due to over-production.  
6.3 The Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966, contains the ne cessary 
provisions for action against defaulting sugar mills and the powers in this 
regard are delegated and vested with the State Governments concerned 
who have the necessary field formations.  The action taken by the State 
Governments against such sugar mills is not available. 

 
 
6.4 The problem of cane price arrears arises when there is excess 
production of sugar. During 2006 -07 and 2007 -08 sugar seasons, there 
was high production of sugar and the Government took the necessary 
initiatives to ensure that the  excess production of sugar does not lead to 
excessive cane price arrears i.e. a buffer stock of 50 lac tons was created; 
export assistance for export of sugar was extended; and a novel scheme 
under the title „ Scheme for extending financial assistance to s ugar 
undertakings 2007’ was formulated.  
6.5 The problem of cane price arrears normally arises when the sugar 
mills do not get fair realization on their sale of sugar, which in turn, affects 
their capacity to pay cane price to sugarcane growers. This happe ns when 
there is excess production of sugar and also partly when State 
Governments fix high State Advised Prices. 
6.6 The Central Government regularly monitors payment of cane price 
by sugar mills to cane growers and maintain data on cane price arrears. 
The State Governments/sugar mills are required to send a fortnightly report 
on the total cane price due, total cane pric e paid, and cane price arrears 
payable for the current sugar season as well as the previous sugar 
seasons to the Directorate of Sugar. There is no provision under the 
Sugarcane (Control) Orders 1966 to declare a mill as defaulter due to non -
payment of cane price arrears.    
6.7 During evidence, the Committee wanted to know the steps taken by 
the Government to decrease the cane price arrears from the sugar mills, 
the Secretary, Department of Food and Public Distribution stated as 
under:- 
„The Government took  a series of measures. You would recall that 
the Government at that time had taken up measures like, for 
example, interest subvention. If the sugar mill was taking a loan and 
the interest was being subvented so that there could be more 
payment to the farmers.‟ 

 
 
 
6.8 She further added:- 
„The State Government would announce their State Advised Price. 
We have, on the request of the State Governments, withdrawn that 
provision wherein we said that the State Governments, if they 
announce the SAP, they would have to bear the burden themselves. 
That was really because while the State Governments are fixing the 
SAP but that SAP was not really being paid by mills immediately. 
The sugar mills were obliged to pay the Statutory Minimum Price 
within 14 days. But the diffe rence between the SAP and the SMP 
was continuing as arrears. So, effectively on paper, notionally the 
farmers were being shown as getting so much of money but that 
money was never coming to them. Now, with this F&RP, the sugar 
mill is obliged to pay the pr ice upfront immediately, the moment it 
takes cane. So, this is, definitely, a very, very pro-farmer measure.‟ 
6.9 When asked about the reasons for difference between S MP and the 
SAP as arrears, the Secretary stated:- 
„Sir, the law says that the Statutory M inimum Price should be paid 
within 14 days failing which it would accrue interest and it would be 
recoverable as arrears of land revenue. Now, for the State Advised 
Price, the law does  not mandate anything specifically. The very 
word says, it is the State Advised Price, So, it is not statutory; it is an 
advised price. Effectively, the sugar mills were compelled to pay 
SMP.‟ 
6.10 To a query whether any mill owner paid the arrears with interest, the 
Secretary stated that as per provision, District Magistrate  are empowered 
to recover the cane price arrears from sugar mills in the form of arrears of 
land revenue.  
6.11 When asked whether the Government impress upon the State 
Government at highest level to make payment of the dues where the State 
has given the Government guarantee, the Department stated that the issue 
of payment of dues is taken up at the level of the Chief Secretary of the 
States, which have stood guarantee for the loan. It is only after  taking up 
the matter with the State Governments that  the  Ministry of Finance is 

 
 
moved for making adjustments out of Plan fund assistance to the States for 
recovery of outstanding dues. 
 
6.12 The Committee are pained to note that arrears to the tune of   
Rs. 2084 crore for the sugar season 2009 -10 are still outstanding. The 
Committee desire that the Government should take appropriate action 
under ‘Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966’ under which Central/State 
Government Officers are authorized to recover the arrears of cane 
price remaining unpaid after 14 day ’s supply of cane by the growers, 
together with interest @ 15% per annum . The Committee would also 
like to be apprised of the details of sugar mills which are still to 
liquidate their outstanding arrears against the farmers and the 
reasons for not paying outst anding arrears along wi th interest. The 
Committee feel that the interest of farmers should be protected in 
such a manner that they continue to cultivate sugarcane without any 
hindrance. For achieving this, the Committee recommend  that all 
incentives/aids/assistance prov ided to sugar mills should be 
contingent upon the liquidation of cane arrears with interest from the 
mills. In defaulter case, no funds should be released.  
 
NEW DELHI                VILAS MUTTEMWAR 
      25 AUGUST, 2010                       Chairman, 
    3  Bhadrapada, 1932 (Saka)          Standing Committee on Food, 
      Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
  

 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE  TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON FOOD, CONSUME R AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTIO N HELD 
ON THURSDAY, 4TH FEBRUARY, 2010. 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1710 hrs in Committee Room 
„B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 Present 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar - Chairman 
 Members 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
4. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
5. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
6. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
7. Shri Puranmasi Ram 
8. Shri Laxman Tudu 
  
  Rajya Sabha 
 
9. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
10. Shri Lalhming Liana 
11. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
12. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
13. Shri Matilal Sarkar  
14. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
  Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P.K.Misra  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

 
 
Representatives of the Department of Food and Public Distribution 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department 
of Food and Public Distribution) to the sitting of the Committee convened to 
have briefing on the subject „Production, Consumption and Pricing of 
Sugar‟ selected for examination during 2009 -10. In his opening remarks, 
the Chairman asked the Secretary to brief the Committee on some of the 
important issues related to the subject specifically, steps initiated by the 
Department for increasing the production of sugar in the country, stabilizing 
the constant rising prices of sugar, new schemes/incentives for 
encouraging the farmers to go in for more sugarcane production, timely 
payment of cane price to the farmers, liquidation of the existing cane price 
arrears, production of ethanol by the sugar mills, to educate the sugar mills 
to avail loans for various schemes from the Sugar Development Fund 
(SDF), revival of sick sugar mills, to prevent black -marketing and hoarding 
of sugar, etc. The Secretary gave a brie f overview of the subject and also 
Sl No.  Name  Designation  
  
1. Smt. Alka Sirohi                       - 
Secretary 
2. Shri Chaman Kumar                - 
AS & FA 
3. 
Dr. Joy I. Cheenath                 - Joint Secretary 
4. 
Shri N. Sanyal                         - Joint Secretary 
5. 
Shri Naveen Prakash              - Joint Secretary 
6. 
Shri Abinash Verma                - Director 
7. 
Shri Arvind Kumar                  - Director (Policy 
8. 
Shri R.P.Bhagria                    - CD (Sugar) 

 
 
on various points raised by Hon‟ble Chairman. Explaining the reasons for 
big shortfall in the production of sugar, the Secretary stated that the MSP 
for wheat and rice was more attractive than that of sugarcane and since the 
alternative crops were more remunerative, there was shift in acreage from 
sugarcane to other crops. The productivity also came down sizably 
because of unseasonal rains and lack of rains. Explaining the measures 
taken by the Government to increase the a vailability of sugar, she stated 
that imports of sugar were incentivized to ensure that adequate stocks of 
sugar were available. Apart from this, the MMTC, FCI, STC and NAFED 
have also been allowed to import refined sugar on zero duty. Now they 
have also been encouraged to import raw sugar and process it in the sugar 
mills to cut the processing cost. The Secretary also explained about the 
parity between the domestic and the imported price.  
3. While expressing concern over the constantly soaring price of sugar, 
the Committee observed that at the time of crisis, the organize d industries 
such as beverage industry such as coca -cola and pepsi, confectionery and 
bakery industry, alcohol industry etc. which are the bulk consumers, should 
be asked to directly import sugar so that they do not make bulk purchase of 
sugar from the domestic market  and cause hardship to the common man . 
There should be control on their purchase from domestic market and a 
stock holding limit of less than 15 days on what they get from open market 
should also be imposed. The Committee also observed that there is need 
to check blackmarketing and hoarding of sugar and also to take strict 
action against the traders/hoarders who create artificial scarcity in the 
market to earn heavy profit. The M embers were of the view that the 
percentage of levy sugar may be increased so that more sugar may 
become available for distribution through Public Distribution System.  
 
 

 
 
4. The representatives of the Department responded to the queries 
raised by the Membe rs of the Committee. On some of the points on which 
the information was not readily available, the Committee asked the 
witnesses to furnish the written replies to the Secretariat at the earliest. 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
/……………./ 
 
 
  

 
 
MINUTES OF THE  NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUME R AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION HELD ON MONDAY, 28TH JUNE, 2010. 
The Committee sat from 1200 hrs to 1330 hrs in Committee Room 
„B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 Present 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar - Chairman 
 Members 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
4. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
5. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
6. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
7. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
8. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
9. Shri Lal Chand Kataria 
10. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
11. Shri Puranmasi Ram 
 
  Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
13. Shri Lalhming Liana 
14. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
15. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
16. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
17. Shri Ram Narayan Sahu  
18. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
  Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P.K.Misra  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad  - Additional Director 

 
 
Witnesses 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
 
Sl 
No.  
 
Name  
 
Designation   
1. 
Shri Desh Deepak Verma - Addl. Secretary & FA 
2. 
Shri N. Sanyal  - Joint Secretary (Sugar) 
3. 
Shri C.Viswanath  - Joint Secretary (BP&PD) 
4. 
Shri R.P.Bhagria  - Chief Director (Sugar) 
5. 
Shri Adhir Jha  - Director (SDF) 
6. 
Shri Ranjan Sehgal  - Director (Finance) 
7. 
Shri Kalyan Negi  - Director (Cost), Directorate of 
Sugar 
Food Corporation of India 
 
Shri Siraj Hussain  - Chairman cum Managing Director 
Department of Agriculture &Co-operation 
 
Shri Rajeev Lochan  - Advisor, Dte.of Economics & 
Statistics 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
 
Dr. K.C. Jain   - Asstt. Director General 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
 
Dr. Kewal Ram  - Sr.  Economic Advisor 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
 
Ms. Rashmi Agarwal - Director 
Ministry of Commerce & Industry 
 
Ms. Aditi Das Raut           - Director 
 
 

 
 
BIFR 
 
Shri Gajendra Bhujbal - Secretary 
NABARD 
 
Shri M.S.Rathore  - DGM 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department 
of Food and Public Distribution) and other Ministries/Departments to the 
sitting of the Committee convened to take evidence on the subject 
„Production, Consumption and Pricing of Sugar‟ and drew their attention to 
Direction 55 (1) of the Direction by the Speaker. In his opening remarks, 
Hon‟ble Chairman raised various issues related to the subject, viz. steps 
taken to increase the production of sugar i n the country, stabilizing the 
rising prices of sugar, de -control policy of sugar, sick sugar industry, Sugar 
Development Fund, direct use of sugarcane for production of ethanol and 
cane price arrears, etc.  
3. While responding to the observation made by t he Chairman, the 
representative of the Department of Food and Public Distribution stated 
that there was decline in production of sugar in the year 2008-09 and 2009-
10 as compared to the year 2007 -08. He further stated that starting from 
October 2011, huge surplus in cane and sugar production is again 
anticipated and, therefore, the prices of sugar will also come down.  The 
following main points were also discussed during the evidence at length:- 
 (i) Sugar availability and price situation  
 (ii) Decrease in the area of cultivation of sugarcane  
(iii) Change in the policy to prevent rise in price of sugar 
 (iv) Production of Gur and Khandsari 

 
 
 (v) Bilateral agreement between India and neighbouring 
countries under which sugar is allowed to be exported. 
(vi) Areas to divert sugarcane and steps to prevent diversion of 
sugarcane 
 (vii) Market interventions to control prices of sugar 
 (viii) Buffer stock of sugar 
 (ix) Demand of sugar in soft drinks and biscuit industries.  
 (x)  Use of various by-products of sugar industry  
 
4. The witnesses resolved to the queries raised by the Members. The 
Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee 
and sharing their views with the Committee in a free and frank manner. 
They were asked to send the writte n replies to points on which the 
information was not readily available with them. 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
/……………./ 
 
 