 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION   
(2009-2010) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
[Action Taken  by the  Governm ent   on the   
observations/recommendations  contained in  the Second  Report  of the  
Committee o n  Demands  for Grants  (2009-10)  of  the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution      
(Department of Food and Public Distribution)] 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2010/Sravana , 1932 (Saka) 
 
6 

  SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
  
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND  
PUBLIC DISTIRBUTION  
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken  by the  Government   on the   
observations/recommendations  contained in  the Second  Report  of the  
Committee o n  Demands  for Grants  (2009-10)  of  the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  (Department of Food and 
Public Distribution)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.08.2010 
       Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.08.2010 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2010/Sravana , 1932 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………. 
 
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………. 
…………(ii) 
 
………(iv) 
 
CHAPTER  I Report ……………………………………………………………… ………… 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government ……………………………………………… 
 
……… 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies…….. 
 
……… 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Observations /Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of t he Government have not been accepted by the 
committee…………………………………………………………. 
 
 
……… 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
Observations /Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited. …………………… 
 
……… 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I Minutes of the Twenty S econd sitting of the Committee held 
on 9th August, 2010 
 
…………. 
 
I
I 
Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Second Report of the 
Committee……………………………………………………... 
 
 
…………. 
 
                                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2009-10. 
 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar  - Chairman      
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
4. Shri Tara Chand Bhagora 
5. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
6. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
7. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
8. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
9. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
10. Shri Lalchand Kataria 
11. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee* 
12. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
13. Shri Sohan Potai 
14. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
15. Shri Dinubhai Solanki 
16. Shri Laxman Tudu 
17. Shri D. Venugopal  
18. Shri Madhusudan Yadav 
19. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Smt. T. Ratna Bai 
23. Shri P. Kannan 
24. Shri Lalhming Liana 
25. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
26. Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
27. Shri Rajniti Prasad 
28. Dr. T.N. Seema 
29. Shri Veer Singh 
30. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
31. Vacant                     
      * Nominated w.e.f. 04.08.2010 
  (ii) 
            
 

 
 Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P.K. Mishra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad  - Additional Director 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (iii) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution (2009 -2010) having been authorized by the Committee to 
submit the Report on their behalf, present this Sixth Repo rt on Action Taken by 
the Government on the observations /recommendations contained in the Second 
Report of the Committe e (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009 -2010) 
of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food and Public Distribution). 
 
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 25 th December, 2009. The Government furnished their replies indicating 
action taken on the observations /recommendations contained in the Report on 
31st March, 2010. 
 
3.  Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held  
on 9th August, 2010 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;                                 VILAS MUTTEMWAR 
   9th August, 2010                      Chairman, 
18 Sravana,1932 (Saka)                        Standing Committee on Food,  
                                                               Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
        

   CHAPTER -I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on  Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report (1 5th  Lok 
Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (200 9-2010) pertaining to the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution). 
1.2 The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 25th December, 2009 . It contained 28 observations/ 
recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 28 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report have been received and 
these have been categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations /r ecommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government : 
 
Serial Nos.- 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 15, 17, 18, 19, 22, 26, 27, 28 
(Paragraph Nos. – 3.6, 4.17, 4.18, 4.28, 4.41, 4.42, 4.43, 4.53, 4.56, 
4.62, 5.6, 5.17, 5.25, 5.30, 6.10, 7.8, 7.13, 8.9) 
      (Chapter –II , Total   18  ) 
 
(ii) Observations /recommendations  which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government 
 
Serial Nos. 16, 21, 23, 24, 25 
(Paragraph Nos- 5.10, 6.6, 6.21, 6.22, 6.29) 
      
      (Chapter –III , Total  5  ) 
 

 
 
 
(iii) Observations /recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
 
Serial Nos.  13, 20 
(Paragraph Nos. – 4.69 and 5.31)  
 
      (Chapter – IV, Total 2)   
 
(iv) Observations /recommendations in respect of which the interim 
replies of the Government have been received. 
   Serial No. 8, 12 and 14 
   (Paragraph No. – 4.49, 4.65 and 4.75) 
 
 (Chapter – V, Total 3) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations for which only interim replies have been 
received from the Government be furnished to the Committee 
expeditiously. 
1.4 The Committee strongly emphasize that utmost i mportance should 
be given to the implementation of Observations/Recommendations 
accepted by the Government. In case where it is not possible for the 
Government to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any 
reason, the matter should be repor ted to the Committee in time with 
reasons for non-implementation. 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations. 
 
 

 
A. Enactment of National Food Security Act 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3  Paragraph 4.18) 
 
1.6 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
           
„The Committee note that the Government is committed to ensure Food Security 
to all the BPL and AAY families through Public Distribution System.  The 
Government is also contemplating to adopt a str ategy to improve the wage 
earning capacity of the people by giving them better employment opportunity, so 
that they can purchase the balance requirement of foodgrains from open market.  
The Committee are happy to note that the Government would bring forwar d a 
legislation for food guarantee to all the citizens, especially the targeted families.  
Therefore, a bill namely, Food Security Legislation is under consideration of 
Empowered Group of Ministers.  After the broad outlines of the legislation is 
worked out, it would be posted on the website of the Ministry for eliciting public 
opinion and wider debate.  The Committee are of the opinion that this is the right 
step taken by the Government to ensure food for all.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should make sincere efforts to get an early 
clearance of the Bill from Empowered Group of Ministers and ensure that the Bill 
is introduced during the next session of Parliament‟. 
 
 
 1.7 The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as under:- 
 
             „The Department accepts the recommendation.  As announced in the 
President‟s address to the joint session of Parliament on 04.06.2009, 
Government proposes to enact a National Food Security (NFS) Act.  The 
Department of Food and Public Distribution has already initiated necessary 
action for this.  A Concept Note on the important policy issues related to the 
proposed law was prepared in the Department and circulated to State 
Governments and Central Ministries in June 2009 for their comments/ views. 
 
            The first consultation meeting with the State Food Secretaries was held 
on 10.06.2009.  In pursuance to that, so far views/ comments have been 
received from 31 State Governments, which are under examination. 
 
             On the con cept note, a meeting was held with representatives of 
Ministries of Rural Development (RD), Women and Child Development (WCD), 
Human Resource Development (HRD) and Planning Commission on 11.06.2009.  
Consultation with experts was held on 12.06.2009. 
 
           Next round of discussion with representatives of Ministries of Agriculture, 
RD,  Deptt. of Drinking Water Supply, HRD, WCD, Social Justice & 

Empowerment, Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation (HUPA) and Planning 
Commission was held on 1st July, 2009. 
 
          Comments have been received from the Ministries of HRD, Social Justice 
& Empowerment, HUPA and Agriculture, they are under examination.  Ministry of 
RD has initiated action to finalise methodology for identification of poor families in 
rural areas. 
 
           To consider the various issues related to the national Food Security Act, 
an Empowered Group of Ministers (EGOM) has been constituted.  The subject 
was taken up for discussion in the EGoM meetings held on September 1 st and 
16th, 2009.  It was decided that the Ministries of Rural Development and Housing 
& Urban Poverty Alleviation should finalise the methodology for identification of 
BPL families in rural and urban areas, respectively and place it before the EGoM.  
The remaining issues of the EGoM Note will be discussed further by the EGoM to 
firm up various aspects of the NFS Act.  The Department is taking further action 
in this regard.‟ 
 

1.8 The Committee are not satisfied with the slow pace of action initiated 
by the Government to enact the National Food Security (NFS) Act for food 
guarantee to all the c itizens, especially the targeted families. The 
Committee note that a lthough the comments/views on the important policy 
issue related to the proposed law have been received from the  State 
Governments/Central Ministries , these are still  under examination  in the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution. Further, the Ministry of Rural 
Development and Ministry of  Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation are 
still to  finalize the methodology for iden tification of BPL families in rural 
and urban areas and to place it before the empowered group of Minis ters 
(EGOM). The Committee feel  that inordinate delay in finalizing the 
methodology for identification of targeted families would deprive the 
vulnerable section of the society from the benefits of the Public 
Distribution System. The Committee, therefore, urge the Government to 
impress upon the Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of  Housing 
and Urban Poverty Alleviation to finalize the methodology fo r identification 
of BPL families at the earliest and make sincere efforts to get early 
clearance of the Bill from the Empowered Group of Ministers so that the 
Bill is introduced in the forthcoming session of Parliament.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

B. Need to contain huge food subsidy amount  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4  Paragraph 4.28) 
 
1.9 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
           
„The Committee note that Food Subsidy is paid to FCI for re -imbursement of the 
difference between economic cost of foodgrains and th eir issue price, carrying 
cost of buffer stock, and on account of levy sugar, import of sugar, etc. The 
Committee observe that despite various measures taken by the Government to 
reduce the food subsidy Bill, there is huge increase in food subsidy amount 
continuously during the last three years i.e. from Rs.25424.89 Crore in 2007 -08 
to Rs. 32400.28 in 2008 -09 and Rs. 52487.72 crore in 2009 -10. The major 
reason for increase in food subsidy is (i) increase in economic cost of foodgrains 
on account of increase  in Minimum Support Price (MSP) while the Central Issue 
Price (CIP) remain static over the last seven years, i.e. since 1.7.2002 and  (ii) 
increased offtake of subsidized foodgrains under TPDS. The Committee note 
that the Government has been taking several  measures to contain food subsidy 
since the year 2007 -08 by way of encouraging decentralized procurement and 
distribution of foodgrains, issue of bonds by FCI at lower coupon rates backed by 
the Government guarantee and improving the operational efficiency  of FCI. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should take the 
aforementioned measures with all seriousness so as to contain the huge amount 
of food subsidy. The Committee further note that the Department has also 
prepared a draft scheme to test feasibility of direct transfer of food subsidy in 
cash to BPL/AAY beneficiaries under the TPDS. The scheme proposes to 
disburse equivalent amount of food subsidy in cash to be deposited directly by 
the concerned district authorities in bank/post of fice accounts to be opened by 
each of the beneficiaries instead of releasing subsidized foodgrains to the eligible 
BPL & AAY families. The Committee desire that the Department may expedite 
examination of the proposal for direct transfer of food subsidy in cash to t he 
BPL/AAY families and analyse its pilot implementation in select districts.‟    
 
1.10 The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as under:- 
 
   „The Government has taken several measures to contain food subsidy. The 
main measures in this regard include:- 
 
(i) Encouraging decentralized procurement and distribution of foodgrains. 
Eleven States are procuring foodgrains under DCP on behalf of 
Government of India. 
(ii) Issue of bonds by the FCI at lower coupon rates, backed by 
Government guarantee. 
(iii) Improving the operational efficiency of FCI. 

(iv) Proposal to increase the Central Issue Prices (CIPs) of wheat and rice 
for APL categories was initiated on several occasions during the past 
years by this Deptt. However approval of the EGOM/Cabinet has not 
been received in this regard so far. 
 
 The FCI has informed that the Corporation issued Government Guarantee 
bonds amounting to Rs.8604.90 crores in the year 2005 at an annualized 
weighted average cost of 7.31%.  The yearly savings on account of issue of 
bonds by FCI with reference to present annualized cash credit rate of interest of 
10.75 % is Rs.296 crores approx. To further reduce the cost of funds, the 
Corporation has undertaken resource raising initiatives through issue of Short 
Term Loans and has raised  Short Term Loan so far for an amount of Rs.25870 
crores for 3 and 6 months tenure, out of which Rs.15870 crores has since been 
paid. The resultant savings in interest cost has been Rs.319 crore (approx). 
  
 As regards draft scheme of direct transfer of fo od subsidy in cash to 
BPL/AAY beneficiaries, the draft scheme has been prepared on the basis of 
proposals received from State Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and 
Delhi. The draft scheme is initially for implementation in five districts of these 
three States (Haryana – 02, Uttar Pradesh -02, and Delhi -01) as a pilot scheme. 
The proposal has been referred to Department of Expenditure on 26.6.2009 for 
placing it before the Committee on Non -plan Expenditure (CNE) for appraisal. 
The Department of Expenditur e has latest been reminded on 23.12.2009. Reply 
of Department of Expenditure on the proposal of this Department is awaited.‟  
 

1.11 Keeping in view the huge increase in food subsidy amount 
continuously over the last three years, the Committee had recommen ded 
that remedial measures should be taken with all seriousness to contain the  
mounting food subsidy amount. While the Department in their Action Taken 
Reply have  spelled out  measures taken by them but unfortunately it 
appears that the Government have not  taken such measures with the 
seriousness it deserves to contain the subsidy amount which is putting 
heavy pressure on the inflationary trend . The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Government should take their recommendations in this 
behalf with all earn estness to devise suitable remedial measures so that 
the food subsidy amount is contained.  
The Committee had also desired to expedite examination of the 
proposal for direct transfer of food subsidy in cash to the BPL/AAY families 
and to analyse its pilot implementation in select districts. The Committee 
find that the Department of Food and Public Distribution has sent a 
proposal of a draft scheme, initially for implementation in five districts of 
three States viz. Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Delhi as a pilo t scheme to the 
Department of Expenditure for placing it before the Committee on Non-plan 
expenditure (CNE)  for appraisal. The Committee desire that the 
Government should expedite the matter for getting appraisal of the 
schemes by the Committee on Non -plan expenditure (NPE) and analyse its 
implementation on pilot basis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
C. Need for greater involvement of Self-help Groups and Panchayati Raj 
 Institutions to improve the functioning of PDS.  
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10,  Paragraph 4.56) 
 
1.12 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
           
„The Committee express their serious concern that poor quality of foodgrains 
which is not fit for human consumption are sometimes being supplied by FCI 
through Fair Price Shops to the BPL and AAY families covered under PDS. 
The plea of the Government that they have always supplied fair quality of 
foodgrains from the FCI godowns to the State Government representatives 
who in turn supplied the foodgrains to the Fair Price Shop dealers is not 
acceptable to the  Committee. The Committee are also unable to accept the 
contention of the Government that it could be the handiwork of some vested 
interest as after the stocks are released by FCI there are many intermediaries 
in the process i.e. State agency, issue centre s, wholesalers and Fair Price 
Shops. The Committee are of the strong view that there is lack of proper 
monitoring by the Department which leads to such situations.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that instead of shifting the responsibility to 
the Stat e Governments, the Department should evolve a foolproof and 
transparent system and strengthen its monitoring mechanism by setting up 
Vigilance Committees  at every level to keep strong vigil on the quality of 
foodgrains supply by FCI through PDS.  The Comm ittee also desire that 
Gram Panchayats should be roped in the process to oversee the functioning 
of Fair Price Shops. The Department should also look into the possibility of 
giving the dealership of Fair Price Shops to Self-help Groups and Cooperative 
Societies to improve its functioning‟    
 
1.13 The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as under:- 
 
„The Public Distribution System (Control) Order 2001 stipulates formulation of 
vigilance committees at the State, District, Block and FPS level an d also 
stipulates meeting of Vigilance Committee on periodic basis. Detailed 
guidelines were issued in 2005 by the Department for greater involvement of 
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) in the functioning of TPDS to bring in more 
transparent and accounta ble system of distribution as a measure of social 
audit. The States were asked to involve PRIs in the vigilance committees.  
 

In November, 2004 all State/UT Governments were requested to allot 
FPS to Cooperatives of Women & Ex -servicemen. In April 2008 all  State/UT 
Governments were again requested to allot the FPS to Self Help Groups, 
Cooperatives of Women, Ex -servicemen, PRIs, Urban Local Bodies, etc. 
Allotment of Fair Price Shops to these Institutions and Groups, as per reports 
received from State/UT Gove rnments upto December 10, out of 5 lakh fair 
price shops in the country, about 1,17,266 fair price shops have been allotted 
to Cooperatives, women‟s Self Help Groups, Village Panchayats, Urban Local 
Bodies and other Self Help Groups in different States. 
 
Introduction of monthly certification of delivery of food grains at fair 
price shops and their distribution to ration card holders - To ensure greater 
transparency in functioning of fair price shops, directions were issued to State 
& UT Governments in March 2008 to introduce monthly certification by Village 
Panchayats/urban local bodies/vigilance committees/women‟s Self Help 
Groups for delivery of food grains to fair price shops in time and their 
distribution to ration card holders during the allocation mont h. So far, 15 
State/UT Governments have reported on implementation of this monthly 
certification.‟  
 

1.14 While expressing serious concern over the poor quality of 
foodgrains sometimes being supplied by FCI to BPL/AAY families under 
PDS, the Committee had  recommended  the Government to strengthen its 
monitoring mechanism by setting up vigilance committees at every level 
and for greater involvement of Self -help Groups and Panchayati Raj 
Institutions to oversee the functioning of Fair Price Shops and to give  them 
the dealership of Fair Price Shops to improve their functioning. From the 
action taken reply, the Committee find that out of 5 lakh Fair Price Shops in 
the country, 1,17,266 Fair Price Shops have been allotted to the 
cooperatives, Women Self -help Gro ups, Village Panchayat, Urban Local 
Bodies and other self -help groups in different States . The Committee urge 
the Government to further strengthen its monitoring mechanism and 
impress upon the States to allot more Fair Price Shops to Self-help Groups, 
Co-operative Societies, Ex-service men, PRI, urban local bodies , etc and 
expedite implementation of monthly certification of delivery of foodgrains 
at Fair Price Shops and their distribution to ration card holder s in the 
remaining States also to ensure greater  transparency in the functioning of 
Fair Price Shops. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

D. Need for installing Global Positioning System (GPS) in all the States 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11,  Paragraph 4.62) 
 
1.15 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
           
„The Committe e note that as per the findings of the National Council for 
Applied Economics Research (NCAER), the level of diversion of foodgrains in 
the States of Assam and Mizoram have been as high as 47.97% in case of 
Rice allocated for BPL families and 100% in case of wheat allocated for APL 
families.  In other words, the foodgrains meant for APL families have not 
reached the beneficiary APL families at all in these two States.  The level of 
diversion of foodgrains in other States are also fairly high.  The Committee , 
therefore, strongly recommend that all necessary steps be taken to prevent 
diversion of foodgrains meant for TPDS.  The scheme for installing Global 
Positioning System (GPS) devices on vehicles transporting TPDS foodgrains 
should also be implemented in all the States on top priority.‟    
 
1.16 The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as under:- 
 
„The concurrent evaluation study reports in respect of 12 States, 
received from NCAER have been sent to the concerned State Governments 
for taking necessary remedial measures to remove the deficiencies noticed in 
the functioning of TPDS including leakages and diversion of foodgrains. 
 
2. TPDS is implemented jointly by Government of India and State/UT 
governments.  Under this mechanism, the responsibil ity of allocation of 
foodgrains within the states/UT, identification of eligible BPL and AAY families 
based on estimates of Planning Commission, issuance of ration cards, 
distribution of allotted foodgrains to ration card holders through FPS and 
monitoring of TPDS are done by state/UT governments.  
             
3. To strength the functioning of TPDS, besides the PDS (Control) Order 
2001, the Government has taken the following measures: 
 
A. to strength monitoring and vigilance by- 
i) implementation of the Nine Point Action Plan;. 
ii) taking action against those with Bogus Ration Cards; and 
iii) ensuring greater involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions 
(PRIs)/ Urban Local Bodies in functioning of Fair Price Shops. 
 
B. to ensure increased transparency in functioning of TPDS by- 
i) adoption and implementation of revised Model Citizens‟ Charter; 

ii) introduction of monthly certification of delivery of foodgrains at 
Fair Price Shops and their distribution to ration card holders; 
iii) taking up publicity-cum-awareness Campaign on TPDS; and 
iv) display of allocation of foodgrains – district and FPS wise on 
websites for public scrutiny. 
 
C. to use ICT tools such as 
i) computerization of TPDS Operations; 
ii) pilot scheme on Smart Card based Operations in Haryana and 
Chandigarh; 
iii) piloting of new technologies for tracking movement of vehicles 
transporting  TPDS commodities. 
 
D. to improve efficiency of FPS operations through- 
i) doorstep delivery of foodgrains; 
ii) ensuring timely availability of foodgrains; 
iii) distribution of wheat flour/fortified wheat flour under TPDS; 
iv) allotment of Fair Price Shops to Institutions and Groups; 
v) sale of non-PDS items by FPS licensees, and 
vi) revision of commission to FPS licensees 
 
4. The Scheme for installing Global Positioning System (GPS) devices on 
vehicles transporting TPDS foodgrains was introduced on pilot basis and 
funds were provided to three State Governments, namely, Tamil Nadu, Delhi 
& Chhattisgarh.   Further funds will be released to the other States after 
evaluating the performance of the scheme in these three states. So far, State 
Govt. of Tamil Nadu has sent the performance report.  Reports from the 
remaining two States are still awaited.‟ 
 

1.17 The Committee note that besides various other steps taken  to 
prevent diversion of subsidized foodgrains, the Go vernment had  
launched a scheme for installing Global Positioning System (GPS) 
Devices in vehicles carrying subsidized foodgrains in three States on 
pilot basis viz. Tamil Nadu, Delhi and Chhatisgarh. In their Actio n Taken 
reply, the Ministry have stated that  the funds would be released to other 
States after evaluating the performance of the scheme in these States . 
The Committee are unhappy to note that so far the performance report 
has been received only from the St ate of Tamil Nadu and reports from 
the remaining States are still awaited. Moreover, the Department have 
not mentioned the steps taken by them to get the reports from the 
remaining two States which indicates the lack of seriousness on their 
part to impleme nt the scheme.  The Committee would, therefore, like to 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the Department to take 
up the matter with the two States namely, Delhi and Chattisgarh for 
forwarding of their performance reports expeditiously. Based o n the 
performance report, the Government may take further action to instal 
the GPS Devices in vehicles carrying subsidized foodgrains to Fair 
Price Shops in other States. 
 
 
 
 

E. Need for implementation of Smart Card based delivery of Essential 
Commodities  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13, Paragraph 4.69) 
 
1.18 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
           
„The Committee note that the Government has initiated implementation of a 
pilot scheme on Smart Card based delivery of essential commodities under 
the TPDS announced in Union Budget 2008 -09.  Administrative approval for 
Rs. 142.29 crore to be incurred on this pilot scheme during 2008 -09 and 
2009-10 has been issued on 18.12.2008.  Work on implementation of the 
scheme is currently in progress in two dis tricts of Haryana and work is being 
taken up in Chandigarh.  Based on the success and after studying its 
shortcomings, the Governments will improve it and take it up all over the 
country.  The Committee hope that Smart Card based delivery of essential 
commodities will go a long way in improving the efficiency of the PDS and 
therefore, recommend that the Department should take all essential steps to 
expedite the project for implementation all over the country.‟ 
 
1.19 The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as under:- 
 
„The scheme was reviewed by the National Scheme Steering 
Committee (NSSC) on 22.12.09. The first set of smart cards was scheduled 
to be issued by end of February, 2010‟. 
 
 

1.20 The Committee regret to note that Government have not furnished 
the full details of the progress of implementation of the Pilot Scheme on 
Smart Card based delivery of Essen tial Commodities under the TPDS 
which was initially to be implemented in two districts of Haryana. The 
Committee, therefore,  desire to b e apprised of the full details of the 
progress of the scheme. While reiterating its earlier recommendation , 
the Committee further desire that based on its performance, the scheme 
may be implemented in other States also at the earliest as the scheme 
will go a long way in improving the efficiency of the Public Distribution 
System.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
F. Need for construction of godowns in NE States  to augment storage 
capacity  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18, Paragraph 5.25) 
 
1.21 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
           
„The committee note with concern that the North Eastern States are the most 
disadvantaged States in maintaining  the adequate foodgrain stock. The 
requirement of the godowns in NE States is 11.78 lakh MT whereas the existin g 
capacity in the entire region is only 4.43 LMT, thereby leaving a gap of 7.35 MT.  
The Committee are unable to accept the plea of the Govt. that due to Law and 
Order Problem and delay in providing land by the State Governments, they could 
not provide ade quate storage facilities in the North eastern States.  The 
Committee feel that there is lack of coordination between the Deptt. Of Food and 
Public Distribution and States/UTs which resulted in non acquisition of land at 
different centres of States.  The Co mmittee observed that due to the 
geographical conditions of the NE Region, even the Railway authorities find it 
difficult to carry the required number of rakes during the mon -soon season.  The 
committee further observed that in spite of the subsidy given f or foodgrains, it is 
not subjected to safe storage as at times it is spread in open and simply covered 
by Tadapatra leaving it rotting, specially during monsoon season.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Deptt. Of Food & Public 
Distribution should take up the matter urgently with the North eastern States/UTs 
at the highest level for identification of suitable land for construction of godowns 
in the region to augment the storage capacity.‟ 
 
1.22 The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as under:- 
 
„The availability of suitable land in NE States is a difficult task, due to the region 
being hilly or low lying, hence there is delay in acquisition of land for construction 
of godown. FCI has taken up with the respective States Gov ernments to provide 
suitable land for construction of godowns at identified centres under Plan 
Scheme.  This Department has also taken up the matter with the State 
Governments.  Due to the continuous efforts during the current Plan Period land 
has been acquired at the following places in the North Eastern Region including 
Sikkim:- 
 
1. Hailakandi/Assam   5000 MT 
2. Changsari/Assam  50000 MT 
3. Jorthang/Sikkim   5000 MT 
4. Kohima/Nagaland   5000 MT 
5. Senapati/Manipur   5000  MT 

6. Churachandpur/Manipur  2500 MT  Land identified, yet to be taken over. 
7. Seppa     1670 MT  Land identified, yet to be taken over. 
8. Ziro      5000 MT     -do- 
9. Lower Dibang Valley (Roing) 1670 MT    -do-      
10. Anjaw Khupa      640 MT     -do-   
        
 The Plan Outlay for t he XIth Plan will be fully utilized in completing the 
godowns over these lands.  Efforts are also being made for getting suitable land 
for construction of godowns at other identified centres.‟ 
 

1.23 The Committee note that consequent upon the recommendati on 
made in their earlier report for construction of godowns  in North -
eastern States, the Department have made continuous efforts due to 
which the land has been acquired at some pla ces in the North -eastern 
region, including Sikkim . The Committee hope that the Department will 
continue to make  vigorous efforts for taking over of the land and 
construction of godowns in NE areas.  
 

G. Need to ensure strict punitive action against corrupt officials and 
timely movement of foodgrains etc. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19,  Para No. 5.30) 
 
The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
1.24 The Committee are concerned to note that a large quantity of foodgrains is 
lost every year in the form of storage, transit and pilferage losses. The 
Committee have been informed that du ring 2008 -09, a total of 2.69 MT of 
foodgrains amounting to Rs. 233.91 crore was lost on account of storage, transit 
and pilferage. Despite the best efforts of the Government, the storage losses in 
the godowns of Food Corporation of India  (FCI) have not s hown any decreasing 
trend. The Committee feel that in order to minimize storage, transit and pilferage 
losses, it needs constant monitoring through regular inspections. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that FCI should adopt scientific and moder n 
technology to store the food grains. Besides, they should also recruit personnel 
who have technical knowledge and expertise with a view to ensure safe storage 
and minimizing the storage losses. The Committee also desire that Government 
should contemplate fixing of responsibility for such losses and punish the guilty 
officials in this regard. 
Reply of Government 
1.25 It has been mentioned that a total of 2.69 MT of foodgrains have been lost 
due to storage, transit and pilferage.  In this regard the total q uantity of storage 
and transit losses have been 1.54 lakh MT and the pilferage loss has been 1.15 
MT in 2008 -09.  Hence the total loss of foodgrains due to transit, storage and 
pilferage in 2008-09 was 1.54 lakh MT totaling Rs. 233.91 crore. 
 
 The following steps have been taken to bring down storage and transit 
losses: 
 
Inspections 
 Special Squad checking at selected rail -heads, transshipment and 
destination/ despatch centers 
 Identification of vulnerable points. 
 Inspection of Depots by Senior Officers of th e HQs, Executive Directors 
(Zone)/ General Managers (Region)/ Area Managers. 
 
Quality Control Measures 
 Periodical prophylactic and curative treatment of stocks, as prescribed. 
 Maintaining priority list for issue of stocks observing the FIFO principle. 
 Undertaking pre-monsoon fumigation. 
 Improvement in dunnage material. 
 Ensuring proper quality checking of foodgrains at the time of procurement 

 
 
Preventive Measures and Monitoring of Losses 
 Streamlining of procedure and documentation for transparency and 
accountability in operations at each level. 
 Adoption of 50kg packing to avoid use of hooks 
 Double line machine stitching of bags. 
 Supervision of loading/unloading operations by the ICCS (Independent 
Consignment Certification Squad) 
 MOU is being signed between F CI and Ministry of CAF&PD for the last 5 
years.  One of the parameters of MOU is to bring down/control storage & 
transit losses. 
 Monitoring of  Storage and Transit Losses is being done in the Monthly 
Performance Review Meetings at Regional/Zonal/Headquarters levels 
 Transfer of officials whose integrity is found doubtful as per existing 
instructions. 
 Transit Insurance of stocks. 
 
Safeguards for Movement & Storage 
 Inspection and monitoring of calibration of weigh-bridges. 
 Ensuring that all FCI owned godowns a re constructed and maintained on 
scientific lines for storage of foodgrains. 
 Movement of foodgrains from one place to another by safe means i.e. 
normally covered wagons etc. 
 Loading of standardized bags as far as possible and leaving 18 inches 
space near the flap doors. 
 Proper weighment and accounting at the time of receipt and issue. 
 
  Due to the above steps, storage losses have come down from 0.42% 
during 2000 -01 (Audited) to 0.13% during 2008 -09 (Provisional) and transit 
losses from 0.84% during 2000 -01 (Audited) to 0.40% during 2008 -09 
(Provisional), as can be seen from the following details :  
Storage Losses 
                       
(Qty.of wheat + rice in lakh MT/ Value Rupees in Crores) 

 
(*Audited) 
 
Transit Losses        
            (Qty of wheat + rice in lakh MT/ Value in Rupees in Crores)     
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(*Audited) 
  
During the year 2008-09, the total quantity of storage & transit losses was 
1.54 lakh MT excluding pilferage. This works out to 0.22% in relation to the total 
quantity of 696.10 lakh MT, which was   issued and moved during the year. 
 
 Despite having taken various steps for reducing losses, oc currence of 
some losses while carrying out operational activities on a gigantic scale are 
inevitable / unavoidable. 
 
Besides, the following steps have been taken to detect / curb the pilferage (theft): 
 
Year Qty of 
Loss 
Value of Loss Qty issued % age of 
Loss 
2000-01* 1.56 145.31 375.27 0.42 
2001-02* 1.44 143.02 578.98 0.25 
2002-03* 3.17 309.39 831.34 0.38 
2003-04* 2.32 244.59 821.18 0.28 
2004-05* 1.46 156.37 767.02 0.19 
2005-06* 1.17 133.87 736.69 0.16 
2006-07* 1.34 155.80 654.89 0.20 
2007-08 
(Provisional) 
1.29 160.66 461.45 0.28 
2008-09 
(Provisional) 
0.58 101.26 456.84 0.13 
                                                                                                                                
Year 
Qty of 
Loss 
Value of 
Loss 
Qty. 
Moved 
%age of Loss 
2000-01* 1.55 134.76 185.40 0.84 
2001-02* 1.42 123.12 234.28 0.61 
2002-03* 1.70 148.52 297.46 0.57 
2003-04* 1.70 150.48 341.74 0.50 
2004-05* 1.83 149.93 382.77 0.48 
2005-06* 1.51 143.00 353.75 0.43 
2006-07* 1.39 133.87 322.58 0.43 
2007-08 
(Provisional) 
1.18 139.21 287.01 0.41 
2008-09 
(Provisional) 
0.96 132.65 239.26 0.40 

1. Installation of barbed wire fencing of boundary walls , provision of street 
lights in the godowns / complexes and proper locking of the sheds. 
 
2. Security staff of FCI as well as other Agencies like Home Guards, Special 
Police Officers are deployed for safety of stocks. 
 
3. Deployment of Central Industrial Securit y Force and State Armed Police 
has been done at vulnerable depots / godowns in the Naxal prone area. 
 
4. Security Inspection as well as surprise checks of the depots are being 
conducted from time to time at various levels to detect and plug any 
security lapses. 
 
5. FIRs have also been lodged with the Police where pilferage has come to 
notice.  Apart from this, departmental action including recovery of loss has 
been resorted to act as a deterrent. 
As a result of the above steps, cases of theft over the years have come down 
as can be seen from the following details: 
 
Year No.of 
Cases 
Quantity 
(MT) 
Amount (Rs.) Remarks 
2005-06 5 69.40 669939 3 cases closed 
2006-07 3 6.95 53905 2 cases closed 
2007-08 17 91.29 895766 5 cases closed 
2008-09 2 1.15 17422 2 cases closed 
 
 With a view to reduce storage and transit losses, the field functionaries are 
conducting regular checks/inspections by squads at District/Regional/Zonal 
levels.  Even the progress made in respect of such losses is being closely 
monitored during the M onthly Review Meetings at Regional/Zonal/Headquarters‟ 
levels so as to minimize these losses even below the permissible parameters 
fixed in MOU.     In order to avoid transit losses, loading/unloading operations are 
undertaken in the presence of FCI‟s Inde pendent Coordination & Certification 
Squads / Insurance Company‟s Surveyors etc. 
 
 In so far as storing foodgrains stocks is concerned, scientifically 
constructed godowns, as per IS Code 607:1971 and also as per the  latest 
CPWD specifications/guidelines i ssued from time to time, are used for storage 
purposes.   
 
 As regards recruitment of personnel who have technical knowledge and 
expertise it is mentioned that the Corporation has well defined policy for 
recruitment in place including recruitment of techni cal staff.  As per the existing 
recruitment policy for induction of technical staff in Quality Control Cadre, as 
contained in FCI (Staff) Regulations, 1971, persons with qualifications in 
Agriculture and Agriculture Engineering and having sufficient experi ence in 

storage of foodgrains and maintenance of food stocks,  are recruited in the 
technical cadre.  FCI is giving stress on strengthening of the technical cadres in 
the future recruitments being planned.  
 
 Regarding fixing of responsibility for the loss es and punishing the guilty 
officials, it is mentioned that as per the standing instructions, a system of 
investigation exists in  FCI for each and every case of storage & transit loss on its 
merits considering various factors responsible for loss includin g dereliction of 
duty by officials.  The losses beyond 0.5% are mandatorily required to be 
investigated for fixing responsibility and making recovery from delinquents, if any, 
against the unjustified losses. 
 
 Appropriate disciplinary action is being taken , including imposing of 
penalties and recovery thereof, against the delinquents responsible for unjustified 
storage & transit losses.  FCI initiated strict disciplinary proceedings against 
delinquent staff for abnormal storage and transit loss due to negli gence.  The 
detailed position about such disciplinary action taken for the year 2008 -09 on 
account of abnormal Storage Losses and Transit Losses cases are as under: 
 
(i)   No. of charge-sheets issued against the delinquents  ... 1172 
 for abnormal Storage Losses/Transit Losses 
            during 2008-09 
(ii) No. of officials involved   ..             4634 
  
 Following penalties were imposed: 
 
 a) Dismissal from the service   .. 4 
 b) Compulsorily retired from the service .. 7 
 c) Reduction in time scale of pay  .. 43 
 d) Reduction in lower post   .. 3 
 e) Censure     .. 326 
 f) Recovery from no. of officials  .. 3136 
 g) Recovery in addition to stoppage of increment.. 23 
 h) Amount recovered                   Rs.3,21,15,356 
 
  Apart from above, Executive Dir ectors (Zone) / General Managers 
(Region) have been requested to take appropriate action on the above 
observation/ recommendation of the Standing Committee.  
 

1.26 The Committee are unhappy with the casual approach of the Ministry 
towards the important re commendation of the Committee regarding 
adoption of scientific and modern technology to ensure safe storage of 
foodgrains. In their original report, the Committee had recommended that 
in order to minimize the storage and transit losses of foodgrains, the F CI 
should adopt scientific and modern technology to store foodgrains. From 
the  reply furnished by the Government, the Committee find that the 
Department did not give due weightage to the recommendation of the 
Committee. The Committee, therefore, while rei terating their 
recommendation, desire that the Government should take instant action for 
construction of storage space by adopting latest modern technology such 
as silos, so as to ensure scientific storage of foodgrains  and avoid losses. 
In this regard, th ey may explore the possibility of involving private people 
in the construction of silos by providing them proper incentive.  
The Committee further note from the reply of the Ministry, the steps 
taken by the Government for movement of foodgrains from one pl ace to 
another by safe means. The Committee find that no time limit has been 
prescribed within which the foodgrains produced in a procuring State 
should be moved to the consuming States. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that in order to prevent storage and  transit losses, a time limit 
should be prescribed for the movement of foodgrains from one State to 
another.  The Committee are further pained to note that out of 1172 officials 
charge sheeted for being  responsible for abnormal storage and transit 

losses, only 4 officials were dismissed from service and 7 officials were 
compulsorily retired from service which in the opinion of the Committee, is 
lack of seriousness in dealing with officials  found guilty . The Committee 
feel that unless punitive action is take n against officials found responsible 
for corruption or dereliction of duty, the problem could not be contained. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government 
should take deterrent punitive action against the officials who are found 
responsible for any negligence or  corrupt practice leading to storage and 
transit loss of foodgrains.  

H. Need for safe storage of foodgrains 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20, Paragraph 5.31) 
 
1.27 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
           
„The Committee further note that 20,000 MT of foodgrains amounting to Rs. 13 
crore was damaged during storage in 2008 -09 due to poor maintenance. The 
Committee also note that as a result of regular/surprise checks, the quantum of 
damaged foodgrains declared have been reduced drastically but it is still very 
high. The Committee are unhappy to note that a large quantity of foodgrains are 
spoiled every year due to floods and cyclonic weather, which in the opinion of the 
Committee is lack of farsightedness on the part of F CI. The Committee, therefore 
take a serious view and recommend that the FCI should make advance planning 
for storing the foodgrains in a safe place. The Committee also recommend that a 
comprehensive plan for time bound disposal of the stocks accumulated be  
prepared by the Government in order to save the accumulated grain from further 
deterioration and prevent unnecessary expenses on handling and storage of 
damaged foodgrain which is not fit for human consumption.‟ 
 
1.28 The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as under:- 
 
„The FCI ensures regular checks/super checks of the stocks in order to avoid 
deterioration/down gradation   and subsequent damage to the stocks. 
 
 Immediate salvaging operations are taken up to avoid/reduce to the extent 
possible the stocks that get affected due to floods/cyclones. 
 
    FIFO principle is followed to avoid losses due to long storage.‟ 
 
 
 

1.29 The Committee note with concern the casual approach adopted by 
the Government in treating the recommendation of t he Committee. Keeping 
in view the large quantity of foodgrains being sp oiled due to floods and 
cyclonic weather, t he Committee had  recommended to draw a 
comprehensive plan for a time  bound disposal of the stocks accumulated 
and to prevent unnecessary expenses of  handling and storage of damaged 
foodgrains. But the action taken reply of the Ministry is silent on the issue. 
The Committee deplore this attitude of the Department and while reiterating 
their earlier recommendation, desire to be apprised of the details o f the 
comprehensive plan as also the pre-emptive steps taken to prevent 
damage of foodgrains in such unforeseen situations  like floods and 
cyclonic weather. 
  

 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.1, Para No. 3.6) 
 
2.1 The Committee note that the Budget Estimate of the Department of Food 
and Public Distribution for its Plan and non -plan schemes was Rs. 95 crore and 
Rs. 34016 crore, respectively for the financial year 2008 -09.  At Revised 
Estimate Stage, the allocation for its Plan Schemes was reduced to Rs. 65 
crores, whereas the allocation of non -plan schemes was raised to Rs. 45619 
crore.  The Committee find that the Department has utilized the entire funds 
allocated for its non -plan schemes, the major portion of which i.e. Rs. 44167.20 
crore has gone to food subsidy.  The Committee, however, note with surprise 
that the allocation for Plan Schemes, which was reduced from Rs. 95 crore to Rs. 
65 crores, could not be fully utilized a nd the actual expenditure during the year 
was only Rs. 45.05 crore, indicating that utilization was merely 69.5%.  The 
position is worst in case of the Schemes of „Construction of godowns‟ and 
„Computerisation of PDS operation‟ for which 71.5% and 14.7% of  the allocated 
funds were utilized during the year.  The committee are unable to accept the 
pleas of the Government that shortfall in expenditure was due to (i) non approval 
of Computerisation of PDS operation scheme by Expenditure Finance Committee 
(EFC) (ii) non -finalisation of Detailed Project Report (DPR)  (iii) difficulties in 
construction of godowns by FCI in N.E.Region (iv) Delay in setting up of Village 
Grain Bank in the States and (v) Non -submission of utilization Certificates by the 
State/UTs.  In  the opinion of the Committee, the Department could not take 
timely action and get completion of procedural formalities well in advance due to 
which the BE was reduced by the Planning Commission at RE stage and there 
was less expenditure during the year.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Department should make sincere efforts for getting timely 
approval of the schemes and utilization Certificates from the States/UTs and get 
clearance from the Competent Authority so that the schemes are implemented 
and projects are completed within stipulated time limit.  The Department should 
also ensure full utilization of funds earmarked during 2009 -10 for their plan 
schemes.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
2.2 All Divisional Heads of this Department  have been sensitized for taking 
note and following the recommendations of the Committee scrupulously to 
ensure full utilization of funds for implementation of plan schemes earmarked 
during 2009-10. For 2008-09, BE was Rs.95 crores, RE was Rs.65 crores. Th e 
actual expenditure after reconciliation of figures  was Rs.45.66 crores, after 

adjustment of recovery of unspent balance of grant -in-aid to States amounts to 
Rs.44.67 lakhs.  
 
 
For “Construction of Godown” scheme for 2008 -09, against BE of Rs. 
crores actual expenditure was Rs. 21.17 crores while during 2009 -10 against RE 
of Rs.29.49 crores full amount was utilized.  
The shortfall in expenditure during 2008 -09 in the Scheme 
“Computerisation of TPDS Operations” was due to the EFC clearance for the 
scheme whi ch was accorded in June 2009 only. First instalment to State 
Governments has since been released. During 2009-10, the utilization of funds is 
Rs.69.00 crores (provisional) (98.7% of RE).  
During 2009 -10, against RE of Rs.70.00 crores, the anticipated 
expenditure is Rs.69.09 crores (98.07% of RE). The position of utilization of 
funds has improved in 2009-10 and is likely to be maintained or further improved 
in 2010-11. 
To utilize the funds under the Plan Schemes on Village Grain Bank 
Scheme this Department h as been vigorously pursuing with the representatives 
of States/UT Governments by holding meeting and periodical correspondence, 
including monthly D.O. letters sent to apprise them of pending issues. The 
Department has been requesting States/UTs for furnishing utilization   certificates 
for funds allocated in the previous years and to send fresh proposals so as to 
ensure full utilisation of funds provided under these schemes. All efforts are 
being made to utilize the provision earmarked for Village Grain Ban k Scheme. 
However, the utilization of funds depends on the responses received from 
State/UT Governments and their compliance with the mandatory requirement of 
furnishing UCs for past releases to enable the Department to make fresh 
additional releases. In the case of Village Grain Banks, during 2008 -09, Rs.16.81 
crores have been utilized against the Budget Estimates provision of Rs.17.00 
crores. During 2009 -10, against Rs.17.33 crores provided under BE, Rs. 17.23 
crores have been utilized.  
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.2, Para No. 4.17) 
 
2.3 The Committee note with concern that there has been fluctu ating trends in 
the procurement of wheat and rice during the last two years.  The Committee are 
given to understand that the reasons for increase/decrease in procurement of 
foodgrains depends upon various factors such as production, marketable 
surplus, ope n market price, ,market sentiment and extent of participation  by 
private trade.  The Committee note that the Government have taken various 
measures to enhance the procurement of wheat and rice, such as increase in 
procurement price of wheat to Rs. 1080 pe r quintal and Paddy to Rs. 950 per 
quintal from the marketing seasons 2009 -10.  Besides, to maximize procurement 
of rice, the Government has given Commission to Societies/Cooperatives, etc. @ 
2.5% MSP.  The Government has also banned exports of wheat and n on-
basmati rice and reduced the import duty of wheat to zero.  The proposal for 
reduction of import duty on rice is also under consideration.  The Committee 
further note that the production of 805.8 and 991.5 lakh tonnes of wheat and rice, 
respectively has  been estimated for 2008 -09 crops, which is sufficient to meet 
the requirement of the country.  Besides, in order to increase foodgrains 
production and improving the agricultural growth in the country, the Government 
has initiated two schemes namely (i) National Food Security Mission (NFSM) and 
(ii) Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY).  The Committee are of the view that 
despite the various measures taken by the Government, there is likelihood of 
decline in production of wheat and rice due to delayed monso on and 
consequently there will be shortage of foodgrains in the country.  The Committee 
are aware that every year in one or the other parts of the country there is drought 
and flood due to which the crops are destroyed.  Due to the global warming and 
climate change the drought have become recurring features.  In order to deal 
with such situations, the Committee desire that the Government should adopt 
new method of agriculture and irrigation to increase the production of foodgrains, 
so that the procurement b y FCI and other agencies is further enhanced.  The 
Committee also desire that the Department should keep a close watch on other 
aspects which affect the procurement of foodgrains and take every possible 
measure to ensure that availability of foodgrains in the central pool is maintained 
and poor people are not forced to purchase foodgrains at higher prices.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
2.4 Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has information that they have 
taken following measures for increasing the production of foodgrains:- 
 
(i) Rabi production enhancement measures : 
The foodgrain production has been estimated at about 96.53 million 
tonnes (Ist Advance Estimates) in the country during Kharff 2009 as compared to 
117.70 million tonnes during Kharif, 2008 . Loss of foodgrain has been reported 
due to drought during Kharif, 2009 season in major part of the country. 

    For increasing rabi production, Government of India organized a 
conference and video conferences with States to review issues relating drought  
management and preparedness for   Rabi crops. 
          In this regard, State Governments have taken several initiatives to 
enhance the productivity as well as coverage of more area during rabi season: 
          States have been given more flexibility to utilize the funds under various 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes namely National Food Security Mission (NFSM), 
Integrated Cereal Development Programme (ICDP) under Macro Management 
and Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Palm Oil and Maize (ISOPOM) to 
meet the additional demand for requirement of seed distribution component. Age 
norms of certified seed of Wheat, rice and pulses have been relaxed and 
additional area coverage under boro/summer rice /wheat/pulses are planned for 
enhancing production. Seed norms of Wheat and rice, pulses and Jowar and 
bajra (rabi /summer2009 -10) have been increased under various crop 
development schemes of Ministry of Agriculture to reduce the burden on farmers 
in drought affected area. Availability and supply of   essential input s such as 
fertilizers, additional power for irrigation etc have ensured in coordination with the 
States and various Central Ministries. 
 
   (ii)   Schemes adopted for improvement in production practices and 
irrigation technology: 
Government of India is imp lementing a number of crop specific Schemes 
to increase the foodgrain production.   To enhance the production and 
productivity of food grains, a Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National Food 
Security Mission (NFSM) is under implementation in 312 districts in  17 States as 
mission mode approach focusing on important foodgrain crops, i.e. rice, wheat 
and pulses by 10, 8 and 2 million tones, respectively by the end of XI Plan (2011 -
12). It was launched in Rabi 2007-08.   Besides,  Centrally Sponsored scheme of 
“Integrated Cereals Development Programme in Rice/ wheat Based Cropping 
Systems Areas (ICDP - Rice/Wheat)” is  implemented  in  non - NFSM  Rice/ 
Wheat districts in the country and “Integrated Cereals Development Programme 
in Coarse Cereals (excluding Maize)”  based Cropping System Areas (ICDP -
Coarse Cereals) in major Coarse Cereals growing states in the country under 
Macro Management Agriculture (MMA). The development of Maize crop is 
undertaken through the centrally sponsored Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, 
Oilpalm and Maize (ISOPOM). 
   
 The above schemes are meant for popularization of new technologies in 
crop production and water use  includes  various components  like 
demonstrations & training on  improved production technologies; distribution of 
quality seeds of high yielding varieties/ hybrids through seed minikit ; support for 
micro nutrients, gypsum, zero tillage; rotavators, weeders and other farm 
implements, Integrated Pest Management (IPM), Integrated  Nutrients 
Management (INM), extension, water saving  and moisture saving devices,  
mass media campaign including awards for best performing districts etc. 
 

 
(iii) Development of new technology to adopt to changing climate 
condition   
 
 The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has taken research 
work vigorously for development of new technology particularly in view of larger 
variation in climate change/climate factors since 10 th five-year plan period in 
collaboration with State Agricultural University for development of suitable 
production technologies. 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research has developed heat tolerance/ 
high temperature varieties of wheat such as NIAW 34, Raj. 3765,  Raj 4037, NW -
2036, NW -1014, HW -2045, HD -2643,  K -8962 and DBW -14 water saving 
devices, improved crop -protection/production technology, resource conservation 
technology like zero tillage and bed planting   specifically with surface - residue 
retention using second -generation seeding machines like rotary disc drill and 
happy seeder. These technologies generated/are being generated by research 
systems are being popularized under above motioned various crop development 
schemes to enhance the production of foodgrains and the Government of India is 
giving accelerated support for this purpose.      
 Minimum Support Prices (MSPs ) of wheat and paddy has substantially 
been increased in the last three Kharif/Rabi Marketing Seasons (KMS/RMS). 
Due to the increased MSP, announcement of incentive bonuses and various 
other measures taken by the Government, there has been record procureme nt of 
226.89 and 253.82 lakh tonnes of wheat in RMS 2008 -09 and 2009 -10 and 
record procurement of 284.93 and 336.85 lakh tonnes of rice in KMS 2007 -08 
and 2008 -09. With the increased level of wheat and rice procurement in the 
Central Pool, availability of foodgrains to poor people has been ensured.  
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
Recommendation (Serial No.3, Para No. 4.18) 
2.5 The Committee note that the Government is committed to ensure Food 
Security to all the BPL and AAY families through Public Distribution System.  The 
Government is also contemplating to adopt a strategy to improve the wage 
earning capacity of the people by giving them better employment opportunity, so 
that they can purchase the balance requirement of foodgrains from open market.  
The Committee are happy to note that the Government would bring forward a 
legislation for food guarantee to all the citizens, espe cially the targeted families.  
Therefore, a bill namely, Food Security Legislation is under consideration of 
Empowered Group of Ministers.  After the broad outlines of the legislation is 

worked out, it would be posted on the website of the Ministry for eli citing public 
opinion and wider debate.  The Committee are of the opinion that this is the right 
step taken by the Government to ensure food for all.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should make sincere efforts to get early 
clearance of the Bill from Empowered Group of Ministers and ensure that the Bill 
is introduced during the next session of Parliament. 
 
 Action Taken by the Government: 
             
2.6  The Department accepts the recommendation.  As announced in the 
President‟s ad dress to the joint session of Parliament on 04.06.2009, 
Government proposes to enact a National Food Security (NFS) Act.  The 
Department of Food and Public Distribution has already initiated necessary 
action for this.  A Concept Note on the important polic y issues related to the 
proposed law was prepared in the Department and circulated to State 
Governments and Central Ministries in June 2009 for their comments/ views. 
 
            The first consultation meeting with the State Food Secretaries was held 
on 1 0.06.2009.  In pursuance to that, so far views/ comments have been 
received from 31 State Governments, which are under examination. 
 
             On the concept note, a meeting was held with representatives of 
Ministries of Rural Development (RD), Women an d Child Development (WCD), 
Human Resource Development (HRD) and Planning Commission on 11.06.2009.  
Consultation with experts was held on 12.06.2009. 
 
           Next round of discussion with representatives of Ministries of Agriculture, 
RD,  Deptt. of Dri nking Water Supply, HRD, WCD, Social Justice & 
Empowerment, Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation (HUPA) and Planning 
Commission was held on 1st July, 2009. 
 
          Comments have been received from the Ministries of HRD, Social Justice 
& Empowerment, HUPA and Agriculture, they are under examination.  Ministry of 
RD has initiated action to finalise methodology for identification of poor families in 
rural areas. 
 
           To consider the various issues related to the national Food Security Act, 
an Empowered Group of Ministers (EGOM) has been constituted.  The subject 
was taken up for discussion in the EGoM meetings held on September 1 st and 
16th, 2009.  It was decided that the Ministries of Rural Development and Housing 
& Urban Poverty Alleviation should fi nalise the methodology for identification of 
BPL families in rural and urban areas, respectively and place it before the EGoM.  
The remaining issues of the EGoM Note will be discussed further by the EGoM to 
firm up various aspects of the NFS Act.  The Depa rtment is taking further action 
in this regard. 
 

Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.4, Para No. 4.28) 
2.7 The Committee note that Food Subsidy is paid to FCI for re -imbursement 
of the difference between economic cost of foodgrains and their issue price, 
carrying cost of buffer sto ck, and on account of levy sugar, import of sugar, etc. 
The Committee observe that despite various measures taken by the Government 
to reduce the food subsidy Bill, there is huge increase in food subsidy amount 
continuously during the last three years i.e.  from Rs.25424.89 Crore in 2007 -08 
to Rs. 32400.28 in 2008 -09 and Rs. 52487.72 crore in 2009 -10. The major 
reason for increase in food subsidy is (i) increase in economic cost of foodgrains 
on account of increase in Minimum Support Price (MSP) while the Ce ntral Issue 
Price (CIP) remain static over the last seven years, i.e. since 1.7.2002 and  (ii) 
increased offtake of subsidized foodgrains under TPDS. The Committee note 
that the Government has been taking several measures to contain food subsidy 
since the year 2007 -08 by way of encouraging decentralized procurement and 
distribution of foodgrains, issue of bonds by FCI at lower coupon rates backed by 
the Government guarantee and improving the operational efficiency of FCI. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend  that the Department should take the 
aforementioned measures with all seriousness so as to contain the huge amount 
of food subsidy. The Committee further note that the Department has also 
prepared a draft scheme to test feasibility of direct transfer of fo od subsidy in 
cash to BPL/AAY beneficiaries under the TPDS. The scheme proposes to 
disburse equivalent amount of food subsidy in cash to be deposited directly by 
the concerned district authorities in bank/post office accounts to be opened by 
each of the beneficiaries instead of releasing subsidized foodgrains to the eligible 
BPL & AAY families. The Committee desire that the Department may expedite 
examination of the proposal for direct transfer of food subsidy in cash to the 
BPL/AAY families and analyses its pilot implementation in select districts.    
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
2.8 The Government has taken several measures to contain food subsidy. 
The main measures in this regard include:- 
(v) Encouraging decentralized procurement and distribution of food grains. 
Eleven States are procuring foodgrains under DCP on behalf of 
Government of India. 

(vi) Issue of bonds by the FCI at lower coupon rates, backed by 
Government guarantee. 
(vii) Improving the operational efficiency of FCI. 
(viii) Proposal to increase the Central Issue Prices (CIPs) of wheat and rice 
for APL categories was initiated on several occasions during the past 
years by this Deptt. However approval of the EGOM/Cabinet has not 
been received in this regard so far. 
 
The FCI has informed that the Corporation issued G overnment Guarantee 
bonds amounting to Rs.8604.90 crores in the year 2005 at an annualized 
weighted average cost of 7.31%.  The yearly savings on account of issue of 
bonds by FCI with reference to present annualized cash credit rate of interest of 
10.75 % is Rs.296 crores approx. To further reduce the cost of funds, the 
Corporation has undertaken resource raising initiatives through issue of Short 
Term Loans and has raised Short Term Loan so far for an amount of Rs.25870 
crores for 3 and 6 months tenure, ou t of which Rs.15870 crores has since been 
paid. The resultant savings in interest cost has been Rs.319 crore (approx). 
  
 As regards draft scheme of direct transfer of food subsidy in cash to 
BPL/AAY beneficiaries, the draft scheme has been prepared on the  basis of 
proposals received from State Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and 
Delhi. The draft scheme is initially for implementation in five districts of these 
three States (Haryana – 02, Uttar Pradesh -02, and Delhi -01) as a pilot scheme. 
The proposal has been referred to Department of Expenditure on 26.6.2009 for 
placing it before the Committee on Non -plan Expenditure (CNE) for appraisal. 
The Department of Expenditure has latest been reminded on 23.12.2009. Reply 
of Department of Expenditure on the proposal of this Department is awaited.  
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.5 Para No. 4.41) 
  
2.9 The Committee note that the Public Distribution System (PDS) 
Scheme is one of the most important schemes of the Government to provide 
subsidized foodgrains to poor people. The Comm ittee also note that BE for 
strengthening of PDS during 2008 -09 was Rs. 5.50 crore but the Department 

could utilize only Rs. 1.71 crore during the year. The Committee, regret that 
this scheme, like other schemes of the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution, has suffered for want of sufficient proposals and utilization 
certificates from the States/ UTs. The Committee are not inclined to accept 
the plea of the Department that the under -utilization of funds was due to non -
receipt of sufficient proposals f rom States/UTs under the component 
Publicity-cum-Awareness Campaign on TPDS and non -submission of 
utilization certificates under the component curbing leakage and diversion. In 
the opinion of the Committee, it is the lack of coordination with the State 
Governments and weak monitoring over the scheme on the part of the 
Department.  The Committee feel that due to non -utilisation of funds by the 
State Governments, ultimately the targeted population i.e. BPL and AAY 
families will suffer and will be deprived of the benefits intended for them. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should take up the 
matter with State Governments/UT Administration at highest level and find out 
the reasons for non -submission of utilization certificates and sufficie nt 
proposals and persuade them to implement the scheme so that allocated 
funds are fully utilized in the financial year itself. 
 
Action Taken by the Government: 
 
2.10 The innovative scheme to curb leakages/diversion meant for TPDS 
was started on pilot basi s and releases were made to three selected States 
viz. Tamil Nadu, NCT of Delhi & Chhattisgarh in 2007 -08 for installing Global 
Positioning System (GPS) devices on the vehicles transporting TPDS 
foodgrains. So far, State Govt. of Tamil Nadu has implemented  installation of 
GPS devices and sent the utilisation certificate which has been accepted by 
the Department.  NCT of Delhi has not yet implemented the scheme. While 
State Govt. of Chhattisgarh has submitted the utilisation certificate but it could 
not be a ccepted for want of some information. Further, releases under this 
component to other States will be made only after reviewing the performance 
of the scheme in three selected states to whom releases were made.  State 
Govt. of Chhattisgarh & NCT of Delhi ha ve been   reminded to submit the 
utilisation certificates alongwith benefits derived  from the implementation of 
this scheme.  
 
Financial assistance to States/UT for generating awareness amongst 
TPDS beneficiaries about their entitlement and redressal mechanism:   
 
To utilize the funds under the Plan Scheme Publicity cum awareness 
campaign on TPDS, the BP Division has been vigorously pursuing and holding 
periodical meetings with State/UT Governments by correspondences including 
through monthly D.O. letters s ent to State Food Secretaries to apprise them of 
pending issues. Through these fora, the Department has been requesting 
States/UTs for furnishing utilization certificates for funds allocated in the previous 

years and issue of submission of necessary fresh proposals so as to ensure full 
utilization of funds. All efforts are being made to utilize the provision earmarked 
for Publicity cum awareness campaign on TPDS for the year 2009 -10. However, 
the utilization of funds depends on the responses received from S tate/UT 
Governments and their compliance with the mandatory requirement of furnishing 
UCs for past releases to enable the Department make fresh additional releases. 
Rs.73.66 lakhs have been utilized as against Budget Estimates provision of 
Rs.250.00 lakhs during 2008 -09. During 2009 -10, so far an expenditure of 
Rs.24.00 lakhs have been incurred against the Budget Estimates provision of 
Rs.100.00 lakhs. The recommendation of the Committee to take up the matter 
with State/UT Governments at the highest level h as been taken note of and 
accordingly the matter is being taken up with them. 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No 4.42) 
  
2.11 The Committee note that Central Government has a very important 
role to ensure efficient functioning of the TPDS since in most of the 
States/UTs the Foodgrains are procured by Food Corporation of India on 
behalf of the Ce ntral Government for distribution to APL/BPL/AAY 
beneficiaries at subsidised rates. The Committee note that though the 
Government has taken a number of measures to strengthen and streamline 
the functioning of TPDS such as continuous review of the lists of BPL and 
AAY families, greater transparency in the functioning of TPDS by displaying 
allocated quantities of foodgrains on web sites, improve vigilance at various 
levels and introduction of new technologies etc., yet in the opinion of the 
Committee the sche me is not being implemented effectively in all the 
States/UTs particularly in hilly/tribal/backward areas of the country.  The 
Committee are given to understand that all the BPL and AAY families are 
covered in all the areas including inaccessible hilly/tri bal/backward and forest 
areas in each State & UT for allocation of foodgrains as per allocation norms.  
The Committee, however, feel that all the BPL and AAY families do not get 
their share of foodgrains as per allocation norms on regular basis.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that functioning of TPDS may further be 
strengthened and the Government should ensure that whatever measures are 
taken by them are sincerely implemented by all the State/UT Governments for 
the benefit of the BPL/AAY families. 
 
 

 Action Taken by the Government: 
 
2.12 TPDS is operated under the joint responsibility of the Central and 
State/UT Governments. The operational responsibilities for identification of 
eligible families living below poverty line and issuance of rations cards to 
them rest with the concerned State/UT Government.  
 
For issuing ration cards to eligible AAY, BPL and APL families under 
TPDS necessary provisions have been made under the PDS (Control) Order 
2001. As per para2 of the annex attached to this Order, the S tate 
Governments have to ensure that no eligible applicant is denied a ration card 
in any area including hilly/ tribal/ backward areas of the country and they have 
to conduct periodic checking of ration cards to weed -out ineligible and bogus 
ration cards a nd bogus units in the ration cards. Elimination of bogus ration 
cards as well as bogus units in them shall be a continuous exercise by the 
State Governments to check diversion of essential commodities. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distrib ution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
   
Recommendation  (Serial No.7, Para No. 4.43) 
   
2.13 The Committee note that for identification of BPL families under the 
Targeted Public Distributi on System (TPDS), poverty estimates are made 
based on level of consumption expenditure.   As per the poverty estimates of 
2004-05, the level of consumption expenditure per person per month was  Rs. 
356.30 in rural areas and Rs. 538.60 in urban areas.  The Committee are 
aware that the TPDS is being implemented jointly by the Government of India 
and State/UT Governments.  The State/UT Governments are responsible for 
identification of eligible BPL and AAY families based on estimates of Planning 
Commission, iss ue of ration cards, lifting and distribution of allotted 
foodgrains to ration card holders through Fair Price Shops (FPS) within the 
States/UTs including monitoring of TPDS. The Committee find that in order to 
streamline the functioning of TPDS, the Govern ment has taken a number of 
measures which include improving the functioning of TPDS machinery, 
continuous review of lists of BPL and AAY families, door step delivery of 
foodgrains to Fair Price Shops, improved vigilance at various levels and 
introduction o f new technologies such as computerization of TPDS 
operations.   The Committee, however, feel that the Central Government has 
a very important role which includes monitoring of TPDS to ensure the 
efficient functioning of the TPDS since in most of the State s/UTs the FCI is 
procuring and allocating foodgrains on behalf of the Central Government.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should make all 
out efforts to implement the aforementioned measures in letter and spirit as 
also strictly monitor and improve the functioning of TPDS in the country. 

 
 Action Taken by the Government: 
 
2.14 To strength the functioning of TPDS, besides the PDS (Control) Order 
2001, the Government has taken the following measures: 
  
A. to strength monitoring and vigilance by- 
i) implementation of the Nine Point Action Plan;. 
ii) taking action against those with Bogus Ration Cards; and 
iii) ensuring greater involvement of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions (PRIs)/ Urban Local Bodies in functioning of 
Fair Price Shops. 
 
B. to ensure increased transparency in functioning of TPDS by- 
i) adoption and implementation of revised Model Citizens‟ 
Charter; 
ii) introduction of monthly certification of delivery of 
foodgrains at Fair Price Shops and their distribution to 
ration card holders; 
iii) taking up publicity -cum-awareness Campaign on TPDS; 
and 
iv) display of allocation of foodgrains – district and FPS wise 
on websites for public scrutiny. 
 
C. to use ICT tools such as 
i) computerization of TPDS Operations; 
ii) pilot scheme on Smart  Card based Operations in 
Haryana and Chandigarh; 
iii) piloting of new technologies for tracking movement of 
vehicles transporting  TPDS commodities. 
 
D. to improve efficiency of FPS operations through- 
i) doorstep delivery of foodgrains; 
ii) ensuring timely availability of foodgrains; 
iii) distribution of wheat flour/fortified wheat flour under 
TPDS; 
iv) allotment of Fair Price Shops to Institutions and Groups; 
v) sale of non-PDS items by FPS licensees, and 
vi) revision of commission to FPS licensees 
 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 

 
Recommendation (Serial No.9,  Para No. 4.53) 
 
2.15 The Committee note that the Government of India  have directed the 
State/UT Governments from time to time to carry out checking of 
bogus/ineligible ration cards on a continuous basis.  As a result of such 
exercise, 16 State Governments have reported to have deleted 149.16 lakh 
bogus/ineligible ration cards till 10.9.2009.  However, it is believed that a lot of 
bogus/ineligible ration cardholders still continue to exist in most of the States.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that all the State/UT Governments should 
be directed to take necessary steps to eliminate bogus/ineligible ration cards 
while taking due care to ensure that those persons who are genuinely eligible 
to have ration cards are not deprived of the same.  
 
 Action Taken by the Government: 
 
2.16 For issuing ration cards to eligible AAY, BPL and APL families under 
TPDS necessary provisions have been made under the PDS (Control) Order 
2001. As per para2 of the annex attached to this Order, the State 
Governments have to ensure that no eligible applicant is denied a ration card 
and they have to c onduct periodic checking of ration cards to weed -out 
ineligible and bogus ration cards and bogus units in the ration cards. 
Elimination of bogus ration cards as well as bogus units in them shall be a 
continuous exercise by the State Governments to check diversion of essential 
commodities. 
 
 The State Governments have been directed from time to time to carry 
out this exercise on a continuous basis. Under the 9 -point Action Plan, the 
first action point is to continuously review lists of BPL and AAY families t o 
eliminate bogus/ineligible ration cards. Special instructions have also been 
issued to the State Governments for taking penal action against the staff 
responsible for issuance of bogus/ineligible ration cards and those found in 
possession of such rations . Because of these instructions, as per reports 
received on 31.12.2009 from 20 State Governments, 170.40 lakh 
bogus/ineligible ration cards have been deleted since July, 2006. 
 
All the State & UT Governments have been further directed in August, 
2009 to ta ke up a special campaign from October, 2009 to December, 2009 
for verification of all AAY and BPL ration card holders so as to detect and 
eliminate bogus/ineligible ration cards.  
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     

 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10,  Para No. 4.56) 
 
2.17 The Committee express their serious concern that poor quality of 
foodgrains which is not fit for human consumption are  sometimes being 
supplied by FCI through Fair Price Shops to the BPL and AAY families 
covered under PDS. The plea of the Government that they have always 
supplied fair quality of foodgrains from the FCI godowns to the State 
Government representatives who i n turn supplied the foodgrains to the Fair 
Price Shop dealers is not acceptable to the Committee. The Committee are 
also unable to accept the contention of the Government that it could be the 
handiwork of some vested interest as after the stocks are releas ed by FCI 
there are many intermediaries in the process i.e. State agency, issue centres, 
wholesalers and Fair Price Shops. The Committee are of the strong view that 
there is lack of proper monitoring by the Department which leads to such 
situations.  The C ommittee, therefore, recommend that instead of shifting the 
responsibility to the State Governments, the Department should evolve a 
foolproof and transparent system and strengthen its monitoring mechanism 
by setting up Vigilance Committees  at every level to keep strong vigil on the 
quality of foodgrains supply by FCI through PDS.  The Committee also desire 
that Gram Panchayats should be roped in the process to oversee the 
functioning of Fair Price Shops. The Department should also look into the 
possibility of giving the dealership of Fair Price Shops to Self -help Groups 
and Cooperative Societies to improve its functioning.  
 
Action Taken by the Government: 
 
2.18 The Public Distribution System (Control) Order 2001 stipulates 
formulation of vigilance committees at the State, District, Block and FPS level 
and also stipulates meeting of Vigilance Committee on periodic basis. 
Detailed guidelines were issued in 2005 by the Department for greater 
involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) in the functioning of TPDS 
to bring in more transparent and accountable system of distribution as a 
measure of social audit. The States were asked to involve PRIs in the 
vigilance committees.  
 
In November, 2004 all State/UT Governments were requested to allot 
FPS to Coopera tives of Women & Ex -servicemen. In April 2008 all State/UT 
Governments were again requested to allot the FPS to Self Help Groups, 
Cooperatives of Women, Ex -servicemen, PRIs, Urban Local Bodies, etc. 
Allotment of Fair Price Shops to these Institutions and G roups, as per reports 
received from State/UT Governments upto December 10, out of 5 lakh fair 

price shops in the country, about 1,17,266 fair price shops have been allotted 
to Cooperatives, women‟s Self Help Groups, Village Panchayats, Urban Local 
Bodies and other Self Help Groups in different States. 
 
Introduction of monthly certification of delivery of food grains at fair 
price shops and their distribution to ration card holders - To ensure greater 
transparency in functioning of fair price shops, directio ns were issued to State 
& UT Governments in March 2008 to introduce monthly certification by Village 
Panchayats/urban local bodies/vigilance committees/women‟s Self Help 
Groups for delivery of food grains to fair price shops in time and their 
distribution to ration card holders during the allocation month. So far, 15 
State/UT Governments have reported on implementation of this monthly 
certification.  
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.14  of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11,  Para No. 4.62) 
 
2.19 The Committee note that as per the findings of the National Council  for 
Applied Economics Research (NCAER), the level of diversion of foodgrains in 
the States of Assam and Mizoram have been as high as 47.97% in case of 
Rice allocated for BPL families and 100% in case of wheat allocated for APL 
families.  In other words, t he foodgrains meant for APL families have not 
reached the beneficiary APL families at all in these two States.  The level of 
diversion of foodgrains in other States are also fairly high.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that all necessary step s be taken to prevent 
diversion of foodgrains meant for TPDS.  The scheme for installing Global 
Positioning System (GPS) devices on vehicles transporting TPDS foodgrains 
should also be implemented in all the States on top priority.  
 
Action Taken by the Government: 
 
2.20 The concurrent evaluation study reports in respect of 12 States, 
received from NCAER have been sent to the concerned State Governments 

for taking necessary remedial measures to remove the deficiencies noticed in 
the functioning of TPDS including leakages and diversion of foodgrains. 
 
2. TPDS is implemented jointly by Government of India and State/UT 
governments.  Under this mechanism, the responsibility of allocation of 
foodgrains within the states/UT, identification of eligible BPL and AAY families 
based on estimates of Planning Commission, issuance of ration cards, 
distribution of allotted foodgrains to ration card holders through FPS and 
monitoring of TPDS are done by state/UT governments.  
             
3. To strength the functioning of TP DS, besides the PDS (Control) Order 
2001, the Government has taken the following measures: 
 
A. to strength monitoring and vigilance by- 
i) implementation of the Nine Point Action Plan;. 
ii) taking action against those with Bogus Ration Cards; and 
iii) ensuring greater involvement of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions (PRIs)/ Urban Local Bodies in functioning of 
Fair Price Shops. 
 
B. to ensure increased transparency in functioning of TPDS by- 
i) adoption and implementation of revised Model Citizens‟ 
Charter; 
ii) introduction of monthly certification of delivery of 
foodgrains at Fair Price Shops and their distribution to 
ration card holders; 
iii) taking up publicity -cum-awareness Campaign on TPDS; 
   and 
iv) display of allocation of foodgrains – district and FPS wise 
on websites for public scrutiny. 
 
C. to use ICT tools such as 
i) computerization of TPDS Operations; 
ii) pilot scheme on Smart Card based Operations in 
Haryana and Chandigarh; 
iii) piloting of new technologies for tracking movement of 
vehicles transporting  TPDS commodities. 
 
D. to improve efficiency of FPS operations through- 
i) doorstep delivery of foodgrains; 
ii) ensuring timely availability of foodgrains; 
iii) distribution of wheat flour/fortified wheat flour under 
TPDS; 
iv) allotment of Fair Price Shops to Institutions and Groups; 
v) sale of non-PDS items by FPS licensees, and 
vi) revision of commission to FPS licensees 

 
 
4. The Scheme for installing Global Positioning System (GPS) devices on 
vehicles transporting TPDS foodgrains was introduced on pilo t basis and 
funds were provided to three State Governments, namely, Tamil Nadu, Delhi 
& Chhattisgarh.   Further funds will be released to the other States after 
evaluating the performance of the scheme in these three states. So far, State 
Govt. of Tamil Nad u has sent the performance report.  Reports from the 
remaining two States are still awaited. 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.1.17 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15,  Para No. 5.6) 
 
2.21 The Committee note with concern that a huge amount to the tune of Rs. 
3039.29 crore is still outstanding against the Minist ry of Rural Development and 
Ministry of Human Resource Development on account of foodgrains provided to 
them by the FCI for various welfare schemes on payment basis. The Committee 
note from the information furnished by the Department that the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development (HRD) has paid Rs. 300 crores as revolving fund against 
bills in the pipeline. As far as the Ministry of Rural Development is concerned, the 
Department seems to be justifying the delay in liquidating the dues by stating that 
liquidation of outstanding dues depends on allocation of funds to these ministries 
by Ministry of Finance. The Committee are shocked to observe that instead of 
fixing any time limit for recovery of outstanding dues, the Department has taken a 
lenient view towar ds the Ministries. The Committee feel that instead of justifying 
the delay, the Department should make serious efforts towards settlement of the 
dues, especially of the Ministry of Rural Development and also taken up the 
matter with the concerned Ministrie s to make separate budgetary provision for 
foodgrain component in their respective Budgets. 
 
   
Reply of Government 
 

2.22 As per the decision of the Government, foodgrains were supplied under 
Sampoorna Gramin Rojgar Yojna (SGRY) of Ministry of Rural Develo pment 
(MoRD) by Food Corporation of India (FCI) since beginning of the Scheme. 
However, proper budget allocation for the scheme was not made initially resulting 
in outstanding dues of FCI.  To liquidate the outstanding dues of FCI against 
MoRD, the matter has already been placed before the Cabinet and Committee of 
Secretaries (COS).  As a result of continuous efforts made by this Department for 
settlement of outstanding dues of FCI pending against Ministry of Rural 
Development for the foodgrains supplied un der SGRY, 94% (approx.) of the 
outstanding dues has been recovered which includes Rs. 16,200/ - crore given by 
Ministry of Finance in the shape of bonds in the year 2006 -07.To liquidate the 
remaining outstanding amount, this Department has been constantly p ursuing 
the matter with Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of Finance  at various 
levels.  
 As regards outstanding dues of FCI against Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (MoHRD) for supply of foodgrains under Mid -Day-Meal (MDM) 
scheme, the Corp oration has informed that the outstanding dues as on 
31.12.2009 are Rs.226.59 crore. The issue relating to outstanding dues has been 
regularly pursued with the Ministry of HRD at various levels and due to the 
concerted efforts, some old dues relating to th e supply of foodgrains under MDM 
Scheme for the period upto 2006 -07 have been released by the Ministry of HRD 
during the year 2008-09. For dues & bill in pipeline however, FCI has been given 
a revolving fund to the tune of Rs. 300 crore by the MoHRD.      
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17,  Para No. 5.17) 
 
2.23 The committee note with dissatisfaction t hat the FCI has not been able to 
maximize the utilizations of its storage capacity, both covered and CAP (Open) 
available with them. The committee find that the FCI has utilized more hired 
capacity as compared to their own capacity. It is surprising to the  committee that 
FCI hired 100% open capacity in 2007 -08 whereas their own capacity utilization 
was only 1% during the same period. Similarly, in 2008 -09, they have utilized 
77% of their own capacity but the utilization of hired capacity was 89%. The 
position of CAP (covered) utilization is worst in 2008 -09 when the FCI utilized 
only 13% of their own capacity but utilization of hired capacity was 53%. The 
argument put forth by the FCI that they hired storage capacity only in such cases 
where they do not have  their own godowns or where their capacity is not 

sufficient, is not acceptable to committee. The committee also regret to observe 
that a huge amount is spent every year on hiring the godowns by FCI whereas 
the utilization of owned capacity is not optimum.  For example, FCI paid Rs. 
371.31, Rs. 271.06 and Rs. 359.30, respectively during the years 2006 -07, 2007-
08 and 2008-09, which in the opinion of the committee is nothing but wastage of 
Government money. The committee are of the opinion that the FCI should , as far 
as possible, avoid undertaking hiring of godowns and the infructuous expenditure 
incurred thereon. The committee, therefore, recommend that the FCI should 
make proper assessment of the availability of their own storage capacity as well 
as the requ ired capacity and make maximum utilization of owned storage 
capacity, so as to avoid huge rent spent on hired storage. 
 
Reply of Government 
2.24 The observation made by the committee is that the percentage utilization 
of owned capacity of FCI is less compa red to that of hired capacity and therefore 
the committee has recommended that FCI should make proper assessment of 
the availability of its own storage capacity as well as the required capacity and 
make maximum utilization of owned storage capacity, so as to avoid huge rent 
spent on hired storage. 
 
 There are certain impediments to 100% owned capacity utilization by FCI 
and the same is not always possible on practical/operational basis. As far as 
higher percentage utilization of hired capacity, as compared to owned capacity is 
concerned, it is submitted that the storage capacity is hired  when there is 
necessity of hiring space at specific location/Centres.  The table given below 
gives details of utilization of capacity: 
 
 
                      (Figs. in lakh tonnes )  
 
 Figures pointed out by the Committee are shown in bold 
 
YEAR 
ENDING 
MARCH 
 COVERED CAP (Open)  
OWNED HIRE
D 
TOTAL OWNE
D 
HIRE
D 
TOTA
L 
G.TOTAL 
2007-08 
 
CAPACITY 129.48 87.13 216.61 22.06 0.27 22.23 238.94 
STOCKS  60.26 56.68 116.94   0.28 0.27 0.55 117.49 
UTILIZATION 47% 65% 54% 1% 100% 2% 49% 
2008-09 CAPACITY 129.67 101.2
4 
230.91 21.73 0.15 21.88 252.79 
STOCKS 99.2 90.37 189.57 2.93 0.08 3.01 192.58 
UTILIZATION 76% 89% 82% 13% 53% 14% 76% 

 In respect to the observation regarding 100%  utilization of hired open 
capacity against only 1% utilization of the owned open capacity in absolute 
terms.  It is seen that in 2007 -08 only 55,000 MT against a total quantity of 1, 17, 
49,000 MT i.e. approximately 0.46% of the total stocks were stored i n open. Out 
of this only 27000 MT CAP capacity was hired (against 22.06 lakh MT of FCI 
owned CAP capacity) where FCI‟s owned capacity was not available. Therefore, 
the rent has just been paid for the CAP space hired for only 27000 MT of stocks.  
Similarly in 2008 -09 the hired CAP capacity was only 15000 MT in which only 
8000 MT of stocks were kept which was only 0.42% of the total stocks.  Even in 
respect of covered capacity, above data clearly shows wide variation in the hired 
capacity depending on the req uirements.  Capacities are hired and dehired 
depending on the need and as a result the capacity utilization of hired capacity 
remains higher because if they are not needed, they are dehired, keeping the 
percentage utilization higher though actual capacity may have gone down.  
Moreover where godowns are required for very short period, it is economical to 
hire godowns on Actual Utilization Basis (AUB). FCI hires capacity on AUB 
(Actual Utilization Basis).   In such cases the rent is paid as per the stocks 
actually stored and not for the entire godown. The capacity utilization in such 
cases would always remain 100% since the capacity hired is equal to the stocks 
stored.  Thus, the capacity utilization in hired cases is more than that in the 
owned capacity cases. 
 
 The lower percentage utilization in 2008 -09 of the owned covered 
capacity, 77% against 89% utilization of hired covered capacity is due to the fact 
that FCI was having only 129.67 lakh MT of capacity against total stocks of 
189.57 lakh MT stored in cov ered godowns as on 31 -3-2009. FCI hired covered 
capacity in respect of 90.37 lakh MT of stocks only. As per the norms based on 
BICP studies, the optimum utilization of storage capacity should be 75% whereas 
the capacity utilization as on 31.3.09 was 76% (o verall) and 82% for covered for 
both owned and hired together.  The capacity utilization is below 100% due to 
continuous inflow and outflow of stocks.  
 
 Further, for hired capacity taken over on 7 year guarantee basis from 
SWC/CWC, rent to be paid include s preservation charges, which is to be 
undertaken by the concerned agency i.e. CWC/SWC.  Hence, it is preferred to 
store stocks in godowns hired from CWC/SWC because this saves preservation 
charges which would have been incurred if the stocks were stored i n FCI‟s own 
godowns.  
 
 Here it is worth mentioning that FCI is dealing with seasonal commodities 
and utilization of capacity varies throughout the year. The figures taken by the 
committee are at the end of financial year on 31st March which is the 
initial/starting point of Rabi season. The capacity utilization at this point of time is 
less as space creation is under process for accommodating the coming Rabi 
crop.  Rice procurement is also not complete by this time. The capacity utilization 
as on 30 th June for the two years is given in the table below which shows that 

utilization was higher as compared to that on 31 st March for the two years under 
consideration.  
 
        
 
              (Figs. In lakh tonnes as on 30th  June) 
  COVERED CAP  
OWNE
D 
HIRE
D 
TOTAL OWNED HIRE
D 
TOTAL G.TOTAL 
30.6.08 
 
CAPACITY 129.63 97.49 227.12 22.97 0.86 23.83 250.95 
STOCKS 93.12 86.01 179.13 6.55 0.87 7.42 186.55 
UTILIZATION 72% 88% 79% 29% 101% 31% 74% 
30.6.09 CAPACITY 129.67 117.1
5 
246.86 23.07 5.70 28.77 275.59 
STOCKS 112.17 114.2
8 
226.45 10.56 5.65 16.21 242.66 
UTILIZATION 87% 98% 92% 47% 99% 56% 88% 
 
 The stock levels after procurement of Rabi crop is highest between 1 st 
June to 1 st July and gradually goes down reaching a minimum level generally 
between 1st January and  31 st March depending on the trend of rice milling.  The 
comparison of the above table with the table showing capacity utilization as on 
31st March shows higher percentage utilization of both hired and owned 
capacities in June. 
 
 Further, hiring of capacities depends upon the trend of procurement in the 
procuring regions. The storage capacities created by FCI are at fixed places and 
it is not cost effective to undertake long distance transportation and double 
handling of food grains just to ensure ut ilization of FCI‟s vacant space at far off 
places.  Thus hiring of storage capacity at places where it is required because of 
proximity to the procurement or consumption centres becomes essential. Type of 
capacity available is also an important factor, FCI  may have silos for 
wheat/Owned CAP capacities at a particular place but FCI may still have to hire 
storage capacity to store rice, since rice cannot be stored in Silos for wheat/CAP. 
Sometimes, even if it is economically viable to use FCI‟s existing capac ity at a far 
off place vis -à-vis hiring a nearby storage capacity, it may be operationally 
impossible to use the far off owned capacity. For example in procurement areas, 
during the procurement season often arrivals are very heavy and the arrivals are 
to be immediately removed from the mandis and taken to the safe storage places 
to evacuate the mandis for next day arrivals.  The local availability of trucks and 
labour in many such mandis become a serious constraint to undertake long 
distance transportation.  It becomes necessary to hire a nearby storage space to 
ensure more turnover of available trucks and labour.  In some consuming as well 
as procurement areas, few godowns become unusable for short or long duration 

because of litigation, law and order probl em, breach of rail/roads, change in 
railway policies etc. 
 
 FCI‟s emphasis is on reducing the expenditure and not only to maximize 
percentage utilization of owned capacity.  As long as the two objectives are in 
congruence, the aim is to reduce the expendit ure by maximizing the capacity 
utilization. However, preference is given to reducing the expenditure even if it 
results in lower capacity utilization of owned space. Thus, the capacity utilization 
by FCI for the years 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 may be seen in the  light of above 
stated facts.  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18,  Para No. 5.25) 
 
2.25 The commit tee note with concern that the North Eastern States are the 
most disadvantaged States in maintaining the adequate foodgrain stock.  The 
requirement of the godowns in NE States is 11.78 lakh MT whereas the existing 
capacity in the entire region is only 4.43  LMT, thereby leaving a gap of 7.35 MT.  
The Committee are unable to accept the plea of the Govt. that due to Law and 
Order Problem and delay in providing land by the State Governments, they could 
not provide adequate storage facilities in the North easter n States.  The 
Committee feel that there is lack of coordination between the Deptt. Of Food and 
Public Distribution and States/UTs which resulted in non acquisition of land at 
different centres of States.  The Committee observed that due to the 
geographical conditions of the NE Region, even the Railway authorities find it 
difficult to carry the required number of rakes during the mon -soon season.  The 
committee further observed that in spite of the subsidy given for foodgrains, it is 
not subjected to safe storage as at times it is spread in open and simply covered 
by Tadapatra leaving it rotting, specially during monsoon season.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Deptt. Of Food & Public 
Distribution should take up the matter urgently with  the North eastern States/UTs 
at the highest level for identification of suitable land for construction of godowns 
in the region to augment the storage capacity. 
Reply of Government 
2.26 The availability of suitable land in NE States is a difficult task, d ue to the 
region being hilly or low lying, hence there is delay in acquisition of land for 
construction of godown. FCI has taken up with the respective States 
Governments to provide suitable land for construction of godowns at identified 

centres under Plan Scheme.  This Department has also taken up the matter with 
the State Governments.  Due to the continuous efforts during the current Plan 
Period land has been acquired at the following places in the North Eastern 
Region including Sikkim:- 
 
1. Hailakandi/Assam   5000 MT 
2. Changsari/Assam  50000 MT 
3. Jorthang/Sikkim   5000 MT 
4. Kohima/Nagaland   5000 MT 
5. Senapati/Manipur   5000  MT 
6. Churachandpur/Manipur  2500 MT  Land identified, yet to be taken over. 
7. Seppa     1670 MT  Land identified, yet to be taken over. 
8. Ziro      5000 MT     -do- 
9. Lower Dibang Valley (Roing) 1670MT    -do-      
10. Anjaw Khupa      640 MT     -do-   
        
 The Plan Outlay for the XIth Plan will be fully utilized in completing the 
godowns over these lands.  Efforts are al so being made for getting suitable land 
for construction of godowns at other identified centres. 
  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.23 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19, Para No. 5.30) 
 
2.27 The Committee are concerned to note that a large quantity of foodgrains is 
lost every year in the form of storage, tr ansit and pilferage losses. The 
Committee have been informed that during 2008 -09, a total of 2.69 MT of 
foodgrains amounting to Rs. 233.91 crore was lost on account of storage, transit 
and pilferage. Despite the best efforts of the Government, the storage losses in 
the godowns of Food Corporation of India  (FCI) have not shown any decreasing 
trend. The Committee feel that in order to minimize storage, transit and pilferage 
losses, it needs constant monitoring through regular inspections. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that FCI should adopt scientific and modern 
technology to store the food grains. Besides, they should also recruit personnel 
who have technical knowledge and expertise with a view to ensure safe storage 
and minimizing the storage losses. The Committee also desire that Government 

should contemplate fixing of responsibility for such losses and punish the guilty 
officials in this regard. 
Reply of Government 
2.28 It has been mentioned that a total of 2.69 MT of foodgrains have been los t 
due to storage, transit and pilferage.  In this regard the total quantity of storage 
and transit losses have been 1.54 lakh MT and the pilferage loss has been 1.15 
MT in 2008 -09.  Hence the total loss of foodgrains due to transit, storage and 
pilferage in 2008-09 was 1.54 lakh MT totaling Rs. 233.91 crore. 
 
 The following steps have been taken to bring down storage and transit 
losses: 
 
Inspections 
 Special Squad checking at selected rail -heads, transshipment and 
destination/ despatch centers 
 Identification of vulnerable points. 
 Inspection of Depots by Senior Officers of the HQs, Executive Directors 
(Zone)/ General Managers (Region)/ Area Managers. 
 
Quality Control Measures 
 Periodical prophylactic and curative treatment of stocks, as prescribed. 
 Maintaining priority list for issue of stocks observing the FIFO principle. 
 Undertaking pre-monsoon fumigation. 
 Improvement in dunnage material. 
 Ensuring proper quality checking of foodgrains at the time of procurement 
 
 
Preventive Measures and Monitoring of Losses 
 Streamlining of procedure and documentation for transparency and 
accountability in operations at each level. 
 Adoption of 50kg packing to avoid use of hooks 
 Double line machine stitching of bags. 
 Supervision of loading/unloading operations by the ICCS (Indepe ndent 
Consignment Certification Squad) 
 MOU is being signed between FCI and Ministry of CAF&PD for the last 5 
years.  One of the parameters of MOU is to bring down/control storage & 
transit losses. 
 Monitoring of  Storage and Transit Losses is being done in the Monthly 
Performance Review Meetings at Regional/Zonal/Headquarters levels 
 Transfer of officials whose integrity is found doubtful as per existing 
instructions. 
 Transit Insurance of stocks. 
 

Safeguards for Movement & Storage 
 Inspection and monitoring of calibration of weigh-bridges. 
 Ensuring that all FCI owned godowns are constructed and maintained on 
scientific lines for storage of foodgrains. 
 Movement of foodgrains from one place to another by safe means i.e. 
normally covered wagons etc. 
 Loading of sta ndardized bags as far as possible and leaving 18 inches 
space near the flap doors. 
 Proper weighment and accounting at the time of receipt and issue. 
 
  Due to the above steps, storage losses have come down from 0.42% 
during 2000 -01 (Audited) to 0.13% durin g 2008 -09 (Provisional) and transit 
losses from 0.84% during 2000 -01 (Audited) to 0.40% during 2008 -09 
(Provisional), as can be seen from the following details :  
Storage Losses 
                       
(Qty.of wheat + rice in lakh MT/ Value Rupees in Crores) 
    
(*Audited) 
 
Transit Losses        
            (Qty of wheat + rice in lakh MT/ Value in Rupees in Crores)     
Year Qty of 
Loss 
Value of Loss Qty issued % age of 
Loss 
2000-01* 1.56 145.31 375.27 0.42 
2001-02* 1.44 143.02 578.98 0.25 
2002-03* 3.17 309.39 831.34 0.38 
2003-04* 2.32 244.59 821.18 0.28 
2004-05* 1.46 156.37 767.02 0.19 
2005-06* 1.17 133.87 736.69 0.16 
2006-07* 1.34 155.80 654.89 0.20 
2007-08 
(Provisional) 
1.29 160.66 461.45 0.28 
2008-09 
(Provisional) 
0.58 101.26 456.84 0.13 

           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(*Audited) 
  
During the year 2008-09, the total quantity of storage & transit losses was 
1.54 lakh MT excluding pilferage. This works out to 0.22% in relation to the total 
quantity of 696.10 lakh MT, which was   issued and moved during the year. 
 
 Despite having taken various steps for reducing losses, occurrence of 
some losses while carrying out operational activities on a gigantic scale are 
inevitable / unavoidable. 
 
Besides, the following steps have been taken to detect / curb the pilferage (theft): 
 
6. Installation of barbed wire fencing of boundary walls, provision of street 
lights in the godowns / complexes and proper locking of the sheds. 
 
7. Security staff of FCI as well as other Agencies like Home Guards, Special 
Police Officers are deployed for safety of stocks. 
 
8. Deployment of Central Industrial Security Force and State Armed Police 
has been done at vulnerable depots / godowns in the Naxal prone area. 
 
9. Security Inspection as well as surprise checks of the depots are being 
conducted fr om time to time at various levels to detect and plug any 
security lapses. 
 
10. FIRs have also been lodged with the Police where pilferage has come to 
notice.  Apart from this, departmental action including recovery of loss has 
been resorted to act as a deterrent. 
As a result of the above steps, cases of theft over the years have come down 
as can be seen from the following details: 
 
Year No.of Quantity Amount (Rs.) Remarks 
                                                                                                                                
Year 
Qty of 
Loss 
Value of 
Loss 
Qty. 
Moved 
%age of Loss 
2000-01* 1.55 134.76 185.40 0.84 
2001-02* 1.42 123.12 234.28 0.61 
2002-03* 1.70 148.52 297.46 0.57 
2003-04* 1.70 150.48 341.74 0.50 
2004-05* 1.83 149.93 382.77 0.48 
2005-06* 1.51 143.00 353.75 0.43 
2006-07* 1.39 133.87 322.58 0.43 
2007-08 
(Provisional) 
1.18 139.21 287.01 0.41 
2008-09 
(Provisional) 
0.96 132.65 239.26 0.40 

Cases (MT) 
2005-06 5 69.40 669939 3 cases closed 
2006-07 3 6.95 53905 2 cases closed 
2007-08 17 91.29 895766 5 cases closed 
2008-09 2 1.15 17422 2 cases closed 
 
 With a view to reduce storage and transit losses, the field functionaries are 
conducting regular checks/inspections by squads at District/Regional/Zonal 
levels.  Even the progress  made in respect of such losses is being closely 
monitored during the Monthly Review Meetings at Regional/Zonal/Headquarters‟ 
levels so as to minimize these losses even below the permissible parameters 
fixed in MOU.     In order to avoid transit losses, lo ading/unloading operations are 
undertaken in the presence of FCI‟s Independent Coordination & Certification 
Squads / Insurance Company‟s Surveyors etc. 
 
 In so far as storing foodgrains stocks is concerned, scientifically 
constructed godowns, as per IS Cod e 607:1971 and also as per the  latest 
CPWD specifications/guidelines issued from time to time, are used for storage 
purposes.   
 
 As regards recruitment of personnel who have technical knowledge and 
expertise it is mentioned that the Corporation has well defined policy for 
recruitment in place including recruitment of technical staff.  As per the existing 
recruitment policy for induction of technical staff in Quality Control Cadre, as 
contained in FCI (Staff) Regulations, 1971, persons with qualifications in 
Agriculture and Agriculture Engineering and having sufficient experience in 
storage of foodgrains and maintenance of food stocks,  are recruited in the 
technical cadre.  FCI is giving stress on strengthening of the technical cadres in 
the future recruitments being planned.  
 
 Regarding fixing of responsibility for the losses and punishing the guilty 
officials, it is mentioned that as per the standing instructions, a system of 
investigation exists in  FCI for each and every case of storage & transit loss on its 
merits considering various factors responsible for loss including dereliction of 
duty by officials.  The losses beyond 0.5% are mandatorily required to be 
investigated for fixing responsibility and making recovery from delinquents, if any, 
against the unjustified losses. 
 
 Appropriate disciplinary action is being taken, including imposing of 
penalties and recovery thereof, against the delinquents responsible for unjustified 
storage & transit losses.  FCI initiated strict disciplinary proceedings agai nst 
delinquent staff for abnormal storage and transit loss due to negligence.  The 
detailed position about such disciplinary action taken for the year 2008 -09 on 
account of abnormal Storage Losses and Transit Losses cases are as under: 
 
(i)   No. of charge-sheets issued against the delinquents  ... 1172 

 for abnormal Storage Losses/Transit Losses 
            during 2008-09 
(ii) No. of officials involved   ..             4634 
  
 Following penalties were imposed: 
 
 a) Dismissal from the service   .. 4 
 b) Compulsorily retired from the service .. 7 
 c) Reduction in time scale of pay  .. 43 
 d) Reduction in lower post   .. 3 
 e) Censure     .. 326 
 f) Recovery from no. of officials  .. 3136 
 g) Recovery in addition to stoppage of increment.. 23 
 h) Amount recovered                   Rs.3,21,15,356 
 
  Apart from above, Executive Directors (Zone) / General Managers 
(Region) have been requested to take appropriate action on the above 
observation/ recommendation of the Standing Committee.  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affai rs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 22,  Para No. 6.10) 
 
2.29 The Committee is  unhappy to note that despite taking various measures 
such as reduction in non -plan expenditure on heads like publicity, telephone, 
travel, entertainment, etc.,  the establishment cost which was 234.62 crore in 
2007-08 has sudd enly gone up to Rs. 333.42 crore i.e. Rs. 99 crore more as 
compared to previous year. The Committee cannot accept the contention of the 
Department that the establishment cost of CWC has increased mainly on 
account of impact of pay revision on salary and in crease in Gratuity and Leave 
Benefits, since these are the regular and compulsory expenditure to be incurred 
by the management. The Committee are also surprised that the 
recommendations of Tata Consultancy services (TCS) regarding cost reduction 
have been taken by CWC very casually. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that CWC should restructure its Plan and Policy and make sincere efforts to 
reduce its establishment cost and enhance its profits.   
 

Action taken by the Government 
 
2.30 (i) The increase of R s. 99 crore in the establishment cost is 
attributable mainly to revision in Pay and Allowances in all the categories of 
employees implemented during 2008 -2009 and consequential increase in 
provisions for gratuity, leave & other employee‟s benefits. The bre akup of 
increase of Rs. 99 crore in establishment cost is as under: 
[Amount in Crore Rs.] 
Sl. No. Head of account 2007-08 2008-09 Increase 
1. Pay & Allowances 157.40 180.27 22.87 
2. Contribution to 
Provident Fund 
14.62 17.51 2.89 
3. Provision for Gratuity 10.89 18.43 7.54 
4. Provision for PLI 3.71 3.30 (-)0.41 
5. Provision for Leave 
Benefits 
13.68 49.21 35.53 
6. Provision for Post 
Retirement Medical 
Benefits 
10.90 3.48 (-) 7.42 
7. Provision for Death 
Compensation 
0.03 0.09 0.06 
8. Provision for LTC 0.00 0.60 0.60 
9. Provision for Pay 
Revision 
23.40 60.53 37.13 
 TOTAL 234.63 333.42 98.79 
     
 
(ii) Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC) has also made earnest efforts 
to reduce the establishment cost. CWC has given due consideration to 
the recommendations  of TCS on Organisational Restructuring and 
Human Resource Systems, which were implemented in the Corporation 
after examination and acceptance by the Board of Directors of CWC. 
The main recommendation of TCS Report was to reduce manpower 
especially in Groups C&D. There was no fresh recruitment after 1998 in 
any cadre. Besides, the Corporation also introduced VRS during the 
year 1994, 1998, 2000, 2005 and lastly exclusively for Engineers during 
2008. However, considering the commercial requirement, during 20 08-
09, the Corporation has made some Direct Recruitments of JTAs 
(Group-C) and Management Trainees (Group-A).  
(iii)  During the period prior to the implementation of the TCS report, no fresh 
recruitment was being made since 1998 in any cadre with a view to 
reduce the man power and the resultant cost. Further, the Corporation 
also implemented VRSs during the year 1994, 1998 and 2002, as a result 

of which 2186 employees availed the scheme, thereby reducing the 
establishment cost to that extent.  
 
Total no. of employees in position as on 31st March of 
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 
9041 8954 8683 8676 8579 8455 
 
(iv)  After, the TCS report was accepted for implementation during Dec., 
2002, VRSs were introduced twice during 2005 and 2008, out of which 
291 employees avai led the scheme, thereby reducing the establishment 
cost correspondingly. 
 
Total no. of employees in position as on 31st March of 
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 
6984 6813 6690 6413 6192 6059 5935 
 
(v) The above table will show that the total number of em ployees on the 
rolls has been getting reduced every year, resulting in reduction of 
establishment cost proportionately. When the above is juxtaposed with 
that the total storage capacity, which had shown a sharp increase over 
the aforesaid period, (table gi ven below) it would indicate the efficient 
utilisation of the manpower in the Corporation. 
 
    (As on 31st March) 
Total Capacity (in 
lakh MTs) 31 st 
March 
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 
71.19 72.28 73.48 74.79 83.91 89.17 
Capacity handled 
(MT)/ per 
employee 
787 807 846 862 978 1055 
Turnover per 
employee (lakh 
Rs) 
2.60 2.83 2.94 3.19 3.96 4.49 
 
Total Capacity  
available (in 
lakh MTs) 31 st 
March 
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 
91.14 94.1
6 
101.86 100.38 102.20 98.78 105.25 
Capacity 
handled (MT)/ 
per employee 
1305 1382 1523 1565 1651 1630 1773 
Turnover per 
employee (lakh 
Rs) 
6.75 6.79 7.82 9.66 11.09 12.81 14.31 

 
(vi) Moreover, the wages bill of CPSEs went up by 28.67% during the year 
2008-09 mainly on account of pay commissions recommendations (i.e. 
on account of revision of pay). 
(vii) Based on an internal assessment of the manpower vis -a-vis the 
capacity operated, recruitment of 40 JTAs (Group‟C‟) and 30 management 
trainees (Group‟A‟) was undertaken during 2009 in order to tide over the 
shortage in these cadres. 
(viii) Keeping in view the reduction achieved in manpower, it has been 
decided to carry out a fresh study through a consultant for reorganisation 
of the Corporation as well as a study on manpower planning. 
(ix) At the same time, the concern expressed by the Commit tee with 
regard to increase in the establishment costs is noted for necessary 
action as advised by the Committee.  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 26,  Para No. 7.8) 
 
2.31 The Committee shocked to observe that production of sugar which was 
more than the consumption level during the years 2006 -07 and 2007-08 has got 
down suddenly in 2008 -09. The production  of sugar in the country in 2006 -07 
and 2007-08 was 282 lakh tonnes and 263 lakh tons, respectively, and there was 
excess stock of sguar in the country. During 2008 -09, while the demand of sugar 
has increased to 225 lakh tonnes, its production has reduced only to 150 lakh 
tonnes, indicating a shortfall of about 33 per cent. The Committee was unable to 
accept the argument of the Government that less production of sugar was due to 
diversion of crops of sugarcane by farmers to other cash crops. The Committee 
are of the view that the farmers have shifted their crop due to wrong policy of the 
Government which failed to provide adequate Minimum Support Price (MSP) to 
the farmers of their cane produce. The Committee feel that import of sugar by the 
Government at zero duty is not the solution because the farmers will continue to 
opt for other cash crops if not given adequate MSP of cane produce, resulting in 
less production of sugar in the country. The Committee are aware that recently 
the Government has increased th e MSP of sugarcane, yet in the opinion of the 
Committee, these prices are not enough to attract the farmers to opt for 
sugarcane production. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Government 
should reconsider its decision and suitably increase the MSP of  sugarcane. At 
the same time, to increase the production of sugar, agriculture should be made 
profitable vocation and the Government should give highest priority to provide the 
small and marginal farmers opportunity for assured and remunerative marketing 
of their produce at the time of harvesting. The Govt. should make sincere efforts 
to clear all dues of farmers which are pending with Sugar mills in the form of 
Sugarcane arrears. Henceforth, the loan cane development should be given 

directly to the farmers  through Panchayats and not through the Sugar Mills, so 
that the farmers are benefited with the various schemes initiated by the Govt. to 
raise production of sugarcane.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.32 The Government felt that the sugarcane pricing p olicy needed a review 
and accordingly the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and the Sugarcane 
Control) Order, 1966 were amended in 2009, as per which the Central 
Government is now fixing a Fair and Remunerative Price (FRP) for sugarcane 
instead of Statutory Minimum Price (SMP). 
 
  Under the Fair and Remunerative Price, margins on account of risk and 
profit on the cost of production and transportation of sugarcane will be given at 
the time of purchase of sugarcane by the sugar factories.  Under the Statutory 
Minimum Price which were fixed by the Central Government previously, the price 
so fixed did not give any specific consideration for risk and profit to the farmers.   
 
  FRP was fixed by the Central Government for the first time for 2009 -10 
sugar season at R s.129.84 per quintal of sugarcane linked to a basic recovery 
rate of 9.5% and subject to a premium of Rs.1.37 for every 0.1 percentage point 
increase above the basic recovery rate of 9.5%.  As was recommended by the 
Commission for Agricultural Costs & Pric es (CACP), the FRP included a margin 
of 15% on account of profit and 25% on account of risk to the farmers on their 
cost of production and transportation of sugarcane. 
 
  As compared to the SMP for 2008 -09 sugar season of Rs.81.18 per 
quintal linked to a b asic recovery rate of 9%, the FRP for 2009 -10 of Rs.129.84 
per quintal linked to a basic recovery rate of 9.5% was almost 60% higher.  
Escalating the SMP for 2008 -09 to 9.5% which would work out to Rs.85.68, the 
percentage increase of FRP for 2009 -10 over 2008-09 SMP (escalated to 9.5%) 
is 51.5% more. 
 
  The FRP being determined by the Central Government is a guaranteed 
benchmark price for sugarcane.  It is provided in the Sugarcane (Control) Order, 
1966 that no person shall sell or agree to sell sugarcane to a producer of sugar 
or his agent and no such producer or agent shall purchase or agree to purchase 
sugarcane at a price lower than that fixed by the Central Government as FRP.  
Further, the SCO provides for an “agreed” price between the sugarcane farmer s 
and the sugar factories which necessarily has to be equal to or above the FRP 
and which in turn would depend on prevailing market conditions for sugarcane 
and sugar.  Depending on good sugar prices, the sugar factories do pay a much 
higher price for suga rcane than the FRP fixed by the Central Government.  As 
per information available, the sugar factories in almost all the States have 
paid/are paying between Rs.225 to 250 per quintal of sugarcane for 2009 -10 
sugar season.   

 
  With good prices of sugarcane  paid by the sugar factories during 2008 -09 
and 2009 -10 sugar seasons, the initial reports suggest that more sugarcane is 
being sown by the farmers which would be available in 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 
sugar seasons. 
 
  As concerns payment of cane price arrears,  the Central Government took 
various steps and announced schemes to ensure that the arrear payments are 
made to the farmers.  These inter alia included – (a) export subsidy on sugar; (b) 
buffer subsidy on buffer stock; (c) interest subvention of maximum 12 % on loan 
against excise duty paid or payable by sugar factories; etc. 
 
It may be mentioned that the payments to sugar factories under the above 
schemes were to be specifically utilized to clear the cane price arrears of 
farmers, if any, during 2006-07, & 2007-08 sugar seasons.   
 
  As concerns loan for cane development, loans from Sugar Development 
Fund (SDF) are given for the purpose of cane development to the sugar factories 
for various schemes which include seed nursery, incentive to cultivators to swit ch 
over to better seed varieties, irrigation schemes, computerization of cane 
management, ratoon management etc. Since Sugar Development Fund Act 
provides that the loans are to be given only to sugar factories, such loans from 
SDF are given to the sugar fa ctories who in turn extend loans to the farmers at a 
similar rate of interest, which is 4% per annum simple interest as of now.  The 
loan is to be recovered from the sugar factories.   
 
Considering the importance of cane development, the Central 
Government also announced in July, 2009, a short -term cane development loan 
scheme for sugar factories from SDF for purchase of seed, fertilizers and 
pesticides at 4% interest rate.  This loan is required to be passed on to the 
farmers by the sugar factories either in cash or in kind.  Rs.156.30 crore has 
been disbursed during 2009 -10 under this short -term cane development loan 
scheme to 81 sugar factories.  This is expected to not only increase availability of 
sugarcane but also improve production of sugar in the coming year. 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 27,  Para No. 7.13) 
 
2.33 The Committee expresses their concern over the rising trend in prices of 
sugar during the last one year. The price of sugar which was Rs.20 per kg in all 

the four metropolitan cities in November, 2008 has increased to Rs.40 per kg in 
November, 2009 i.e 100% increase in the price of sug ar. The Committee note 
from the information furnished to them that less production of sugar contributes 
to rise in price of sugar. The Committee feel that despite being fully aware of the 
inflationary trends prevailing in the country, the Government has fa iled to take 
timely action to bring down the prices of sugar. Moreover, the Committee feel 
that when there was excess production of sugar, the Government has framed a 
policy to provide adequate Minimum Support Price (MSP) to sugarcane growers 
so that the farmers did not shift to growing other crops and would have continued 
with sugarcane production, in order to obviate occurrence of such a situation. 
The Committee deplore this lack of farsightedness on the part of the 
Government. The Government have taken v arious measures to make available 
sugar at reasonable prices like import of raw sugar at zero duty, imposing of 
stock holding and turnover limits on sugar and putting ban on future trading in 
sugar to check speculative tendencies in sugar trade. The Commit tee are of the 
view that all the measures will be futile exercise if these are not implemented in 
letter and spirit. The Committee are also aware that one of the reasons for rise in 
the prices of sugar is hoarding of sugar by traders who create artificial scarcity in 
the market with the motive to earn more profits by selling sugar at higher prices.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that Government should 
strengthen machinery to conduct raids on the godowns of traders and stringent 
action against them in order to check hoarding and blackmarketing of sugar. The 
Committee also recommend that the Department of Food and Public Distribution 
should draw a long term plan to meet the situation of rising trend of sugar before 
it goes out of hands to unbearable proportions. 
 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.34 The Central Government has imposed stockholding and turnover limits  on 
dealers of sugar vide the notification dated 12.03.2009 initially for a period of four 
months, which was subsequently extended for another six months and khandsari 
sugar was also brought under these limits, vide the notification dated 16.07.2009. 
The Central Government has again extended such limits vide notification dated 
11.01.2010 till 30.09.2010.  States /UTs are being urged by  the Central 
Government to impose these limits in their respective States/ UTs. So far only 23 
States/ UTs have imposed such limits in their respective areas. It is the 
responsibility of the State Governments / UT Administrations to ensure that the 
limits are scrupulously observed and conduct checks/raids on traders for the 
purpose. Many States have conducted checks/raids on unscrupulous dealers of 
sugar and also taken penal actions under the relevant provisions of the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955. Direc torate of Sugar in the Government of India does 
not have necessary field formations to carry out raids on dealers of sugar. As 
such, the recommendation of the Committee is being forwarded to the State 
Governments / UT Administrations for effective implemen tation.  As regards 
drawing long-term plan, it is stated that the Central Government has, as a  part of 

long-term strategy to meet rising demand for sugar, has replaced the concept of 
Statutory Minimum Price of sugarcane with that of „Fair and Remunerative  Price‟ 
(FRP)  vide the amendment dated 22.10.2009 to the Sugarcane (Control) 
Order,1966. The FRP includes an element of risk and profit margin for the 
farmers upfront as an additional criterion for fixing the price of sugarcane and is a 
substantial improv ement over the earlier concept of SMP based on cost of 
production alone. The FRP for 2009 -10 sugar season has been fixed at 
Rs.129.84/- per quintal linked to a basic recovery rate of 9.5% against Rs.81.18/ - 
per quintal linked to 9% recovery rate for 2008 -09 sugar season, representing 
more than 50% hike over the earlier SMP. The FRP is a benchmark price below 
which no longer mill can purchase sugarcane. However, mills are expected to 
pay higher price for sugarcane depending on market economics.  Besides, the  
Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966, was amended from 29.12.2008 to provide the 
realization made from sale of by products viz. molasses, bagasse and press mud 
or their inputed value to be taken into consideration for fixing the statutory 
minimum price, which has been continued in the scheme for determining FRP, 
apart from the earlier existing five criteria as laid down in the Sugarcane (Control) 
Order, 1966.  It is expected that with this substantial increase in FRP, farmers 
would be attracted for cultivation of sugarcane with consequent increase in 
sugarcane and sugar production.  
  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 28,  Para No. 8.9) 
 
2.35 The Committee note that inspite of various initiatives undertaken by the 
Government, the production of oilseeds have not shown any remarkable rising 
trend.  Every year, the country has to spend a huge amount to import a larg e 
quantity of edible oils to meet the domestic demands.  The availability of edible 
oils during 2008 -09 from all domestic sources was 85.52 lakh MT and the 
consumption during this period was 151.18 lakh MT.  In order to bridge the gap 
between demand and su pply, the Government had imported 65.66 lakh MT of 
edible oils during 2008 -09.  The Committee note that the Directorate of 
Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils and Fats (DVVO&F) has been given the responsibility 
for development of technology for increased production of oil from oil bearing 
materials as also optimum utilization of these materials.  The Committee are 
astonished to note that though the Government has been allocating huge funds 
under the plan scheme “Research & Development and Modernization of the 
Laboratories of the Directorate of Vanasapti, Vegetable Oils and Fats” for 
research, development and modernization of laboratory, the entire funds could 
not be utilized, due to unsatisfactory progress of Research & Development 
Projects undertaken by the Directora te.   The Committee desire that the 
Government should find out the reasons for unsatisfactory progress of R&D 

Projects due to which the DVVO&F failed to operate the plan scheme.   In view of 
stagnation in domestic production of edible oils and steadily inc reasing 
consumption, the Government have taken a number of steps, but the Committee 
feel that those steps are not adequate to ensure availability of edible oils.   The 
committee, therefore, recommend that Government should strengthen its   
monitoring over the functioning of DVVO&F to increase the agricultural 
production of oilseeds by improving the conditions of soil, its nutrient contents, 
water management and to grow alternative crops.  Besides, the Government 
should ensure that the funds allocated for R& D Projects are fully utilized by the 
DVVO&F.   The Agricultural Ministry should also organize latest researches, 
adopt new technologies and measures to raise oilseed production.   Use of 
vegetable oil for bio -fuels should not be permitted as long as local production of 
these oil is short to meet the country‟s own demand.   The nodal ministry should 
also direct Agriculture Ministry and Agriculture Research Institutes & Universities 
to take up the responsibility for providing necessary inputs to increase the 
production of oil.   The export of edible oils should not be allowed under any 
circumstances.  
 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
2.36 The availability of edible oils during 2008 -09 from all domestic sources 
was 85.98 lakh MT and the consumption during this  period was 167.81 lakh MT.   
The Government had imported 81.83 lakh MT of edible oils during 2008-09.    
  
The Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils and Fats is operating a plan 
scheme on Research and Development and Modernisation of the Laboratory of 
VVO&F with an initial outlay of Rs.1.00 crores with year -wise break-up of Rs.20 
lakhs during the 11th Five Year Plan. 
 
The Plan Scheme is basically aimed at improved recovery of oils and co -
products, both quantitatively and qualitatively from oil -bearing materials.  It is not 
possible to single out any individual factor, which contributes to the increased 
production of these oils.  A combination of factors including the plan efforts is 
attributable to the increase.  The broad objectives of the R&D Scheme ar e to co-
ordinate and concentrate research efforts for development of technology for 
increased production of oils from oil bearing materials as also optimum utilization 
of these materials. 
 
 The unsatisfactory progress of Research and Development projects b y 
research Institutes was due to following reasons:- 

1. In some cases the institutes either did not purchase equipments in time or 
purchase some other equipment. These institutes have been asked to 
refund the amount sanctioned for purchase of equipments.  
2. Non-availability of materials used to carry out the research work. 
3. Non-submission of utilization certificates and progress reports. 
4. Dislocation of work due to frequent changes in top positions in these 
Institutes. 
5. Change in site location for installation of pilot plan.  
 
Procedures have been streamlined in the Department for giving timely 
approval and for regular monitoring.  The institutes have been advised to 
complete the projects in time.   
 
During the 10 th Five Year Plan 21 R&D projects were funded out of which 
13 projects were completed and 8 projects have been carried over to the 11 th 
Plan period. During the 11 th Plan period (2007 -2012) out of 8 ongoing R&D 
projects, 5 projects have been completed and 4 new R&D projects are under 
consideration for funding.  
 
  
The major research work carried out is as follows: 
Development of minor oils from tree and forest origin.  
i) Processes are being developed by using new technology like ceramic 
membrane for purification of rice bran oil.  
ii) Studies have been carried out t o determine the frying performance of 
blended edible oils.  
iii) Laboratory process has been developed for production of nutritionally 
superior rice bran oil with improved colour and haziness. 
iv) Enzymatic interesterification of vegetable oils and fats is carried out to 
prepare butter like fats for bakery, confectionary and margarine with no 
Tran‟s fat.  
v) Simple reliable low cost analytical method/technology has been 
developed for detection and determination of adulterants in edible oils 
and vanasapti.  
vi) Recovery upgradation and modification of lecithin from rice bran oil.  
vii) Determined carotenoids in imported crude palm oil.  
viii) Sesame lignans are used as natural anti -oxidants in different blends of 
vegetable oils to increase the stability of the oils 
ix) Carotene rich red palmolein and zero trans shortening were developed 
from imported crude palm oil.   These products were found suitable for 
shallow fried products and found acceptable.  

x) Development of micro nutrients enriched high performance multiple 
blended oil medium.  
 
2. The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation have informed that they 
are implementing a Centrally Sponsored Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, 
Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize (ISOPOM) in 14 major oilseeds growing States 
w.e.f.1.4.2004. The production of oilseeds has increased from 25.19 million 
tonnes in 2003 -04 to 28.83 million tonnes in 2007 -08. This was brought about 
not only by increase in area but also by improving the productivity from 1064 kg. 
to 1086 kg. per hectare during above period. However, the produc tion of 
oilseeds declined from 28.83 million tonnes to 27.12 million tonnes in 2008 -09 
(IV Advance Estimates) due to unfavorable conditions in the States of 
Karnataka, Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh. Despite increase in production 
and productivity, the production of oilseeds is less than the demand. 
 
Under ISOPOM, financial assistance is provided for purchase of breeder 
seed, production of foundation seed, production and distribution of certified seed, 
distribution of seed mini kits, distribution of plant p rotection equipments, 
weedicides, supply of rhizobium culture/phosphate solubilising bacteria, 
distribution of gypsum/pyrite/ liming/dolomite, distribution of sprinkler sets and 
water carrying pipes, publicity, etc. to encourage farmers to grow pulses on a  
large scale.  In order to disseminate information on improved production 
technologies amongst the farmers, block demonstrations and Integrated Pest 
Management (IPM) demonstrations are organized through State Departments of 
Agriculture and Frontline Demons trations through ICAR.  In order to overcome 
the constraints and to narrow down the gaps between existing productivity and 
yields of oilseeds achieved under demonstrations,  the Government of India have  
focused on transfer of technology through demonstrat ion and trainings and 
supply of critical inputs under the scheme.  To promote the cultivation of newly 
released varieties of oilseeds, the farmers are given seed mini kits of oilseeds of 
the varieties/hybrids, not older than 10 years, free of cost.  The se ed mini kits are 
given to the farmers to bring more area under high yielding varieties/hybrids.  
 
Further, to make ISOPOM more effective, the Government of India has 
modified/restructured Centrally Sponsored Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, 
Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize (ISOPOM) during XI plan period. The details of 
modification made under ISOPOM are as under;  
 
i) To increase the Seed Replacement Rate (SRR), the assistance on 
Production of Foundation and Certified Seed has been enhanced from Rs. 
500/- per qtl to Rs. 1000/- per qtl.  Similarly, the subsidy on Distribution of 
Certified Seed has been enhanced from Rs. 800/- per qtl to Rs. 1200/- per 
qtl during 11 th Plan Period.  The Government has further enhanced the 

subsidy for distribution of certified seed of oils eeds from Rs1200/ per 
quintal to Rs2000/ per quintal for Rabi+ Summer of 2009-10. 
ii) The Private Sector seed producing agencies have been involved in the 
distribution of Certified Seeds of Oilseeds besides NSC, SFCI, NAFED, 
KRIBHCO and IFFCO.   
iii) Enhancement of  rationalization of subsidy on demonstration, sprinkler 
sets, rhizobium cultures, irrigation pipes besides inclusion of new 
components i.e.  supply of improved farm implements and micronutrients 
during 11th Plan Period.    
 
Keeping in view the fact that th ere is a constraint in area expansion under 
oilseeds, the thrust during 11 th plan is being given towards yield improvement in 
oilseeds besides promoting the cultivation of oil palm under ISOPOM in 8 States, 
for augmenting the indigenous availability of edi ble oils in the country. Under 
ISOPOM, an area of 96552 hectare has been achieved under oil palm plantation 
from 2004 -05 to 2009 -10 (estimated till December, 2009). The oil palm starts 
yield after 4 -5 years of its plantation. These new plantations will hel p in 
increasing the domestic supply of edible oils.  
 
3. Under the National Agricultural Research System (NARS) several high 
yielding varieties/hybrids having inbuilt resistance to diseases with suitable crop 
production and protection technologies has been  developed as per the 
requirements of different agro ecologies.   Varieties suitable for specific situation 
have also been developed.  
 
4. The study has been entrusted to the Division of Agricultural Economics, 
Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New D elhi to assesses demand and 
supply scenario of oilseeds and edible oils in    the country and to suggest 
suitable measures to increase the production of oilseeds to make the country self 
sufficient, the present  and future edible oils needs of the country,  current 
production and its deficiencies, quality of seeds availability and their yield 
position, constraints in terms of availability and utilization of high yielding variety 
oilseeds, consumption patterns of edible oils in rural and urban areas of differ ent 
income groups, import of edible oils and its impact on economy and implications 
of trade and related policies on domestic oil prices and availability.  
 
5. A National Policy on Biofuels has been announced in December, 2009 by 
the Ministry of New and Re newable Energy.  As per the Policy, the focus for 
development of biofuels in India will be to utilize waste and degraded forest and 
non-forest lands only for cultivation of shrubs and trees bearing non -edible 
oilseeds for production of bio -diesel.  Biofuel  production is based solely on non -
food feed stocks as per the Biofuel Policy. 
 
6. Export of edible oils has been prohibited since 17 th March, 2008 vide 
Notification No. 85 dated 17.3.2008.  However, w.e.f. 1.4.2008, the export 
restriction has been lifted in respect of coconut oil (through Cochin Port) and 

certain oils produced from minor forest origin. The ban is applicable, presently, till 
30.9.2010.   However, export of edible oils in branded consumer packs upto 5 
kgs, had been allowed subject to a limit  of 10,000 MTs for a period till 
31.10.2009, initially.  A fresh limit of 10,000 MTs has been allowed for a period 
from 1.11.2009 to 31.10.2010 vide notification No. 18 dated 2.12.2009. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Departmen t of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
  CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT‟S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16,  Para No. 5.10) 
 
3.1 The Committee note that the net expenditure incurred by FCI , including 
the establishment Cost, is reimbursed by the Government in the form of food 
subsidy. The Committee are deeply cocerned to note that a large  part of the 
food su bsidy goes towards meeting the Establishment Cost of FCI which is 
increasing years after years. The steep rise in the Establishment Cost of FCI is 
evident from the fact that it has risen from Rs.1369.76 crore (0.07%) in 2006 -07 
to Rs.2073.20 crore (38.87%)  in 2008 -09. The justification given by the 
Department that the Sixth Pay Commission benefits were provided to the staff 
with retrospective effect from 01.01.2006 and in real terms, the Establishment 
Cost for the year 2008 -09 comes to only 3.7% of the tota l cost of FCI is not 
acceptable to the Committee. The Committee feel that even after making 
payment of salary arrears and other benefits accured from the Sixth Pay 
Commission, the establishment cost is still very high. The Committee feel that 
cutting down the establishment cost consequently results in the increased 
allocaton of food component under the food subsidy. The Committee further note 
that the suggestion given by M/s Mckinsey &Co. to improve FCI‟s efficiency 
including in the field of staff rationali zation is at different stages of 
implementations. Besides, the Ministry is also stated to have adopted instructions 
on economy measures issued by the Department of Expenditure. The Committee 
hope that by adopting various aforesaid measures they would be ab le to reduce 
the food subsidy bill by lowering the establishment cost so that the benefits of 
food subsidy reach the eligible beneficiaries covered under Public Distribution 
System(PDS).” 
 
Action Taken by the Government: 
 
3.2 The details of increase in est ablishment cost and the increase in the 
Consumer \Price Index between 2004-05 and 2008-09 are as under:- 
                                                                                                                                     
Rs.crore 
 2004-05     2008-09 (RE) 
Staff Cost                           1499.63 1857.67 
Other Establishment Cost    118.29 215.53 
TOTAL:   1617.92 2073.20 
% increase  28.14% 

CPI for UNME* (last Month of the year)  441 577 
% increase  30.83% 
* Urban Non Manual Employee. 
 
 
During the period, the Establishment cost has increased by approx.28% 
whereas the Consumer Price Index has increased by 31%. Further, in 2008 -09, 
due to pay revision, the Pay of Staff has increased by 30% in the form of uniform 
fitment benefit. This b enefit of revision of pay has been given to all the 
employees of Govt. of India and it is not possible to deny the benefit of pay 
revision to FCI‟s employees.  
 
FCI implements the Foodgrain policies framed by the Govt. of India.  For 
this purpose, it needs  to have proper infrastructure and adequate man -power.  
These costs form only a small part of the total food subsidy.  Strong physical 
infrastructure is necessary for the effective functioning of FCI to carry out the 
mandate given to the Corporation.    Th e establishment costs are separately 
accounted and shown in the Annual Report and Performance Budget of the 
Corporation. Performance budget of FCI is approved by its Board of Directors 
which includes Financial Advisor of Deptt. of Food & Public Distribution. 
 
It is also pertinent to mention that in addition to FCI, the State 
Governments also undertake foodgrain procurement and distribution for the 
Central Pool. The States are also allowed to include the related establishment 
and administrative charges in th eir claims for subsidy. On normative basis, they 
are allowed administrative charges @ 2.5% of MSP for procurement and @ 1.5% 
of MSP for distribution. The States are also allowed to claim higher administrative 
charges, (if incurred)  at the time of finalization of economic cost. 
 
The instructions on economy measures and rationalizations of expenditure 
issued by Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure vide OM No. 
7(1)/E.Coord/2009 dated 7th September, 2009 are being implemented by the FCI 
so that the establishment expenses are lowered. 
  
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21,  Para No. 6.6) 
 
3.3 The Committee note that although the amount of bad debts written off has 
declined from Rs. 0.57 crore in 2007 -08 to Rs. 0.41 crore in 2008 -09, it is still 
very high. The Committee note from the information furnished to them that writing 
off of bad debt is resorted  to only when all efforts made to realize the amount 
have failed. The Committee feel that the huge money written off every year may 

be due to shortcomings in the norms fixed by the Department for the recovery of 
outstanding dues. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government 
should keep a close watch on the amount of bad debt written off and review the 
norms fixed for recovery of outstanding dues by CWC for full liquidation of 
outstanding dues at the earliest so as to enhance its profitability.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
3.4 Central Warehousing Corporation has assured that all out efforts will be 
made to reduce the amounts written off as bad debts to the bare minimum 
possible. The review of outstanding debts is done on a monthly basis by the  top 
management of the Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC) at the level of the 
Managing Director. A decision to write off the bad debts is taken only after 
thoroughly ensuring that the amount is not realizable and cannot be recovered 
from the concerned d ebtors through all possible efforts including legal steps 
wherever required. 
 
Presently, the outstanding dues are being regulated / realized as per the 
terms & conditions of the storage and guidelines for giving credit facility have 
also been issued to all  field units.  The recovery of outstanding dues is being 
undertaken by the Warehouse Managers/Regional Managers concerned and 
monitored by the Finance Division of CWC at the Corporate Office level and by 
the Audit Committee comprising of members of Board of Directors of CWC. 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 23,  Para No. 6.21) 
 
3.5 The Committee are deepl y concerned to note that there was continuous 
decline in the funds allocated and achievements made by CWC for augmentation 
of storage capacity during the last three years.  The funds allocated to CWC for 
augmentation of storage capacity for food grains und er internal and external 
budgetary resources (IEBR) Scheme were also not utilized fully. The Committee 
do not agree with the arguments of the Government that the funds could not be 
utilized for want of suitable location or due to land dispute. The Committe e are of 
the view that it clearly reflects slackness on the part of CWC which could not 
timely locate the suitable sites for construction of godowns. The Committee 
wonder how the CWC will utilize the entire fund of Rs. 360 crore allocated for the 
XI Five Y ear Plan period until and unless the above mentioned disputes are 
resolved. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the CWC should pursue 
the matter with concerned State Government / UT Administration vigorously for 
providing suitable land for constructio n of storage godowns and ensure that the 
funds do not remain unutilized for want of locations. Priority should be given to 

remote, hilly and backward areas so that the small and marginal farmers are not 
deprived of the benefits of the storage facilities of CWC. 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
3.6 During the year 2009 -10, CWC has planned to construct a capacity of 
0.91 lakh tonnes at an estimated cost of Rs.53.45 crore (RE 2009 -10).  CWC 
also plans to construct additional capacity of 2.34 lakh tones during 2010-11 with 
estimated expenditure of Rs.110.85 crore. Further, depending on business 
potential, additional capacity will be created during 2011 -12. Hence, CWC will be 
able to utilize the funds allocated during the XI five year plan period.    
 
As regards priority to backward areas etc., CWC proposes to construct 
additional capacity of 85,000 MT in the State of Orissa during 2010 -11 at 
Bolangir, Junagarh, Chaudwar and Bargarh, subject to allotment of land by the 
Govt. of Orissa.  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affai rs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Paragraph 6.22) 
 
3.7 The Committee had recommended as below:- 
           
„The Committee furt her note that CWC did not allocate any amount for 
construction of godowns for food storage in North -Eastern region during the 
financial year 2009-10. The Committee are not inclined to accept the plea of the 
Government that due to less occupancy of warehous es, the additional capacity 
could not be considered. The Committee are of the view that the North -Eastern 
State which already faces difficult geographical conditions should not be deprived 
of storage facilities. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend  that the 
Government / CWC   should earmark separate funds i.e. 10% of the total plan 
funds for construction of godowns in North -Eastern states and make sincere 
efforts for construction of godowns in the region at the earliest.‟ 
 
3.8 The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as under:- 
 
„CWC, at present, is operating 9 warehouses in North Eastern region with a total 
capacity of 1.01 lakh MT which had a occupancy of 79% during 2008 -09. In 
addition to above, Assam and Meghalaya State Warehousing 
Corporations(SWCs), having 50% equity contribution from CWC, are operating 
warehouses having capacity of 2.50 Lakh MT and 0.11 lakh MT respectively in 

Assam and Meghalaya. Both these SWCs also have plans to construct additional 
capacity of 0.03 Lakh MT each in Assam and Meghalaya.  
 
Being a commercial organization, it may be difficult for CWC to construct 
the godowns in North Eastern States in the absence of viable demand for 
storage capacity. Besides, allocation of land by the State Government concerned 
is also an important factor for creation of godowns in North Eastern Region. 
Under the Seven Year Guarantee Scheme, matter is discussed with FCI for 
creation of additional capacity in all states including NE Region. Until there is 
guaranteed business, if we construct the godowns in N.E. States and there is no 
business at a later stage, we may invite criticism from all including CAG.  If FCI 
give reservation and State Govt. provides land, CWC may construct the godown 
in the Region.‟ 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 25,  Para No. 6.29) 
 
3.9 The Committee find that while on the one hand the utilization of hired 
capacity of godowns by CWC has declined as compared to their owned capacity 
utilization, on the other, the rent paid by CWC on hiring the godowns has been 
increasing for the last three years. The reason for more expenditure on hiring the 
godowns during 2008 -09 are stated to be payment of enhanced rent to Mumbai 
Port Trust and other State agencies. The Committee regret that despite the fact 
that the entire capac ity is not put to use, the CWC have no plan to dehire the 
hired capacity. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the CWC 
should make vigorous efforts to use their owned capacity and dehire the hired 
capacity to improve occupancy utilization of godowns as well as profitability. 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
3.10 As far as possible, the Corporation strives to utilize its own capacity for 
storage. Only in cases where own capacity is in-adequate to meet the depositor‟s 
requirement at a specific pl ace or there is no owned capacity at that location, 
CWC opts for hired capacity.  Besides, hired capacity is being de -hired as soon 
as the stock is liquidated and if there is no further demand for the same. The 
hired units are also de -hired when it is foun d economically unviable to continue 
with the storage.  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.      
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13,  Para No. 4.69) 
 
4.1 The Committee note that the Government has initiated implementation 
of a pilot scheme on Smart Card based deli very of essential commodities 
under the TPDS announced in Union Budget 2008 -09.  Administrative 
approval for Rs. 142.29 crore to be incurred on this pilot scheme during 
2008-09 and 2009 -10 has been issued on 18.12.2008.  Work on 
implementation of the schem e is currently in progress in two districts of 
Haryana and work is being taken up in Chandigarh.  Based on the success 
and after studying its shortcomings, the Governments will improve it and take 
it up all over the country.  The Committee hope that Smart Card based 
delivery of essential commodities will go a long way in improving the 
efficiency of the PDS and therefore, recommend that the Department should 
take all essential steps to expedite the project for implementation all over the 
country. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
4.2 The scheme was reviewed by the National Scheme Steering 
Committee (NSSC) on 22.12.09. The first set of smart cards was scheduled 
to be issued by end of February, 2010 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20,  Para No. 5.31) 
 
4.3 The Committee further n ote that 20,000 MT of foodgrains amounting to 
Rs. 13 crore was damaged during storage in 2008 -09 due to poor maintenance. 
The Committee also note that as a result of regular/surprise checks, the quantum 
of damaged foodgrains declared have been reduced dras tically but it is still very 
high. The Committee are unhappy to note that a large quantity of foodgrains are 
spoiled every year due to floods and cyclonic weather, which in the opinion of the 

Committee is lack of farsightedness on the part of FCI. The Comm ittee, therefore 
take a serious view and recommend that the FCI should make advance planning 
for storing the foodgrains in a safe place. The Committee also recommend that a 
comprehensive plan for time bound disposal of the stocks accumulated be 
prepared by the Government in order to save the accumulated grain from further 
deterioration and prevent unnecessary expenses on handling and storage of 
damaged foodgrain which is not fit for human consumption. 
Reply of Government 
4.4 The FCI ensures regular checks/s uper checks of the stocks in order to 
avoid deterioration/down gradation   and subsequent damage to the stocks. 
 
 Immediate salvaging operations are taken up to avoid/reduce to the extent 
possible the stocks that get affected due to floods/cyclones. 
 
    FIFO principle is followed to avoid losses due to long storage.  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES TO 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.8,  Paragraph No. 4.49) 
 
5.1 The Committee find that at presen t the total number of BPL families is 
652.03 lakh as against 596.23 lakh families originally estimated when the 
TPDS was introduced in June, 1997.  For determination of the BPL families, 
the Government rely on the data of State -wise poverty estimates of th e 
Planning Commission for the year 1993 -94, which is more than one and half 
decade old.  The Committee feel that while identifying the BPL families, the 
thrust should be to include the really poor and vulnerable sections of the 
society such as landless agr icultural labourers, marginal farmers, rural 
artisans/ craftsmen like potters, tapers, weavers, blacksmith, carpenters, etc. 
in the rural areas and slum dwellers and persons earning their livelihood on 
daily basis in the informal sectors like porters, rick shaw-pullers, cart-pullers, 
fruit and flower sellers on the pavement, etc. in urban areas.  The Committee 
are given to understand that a Committee headed by Mr. N.C. Saxena, 
Commissioner for the Supreme Court had been set up by the Ministry of 
Rural Development to identify the poor in rural areas.  The said report is being 
finalized by the Department of Rural Development which will also be looked at 
by the empowered Group of Ministers.  The Committee desire that the 
recommendations of the Saxena Committee r eport be finalized soon.  The 
Committee recommend that the Department should evolve a common 
methodology across the country for identification of the poor so that the 
chances for erroneous inclusion or exclusion is checked.  The Committee 
also recommend th at the base year for identification of the poor should be 
revised and the latest information available on the census report of the 
Registrar General of India may be made the basis for identification of the poor 
in the country.    
 
Action Taken by the Government: 
  
5.2 Ministry of Rural Development has informed that the report of the 
Expert Group submitted in August, 2009 has been circulated among the 
States/UTs and the concerned Central Ministries for their comments.  The 
Report of the Expert Group has also  been posted on the Ministry of Rural 
Development website www.rural.nic.in.  The methodology for the next BPL 

Census would be finalised after taking into consideration the 
comments/suggestions received. 
 
 The Ministry of Rural Development would issue guidelines to carry out 
next BPL Census in Rural Areas across the country which would cover all the 
households of Rural Areas at the time of survey.  
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department o f 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
Recommendation (Serial No.12,  Paragraph No. 4.65) 
 
 
5.3 The Committee are happy to note that a new scheme namely, 
“Computerization of TPDS operations” has been taken up  from 2007 -08 to 
provide for computerization of back end operations essentially.  Under the 
scheme, Rs. 45 crore has been allocated in BE 2009 -10 and the Planning 
Commission has approved an allocation of Rs. 376 crore for this scheme 
under the 11th Five Year Plan.  The Committee further note that the scheme is 
being implemented on Pilot basis in 4 States/UTs, including Assam.  The 
Committee are of the view that computerization of TPDS operations will 
facilitate and improve the efficient functioning of the T PDS operations, which 
will in turn benefit the entire beneficiary families across the country.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the work of Computerisation of TPDS 
operations should be accorded priority and necessary steps be taken to 
implement the scheme not only on Pilot basis in 4 States/UTs but on regular 
basis all over the country.  
 
 
Action Taken by the Government: 
 
5.4 It has been envisaged to implement the scheme of Computerization of 
TPDS operations in all the State/UTs. It was decided to implement this 
scheme in three phases. In the first phase, it was to be implemented in four 
States on pilot basis and after reviewing the progress of its implementation in 
these four States, the scheme will be implemented in 15 other State/UTs in 
the second phase. Finally it will be implemented in 16 remaining State/UTs in 
the third phase, thus covering the entire length & breadth of the country. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 

 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.14,  Paragraph No. 4.75) 
 
 
5.5 The Committee note that Village Grain Bank Scheme (VGBs), which is a 
centrally sponsored scheme, was started during the year 1996 -97 by the Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs in 11 States.  The main objective of the scheme is to provide 
safeguard against starvation during the period of natural calamity and during lean 
season.  The VGB Scheme has been implemented by the Department of Food 
and Public Distribu tion since the year 2005 -06.  So far, funds have been 
sanctioned for establishing 16478 VGBs in 20 States/UTs.  The Committee 
further note that the performance of the VGB Scheme has been evaluated into 
two States viz. Orissa and Chhattisgarh by World Food Programme.  An 
independent agency is evaluating the performance of the scheme in 16 States 
which is expected to give its report within six months.  From the report of the 
World Food Programme, the Committee find that the absolute proportion of 
households that faced food shortage has been reduced from 87% to 47%, since 
the introduction of the scheme.  The households that faced food shortage have 
come down by 60% in Orissa and by 10% in Chhattisgarh.  The Committee are, 
therefore, convinced that the VGB schem e is very important to provide food 
security to the poorest of the poor sections of the country‟s population.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department of Food and 
Public Distribution should evolve and put in place an effective syst em of 
monitoring and control over the performance of the VGB Scheme on top priority.  
The Committee desire that action taken by the Government in this regard be 
intimated to them. 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government: 
 
5.6 The Village Grain Bank Scheme is bein g evaluated through an 
independent agency during the current year 2009 -10.  The agency is evaluating 
the performance of the scheme in 16 States and has given its report on 
24.02.2010. The report is being examined.  On the receipt of the 
recommendations of the evaluation report, the Department would review the 
implementation of the VGB Scheme and also consider various aspects for 
improving its implementation.  The recommendation of the Committee to evolve 
and put in place an effective system of monitoring an d control over the 

performance of the VGB Scheme on  priority basis will also be considered in that 
regard. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food & Public Distribution OM. No.G.20017/5/2009-AC dated the 31th March, 
2010.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       NEW DELHI;                  VILAS MUTTEMWAR 
         9th AUGUST, 2010                    Chairman, 
      18 Sravana, 1932 (Saka)                     Standing Committee on Food, 
              Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
 
 
 
   

MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANIDING COMMITTEE  
       ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2006-  
        2007) HELD ON FRIDAY, 17th NOVEMBER, 2006. 
 
The Committee sat from 1530 hours to 1600 hours in Committee 
Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
Present 
  
Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav     -      Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Shri W.Wangyuh Konyak 
3. Shri  Munshi Ram 
4.    Adv. P. Satheedevi 
5.    Smt. V. Radhika Selvi 
6.    Shri Chandra Bhan Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
7.      Shri  T.S. Bajwa 
8.      Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik 
9.      Shri Kanjibhai Patel 
10.      Shri Rajniti Prasad 
11.     Shri Matilal Sarkar 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri    P.K.Bhandari   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri    R.S. Kambo                         -          Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri     B.S. Dahiya    -          Under Secretary 
4.        Shri    Jagdish Prasad                   -          Assistant Director 
 
 
Cont/-….. 
 
 
 

-2- 
 
2.  At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting 
of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration Draft Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 13 th Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer 
Affairs and Public Distribution on “ Demands for Grants (200 6-07)” pertaining to 
the Department of Consumer Affairs and  adopted the same with some minor 
modifications/ amendments. 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Draft Report in the 
light of consequential changes and present the same to Par liament on their 
behalf in the ensuing Winter Session of Parliament. 
4. During deliberations, the Members desired that the Committee may visit 
some of the places to have in depth study of the subjects selected by the 
Committee for detailed examination afte r the Winter Session of Parliament. After 
some discussion , the Committee decided to undertake an on -the-spot study visit 
to Goa, Cochin, Lakshadeep and Mumbai from 23rd to 30th December, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

APPENDIX II 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations   28 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have  
   been accepted by the Government : 
 
Recommendation Nos.1,2,3,4,5,6,7,9,10,11,15,17,18,  
19, 22, 26, 27, 28. 
 
 Total              18 
 Percentage                   64.29% 
(iii) Recommendations/observations w hich the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government 
 
Recommendation  Nos. 16, 21, 23, 24, 25 
      
 Total              5   
    
Percentage                 17.86% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of wh ich replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 13 and 20 
 
Total              2  
Percentage                    7.14% 
 
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect of which the replies  of 
the Government are still awaited 
 
  Recommendation No. 8, 12 and 14 
Total               3 
Percentage                              10.71%  
 