 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
              AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2013-2014) 
 
 
      FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the observations/  
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Eighth Report of   the Committee 
(2012-13) on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) pertaining to the  Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Departme nt of Food and 
Public Distribution)} 
 
 
THIRTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
           December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
32 


THIRTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2013-2014) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
{Action Taken by    the   Government    on    the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the T wenty-Eighth Report of   the Committee 
(2012-13) on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) pertaining to the  Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution)} 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.12.2013 
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 12.12.2013 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
 


 
CONTENTS 
 
            
Composition of the Committee …………………………………………           
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………...           
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………………             
 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government……………………………   
  
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
 the Government‟s replies………………………………...  
 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee ………………………………………..   
 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are  
still awaited………………………………………………   
   
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the  3rd sitting of the Committee held on    
09. 12.2013…………………………………………… 
 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Twenty-Eighth Report  
of the Committee (2012-13) ………………………………   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2013-14) 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
4. Shri Kantilal Bhuria 
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary  
6. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
7. Shri Sanjay Dhotre  
8. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
9. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
10. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav  
11. Shri Sohan Potai 
12. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar  
13. Shri C. Rajendran 
14. Shri Purnmasi Ram  
15. Shri Chandulal Sahu (Chandu Bhaiya) 
16. Shri Adhi Sankar 
17. Shri Suresh K. Shetkar 
18. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
19. Shri Laxman Tudu 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
23. Shri Lalhming Liana 
24. Smt. Rajani Patil 
25. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
26. Ms. Rekha 
27. Dr. N.Janardhana Reddy 
28. Dr. T.N. Seema 
29. Shri Birender Singh 
30. Shri Veer Singh 
31. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri P. K. Misra   -  Additional Secretary 
 2. Smt. Veena Sharma  - Director 
 3. Shri Khakhai Zou   - Under Secretary 
 4. Smt. Darshana G. Khanduja - Sr. Exec. Asstt. 

INTRODUCTION 
  
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution (201 3-14) having been authorized by the Committee to 
submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty-Second Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Obse rvations/Recommendations contained in 
the Twenty-Eighth Report of the Committee (201 2-13) on Demands for Grants 
(2013-14) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
 
2.  The Twenty-Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 30th April, 2013 . The Government have furnished their replies 
indicating Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Report on   
30th July, 2013. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopt ed by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 9th December, 2013. 
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.  
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Ob servations/Comments of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the text of the Report. 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  NEW DELHI;                      VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
 9 December, 2013                     Chairman, 
18 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution deals with the Action Taken by the Government on                      
the Obs ervations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Eighth Report                        
of the Committee (201 2-13), (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (201 3-14) 
pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
 
1.2 The Twe nty-Eighth Report was presented to Lok S abha and laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 30.04.2013. It contained 3 4 observations/ 
recommendations. Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 33 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report have been received and 
these have been categorized as follows:- 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government : 
 
 Serial Nos.:- 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 
25, 26, 27, 29, 30, 31, 33 and 34.     
    
Paragraph Nos: - 2.8, 3.12, 3.19, 3.28, 3.35,3.36, 3.44, 3.50, 
3.67, 4.18, 4.23, 4.24, 4.25, 4.28, 5.9, 5.18, 5.19, 
5.20, 6.5, 6.11, 6.12, 6.15, 6.23 and 7.8   
          (Chapter – II, Total - 24) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government 
Serial Nos. 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 22, 28 and 32  
(Paragraph Nos. – 3.54, 3.59, 3.68, 4.6, 4.10, 4.14, 5.5, 6 .7, 
        and 6.21) 
           (Chapter – III, Total - 9)

(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
          of the Government have not been accepted by the 
         Committee and which require reiteration: 
Serial No. 2   
(Paragraph No. – 3.6)  
            (Chapter – IV, Total -1)   
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
interim replies of the Government have been received. 
   Serial No.:- Nil 
   (Paragraph No. – Nil) 
    (Chapter – V, Total - 0) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the replies in respect of the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee strongly emphasize that utmost importance should 
be given to the implementation of Observations/Recommendations 
accepted by the Government. In case where it is not possible for the 
Government to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any 
reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee in time with 
reasons for non-implementation. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations. 
 

A. Need to take concrete steps to convince remaining States/UTs to 
adopt Decentralized Procurement (DCP) Scheme 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.2, Para No. 3.6) 
 
1.6 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows: - 
 
   The Committee regret to note that after 16 years of launching the 
scheme and despite of their repeated recommendations for taking concrete 
steps to try and convince the States/UTs to adopt the Decentralized 
Procurement Scheme (DCP), the scheme has so far been adopted by only 
9 States/UTs for Rice and 5 States for Wheat respectively. Government of 
Uttar Pradesh had been procuring wheat under the DCP Scheme upt o 
KMS 2008-09 but have discontinued the system. Governments of Andhra 
Pradesh and Rajasthan have expressed their willingness to adopt the DCP 
mode from KMS 2012-13 and RMS 2013-14 respectively. While noting that 
procurement of foodgrains is more effective under the Decentralized 
Procurement (DCP) Scheme since non-decentralized procurement involves 
one additional handling transaction of FCI taking over the stock of 
foodgrains and releasing them to the State Governments, the Committee 
are fully convinced that  the remaining States/UTs should also adopt the 
DCP Scheme at the earliest possible. It has become all the more essential 
for the States/UTs to adopt the DCP Scheme in view of the anticipated 
implementation of the National Food Security Bill. The Committee , 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution should make earnest efforts to ascertain the problems being 
faced by the States/UTs and provide maximum assistance possible to all 
the States/UTs to enable them to adopt the DCP Scheme. The Department 
should expedite discussion not only with the Government of Rajasthan who 
expressed willingness to adopt the scheme, but also make sincere efforts 
to encourage the Government of Uttar Pradesh who discontinued DCP 
Scheme since KM S 2008 -09 and all other States/UTs so as to persuade 
them to adopt the scheme. 
 
 
1.7 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:-  
 
  The Government of India makes active effort to pursue State 
Governments to adopt the Decentralized System o f Procurement (DCP) 
Scheme. With the efforts made in this regard, Government of Andhra 
Pradesh has adopted the Decentralized Procurement (DCP) Scheme of 
procurement from KMS 2012 -13 onwards. Government of Rajasthan has 
adopted the DCP mode of procurement w.e.f. RMS 2013-14, initially in the 
Alwar district of the State. State Government has been requested to adopt 
the DCP mode in the entire State from 2014 -15 onwards. The decision 
regarding adoption of DCP system lies with the State Government. The 
determining factors are infrastructure and resources available with the 
respective State Governments including manpower, storage and 
necessary logistics required for procurement and accordingly, State 

Government‟s readiness to undertake DCP procurement. Citing 
infrastructural problems, Governments of Delhi, Haryana and Sikkim have 
conveyed their inability to adopt the DCP system of procurement. Among 
the infrastructure required for procurement operations, storage facilities for 
foodgrains is a major factor. For this  purpose the Government has 
formulated the Private Entrepreneur Guarantee (PEG) scheme for 
construction covered storage godowns through private entrepreneurs, 
CWC and State Warehousing Corporation (SWC). Under the PEG 
Scheme, FCI gives guarantee for the st orage charges to the private 
investors for ten years. A capacity of 197 (as on 31.03.2013) lakh tonnes 
has been approved for construction of godowns in 19 States under PEG 
Scheme. 
 
  The Government of Uttar Pradesh had been procuring rice under 
the DCP Sch eme upto KMS 2008 -09, but have discontinued the system 
after this period, on the stated grounds of pending procurement incidentals 
and delay in receipt of food subsidy bills. The delay, in certain cases in 
this regard, was on account of delay on the part o f the State Government 
in submitting their claims.   
 

 
 
1.8 In their Original Report, the Committee had regretted  to note that even 
after 16 years of launching the Decentralized Procurement Scheme (DCP) and  
despite repeated recommendation over the years, the Department ha d failed to 
convince all the States/UTs to adopt the Decentralized Procurement Scheme 
(DCP) which ha d been adopted by only 9 States/UTs for rice and 5 States for 
wheat, respectively. The Committee had, therefore,  recommended inter-alia, th e 
Department to make earnest efforts to ascertain the problems being faced by the 
States/UTs and provide maximum assistance possible to all the States/UTs to 
enable them to adopt the DCP Scheme. The Government, in their Action Taken 
Reply have stated that the Government of India makes active efforts to persuade 
the State Governments to adopt the DCP Scheme and as a result thereof,  the 
Government of Andhra Pradesh has adopted the DCP Scheme of Procurement 
from KMS 2012 -13 onwards and Government of Rajasthan has adopted the DCP 
mode of procurement w.e.f. RMS 2013-14, initially in the Alwar district of the State. 
The State Government has been requested to adopt the DCP mode in the entire 
State from 2014-15 onwards. The Department have further stated that the decision 
regarding adoption of DCP system lies with the State Government and  the 
determining factors are infrastructure and resources available with the respective 
State Governments including manpower, storage and necessary logistics required 
for procurement . Some of the States like Delhi, Haryana and Sikkim have cited 
infrastructural problems for their inability to adopt the DCP System of 
Procurement. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Government 
as the efforts made to ascertain the proble ms being faced by the States/UTs and 
to provide maximum assistance possible have not been indicated.  The 
Government ha ve apparently focused upon the storage facilities  only and have 
not paid adequate attention towards  other important aspects like manpower  and 

logistics required for procurement. Now that the National Food Security Bill has 
been passed by the Parliament, t he Committee would like to emphasize the need 
to adopt the DCP Scheme by all the remaining States/UTs at the earliest so that 
the implementation of the F ood Security Act is facilitated. While reiterating their 
recommendation, the Committee desire the Department to take concrete steps to 
convince all  the remaining States/UTs to adopt DCP Scheme and extend all 
possible assistance to them for creation of necessary infrastructure for adoption 
of DCP Scheme.   
 

B. Need to put a check on leakages/diversion of PDS Commodities 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 3.35) 
 
1.9 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
"The Committee note that the result of an independent study 
conducted by a group of scholars in 9 States have shown impressive 
revival of PDS across the country as it suggests that the days when upto 
half of the PDS foodgrain was diverted to open market a re gone. The 
Committee are, however, constrained to say that the evaluation study 
conducted by IIPA in 14 States have shown that the leakage as 
percentage of offtake has been as high as 49.49% in Nagaland, 27.00% in 
Manipur and 26.84% in West Bengal. The N CAER Report in 12 
States/UTs have also indicated that the level of leakages and diversion of 
foodgrains was as high as 100% wheat for APL in the States of Assam 
and Mizoram and in case of rice, it was 83.28% and 81.12%, respectively 
in these two States. Th e Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution, FCI and the States/UT 
Governments should make earnest efforts to identify the loopholes in the 
PDS and curb leakage/diversion of foodgrains to the extent possible so as 
to ensure that the target beneficiaries do receive right quantity and quality 
of foodgrains at the right price regularly." 
 
 
1.10 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
  
 "In order to curb leakages and diversion of foodgrains, a N ine Point 
Action Plan was evolved in 2006 in consultation with the State/UT 
Governments which inter-alia includes continuous review of BPL/AAY lists 
and to eliminate bogus/ineligible ration cards along with strict action to be 
taken against the guilty to e nsure leakage free distribution of foodgrains. 
Instructions were also issued to all State/UT Governments to carry out an 
intensive campaign from October, 2009 to December, 2009 to review the 
existing lists of BPL/AAY families and eliminate ineligible/bogus  ration 
cards. As a result thereof, 28 State/UT Governments have reported by 
31.03.2013, deletion of 364.01 lakh bogus/ineligible ration cards.  
 
 With a view to ensure that the beneficiaries under TPDS and other 
welfare schemes do receive right quality of  foodgrains, this department 
has issued following instructions from time to time to Food Secretaries of 
all State Governments/Union Territory Administrations and FCI to ensure 
supply of good quality foodgrains under the TPDS and other welfare 
schemes:-  

 
(i) Only good quality foodgrains free from insect infestation and conforming to 
Food Safety Standards are to be issued under TPDS and other Welfare 
Schemes. 
 
(ii) Ample opportunities are to be provided to the officials of the State 
Government/UTs Administration to i nspect the stocks prior to lifting from 
FCI godowns. States/UTs may ensure that officers not below the rank of 
Inspector are deputed for inspection of the foodgrains before their lifting 
from FCI. 
 
(iii) The samples from the stocks to be issued to States/UTs und er TPDS and 
other Welfare Schemes are to be drawn jointly and sealed by the officers of 
the State Governments and FCI for displaying them at the counter of Fair 
Price Shops for the benefit of consumers. A duplicate sealed sample is to 
be kept with concerne d FCI depots/godowns for any future reference. In 
case the State agencies are taking delivery from FCI and thereafter 
delivering the same to the FPS dealers, they should also follow the same 
procedure as is being followed by FCI for issuing the jointly sealed samples.  
 
(iv) Type sealed samples should be displayed by the FPS dealers in their 
shops, so that the ration card holder/consumers may check the quality of 
foodgrain supplied to them. FPS dealers should also maintain a complaint 
register to enable the consumers to lodge their complaints/opinions, in case 
the quality of foodgrains issued is not of proper quality standards. 
 
(v) It is the responsibility of the concerned State Government/UT 
Administrations to ensure that during transportation and storage at differ ent 
stages in the distribution chain, the foodgrains retain the required quality 
specifications. For this purpose, all required measures are to be taken for 
scientific storage of foodgrains so that there is no deterioration in their 
quality at any stage ti ll they are delivered to the ration card 
holders/consumers. 
 
(vi) An officer not below the rank of Inspector is to be deputed from State 
Government to take the delivery of foodgrains stocks from FCI godowns.  
 
(vii) Where the decentralized procurement is in operation , State Government 
should follow the same procedure of inspection of foodgrains stocks and 
joint sealed sampling to ensure that quality of foodgrains issued under 
TPDS and other welfare schemes meet the desired standards under the 
Food Safety Standards Act. 
 
Department of Food & Public Distribution have also launched a plan 
scheme under 12 th Five Year Plan for end -to-end computerisation of TPDS 

operations in all States/UTs. The schemes provides for, inter -alia, 
computerisation of Supply -Chain, Digitization of Ration Card database, SMS/E -
mail alerts on dispatch and delivery of foodgrains, setting -up of Transparency 
Portal, Grievance redressal mechanism, FPS automation, etc. Digitization  of 
PDS data, including ration cards data, is a primary steps to be taken  by 
States/UTs for computerisation of PDS so as to ensure correct identification of 
beneficiaries, distribution of PDS commodities to deserving beneficiaries, 
elimination of bogus/duplicate ration cards etc., thereby putting a check on 
leakages/diversion of PDS commodities. 
 
Further, in view of recommendation of Standing Committee, instructions to 
all stake holders are being issued in this regard." 
 
 

  
1.11  In the context of an independent study undertaken by a group of scholars 
in 9 States showing impressive revival of PDS across the country,  the Committee 
had observed that the results of the Evaluation Study undertaken by the Indian 
Institute of Public Administration (IIPA) and the National Council for Applied 
Economic Research (NCAER) report on the level of leakages and diversion of PDS 
commodities was far from satisfactory  in several States . T he Committee , 
therefore, had recommended in their Original Report that the Department of Food 
and Public Distribution, FCI and the States/UT Governments should ma ke earnest 
efforts to identify the loopholes in the PDS and curb leakage/diversion of 
foodgrains to the extent possible so as to ensure that the target beneficiaries do 
receive the right quantity and quality of foodgrains at the right price regularly. In 
their Action Taken Reply, the Department have, inter-alia, stated that under a Nine-
Point Action Plan  evolved in 2006 , instructions were issued to all State/UT 
Governments to carry out an intensive campaign from October, 2009 to December, 
2009 to review the  existing lists of BPL/AAY families and eliminate 
ineligible/bogus ration cards. As a result thereof, 28 State/UT Governments have 
reported deletion of 364.01 lakh bogus/ineligible ration cards  by 31st March, 2013. 
The Department have further stated that t o ensure that the beneficiaries under 
TPDS and other welfare schemes do receive right quality of foodgrains, they have 
issued instructions from time to time to Food Secretaries of all State 
Governments/UT Administrations and FCI. It is also stated that the Department 
have launched plan scheme under  the 12th Five Year Plan for end -to-end 
computerization of TPDS operations in all States/UTs. While appreciating the 
initiatives undertaken by the Government, the Committee feel that the Department 
should regularl y advise/remind the remaining States/UTs who have not yet 
implemented the scheme , to implement the provisions of the Nine  Point Action 

Plan at the earliest. The Committee , therefore, desire that the Department should 
follow up the matter with the remaining  States/UTs and also closely monitor and 
expedite the implementation of the project on End -to-End Computerization of 
TPDS operations in all States/UTs so as to ensure that leakages/diversion of PDS 
commodities are kept in check to the extent possible.  

C. Need to i nstall Global Positioning System (GPS) in all vehicles 
carrying PDS foodgrains in all States/UTs on top priority 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.  7, Para No. 3.36) 
 
1.12 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
 "The Committee also note that the Government has given financial 
assistance in 2007 -08 to the State Governments of Tamil Nadu and 
Chattisgarh for installation of Global Positioning System (GPS) on the 
vehicles carrying TPDS commodities in order to curb leakages and 
diversion of foodgrains. The installation of GPS devices on vehicles 
carrying PDS foodgrains in the States of Tamil Nadu and Chhattisgarh 
have shown positive results. Government of Tamil Nadu have reported 
that the GPS devices not only help in ensuring  that the quantities of 
foodgrains allotted reached the intended godowns of FCI in time without 
any diversion, but also create moral fear among those involved in 
transportation of PDS items and enable the concerned officials and 
vigilance agencies to track  the movement of vehicles. The Government of 
Chhattisgarh have also reported that the vehicles reached their 
destination/intended places and no irregularities were noticed. The 
Committee are, therefore, of the view that installation of GPS devices on 
vehicles carrying PDS items in all States/UTs of the country would go a 
long way in checking the problem of leakage/diversion of foodgrains. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the proposals received 
from the States/UTs for sanctioning of funds un der the scheme should be 
processed on priority and released expeditiously. The Department should 
also persuade all the States/UTs to submit their proposals for sanction of 
funds under the scheme." 
 
  
1.13 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
 " In view of the feedback received from State Governments of Tamil 
Nadu and Chhattisgarh, it was decided to extend this scheme in all the 
States/UTs from the financial year 2011 -12. In the XIIth Five Year Plan 
too, this scheme had been proposed to be continued. 

  
  States/UTs are regularly requested to send their proposals under 
the scheme.  However, despite constant follow up with States, the 
Department received proposals only from State of Rajasthan and 
Puducherry UT in 2011 -12. Since the p roposals were incomplete, they 
were requested to send revised proposals, which have not been received 
from them. During the financial year 2012 -13 also, only two proposals 
from State Governments of Manipur and J&K were received.  Keeping in 
view the feedba ck from States that had implemented the scheme, lack of 
suitable response from States and plan scheme on End–to–end 
Computerization of TPDS operations, the functioning of this scheme is 
being reviewed by the Department." 
 
 
 

 
1.14 While noting that the ins tallation of Global Positional System (GPS) 
on the vehicle s carrying TPDS commodities ha d shown positive results in 
Tamil Nadu and Chhattisgarh in curbing leakages and diversion of 
foodgrains, th e Committee  in their original report  had recommended that 
the proposals received from the States/UTs for sanctioning of funds under 
the scheme should be processed on prior ity and released expeditiously and 
the Department should  also persuade all the States/UTs to submit their 
proposals for sanction of funds under th e scheme. The Department, in their 
Action Taken Reply, have stated that in view of the feedback received from 
State Government of Tamil Nadu and Chhattisgarh, it was decided to extend 
this scheme in all the States/UTs from the financial year 2011 -12. In the 12th 
Five Year Plan too, this scheme had been proposed to be continued. They 
have further stated that  keeping in view the  feedback from States that had 
implemented the scheme, lack of response from the remaining States and 
plan scheme on end-to-end compu terization of TPDS operation s, the 
functioning of this scheme is being reviewed by the Department . The 
Committee feel that for the successful implementation of the National Food 
Security Bill as well as other welfare schemes of the Government, curbing 
the menace of leakages and diversion of TPDS foodgrains to the extent 
possible is very essential. The Committee, therefore, strongly desire that the 
Department should take up the issue regarding review of the functioning of 
the scheme on priority and thereafte r, to take vigorous/effective st eps to 
convince the States/UTs to implement reviewed scheme at the earliest.  
 

D. Need for expeditious i mplementation of scheme on End-to-End 
 Computerization of TPDS 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.  8, Para No. 3.44) 
 
1.15 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
 "The Committee note that pursuant to the Hon'ble Supreme Court 
instructions, all States/UTs are required to undertake end -to-end 
computerization of TPDS in a time bound manner for which the 
Government of India shall provide necessary infrastructure and financial 
support. The Government has accordingly prepared an estimated outlay of 
Rs. 4273.47 crore for the XII Five Year Plan on 50:50 cost sharing with 
States/UTs except for North -eastern States, where the sharing will be 
90:10 basis. An amount of Rs. 200 crore has been provided for BE 2013 -
14 under the scheme of 'End -to-end Computerization of TPDS operations' 
in all States/UTs. The Smart Card Scheme launched in December 2008 
for Chandigar h UT and Haryana have now been subsumed in the Plan 
Scheme on End -to-End Computerization of TPDS operations to be 
implemented in all States/UTs under the XII Five Year Plan (2012 -17). 
The Committee are surprised to note that out of the 24 States/UTs that 
have submitted their proposals for financial assistance under the scheme 
during the year 2012 -13, only proposals from 7 States are found to be 
complete in all respects and funds released to them. The remaining 
proposals are under examination in the Departme nt. The Committee are 
of the firm opinion that End -to-end Computerization of PDS operations will 
solve several problems that are being associated with the functioning of 
PDS in the country. The Committee are also not happy with the status of 
computerization of TPDS operations in States/UTs. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly urge the Department to expedite the examination of the 
remaining proposals already received by them for financial assistance 
from the States/UTs under the scheme and release the funds 
expeditiously. The Department should also pursue with the remaining 
States/UTs to submit their proposals for financial assistance and make all 
efforts to complete computerization of PDS operations in all the 
States/UTs in anticipation of the ensuing enactme nt of the Na tional Food 
Security Bill, 2011." 
1.16 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
 "After approval of Component -I of the plan scheme on „End -to-End 
Computerization of TPDS Operations‟ by the Cabinet, Administrative 
approval for the same was issued on 10.12.2012, requesting States/UTs to 
send their proposals under the scheme. So far, proposals for financial 

assistance from 26 States/UTs have been received, out of which Central 
assistance has been released by this Department to 9 States. Proposal of 
Meghalaya which is complete in all respect is under process. Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands Administration has later on intimated that they do not 
require funds from the Centre. Similarly, no fund is to be released to Sikkim 
as the Stat e Government has received the funds from NE Council for 
implementation of the scheme. Proposals of remaining 14 States/UTs 
received have also been assessed. However, funds to these States/UTs 
could not be released as they have not yet fulfilled the pre -requisites 
prescribed for the scheme, such as confirmation regarding setting up of 
State Apex Committee (SAC)/State Project e -Mission Team (SPeMT), 
signing of MoU, etc. Matter is being repeatedly pursued with them.  
 
             Proposals for financial assis tance are yet to be received from 9 
States/UTs. Several reminders have been sent by the Department at 
various levels to these States/UTs for expediting their financial proposals.  
  
            The Department is regularly reviewing the progress of the 
implementation of the scheme through various meetings, conferences, etc. 
with States/UTs and NIC. In May 2013, a regional workshop -cum-
conference was organized in Guwahati (Assam) for North -Eastern States to 
assess the progress, challenges faced and help in ad dressing their issues. 
Similar conferences will be held for review of progress in other States/UTs." 
 
 
 

 
1.17 The Committee ha d noted in their Original Report that the Smart 
Card Scheme launched in December, 2008 had been subsumed in the Plan 
Scheme on En d-to-End Computerization of TPDS operations to be 
implemented in all States/UTs under the 12th Five Year Plan (2012 -17) and 
that out of 24 States/UTs  that ha d submitted their proposals for financial 
assistance under the scheme , proposals of only 7 States were found 
complete and fund s released to them. The Committee had, therefore, not 
only urged the Department to expeditiously examine  the proposals already 
received by them from the States/UTs under the scheme for financial 
assistance and release the funds but also pursue with the remaining 
States/UTs to submit their proposals for financial assistance and make all 
efforts to complete Computerization of PDS operations in all the States/UTs 
in anticipation of the ensuing enactment of the  National Food Security Bill, 
2011. In their Action Taken Reply, the Department have stated that  after 
approval of Component – I of the plan scheme on 'End -to-End 
Computerization of TPDS Operations' by the Cabinet, Administrative 
approval for the same was issued on 10 th December, 2012, requesting the 
States/UTs to send their proposals under the scheme. S o far, proposal for 
financial assistance from  26 States/UTs have been received out of which  
Central assistance ha s been released by this Department to 9 States. The 
Department have further stated that funds in respect of 14 States could not 
be released as  they have not yet fulfilled the pre -requisite prescribed for 
the scheme such as confirmation regarding setting up of State Apex 
Committee (SAC)/State Project e -Mission Team (SPeMT) , signing of MoU, 

etc. The proposals for financial assistance are yet to be received from 9 
States/UTs. The Committee desire that the Department should follow up 
with the States/UTs so as to help and persuade them to fulfill  all necessary 
pre-requisites prescribed for the scheme and also remind the remaining 9 
States/UTs to expeditiously send their proposals for financial assistance 
under the scheme. The Committee also feel that the procedure for financial 
assistance be simplified, if necessary, so as to en able the States/UTs to 
comply with all the necessary formalities for availing the scheme by 
submitting their proposals complete in all respects and supported by the 
requisite details/documents. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the action taken in the matter.  

 
E. Need for implementation of modified Village Grain Bank Scheme 
  
Recommendation (Serial No.  9, Para No. 3.50) 
 
 
1.18 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
  "The Committee note that the main objective o f the Village Grain 
Bank Scheme is to provide safeguard against starvation during the period 
of natural calamity or during lean season when the marginalized food 
insecure households  do not have sufficient resources to purchase rations.  
The Schemes is cur rently being implemented by 17 out of 35 States/UTs. 
Out of 21,842 Village Grain Banks sanctioned by the Department, the 
States have set up 17,266 Village Grain Banks till date. While the State 
Governments have entrusted the management of Village Grain Ban ks to 
Panchayats, SHG, NGOs, etc. the Village Grains Banks established in the 
state of Uttarakhand is being managed by the World Food Programme 
(WFP).  The Committee also observe that the scheme has helped the 
beneficiaries reduce their dependence on high interest loans during lean 
season and the extent of immigration during lean season has also come 
down significantly.  It is also stated that majority of the States are 
interested in continuation of the scheme during the Twelfth Five Year Plan 
period and 5 States have given suggestions for modification of the 
scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution should make sincere efforts to popularize the 
scheme by engaging the State/UT Governments in a more proact ive and 
regular manner while giving due consideration to the suggestions made by 
the States/UTs for modification of the scheme."   
 
 
1.19 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
  "Approval of Standing Finance Committee (SFC) has b een 
obtained for its implementation during the 12 th Plan period.  Based on 
SFC approval, the scheme has been made more attractive.  The 
revised guidelines of VGB Scheme are under process.  
 
  Under the revised VGB Scheme the cash component is to be 
increased from Rs. 12,200/-  to Rs. 19,350/-.  
 
  After the revised VGB Scheme is approved, States/UTs will be 
requested to send their proposals for setting up of Village Grains 
Banks and also to send the pending utilization Certificates for the past 
allocation."  

 
1.20 The Committee in their Original Report had observed that the Village 
Grain Bank (VGB) Scheme  had helped the beneficiaries reduce their 
dependence on high interest loans during lean season and the extent of 
immigration during lean season ha d also co me down significantly. 
However, the scheme was being implemented by only 17 States/UTs and 
out of 21,482 Village Grain Banks sanctioned by the Department, the 
States/UTs ha d set up only 17,266 VGBs. The Committee  had, therefore, 
recommended that the Department of Food and Public Distribution should 
make sincere efforts to popularize the scheme by engaging the State/UT 
Governments in a more proactive and regular manner while giving due 
consideration to the suggestions made by the States/UTs for modification 
of the scheme.  The Department , in their Action Taken Reply , have stated 
that approval of Standing Finance Committee (SFC) has been obtained for 
implementation of Village Grain Bank Scheme during the 12th Plan Period. 
Based on Standing Finance Committee (SF C) approval, the scheme has 
been made more attractive. The revised guidelines of Village Grain Bank 
Scheme are under process. Under the revised Village Grain Bank scheme, 
the cash component is to be increased from Rs. 12,200/ - to Rs. 19,250/ -. 
While a ppreciating the action taken by the Government, t he Committee 
desire that the revised guidelines of the Village Grain Bank Scheme be 
processed on priority and issued at the earliest so that the scheme is 
implemented by the remaining States/UTs for the benefit o f the intended 
beneficiaries.  

 
F. Need to minimize Storage and Transit losses.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.  18, Para No. 4.23) 
 
1.21 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
 "The Committee note that despite  the various initiatives taken by the 
Ministry to reduce the storage and transit losses, the losses have been 
increasing marginally both in terms of percentage and values over the last  3 
years.  While the storage loss of wheat and rice increased from 0.21% in the 
year 2010-11 to 0.27% in the year 2012 -13 (upto February, 2013), the transit 
loss increased from 0.47% to 0.52% during the same period.  However, in terms 
of values, storage loss of Rs.405.36 crore in 2011 -12, came down to  Rs.343.53 
crore in 2012 -13 (upto Feb ruary, 2013).  In the same way transit losses have 
reduced from Rs. 333.01 crore in 2011 -12 to 301.89 crore in 2012 -13.  The 
Committee, however, feel that these losses are still too high and need to be 
minimized further. The Committee, therefore, desire th at the Department should 
continue making vigorous efforts to reduce the storage and transit losses of 
foodgrains to minimum during the year 2013-14 and beyond." 
 
 
 
1.22 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
" The updated figures of storage and transit loss for the year 2012 -13 
(upto March 2013) is given as under: 
 
Storage Loss: 
                              (Qty.in lakh MT/ Value in Crores) 
Year Agency Qty. 
Received 
Qty. 
Loss %age Value 
2012-
13 
FCI 378.46 0.53 0.14 127.30 
SWC 170.61 0.88 0.52 190.50 
CWC 90.90 0.29 0.33 62.57 
Total 639.98 1.70 0.27 380.37 
            *Provisional figure 
 
Transit Loss: 
                          (Qty.in lakh MT/ Value in Crores) 
Year Qty 
Received 
Qty 
Loss %age Value 
2012-13 355.85 1.84 0.52 339.38 

*Provisional figure 
 
Constant monitoring and reviews are being done to reduce/ minimize 
storage and transit losses.  The Storage and Transit losses are also monitored 
as a part of the MOU between the Department and FCI." 
 
 
 

 
 
1.23  The Committee had noted in their Original Report  that despite the 
various initiatives taken by the Ministry to reduce the storage and transit 
losses, the losses were increasing marginally, both in terms of percentage 
and value, over the last three years.  Though the storag e and transit losses 
in terms of value had come down marginally, the losses were still too high. 
The Committee had, therefore, desired that the Department should 
continue making vigorous efforts to reduce the storage and transit losses 
of foodgrains to the minimum during the year 2013-14 and beyond.  In their 
Action Taken Reply, the Department ha ve stated that constant monitoring 
and reviews are being done to reduce/minimize  storage and transit losses. 
The storage and transit losses are also monitored as a part of the MOU 
between the Department and FCI. T he Committee , however,  are not 
satisfied with the reply of the Department as they have not mentioned as to 
what concrete measures have  been taken or are proposed to be taken so 
as to further reduce the losses. The Committee, therefore, again urge  the 
Department to take effective measures to minimize storage and transit 
losses of foodgrains by adopting latest modern technology.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
 

G. Need to expedite the finalization of process of National Mission on 
Oilseeds and Oil Palm (NMOOP) for increase d 
production/productivity of oilseeds. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 34 Para No. 7.8) 
 
1.24 The Committee in their earlier report observed/ recommended as follows:- 
 
  "The Committee are concerned to note that the production of 
oilseeds in the country has been gradually declining over the last three 
years while the consumption of oils is increasing.  The Committee observe 
that the net availability of edible oils during the years 2010 -11 and 2011 -
12 was 97.82 and 89.57 lakh tonnes while the total consumption was 
170.24 and 189.00 lakh tonnes respectively.  The shortfall was met by 
import from other countries.  The net availability of edible oil from domestic 
sources in the year 2012 -13 was 89.90 lakh tonnes and the edible oil 
imported was 16.41 lakh tonnes (upto December, 2012) and the total 
consumption figure is yet to be ascertained.  The Committee note that 
production of oilseeds has d ecreased due to decline in acreage under 
cultivation, less monsoon rains in major oilseeds growing states and 
lesser yield of oilseeds etc.  The Government is making efforts to ensure 
availability of edible oils by fixing import duty on refined edible oils  at 
7.5%, continuing ban on export of edible oils, authorizing State 
Governments to impose stock limits on edible oils and providing relief to 
consumers especially BPL households by distribution of subsidized 
imported edible oils.  A Centrally Sponsored In tegrated Scheme of 
Oilseeds, Oil, Palm and maize (ISOPOM) in 14 major oilseeds, 15 maize 
growing States and 9 oil Palm growing States is also being implemented 
to enhance the production and productivity of edible oils.  Financial 
assistance is provided und er the scheme for purchase of breeder seeds, 
distribution of plant protection chemicals, supply of micronutrients and 
improved agricultural implements, training, publicity etc.  Despite all steps 
taken, the production of oilseeds has not increased to meet the domestic 
oil consumption requirements.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Department of Food & Public Distribution in coordination with the 
Ministry of Agriculture, ICAR and State Governments should pay more 
attention towards the proper impl ementation of all the schemes including 
R&D for increasing the production of oilseeds in the country. "   
 
 
 
1.25 The Ministry in their action taken reply to have stated as under:- 
 
  " The production of oilseeds has increased from 24.35 million tons 
in 2004-05 to 30.72 million tons in 2012-13(as per 3rd Advance Estimates). 
The highest production of oilseeds to the tune of 32.48 million tons was 
achieved during 2010 -11. However, the production also fluctuates due to 
weather aberrations and low moisture availability at the time of sowing. 

  
           The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation is in the process of  
finalizing  the National Mission on Oilseeds & Oil Palm (NMOOP) for 
increasing production /productivity of oilseeds and area expansion under 
oil palm and Tree Borne Oilseeds (TBOs) for augmenting  the domestic 
production of vegetable oils  in the country. The outlay for this Mission is 
Rs. 3507 crores for the 12 th Plan. The proposed NMOOP will consist of 
three Mini Missions i. e. (i) Mini Mission  on oilseeds in 19 states, (ii) Mini 
Mission on oil palm for 15 states and (iii) Mini Mission on Tree Borne 
Oilseeds in 28 states.  
 
         The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) is under taking 
research programmes in different oilseed crops at four commodity based 
institutes. The research programme includes basic and strategic research 
related to crop improvement, production and protection technologies in 
different oilseed crops which form a base for applied research. The 
information so devel oped will be used by six All India Coordinated 
Research Projects on specific oilseed crops to develop location specific 
varieties and technologies as per agro -ecologies  for enhancing 
production and productivity. The contribution of improved technologies i n 
oilseeds has resulted in increasing oilseed productivity continuously (1133 
kg/ha in 2011-12) despite marginal variation in acre and production. Some 
of the initiatives being pursued by ICAR in the XII Plan  are:- 
 
 Development of short duration high yielding hybrids in mustard, sunflower, 
castor and sesame  
 
 Using cutting edge technologies for solving biotic stresses viz.  Necrosis in 
sunflower, botrytis in castor, lepidopteran pests in castor, soyabean  and 
groundnut, white rust in mustard and improving oil quality etc. 
 
 Improving input use (nutrients & moisture) efficiency and reduction in cost 
of cultivation of oilseeds. 
 
 Development of genomic resources for abiotic stresses/climate adaptation 
traits and climate resilient technologies for adaptation. 
 
 Developing bio pesticides based IPM technologies. 
 
 Organizing Front line Demonstrations (FLDs) and Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) 
activities on latest improved  technologies of oilseeds. 
 

 Exploration of oilseed cultivation in non traditional areas such as mustard 
in rice/rabi fallows of Eastern India, Summer Groundnut in Assam, West 
Bengal, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh;  
Safflower in Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh, besides as intercrop in major 
crops of the region etc.." 
 
 
 
 

 
1.26 The Committee ha d noted in their Original Report that despite the 
various steps taken by the Government to increase oil production such as  
implementation of ISOPOM scheme, distribution of plan protection 
chemicals, supply of micronutrients and improved agricultural imple ments, 
training and publicity etc., the production of oilseeds in the country ha d 
been gradually declining over the last three years while the consumption of 
oil was increasing and that the shortfall had to be met by import from other 
countries. The Committee had recommended that the Department of Food 
& Public Distribution, in coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture, ICAR 
and State Governments , should pay more attention towards the proper 
implementation of all the schemes including R&D for increasing  the 
production of oilseeds in the country. In the ir Action Taken Reply, the 
Department ha ve stated  that the Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation is in the process of finalizing the National Mission on Oilseeds 
& Oil Palm (NMOOP) for increasing production /productivity of oilseeds and 
area expansion under oil palm and Tree Borne Oilseeds (TBOs) for 
augmenting  the domestic production of vegetable oils  in the country.  The 
Department ha ve also stated that the Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR) is undertaking research programmes in different oilseed 
crops at four commodity based institutes. The information so developed 
will be used by six All India Coordinated Research Projects on specific 
oilseed crops to develop location , specific varietie s and tech nologies as 
per agro -ecologies for enhancing production and productivity.  The 
Committee are of the opinion that expeditious finalization of the aforesaid 

process, would raise the productivity of oilseeds  in the country . The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should pursue the 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation to finalize the National Mission 
on Oilseeds and Oil Palm (NMOOP) at the earliest and also utilize the 
outcome of the research programmes of the Indian Council of Agricu ltural 
Research (ICAR) for crop improvement, production and protection 
technology in different oilseed crops. The Committee f urther hope that the 
information so developed will substantially raise the oilseed production 
thereby bridging the gap between its production and consumption.  

                  
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
  ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.1, Para No. 2.8) 
 
2.1 The Committee are not satisfied with the overall performance of the 
Department in so far as expenditure incurred during 2012 -13 is concerned.  The 
Committee note that plan budget during 2012 -13 was Rs.126 crores which was 
reduced to Rs.85 crore at RE stage and the actual expenditure was 
Rs.69.94crore only (which indicates82.29% of RE). In case of non-plan schemes, 
the BE for 2012 -13 was Rs.86835.66 crore which was increased to Rs.96790.71 
crore at RE stage but Actual Expenditure was Rs. 85928.53 crore only which is 
88.78% of the RE.  This decrease from BE to RE in case of Plan Sc hemes, 
increase from BE to RE for non -plan schemes and reduction from RE to Actual 
Expenditure for both Plan and Non -plan schemes indicates lack of proper 
planning by the Department at initial stage. The Committee have been informed 
that various difficulti es are being faced by the Department in implementation of 
various schemes, i.e. non -submission of adequate financial proposals from the 
States/UTs, non-receipt of utilization certificate under the scheme strengthening 
of PDS and capacity building; problems  in land acquisition in North -Eastern 
States in the scheme of construction of godowns by FCI/State Governments and 
lack of interest shown by various States in implementation of Village Grain Bank 
Scheme etc.  The Committee are not convinced with the plea o f the Department 
that the shortfall in expenditure attributed to these problems because such issues 
could be taken care of by proper planning and better coordination with the 
States/UTs.  In the opinion of the Committee, the Department has not been able 
to improve its monitoring mechanism over various schemes and it also lacks co -
ordination with the States/UTs.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that the Department should make sincere efforts in persuading the States/UTs to 
furnish financial prop osals/utilization certificates at the earliest so that the entire 
funds allocated for the various schemes/projects can be utilized fully during the 
financial year itself and benefits are passed on to the targeted 
populace/beneficiaries. 
 
(Reply of the Government) 
 
2.2 Funds utilized during the Financial Year 2012 -13 were 98.28% of RE. An 
amount of Rs.0.40 crores could not be utilized under the Scheme Strengthening 
of PDS as the agency for Evaluation, Monitoring & Research could not be 
finalized. Action is under way to finalize the agency for awarding evaluation study 
on a regular basis. As regards to the issue of difficulty in land acquisition in North 
East by FCI, the matter is reviewed at the level of Secretary (F & PD) for timely 
and effective implementat ion of the Scheme. Officers from the Ministry and FCI 
are being deputed on field visit for assessing the progress made by FCI and 
State Govts. of North Eastern States for completion of projects undertaken by 

them. As for furnishing of UC for the Grant –in-Aid released to the States Govt. of 
NE and J &K, the State Govt. are regularly requested for furnishing the UCs. 
Approval of Standing Finance Committee (SFC) has been obtained for 
implementation of VGB Scheme during the 12 th Plan period. Based on SFC 
approval, the scheme has been updated and made more relevant. The revised 
guidelines of VGB Scheme are under process. After the revised VGB Scheme is 
approved, States/UTs will be requested to send their proposals for setting up of 
Village Grain Banks and also to  send pending utilization Certificates for the past 
allocation. The saving in the RE was due to unavoidable situations and not 
because of lack of perspective planning by the Department. However, the 
Department would ensure that RE is fully utilized in future. 
 
 So far as Committee‟s observations with regard to less expenditure in 
non-plan schemes i.e. Rs.85928.53 crore against RE of Rs.96790.71 crore, it is 
clarified that the expenditure of Rs.85928.53 crore was incurred upto 28.02.2013 
and actual expenditu re  before the closing of financial year 2012 -13 was 
Rs.96782.12 crore  i.e. 99.99% of the RE.  An expenditure of Rs.85928.53 crore 
was booked upto 28.02.2013 and balance of Rs.10853.59 crore was released 
from 01.03.2013 to 31.03.2013. The heavy expenditur e of Rs.10853.59 core 
booked in the month of March, 2013 was due to Supplementary Grants (3 rd 
Batch) of Rs.10005.91 core (including saving of Rs.63.47 cores which required 
approval of Parliament through Token supplementary for its re -appropriation) 
received on 25.03.2013. 
 
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 

Recommendation (Serial No.3, Para No. 3.12) 
 
2.3 The Committee note that the amoun t of food subsidy released to FCI has 
been constantly increasing each year due to increased procurement of 
foodgrains, continuous increase in MSP of wheat and rice vis -à-vis Central Issue 
Price, increased off -take of foodgrains under TPDS and other welfare  schemes, 
additional allocation of foodgrains made for APL/BPL families etc. The 
Committee feel that the amount of food subsidy is expected to further increase 
substantially with the implementation of the National Food Security Bill. While 
appreciating the efforts made by the Government to contain the food subsidy, by 
encouraging decentralized procurement, giving guarantee to FCI for issue of 
bonds at lower coupon rates, improving operational efficiency of FCI, negotiating 
with the consortium of banks to pr ovide food credit at lower rate of interest etc., 
the Committee, however, desire that the Department should make even more 
vigorous efforts to explore the possibilities of containing food subsidy without 
compromising the regular supply and availability of subsidized foodgrains to the 
targeted beneficiaries especially to the marginalized sections of the society.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 The rise in food subsidy is mainly attributable to increase in economic cost 
of foodgrains on account of increase in MSP whereas Central Issue Prices 
(CIPs) of subsidized foodgrains have remained unchanged since 2002. Besides 
MSP, the economic cost of foodgrains consists of taxes levied by State 
Governments on procurement, and other procurement incidentals. Since taxes 
levied by State Governments are ad valorem and linked to MSP, they also 
increase with increase in MSP and contribute to increase in food subsidy. The 
Government has taken additional measure like  bringing in overall cost -
effectiveness in the operations of F CI to contain the food subsidy.  State 
Governments which levy taxes at higher level are being pursued to lower the tax 
rates. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
 (Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 

 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.4, Para No. 3.19) 
 
 
2.5 The Committee are unhappy to note that an amount of Rs. 1646.54 lakhs 
are yet to be released under the Hill Transport Subsidy Scheme (HTS) to the 
States of Mizoram, Himachal Pradesh,  J&K, Lakshadweep and Sikkim and in 
some cases, the claims are pending since the year 2010 -11. While agreeing that 
funds under the scheme are released on the basis of claims made by the 
concerned States/UTs with proper details/documents, the Committee are 
dismayed to find that out of Rs. 197.30 lakh claimed by the Government of 
Himachal Pradesh for the year 2012 -13, an amount of Rs. 37.07 lakh only was 
released and the claims for the remaining amount of Rs. 159.93 lakh were found 
to be deficient and returne d to the State for rectification. The Committee are also 
surprised to note that no claims for reimbursement under the scheme were 
received from any other State/UT during the year 2012 -13. This gives the 
impression that either there are no clear guidelines for claiming reimbursement 
for expenditure incurred under the scheme or the guidelines are too 
cumbersome/complex. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department may look into the issue and simplify the procedure of disbursement 
to ensure full dis bursal of funds under the scheme so as to benefit the target 
groups who normally comprise of backward and weaker sections of society 
dwelling in predominantly hilly States with difficult and inaccessible terrain areas.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6  For r elease of payment under HTS, FCI has been directed to ensure 
genuineness of claims and to verify that stock is actually transported and 
reached the fair price shops/beneficiaries.  Accordingly,   FCI has   been insisting  
for State Governments to submit th e documents to this effect.  It is also added 
that some of the State Governments have been submitting their claims along with 
the supporting documents. 
 

 As regards, reimbursement of claims to the State of Himachal Pradesh is 
concerned, State Govt. has sub mitted the claims to the tune of Rs. 239.26 lakhs 
against the financial year 2012 -13 and an amount of Rs. 90.26 lakhs has been 
reimbursed upto 30.04.2013.  FCI returned the bills pertaining to the period 2010-
11 onwards to the State Government due to some discrepancies and the same 
have been received after ratification on 20.03.2013 and all bills are under 
process for release of HTS. 
 
 Besides Himachal Pradesh, Lakshadweep Administration has submitted 
claim bills to the tune of Rs. 15.69 lakhs during the ye ar 2012-13 and admissible 
amount of Rs. 14.72 lakh have already been released. 
 
 As per existing procedure, State Govts. have to submit  bills on 
fortnightly/monthly basis but some of the State Governments are  submitting bills 
after long period or even af ter years o 5n the ground of their operational 
difficulties. 
 
 A Statement showing HTS payments released during 2009 -10, 2010 -11, 
2011-12 and 2012-13 is at annexure-I.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.5, Para No. 3.28) 
 
2.7 The Committee note that the Public Distribution System (PDS) was 
evolved as a system of management of scarcity and for distribution of foodgra ins 
at affordable prices and the Department is taking all necessary measures to 
closely monitor the implementation of the scheme by States/UTs. Utilization 
Certificates for the foodgrains allocated to State Governments are also obtained 
regularly. The Comm ittee also note that the Department has issued instructions 
to States/UTs to strengthen functioning of TPDS by improving monitoring 
mechanism and vigilance, increasing transparency in functioning of the scheme, 
use of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) tools and improving the 
efficiency of Fair Price Shop operations. Besides the States/UTs are reminded to 

ensure implementation of the Nine -Point Action Plan for curbing 
leakages/diversion of foodgrains under TPDS. Moreover, the PDS (Control) 
Order, 2001 which mandates the States/UT Governments to carry out all 
required action to ensure smooth functioning of PDS in the country has been 
notified on August, 2001. The Committee are pained to note that despite taking 
all these measures by the Government  which also includes reviewing of its 
functioning, the functioning of the PDS in the country is far from satisfactory. 
Door-step delivery of foodgrains to fair price shops is being done by 20 
States/UTs and the district -wise/FPS-wise allocation of foodgrai ns on the 
websites and other prominent places has been initiated in 21 States/UTs only. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department should 
consult and coordinate with the State/UT Governments on a regular basis and 
also carry out surpr ise visits and inspections of the agencies involved in 
distribution of foodgrains such as principal distribution depots of FCI, fair price 
shops, transporting agencies etc for efficient and smooth functioning of PDS in 
the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) is operated under the joint 
responsibility of the Central and the State/Union Territory (UT) Governments 
wherein the operational responsibilities for allocation and distribution of 
foodgrains within the Stat es/UTs, identification of eligible Below Poverty Line 
(BPL) families, issuance of ration cards to them and supervision over and 
monitoring of functioning of Fair Price Shops (FPSs) rest with the concerned 
State/UT Governments. 
 
However, in order to improve  functioning of TPDS, Government  of India 
has been regularly issuing advisories and holding conferences wherein State/UT 
Governments are requested for improving the offtake of allocated foodgrains, 
ensuring timely availability of foodgrains at FPSs, great er transparency in 
functioning of TPDS, improved monitoring and vigilance at various levels, 
adoption of revised Model Citizen‟s Charter, use of Information and 

Communication Technology (ICT) tools, improving the viability of FPS 
operations, etc. Various a spects of functioning of TPDS is also reviewed by the 
Officers of the Department of Food & Public Distribution during their visits to 
States/UTs 
 
As per Public Distribution System (Control) Order, 2001, the State and UT 
Governments are responsible for impl ementing TPDS and competent to take 
action against those indulging in malpractices in TPDS by invoking provisions of 
clauses 8 & 9 of the said Order. An offence committed in violation of the 
provisions of this Order is liable for penal action under the Essential Commodities 
Act, 1955. State/UT Governments are also required to  take action under 
Prevention of Black Marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential 
Commodities Act, 1980. A statement showing results of action taken by the 
State/UT Governments under Clauses 8 & 9 of the PDS (Control) Order, 2001 
from January 2006 to March, 2013 is at annexure-II. 
 Further, in view of recommendation of Standing Committee, instructions to 
all stake holders are being issued in this regard.  
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.6, Para No. 3.35) 
 
2.9 The Committee note that the result of an independent study conducted by 
a group of scholars in 9 States have shown impressive revival of PDS across the 
country as it suggests that the days when upto half of the PDS foodgrain was 
diverted to open market are gone. The Committee are, however, constrained to 
say that the evaluation study conducted by IIPA in 14 States have shown that the 
leakage as percentage of offtake has been as high as 49.49% in Nagaland, 
27.00% in Manipur and 26.84% in West Bengal. The NCAER Report in 12 
States/UTs have also indicated that the level of leakages and  diversion of 
foodgrains was as high as 100% wheat for APL in the States of Assam and 
Mizoram and in case of rice, it was 83.28% and 81.12%, respectively in these 

two States. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Food 
and Public Distri bution, FCI and the States/UT Governments should make 
earnest efforts to identify the loopholes in the PDS and curb leakage/diversion of 
foodgrains to the extent possible so as to ensure that the target beneficiaries do 
receive right quantity and quality of foodgrains at the right price regularly. 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.10 In order to curb leakages and diversion of foodgrains, a Nine Point Action 
Plan was evolved in 2006 in consultation with the State/UT Governments which 
inter-alia includes con tinuous review of BPL/AAY lists and to eliminate 
bogus/ineligible ration cards along with strict action to be taken against the guilty 
to ensure leakage free distribution of foodgrains. Instructions were also issued to 
all State/UT Governments to carry out an intensive campaign from October, 2009 
to December, 2009 to review the existing lists of BPL/AAY families and eliminate 
ineligible/bogus ration cards. As a result thereof, 28 State/UT Governments have 
reported by 31.03.2013, deletion of 364.01 lakh bogus/ineligible ration cards.  
 
With a view to ensure that the beneficiaries under TPDS and other welfare 
schemes do receive right quality of foodgrains, this department has issued 
following instructions from time to time to Food Secretaries of all State 
Governments/Union Territory Administrations and FCI to ensure supply of good 
quality foodgrains under the TPDS and other welfare schemes:-  
 
(i) Only good quality foodgrains free from insect infestation and 
conforming to Food Safety Standards are to be issued under TPDS and 
other Welfare Schemes. 
 
(ii) Ample opportunities are to be provided to the officials of the State 
Government/UTs Administration to inspect the stocks prior to lifting from 
FCI godowns. States/UTs may ensure that officers not below the rank o f 
Inspector are deputed for inspection of the foodgrains before their lifting 
from FCI. 
 
(iii) The samples from the stocks to be issued to States/UTs under 
TPDS and other Welfare Schemes are to be drawn jointly and sealed by the 
officers of the State Gover nments and FCI for displaying them at the 
counter of Fair Price Shops for the benefit of consumers. A duplicate sealed 
sample is to be kept with concerned FCI depots/godowns for any future 

reference. In case the State agencies are taking delivery from FCI and 
thereafter delivering the same to the FPS dealers, they should also follow 
the same procedure as is being followed by FCI for issuing the jointly 
sealed samples.  
 
(iv) Type sealed samples should be displayed by the FPS dealers in 
their shops, so that the ration card holder/consumers may check the quality 
of foodgrain supplied to them. FPS dealers should also maintain a 
complaint register to enable the consumers to lodge their 
complaints/opinions, in case the quality of foodgrains issued is not of proper 
quality standards. 
 
(v) It is the responsibility of the concerned State Government/UT 
Administrations to ensure that during transportation and storage at different 
stages in the distribution chain, the foodgrains retain the required quality 
specifications. For this purpose, all required measures are to be taken for 
scientific storage of foodgrains so that there is no deterioration in their 
quality at any stage till they are delivered to the ration card 
holders/consumers. 
 
(vi) An officer not below the ran k of Inspector is to be deputed from 
State Government to take the delivery of foodgrains stocks from FCI 
godowns.  
 
(vii) Where the decentralized procurement is in operation, State 
Government should follow the same procedure of inspection of foodgrains 
stocks and joint sealed sampling to ensure that quality of foodgrains issued 
under TPDS and other welfare schemes meet the desired standards under 
the Food Safety Standards Act. 
 
Department of Food & Public Distribution have also launched a plan 
scheme under 12th Five Year Plan for end -to-end computerisation of TPDS 
operations in all States/UTs. The schemes provides for, inter -alia, 
computerisation of Supply -Chain, Digitization of Ration Card database, SMS/E -
mail alerts on dispatch and delivery of foodgrains, setting-up of Transparency 
Portal, Grievance redressal mechanism, FPS automation, etc. Digitization  of 
PDS data, including ration cards data, is a primary steps to be taken by 
States/UTs for computerisation of PDS so as to ensure correct identification of  
beneficiaries, distribution of PDS commodities to deserving beneficiaries, 
elimination of bogus/duplicate ration cards etc., thereby putting a check on 
leakages/diversion of PDS commodities. 
 

Further, in view of recommendation of Standing Committee, instr uctions to 
all stake holders are being issued in this regard.  
  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.11 Please see Para No.1.11 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.7, Para No. 3.36) 
 
2.12 The Committee also note that the Government has given financial 
assistance in 2007 -08 to the State Governments of Tamil Nadu and Chattisgarh 
for installation of Glo bal Positioning System (GPS) on the vehicles carrying 
TPDS commodities in order to curb leakages and diversion of foodgrains. The 
installation of GPS devices on vehicles carrying PDS foodgrains in the States of 
Tamil Nadu and Chhattisgarh have shown positi ve results. Government of Tamil 
Nadu have reported that the GPS devices not only help in ensuring that the 
quantities of foodgrains allotted reached the intended godowns of FCI in time 
without any diversion, but also create moral fear among those involved in 
transportation of PDS items and enable the concerned officials and vigilance 
agencies to track the movement of vehicles. The Government of Chhattisgarh 
have also reported that the vehicles reached their destination/intended places 
and no irregularities were noticed. The Committee are, therefore, of the view that 
installation of GPS devices on vehicles carrying PDS items in all States/UTs of 
the country would go a long way in checking the problem of leakage/diversion of 
foodgrains. The Committee, therefor e, strongly recommend that the proposals 
received from the States/UTs for sanctioning of funds under the scheme should 
be processed on priority and released expeditiously. The Department should also 
persuade all the States/UTs to submit their proposals for  sanction of funds under 
the scheme. 
 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
2.13 In view of the feedback received from State Governments of Tamil Nadu 
and Chhattisgarh, it was decided to extend this scheme in all the States/UTs 
from the financial year 2011 -12. In the XIIth Five Year Plan too, this scheme had 
been proposed to be continued. 
  
 States/UTs are regularly requested to send their proposals under the 
scheme.  However, despite constant follow up with States, the Department 
received proposals only from State of Rajasthan and Puducherry UT in 2011 -12. 
Since the proposals were incomplete, they were requested to send revised 
proposals, which have not been received from them. During the financial year 
2012-13 also, only two proposals from State Governments of Manipur  and J&K 
were received.  Keeping in view the feedback from States that had implemented 
the scheme, lack of suitable response from States and plan scheme on End–to–
end Computerization of TPDS operations, the functioning of this scheme is being 
reviewed by the Department. 
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.14 Please see Para No.1.14 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.8, Para No. 3.44) 
 
2.15 The Committee note that pursuant to the Hon'ble Supreme Court 
instructions, all States/UTs are required to undertake end -to-end computerization 
of TPDS in a time bound manner for which the Government of India  shall provide 
necessary infrastructure and financial support. The Government has accordingly 
prepared an estimated outlay of Rs. 4273.47 crore for the XII Five Year Plan on 
50:50 cost sharing with States/UTs except for North -eastern States, where the 
sharing will be 90:10 basis. An amount of Rs. 200 crore has been provided for 
BE 2013 -14 under the scheme of 'End -to-end Computerization of TPDS 
operations' in all States/UTs. The Smart Card Scheme launched in December 

2008 for Chandigarh UT and Haryana have n ow been subsumed in the Plan 
Scheme on End-to-End Computerization of TPDS operations to be implemented 
in all States/UTs under the XII Five Year Plan (2012 -17). The Committee are 
surprised to note that out of the 24 States/UTs that have submitted their 
proposals for financial assistance under the scheme during the year 2012 -13, 
only proposals from 7 States are found to be complete in all respects and funds 
released to them. The remaining proposals are under examination in the 
Department. The Committee are o f the firm opinion that End -to-end 
Computerization of PDS operations will solve several problems that are being 
associated with the functioning of PDS in the country. The Committee are also 
not happy with the status of computerization of TPDS operations in  States/UTs. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly urge the Department to expedite the 
examination of the remaining proposals already received by them for financial 
assistance from the States/UTs under the scheme and release the funds 
expeditiously. The Department should also pursue with the remaining States/UTs 
to submit their proposals for financial assistance and make all efforts to complete 
computerization of PDS operations in all the States/UTs in anticipation of the 
ensuing enactment of the National Food Security Bill, 2011. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.16  After approval of Component -I of the plan scheme on „End -to-End 
Computerization of TPDS Operations‟ by the Cabinet, Administrative approval for 
the same was issued on 10.12.2012, requesting States/UTs to  send their 
proposals under the scheme. So far, proposals for financial assistance from 26 
States/UTs have been received, out of which Central assistance has been 
released by this Department to 9 States. Proposal of Meghalaya which is 
complete in all respe ct is under process. Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
Administration has later on intimated that they do not require funds from the 
Centre. Similarly, no fund is to be released to Sikkim as the State Government 
has received the funds from NE Council for implement ation of the scheme. 
Proposals of remaining 14 States/UTs received have also been assessed. 
However, funds to these States/UTs could not be released as they have not yet 
fulfilled the pre -requisites prescribed for the scheme, such as confirmation 

regarding setting up of State Apex Committee (SAC)/State Project e -Mission 
Team (SPeMT), signing of MoU, etc. Matter is being repeatedly pursued with 
them.  
 
Proposals for financial assistance are yet to be received from 9 States/UTs. 
Several reminders have been se nt by the Department at various levels to these 
States/UTs for expediting their financial proposals.  
 
The Department is regularly reviewing the progress of the implementation of 
the scheme through various meetings, conferences, etc. with States/UTs and 
NIC. In May 2013, a regional workshop -cum-conference was organized in 
Guwahati (Assam) for North -Eastern States to assess the progress, challenges 
faced and help in addressing their issues. Similar conferences will be held for 
review of progress in other States/UTs. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.17 Please see Para No.1.17 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
 
  Recommendation (Serial No.9, Para No. 3.50) 
 
2.18 The Committee note that the main objective of the Village Grain Bank 
Scheme is to provide safeguard against starvation during the period of natural 
calamity or during lean season when the marginalized food insecure  households  
do not have sufficient resources to purchase rations.  The Schemes is currently 
being implemented by 17 out of 35 States/UTs. Out of 21,842 Village Grain 
Banks sanctioned by the Department, the States have set up 17,266 Village 
Grain Banks til l date. While the State Governments have entrusted the 
management of Village Grain Banks to Panchayats, SHG, NGOs, etc. the Village 
Grains Banks established in the state of Uttarakhand is being managed by the 
World Food Programme (WFP).  The Committee also  observe that the scheme 
has helped the beneficiaries reduce their dependence on high interest loans 

during lean season and the extent of immigration during lean season has also 
come down significantly.  It is also stated that majority of the States are 
interested in continuation of the scheme during the Twelfth Five Year Plan period 
and 5 States have given suggestions for modification of the scheme. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution should make sincere efforts to popularize the scheme by engaging 
the State/UT Governments in a more proactive and regular manner while giving 
due consideration to the suggestions made by the States/UTs for modification of 
the scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
2.19 Approval of Standing Finance Committee (SFC) has been obtained for 
its implementation during the 12 th Plan period.  Based on SFC approval, the 
scheme has been made more attractive.  The revised guidelines of VGB 
Scheme are under process.  
 
 Under the revised VGB Scheme the cash component is to be increased 
from Rs. 12,200/-  to Rs. 19,350/-.  
 
 After the revised VGB Scheme is approved, States/UTs will be 
requested to send their proposals for setting up of Village Grains Banks and 
also to send the pending utilization Certificates for the past allocation.   
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.20 Please see Para No.1.20 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12, Para No. 3.67) 
 
2.21 The Committee observe that for greater transparency in the functioning of 
TPDS, various measures such as display of list of BPL and AAY families at FPS, 
display of allocated quantit ies of foodgrains on websites, adoption and 
implementation of Revised Model Citizens Charter have been initiated.  Besides, 

11 States have also undertaken various publicity -cum-awareness campaign's 
such as advertisements in Print and Electronic Media in lo cal and Hindi 
Newspapers including AIR and DD Channels, distribution of booklets in regional 
languages, use of sign boards, banners, posters, billboards, quiz competitions, 
deployment of Youth groups etc.   Despite the various steps taken by the 
Department and the reported adoption and implementation of the Revised Model 
Citizen Charter by all State/UT Governments except the State Government of 
Jharkhand, the Committee feel that there is no visible improvement in regard to 
transperancy and efficiency in the  functioning of the TPDS in the country.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should impress upon all the 
State/UT Governments to ensure that the Revised Model Citizen Charter is 
implemented in letter and spirit and also more publicity -cum-awareness 
campaign are undertaken during the current financial year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  2.22 The Revised Model Citizens‟ Charter for Targeted Public Distribution 
System (TPDS) was issued in July, 2007 by the Government for adoption and 
implementation by State/UT Governments. All State/UT Governments except 
State Government of Jharkhand have reported the adoption and implementation 
of the Revised Model Citizens‟ Charter. State Government of Jharkhand has 
been requested to look into the matter and e nsure its early 
adoption/implementation. The Department has requested all State/UT 
Governments to carry out impact analysis of Citizens‟ Charter adopted by them 
and has also requested time and again to take stringent measures for their early 
implementation in letter and spirit.   
 
All States/UTs have been requested to undertake end -to-end 
computerisation of TPDS, which comprises activities, namely, digitization of 
ration card/beneficiary and other databases, computerisation of supply -chain 
management, SMS/E-mail alerts on dispatch and delivery of foodgrains, setting -
up of Transparency Portal, Grievance redressal mechanism, FPS automation, 
etc.  
 
To facilitate greater public scrutiny of functioning of TPDS, publicity -cum-
awareness campaign on TPDS has been ta ken up under a plan scheme on 
strengthening of TPDS.  Rs. 59.832 lakh were sanctioned to 8 States including 4 
NE States during 2011 -12.  During 2012 -13, an amount of Rs. 30.756 lakh were 
sanctioned to the states of Andhra Pradesh (Rs. 8.4 lakh), Kerala (Rs . 19.30 
lakh) and Tripura (Rs. 3.05 lakh). 
 

Further, in view of recommendation of Standing Committee, instructions to 
all stake holders are being issued for making earnest efforts in this regard.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17, Para No. 4.18) 
 
2.23 The Committee are concerned to note that FCI could not achieve the 
physical and financial targets set for con struction of godowns during 2012 -13 in 
respect of NE States as well as other than NE States. The Committee also note 
that during 2012 -13, physical target set for creation of storage space in NE 
region was 13.36 MT but its achievement was only 2.9 MT. Finan cial target set 
during 2012-13 for NE region was Rs. 70.00 crore but its achievement was only 
Rs. 12.32 crore. The Department has informed that the shortfall has been mainly 
due to not getting suitable lands for the storage godowns. The North -eastern 
States are the most disadvantaged States in terms of lack of infrastructure, 
communication and rail/road network etc.  Inadequacy of storage space in NE 
region poses a serious threat to running of an efficient Public Distribution System 
(PDS). The Committee, th erefore, desire that Department of Food and Public 
Distribution should take up the matter urgently with States/UTs at highest level 
for taking over the lands already identified in these States as well as in North -
Eastern States for construction of godowns and ensuring that construction of 
godowns are completed expeditiously.  The Committee further recommend that 
the Ministry should include the NE States also in the perspective plan drawn for 
the coming year and make sincere efforts for achievement of physic al as well as 
financial targets in these States. The construction of godowns in other than NE 
region should also be speeded up so that the people of NE region as well as 
other than NE States are not deprived of the benefits of PDS for lack of 
foodgrains storage facilities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.24   It is true that against the physical target of 13360MT (NE), the 
achievement made was only 2910MT during FY 2012 -13.  However, due to  
reasons  given below, the targeted capacity  and  financial expenditur e could not 
be achieved: 
 
A     Physical: 
 
 The godowns at the following locations could not be completed resulting in 
shortfall :- 
 

1. 2500 MT(Churachandpur/ Manipur):  As per the recommendations of 
State Govt. the work was entrusted to Manipur Development  Society (MDS) 
during November 2011.  Due to delay in submission of estimate by MDS, the 
initial amount was deposited in the month of  March 2012; the agency could start 
the work only in the month of Sept. -Oct. 2012.  The work  is now likely to be 
completed by October 2013. 
 
2. 7950MT (Arunachal Pradesh – 4 locations):   The work at 4 locations 
has been entrusted to M/s. Hindustan Prefab Limited (HPL).  However, due to 
limited working period and difficult terrain, the work could not be completed 
during 2012-13.  The construction work is likely to be completed by 30.9.2013. 
B   Financial: 
 
 Against the financial target of Rs.70 crores for NE Areas and Rs.8.50 
crores for the areas other than NE) the achievement made in FY 2012 -13 was 
Rs.30.36 crores (NE Rs.27.72 crores and Rs.2.64 crores others).  The shortfall is 
mainly due to difficulty in acquiring land mainly in the NE States of Manipur, 
Mizoram, Tripura.  
 
Similarly in areas other than NE land could not acquired in Goa and at  2 
locations in Himachal Pradesh.   
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
 (Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.18, Para No.4.23) 
 
2.25 The Committee note that despite  the various i nitiatives taken by the 
Ministry to reduce the storage and transit losses, the losses have been 
increasing marginally both in terms of percentage and values over the last  3 
years.  While the storage loss of wheat and rice increased from 0.21% in the 
year 2010-11 to 0.27% in the year 2012 -13 (upto February, 2013), the transit 
loss increased from 0.47% to 0.52% during the same period.  However, in terms 
of values, storage loss of Rs.405.36 crore in 2011 -12, came down to  Rs.343.53 
crore in 2012 -13 (upto Febr uary, 2013).  In the same way transit losses have 
reduced from Rs. 333.01 crore in 2011 -12 to 301.89 crore in 2012 -13.  The 
Committee, however, feel that these losses are still too high and need to be 
minimized further. The Committee, therefore, desire tha t the Department should 

continue making vigorous efforts to reduce the storage and transit losses of 
foodgrains to minimum during the year 2013-14 and beyond. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.26 The updated figures of storage and transit loss for the year 2012 -13 (upto 
March 2013) is given as under: 
 
Storage Loss: 
                              (Qty.in lakh MT/ Value in Crores) 
Year Agency Qty. 
Received 
Qty. 
Loss %age Value 
2012-
13 
FCI 378.46 0.53 0.14 127.30 
SWC 170.61 0.88 0.52 190.50 
CWC 90.90 0.29 0.33 62.57 
Total 639.98 1.70 0.27 380.37 
            *Provisional figure 
 
Transit Loss: 
                          (Qty.in lakh MT/ Value in Crores) 
Year Qty 
Received 
Qty 
Loss %age Value 
2012-13 355.85 1.84 0.52 339.38 
*Provisional figure 
 
Constant monitoring and reviews are being done to reduce/ minimize 
storage and transit losses.  The Storage and Transit losses are also monitored 
as a part of the MOU between the Department and FCI.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.27 Please see Para No.1.23 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.19, Para No. 4.24) 
 
2.28      The Committee note that abnormal stor age and transit loss cases are 
monitored and vigilance cases are initiated against the delinquent officials by 

FCI.   Based on the investigations and disciplinary actions, various penalities 
including recovery have also been imposed upon delinquent officia ls.  The 
Committee also observe that as many as 192 and 218 cases are pending 
against FCI officials who were responsible for transit losses during the years 
2011-12  and 2012 -13 respectively,  which is showing an upward trend. The 
Committee desire that the  framework for addressing the pendency of legal 
cases at department level should be reviewed to include all such essential 
ingredients necessary for speedier disposal of cases such as streamlining/re -
engineering the procedure currently followed, setting gu idelines/checklist for 
various officers, incharges, establishing a monitoring system of legal cases, 
improving the capacity and skill building of staff etc.  The Committee also 
strongly recommend that steps should be taken to dispose off all pending cases 
against the delinquent officials expeditiously in a time bound manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.29   Efforts are being made for speedy disposal of pending cases. Special 
focus is on cases pending for more than one year. Besides taking action against 
those accused of misconduct, FCI‟s vigilance division has also been taking major 
initiatives in the area of preventive vigilance. These are aimed at modifying and 
improving the existing system so as to reduce the scope for any illegal activity.    
 
  Cases of disciplinary proceedings are reviewed on regular intervals. Checks 
and balances are being put in place in respect of occurrences of unjustified 
storage and transit losses.  
 
  A guideline for identifying notorious depots on account of above mentioned 
discrepancies and malpractices for keeping constant surveillance and vigil at all 
administrative levels/ hierarchy is being devised as a measure of preventive 
vigilance.   
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
 (Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20 Para No. 4.25) 
 

2.30 The Committee also note that the steps  are being taken to raise proper 
infrastructure in the country to mitigate loss of foodgrains due to  shortage of 
storage facilities. In order to augment the covered storage gap, the Government 
is implementing the Private Entrepreneurs Guarantee (PEG) Scheme for 
construction of storage godowns through private entrepreneurs, Central 
Warehousing Corporation (CWC) and State Warehousing Corporations (SWCs). 
The Committee feel that inadequate and improper storage facility is again a 
common concern for almost all the States/UTs.  Lack of proper storage space in 
FCI godowns or non -availability of private storage facilities is the major 
bottleneck for efficient functioning of Targeted Public Distribution System in 
various States. The Committee also note that huge amount of foodgrains 
reportedly get wasted due to lack of adequate storage capacity. Moreover, this 
wastage of foodgrains has become an yearly phenomenon and yet the 
Department failed to take any concrete measures to prevent this wastage. The 
Committee desire that the FCI should make use of new ways and material 
available, for storing grains for longer peri od, to prevent huge storage losses in 
future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.31 With a view to minimize storage and transit losses and to introduce 
modern technology, the Govt. of India had approved the National Policy on bulk 
Handling, Storage and Transporta tion of foodgrains in June, 2000. M/s Adani 
Logistics Limited has engaged as Special Purpose Company (SPC) for the 
project as per requirement of RFP document and service documents for the silos 
was executed between FCI and SPC on 28.06.2005. FCI started us ing these 
silos of 5,50,000 MT capacity since May, 2007. The bulk storage infrastructure 
has been proved to be helpful in the following manner:- 
 
i. The handling operation is fully mechanized and manual handling is 
required only at the time of issue of stocks  minimizing the handling losses 
and also results in time saving. Moreover, it has resulted in saving staff 
and labour requirements. 
ii. The stocks can be stored for longer period safely as the storage is done in 
a scientific manner having all modern facilities  of sampling, weighment 

and preservation enabling longer and safer storage without any storage 
loss, theft and pilferage losses. 
iii. The movement is being done through specialized wagons which has high 
payload and being faster, saves time besides minimizing tr ansit losses. 
Since movement is through specialized wagons hence availability of 
wagons is not a problem. 
 Government of India is also implementing the Private Entrepreneurs 
Guarantee Scheme for construction of storage godowns through Private 
entrepreneurs, Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC) and State Warehousing 
Corporations (SWCs). 
 
 Under this scheme, total capacity of 197.14 Lakh MT has been approved 
to be created in 19 states through Private entrepreneurs, CWC and SWCs. Out 
of this tenders have been sanctioned for a capacity of 106.18 Lakh MT to private 
investors and a capacity of 7.66 Lakh MT and 28 Lakh MT have been allotted to 
CWC and SWCs. Out of this, a capacity of 70.59 Lakh MT has already been 
completed as on 30.04.2013 and 37.34 Lakh MT is under construction. 
 
 In this regard, Govt. of India has also planned for creation of scientific 
storage capacity of 20 lakh MTs as Silos. The approved locations of Silos are as 
under: 
Sl. 
No. 
State Silo 
capacity 
in MTs 
 
Approved locations 
1. Bihar 2,00,000 Kaimur, Buxar, Bhagalpur, Bettiah. (50,000 MT 
each) 
2. Haryana 3,00,000 Bhattu, Jind, Karnal, Palwal, Rohtak, Sonepat. 
(50,000 MT each) 
3. M.P. 3,50,000 Sehore, Jabalpur, Raisen, Vidisha, Guna, 
Hoshangabad, Ujjain (50,000 MT each) 
4. Punjab 4,00,000 Barnala, Chhehreatta, Patiala, Jalalabad, 
Kilaraipur, Sangrur, Dhuri, Batala. (50,000 MT 
each). 
5. West 
Bengal 
2,00,000 Rangapani, Malda, Dankuni, Mecheda. (50,000 
MT each) 
6. Assam 50,000 Guwahati (Changsari) and Dibrugarh. (25,000 
MT each) 
7. Kerala 50,000 Eranakulam and Calicut. (25,000 MT each) 
8. Maharashtra 1,00,000 Pune, Nagpur (50,000 MT each) 
9. Uttar 
Pradesh 
3,00,000 Jaunpur, Kannauj, Faizabad, Fatehpur, Basti, 
Deoria (50,000 MT each) 
10. Gujarat 50,000 Between Palanpur (Banaskantha) and Siddhapur 
(Patan) 
Total 20,00,000  

  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.21, Para No. 4.28) 
 
2.32 The Committee are disturbed to note that as many as 613, 479 and 542 
vigilance and corruption cases were pending at the end of the year 2010 -11, 
2011-12 and 2012-13 respectively.  It is also noted that as many as 1750, 1297 
and 1735 employees of FCI were held guilty of vari ous irregularities during the 
years 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 and were given different penalties such as 
dismissal/removal/compulsorily retired from service, reduction in rank or time 
scale of pay, withholding increment or promotion, recovery of the los s caused 
and censure.  Apart from these, 13 cases were referred to CBI in the year 2012 -
13.  The number of vigilance and corruption cases detected over the years only 
reflects the level of rampant corruption amongst the employees of the FCI. The 
Committee are of the view that the various preventive and punitive measures 
initiated by the Ministry such as ensuring fairness and transparency in foodgrain 
procurement functions, sales of foodgrain stock, procurement of H&T services, 
scientific management of foodg rain stocks at depots, etc. does not have the 
desired effect to contain corruption.  The Committee also feel that inordinate 
delay in prosecution of cases could be another factor encouraging employees 
indulging in corrupt practices.  The Committee, therefo re, recommend that the 
Department should strictly enforce the various preventive and punitive measures 
initiated by them and also speedily  dispose of cases of corruption so as to 
create fears in the minds of the employees of FCI and prevent corrupt practi ces 
assuming gigantic proportion. 
 
 Reply of the Government 
 
2.33 The following steps have been taken:- 
 
1. Putting in place appropriate business process for detection of cases of 
fictitious procurement of food grains jointly by FCI staff and state agencies i n 
collusion with rice millers and transporters. 

 
2. Minimizing subjectivity in Quality Control functions at the time of 
procurement of Food Grains and providing for effective appeal by aggrieved 
farmers and rice millers. 
 
3. Business Process Reengineering for is sue of “weight Check Memo and 
Acceptance cum Analysis Report so that the farmers, rice miller or state agency 
is not subjected to harassment by delay in issue of these records and resultantly, 
procedure for releasing payment to farmers supplying food grain s to FCI and rice 
millers and State Agencies procuring food grains for FCI.  
 
4. Strengthening system of periodic physical verification of stock and putting 
check on fictitious / cosmetic physical verifications of stock detected in alarmingly 
large numbers in  certain regions of FCI. A practice of sabotaging results of 
previous physical verification by manipulation of entries in depot ledgers followed 
by fictitious subsequent physical verification has also been detected and effort 
are being made to put a check on this. 
 
5. Restoring system of Reconciliation of Monthly and Annual Stock Account 
and Stock Ledger Summary and Annual Stock Accounts. 
 
6. Putting in place a system of joint monitoring of stock by depot staff and 
Quality Control staff at Depots so that MSA and RTR can be used for 
complementing each other.  
 
7. Steps taken to curb instances of corruption by FCI staff and State 
Agencies through H & T contractors by manipulating with quality of food grains. 
 
8. Introduction of Standard Operating Procedure (SoP) for respo nding to 
cases of theft / misappropriation / pilferage of stock. 
  
9. Putting in place a new System of Quality assurance regarding food grains 
to be issued by FCI under TPDS and other welfare schemes. 
 
10. Steps taken to detect and prevent occurrences new cases o f 
misappropriation of amount of EFP and ESIC contributions for contractual work -
men engaged by FCI. 
 
11. Redefining responsibility of supervisory functionaries so that supervisory 
officer above rank of AGM too, have regular inspections of depot and district 
offices to ensure proper and scientific stock management, proper record keeping 
and reporting and monitoring critical parameters like SL, TL, PV losses. 
 
12. Critical Examination of Model Tender Forms and getting them modified, if 
necessary. 
 

13. Effective Scrutiny of Annual Property Returns to identify disproportionate 
assets. 
 
14. Strengthening Vigilance Squad through training and redefining their job 
requirement which is, hitherto, too much centralized on quality of food grains at 
time of procurement only. 
 
15. In order t o eliminate subjectivity and to bring clarity in the analysis of 
samples of rice, at the initiative of Vigilance division, FCI Hqrs, a pictoral 
depiction of refractions in respect of Uniform Specifications of rice (Raw and Par 
boiled) was incorporated in t he form of a circular for the benefit of suppliers of 
CMR/Levy rice to the central pool and also as a measure of transparency. The 
said circular has been made available on the FCI website also.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 23, Para No. 5.9) 
 
2.34 The Committee are happy to note that Central Warehousing Corporation 
(CWC) has taken various remedial steps/measu res to reduce the administrative 
cost such as reduction in non -plan expenditure on heads like telephones, 
TA/DA, Advertisement, entertainment etc. Further, steps have been taken to 
reduce Establishment Cost such as closing of 13 Construction Cells, 
implementation of VRs schemes etc.  Consequently, the Corporation has been 
able to reduce its manpower from 5765 employees in 2009 -10 to 5253 
employees in 2012 -13 and also reduced the  Establishment Cost from 
Rs.501.05 crore in the year 2011 -12 to Rs.470.78  cror e in 2012 -13 (upto 
February, 2013).  However, the establishment cost is likely to be around Rs.510 
crore during the current year due to likely introduction of PRP scheme for the 
Executives and revision of perquisites of the Group C & D employees w.e.f. 
1.1.2012.  The Committee feel that though reducing the  Establishment Cost to 
the extent possible is desirable, yet the Corporation should not compromise the 
manpower strength necessary to not only maintain its efficient overall 
functioning but also to improv e it. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Corporation should make all efforts to minimize its Establishment Cost and also 

recruit manpower necessary to ensure improved performance of the 
Corporation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.35 In order to further reduce the establishment cost, with the approval of the 
Board of Directors and as per the MOU entered into with the Department of Food 
& Public Distribution for 2013 -14, the Corporation has decided to introduce 
Special Voluntary Retirement Scheme for Group „D‟ employees w.e.f. 1.7.2013. 
 
As regards the Committee‟s recommendations on recruitment of manpower, 
it is informed that the Corporation is recruiting minimum necessary manpower to 
ensure that the performance of the Corporation is not affected.  In view  of the 
increase in storage of foodgrain stocks as well as creation of additional storage 
capacity under PEG Scheme, the Corporation has recently appointed 109 Junior 
Technical Assistants.  Further, appointment of 10 Accountants, 10 Management 
Trainees (Accounts) and 20 Management Trainees (General) is in advance stage 
and offers of appointment are likely to be issued by the end of July 2013. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 24, Para No. 5.18) 
 
2.36 The Committee are happy to note that CWC is making use of owned as 
well as hired storage capacities to the maximum which is evident from the 
percentage utilisation of  capacity furnished by the department  i.e. 94% for 
owned/covered capacity and 93% for hired.  The Committee hope that the 
corporation will continue to make best utilization of owned as well as hired 
capacities and make efforts to minimize dependency on hi red capacities in the 
coming years thereby enhancing its profit.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.37 The utilization of owned as well as hired storage capacity is being 
constantly monitored so as to ensure that the same are gainfully utilized.  Hiring 

of stor age capacity is resorted to only when there is either no owned storage 
capacity or the same is insufficient to meet the business requirement.  The 
Corporation is also progressively creating additional storage capacity either at 
the vacant land in its exist ing warehouses or by securing additional land as may 
be seen from the following: 
 
Year Capacity added 
(in lakh MT) 
2008-09 0.54 
2009-10 0.95 
2010-11 1.45 
2011-12 2.09 
2012-13 2.35 
 
 Further as per the Memorandum of  Understanding (MOU) for 2013 -14, 
2.20 lakh MT has been targeted for creation during 2013-14. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.25, Para No. 5.19) 
 
2.38 The Committee are concerned to note that Corporation has failed to 
achieve its physical as well as financial target for construction of storage space. 
The physical target set during the year 2012 -13 for construction of godowns was 
2.10 lakh MT but its achievement was 2.00 lakh MT and the financial target set 
by the Corporation during the same year was Rs. 126.56 crore but its 
achievement was only Rs. 75.15 crore. According to the Department, the main 
reason for non -achievement of financial targets r egarding contribution to the 
share capital to the State Warehousing Corporations (SWCs) is the failure of the 
SWCs to comply with the provisions of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 
in the matter of finalisation of the Annual Accounts and holding of t he Annual 
General Meeting and lack of demand from the SWCs for infusion of equity, 
excepting Kerala SWC, Assam SWC, and Meghalaya SWC which are loss 
making. The Committee feel that inadequacy of storage capacity poses a serious 
threat to running of efficie nt Public Distribution System and desire that CWC 

should pursue the matter with concerned State Governments/UT Administrations 
vigorously and ensure that funds are fully utilized and the physical and financial 
targets achieved during the current year.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.39 During the year 2012 -13, against the physical target for creation of 2.10 
lakh MT storage capacity, the Corporation has constructed 2.35 lakh MT storage 
capacity, thereby exceeding the physical target set for itself. 
 
  In orde r to improve the compliance of provisions of the Warehousing 
Corporations Act, 1962 by the State Warehousing Corporations (SWCs), CWC 
recently organized a meeting of CMDs/MDs of the SWCs on 9 th April, 2013.  The 
meeting was chaired by the Secretary (Food &  Public Distribution), Government 
of India during which, among other things, the SWCs were impressed upon to 
ensure the creation of additional storage capacity as per the target in a time 
bound manner and to finalize the Annual Accounts upto date and hold Annual 
General Meetings. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.26, Para No. 5.20) 
 
2.40 The Committee also note tha t the perspective plan drawn by CWC for 
construction of godowns in 2013 -14 does not include any NE States except 
Assam. Construction of additional storage capacity of 9000 MT in two 
warehouses in Assam (CW, Sarbhog and CW, Dhubri) has been planned for 
2012-13. While construction of 2000 MT at CW, Dhubri is likely to be completed 
by 31st March, 2013, tender in respect of 7,000 MT at CW, Sorbhog has been 
finalized and Letter of Intent is being issued shortly.  The CWC is operating 9 
warehouses in NE region wi th a total capacity of 1.03 lakh MT and the average 
occupancy of these warehouses during the years  2009 -10,  2010-11 and 2011-
12  was 86%, 92% and 90%  respectively.    The Committee are not convinced 
with the plea taken by the Government that since the e xisting capacity in NE 

region  is not fully utilized, the construction of additional capacity could not be 
considered earlier as the  average capacity utilization of the Region during 
2012-13 (upto February 2013) was 88%.  The Committee feel that the poor 
people of the region should not be deprived of benefits of Public Distribution 
System (PDS) due to shortage of storage space and therefore, recommend that 
NE region be included in the perspective plan drawn by CWC for construction of 
godown and ensured that construction of godowns as per the plan are taken up 
expeditiously so as to complete their construction to facilitate implementation of 
the National Food Security Act. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.41 CWC has added 2,000 MT additional storage capacity at Ce ntral 
Warehouse, Dhubri (Assam) in 2012 -13.  Construction of additional storage 
capacity of 7,000 MT at Central Warehouse, Sorbhog is in progress and will be 
completed during 2013 -14.  CWC is unable to create further storage capacity in 
the North-Eastern States for want of suitable land.  If and when suitable land is 
made available by the respective State Governments and guaranteed utilization 
is extended by the FCI, CWC is willing to consider construction of additional 
storage capacity in these States. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.27, Para No. 6.5) 
 
2.42    The Committee are concerned to note that the productio n of sugar  has 
declined from 263.43 lakh tonnes in  2011 -12 to 246 lakh tonnes in 2012 -13. 
The area under sugarcane cultivation has marginally increased from 50.38 lakh 
hectares in 2011-12 to 50.63 lakh hectares in 2012 -13 i.e. 0.49% increase.  The 
Committee also observe that a number of steps have been taken by the 
Government to increase sugarcane production in the country such as replacing 
the concept of "Minimum Price" to "Fair and Remunerative Price", launching a 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme called "Sust ainable Development of Sugarcane 
Based Cropping System Areas (SUBACS), providing concessional loans to 

sugar factories from Sugar Development Fund (SDF) etc. Despite all these 
measures taken by the Government the production of sugarcane in the country 
has declined during the year 2012 -13, which reflects that the steps taken by the 
Government are not having positive effect.  The Committee are of the view that 
India being the largest consumer of sugar in the world, the production of 
sugarcane in the country n eeds to be enhanced. The Committee, therefore,  
desire that the Government should encourage the farmers to grow early 
maturing and high-yielding cane varieties, adopt the drip and sprinkler irrigation 
system and provide every possible assistance/incentive by way of finance, 
equipments,  fertilizers etc. so that sufficient sugarcane is produce domestically 
and the country need not resort to import of sugar for their consumption 
requirements. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the nodal ministry in 
coordination with the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation and the 
various State Governments should initiate appropriate public private partnership 
on research and extension programmes, set up soil testing laboratories in sugar 
cultivation areas to determ ine and improve fertility of soil, provide training and 
incentives to farmers for growing sugarcane etc.   
 
Reply of the Government 
2.43 The production of sugar has been provisionally estimated at about 248 lac 
tons during the current sugar season 2012 -13 as against the domestic 
requirement of 230 lac tons. The shortfall in sugar production as compared to last 
sugar season 2011 -12 is mainly due to drought like situation and diversion of 
sugarcane as fodder in the States of Maharashtra and Karnataka.  As per  3rd 
advance estimates released on 3 rd May, 2013 by the Department of Agriculture 
and Cooperation, the area under sugarcane cultivation has marginally increased 
from 50.38 lac hectares in 2011 -12 to 50.57 lac hectares in 2012 -13 i.e. an 
increase of 0.38%. However, due to reduction in all India average yield of 
sugarcane from 71.67 tons/hectare in 2011 -12 season to 66.47 tons/hectare in 
2012-13 sugar season, the sugarcane production has decreased from 3610.37 
lac tons in the sugar season 2011 -12 to 3361.46 l ac tons during current season 
2012-13 i.e. a decrease of 248.91 lac tons.  
 
 The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation under Ministry of 
Agriculture implements research and extension programmes with the help of 
State Governments for increasing producti on and productivity of various crops 
including sugarcane in the country. In order to increase sugarcane production 

and productivity in the country, assistance is provided by them for the Centrally 
Sponsored scheme on “Sustainable Development of Sugarcane B ased Cropping 
System(SUBACS)” under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) in many 
sugarcane growing States for field demonstration of production technologies, 
production of seed sets, training of farmers, setting up of Moist heat treatment 
plants, drip/spri nklers irrigation system, tissue culture laboratories, integrated 
management of pest, growing early maturing and high -yielding varieties etc. 
Sugar Development Fund (SDF) in the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution provides soft term loans to the sug ar mills for undertaking cane 
development activities in the area where the mills are located. 
 
   Further, two sugarcane research institutes namely, Sugarcane Breeding 
Institute (SBI), Coimbatore and Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research (IISR), 
Lucknow u nder the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), Ministry of 
Agriculture have developed sugarcane varieties which are high yielding, early 
maturing, tolerance to water logging stress, good ratooning potential and high 
sucrose containing suitable for the different regions/parts of the country. Both the 
Institutes also organize Sugar Institutes -Industry interface meetings (R&D 
meetings) to discuss the problems and issues faced by the sugar industry. 
Regular training/demonstration sessions on recent ad vancement in sugarcane 
production and protection technology are organized for cane personnel of sugar 
mills and farmers both in public -private and public -public partnership modes by 
involving research institutions, sugar mills, NGOs and extension agencies.  
  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
    
Recommendation (Serial No.29, Para No. 6.11) 
 
 
2.44  The Committee note that Sugar Development F und(SDF) is being utilized 
by the Government for various purposes such as providing loans for facilitating 
the rehabilitation and modernization of any sugar factory, loans for undertaking 
any scheme for development of sugarcane, grants for carrying out any  project 
aimed at the promotion and development of any aspect of sugar industry, 
defraying expenses to sugar factory on internal transport and freight charges on 
export of sugar, loans to any sugar factory having an installed capacity of 2500 
TCD or higher etc.  It is observed that an amount of Rs.9296.33 crore have so far 

been disbursed from SDF since its inception and the sugar factories have repaid 
an amount of Rs.3661.84 crore (principal plus interest) as on 31.12.2012. The 
Committee are of the view tha t modernization of sugar mills and rehabilitation of 
sick sugar mills should be accorded due importance so as to ensure regular 
supply and availability of sugar in the market.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the sugar mills should be encouraged t o avail loans/financial 
assistance from the SDF not only for the purpose of reviving the sick sugar mills 
but also for modernization/upgradation of the mills for improving their efficiency 
and production. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.45 The Committee has rec ommended that the sugar mills should be 
encouraged to avail loans/financial assistance from the SDF not only for the 
purpose of reviving the sick sugar mills but also for modernization/upgradation of 
the mills for improving their efficiency and production. 
  
Rule 16(1) of the Sugar Development Fund Rules, 1983, provides that any 
sugar undertaking, which is approved by a financial institution for assistance 
under this relevant scheme for modernization and rehabilitation for purpose of 
rehabilitation/modernization of its plant and machinery, shall normally be eligible 
for a loan under this Rule. 
 
With a view to encourage sugar mills to avail SDF loan for 
modernisation/upgradation of the mills, the simplified procedure for availing the 
loan has been circulated to the State Governments, the apex organisations of the 
sugar industry vide letter dated 03.01.2013 and also put on the website of the 
department. 
 
Amendment to the SDF Rules is considered from time to time to meet the 
emerging requirement in the industry.  Recently the Central Government has 
amended the SDF Rules 1983 vide notification dated 30.07.2012 reducing the 
number of concurrent loans to be availed by the sugar mills under this category 
from two to one. This will facilitate more number of sugar mills  to avail assistance 
under this scheme. 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
 
 

 
Recommendation (Serial No.30, Para No. 6.12) 
 
2.46 The Commi ttee note that the objective of the scheme "Subsidy for 
Maintenance of Buffer Stock of Sugar" is to give subsidy to the sugar mills to 
enable them liquidate the sugarcane price arrears.  Under the Scheme, the 
amount of buffer subsidy disbursed was Rs.591.8 7 crore during 2002 -03 and 
Rs.616.83 crore during 2006 -07 sugar season respectively and cases involving 
an amount of Rs.20 crore and Rs.30 crore respectively are pending settlement 
due to lack of documentation.  Now that a new Rule 19A has been inserted in  the 
SDF Rules, 1983 for settlement of buffer stock claims, the Committee hope that 
the pending cases involving an amount of Rs.20 crore and Rs.30 crore would be 
settled during the current financial year.  
Reply of the Government 
2.47 The settlement of the  buffer subsidy claims for the buffer stock created 
during period 2002 -04 [18.12.2002 to 17.12.2004] is governed by the provisions 
of the Rule 19 of the SDF Rules, 1983. A new Rule 19A was inserted in the SDF 
Rules, 1983 vide notification dated 08.11.2007 for expeditious settlement of 
buffer subsidy claims for the buffer stock created during period 2007 -08 
[01.05.2007 to 31.07.2008].   
 
As on 18.06.2013, the buffer subsidy amounting to Rs. 592.15 crore and 
Rs. 619.37 crore has been disbursed so far under th e buffer stock created during 
the period 2002-04 and 2007-08 respectively. The claims amounting to Rs. 17.25 
crore and  Rs. 28.52 crore are pending for settlement under the buffer stock 
created during the period 2002 -04 and 2007 -08 respectively on account of non-
submission of requisite documents from the claimant sugar mills. The concerned 
sugar mills have already been informed about the discrepancies/ shortcomings 
observed in their claims advising them to submit requisite documents in the 
prescribed time t o settle the claims expeditiously. The Cane Commissioners 
have also been requested to advice the concerned mills to submit the 
documents. Further, the deficiencies found in the documents of these mills have 
been put on the web-site of the Directorate of Sugar. All efforts would be made to 
settle the pending claims within the current financial year.  
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
 (Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 

Recommendation (Serial No.31, Para No. 6.15) 
 
2.48     The Committee note that the physical target under the scheme 
reimbursement of internal transport and freight charges, ocean freight and 
handling and marketing charges on export shipment of sugar has never be en 
achieved since the year 2008 -09 onwards. However, the financial targets have 
been achieved except during the year 2010 -11 when the achievement was 
Rs.146.81 crore against the target of Rs.150 crores.  The reason for not 
achieving the targets is stated t o be non -furnishing of requisite 
information/proper documents by the concerned sugar mills. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that concerted efforts should be made for achieving the 
physical targets also by reviewing the procedural formalities, if necessary , for 
settlement of claims. 
Reply of the Government 
2.49 The Committee has recommended that concerted efforts should be made 
for achieving the physical targets also by reviewing the procedural formalities, if 
necessary, for settlement of claims. 
 
 The above recommendations of the Committee have since been noted. All 
out efforts would be made for achieving the physical targets also for settlement of 
pending claims.   
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
 (Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.33 Para No. 6.23) 
 
2.50 The Committee express its concern over the continuous rise in price of 
sugar in the country. The Committee feel that the mismatch between product ion 
and demand for sugar is primarily responsible for rise in price of sugar. The 
Committee also note that production of sugar during sugar season 2011 -12 was 
263.43 lakh tonnes and sugar production estimated to be about 230 lakh tonnes 
in the current suga r season 2012 -13. The Committee, therefore, strongly desire 
that Government should sincerely work for a long -term policy involving concerted 
efforts on the part of number of Departments/Ministries  and take steps to 
achieve long-term stabilization of sugar production and its price thereof.   

 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.51 Sugar production in the country during last two sugar seasons 2010 -11 
and 2011 -12 was 244 & 263 lakh tons respectively as against the domestic 
requirement of about 215 and 220 lakh tons. T he sugar production during current 
sugar season 2012 -13 is estimated at about 248 lakh tons as against the 
domestic consumption requirement of about 230 lakh tons. Hence, there is 
adequate availability of sugar in the country. The prices of sugar in the do mestic 
market depends upon various factors namely; sugar production, carry -over 
stocks, domestic demand, international sugar prices and market sentiments etc. 
The sugar prices in the domestic market were stable except showing sudden 
spike during the months of August-September, 2012. The sudden spike was due 
to speculative tendencies on the news of drought like situation in some of the 
States as well as delay in commencing sugar production in Brazil. The 
Government took several measures including additional releases of non -levy 
sugar over and above the normal monthly quota for sale in domestic market. 
Thereafter, the prices remained stable. 
 
The Government has constituted a committee under chairmanship of Dr. 
C. Rangarajan, Chairman to the Prime Minister‟s Advisory Committee, to look into 
all aspects of de -regulation of sugar sector. The Government has accepted the 
recommendations of the Committee and, has inter -alia, done away with the levy 
obligation on sugar mills for sugar produced after September, 2012 an d 
dispensed with the regulated release mechanism on open market sale of non-levy 
sugar. The de -regulation of the sugar sector is likely to improve the financial 
health of the sugar mills, increase the cash flow, reduce their inventory cost and 
also result in timely and better payment of cane price to sugarcane farmers in the 
country.    
 In order to increase sugarcane production and productivity in the country, 
assistance is provided in a Centrally sponsored scheme on “Sustainable 
development of Sugarcane B ased Cropping System(SUBACS)” under RKVY in 
many sugarcane growing states for field demonstration of production 

technologies, production of seed setts, setting of moist heat treatment plants and 
training of farmers etc. The Department of Agriculture & Co -operation is regularly 
monitoring the implementation of SUBACS and RKVY through field visits/ review 
meetings and issue administrative approval, releases funds on time for 
increasing productivity of sugarcane. The Central Government also provides 
loans to s ugar mills from Sugar Development Funds at a concessional rate of 
interest for undertaking of any scheme for development of sugarcane in the area 
in which the sugar mill is located. The Government has also made 5% blending 
of ethanol with petrol mandatory vide notification dated 2 nd January, 2013 for 
better exploitation of sugarcane crop. It would lead to stabilization of sugarcane 
production and thus sugar production.  
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
 (Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.34, Para No. 7.8) 
 
2.52 The Committee are concerned to note that the production of oilseeds in 
the country has been gradually declining over the last three years w hile the 
consumption of oils is increasing.  The Committee observe that the net 
availability of edible oils during the years 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 was 97.82 and 
89.57 lakh tonnes while the total consumption was 170.24 and 189.00 lakh 
tonnes respectively.  Th e shortfall was met by import from other countries.  The 
net availability of edible oil from domestic sources in the year 2012 -13 was 89.90 
lakh tonnes and the edible oil imported was 16.41 lakh tonnes (upto December, 
2012) and the total consumption figure  is yet to be ascertained.  The Committee 
note that production of oilseeds has decreased due to decline in acreage under 
cultivation, less monsoon rains in major oilseeds growing states and lesser yield 
of oilseeds etc.  The Government is making efforts to  ensure availability of edible 
oils by fixing import duty on refined edible oils at 7.5%, continuing ban on export 
of edible oils, authorizing State Governments to impose stock limits on edible oils 
and providing relief to consumers especially BPL househol ds by distribution of 

subsidized imported edible oils.  A Centrally Sponsored Integrated Scheme of 
Oilseeds, Oil, Palm and maize (ISOPOM) in 14 major oilseeds, 15 maize growing 
States and 9 oil Palm growing States is also being implemented to enhance the 
production and productivity of edible oils.  Financial assistance is provided under 
the scheme for purchase of breeder seeds, distribution of plant protection 
chemicals, supply of micronutrients and improved agricultural implements, 
training, publicity etc.  Despite all steps taken, the production of oilseeds has not 
increased to meet the domestic oil consumption requirements.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department of Food & Public Distribution in 
coordination with the Ministry of Agricultu re, ICAR and State Governments 
should pay more attention towards the proper implementation of all the schemes 
including R&D for increasing the production of oilseeds in the country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
2.53 The production of oilseeds has increased fr om 24.35 million tons in 2004 -
05 to 30.72 million tons in 2012 -13(as per 3 rd Advance Estimates). The highest 
production of oilseeds to the tune of 32.48 million tons was achieved during 
2010-11. However, the production also fluctuates due to weather aberra tions and 
low moisture availability at the time of sowing. 
  
         The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation is in the process of  
finalizing  the National Mission on Oilseeds & Oil Palm (NMOOP) for increasing 
production /productivity of oilseeds an d area expansion under oil palm and Tree 
Borne Oilseeds (TBOs) for augmenting  the domestic production of vegetable oils  
in the country. The outlay for this Mission is Rs. 3507 crores for the 12 th Plan. 
The proposed NMOOP will consist of three Mini Missio ns i. e. (i) Mini Mission on 
oilseeds in 19 states, (ii) Mini Mission on oil palm for 15 states and (iii) Mini 
Mission on Tree Borne Oilseeds in 28 states.  
 
       The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) is under taking research 
programmes in d ifferent oilseed crops at four commodity based institutes. The 
research programme includes basic and strategic research related to crop 
improvement, production and protection technologies in different oilseed crops 
which form a base for applied research. T he information so developed will be 
used by six All India Coordinated Research Projects on specific oilseed crops to 
develop location specific varieties and technologies as per agro -ecologies  for 
enhancing production and productivity. The contribution of improved technologies 
in oilseeds has resulted in increasing oilseed productivity continuously (1133 

kg/ha in 2011-12) despite marginal variation in acre and production. Some of the 
initiatives being pursued by ICAR in the XII Plan  are:- 
 
 Development of short duration high yielding hybrids in mustard, sunflower, 
castor and sesame  
 
 Using cutting edge technologies for solving biotic stresses viz.  Necrosis in 
sunflower, botrytis in castor, lepidopteran pests in castor, soyabean  and 
groundnut, white rust in mustard and improving oil quality etc. 
 
 Improving input use (nutrients & moisture) efficiency and reduction in cost 
of cultivation of oilseeds. 
 
 Development of genomic resources for abiotic stresses/climate adaptation 
traits and climate resilient technologies for adaptation. 
 
 Developing bio pesticides based IPM technologies. 
 
 Organizing Front line Demonstrations (FLDs) and Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) 
activities on latest improved  technologies of oilseeds. 
 
 Exploration of oilseed cultivation in non traditional a reas such as mustard 
in rice/rabi fallows of Eastern India, Summer Groundnut in Assam, West 
Bengal, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh;  
Safflower in Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh, besides as intercrop in major 
crops of the region etc. 
  
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
 (Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
 (Comments of the Committee) 
 
2.54 Please see Para No.1.26 of Chapter-I of the Report. 

 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S 
 REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.10, Para No.  3.54) 
 
3.1 The Committee observe that the PDS(Control) Order, 2001 mandates the 
States/UTs to formulate suitable guidelines for identification of BPL/AAY families 
as per the poverty estimates adopted by the Central Government.  Detailed 
guidelines issued for identification of eligible AAY families in December 2000 
have since been expanded three times in 2003 -04, 2004-05 and 2005 -06.  The 
Committee also note that the Ministry of Rural Development have commenced 
the Socio-Economic and Caste census 2011 through a comprehensive door to 
door enumeration across the country to generate information on  a large number 
of socio-economic indicators of households across the country.  As about 97% 
of the  enumerators has been completed, the Ministry of Rural Development has 
constituted on Expert Committee on 28 December, 2012 under the chairmanship 
of Prof. Abhijit Sen to exami ne the SECC indicators and for data analysis and 
recommend appropriate methodologies for determining classes of beneficiaries 
for different rural development programmes.  The Committee understand during 
the course of their discussion with the representativ es of the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution at the time of the examination of 
the National Food Security Bill, 2011 that the final result of the SECC will be 
used by the States/UTs for identifying the households for becoming eligib le to 
get benefit under the ensuing National Food Security Bill and various other 
development/Welfare Schemes of the Central Government. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Department of Food and Public Distribution to closely 
coordinate with the Ministry o f Rural   Development so as to persuade them to 
expedite the work relating to examination of the SECC data analysis and 
recommend appropriate methodologies for determining the classes of 
beneficiaries for different rural development programmes on topmost priority. 
 
 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 National Food Security Bill, 2011 (NFSB) inter alia provided that t he 
Central Government may prescribe the guidelines for identification of priority 
households and general households  for entitlements under the Act a nd that 
within the number of persons belonging to the priority households and general 
households determined for each State, identification of households shall be done 
by the State Governments or such other agency as may be decided by the 
Central Government in accordance with those guidelines. 
 The Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution examined the National Food Security Bill, 2011 and gave their report 
in January, 2013. The Committee inter alia recommended on the issue of 
identification of beneficiaries under Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) 
that a simple and fair way of setting State -wise exclusion ratios should be 
prescribed with the cut -offs set in such a way that 25% of the rural population 
and 50% of the urban population are above the respective cut-offs at the national 
level. The Standing Committee further recommended that clearly defined 
exclusion criteria be devised in consultation with State Governments. 
Recommendations of the Committee were examined in consul tation with 
concerned Central Ministries and States/UTs. Based on the recommendations 
and views of various stakeholders thereon, Government proposed certain 
amendments to the Bill and notice for consideration and passing of the Bill, along 
with notice for official amendments, was given in the Lok Sabha on 20.03.2013. 
As regards identification of beneficiaries under TPDS, it was decided that State -
wise coverage will be based on inclusion ratios determined for each State by the 
Central Government correspondin g to coverage of 75%/50% of the rural/urban 
population at the all India level and will be prescribed separately. As regards 
recommendation of the Standing Committee to devise exclusion criteria in 
consultation with States, it was felt that it would be diff icult to evolve a consensus 
with State Government over this issue. Therefore, within the inclusion ratios 
determined for each State, the work of identification of households may be left to 
States/UTs, who will be free to develop their own criteria or use the SECC data, if 
they so desire. 
 Although the Government moved the motion in the Budget Session, 2013 
for consideration and passing of the Bill, along with official amendments, the Bill 
could not be considered and passed. In view of the time that has alre ady lapsed 
in passing of the Bill and further delay involved in getting it passed through 
Parliament in the normal course, the Government has promulgated the National 
Food Security Ordinance, 2013 (NFSO) on 05.07.2013 to ensure that the 
benefits of the pro posed legislation reach the people at the earliest. The NFSO 
provides that within the coverage under TPDS determined for each State, the 
State Government shall identify the households to be covered under the 
Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) in accordance with t he guidelines applicable to 
the said scheme and the remaining households as priority households to be 

covered under the TPDS, in accordance with such guidelines as the State 
Government may specify. 
 It may be seen from the above that earlier the NFSB provi ded that 
identification of households to determine coverage of population under TPDS 
was to be done by State Governments or any other agency as decided by the 
Central Government, in accordance with the guidelines prescribed by the Central 
Government. On th e other hand, the NFSO now provides that identification of 
households under TPDS would be done by the State Governments and 
guidelines for which would also be specified by them (other than for AAY 
households). However, as recommended by the Standing Commit tee, the 
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) has been 
requested to expedite Socio-Economic and Caste Census (SECC) data analysis. 
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
 (Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013]    
 
Recommendation (Serial No.11, Para No.  3.59) 
 
3.3 The Committee note that a Nine Point Action Plan, which inter -alia 
includes continuous review of BPL/AAY lists and to eliminate bogus/ineligible 
ration cards alongwith taking strict action against the guilty was evolved in 2006 
in consultation with State/UT Governments so as to ensure leakage free 
distribution of  foodgrains.  As a result of the instructions issued to all States/UTs 
Governments to c arry out an extensive campaign to review the existing list of 
BPL/AAY families and to eliminate bogus/ineligible ration cards, 28 State/UT 
Governments have reported deletion of 362.26 lakh bogus/ineligible ration cards 
since July, 2006.  All State/UT Gover nments were also instructed to issue 
warnings to the bogus ration card holders through advertisements on the 
newspapers and to surrender the bogus ration cards.  The State/UT 
Governments have also reported departmental action including suspension, 
lodging of FIR and recovery action in respect of staff held responsible for issue 
of bogus ration cards. While appreciating all these steps taken, the Committee 
are constrained to note that a large number of bogus/ineligible ration cards 
continue to exist in sever al States/UTs in the country.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend the Department to take even more proactive 
steps in consultation with the States/UT Governments to review the BPL/AAY 

lists so as to detect and delete bogus/ineligible ration cards  on a continuing 
basis while ensuring that genuine BPL/AAY families are not deprived of the 
benefits of Public Distribution System (PDS). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 3.4 PDS (Control) Order, 2001 mandates the State Governments for 
formulating suitable guide lines for the purpose of identification of families living 
below the poverty line (BPL), including Antyodaya families as per the estimates 
adopted by the Central Government.  The order further required that State 
Governments shall get the lists of BPL & An tyodaya families reviewed every year 
for the purpose of deletion of ineligible families and inclusion of eligible families. 
Besides, State Government shall conduct periodical checking of ration cards to 
weed out ineligible and bogus ration cards and bogus units in ration cards. Such 
an exercise shall be a continuous one by the State Government to check 
diversion of essential commodities. Instructions were also issued to all State/UT 
Governments to carry out an intensive campaign from October, 2009 to 
December, 2009 to review the existing lists of Below Poverty Line 
(BPL)/Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) families and eliminate ineligible/bogus 
ration cards. As a result thereof, 28 State/UT Governments have reported by 
31.03.2013, deletion of 364.01 lakh bogus/ineligible ration cards.  
 
Further, on the basis of recommendations made by the Standing 
Committee of the Department in its 16th Report, all the States/UTs have been 
advised to launch a special drive during 2012 -13 (upto March 2013) to identify 
and issue ratio n cards to poor families under AAY or BPL who have not been 
issued the ration cards or who have not yet been included under AAY/BPL list.  
 
Digitization of ration card database in States/UTs being undertaken under 
the scheme of end -to-end computerisation i s expected to lead to elimination of 
bogus ration cards through the process of de -duplication. Computerisation of 
PDS will ensure proper identification of beneficiaries and distribution of 
foodgrains to the intended beneficiaries. 
 
Further, in view of recommendation of Standing Committee, instructions to 
all stake holders are being issued in this regard.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 

Recommendation (Serial No.13, Para No. 3.68) 
 
3.5 The Committee also note that the State/UT Governments have been 
authorized to fix margin over and above the Central Issue Price(CIP)  to be 
charged by the FPS Dealers to cover transport charges, margin etc. for 
distribution of foodgrains to the TPDS beneficiaries.  However, in case of AAY, 
the end retail price of foodgrains is to be retained at Rs.2/ - per kg for wheat and 
Rs.3/- per kg for rice.  Though fixing of FPS margin comes under the domain of 
State/UT Governments, the Central Government has been advising the State/UT 
Governments from time to time to ensure viability of FPS operations by 
increasing FPS dealer's margin.  The Committee are happy to note that the issue 
of FPS dealer's margin was taken up by  the Hon'ble Minister of State in -charge 
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution with Hon'ble Chief 
Ministers/Administrators in States/UTs.  The Committee, however, regret that 
whether all these efforts made by the Government have any positive im pact on 
the FPS operations in the country is not known.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should examine the proposal of some states 
regarding bearing of expenditure by the Central Government on the margins paid 
to the FPS dealers in  respect of foodgrains distributed to AAY category and also 
take necessary steps to ensure viability of FPS operations in the country.   
Reply of the Government 
3.6 TPDS is operated under the joint responsibility of Central and State 
Governments wherein th e fixation of margin to Fair Price Shop Dealers is the 
responsibility of the concerned State /UT Government.  Central Govt. has given 
flexibility to the State/UT Governments in the matter of fixing the margin for the 
FPS for distribution of foodgrains to TPDS beneficiaries.  
 
 State/UT Governments had made requests that on the line of Above 
Poverty Line (APL) category, they should be given flexibility in determining the 
margin to FPS owners and fixing of retail issue prices for foodgrains issued to 
BPL category.  The requests from State/UT Governments were considered in this 
Department and they have been given flexibility vide this Departments letter 
No.6(4)/2001-PD-I dated 28.8.2001 in the matter of fixing the margin for the Fair 
Price Shops for distributio n of foodgrains to BPL families under TPDS.  This is, 
however, not to apply to the distribution of foodgrains under Antyodaya Anna 
Yojana where end retail price is to be retained at Rs.2/- a kg for wheat and Rs.3/- 

a kg for rice.  The rates of commission t o FPS owners are, therefore, to be 
determined by the respective States/UTs.   
 
 As regards recommendations that Department of Food and Public 
Distribution should bear the expenditure on FPS dealers margin, it is stated that 
in the official amendments propo sed to the National Food Security Bill, it is 
provided that Central Government shall provide assistance to State Governments 
in meeting the expenditure on intra-State movements, handling of foodgrains and 
margin paid to FPS dealers in accordance with norms  and manners to be 
prescribed by Central Government.  The  Government has promulgated the 
National Food Security Ordinance, 2013 (NFSO) on 05.07.2013. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
  
Recommendation (Serial No.14, Para No. 4.6) 
 
 
3.7 The Committee note with concern that a large amount of dues are still 
outstanding against the Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of Human 
Resource De velopment on account of foodgrains provided to them by FCI for 
various welfare schemes on payment basis. The Committee have been informed 
that outstanding amount against Ministry of Rural Development as on 31.03.2013 
is Rs. 2890.82 crore for each of the ye ars 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012 -13. The 
amount outstanding against Ministry of Human Resource Development as on 
31.03.2013 for the year 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 is Rs. 176.97, Rs. 317.99 
and Rs. 397.93 crore respectively, which exclude revolving fund of Rs. 300 crore 
provided by the Ministry of Human Resource Development. The Committee are 
surprised to note that no time limit has been fixed for making payment by the 
Ministry of Rural Development for foodgrains supplied under SGRY Scheme 
which has been clo sed on 31.3.2008. In respect of Mid -Day Meal Scheme 
(MDM) of the Ministry of  Human Resource Development, there is time limit of 20 
days for making payment after submission of bills in the subsequent month (time 
for submission of bills is 10 days) by the  District Authorities under the 
Decentralized Scheme of Payment. However, the prescribed time limit is not 
adhered to strictly by the  Ministry of Human Resource Development/District 
Authorities. The Committee find that despite various steps taken by the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution and even after intervention at 
Minister's level with the Ministry of Finance and other concerned Ministries i.e. 
Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of Human Resource Development, 
huge  amount is still outsta nding for several years. The Committee view this with 
grave concern and reiterate its earlier recommendation made in the report on 
Demands for Grants (2012 -13) and desire that the Department should find ways 
and means to liquidate these outstanding dues at  the earliest so as to avoid 
undue burden on ever increasing Food Subsidy Bill. The Committee also desire 

that a time limit should be fixed within which Ministries are required to make 
payment.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.8 The issue of outstanding dues of the FCI pending against the Ministry of 
Rural Development (MoRD) and Ministry of Human Resource Development 
(MoHRD) has been taken up with these Ministries at the highest level from time 
to time.  
In case of Ministry of Rural Development, an amount of R s.2890.82 crore 
is outstanding dues of FCI against MoRD in respect of foodgrains released under 
SGRY Scheme. This scheme has been closed on 31.03.2008. Since then an 
amount of Rs.2890.82 is constant in pending despite regular follow up by this 
Deptt./FCI. The matter is regularly followed up with the MoRD through letters and 
discussion in the meetings. Last such meeting was held on 07.05.2013. 
 
In case of Ministry of Human Resources Development also, the matter for 
settlement  of outstanding dues of FCI has been vigorously pursued at all level to 
ensure the timely payment  of dues for foodgrains supplied for MDM.  A meeting 
was also  held in this regard with officers of MoHRD on 26.12.2012.   
It is submitted that due to continuous efforts made by D/o Food & P D  and 
FCI, the outstanding dues against MoHRD has been fully settled for the period 
upto 31.03.2010 i.e the period upto which payment was being made on  
Centralized basis.  
      For the period from 01.04.2010 onwards when decentralised payment 
system was introduced,  as per information furnished by FCI, as on  01.04.2013 
an amount of Rs.353.89 crore was due against foodgrains supplied under MDM,  
which also include revolving fund of Rs.300 crore.      
 
Besides, this matter  is also being taken up with MoH RD to convert the 
present credit based payment  system  into pre-payment system at decentralized 
level. 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
 (Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.15, Para No. 4.10) 
 
3.9 The Committee note that the net expenditure incurred by FCI including the 
Establishment Cost is reimbursed by the Government in the form of food 
subsidy. The Committee are also deeply concerned that a large  part of the food 
subsidy goes towards the establishment cost of FCI which increased from 

Rs.160.92 crore in 2011 -12 to Rs.335.11 crore in 2012 -13 despite reducing the 
sanctioned staff strength from 55,045 to 36,515 in the year 2010. The 
Establishment Cost  is, therefore, still very high and it should be kept under 
check as the poor are deprived of foodgrains to the extent the food subsidy 
amount is diverted towards the establishment cost. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that ways and means shou ld be devised by the 
Department so as to reduce the Establishment Cost and ensure that the 
maximum  amount of food subsidy is utilized for distribution of  foodgrains to the 
poor section of the society, who are the most legitimate beneficiaries. 
 
(Reply of the Government) 
 
3.10 Food Corporation of India is following instructions on economy measure 
and rationalization of expenditure issued from time to time by Government of 
India to keep the establishment cost to its barest minimum. 
 
The Establishment Cost o f FCI for 2011 -12 (Audited) and 2012 -13 
Revised Estimated (RE) are as under:                                                                            
  (Amt. in Rs crores) 
Establishment Cost 2011-12 (Audited) 2012-13 (RE) 
(i) Staff Cost 2285.28 3058.50 
(ii) Other Administrative  Cost 160.92 335.11 
Total Establishment Cost 2446.20 3393.61 
 
 
From the above it can be seen that the total establishment cost of FCI  
has increased from Rs. 2446.20 Crores in 2011 -12 to 3393.61 Crores in 2012 -
13(RE). The increase from Rs. 160.92 crores in 2011 -12 to Rs. 335.11 crores in 
2012-13(RE) relates to the “other Administrative Cost”. This “Other 
Administrative cost” is part of the total Establishment Cost. The Staff cost 
mentioned in the above table includes the cost of  outsourcing which is resorted 
due to the shortage of manpower. The Net Staff Cost of FCI which is incurred on 
the employee has increased from Rs. 2263.04 crores in 2011 -12 to 3001.00 
crores in 2012-13(RE). i.e. an increase of 32.61 %. 
 
The Main reasons for increase in the Staff Cost are  as under:- 
 
While preparing budget for 2012 -13(RE), it was estimated that 
approximately 3654 new recruits would join the FCI.  
 
 Due to the large number of retirement in 2012 -13, payment of retirement 
benefits (DCRG, EL on  retirement) have increased from Rs. 466.26 crores in 
2011-12 to Rs. 550 crores in 2012 -13(RE). A retired person gets his terminal 
dues which is almost equivalent to 2 years‟ salary. 

 
Overtime has increased as manpower strength has considerably reduced. 
The expenditure on the overtime has increased from Rs. 19.11 crores in 2011 -12 
to Rs. 43.00 crores in 2012-13(RE). 
 
During 2011-12, the PLI for the employees of FCI was not approved and 
the same got approved during 2012-13. Thus the cost on account of PLI includes 
the PLI cost for 2011-12 and 2012-13. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.16, Para No. 4.14) 
 
 
3.11 The Co mmittee are concerned to note that as on 31.01.2013, the 
utilization of CAP (owned) storage capacity of FCI was only 37% and that of 
CAP(hired) capacity was only 60%.  The Committee are constrained to observe 
that on the one hand, there is overall shortage  of storage facilities in the country 
and, on the other, the FCI could not make full use of their owned and hired CAP 
storage capacity. Besides, FCI has been spending a huge amount every year for 
the last many years on hiring the godowns. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
utmost care should be exercised by FCI to maximize storage capacity utilization 
for owned as well as hired godowns. The Committee also strongly recommend 
that FCI should ensure that  their owned capacity is utilized to the maximum 
before hiring any storage capacity in order to save precious funds, on hiring the 
storage space to the extent possible. 
 
(Reply of the Government) 
 
3.12 It is submitted that CAP (Cover and Plinth) capacity is used as a 
temporary mode of storage for a short dur ation only when no covered capacity is 
available at a particular location. Further, this capacity is used to store 
wheat/paddy only and not rice. These factors are responsible for lower utilization 
of CAP capacity as it is utilized only as a last resort an d that too for wheat/paddy 
only. Further, in some Regions/Zones CAP capacity is not utilized due to local 
climatological situations. 
 
During the procurement months of April to June, wheat is procured in the 
states of Punjab, Haryana, M.P. and U.P. etc. whi ch is despatched to the 
consuming states throughout the year. Therefore the capacity utilization of CAP 
capacity, which is mainly concentrated in wheat procuring states, is high during 
the peak season but goes on declining continuously as the stocks are 
despatched to the consuming areas/states throughout the year. 

   
During the Year 2012 -13, the storage capacity with CAP(Owned/Hired), 
stocks held and its percentage utilization was as follows:- 
(Fig. in Lakh MT) 
Month CAP capacity 
  Owned Stocks Utilization Hired Stocks Utilization 
Apr-12 26.36 9.62 36 8.65 7.28 84 
May-12 26.36 16.63 63 10.22 13.00 127 
Jun-12 26.36 18.32 69 12.35 17.12 139 
Jul-12 26.36 18.21 69 13.54 16.59 123 
Aug-12 26.36 16.30 62 12.53 13.95 111 
Sep-12 26.37 14.41 55 13.79 11.54 84 
Oct-12 26.37 13.42 51 12.57 9.20 73 
Nov-12 26.37 12.29 47 11.28 8.30 74 
Dec-12 26.37 10.97 42 10.72 7.27 68 
Jan-13 26.37 9.87 37 10.43 6.24 60 
Feb-13 26.37 7.83 30 11.12 5.55 50 
Mar-13 26.37 5.52 21 11.07 4.85 44 
Average 26.37 12.78 48 11.52 10.07 87 
 
From the table above it can be seen that the utilization of owned CAP 
capacity was maximum in the month of June, July 2012 i.e. 69% with average 
utilization of 48%.  The utilization of hired capacity was maximum in the month of 
June, 2012 i.e. 139% with a average utilization of 87%. 
 
As far as the lower utilization of owned capacity is compared to the hired 
capacity,  it may please be noted that this is a rather natural phenomenon due to 
the following reasons: 
 
1. The Storage Capacity is hired only when there is absolute necessity of the 
same which becomes all the more reason for it to be fully/more utilized. 
 
2. The owned capacity once constructed at a particular place/location cannot 
be shifted if the same is required at a different location due to changed 
procurement pattern or change in off take of foodgrains on account of 
consumer preference etc. whereas the hired capacity can be de hired and 
re hired as per requirements making its utilization more than the owned 
capacity. 
 
3. Owned capacities are created at c ertain remote/hill areas also keeping in 
view the regional requirements where private parties do not come forward 
to offer hired capacity. Higher utilization of capacity in such places is not 
possible due to various factors such as difficult terrain, impro per 

infrastructure, climatic conditions, limitation of railways/other transportation 
facilities etc. Examples of the same are NE Zone, Himachal Pradesh, J&K 
etc. 
 
4. Many a times hired capacity is taken on AUB (Actual Utilization Basis) 
where the capacity hir ed is shown equal to stock stored there in making 
the capacity utilization 100% thereby increasing the overall capacity 
utilization of hired capacity as compared to owned capacity. 
 
5. Some part of the owned capacity remains under repair and maintenance 
resulting in overall less utilization as compared to hired capacity because 
the hired capacity is taken only when it is fully storage worthy. 
 
6. Often it is not cost effective to undertake long distance transportation and 
double handling of food grains just to en sure utilization of FCI vacant 
space at far off places in place of hiring the fresh storage space at the 
place where it is required because of proximity to the procurement or 
consumption centres.  
 
7. As has already been stated above, CAP capacity is used onl y for storage 
of wheat, many a times this becomes the reason for low utilization of CAP 
capacity as compared to covered capacity which can be used for all the 
commodities. 
 
 Further, it is submitted that adequate checks and balances are in place in 
the form of Internal Audit so as to ensure proper utilization of available capacity 
whether owned or hired and to ensure that no infructuous expenditure is made 
on account of rental charges by hiring the godowns unnecessarily. Review of 
capacity utilization is al so carried out by Regional Offices/ Zonal Offices/FCI 
HQs. to ensure optimum utilization of storage capacity and to minimize the cost 
of storage.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.22, Para No. 5.5) 
 
3.13 The Committee note that the outstanding dues of Central Warehousing 
Corporation (CWC) have been rising continuously during the last three years - 
from Rs.215.00 crore in 2010-11 to Rs.260.00 crore in 2012 -13.  The Committee 
also observe that with the approval of the Board of Directors of CWC, an amount 

of Rs.9.47crore was written off in the year 2010 -11 against the outstanding dues 
in respect of the Fertiliser Corporation of India Ltd.(FCIL) considering the fact that 
FCIL was referred to Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR).  
Though the functioning of CWC may not suffer on account of outstanding dues 
being a profit making PSU, yet the Committee d esire that the Corporation should 
make efforts to liquidate the outstanding dues fully at the earliest.  The 
Committee further urge the Corporation not to write off bad debts in respect of 
any PSU before exercising every option available under the rules in this regard.  
 
(Reply of the Government) 
3.14 The total outstanding dues of the Central Warehousing Corporation 
(CWC) has increased from Rs. 228 crore as on 31.03.2011 to Rs. 260 
crore(provisional) as on 31.03.2013.  During the same period, the total inco me of 
the Corporation has increased from Rs. 1030 crore in 2010 -11 to Rs. 1400 crore 
(provisional) in 2012 -13.  Though the total outstanding dues amount has 
increased in absolute terms, yet as a percentage of the total income, it has 
declined from 22.13% as on 31.03.2011 to 18.57% as on 31.03.2013. 
 
Major amount of the outstanding, out of Rs. 260 crore as on 31.03.2013 is 
against the Food Corporation of India (FCI) amounting to Rs. 159.11 crore. This 
amounts to about 61% of the total outstanding dues. In or der to liquidate the 
outstanding dues of FCI, besides regular meeting at the level of Area Managers, 
General Managers (Region), and Executive Directors (Zones) of FCI, the matter 
is also being taken up regularly with the FCI headquarters. Besides, meetings  at 
the level of the Department of Food & Public Distribution is being organized and 
the Corporation is hopeful that these steps would bring down the outstanding 
dues of FCI considerably during the coming days. 
 
As regards writing off the bad debts, the Co rporation undertakes writing off 
bad debts only as a matter of last resort after exhausting all options to realize the 
outstanding dues and after obtaining the approval of the Board of Directors. 
However, as advised by the Committee, it would be ensured th at before writing 
off bad debts, all options to realize the same would be explored. 

 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.28, Para No. 6.7) 
 
3.15 The Committee observe that the Government had created a buffer stock 
of 20 lakh tonnes and another buffer stock of 30 lakh tonnes for a period of one 
year from 01.05.07 to 30.04.08 vide notification dated 20.04.07 and from 
01.08.07 to 31.07.08 vide order dated 01.08.07 respectively. Subsequently, when 
the production of sugar declined, the Government dismantled the buffer stock on 
their due dates.  The Committee feel that maintaining buffer stock of sugar is 
very much essential to meet the requirement of PDS as also crisis situation in the 
years of deficit sugar production. The Committee, therefore desire that 
government may review its buffer stock policy with a view to exploring the 
possibility of maintaining buffer stock of s ugar  and take appropriate measures in 
this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
3.16 The Central Government had created a buffer stock of 50 lakh tones out of 
non-levy stock for a period of one year when there was excess production of 
sugar in 2006 -07 and 2007 -08 sugar seasons to stabilize sugar prices in the 
open market. 
  
The Central Government has since reviewed its sugar policy in April,2013 
in the light of the recommendations of Dr. C. Rangarajan Committee on 
deregulation of sugar sector. The Government ha s accepted the 
recommendations of the Committee and has, inter -alia, done away with the levy 
obligation on sugar mills for sugar produced after September, 2012 and 
dispensed with the regulated release mechanism for sale of non -levy sugar. 
Under the new dis pensation, the State Government/UTs are required to procure 
sugar from the open market through a transparent mechanism to make sugar 
available in the Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) at the existing Retail 
Issue Price (RIP) of Rs 13.50 per kg and  the Central Government would 
reimburse the subsidy @Rs. 18.50 per kg, limited to the quantity as per their 
existing allocation. As such, there is no need to have buffer stock for meeting 
PDS requirements. 
 
As regards, meeting sugar requirement during the years of low production, 
the Government is of the view that the appropriate export/import policy coupled 

with the removal of regulated release mechanism would ensure adequate 
availability of sugar in the years of deficit sugar production.  
 
It is pertinent  to mention that the sugar production during last two sugar 
seasons 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 was 244 and 263 lakh tons, respectively which 
was sufficient to meet domestic requirement. Sugar production during current 
sugar season 2012 -13 is estimated at about 24 8 lakh tons as against the 
domestic consumption requirement of about 230 lakh tons. Sugar production in 
the ensuing 2013-14 sugar season is projected to be less than the current sugar 
season due to lower sugarcane production in drought affected states. How ever, 
with a carryover stock of about 85 lakh tones, the availability of sugar would be 
sufficient to meet the domestic requirement. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.32 Para No.6.21) 
 
3.17 The Committee are shocked to note that cane price arrears to farmers are 
constantly on the rise and the outstanding cane price arrears are as high as      
Rs. 11102.96 crore as on 15th February, 2013. The Committee are pained to 
note that although payment of sugarcane arrears is required to be made within 
14 days of the supply of sugarcane by the farmers, it is, however, rarely done. 
Cane price arrears pertaining to sugar season 201 2-13 and earlier are still 
outstanding. Fatty outstanding cane arrears often prompt cane growers to shift to 
other crops every two years or so which leads to occasional shortfall in sugar 
output, pushing up consumer prices and a glut deficit cycle. The Com mittee feel 
that non -payment of cane price arrears in time can be discouraging and might 
refrain the farmers from growing sugarcane who may opt for producing other 
crops. Farmers need to be paid remunerative price immediately on delivery of his 
agricultural produce. Based on recommendations of the Rangarajan Committee, 
Government has further decided for removal of levy sugar obligation and 
dispensing with the regulated release mechanism on non -levy sugar which in 
turn would affect the profitability of mille rs and bargaining power of farmers. 
During evidence, the Secretary, Department of Food & Public Distribution stated 
that by doing away with the practice of compulsory requisition of part production 
from sugar factories as levy sugar for distribution to Pub lic Distribution System 

will, in turn, improve the financial position of the sugar mills and will enable them 
to make payment of care price arrears at the earliest.  The Committee hope that 
the Government's attempt to decontrol sugar will play a significan t role in 
reducing the cane price arrears of sugar mills.  The Committee note that 
Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966 also empowers the State Government to 
recover cane price arrears from defaulting sugar mills as land revenue arrears 
and desire that strict a ction should be taken against defaulting sugar mills under 
the provisions of the order. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
to protect the interests of the sugarcane farmers and to motivate them to 
continue growing sugarcane, the aids/grants given to the sugar mills should be 
suspended till they liquidate the cane price arrears with interest.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.18 The outstanding cane price payment as on 15.4.2013 is about Rs. 12359 
crores. The Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966 stipul ates payment of interest at 
the rate of 15% per annum on amount due for the delayed period beyond 14 
days. The powers for enforcing this provision are delegated and vested with the 
State Governments/UT Administrations who have necessary field formations. 
State Governments are also advised by the Central Government from time to 
time to reduce cane arrears. 
 
However, w hen the sugar price decline, which generally happens in the 
years of surplus sugar production, the Central Government, at times, extends 
assistance to mills through schemes like creation of buffer stock, export subsidy 
etc.  The funds disbursed under such schemes are linked to settlement of cane 
price arrears as a first priority.  If the Government accepts the suggestion of the 
Committee, it woul d not be able to extend assistance under these schemes to 
sugar mills having cane price arrears and ultimately sugarcane farmers may 
suffer. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 

CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.2, Para No. 3.6) 
 
4.1 The Committee regret to note that after 16  years of launching the scheme 
and despite of their repeated recommendations for taking concrete steps to try 
and convince the States/UTs to adopt the Decentralized Procurement Scheme 
(DCP), the scheme has so far been adopted by only 9 States/UTs for Rice and 5 
States for Wheat respectively. Government of Uttar Pradesh had been procuring 
wheat under the DCP Scheme upto KMS 2008 -09 but have discontinued the 
system. Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan have expressed their 
willingness to adopt the DCP mode from KMS 2012 -13 and RMS 2013 -14 
respectively. While noting that procurement of foodgrains is more effective under 
the Decentralized Procurement (DCP) Scheme since non -decentralized 
procurement involves one additional handling transaction of FCI takin g over the 
stock of foodgrains and releasing them to the State Governments, the Committee 
are fully convinced that the remaining States/UTs should also adopt the DCP 
Scheme at the earliest possible. It has become all the more essential for the 
States/UTs to adopt the DCP Scheme in view of the anticipated implementation 
of the National Food Security Bill. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Department of Food and Public Distribution should make 
earnest efforts to ascertain the problems bein g faced by the States/UTs and 
provide maximum assistance possible to all the States/UTs to enable them to 
adopt the DCP Scheme. The Department should expedite discussion not only 
with the Government of Rajasthan who expressed willingness to adopt the 
scheme, but also make sincere efforts to encourage the Government of Uttar 
Pradesh who discontinued DCP Scheme since KMS 2008 -09 and all other 
States/UTs so as to persuade them to adopt the scheme. 
 
(Reply of the Government) 
 
4.2 The Government of India makes a ctive effort to pursue State 
Governments to adopt the Decentralized System of Procurement (DCP) Scheme. 
With the efforts made in this regard, Government of Andhra Pradesh has 
adopted the Decentralized Procurement (DCP) Scheme of procurement from 
KMS 2012-13 onwards. Government of Rajasthan has adopted the DCP mode of 
procurement w.e.f. RMS 2013 -14, initially in the Alwar district of the State. State 
Government has been requested to adopt the DCP mode in the entire State from 
2014-15 onwards. The decision re garding adoption of DCP system lies with the 
State Government. The determining factors are infrastructure and resources 
available with the respective State Governments including manpower, storage 
and necessary logistics required for procurement and accordi ngly, State 
Government‟s readiness to undertake DCP procurement. Citing infrastructural 
problems, Governments of Delhi, Haryana and Sikkim have conveyed their 
inability to adopt the DCP system of procurement. Among the infrastructure 

required for procureme nt operations, storage facilities for foodgrains is a major 
factor. For this purpose the Government has formulated the Private Entrepreneur 
Guarantee (PEG) scheme for construction covered storage godowns through 
private entrepreneurs, CWC and State Warehou sing Corporation (SWC). Under 
the PEG Scheme, FCI gives guarantee for the storage charges to the private 
investors for ten years. A capacity of 197 (as on 31.03.2013) lakh tonnes has 
been approved for construction of godowns in 19 States under PEG Scheme. 
 
 The Government of Uttar Pradesh had been procuring rice under the DCP 
Scheme upto KMS 2008 -09, but have discontinued the system after this period, 
on the stated grounds of pending procurement incidentals and delay in receipt of 
food subsidy bills. The de lay, in certain cases in this regard, was on account of 
delay on the part of the State Government in submitting their claims.   
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M.No.G-20017/6/2013-AC dated 25th July, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
4.3 Please see Para No. 1.8   of Chapter-I of the Report. 
  

CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-  NIL   - 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI            VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
 9  December, 2013            CHAIRMAN, 
18 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)             Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 

 
APPENDIX I 
 
                       
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (201 3-14) HELD 
ON MONDAY, 9TH DECEMBER, 2013 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs. in Committee Room 
'E', Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
4. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
5. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
6. Shri C.Rajendran 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
7. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
8. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
9. Dr. T.N.Seema 
10.  Shri Veer Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.K.Misra  - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou - Under Secretary 
 
 

 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
 
1. XXXXXXX    - XXXXXXX 
2. XXXXXXX    - XXXXXXX 
  
 At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of 
the Committee. The Committee first considered the draft report on action taken 
by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 28th 
Report o f the Committee on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) pertaining to the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution. After due deliberation, the 
Committee unanimously adopted the draft Report without any 
amendments/modifications.  
 
2. Thereafter, Senior Economic Advisor and other officials of the Department 
of Consumer Affairs were invited to the sitting of the Committee  to tender  oral 
evidence on the subject 'National Test House (NTH) – Facilities for Testing, 
Evaluation and Calibration of Engineering Equipments'.  
 
  XXXXXXXXX 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS  OF THE  ACTION  TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWELFTH REPORT  OF  
THE  STANDING  COMMIT TEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFA IRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION (2010-11) 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)   
(i) Total number of Recommendations:        34 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government : 
 
 Serial Nos.:- 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 
25, 26, 27, 29, 30, 31, 33 and 34. 
    
Para Nos:-    2.8, 3.12, 3.19, 3.28, 3.35,3.36, 3.44, 3.50, 3.67, 
4.18, 4.23, 4.24, 4.25, 4.28, 5.9, 5.18, 5.19, 5.20, 
6.5, 6.11, 6.12, 6.15, 6.23 and 7.8   
  
          (Chapter – II, Total - 24) 
Percentage : 70.59% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government 
Serial Nos. 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 22, 28 and 32 
Para  Nos. – 3.54, 3.59, 3.68, 4.6, 4.10, 4.14, 5.5, 6 .7, and 
6.21 
           (Chapter – III, Total - 9) 
Percentage : 26.47% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
Serial No. 2   
(Para No. – 3.6)  
            (Chapter – IV, Total -1)   
Percentage : 2.94% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
interim replies of the Government have been received. 
    
   Serial No.:- Nil 
   (Para No. – Nil) 
    (Chapter – V, Total - 0) 
Percentage : 00.00% 