 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
              AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2012-2013) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
 
 
{Action  Taken  by   the  Government  on  the  observations/recommendations 
contained in the Seventeenth Report of the Committee (2011-12) on Demands 
for Grants (2012-13) pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution)} 
 
 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2012/  Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 
24 


TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2012-2013) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
{Action  Taken  by   the  Government  on  the  observations/recommendations 
contained in the Seventeenth Report of the Committee (2011-12) on Demands 
for Grants (2012-13) pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution)} 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2012 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2012 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2012/  Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 


 
CONTENTS 
 
              PAGE 
 
Composition of the Committee …………………………………………          (ii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………...          (iv) 
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………………            7 
 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government……………………………  27 
  
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
 the Government‟s replies………………………………... 61 
 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee ………………………………………..  74 
 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are  
still awaited………………………………………………  78 
   
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the --- sitting of the Committee held on    
-----, 2012 …………………………………..                       82 
 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report  
of the Committee (2011-12) ……………………………… 84  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2012-13) 
 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar  - Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
4. Shri Kantilal Bhuria 
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary  
6. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
7. Shri Sanjay Dhotre  
8. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
9. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
10. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav   
11. Shri Sohan Potai 
12. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
13. Shri A. Sai Prathap 
14. Shri C. Rajendran 
15. Shri Purnmasi Ram  
16. Shri Chandulal Sahu (Chandu Bhaiya) 
17. Shri Adhi Sankar 
18. Shri N. Chaluvaraya Swamy 
19. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
20. Shri  Laxman Tudu 
21. Vacant* 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
23. Shri Lalhming Liana 

(ii) 
 
 
24. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
25. Ms. Rekha  
26. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy 
27. Dr. T.N. Seema 
28. Shri Birender Singh 
29. Shri Veer Singh 
30. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
31. Vacant 
____________________________________________________________ 
* Shri Lal Chand Kataria, MP appointed Minister w.e.f 28.10.2012 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri P. K. Misra  -  Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3.  Shri Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

INTRODUCTION 
  
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution (2012 -13) having been authorized by the Commi ttee to 
submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty -fourth Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Seventeenth Report of the Committee (2011 -12) on Demands for Grants            
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
 
2.  The Seventeenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in            
Rajya Sabha on 3 rd May, 2012. The Government have furnished their rep lies 
indicating Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Report on                           
1st August, 2012.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 11th December, 2012.  
 
4.  An analysis of the ac tion taken by the Government on Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.  
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the text o f 
the Report. 
  
 
  
 
NEW DELHI;                      VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
11th December, 2012                        Chairman, 
20 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution deals with the Action Taken by the Government on                      
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report                        
of the Committee (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) pertaining 
to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Food and Public Distribution). 
 
1.2 The Seventeenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and l aid on               
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 03.05.2012. It contained 27 observations/ 
recommendations. Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 27 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report have been received and 
these have been categorized as follows:- 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government : 
 
 Serial Nos.:- 1, 3, 5,  6, 7, 8, 13, 14, 16, 17, 19, 21, 23, 25, 
26 and 27.  
    
Paragraph Nos:- 2.6, 3.14, 3.17, 3.33, 3.42, 3.52, 4.23, 4.42,   
  4.44, 4.48, 5.9, 5.17, 6.10, 6.20, 7.7 and 7.13. 
          (Chapter – II, Total - 16) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government 
Serial Nos. 10, 11, 12, 18, 22 and 24   
(Paragraph Nos. – 4.7, 4.12, 4.17, 5.7, 6.7and 6.15) 
           (Chapter – III, Total - 6)

(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
          of the Government have not been accepted by the 
         Committee and which require reiteration: 
Serial No. 2 and 15  
(Paragraph No.  3.7 and 4.43)  
            (Chapter – IV, Total -2)   
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
interim replies of the Government have been received. 
   Serial No.:- 4, 9 and 20. 
   (Paragraph No. – 3.15, 3.60 and 5.13) 
    (Chapter – V, Total - 3) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations for which only interim replies have been 
received from the Government alongwith the replies on recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I of this Report be furnished to the Committee within 
three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee strongly emphasize that utmost importance should 
be given to the implementation of Observations/Recommendations 
accepted by the Government. In case where it is not possible for the 
Government to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any 
reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee in time with 
reasons for non-implementation. 
 
1.5 The Committee wil l now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations. 
 

A. Need to adopt DCP Scheme by all States/UTs  
 
  
Recommendation (Serial No.  2, Para No. 3.7) 
 
1.6 The Committee in their original report observed/recommended as follows:  
 
'The Committee note that the Decentralized Procurement Scheme (DCP) like 
other schemes of the Department also suffers for want of infrastructural facilities, 
timely release of funds, submission of utilization certificates and proper planning 
for distributio n of foodgrains. Besides, even after 13 years of its inception, the 
DCP scheme was undertaken by only 6 States for wheat and 10 States for rice. 
The Committee feel that DCP scheme is one of the most important schemes 
being implemented with a view to lessen ing the burden of FCI and reducing the 
dependence of Central Government. The Committee feel that the 
Department/FCI should create necessary infrastructure in coordination with the 
State Governments in Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode in a time bound 
manner by using the modern scientific technology so that more and more States 
opt for the DCP Scheme for procurement of foodgrains. The Committee desire 
that the Department should also take vigorous steps to motivate the remaining 
States to adopt the DCP sc heme. The specific benefits of adopting the scheme 
along with the achievement of DCP States should be duly communicated at the 
highest level through various meetings so as to persuade the States to contribute 
towards the Central Pool thereby enhancing food security.' 
 
 
1.7 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:-  
  
The Scheme of Decentralised Procurement (DCP) of foodgrains was 
introduced in 1997 -98 with a view to enhance the efficiency of procurement and 
PDS and to encourage local procu rement and reduce out go of food subsidy.  In 
it, the States undertake the responsibility of procurement of foodgrains, its 
scientific storage and distribution through Targeted Public Distribution System 
(TPDS).  The surplus of foodgrains procured by DCP S tates, in excess of their 
TPDS requirement is handed over to FCI for the Central Pool stocks and deficit, 
if any, is met by FCI. 
 
            The decision regarding adoption of DCP system lies with the State 
Governments. The determining factors are infrast ructure and resources available 
with the respective State Governments including manpower, storage and 
necessary logistics required for procurement and accordingly, State 
Government‟s readiness to undertake DCP procurement. 
        
The major infrastructure required for procurement operation is the storage 
facilities for the foodgrains.  For this purpose the Government has launched the 
Private Entrepreneur Guarantee(PEG) scheme.  A capacity of about 151 lakh 
tonnes is to be created in 19 States under the PEG scheme through private 
entrepreneurs and Central and State Warehousing Corporations. 
 

 At present the  States of West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, 
Uttrakhand, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and 
Kerala are procuring rice un der the decentralized procurement scheme. The 
States of West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand and Gujarat 
are procuring wheat under the DCP Scheme. Government of Uttar Pradesh had 
been procuring rice under the DCP Scheme upto KMS 2008 -09 b ut have 
discontinued the system after this period. Government of Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, 
Haryana and Sikkim have conveyed their inability to adopt the DCP system of 
procurement of foodgrains due to infrastructural problems. The Government of 
India is actively pursuing this issue with the remaining State governments and all 
possible efforts will be made to encourage the remaining states to adopt the DCP 
scheme. The Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand, 
Rajasthan and J&K have again been reque sted to adopt the DCP Scheme. 
Government of Uttar Pradesh has also been requested to again adopt the DCP 
scheme.' 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 
  

  
1.8 In their original report, the Committee had observed that even after              
13 years of its inception, DCP Scheme had been adopted only by 6 States 
for Wheat and 10 States for rice, mainly due to lack of infrastructural 
facilities, untimely release of funds and non submission of utilization 
certificates etc. The Committee had, therefore, desired that the Department 
should create necessary infrastructure in coordination with the State 
Governments and take vigorous steps to motiva te the remaining 
States/UTs to adopt the DCP Scheme. In their action taken reply, the 
Government have, inter-alia, stated that the DCP Scheme of foodgrains was 
introduced in 1997 -98 with a view to enhancing the efficiency of 
procurement and PDS to encourage local procurement and reduce outgo of 
food subsidy.  The decision regarding adoption of DCP scheme lies with 
the State Governments which is determined by infrastructure and 
resources availability.  At present, nine States are procuring rice and five 
States are procuring wheat under the DCP Scheme. Government of Uttar 
Pradesh which had been procuring rice has discontinued the system after 
KMS 2008 -09. Four States namely, Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana and 
Sikkim have conveyed their inability to adopt the D CP Scheme due to 
infrastructural problems. The Department have again requested seven 
States namely, Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, 
Jammu & Kashmir and Uttar Pradesh to adopt the DCP Scheme. The 
Committee feel that the efforts so far ma de by the Government to convince 
the States for adoption of DCP Scheme are not sufficient and need to be 
enhanced. While reiterating their earlier recommendation, the Committee 
desire that not only few States, but all States/UTs should be vigorously 
persuaded to adopt the DCP Scheme at the earliest particularly keeping in 
view the impending implementation of the National Food Security Bill. The 
Government should also extend all possible assistance to the State 
Governments/UT Administration for creation of n ecessary infrastructure 
required for adoption of DCP Scheme. 
 

B. Need to implement Nine-Point Action Plan by all the States/UTs  
Recommendation (Serial No. 6, Para No. 3.33) 
 
1.9 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
The Committee note that the Government of India launched the Targetted 
Public Distribution System (TPDS) in June, 1997 with a view to making foolproof 
arrangements for identification of poor population for delivery of foodgrains 
through FPS at subsidized rates. The poorest of the poor persons are distributed 
the foodgrains at the lowest price i.e. Rs. 2 per kg of wheat and Rs. 3 per kg. of 
rice under the Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) Scheme. The Government has 
adopted Nine Point Action plan in July 2006 to make TPDS more effective. The 
Committee regret to note that despite various measures taken by the 
Government to streamline and strengthen the TPDS, there is no satisfactory 
improvement in its functioning. There is error in inclusion and exclusion of 
targeted families in the list of BPL and AAY families. Besides, the diversion and 
leakage of foodgrains has become a more serious problem in the States. The 
Citizen's Charter issued by GOI in July 2007 to increase the transparency in the 
functioning of TPDS has not y et been adopted by all the States/UTs. Upto 
31.01.2012, 22 States/UT Government have reported implementation of monthly 
certification scheme. In the opinion of the Committee, this could be attributed to 
weak monitoring over the scheme on the part of the De partment and lack of 
coordination with the State Governments. Consequently, a large number of poor 
families are being deprived of the benefits of the subsidized foodgrains. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should make concerted 
efforts to persuade all the State Governments/UTs to implement the Nine Point 
Action Plan, monthly certification scheme and Citizen's Charter and closely 
monitor the implementation of the scheme so that the AAY and BPL families get 
their due share of foodgrains . The Department should also impress upon all the 
States/UTs to follow the guidelines laid down in the revised Citizen's Charter to 
ensure food security to weaker sections of the society under TPDS. 
 
 
1.10 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted by the 
Department. All States/UTs have been instructed to implement the provisions 
contained in Nine Point Action Plan and the Citizen‟s Charter in letter and spirit. 
Further, the remainin g States/UTs who have not reported 
implementation/adoption of the revised Citizen‟s Charter and who have not 
introduced monthly certification by village panchayats/urban local 
bodies/vigilance committees/women‟s Self Help Groups for delivery of food 
grains to fair price shops in time and their distribution to ration card holders have 
been advised again to take necessary measures for their implementation at the 
earliest.  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
           O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012]  

 
1.11  The Committee in their original report had noted that the 
Government adopted Nine -Point Action Plan in July, 2006 to make TPDS 
more effective but despite various measur es taken by the Government to 
streamline the functioning of TPDS, there was no satisfactory improvement 
in its functioning. The Committee, therefore, had recommended that the 
Department should make concerted efforts to persuade all the State 
Governments/UTs to implement the Nine -point Action Plan, monthly 
certification scheme and Citizens' Charter and closely monitor the 
implementation of the scheme so that the AAY and BPL families get their 
due share of foodgrains. In their action taken reply, the Governme nt have 
stated that the recommendation of the Committee have been noted by the 
Department and all States/UTs have been instructed to implement the 
provisions contained in the Nine -point Action Plan and the Citizens' 
Charter in letter and spirit. It is furt her stated that the remaining States/UTs 
who have not reported implementation/adoption of the revised Citizens' 
Charter and also not introduced monthly certification by Village 
Panchayats/Urban Local Bodies/Vigilance Committees/Women Self -help 
Groups for d elivery of foodgrains to Fair Price Shops in time have been 
advised again to take necessary measures for their implementation at the 
earliest. However, the Department have not mentioned any details as to 
whether any of the States/UTs have taken any action in pursuance to their 
instructions. The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to ascertain 
from all the States/UTs about the present status regarding implementation 
of the Nine-Point Action Plan and revised Citizens' Charter and apprise the 
Committee.  
 
 
 
 
 

C. Need to install GPS Sets on vehicles carrying TPDS Commodities 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 3.42) 
 
1.12 The Committee in their original report observed/recommended as follows:  
 
'The Committee note with concern that as per the findings of  the National 
Council for Applied Research (NCAER), the level of diversion of wheat in Assam 
and Mizoram is 100 per cent for APL whereas in case of rice, it is 83.38 per cent 
and 81.12 per cent for APL families in the two States respectively. This shows 
that foodgrains meant for APL families have not reached to them at all in these 
two States. The level of diversion of wheat for APL in respect of Chhattisgarh and 
Jharkhand is 78.34 per cent and 54.53 per cent, respectively. In order to curb 
diversion and le akages of foodgrains meant for TPDS, Government is taking up 
piloting of innovative/new technologies such as GPS, RFIDs, barcoded coupons, 
stamping of PDS foodgrains, etc. The Committee hope that GPS devices would  
be installed in the vehicles carrying TPD S foodgrains/goods in all the States/UTs 
of the country on top priority basis to curb the menace of diversion and leakages 
of foodgrains, meant for poorest of the poor, to be allocated through PDS.'   
 
1.13 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
'In this connection, it is mentioned that u nder a Plan Scheme on 
strengthening of TPDS, the Government  has taken up a innovative scheme i.e. 
installation of Global Positioning System (GPS) sets on the vehicles carrying 
TPDS commodities in order to curb leakages and diversion of foodgrains.  Under 
this Scheme, financial assistance of Rs.44.76 lakh was given in 2007 -08 to the 
State Governments of Tamil Nadu, Chhattisgarh and Delhi for installation of GPS 
devices on the vehicles carrying TPDS f oodgrains.  Governments of Tamil Nadu 
and Chhattisgarh have reported the implementation of the said scheme. 
 
 Government of Tamil Nadu who have implemented the system in two 
districts have reported that (i) the quantities of foodgrains allotted from FCI to  the 
indented godowns reached without single case of diversion (ii) it has created 
moral fear among those involved in transportation of PDS items and it has (iii) 
enabled the civil supplies department and other vigilance agencies to track the 
movement of v ehicles carrying PDS items at short notice and avoided delays in 
transportation.  
 
 Government of Chhattisgarh have reported that after installation of GPS 
sets on vehicles carrying TPDS commodities, from the distribution centres, such 
vehicles are reachin g their destination/intended places and no irregularities of 
any kind have been noticed. 
 
 On a further request from Government of Chhattisgarh, a further sum of 
Rs.1,11,00,900/- has been sanctioned and released to State Government of 
Chhattisgarh in 2011 -12 for purchase/installation of GPS sets on vehicles 
carrying TPDS commodities. 

 
 Subsequently, it was decided to extend this scheme in all the States/Union 
Territories (UTs) in the financial year 2011 -12 and proposals were invited from 
States/UTs for sanc tioning funds under the scheme.  State/UT Governments 
have again been requested in May, 2012 to send proposals for sanctioning of 
funds under the scheme during 2012 -13 for installation of GPS sets on vehicles 
carrying TPDS commodities'. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 

 
1.14 Having noted that the level of diversions/leakages of foodgrains 
meant for TPDS was very high in many States, th e Committee in their 
original report had expressed the hope that the GPS devices would be 
installed in the vehicles carrying TPDS foodgrains/goods in all States/UTs 
of the country on top priority basis to curb the menace of diversion and 
leakages of foodgr ains. In their action taken reply, the Department have 
stated that financial assistance of Rs. 44.76 lakh was given in 2007 -08 to 
the State Governments of Tamil Nadu, Chattisgarh and Delhi for installation 
of GPS devices on vehicles carrying TPDS foodgrain s. The Government of 
Tamil Nadu and Chattisgarh have reported implementation of the scheme. 
Government of Tamil Nadu have implemented the system in 2 districts and 
reported that as a result thereof, the quantities of foodgrains allotted from 
FCI to the intended godowns reach without a single case of diversion and it 
has created moral fear among those involved in transportation of TPDS 
commodities and enabled the Civil Supplies Department and other 
vigilance agencies to track the movement of vehicles carryin g TPDS items 
at short notice. Government of Chattisgarh also reported that no 
irregularities of any kind were noticed after installation of the GPS device 
on vehicles carrying TPDS foodgrains. Subsequently, it was decided to 
extend the scheme in all States /UTs in the financial year 2011 -12 and 
proposals were invited from States/UTs for sanctioning of funds under the 
scheme. State/UT Governments have again been requested in May, 2012 to 
send proposals for sanctioning of funds under the scheme during the year  
2012-13 for installation of GPS devices on vehicles carrying TPDS 
foodgrains. Having observed that diversion and leakages of foodgrains is a 
major problem in the way of smooth functioning of TPDS, the Committee 
are pained to note that so far GPS devices h ave been implemented in 2 
States only and proposal for implementation of the devices is still awaited 
from rest of the States/UTs. Considering that the National Food Security 
Bill is being implemented shortly, the Committee feel that  there is an 
urgent need to install GPS devices on vehicles carrying TPDS foodgrains. 
The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to expedite the process of 

obtaining proposals from all the States/UTs and also speedily sanction the 
funds for installation of GPS devices on veh icles carrying TPDS foodgrains 
to the States/UTs on top priority to curb the diversion/leakage of 
foodgrains.  

 
D. Need to supply rakes of atleast 90% of the requirement of FCI by 
railways 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.15, Para No. 4.43) 
 
1.15 The Committee in their original report observed/recommended as follows: 
 
'The Committee note that there is shortfall in the supply of rakes by 
Railways vis -à-vis the plan of FCI for meeting the PDS requirement in the 
country.  The Committee have been informed that during 20 11-12, FCI had 
planned movement for 13,215 rakes but railways supplied only 10,969 rakes 
which is about 83% of the planned movement. FCI could have moved about 60 
lakh tonnes additional foodgrains if this shortage was not there. Due to this 
shortfall, many States, especially the two high procuring States i.e. Punjab and 
Andhra Pradesh have been affected. The other States affected are M.P. (about 6 
lakh tones), Chhattisgarh (about 5 lakh tonnes) and Haryana (about 7 lakh 
tonnes). The Committee have been furt her informed that FCI prepares monthly 
Movement Plan based on computerized linear programming indicating date -wise, 
destination-wise requirement of rakes but railways during 2011 -12 has complied 
with only 40% of the linear programming. The unplanned rakes sent by Railways 
lead to bunching, detention and consequently FCI suffers financial loss because 
huge amounts have to be paid to the railways in the form of demurrages. 
Recently, railways have started imposing 6 times demurrages without 
considering their o wn operational problems which is one of the reasons for 
detention of rakes. 
 
 During evidence, the representatives of the Department further informed 
the Committee that there are large number of railways sidings/goodsheds where 
the platform itself cannot a ccommodate full rake i.e. about 40 to 42 wagons. The 
States where this problem exits are Kerala, Bihar, West Bengal and Jharkhand. 
According to the Department, Railway Board itself has approved supply of rakes 
at these locations as two point combinations. But subsequently railway 
authorities impose restrictions on two point combinations for more than 6 months 
in a year which leads to problem of detention and inadequate supply of 
foodgrains on these locations. The Committee desire that Department should 
regularly monitor the movement of foodgrains and coordinate with railway 
authorities for additional supply of rakes on priority basis to augment foodgrain 
stock in the State where shortfall of foodgrains is reported.  In the light of the 
above circumstances/ob servations, the Committee, also desire the Department 
to communicate the concern of the Committee to the Ministry of Railways to 
explore the feasibility of supplying the rakes of atleast 90% of the requirement of 
FCI and not to  impose restrictions on load ing under two point combinations for 
the states of Kerala, West Bengal, Bihar and Jharkhand so that FCI can ensure 
movement of foodgrains in  these States without any hindrance.' 

  
1.16 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
'The Department regularly monitors the movement of foodgrains and takes 
up the matter with FCI and Railways,  in case any shortfall in foodgrain stocks is 
reported in any State and coordinates for providing additional rakes on priority to 
augment the foodgrain stocks in that State.  
 
 FCI requires rakes under two point combinations throughout the year as 
some of the centres in Kerala, Jharkhand, Bihar and West Bengal can 
accommodate rakes in two point combination only. But Railways invariably stops 
sponsoring rakes under two point combinations during the busy season i.e. from 
November to April every year. At present the situation is better due to ongoing 
lean season. 
 
       As recommended by the Committee, the issue of supplying at least 90% 
rake requirement of  FCI and not to impose restrictions on loading of two point 
combinations has been taken up with Ministry of Railways.' 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 
 
 
 
 

1.17 The Committee in their original report had observed that there was 
shortfall in the supply of rakes by Railway vis -à-vis the plan of FCI for 
meeting the PDS requirement in the country.  In 2011 -12, FCI could have 
only 83% of th e planned movement which affected two high procuring 
States i.e. Punjab and Andhra Pradesh.  The Committee further observed 
that the FCI prepares monthly movement plan based on Computerized 
Linear Programming indicating date -wise, destination-wise requirement of 
rakes but railways could supply only 40% of the linear programming during 
2011-12. Railway authorities also imposed restrictions on Two -point 
combinations which are provided at the Railway sidings/goods sheds 
where the platform itself cannot accommo date full rake e.g. in States like 
Kerala, Bihar, West Bengal and Jharkhand, for more than 6 months in a 
year, which leads to detention and inadequate supply of foodgrains on 
these locations. The Committee had, therefore, desired that the Department 
should communicate to the Ministry of Railways the need to explore the 
feasibility of supplying at least 90% of the requirement of rakes of FCI and 
not to impose restrictions on loading under Two -point combinations so 
that FCI could ensure movement of foodgrains  in these States without any 
hindrance. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated that the 
Department regularly monitors movement of foodgrains and takes up the 
matter with FCI and railways. FCI requires rakes under Two -point 
combination through out the year in these States but railways invariably 
stops sponsoring rakes under Two -point combination during busy season 
i.e. from November to April, every year. The Department have further stated 
that the issue of supplying at least 90% rakes requirement to FCI and not to 
impose restrictions on loading under Two -point combination has been 
taken up with the Ministry of Railways. The Committee are not satisfied 
with the reply of the Department as they have not indicated as to at what 
level the matter has b een taken with the Ministry of Railways and what has 
been the outcome thereof.  While reiterating their recommendations the 
Committee desire that the matter should be followed closely with the 
Ministry of Railways and the Committee be apprised of the outco me 
thereof.  

E. Need to dedicate special wagons for movement of foodgrains to 
avoid contamination 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No.16, Para No. 4.44) 
 
1.18 The Committee in their original report observed/recommended as follows: 
    
'The Committee have been informe d during evidence that the railways 
supply general purpose wagons for loading of foodgrains, which are also used for 
loading cement, fertilizers and other general goods. They do not earmark specific 
rakes for loading of foodgrains. The Committee feel that there is imperative need 
to supply wagons which are free from remains of dust, coal, cement and 
fertilizers before they are loaded with foodgrains/sugar. The Committee, 
therefore, feel that there is laxity on the part of Department of Food and Public 
Distribution, FCI and railways authorities in accepting and supplying wagons 
which are not fit to transport foodgrains and may cause serious health hazards to 
consumers. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that under no 
circumstances wagons which are u sed for transporting cement, fertilizers, coal 
etc. be used for transportation of foodgrains. The Committee recommend that 
Government should take up the matter with the Ministry of Railways for providing 
special wagons instead of general purpose ones for t he transportation of 
foodgrains so that the quality of foodgrains remain intact till it reaches its final 
destination'. 
 
  
1.19  The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
'The Railways are supposed to supply clean and tidy wagons for  loading 
of foodgrains. In case any un -cleaned wagons are provided by the Railways, the 
Railway authorities are requested to get the same cleaned before loading the 
foodgrain stocks.  If the wagons are not cleaned by the Railways on the request 
of FCI, the  same are got cleaned by FCI before loading the stocks to avoid any 
contamination of the foodgrains.  
 
 The matter has been taken up with Ministry of Railways to provide  special 
wagons for transporting foodgrains'. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 
 
 
 

 
1.20 In their original report, the Committee observed that the railways did 
not earmark specific rakes for loading of foodgrains and fe lt that if wagons 
which are used for movement of other materials such as cement, fertilizers 
etc., are also used for movement of foodgrains, it may cause serious 
health-hazards to the consumers. Considering these facts, the Committee 
had strongly recommended that the Government should take up the matter 
with the Ministry of Railways to ensure that under no circumstances, 
wagons which are used for transporting cement, fertilizers etc., be used for 
transportation of foodgrains. The Department in their action taken reply 
merely stated that the railways are supposed to supply clean and tidy 
wagons for loading of foodgrains and in case any unclean wagons are 
provided by the railways, the railway authorities are requested to get the 
same cleaned before loading of foodgrains. The Department further stated 
that the matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Railways to provide 
special wagons for transporting foodgrains. The Committee are not 
satisfied with the reply of the Ministry as it does not indicate any 
improvement in the situation. Following the implementation of the National 
Food Security Bill, it is expected that the quantum of movement of 
foodgrains would substantially increase in all parts of the country. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Department to take up the matter with the 
Ministry of Railways more vigorously and ensure that special wagons for 
transportation of foodgrains only are supplied by the railways to the FCI.  
The Committee be apprised of the outcome in this regard.  

 
F. Need to check adu lteration of edible oils and ensure its quality 
control 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 27, Para No. 7.13) 
 
1.21 The Committee in their original report observed/recommended as follows: 
    
'The Committee are concerned to note that the number of surprise visits  
and other inspections of the vanaspati manufacturing units carried out by the 
officials of DVVO&F and samples analyzed for the last three years is on the 
decline. The number of inspections done during 2010-11 was 915 which declined 
to 290 during 2011 -12. Similarly, number of samples analyzed during the year 
2010-11 was 3180 which declined to 2299 in 2011-12. The Committee feel that in 
a vast country like ours where edible oils are the main cooking medium and 
adulteration of edible oils is so widespread, nu mber of inspections being carried 
out and samples being analyzed are almost negligible. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that to keep a check on the adulteration of edible oils 
which is so rampant in our country, and to ensure quality control, the numbe r of 
inspections and samples analysis should be increased and strict action should be 
taken against the offenders'. 
  
1.22 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
'The Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils and Fats (DVVO&F) was 
entrusted with inspection and analysis of samples from industries at the 
production level under Vegetable Oil Products (Regulation) Order, 1998.  The 
regulatory functions have been taken over by FSSAI under  Food  Safety  and  
Standards  Act, 2006 which ha s been implemented w.e.f.  5 th August, 2011. The 
work of inspection and analysis of samples has been entrusted with Food Safety 
and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) w.e.f. 5 th August, 2011. Therefore the 
number of inspections carried out and number of samples analyzed by the 
officials of DVVOF is less during 2011 -12 which is upto 4 th August, 2011 as 
compared to previous year 2010-11. 
 
The matter has been taken up with Food Safety and Standards Authority 
of India (FSSAI)   (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare). As per information 
received from FSSAI, the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 was passed by 
the Parliament during 2006 in order to consolidate all the laws relating to food 
and to establish the Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI)  f or laying 
down science based standards  for articles of food and to regulate their 
manufacture, storage, distribution,  sale and import, to ensure availability of safe 
and wholesome food for human consumption and for matters connected 
therewith or incident al thereto.  By virtue of the mandate given to FSSAI, Rules 
and Regulations hitherto implemented under various regulatory orders had been 
repealed with effect from 5 th August 2011.  These repealed orders include (i) 
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 195 4; (ii) Vegetable Oil Products 
(Regulation) Order, 1998; (iii) Edible Oils Packaging (Regulation) Order, 1998 

and (iv) Solvent Extracted Oils, De -oiled Meals and Edible Flour (Control)         
Order, 1967. 
 
Various Regulations have been notified and being implemented with effect 
from 5th August 2011 under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.  Granting 
of Licenses and Registrations to Food Business Operator are in progress.  
Various Enforcement machineries have been put in place to ensure effective 
Enforcement of the Act and Regulations notified therein. All the States/UTs have 
notified their Food Safety Commissioners.  Testing Laboratories, both 
Governmental and Private, had been accredited for smooth disposal of samples 
from throughout the country.  Var ious laboratories in States/UTs have been 
authorized to carryout analysis of Food samples including edible oils'. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 
 
 
 

 
1.23 The Committee in their original report noted that the number of 
surprise visits and other inspections of the Vanaspati Manufacturing Units 
carried out by the officials of Directorate of Vanaspati Vegetable Oils and 
Fats (DVVO&F) and  samples analyzed had declined during the year              
2010-11. In case of number of inspection done, it declined from 915 during 
the year 2010 -11 to 290 during 2011 -12. Similarly, the number of samples 
analyzed during 2010 -11 was 3180 which declined to 2299 in 2011 -12. The 
Committee had accordingly recommended that adulteration of edible oils 
which is so rampant in our country should be kept in check and the quality 
of edible oils should be ensured by increasing the number of inspections 
and samples analysis, apart from taking strict action against the offenders. 
In their action taken reply, the Department have stated, inter -alia, that 
DVVO&F was entrusted with inspection and analysis of samples from 
industries at the production level under Vegetable O il Products 
(Regulation) Order, 1998. However, the regulatory functions have been 
taken over by Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) w.e.f. 
5th August, 2011 under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
Therefore, the number of inspectio ns carried out and number of samples 
analyzed by the officials of DVVOF is less during 2011 -12 which is upto          
4th August, 2011 as compared to previous year 2010 -11. It is further stated 
that the matter has been taken up with Food Safety and Standar ds 
Authority of India as per information received from Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), by virtue of mandate given to FSSAI, 
Rules and Regulations hitherto implemented under various regulatory 

orders have been repealed with effect from  5th August, 2011 e.g. (i) 
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (ii) Vegetable Oil Products 
(Regulation) Order, 1998 and (iii) Edible Oils Packaging (Regulation) Order, 
1998, etc.  The Committee hope that these Orders will be strictly enforced 
to maintain food safety standards and to check the adulteration of edible 
oils which is so rampant in our country.  

CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
  ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.1, Para No. 2.6) 
 
   
2.1 The Committee note that BE of the Department for the year 2011 -12 was 
Rs. 120 crore for its Plan Schemes which was reduced to Rs. 93.48 crore at RE 
stage and the actual expenditure incurred up to 31.03.2012 was Rs. 91.17 crore 
which indicates 97.5% utilization of R E. The Committee note that for Non -Plan 
Schemes during 2011 -12, BE was  Rs.72211.32 crore which was raised to Rs. 
84393.93 crore at RE stage but actual expenditure was Rs.72726.67 crore. The 
Committee feel that revising the estimate at RE stage and then no t utilizing the 
revised allocated funds shows lack of  perspective planning on the part of the 
Department. The Committee  further note that in Non -Plan Schemes, there is 
under spending in various Schemes such as Scheme for `financial assistance to 
sugar un dertakings‟, `reimbursement export shipment of internal transport and 
freight charges to sugar factories‟, `Indian Grain Storage Management & 
Research Institute(IGMRI)‟, `modernization/rehabilitation of sugar mills‟, etc. In 
view of the above observations,  the Committee strongly recommend that 
Department should make advance and better planning to fix realistic targets so 
as to avoid fluctuations in allocation of funds at RE stage and ensure that the 
allocations earmarked for different schemes are fully utilized during the year. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
2.2 Funds utilized during the FY 2011 -12 were 97.5% of RE.  The funds 
sought by States/ UTs were not released during 2011 -12 in the plan Scheme 
Computerization of PDS Operations as it was decided to ta ke up the 
requirements of fund by States/ UTs under the scheme on end -to-end 
Computerization of PDS under 12th  Five Year Plan (2012-17). Non-finalization of 
schemes for implementation due to procedural issues under the Plan Scheme 
NSI Kanpur and non-carrying out of a  technical study awarded to National Sugar 
Institute, Kanpur, due to technical reasons were other reasons for non -utilization 
of RE.  The savings in the RE were due to unavoidable situations and in keeping 
with financial propriety and prudence  and not because of lack of perspective 
planning on the part of the Department.  However, the Department would ensure 
that RE is fully utilized in future. 
 
As regards expenditure on non -plan schemes, it is clarified that against 
RE of Rs.84393.93 crore for  Non Plan, the actual expenditure was Rs.84332.31 
crore (99.92% of the RE). Expenditure of Rs.72211.32 crore was booked upto 
28.3.2012 and balance of Rs. 12120.99 crore was released from 29.03.2012 to 
31.03.2012. The heavy expenditure during fag end of Mar ch, 2012 was due to 
delay in finalization of 3 rd Batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants for 2011 -
12 of Rs.10069.64 crores (including provision under Token Supplementary) 
which was received on 29.03.2012.   

 However, the observation/recommendations conta ined in Point No.2.6 of 
the SEVENTEENTH REPORT of the Standing Committee for Department of 
Food & Public Distribution regarding under spending in various Schemes has 
been noted and the  Heads of the concerned Division have been asked to follow 
the recommen dation and ensure that the allocations earmarked for different 
schemes are fully utilized by way of  better planning and fixing realistic targets. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3.14) 
 
2.3 The Committee note that the subsidy released on foodgrains has risen by 
leaps and bounds during the last three years for which the reasons attributed by 
the De partment are the increasing gap between Minimum Support Price(MSP) 
and Central Issue Price (CIP) of wheat and rice supplied to AAY, BPL and APL 
families under PDS and also due to supply of foodgrains for several schemes run 
by other ministries and States/U Ts at BPL rates such as Mid -Day Meal scheme 
of the Ministry of Human Resource Development, Annapurna Schemes of 
States/UTs, etc. The Committee also note that there has been normal increase in 
freight/handling charges and interest cost due to higher quantit y of foodgrains 
handled/procured. The Committee feel that the need for higher amount of 
subsidy is due to non -revision of issue price of foodgrains for the past about 10 
years whereas MSP of wheat has substantially increased over the years. In view 
of the aforesaid scenario, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of 
Finance/Planning Commission should be persuaded to allocate adequate food 
subsidy for efficient management of various operations of FCI. The concern of 
the Committee should be commun icated to Planning Commission/Ministry of 
Finance. At the same time, the Committee also desire that encouraging 
decentralized procurement in the remaining States the Department should also 
make concrete efforts  to finalize the poverty estimates of AAY and  BPL 
population at the earliest by considering the existing level of income and 
expenditure structure for deciding the allocation of foodgrains under TPDS to 
reduce the undue burden on food subsidy bill. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
2.4 The requirement of food subsidy has been increasing every year. Ministry 
of Finance is continuously being pursued for release of funds for food subsidy as 
per the yearly requirement. However, since food subsidy is released as non -plan 
funds and is not allocated under any  Plan Scheme; Planning Commission is not 
directly concerned. Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance have been 
informed about the concern of the Hon‟ble Standing Committee. 
 
 This Department has been requesting the non -DCP States for procuring 
sufficient foodgrains to meet their requirement and to switch over to DCP 
Scheme.  
 
As regards the observations/recommendations relating to finalization of 
poverty estimates of AAY and BPL population at the earliest, it is submitted that: 
 
 Ministry of Rural Devel opment issues guidelines for conducting of BPL 
Census in rural areas. Ministry of Rural Development has reported that the 
combined Socio -Economic and Caste Census – 2011 in rural and urban areas 
has been launched on 29.06.2011 in the State of Tripura and i n a phased 
manner throughout the  country. Some of the small States/UTs have 
completed SECC – 2011 and the data is yet to be analyzed by Ministry of Rural 

Development.  It has also been informed by the Ministry of Rural Development 
that SECC 2011 is likely  to be extended beyond July, 2012. This Department is 
pursuing the matter with Ministry of Rural Development for early completion of 
SECC 2011. 
 
 The National Food Security Bill has been introduced in the Lok Sabha on 
22.12.2011. The Bill has been referred  to the Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution on 5 th January, 2012 for examination.  
So far, two meetings of the Committee have been held on 22.02.2012 and 
02.03.2012. Further action will be taken once the report of Standing Committee is 
submitted in the Parliament. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 

Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 3.17) 
 
2.5 The Committee are unhappy to note that claims of huge amount are still 
pending with FCI for being paid to States/UTs on account of cost of 
transportation of foodgrains under Hill Transport Subsidy (HTS) scheme since 
2006 for one or the other reason. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that Department/FCI should make sincere efforts for liquidation of the 
outstanding dues of the States/UTs. The Committee also desire that States 
should be given proper guidelines in clear and unambiguous terms regarding 
procedure to be followed by the States while submitting the claims of HTS. They 
should be given standing instructions in clear terms about the kind of format to be 
furnished and documents to be submitted for ensuring speedier settlement of 
HTS claims. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
2.6 With a view to settle the problem of outstanding amounts of HTS for the 
States of Meghalaya, Mizoram, Tripura, Manipur and Nagaland, a Committee of 
Executive Directors of FCI was set up to examine the issue.  
The Committee has given its recommendations that the settlement of HTS 
bills upto the year 2008 -09 will be on the basis of a certificate from State 
Government regarding flow of funds from State treasury account to transporters‟ 
accounts in form of a statement which will be duly  countersigned by Secretary 
(Food) of the State Govt. The State Govt. will give a statement for each Release 
order. The statement would be duly certified by the following officers of the 
concerned State Government and State Bank of India:-  
1) Treasury Officer 
2) Director of Food Department 
3) Branch Manager, State Bank of India from where the payment  
  was transferred to the Transport contractor account 
4) Secretary (Food) of the State Government. 
Accordingly, instructions have been issued to the Chief Se cretaries of 
Mizoram, Tripura, Meghalaya, Manipur and Nagaland for settlement of HTS 
claims upto the year 2008-09.  Settlement of pending claims is being taken up by 
FCI with respective State governments in accordance with these guidelines.  
  
 
 State-wise position of steps taken for settlement of outstanding HTS dues 
is as follows: 
1. SIKKIM: 
 During the period from 2006 -07 to 2011 -12 (upto June, 2011) an amount 
of Rs.434.73 lakhs has been released to the State Government. An amount of 
Rs.103.39 lakhs is p ending for the period from 2001 -02 to 2011 -12 for 
settlement. Out of this Rs.21.78 lakhs is pending for want of documents from the 

State Govt., Rs.28.01 lakhs is pending in respect of movement through State 
Government trucks and instructions have already b een issued to field office to 
release the payment after obtaining requisite certificates. Further, an amount of 
Rs.53.60 lakhs is pending as the State Government is claiming HTS upto Mill 
Point instead of declared PDCs which is not allowed under existing g overnment 
instructions. 
2. MIZORAM: 
 During the period from 2009-10 & 2011-12 (upto March, 2012), an amount 
of Rs.576.72 lakhs has been released to the State Government and the claims 
amounting to Rs.65.96 lakh are under process. An amount of Rs.3639.25 la kh is 
pending for settlement pertaining to the period prior to and upto 2008 -09 for want 
of supporting documents establishing flow of funds from State Treasury to State 
Govt. account and from State Govt. account to the Transport Contractors‟ 
accounts.  
3. TRIPURA: 
 In case of Tripura, an amount of Rs.328.33 lakh is pending for settlement 
pertaining to the period prior to and upto year 2008 -09 for want of supporting 
documents establishing flow of funds from State Treasury to State Govt. account 
and from State Govt. account to the Transport Contractors‟ accounts.  
4. JAMMU & KASHMIR:  
 During the period from 2006 -07 to 2008 -09, an amount of Rs.1408.22 
lakhs has been released to the State Government. An amount of Rs.2155.16 
lakhs is pending for settlement since  2008-09 onwards. The reason for non - 
settlement of pending claims is due to non -submission of prescribed documents. 
During the course of meetings held by FCI officers with the State Government 
Officers, the State Government is being repeatedly requested t o give requisite 
certificates for settlement of pending bills.  
5. HIMACHAL PRADESH:  
 During the period from 2006-07 to 2011-12 (upto March, 2012), an amount 
of Rs.959.58 lakhs has been released to the State Government. An  amount of 
Rs.312.54 lakhs is pending for settlement pertaining to the years 2008 -09, 2010-
11 & 2011-12 for want of supporting documents from the State Government.  
6. ARUNACHAL PRADESH: 
In case of Arunachal Pradesh, provisional advance to the tune of Rs.45.76 
crore have been released to the State Government against their total claim of 
Rs.86.56 crore for the years 2007-08 to 2009-10.  
In case of pending bills of the State of Arunachal Pradesh for the period 
from 2004-05 to 2006-08, the department has given the approval and an amount 
of Rs.39.38 crore is to be adjusted against the outstanding dues on account of 
excess payments detected by the Internal Audit Teams of FCI  and subsequent 
audit done by the CAG which works out to Rs.127.90 crore. Moreover, the matter 
is sub-judice. State Govern ment of Arunachal Pradesh has filed an SLP before 
the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India i.e. WP(C) No. 32034 -35/2011 after the 

W.P.(C) No.242(GHY)/2010 and R,P.(C) No.41/2011 was dismissed by the 
Principal Bench of Hon'ble Guwahati High Court.  
7. MEGHALAYA : 
 There are no pending dues of HTS in respect of Meghalaya. 
8. MANIPUR :  
 There are no pending current dues in respect of Manipur.  However, old 
dues for the period prior to 1999 -2000 of Rs.153 lakhs is pending due to non -
submission of requisite documents by the State Government. 
9. NAGALAND : 
 There are no current dues on account of HTS pending in the State.  
However, an amount of Rs.390.58 lakhs on account of non -submission of 
requisite documents is pending for the period prior to and upto 2002-03. 
10. LAKSHADWEEP : 
 There is no pending amount for settlement in respect of Lakshadweep. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 

Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 3.33) 
 
2.7 The Committee note that the Government of India launched the Targetted 
Public Distribution System (TPDS) in June, 1997 with a view to making foolproof 
arrangements for identification of poor population for delivery of foodgra ins 
through FPS at subsidized rates. The poorest of the poor persons are distributed 
the foodgrains at the lowest price i.e. Rs. 2 per kg of wheat and Rs. 3 per kg. of 
rice under the Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) Scheme. The Government has 
adopted Nine Point  Action plan in July 2006 to make TPDS more effective. The 
Committee regret to note that despite various measures taken by the 
Government to streamline and strengthen the TPDS, there is no satisfactory 
improvement in its functioning. There is error in incl usion and exclusion of 
targeted families in the list of BPL and AAY families. Besides, the diversion and 
leakage of foodgrains has become a more serious problem in the States. The 
Citizen's Charter issued by GOI in July 2007 to increase the transparency in  the 
functioning of TPDS has not yet been adopted by all the States/UTs. Upto 
31.01.2012, 22 States/UT Government have reported implementation of monthly 
certification scheme. In the opinion of the Committee, this could be attributed to 
weak monitoring ove r the scheme on the part of the Department and lack of 
coordination with the State Governments. Consequently, a large number of poor 
families are being deprived of the benefits of the subsidized foodgrains. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Depa rtment should make concerted 
efforts to persuade all the State Governments/UTs to implement the Nine Point 
Action Plan, monthly certification scheme and Citizen's Charter and closely 
monitor the implementation of the scheme so that the AAY and BPL families  get 
their due share of foodgrains. The Department should also impress upon all the 
States/UTs to follow the guidelines laid down in the revised Citizen's Charter to 
ensure food security to weaker sections of the society under TPDS. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
2.8 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted by the 
Department. All States/UTs have been instructed to implement the provisions 
contained in Nine Point Action Plan and the Citizen‟s Charter in letter and spirit. 
Further, the remaining States/UTs who have not reported 
implementation/adoption of the revised Citizen‟s Charter and who have not 
introduced monthly certification by village panchayats/urban local 
bodies/vigilance committees/women‟s Self Help Groups for delivery of food 
grains to fair price shops in time and their distribution to ration card holders have 
been advised again to take necessary measures for their implementation at the 
earliest.  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 3.42) 
 
2.9 The Committee note with concern that as per the findings of  the National 
Council for Applied Research (NCAER), the level of diversion of wheat in Assam 
and Mizoram is 100 per cent for APL whereas in case of rice, it is 83.38 per cent 
and 81.12 per cent for APL families in the two States respectively. This shows 
that foodgrains meant for APL families have not reached to them at all in these 
two States. The level of diversion of wheat for APL in respect of Chhattisgarh and 
Jharkhand is 78.34 per cent and 54.53 per cent, respectively. In order to curb 
diversion and le akages of foodgrains meant for TPDS, Government is taking up 
piloting of innovative/new technologies such as GPS, RFIDs, barcoded coupons, 
stamping of PDS foodgrains, etc. The Committee hope that GPS devices would  
be installed in the vehicles carrying TPD S foodgrains/goods in all the States/UTs 
of the country on top priority basis to curb the menace of diversion and leakages 
of foodgrains, meant for poorest of the poor, to be allocated through PDS.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
2.10 In this connection,  it is mentioned that u nder a Plan Scheme on 
strengthening of TPDS, the Government  has taken up a innovative scheme i.e. 
installation of Global Positioning System (GPS) sets on the vehicles carrying 
TPDS commodities in order to curb leakages and diversion  of foodgrains.  Under 
this Scheme, financial assistance of Rs.44.76 lakh was given in 2007 -08 to the 
State Governments of Tamil Nadu, Chhattisgarh and Delhi for installation of GPS 
devices on the vehicles carrying TPDS foodgrains.  Governments of Tamil Na du 
and Chhattisgarh have reported the implementation of the said scheme. 
 
 Government of Tamil Nadu who have implemented the system in two 
districts have reported that (i) the quantities of foodgrains allotted from FCI to the 
indented godowns reached witho ut single case of diversion (ii) it has created 
moral fear among those involved in transportation of PDS items and it has (iii) 
enabled the civil supplies department and other vigilance agencies to track the 
movement of vehicles carrying PDS items at short  notice and avoided delays in 
transportation.  
 
 Government of Chhattisgarh have reported that after installation of GPS 
sets on vehicles carrying TPDS commodities, from the distribution centres, such 
vehicles are reaching their destination/intended places  and no irregularities of 
any kind have been noticed. 
 
 On a further request from Government of Chhattisgarh, a further sum of 
Rs.1,11,00,900/- has been sanctioned and released to State Government of 
Chhattisgarh in 2011 -12 for purchase/installation of GPS  sets on vehicles 
carrying TPDS commodities. 
 
 Subsequently, it was decided to extend this scheme in all the States/Union 
Territories (UTs) in the financial year 2011 -12 and proposals were invited from 
States/UTs for sanctioning funds under the scheme.  St ate/UT Governments 

have again been requested in May, 2012 to send proposals for sanctioning of 
funds under the scheme during 2012 -13 for installation of GPS sets on vehicles 
carrying TPDS commodities. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter-I of the Report)

 
Recommendation (Sl.No.8, Para No.3.52) 
 
2.11 The Committee note that t he Hon‟ble Supreme Court, in its orders 
regarding Computerization of TPDS, has directed that end -to-end 
Computerization of TPDS be undertaken with the help of a Common Application 
Software (CAS) and leveraging Aadhaar in consultation with the specialized 
agencies like the Unique Identification Authority of India or any other agencies. 
Hon‟ble Supreme Court has also directed that Computerization of PDS be taken 
up in a phased manner comprising of Component -I relating to computerization of 
complete supply -chain management, digitization of Ration Card database and 
availability of this information in public domain through a transparency portal as 
per Chhattisgarh model and Component -II relating to authentication of delivery 
and payments at the FPS, including use  of Aadhaar in due course, as per 
Gujarat model, or any other advanced model. The Committee also note that the 
pilot scheme on Computerization of TPDS operations is proposed to be 
expanded in the 12th Five Year Plan (2012 -17) which will be taken up as a 
Scheme on end -to-end Computerization of PDS on cost -sharing basis with 
States/UTs. Detailed guidelines have been issued by the Department on 
21.10.2011 to States/UTs for computerization of PDS. The Committee have been 
informed that as the scheme is to be imp lemented by the State/UTs, the success 
of computerization of PDS depend upon their framing of detailed action plan, 
initiatives taken and time bound implementation as per specified milestones. 
Detailed directions alongwith timelines covering various aspect s like Digitization 
of Beneficiary Data Base, Computerization of Supply -Chain Management and 
FPS Automation for achievement of various milestones towards Computerization 
of PDS were issued by Secretary (F&PD) to Chief Secretaries of all States / 
Administrators of all Union Territories on 07.03.2012. The Committee desire that 
the work of end -to-end computerization of PDS operation be accorded priority 
especially in States like Delhi, U.P. where the number of complaints received 
from individuals/organizations  on TPDS are reportedly higher, so that right 
quantity of foodgrains/other commodities are issued to the intended beneficiaries 
only. The Committee further hope that the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution will pursue the matter with Chief Secretari es/Administrator of all 
States/UTs for an expeditious implementation of the project all over the country 
which will in-turn improve the efficiency of the PDS. 
Action Taken by the Government 
2.12 End-to-end Computerization of TPDS has been taken up on prior ity in all 
States/UTs including States of Delhi and Uttar Pradesh. 
 
 Government of NCT of Delhi has reported that computerization of the 
entire TPDS chain based on software developed by NIC, i.e. Common 
Application Software (CAS), called ePDS Portal. The s oftware will link all the 
stakeholders associated with PDS system. Under the Ration Card Management 
module which has been implemented, Delhi Govt. has informed that all type of 
activities relating to preparation/ modification etc. are being done through sy stem 
only. Further, foodgrain allocation as well as Sugar and Kerosene oil allocation is 
being done through the system. Similarly, Release Order module has also been 

implemented and Release Orders are being prepared through System. SMS 
Module in respect of  Sugar has been implemented and SMS are being sent to 
whosoever is registered for the purpose. The SMS Module in respect of Wheat 
and Rice for all FCI godowns will be implemented by the end of June, 2012. FPS 
Automation module will be implemented for all FPS by March, 2013.To make use 
of above software, all Circles have been equipped with adequate hardware and 
to make use of internet, the existing capacity of broadband connection was 
enhanced from 128 kpbs to 2 mbps. With the introduction of the ePDS System , 
Government of NCT of Delhi has reported elimination of 57,680 ration cards from 
the TPDS system. 
 
 Government of Uttar Pradesh has informed that 99.68% database of AAY 
& BPL category and 87% database of APL category has been digitized and the 
same is upl oaded on the Department‟s website for transparency. The details of 
73027 FPSs and the beneficiaries linked to these FPSs have also been uploaded 
on this website. A call centre with an 11 digit toll free number is already in place 
since 2009 for grievance r egistration and redressal.  A system of sending SMS 
alerts to the beneficiaries has also been launched.  
 
 The progress of Computerization of TPDS in all States/UTs is being 
monitored by the Department so that the same is completed by States/UTs in a 
time-bound manner. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 

Recommendation (Sl.No.13, Para No.4.23) 
 
2.13 The Committee note with concern that tho ugh the physical target in 
respect of construction of godowns in regions other the North East (NE) has 
been achieved by FCI during 2011 -12, it has failed to achieve the target in so far 
as North -East Region is concerned. The target set by the corporation f or 
construction of godown in NE was 15000 tons but its achievement was nil. 
Similarly, the corporation failed to achieve the financial target during the same 
period for NE States as well as States other than NE. Reason cited for non -
achievement of physical  target in NE States as slow pace of work by one of the 
State Government agency, does not seem to be convincing. The Committee 
observe that the North -Eastern States are the most disadvantaged States in 
terms of lack of infrastructure, communication and rai l/road network. Inadequacy 
of storage space in NE States poses a serious threat to running of an efficient 
Public Distribution System. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
the Ministry should make all out efforts for speeding up the constructi on of 
godowns in NE region so that the people of North East are not deprived of the 
benefits of PDS and the funds earmarked for the purpose do not remain 
unutilized.  
  
So far as achievement of financial target in NE States/other than NE 
States is concerne d, the Committee desire that pending disputes for 3 acre of 
land for Changasari Project be resolved at the earliest. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry to take up the matter with State 
Governments that have not yet identified the lan d and urge them to hand over 
the land  to FCI at the earliest so that construction of godowns can be started 
without further delay. 
Action Taken by the Government 
2.14 The updated status at the end of FY 2011-12 is as under: 
 
A.   NE Region  
Physical:   
 
 It is submitted that against the target of 15000MT capacity godowns, a 
capacity of 4590MT (3340MT – Senapati/Manipur and 1250MT – 
Jiribam/Manipur) has been achieved. The shortfall is mainly due to following 
reasons:- 
 
(i)  At Kohima/Nagaland the targeted c apacity of 5000MT could not be 
achieved mainly because of failure on the part of Executing Agency i.e. 
PWD Housing Nagaland.  After great persuasion at all levels and 
personnel meetings with the Chief Engineer, PWD, Nagaland the  agency 
has now assured that the work will be completed by September 2012. 
 
(ii)  2500MT capacity at Tura/Meghalaya could not be achieved as the site 
was in sunken zone area and the expert opinion of Geological  Survey of 
India, Meghalaya received only in  March 2011 and thereafter the 

Executing Agency was fixed and it was proposed to entrust the work to 
CPWD.  The estimate has been approved and tendering action is being 
taken by the CPWD. 
Financial:   
 The main reasons for non achievement of financial targets in NE Region 
are as under: 
 
(i)   Provision of Rs.25 crores was kept for the project at Changsari/Assam but 
the failure was due to on the part of ASWC (State Govt. agency) for             
non achieving the physical targets as per plan submitted by ASWC.  The 
agency even could not start the work at site in spite of great persuasion by 
FCI at various levels through many correspondences.   
 
(ii)  In the State of Arunachal Pradesh, the work at 7 centres entrusted to 
CPWD and Hindustan Prefab Ltd and the initial deposit to the tune of  Rs. 
4.28 crores were made in favour of the agencies out of the total budgeted 
cost of Rs.19.45 crores.  The projects at all 7 centres  are likely to be 
completed during 2012-13. 
 
(iii)  Against the projected target of Rs.4.80 crores for the project at Koh ima, 
the  achievement was only to the tune of Rs.0.79 crores for the reasons 
as given in para A (i) above.   
 
It is pertinent to mention that till Dec. 2011, the agency could not finalise 
the layout of the godown.  During the inspection by Headquarters in Jan 
2012, the layout was finalised and work of godown structure physically 
started at site.   
 
(iv)  Against the projected target of Rs.2 crores for the project at 
 Tura/Meghalaya, no expenditure incurred for the reasons given at  para A 
(iii) above. 
 
(v)  Against the projected target of Rs. 4.50 crores kept for cost of land at 
different centres in Tripura, no expenditure incurred as the land could not 
be identified by the State Government. 
 
(vi)  Against the target of Rs. 10.43 crores for Manipur State, th e expenditure 
was to the tune of Rs.4.37 crores at Senapati and Jiribam.  The remaining 
amount which was kept for land cost could not be utilised as the land at 
other centres was not made available by the State Government. 
B. Other than NE:   
Physical:   
 Against the targeted capacity of 5825MT, the achievement made during FY 
2011-12 is 6665MT capacity which includes 2500MT spillover capacity at 
Lakshadweep/UT and 3340MT at Gujjar Ka Talab/HP against the approved 
capacity of 5000MT.  The balance of 1660MT c apacity has also been achieved 
on 31.5.2012. 

Financial:   
 Against the target of Rs.7.30 crores the achievement was made to the 
tune of Rs. 3.87 crores and the shortfall was in Bihar Region to the tune of Rs.2 
crores as the land earlier proposed to be acqu ired at Mohania for which the cost 
was also deposited during 2010 was finally decided not to pursue for acquiring of 
land due to failure on part of State Government for non handing over of land in 
time.  Further Rs. 1.50 crores was kept for the project at Baripada/Orissa which 
could not be utilized because the soil testing work was to be carried out before 
start of work. However the tender for this work has been invited for award of 
work. 
 
 It is assured that all out efforts shall be made to achieve the spi llover  
capacity of 2011-12 and targeted capacity for 2012-13 as well as financial targets  
provided, the land at respective centres is handed over by the respective State 
Governments and the executing agency finalised by the State Government in 
time.   
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 

 
Recommendation (Sl.No.14, Para No.4.42) 
 
2.15 The Committee are concerned to note that despite remed ial steps taken 
by FCI, storage and transit losses are continuously on the rise. Storage losses 
have increased from Rs. 292.91 crore in 2010-11 to Rs. 301.17 crore in 2011-12. 
Similarly, transit losses have increased from Rs. 257.42 crore in 2010 -11 to Rs.  
275.88 crore in 2011 -12. The Committee feel that all this goes to prove that the 
steps taken by the FCI to prevent storage losses are not adequate. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that FCI should adopt latest scientific and modern 
technology for storage of foodgrains to minimize storage losses. Regular 
inspections/surprise checks and constant monitoring are needed so that losses 
do not increase further. The Committee also recommend that norms for storage 
losses need to be revised which are still on the hi gher side and there is need to 
further reduce the same.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
2.16 The above observations/recommendations of the Standing Committee 
have been noted and are being circulated to Zonal and Regional Heads for 
initiating remedial acti ons so that incidence of storage and transit losses is 
reduced/curbed.   
 
 The details of losses mentioned in the above observations are as under: 
 
Storage Losses (Wheat + Rice) 
(Qty.in lakh MT/Value in Crores of Rupees) 
Year Qty. 
received 
Qty. of 
Loss 
Value of 
Loss 
%age of 
Loss 
2010-11* 
 
530.77 1.56 292.91 0.29 
2011-12* 
(Upto Feb. 
2012) 
542.66 1.48 301.17 0.27 
 (* - Provisional) 
 
Transit Losses (Wheat + Rice) 
                         (Qty.in lakh MT/Value in Crores of Rupees) 
Year Qty 
Moved 
Qty. of 
Loss 
Value of 
Loss 
%age of 
Loss 
2010-11* 
 
317.39 1.60 257.42 0.50 
2011-12* 
(Upto Feb. 2012) 
298.69 1.60 275.88 0.54 
               (* - Provisional) 

 Consequent upon completion of audit for the year 2010 -11 and addition of 
figures for March, 2012, the detai ls of storage and transit losses for the above 
two years have now undergone a change, as below: 
Storage Losses (Wheat + Rice) 
                           (Qty.in lakh MT/Value in Crores of Rupees) 
Year Qty. 
issued 
Qty. of 
Loss 
Value of 
Loss 
%age of Loss 
2010-11 (Audited) 817.20 1.75 323.78 0.21 
2011-12 (Provisional) 595.58 1.57 321.55 0.26 
 
Transit Losses (Wheat + Rice) 
                                      (Qty.in lakh MT/Value in Crores of Rupees) 
Year Qty Moved Qty. of Loss Value of 
Loss 
%age of 
Loss 
2010-11(Audited) 375.98 1.77 281.94 0.47 
2011-12 (Provisional) 329.03 1.79 307.66 0.55 
 
 With a view to minimize storage  & transit loss of foodgrains and to 
introduce modern technology besides bringing additional resources through 
private sector particip ation, Government of India had announced a National 
Policy on Handling, Storage & Transportation of foodgrains in June, 2000 for bulk 
and  conventional godowns. 
 
 Under the National Storage Policy, integrated bulk handling, storage and 
transportation facilities for foodgrains especially for wheat, were proposed to be 
constructed on "Build Own  & Operate" through private participation at the 
identified locations in procuring  and consuming areas as well as at port town. A 
total capacity of  5.5 lakh MT was appr oved in the first phase as Pilot Project to 
be created at the identified Base Depots and Field Depots through private sector 
participation on Build Own  & Operate (BOO) basis. The transportation of 
foodgrains from Base Depots (Procurement areas) to the Fiel d Depots 
(consuming areas) is to be made in specially designed top loading and bottom 
discharge bulk rail wagons, procured by the DCO. The linkages of Base Depots 
and Field Depots for Circuit I & II and size of storage capacity is given below:- 
Circuit-I Circuit-II 
Location Storage size Location Storage size 
 
 Base Depot Moga (Pb) 2,00,000 MTs Base Depot Kaithal 
(Hr) 
2,00,000 MTs 
Field Depot  
 
Field Depot  
 Chennai (TN) 25,000 MTs Navi Mumbai 50,000 MTs 
Coimbatore 25,000 MTs Hooghly (WB) 25,000 MTs 
Bangalore (KNK) 25,000 MTs  
 
 
 

 The Government has also approved proposal for construction of 20 lakh 
tonnes of storage capacity in silos under the PPP model.  This will be within the 
overall storage requirement of FCI.   
 
 Regular/surprise inspections of o ffices/ depots are carried out by different 
level authorities. 
  
 The details of regular/surprise checks undertaken by 
HQ/Zonal/Regional/District levels during the last three years are as under: 
 
Year Regular 
Inspection 
Surprise 
Checks  
Total  
2009 11163 3705 14868 
2010 13390 3135 16525 
2011 13359 7979 21338 
  
However, whenever abnormal losses having vigilance angle are being 
reported, disciplinary action is taken against the delinquents. 
 
   The following action is taken by FCI to minimize losses:- 
 
i) Each Zone should prepare an operational report every year, which should 
also have the information regarding the quantum of losses and reasons 
thereof, remedial and punitive action taken to reduce the losses in respect 
of each region. 
ii) Loss Monitoring Cell sho uld be created at Regional and Zonal levels, 
which would review all the cases of abnormal shortages for taking 
remedial measures. 
iii) A list of the centres/depots identified as „high loss reporting depots‟ should 
be made in respect of each Region by ED(Zone) for constant monitoring of 
these centres. 
iv) Immediate shifting of the staff and initiation of disciplinary action against 
them, working in the identified depots. 
v) Quality of gunnies and packaging should also be taken care of properly.   
vi) Electronic carry-able weighing machines in place of beam scales for the 
purpose of test check of weight, be made available at all the depots. 
 
vii) Matter of pilferages at transhipment points ( broad gauge to meter gauge)  
in  E Zone and installation of CCTV cameras at those points,  to be taken 
up with the Railways.         
STEPS TAKEN BY FCI TO PRESERVE THE QUALITY OF PROCURED 
FOODGRAINS DURING STORAGE 
 

 Before the commencement of Rabi and Kharif Marketing Seasons,  
Department of Food & Public Distribution issues uniform specificati ons for 
procurement of foodgrains for the Central Pool.  These uniform specifications are 
circulated to F.C.I. and all State Govts./Agencies with instructions to ensure that 
foodgrains are procured strictly in accordance with the uniform specifications. 
 
 Foodgrains procured by F.C.I. and State Govts/Agencies are stored in 
covered godowns as well as in CAP (cover and plinth). 
 
 During storage, the following steps are taken for safe storage and 
preservations of foodgrains:- 
 
Covered godowns:- 
 
 Godowns are co nstructed on scientific lines making it rodent proof by 
having proper height and damp proof by providing pucca floor. 
 Before the stocks are stored, the godown is properly cleaned and 
cobwebs etc., if any, are removed. 
 Floor and walls are treated with chemi cals such as air charging with 
Malathion and DDVP (insecticide) to make them pest free. 
 Markings are provided for stacks and the dunnage material is used on 
which foodgrains bags are arranged as per the stack plan. 
  Prophylactic (spraying of insecticides) and curative measures 
(fumigation) are carried out regularly for the control of insects/pests. 
 Effective rodent control measures are also undertaken.  
 
 Following checks /super checks are conducted in the godowns to ensure 
proper preservation of foodgrains in storage. 
 
 (i) Fortnightly inspection of stocks on 100% basis by Technical 
Assistants for declaring categorization and classification. 
 
(ii) Monthly inspection by Manager (QC) – 33% of stocks (1/3 rd of 
stocks) in a month.   Monthly Inspection Reports ( MIR) of Manager 
(QC) are scrutinized at Zonal level.   Suggestions made therein are 
to be implemented and monitored through action taken reports 
(ATR) 
 
 
Quarterly inspection by AGM (QC) 
 
 The following inspection schedule is prescribed for AGM (Quality 
Control):- 
- 1/3rd of depots in a month so as to cover all the depots in the District in 
three months. 

- 5% of stocks are to be checked in a depot having capacity of more 
than 25000 MTs. 
- 10% of stocks in respect of depot having less than 25000 MTs 
- Squad Inspection Reports (SIR) of AGM(QC) are scrutinized in Hqrs., 
 CAP (COVER AND PLINTH) 
  In case of shortage of covered storage space, foodgrains may have to be 
stored in open in CAP. Every care is taken for maintenance of quality of grains, 
while kept in CAP. Rats,  birds and moisture are the main enemies of grain in 
CAP storage. In view of the risk involved, this type of storage is attempted as a 
last resort.  
 
 As regards reducing norms for storage losses, it is submitted that in FCI 
such norms have been fixed and each case of loss is investigated taking into 
account various factors responsible for the loss including dereliction of duty by 
officials.   
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 

 
Recommendation (Sl.No.16, Para No.4.44) 
 
2.17 The Committee have been informed during evidence that the railways 
supply general purpose wagons for loading of foodgrains, which are also used for 
loading cement, fertilizers and other general goods. They do not earmark specific 
rakes for loading of foodgrains. The Committee feel that there is imperative need 
to supply wagons which are free from remains of dust, coal, cement and 
fertilizers before they are loaded with foodgrains/sugar. The Committee, 
therefore, feel that there is laxity on the part of Department of Food and Public 
Distribution, FCI and railways authorities in accepting and supplying wagons 
which are not fit to transport foodgrains and may cause serious health hazards to 
consumers. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that under no 
circumstances wagons which are used for transporting cement, fertilizers, coal 
etc. be used for transportation of foodgrains. The Committee recommend that 
Government should take up the matter with the Ministry of Railways for providing 
special wagons instead of general purpose ones for the transportation of 
foodgrains so that the quality of foodgrains remain intact till it reaches its final 
destination. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
2.18 The Railways are supposed to supply clean and tidy wagons for loading of 
foodgrains. In case any un -cleaned wagons are provided by the Railways, the 
Railway authorities are requested to get the same cleaned before loading the 
foodgrain stocks.  If the wagons are not cleaned by the Railways on the request 
of FCI, the same are got cleaned by FCI before loading the stocks to avoid any 
contamination of the foodgrains.  
 
 The matter has been taken up with Ministry of Railways to provide  special 
wagons for transporting foodgrains. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.20 of Chapter-I of the Report)

 
Recommendation (Sl.No.17, Para No.4.48) 
 
2.19 The Committee note that the number of vigilance cases including 
corruption cases detected on various counts in FCI, disposed off and closing 
balance during the year 2009, 2010 and 2011  was 910, 613 and 479, 
respectively. During 2011, cases registered by CBI and Vigilance/ACB of State 
was 2 and 1, respectively. Though the total number of corruption cases have 
declined but still it is very high. The Committee also note that CBI has raided  the 
residences and offices of the senior officers of FCI. The Committee desire to  be 
apprised of the outcome of the investigation done by CBI. The Committee also 
desire that vigilance mechanism should be tightened up and made more 
transparent and account able. Further, the Committee also desire early disposal 
of pending cases as delay in disposal of cases would further aggravate corrupt 
practices. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
2.20 During last three years, there has been one case of raid conducted by th e 
CBI at the residence of a senior officer (Category -I) of FCI, Sh. R. Dorai Raj, the 
then DGM (Region), Tamil Nadu.  The case registered by the CBI for 
disproportionate assets under RC MA 61 (A)/2009 dated 30.11.2009 is still 
pending in CBI court.  
 
 During last three years, at two instances CBI had raided the offices of 
Senior Officers (Category-I). The details are as under: 
 
 (i)  CBI raided the Regional office, Chennai and a case was registered 
under RC MA 1 2009 A 0051 against four officers namely Sh. T . 
Jayakumar, Sh. R. Dorairaj, Sh. A. Vellimalayan and Smt. S. 
Soundaram.  
 
  Two charge sheets have been filed by CBI in the Hon‟ble Court of 
Special Judge for CBI, Chennai. In charge sheet No. 1/RP/10 – C.C. No. 
9/11 involving Sh. T. Jayakumar and others,  the officers have been 
acquitted by CBI Court on 29.07.2011. 
  In charge sheet No 2/RP/10 – C.C. No. 27 /11, involving Shri R. 
Dorairaj and others, the case is still under trial at CBI Court.    
   
(ii) CBI raided the office of Area Manager, Jalandhar and  a case was 
registered under RC CHG. 2009 A 008 against Sh. Sameer Verma, Area 
Manager (Jalandhar).The case is still pending at CBI Court.    
 
 In FCI, efforts have been made to tighten up the vigilance mechanism and 
make it more accountable and transparen t, for which various preventive & 
punitive measures have been taken. To make further improvement additional 
emphasis is being laid on following:   
 

(i) Rotation of officials, particularly on sensitive seats. Complete 
rotation after 3 years  has been implemented in Vigilance division. 
 
 (ii) Prohibition of negotiations in all tenders & modifications in Model 
Tender Forms simplifying the pre -qualification conditions to increase 
competition. All tenders and their results are published in web-site of FCI. 
  
 (iii) Emphasis laid on implementation of E-procurement. 
 
 (iv) Use of E-payment comprehensively. 
 
 (v) Functioning of Internal Audit reviewed and modified to increase its 
effectiveness. To enlarge the scope & coverage of Audit, firms of 
Chartered Accountants  engaged on pilot basis in one Region in each 
Zone. 
  
For speedy disposal of pending cases, special focus given to cases 
pending for more than one year.  Due to various measures taken, the number of 
cases pending has been steadily going down as can be seen  from the year end 
data given below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 
Year Pending cases  
2005 2145 
2006 2004 
2007 1382 
2008 835 
2009 910 
2010 613 
2011 479 

Recommendation (Sl.No.19, Para No.5.9) 
 
2.21 The Committee are deeply concerned to note the continuous rise in 
outstanding dues of Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC) during 2010 -11 
and 2011 -12 i.e. Rs. 225.87crore  and Rs. 215.18 crore, respectively. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend for liquidation of outstanding dues fully at the 
earliest.  
 The Committee are also unhappy to note the unusual increase in bad 
debts written off to the tune of Rs. 9.52 crore and Rs.  5 crore during the last two 
years i.e. 2010-11 and 2011-12. The Committee would like to be apprised about 
the reasons for such a huge amount of bad debts which have  been written off 
and would like the Ministry to keep a close vigil on this trend and take  judicious 
decisions in writing off the bad debts. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
2.22 The position of the total outstanding dues as well as outstanding dues  
against the Food Corporation of India (FCI) during the last three years is given 
below:- 
     (Figures in Crore Rs.) 
As on Total 
Income 
Total 
outstanding 
dues 
Outstanding 
dues against 
FCI 
Bad 
Debts 
Written 
off 
31.3.2009 849.25 151.60 73.25 0.41 
31.3.2010 987.95 185.48 98.81 0.03 
31.3.2011 1029.55 225.87 126.20 9.52 
31.3.2012 
(Provisional) 
1210.28 215.18 118.78 5.00 
 
As per the unaudited financial results, the turnover of the Corporation for 
the year 2011 -12 is Rs.1210.28 crore which is an increase of 16.5% over the 
previous year.  Inspite of increase in turnover, the outstanding dues have come 
down to Rs.215.18 crore in 2011 -12 as compared to Rs.225.87 crore of previous 
year. Outstanding to turnover ratio for the year 2011-12 has come down to 17.8% 
as compared to 21.9% for the year 2010-11.  
 
The outstanding dues against FCI as on 31 st March, 201 2 works out to 
55.2% of the total dues. Various steps have been taken by CWC particularly with 
FCI to realize the outstanding dues including holding of meetings at various level 
of FCI offices. FCI Headquarters has also issued instructions to their field o ffices 
for settlement of CWC dues. Besides, credit facilities to the private parties is 
being regularly reviewed and meetings with depositors are being held to realize 
the outstanding dues. 
 
As regards the writing up off bad debts amounting to Rs.9.52 cror e during 
2010-11, it is informed that the Corporation had given an interest bearing loan of 
Rs. 5.00 crore to Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd. (FCIL), a CPSE under the 
Department of Fertilizer, in the year 1990. The FCIL had been defaulting in 

payment of principal and interest thereon. The total amount due against FCIL 
including interest was Rs. 10.96 crore. The Corporation had been pursuing with 
FCIL and also with Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Government of India 
through the administrative Minis try from time to time. However, inspite of all 
efforts, the amount could not be realised from FCIL. Under the financial 
rehabilitation scheme of FCIL, Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, had proposed 
payment of 30% of the principal amount of loan (Rs.5.00  crore) as one time 
settlement.  In view of the fact that the FCIL has been referred to BIFR, the offer 
made by the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers as above and also that other 
CPSEs like IOC, BHEL etc. have accepted 30% amount due to them, the Board 
of Directors of CWC, in its meeting held on 9 th May 2011 also approved 
acceptance of 30% of dues and to write off balance 70% of the principal together 
with the interest accrued thereon as a one time settlement.  Accordingly during 
the year 2010-11 out of the total amount of Rs. 9.52 crore written off, an amount 
of Rs. 9.47 crore was written off against the provisions in respect of FCIL.   
 
As regards Rs.5.00 crore during 2011 -12, it is only provisional but the exact 
amount and details would be available aft er the finalization of accounts for the 
year 2011-12. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 
 
 
 

Recommendation (Sl. No. 21, Para No. 5.17) 
 
2.24 The Committee note that as against 19 sanctioned posts, 9 are in position 
in the Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority, which was set up in 
October, 2010 for drafting of Warehousing Regulations, Appointment of 
Accreditation Agencies, Noti fication of Agricultural Commodities for Negotiable 
Warehouse Receipt, etc.  As informed by the Department, efforts are being made 
to fill up the vacant posts at the earliest to ensure smooth functioning of the office 
of WDRA. The recruitment rules are bei ng framed so that the sanctioned posts 
could be filled up as per rules.  Hiring of services of staff by WDRA on cost 
recovery basis and proposal for creation of additional 22 posts in the interest of 
smooth functioning of WDRA is also being considered. Tak ing into consideration,  
the wide magnitude and importance of work to be performed by the authority, the 
Committee  desire that filling up of remaining vacant posts be expedited.   
Action Taken by the Government 
2.25 The Warehousing Development and Regulat ory Authority (WDRA) was 
set up on 26 th October, 2010.  At that time, one Joint Secretary and one Director 
(both from Central staffing) were in position.  The authority has been making 
efforts to fill up the remaining vacancies.  Four vacancy circulars wer e issued on 
13.03.2009 (by the Department of Food and Public Distribution), 28.01.2011, 
11.07.2011 and 19.03.2012 (by WDRA) informing all Ministries/Departments of 
Govt. of India.  The NIC had placed these circulars on the website of the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution/WDRA, and these were published in 
the Employment News. One post each of Director(Technical), Under Secretary 
(Admin. & Fin.) and Section Officer (Admn. & Fin.) and Private Secretary were 
filled up against the first circular while o ne post each of Section 
Officer(Technical), Under Secretary (Technical) and Principal Private Secretary 
were also filled up against the second circular. One post each of Assistant and 
Staff Car Driver have been filled up on deputation basis against the thi rd circular.  
However, the post of US(Admn. & Fin.) has fallen vacant on his reversion to 
parent cadre. 
 In response to vacancy circular dated 19.03.2012, applications have been 
received for the posts of Under Secretary (Admn. & Fin.), Private Secretary, 
Section Officer(Technical) and Section Officer(Admn. & Fin.) and Accountant.  
The applications are being scrutinized and it is likely that the above mentioned 
posts may be filled up, subject to the suitability of candidates and their selection 
by the Selection Committee. Efforts are being made to fill up the vacant posts at 
the earliest to ensure smooth functioning of the office of WDRA. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 
 

Recommendation (Sl.No.23, Para No.6.10) 
 
2.26 The Committee observe that the mismatch between domestic production 
and demand for sugar is primarily responsible for rise in price of sugar. The 
Committee note that due to v arious steps taken by the Department such as 
regulated release mechanism of sugar, high sugar production in the sugar 
season 2010 -11 and estimated high production in sugar season 2011 -12, 
maintenance of sufficient stocks of sugar to meet domestic requireme nt, price of 
sugar has remained more or less stable during the last and current sugar 
season. The Committee feel that price of sugar is still on the high side. The 
Committee desire that with the help of scientifically gathered agricultural 
intelligence, the long-term production trend can be assessed. Necessary steps, 
therefore, need to be taken to deal with the situation. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should take necessary steps to bring down the 
price of sugar and achieve the long -term stabilization of sugar production and 
prices. 
Action Taken by the Government 
2.27 The price of sugar depends upon a number of factors like cost of raw 
material mainly sugarcane, conversion cost, domestic demand and supply 
situation, market sentiments , trend of international prices and production, etc. 
While the Government has no control over external factors affecting sugar price 
like market sentiments, international prices etc., the inherent factors leading to 
high cost of sugar production viz the  s ugarcane cost and the factory conversion 
costs need sustained and long term solutions by improving efficiencies at the 
farm and factory level.  
 
 In general, about 60 -70% of the production cost of per unit of sugar is of 
sugarcane. The production of sugarc ane, during any year, depends inter -alia, 
upon the area under sugarcane plantation, rainfall, vagaries of nature, inter crop 
parity and the capacity of the industry to pay agreed sugarcane prices in time. 
Equally important is productivity of sugarcane. Hig her productivity increases 
income of farmers and industry gets raw material at lower cost. 
 
  In order to stabilize sugarcane production and improve farm and factory 
level efficiencies, the Central Government has already taken the following long 
term policy measures/interventions:- 
 
(i) The sustainable development of Sugarcane Based Cropping System 
(SUBACS) is one of the component of Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS), 
namely Revised Macro Management of Agriculture Scheme (RMMA). The main 
thrust of SUBACS is on the transfer of improved production technology to the 
farmers through field demonstrations, training of farmers, supply of farm 
implements, enhancing production of planting materials, efficient use of water, 
treatment of planting materials etc. 
 
(ii) The concept of “Fair and Remunerative Price” (FRP) for sugarcane has 
been introduced w.e.f. December, 2009 in 2009 -10 sugar season instead of the  
Statutory Minimum Price (SMP), previously fixed by the Government.  Under 

FRP system, the farmers get an “upfro nt” payment of margins on account of 
profit and risk, which was not available under SMP. After introduction of FRP as 
well as due to considerable uptrend in the State Advised Prices of sugarcane in 
recent years, the sugarcane area and production has been o n the upswing 
during the last few sugar seasons and the estimates are quite promising for the 
coming season also, as reflected by the sugarcane and sugar production figures 
given below: - 
Sugar 
Season 
Area under 
sugarcane 
(in lakh hectare) 
Sugarcane 
Production 
(in lakh tonnes) 
Sugar 
Production 
(in lakh tonnes) 
2009-10 41.75 2923.02 188.00 
2010-11 48.85 3423.82 243.50** 
2011-12  50.99* 3576.67* 257.65*** 
*4th Advance Estimates of Directorate of Economics & Statistics, 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation. 
**  (Provisional) 
    ***(As on 30.06.12, reported by Cane Commissioners) 
 
 (iii) The Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966 has been amended vide notification 
dated 28.12.2007 permitting sugar mills to produce ethanol directly from 
sugarcane juice. This f acilitates sugar mills to use surplus sugarcane for 
production of ethanol in the years of its high production.  
 
(iv) The Central Government provides concessional loans at an interest rate of 
4% per annum to sugar factories from Sugar Development Fund (SDF ) for 
modernization of plant and machinery, expansion of crushing capacity, utilization 
of by -products viz., bagasse for co -generation of power and molasses for 
production of ethanol, upgradation of technology and sugarcane development 
including better irr igation facilities, improved seed variety, ratoon management 
etc.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 

Recommendation (Sl. No. 25, Para No. 6.20) 
 
2.28 The Committee note that out of 187 sick sugar mills, majority are located 
in Maharashtra and U.P. i.e. 71 and 41 in number, respectively. The main reason 
cited for sickness of the sugar mills are non -availability of adequate raw material, 
poor recovery from sugarcane, uneconomic size, lack of modernization, up -
gradation and diversification, high cost of working capital, declaration of high 
State Advised Price (SAP) of sugarcane by some States, control of molasses, 
lack of professional manag ement, overstaffing, etc. The Committee are 
concerned to note that despite the provision of financial assistance from Sugar 
Development Fund (SDF) for rehabilitation/modernization, sick sugar mills are 
not availing the benefits of the scheme. The Committee  desire that Government 
should view the revival of  sugar mills seriously and encourage them to join the 
mainstream in production of sugar thereby combating the problem of shortage of 
sugar in the country. Further, the Committee also recommend that procedu re for 
availing assistance from SDF be simplified further so that maximum benefit can 
be availed by sick sugar mills for their revival. 
Action Taken by the Government 
2.29 Rule 21 of the Sugar Development Fund Rules, 1983 inserted vide 
notification dated 2 0.08.2002 provides for loans for potentially viable Sick Sugar 
Undertakings and Rule 26 inserted vide notification dated 05.12.2007 provides 
for restructuring of loans of potentially viable Sick Sugar Undertakings. Any sugar 
undertaking seeking the assista nce under the above mentioned rules has to get 
the recommendations of Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR)/ 
Committee on Rehabilitation (COR) as the case may be. 
 
  The Central Government has constituted a Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Sugar) to consider proposals for rehabilitation 
of sick cooperative sugar mills. However, the concerned cooperative sugar mills 
have to prepare the rehabilitation plan and route it through the State Government 
concerned. In case of pr ivate and public sector sugar mills, the proposal for 
sanction of loan from the Sugar Development Fund should be recommended by 
the BIFR. 
 
As per the provisions of SDF Rules, a sick undertaking is required to get a 
revival package approved by the BIFR in t he case of private and public sector 
sugar factories and by the COR in the case of Co -operative sugar mills, with a 
component of SDF loan in the package. Loan is available from SDF both for 
rehabilitation/modernization and cane development. The eligibility criteria for such 
loan to a potentially viable sick unit is quite favourable to the sugar factories in so 
far as loan up to 60% of the project cost (as against 40% in normal cases) can be 
given from SDF for rehabilitation/modernization projects and the mo ratorium 
period for repayment can be decided by the Central Government on case to case 
basis (against a fixed moratorium period of 8 years in normal cases). Similarly for 
cane development loan, the 10% contribution required to be met by the sugar 
factory can be met by the concerned State Government also.  The condition of 
approved revival package by BIFR/COR cannot be dispensed with in view of 
fundamentals of financial propriety in the use of public funds. It may be 

appreciated, however, that loans cannot be given in cases where the likelihood of 
recovery is low, leading to loss of public funds. 
 
 Amendment to the SDF Rules is considered from time to time to meet the 
emerging requirement in the industry. The procedure for availing the assistance 
from SDF und er these rules has already been circulated to the State 
Governments, the Apex organisation of the sugar industry and also on the 
website of the Department. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 

Recommendation (Sl. No. 26, Para No. 7.7) 
 
2.30 The Committee are concerned to note that production of oilseeds in the 
country has been declining for the past few years and at the same time, 
consumption of oil is showing an upward trend, the reasons for which have been 
attributed to increase in population and increase in living standards. Estimated 
production of oilseeds during 2011 -12 is 305.29 lakh tons which is 19.61 lakh 
tons less than the previou s year oilseed production i.e. 324.8 lakh tons. The 
deficit in domestic production over domestic demand is met by imports. The 
Committee are of the view that though the country has achieved self -sufficiency 
in the production of foodgrains, adequate attenti on has not been paid for raising 
the production of traditional oilseeds indigenously. While taking note of status of 
indigenous production and imports alongwith overall demand and supply position 
of oilseeds and edible oil, the Committee feel that there is  an urgent need to pay 
more attention to R&D for improved varieties of seeds and improved 
technologies for production of oilseeds. The Department should make sincere 
efforts in coordination with the Department of Agriculture in the field of nurturing 
improved, high yielding varieties of oilseeds. Officers of State Government  
Departments in different States should be directed to mobilize farmers' groups 
from respective areas to participate in live demonstrations on scientific crop 
production technologies of  oilseeds. The Department of Food and Public 
Distribution in coordination with Department of Agriculture should arrange direct 
interaction between scientists, farmers and agro industry personnel. They should 
also arrange organized farmers' visit to experim ental fields of IARI. Besides this, 
farmers should be encouraged by some incentives based plans/schemes for 
opting for production of oilseeds. The Committee recommend to the Department 
to take initiatives on the lines suggested in consultation with the oth er ministries 
so involved. 
Action Taken by the Government 
2.31 The subject matter relating to latest research, new technology and 
measures to raise oilseed production lies within the purview of Ministry of 
Agriculture. The matter has been taken up with tha t Ministry. As per information 
received from Ministry of Agriculture, the Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation is implementing a Centrally Sponsored Integrated Scheme of 
Oilseed, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize (ISOPOM) in 14 major pulses growing  
States w.e.f. 1.4.2004. Oilseeds are mainly grown on marginal and sub -marginal 
land under rainfed conditions with low input usage.  Only 27% area of oilseeds is 
irrigated, exposing most oilseeds production to weather related yield risks.  The 
production of oilseeds has increased from 251.86 lakh tonnes in 2003-04 (prior to 
ISOPOM) to 324.79 lakh tonnes in 2010-11 with improvement in productivity from 
1064  kg/ha to 1193 kg/ha during the same period. The production of oilseeds in 
2010-11 was achieved at 324.79 lakh tonnes which was an all time record. 
 
 The following interventions are available to enhance increase in 
production of oilseeds under ISOPOM. 
 Seeds: Assistance for purchase of breeder seed and also for production 
of foundation seed and certified seed. 

 Other inputs: Distribution of plant protection chemicals, plant protection 
equipments, weedicides, supply of rhizobium culture/phosphate 
solubilising bacteria, distribution of gypsum/pyrite/liming/dolomite. 
 Irrigation: Distribution of sprinkler sets and water carrying pipes. 
 Information Education and Communication (IEC):   Including publicity 
and demonstration (Block and Integrated Pest Management (IPM). 
 Minikits: Seed minikits of oilseeds are supplied to the states for the 
varieties/hybrids released during last 10 years free of cost. 
 Seed Infrastructure:  Assistance is also given for creation of seed 
production infrastructure at government farms for production of quality 
seeds. 
 Training: Training of farmers and extension workers. 
2. In order to popularize new vari eties and newly developed technologies, 
block demonstration, Integrated Pest Management (IPM) demonstration and 
frontline are conducted on the farms of growers under the supervision of Subject 
Matter Specialist and scientists besides trainings to the farme rs for adoption of 
new technologies including new varieties.  The State Governments organize 
exposure visits of farmers in different oilseeds development programme under 
ISOPOM, provides opportunity to the oilseed growers for interaction with 
scientists and other stakeholders under the trainings programmes at State level. 
 
3. Besides, ISOPOM, Macro Management of Agriculture (MMA) Scheme 
provides assistance for oilseeds development to the States not covered under 
ISOPOM.  Under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY), the States can support 
crop development activities approved by the State Level Sanctioning Committee 
headed by the Chief Secretary of the State. 
 
4.  Union Finance Minister in his budget speech for 2012 -13 announced 
Mission on Oilseeds and Oil Palm  during XII Plan period to strengthen and focus 
on oilseeds and oil palm production. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 

Recommendation (Sl. No. 27, Para No. 7.13) 
 
2.32 The Committee are concerned to note that the number of surprise visits 
and other inspections of the vanaspati manufacturing units carried out by the 
officials of DVVO&F and samples analyzed for the last three years is on the 
decline. The number of inspections done during 2010-11 was 915 which declined 
to 290 during 2011 -12. Similarly, number of samples analyzed during the year 
2010-11 was 3180 which declined to 2299 in 2011-12. The Committee feel that in 
a vast country lik e ours where edible oils are the main cooking medium and 
adulteration of edible oils is so widespread, number of inspections being carried 
out and samples being analyzed are almost negligible. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that to keep a check on the  adulteration of edible oils 
which is so rampant in our country, and to ensure quality control, the number of 
inspections and samples analysis should be increased and strict action should be 
taken against the offenders. 
Action Taken by the Government 
2.33 The Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils and Fats (DVVO&F) was 
entrusted with inspection and analysis of samples from industries at the 
production level under Vegetable Oil Products (Regulation) Order, 1998.  The 
regulatory functions have been taken ov er by FSSAI under  Food  Safety  and  
Standards  Act, 2006 which has been implemented w.e.f.  5 th August, 2011. The 
work of inspection and analysis of samples has been entrusted with Food Safety 
and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) w.e.f. 5 th August, 2011. Therefore the 
number of inspections carried out and number of samples analyzed by the 
officials of DVVOF is less during 2011 -12 which is upto 4 th August, 2011 as 
compared to previous year 2010-11. 
 
The matter has been taken up with Food Safety and Sta ndards Authority 
of India (FSSAI)   (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare). As per information 
received from FSSAI, the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 was passed by 
the Parliament during 2006 in order to consolidate all the laws relating to food 
and to establish the Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI)  for laying 
down science based standards  for articles of food and to regulate their 
manufacture, storage, distribution,  sale and import, to ensure availability of safe 
and wholesome food fo r human consumption and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  By virtue of the mandate given to FSSAI, Rules 
and Regulations hitherto implemented under various regulatory orders had been 
repealed with effect from 5 th August 2011.  These r epealed orders include (i) 
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954; (ii) Vegetable Oil Products 
(Regulation) Order, 1998; (iii) Edible Oils Packaging (Regulation) Order, 1998 
and (iv) Solvent Extracted Oils, De -oiled Meals and Edible Flour (Control)         
Order, 1967. 
 
Various Regulations have been notified and being implemented with effect 
from 5th August 2011 under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.  Granting 
of Licenses and Registrations to Food Business Operator are in progress.  
Various Enfor cement machineries have been put in place to ensure effective 
Enforcement of the Act and Regulations notified therein. All the States/UTs have 

notified their Food Safety Commissioners.  Testing Laboratories, both 
Governmental and Private, had been accredit ed for smooth disposal of samples 
from throughout the country.  Various laboratories in States/UTs have been 
authorized to carryout analysis of Food samples including edible oils. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.23 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 

 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH  THE COMMITTEE DO           
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.10, Para No.4.7) 
 
3.1 The Committee are concerned to note that a huge amount of Rs. 2890.82 
crore each for the year 2009 -10, 2010 -11 and 2011 -12, respectively  are 
outstanding dues of FC I  which are  to be recovered from Ministry of Rural 
Development. Further, Rs. 286.36 crore and   Rs. 191.01 crore for the year 2009-
10 and 2010 -11, respectively are outstanding against the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development on account of providing foo dgrains for various welfare 
schemes on payment basis. In case of Ministry of Human Resource 
Development, a revolving fund of Rs. 300 crore has been provided by the 
Ministry of HRD. Besides this,  Rs.54.05 crore extra have been received from 
Ministry of Hum an Resource Development as account settlement in absence of 
bill-wise settlement.  The Committee are surprised to note that there was no time 
limit for making payment by Ministry of Rural Development for foodgrains 
supplied under SGRY Scheme. In respect of  Mid-Day-Meal scheme of MoHRD, 
there is a time limit of 20 days for making payment after submission  of bills in the 
subsequent month (time for submission of bills is 10 days) by the District 
Authorities under the decentralized scheme of payment.  However,  the 
prescribed time limit is not adhered to strictly by MoHRD as it depends on 
allocation of funds by Ministry of Finance. The Committee find that despite 
various steps taken by the Department of Food and even after intervention at 
Minister's level with t he Ministry of Finance and other concerned ministries, i.e. 
Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of Human Resource Development, 
the outstanding dues are still very high. The Committee feel that inability to 
liquidate the outstanding dues of FCI over the years indicate financial 
indiscipline. The Committee view this with grave concern and desire that the 
Department should find ways and means to deal with the situation and make 
regular and continuous efforts at the highest level for liquidation of the 
outstanding dues at the earliest to avoid undue burden on food subsidy bill. The 
Committee also desire that a time limit should be fixed within which the Ministries 
may be asked to make payments in future failing which some penal interest be 
levied.  
 
Action Taken by the Government 
 
3.2 The matter for recovery of outstanding dues of Food Corporation of India 
(FCI) for the past year has been constantly pursued including at highest level 
with Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD). At present, no foodgrains is b eing 
supplied by FCI under any scheme of MoRD. 

 In case of Ministry of Human Resources Development, they are being 
constantly pursued to realize the outstanding dues of FCI. Consequently, the 
amount of outstanding dues against MoHRD has been reduced from R s.265.42 
crore in 2009-10 to Rs.129.40 crore as on 31.03.2012.  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 

Recommendation (Sl.No.11, Para No.4.12) 
3.3 The Committee are deeply concerned to note that a large part of the food 
subsidy goes towards meeting the establishment cost of FCI which is increasing 
year after year. Establishment cost for the year 2009 -10, 2010-11 and 2011-12 is 
Rs. 1826.65, Rs . 2514.48 and Rs.2972.91 crore, respectively. Reason cited for 
increase in the establishment cost since 2008 -09 is the increase in average 
wages, consequent to pay revision, and also induction of fresh employees. 
Taking into consideration the ever increasing food subsidy bill over the years, the 
Committee recommend that the FCI should take concrete measures to bring 
down the establishment cost which will help in reducing the ever increasing 
burden on Food Subsidy Bill. The Committee, therefore, strongly rec ommend 
that ways and means should be devised to contain the establishment cost so as 
to ensure the benefits of food subsidy to the ultimate beneficiary.  
  
 Action Taken by the Government 
3.4 Food Corporation of India is following instructions on economy m easures 
and rationalization of expenditure issued from time to time by the Government of 
India to keep the establishment cost to its barest minimum. 
 
It is also informed that after restructuring of manpower in FCI in 2010, 
sanctioned strength has been redu ced from 55045 to 36515 posts (excluding 
Hindi and Watch & Ward posts) with the approval of Govt. of India. Thus the 
sanctioned strength has been reduced by nearly 33% which is likely to 
significantly contribute towards bringing down the establishment cost.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 

 
Recommendation (Sl.No.12, Para No.4.17) 
 
3.5 The Committee note with concern that utilization o f CAP (owned) capacity 
by FCI during 2012 (as on 29.02.2012) is 29% whereas utilization of CAP (hired) 
capacity is 64%. Thus, under utilization of owned capacity and hiring of godowns 
when under - utilized owned capacity is available, appears to be irration al and 
leading to avoidable expenditure of precious funds which can be utilized 
elsewhere.  The Committee feel that  due to lack of integrated approach by the 
Department in disseminating the information about availability of storage space 
as well as the new programmes of construction of storage space, the small scale 
farmers cannot utilize/avail the space which eventually result into non -
achievement of the targets fixed by the Department.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Department should bring ou t brochure/pamphlet of various 
schemes/programmes including storage facilities available to the farmers to 
enable them to avail the benefits so that the storage space is put to maximum 
use.  The same should also be distributed to MPs/MLAs/MLCs of the respe ctive 
areas for their information.  The Committee are also unhappy to note that the rent 
paid by FCI for hiring of godowns is constantly on the rise for the last three years. 
The Committee express their deep anguish over under utilization of owned 
capacity of the godowns  and high rent being paid on account of hiring of 
godowns, which clearly reflects lack of planning and improper management on 
the part of FCI. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that FCI should 
re-assess their requirement of stora ge space and utilize their owned capacity to 
the maximum before hiring any storage capacity in order to save precious funds 
spent on hiring the storage space. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the steps taken in this direction and also the reasons  for under utilization of 
owned capacity and hiring of godowns. 
  Action Taken by the Government 
3.6 The CAP (Cover And Plinth) capacity is used as a temporary mode of 
storage for a short duration only when no covered capacity is available at a 
particular location. Further, this capacity is used to store wheat/paddy only and 
not rice. These factors are responsible for lower utilization of CAP capacity as it 
is utilized only as a last resort and that too for wheat/paddy only. 
  
It is further submitted that F CI deals with seasonal commodities like 
wheat, paddy, rice and the assessment of required storage capacity for these 
commodities is made on the basis of peak season requirements. As 
capacities/godowns are generally hired for a minimum period of one year, i t 
would be appropriate to judge the utilization of capacity during the peak season. 
During the procurement months of April to June, wheat is procured in the states 
of Punjab, Haryana, M.P. and U.P. etc. which is despatched to the consuming 
states throughou t the year. Therefore the capacity utilization of CAP capacity, 
which is mainly concentrated in wheat procuring states, is high during the peak 
season but goes on declining continuously as the stocks are despatched to the 
consuming areas/states throughout the year.  
 

 To illustrate the above, the utilization of CAP capacity as on 31.7.2011 is 
given as under: 
 Owned Hired Total 
Capacity (in Lakh MT) 26.36 9.38 35.74 
Stock (in Lakh MT) 15.83 11.11 26.94 
%age Utilization 60 118 75 
 
The overall utilization of CAP capacity as on 31.7.2011 has been 75% which 
is equal to the norm of capacity utilization recommended by BICP.  
  
During the year 1990, BICP, in a study conducted under the Chairmanship of 
Dr. Vijay L. Kelkar, recommended that considering the practic al limitations under 
which FCI has to work the normated level of capacity utilization should be 
adopted as 75%.  
 
Apart from the limitations discussed above, some of the factors as discussed 
below are also responsible for low capacity utilization: 
 
i. Availability of foodgrains, pattern of procurement, movement and off-take 
ii. Operational Issues  
a. Maintaining Miller wise/Technical Assistance wise identity of stacks 
b. Formation of part stack at a particular point of time after loading 
/unloading of rakes and receipt and issue of stocks 
c. The minimum required vacant space for accommodation of the 
incoming rakes against the monthly movement planning. 
 Also, it may please be noted that the utilization levels 
suggested/recommended by BICP pertain mainly to covered capacity.  The norm 
in respect of CAP capacity, if any, is bound to be lower in view of the inherent 
shortcoming of this mode of storage as it is used as a last resort when covered 
storage is not available and that too for wheat only. Thus the capacity utilization 
of CAP capacity as on 31.7.2011 given above should be considered adequate. 
 
 As far as the lower utilization of owned capacity as compared to the hired 
capacity is concerned it may please be noted that this is a rather natural 
phenomenon due to the following reasons: 
 
(i) The Storage Capacity is hired only when there is absolute necessity of the 
same which becomes all the more reason for it to be fully/more utilized. 
(ii) The owned capacity once constructed at a particular place/location cannot 
be shifted if the same  is required at a different location due to changed 
procurement pattern or change in off take of foodgrains on account of 
consumer preference etc. whereas the hired capacity can be de hired and 
re hired as per the requirement making its utilization more th an the owned 
capacity. 
(iii)Owned capacities are created at certain remote/hill areas also keeping in 
view the regional requirements where private parties do not come forward 
to offer hired capacity. Higher utilization of capacity in such places is not 

possible due to various factors such as difficult terrain, improper 
infrastructure, climatic conditions, limitation of railways/other transportation 
facilities etc. Examples of the same are NE Zone, Himachal Pradesh, J&K 
etc. 
(iv) Many a times hired capacity is taken o n AUB (Actual Utilization Basis) 
where the capacity hired is shown equal to stock stored there in making 
the capacity utilization 100% thereby increasing the overall capacity 
utilization of hired capacity as compared to owned capacity. 
(v) Some part of the own ed capacity remains under repair and maintenance 
resulting in overall less utilization as compared to hired capacity because 
the hired capacity is taken only when it is fully storage worthy. 
(vi) Often it is not cost effective to undertake long distance transpo rtation and 
double handling of food grains just to ensure utilization of FCI vacant 
space at far off places in place of hiring the fresh storage space at the 
place where it is required because of proximity to the procurement or 
consumption centres.  
(vii) As has already been stated above, CAP capacity is used only for 
storage of wheat, many a times this becomes the reason for low utilization 
of CAP capacity as compared to covered capacity which can be used for 
all the commodities. 
 
      Further, it is brought to  the attention that adequate checks and balances 
are in place in the form of Internal Audit and CAG audit so as to ensure proper 
utilization of available capacity whether owned or hired and to ensure that no 
infructuous expenditure is made on account of re ntal charges by hiring the 
godowns unnecessarily. Review of capacity utilization is also carried out by 
Regional Offices/ Zonal Offices/FCI HQs. to ensure optimum utilization of storage 
capacity and to minimize the cost of storage.  
 
    The utilization of  storage capacity available with FCI as on 15.05.12 is 
given as under: 
 Covered CAP Total 
Capacity (in Lakh MT) 302.64 34.93 337.57 
Stock (in Lakh MT) 289.55 26.18 315.73 
%age Utilization 95.68 74.93 93.53 
 
From the above, it may please be seen that th e overall utilization of 
capacity has been 93.53% and the capacity utilization of covered capacity, which 
is a preferred mode of storage, has been 95.68% as on 15.05.12. Even for CAP 
storage the capacity utilization of 74.93% is almost equal to the optimum  
utilization norm of 75% given by BICP.  
 
As far as the issue of disseminating the information regarding the storage 
space available and its requirement is concerned, the same is taken care of as 
per the extant guidelines. All the information in respect of  capacity available with 
FCI and its utilization is available on the FCI website also. Whenever capacities 
are hired under various programs like PEG/PWS etc., open tenders are called. 
Besides this, all this information is also available on the FCI website.  However, 

the stocks are stored in the FCI godowns only after the same are procured by 
FCI and therefore, the capacities of FCI cannot be used by the farmers directly.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 

Recommendation (Sl.No.18, Para No.5.7) 
 
3.7 The Committee are unhappy to note that expenditure on establishment 
cost of CWC is constantly increasing despite various remedial measures bei ng 
adopted by the corporation. The expenditure on establishment cost has risen 
from Rs. 333.42 crore in 2008 -09 to Rs. 450.26 crore in 2011 -12. Reasons cited 
by the corporation for increase in establishment cost is the revision of pay scales, 
allowances/fringe benefits/enhancement of the ceiling on gratuity and 
introduction of pension funds for introduction of pension scheme for the 
employees of the corporation w.e.f. 01.01.2007. The Committee feel that even 
after taking into account all such factors, estab lishment cost is still very high. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that corporation should devise ways 
and means, thereby reducing its establishment cost and to further raise its profit. 
 Action Taken by the Government 
3.8 The Central Warehousi ng Corporation is committed to reduce its 
establishment cost and to increase its profit. In pursuance of the same, no 
recruitment is being made against retirement of Group D employees. Only the 
barest minimum number of induction at the level of Junior Tech nical Assistants, 
Accountants and Management Trainees are made to meet the operational 
requirement besides filling up the backlog of SC/ST vacancies in the Group „C‟ 
posts.   
The establishment cost of the Corporation as well as the manpower during 
the past four years is given below: 
                (Amount in Crore Rs.) 
Year Total 
Income 
Total  
Cost 
Estt.  
Cost 
% of Estt. 
Cost to 
Total 
Cost 
% of Estt. 
Cost to 
Total 
Income 
No. of 
Employees 
2008-09 849.25 738.81 333.42 45.13 39.26 5935 
2009-10 987.95 824.07 404.70 49.11 40.96 5765 
2010-11 1029.55 825.82 355.23 43.02 34.50 5667 
2011-12 
(Provisio
nal) 
1210.28 1050.06 489.57 46.62 40.45 5492 
 The establishment cost increased from Rs.333.42 crore during 2008 -09 to 
Rs.404.70 crore during 2009-10 due to additional provisions of Rs.92.49 crore on 
account of gratuity consequent upon enhancement of maximum limit of gratuity 
from Rs.3.50 lakh to Rs.10.00 lakh due to amendment in the Payment of Gratuity 
Act, 1972.  For the year 2011 -12, as per the provisional/unaudite d data, the total 
establishment cost is Rs.489.57 crore as against Rs.355.23 crore during              
2010-11. This includes the provisions of Rs.100.29 crore for contribution towards 
Employees Pension Fund w.e.f. 1.1.2007. If this provision of Rs.100.29 crore is 
excluded, the ratio of establishment cost to total cost works out to 37.07% as 
against 43.02% for 2010-11 and ratio of establishment cost to total income works 
out to 32.16% as against 34.50% for 2010 -11. Excluding the provisions of 
Rs.100.29 cror e towards Pension Fund, the increase in the establishment cost 
during 2011-12 over the previous year 2010 -11 works out to about 10% which is 

normal due to annual increment, increase in Dearness Allowance, consequent 
increase towards CPF contributions, etc. 
  
 It may, also be seen from the above table that the total manpower of the 
Corporation is constantly getting reduced.  During the period 2008-09 to 2011-12, 
the number of employees in position has reduced by 443. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 

Recommendation (Sl.No.22, Para No.6.7) 
 
3.9 The Committee are happy to note the increased trend of  production of 
sugar for the last three y ears. The area under sugarcane cultivation which was 
41.75 hectare during 2009 -10 and 48.84 hectare during 2010 -11 has increased 
to 50.81 hectare during 2011-12 which is 4.03% increase over the previous year.  
The Committee further note that to make sugar cultivation more profitable, the 
Government of India is taking various steps such as fixing of adequate Fair and 
Remunerative Price (FRP) of sugarcane in advance launching of a Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme on “Sustainable Development on Sugarcane Based 
Cropping System(SUBACS)” covered under Macro Management mode of 
Agriculture, the main thrust of which is transfer of improved technologies to the 
farmers, training of farmers, enhancing seed production and pest measures etc. 
The Committee hope that Government w ill continue to take such steps so as to 
encourage farmers to continue cultivating sugarcane crop so that sugarcane 
remain equally competitive with other food/cash crops. 
 Action Taken by the Government 
3.10 As noted by the Committee, the Central Governmen t has taken various 
measures to encourage the farmers to continue cultivating sugarcane and  the 
Government would continue with such measures. The FRP of sugarcane for 
ensuing sugar season 2012 -13, has been determined at Rs. 170/ - per quintal 
linked to a b asic recovery rate of 9.5% as compared to Rs. 145/ -per quintal for 
the current 2011 -12 sugar season. The Centrally Sponsored Scheme on 
“Sustainable Development of Sugarcane Based Cropping Systems Areas 
(SUBACS)” is still in operation under Ministry of Agri culture, for increasing 
production and productivity of cane. In addition to these measures, funds from 
Sugar Development Fund (SDF) at concessional rate (2% below the bank rate) 
are provided to sugar factories for development of cane in their respective areas.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012]  

Recommendation (Sl.No.24, Para No.6.15) 
 
3.11 The Committee are pained to note that cane pri ce arrears to the tune of 
Rs. 8409.62 crore, Rs. 84.21 crore and Rs. 1406.60 crore for the sugar season 
2011-12, 2010-11 and 2009-10, respectively are still outstanding. The Committee 
desire that Government should take appropriate action under Sugarcane 
(Control) Order, 1966 under which Central/State Government officers are 
authorized to recover the arrears of cane price remaining unpaid after 14 days of 
supply of cane by the growers, together with interest at the rate of 15 per cent. 
The Committee, however,   note that as yet no action has been taken against the 
sugar mills to recover the cane price. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
interest of farmers should be protected in such a manner that they continue to 
cultivate sugarcane without any hindrance.  To ensure this, any aid/assistance 
given to sugar mills should be suspended and strict action should be taken 
against defaulting mills under the provision of Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966. 
 
 Action Taken by the Government 
3.12 The latest figures of cane  price arrears, as on 31/05/2012 of various 
seasons, are tabulated below:-  
 
SL. 
NO. 
STATE CANE 
PRICE 
PAYABLE 
2011-12 
CANE PRICE 
PAID 
2011-12 
CANE 
PRICE 
ARREARS 
2011-12 
% CANE 
PRICE 
ARREAR
S 
2010-11 
CANE 
PRICE 
ARREAR
S FOR 
2009-10 
& 
EARLIER 
TOTAL 
CANE 
PRICE 
ARREARS 
1. PUNJAB 967.32 870.58 96.74 10.00 0.00 0.00 96.74 
2. HARYANA 1221.06 1074.35 146.71 12.01 0.00 0.00 146.71 
3. RAJASTHAN 5.99 3.92 2.07 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.07 
4. U.P. 18066.03 14904.50 3161.53 17.50 7.30 134.98 3303.81 
5. UTTARAKHAND 905.46 669.34 236.12 26.08 17.97 6.30 260.39 
6. M.P. 132.77 132.77 0.00 0.00 2.05 11.34 13.39 
7. GUJARAT 1586.41 1550.15 36.26 2.29 0.00 13.41 49.67 
8. MAHARASHTRA 13251.39 13080.82 170.57 1.29 32.54 17.37 220.48 
9. BIHAR 1054.80 956.78 98.02 9.29 1.67 31.94 131.63 
10. ANDHRA PR. 2366.50 2085.02 281.48 11.89 0.00 33.09 314.57 
11. KARNATAKA 6257.50 5857.05 400.45 6.40 38.77 20.29 459.51 
12. T.N. 3790.82 3342.77 448.05 11.82 0.00 2.15 450.20 
13. ORISSA 56.56 54.54 2.02 3.57 0.00 0.00 2.02 
14. W.BENGAL 10.59 10.57 0.02 0.19 0.00 0.00 0.02 
15. PUDUCHERRY 71.14 29.75 41.39 58.18 0.00 0.00 41.39 
16. GOA 16.17 13.73 2.44 15.09 0.00 0.00 2.44 
 TOTAL 49760.51 44636.64 5123.87 10.30 100.30 270.87 5495.04 
 
 
 

  As on 31.05.2012, the cane price arrears of sugar seasons  upto 2009-10 
and of sugar season 2010 -11 are Rs. 270.87 crore and Rs. 100.30 crores as per 
information submitted by states. For the sugar season 2011 -12, out of total cane 
price dues of Rs.49,760.51 crores, an amount of Rs. 44636.64 crores has been 
paid, leaving a balance of Rs. 5,123.87cores, which is 10.30 % of the cane price 
payable.  
 
 The cane price arrears of 2010 -11 and earlier sugar seasons are mainly 
because of matters being subjudice before the courts and stay order by courts, 
etc. The cane price  arrears for 2011 -12 sugar season are mainly on account of 
the mismatch between the prices of sugarcane and sugar. 
 In view of excess production of sugar over domestic requirement in the 
country during 2010-11 & 2011-12, the Government has allowed export o f sugar 
to augment the liquidity of sugar factories and to enable them to settle cane price 
arrears. In the process, sugar export of 26.18 lac tons was allowed during 2010 -
11 sugar season under various categories. Similarly, during, the current sugar 
season 2011-12,  while the Central Government , initially, allowed export of 20 
lac tonnes of sugar in two tranches of 10 lac tonnes each under Open General 
License (OGL) through export release order mechanism (upto 14.05.2012),  
thereafter, Government has allo wed export of sugar under OGL without 
restrictions subject to prior registration of export quantity with DGFT in terms of 
Circular No. 62 dated 14.05.2012 subsequently amended vide Circular dated 
16.05.2012.  
 It is relevant to mention here that, the buffe r and transport subsidy 
schemes in the past were formulated with the condition that the settlement of 
cane price arrears was to be first priority, from the disbursements under these 
schemes and the subsequent disbursements were linked to the submission of 
Utilization Certificates to this effect. However this time, domestic surpluses of 
sugar are being exported, without subsidy burden on the Government and only 
through timely export decisions and by relaxation of export procedures. 
  
The Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966 as amended from time to time, 
already contains the necessary provisions for timely payment of cane prices to 
sugarcane farmers for sugarcane supplied by them to the sugar mills, and the 
powers of enforcing the provisions of the said Order relat ing to payment of cane 
price dues of sugarcane farmers are delegated and vested with the State 
Governments concerned who have necessary field formations. In several cases, 
the State Governments have issued Revenue recovery Certificates to the 
defaulting sugar mills.  
 
 As regards suspension of aid/ assistance to defaulter sugar mills, it is 
submitted that when sugar prices decline, which generally happens in the years 
of surplus sugar production, the Central Government, at times, extends 
assistance to mills  through schemes like creation of buffer stock, export subsidy 
etc. The funds disbursed under such schemes are linked to settlement of cane 
price arrears as a first priority. If the Government accepts the suggestion of the 

committee, it would not be able t o extend assistance under these schemes to 
sugar mills having cane price arrears and ultimately sugarcane farmers may 
suffer. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 

 CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2 Para No. 3.7) 
 
4.1 The Committee note that the Decentralized Procurement Sc heme (DCP) 
like other schemes of the Department also suffers for want of infrastructural 
facilities, timely release of funds, submission of utilization certificates and proper 
planning for distribution of foodgrains. Besides, even after 13 years of its 
inception, the DCP scheme was undertaken by only 6 States for wheat and 10 
States for rice. The Committee feel that DCP scheme is one of the most 
important schemes being implemented with a view to lessening the burden of 
FCI and reducing the dependence of Cen tral Government. The Committee feel 
that the Department/FCI should create necessary infrastructure in coordination 
with the State Governments in Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode in a time 
bound manner by using the modern scientific technology so that more and more 
States opt for the DCP Scheme for procurement of foodgrains. The Committee 
desire that the Department should also take vigorous steps to motivate the 
remaining States to adopt the DCP scheme. The specific benefits of adopting the 
scheme along  with the achievement of DCP States should be duly 
communicated at the highest level through various meetings so as to persuade 
the States to contribute towards the Central Pool thereby enhancing food 
security. 
Action taken by the Government 
 
4.2 The Schem e of Decentralised Procurement (DCP) of foodgrains was 
introduced in 1997 -98 with a view to enhance the efficiency of procurement and 
PDS and to encourage local procurement and reduce out go of food subsidy.  In 
it, the States undertake the responsibility of procurement of foodgrains, its 
scientific storage and distribution through Targeted Public Distribution System 
(TPDS).  The surplus of foodgrains procured by DCP States, in excess of their 
TPDS requirement is handed over to FCI for the Central Pool stoc ks and deficit, 
if any, is met by FCI. 
            
 The decision regarding adoption of DCP system lies with the State 
Governments. The determining factors are infrastructure and resources available 
with the respective State Governments including manpower, storage and 
necessary logistics required for procurement and accordingly, State 
Government‟s readiness to undertake DCP procurement. 
 
       The major infrastructure required for procurement operation is the storage 
facilities for the foodgrains.  For this  purpose the Government has launched the 
Private Entrepreneur Guarantee(PEG) scheme.  A capacity of about 151 lakh 
tonnes is to be created in 19 States under the PEG scheme through private 
entrepreneurs and Central and State Warehousing Corporations. 
 

 At present the  States of West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, 
Uttrakhand, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and 
Kerala are procuring rice under the decentralized procurement scheme. The 
States of West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Chhat tisgarh, Uttarakhand and Gujarat 
are procuring wheat under the DCP Scheme. Government of Uttar Pradesh had 
been procuring rice under the DCP Scheme upto KMS 2008 -09 but have 
discontinued the system after this period. Government of Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, 
Haryana and Sikkim have conveyed their inability to adopt the DCP system of 
procurement of foodgrains due to infrastructural problems. The Government of 
India is actively pursuing this issue with the remaining State governments and all 
possible efforts will be made to encourage the remaining states to adopt the DCP 
scheme. The Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand, 
Rajasthan and  J&K have again been requested to adopt the DCP Scheme. 
Government of Uttar Pradesh has also been requested to agai n adopt the DCP 
scheme. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
(Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter –I of the Report) 

Recommendation (Sl.No.15, Para No.4.43) 
 
4.3 The Committee note that there is shortfall in the supply of rakes by 
Railways vis -à-vis the plan of FCI for meeting the PDS requirement in the 
country.  The Committee have been informed that during 201 1-12, FCI had 
planned movement for 13,215 rakes but railways supplied only 10,969 rakes 
which is about 83% of the planned movement. FCI could have moved about 60 
lakh tonnes additional foodgrains if this shortage was not there. Due to this 
shortfall, many States, especially the two high procuring States i.e. Punjab and 
Andhra Pradesh have been affected. The other States affected are M.P. (about 6 
lakh tones), Chhattisgarh (about 5 lakh tonnes) and Haryana (about 7 lakh 
tonnes). The Committee have been furth er informed that FCI prepares monthly 
Movement Plan based on computerized linear programming indicating date -wise, 
destination-wise requirement of rakes but railways during 2011 -12 has complied 
with only 40% of the linear programming. The unplanned rakes s ent by Railways 
lead to bunching, detention and consequently FCI suffers financial loss because 
huge amounts have to be paid to the railways in the form of demurrages. 
Recently, railways have started imposing 6 times demurrages without 
considering their ow n operational problems which is one of the reasons for 
detention of rakes. 
 
 During evidence, the representatives of the Department further informed 
the Committee that there are large number of railways sidings/goodsheds where 
the platform itself cannot ac commodate full rake i.e. about 40 to 42 wagons. The 
States where this problem exits are Kerala, Bihar, West Bengal and Jharkhand. 
According to the Department, Railway Board itself has approved supply of rakes 
at these locations as two point combinations. B ut subsequently railway 
authorities impose restrictions on two point combinations for more than 6 months 
in a year which leads to problem of detention and inadequate supply of 
foodgrains on these locations. The Committee desire that Department should 
regularly monitor the movement of foodgrains and coordinate with railway 
authorities for additional supply of rakes on priority basis to augment foodgrain 
stock in the State where shortfall of foodgrains is reported.  In the light of the 
above circumstances/obs ervations, the Committee, also desire the Department 
to communicate the concern of the Committee to the Ministry of Railways to 
explore the feasibility of supplying the rakes of atleast 90% of the requirement of 
FCI and not to  impose restrictions on loadi ng under two point combinations for 
the states of Kerala, West Bengal, Bihar and Jharkhand so that FCI can ensure 
movement of foodgrains in  these States without any hindrance. 
Action Taken by the Government 
4.4 The Department regularly monitors the moveme nt of foodgrains and takes 
up the matter with FCI and Railways,  in case any shortfall in foodgrain stocks is 
reported in any State and coordinates for providing additional rakes on priority to 
augment the foodgrain stocks in that State.  
 
 FCI requires rakes under two point combinations throughout the year as 
some of the centres in Kerala, Jharkhand, Bihar and West Bengal can 
accommodate rakes in two point combination only. But Railways invariably stops 

sponsoring rakes under two point combinations during the busy season i.e. from 
November to April every year. At present the situation is better due to ongoing 
lean season. 
 
       As recommended by the Committee, the issue of supplying at least 90% 
rake requirement of FCI and not to impose restrictions on lo ading of two point 
combinations has been taken up with Ministry of Railways. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 
 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.17 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
  

CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.4, Para No.3.15) 
 
5.1 The Committee note that the  proposal of the Department to distribute 
equivalent amount of food subsidy in cash, instead of subsidized foodgrains, 
based on request received from States i.e. U.P., Haryana, Delhi and Bihar, to the 
eligible BPL and AAY families is still under examinatio n in the Department. The 
Committee hope that the Department of Food and Public Distribution will further 
pursue the matter with State Governments of U.P. and Bihar for an early decision 
in the matter. 
  
Action Taken by the Government 
 
5.2 The proposal deve loped so far could not get due approvals therefore it is 
being revised.  After consultation with the States, it will be taken for approval and 
implementation  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 

Recommendation (Sl.No.9, Para No.3.60) 
 
5.3 The Committee note that main objective of the Village Grain Bank scheme 
is to provide safeguard against starvation during the period of natural calamity or 
during lean season when the marginalized food insecure households do not have 
sufficient resources to purchase rations. Such people in need of foodgrains will 
be able to borrow foodgrains from the Village Grain Bank. The grain banks are to 
be set up in food scarce areas like the drought prone areas, the hot and cold 
desert areas, tribal areas and the inaccessible hilly areas which remain cut off 
because of natural calamities like floods, etc. The Committee also note that 
about 16,196 Village Grain Banks have been established by the State/UT 
Governments against 21,751 Village Grain Banks sanctioned by the Department. 
The Department have also informed that the actual VGBs established may be 
more than this figure as some States have established VGBs but have  not sent 
complete UCs. The Committee note that based on the findings of the evaluation 
of the  Village Grain Bank Scheme by World Food Programme in three States 
and by independent agency, it was decided that the scheme may be revised.  
Accordingly, the sc heme is being revised in consultation with the World Food 
Programme and the independent agency to make it more attractive and effective.  
The revised scheme will then be submitted for consideration of the Expenditure 
Finance Committee for approval. The Com mittee has also been given the 
impression that the scheme is not successful at large. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Department should thoroughly modify/revamp the 
scheme at the earliest to make it viable/effective. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
5.4 The provision  of BE 2011 -12 of  Rs. 10.00 crores  has been fully utilized 
under Village Grain Bank Scheme.   
 
             The Department  has been  actively and seriously   pursuing  with 
the State Governments regarding establishment o f new VGBs and  utilization of  
funds under Village Grain Bank Scheme. It has been  writing  to the States  and 
holding review  meetings with them  to   send proposals for setting up of  more 
VGBs.   Seven  review meetings  have been held  during  2008  to  2010 and 
letters  were  written to the  State Food Secretaries. As per the suggestion of the 
Standing Committee, the  Department,  has also written at the level of Secretary 
(F&PD) to the Members of Parliament representing tribal constituencies on 
21.4.2011 to consider the need for setting up of VGBs in the villages under their 
constituencies and send proposals for establishment of VGBs through the State 
Government concerned.   The  Department has  also   written a D.O. letter dated 
17.2.2012 from Secretar y, F&PD to   the Chief Secretaries  of  all State 
Governments/UT Administrations   for sending their suggestions for modifications 
in the scheme for consideration.  
 

 Based on the recommendations of the evaluation reports of the scheme, 
feedback obtained f rom the implementing State Governments and experience 
gained during the course of implementation of the scheme during the   last 7 
years, the Department is in the process of  reviewing the   scheme    to examine 
its continuance/revamping to make it more  v iable/effective  to achieve the 
objectives  of the scheme. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 
 

Recommendation (Sl.No.20, Para No.5.13) 
 
5.5 The Committee note that during 2011 -12, CWC achieved the physical 
target of construction of godowns but failed to achieve the financial target. The 
Committee have been informed that the financial target could not be achieved 
because the expenditure a s planned for the purchase of land and lorry weigh 
bridges/wooden crates/ploy pallets/PCC blocks, etc. could not be made due to 
various constraints. The reasons put forth by  CWC is that they are operating 9 
warehouses in NE region with  a total capacity o f 1.02 lakh MTs. and average 
capacity utilization  as on 29 th February, 2012  was 88%.  Since the existing 
capacity was not even fully utilized, construction of additional capacity could not 
be considered. The Committee, however, note that construction of additional 
storage capacity of 9000 MT in two Warehouses in Assam (CW Sarbhog and 
CW, Dhubri) planned will be undertaken by CWC during 2012 -13.  While 
appreciating the difficulties in construction of godowns in NE region due to 
difficult geographical condi tions, the Committee hope that corporation will make 
maximum possible efforts in materializing the plan of construction of additional 
capacity in the vacant lands at Sorbhog and Dhubri at the earliest so that poor 
persons are not deprived of the benefits of Public Distribution System (PDS). 
 Action Taken by the Government 
5.6 In respect of construction of 2,000 MT capacity at Central Warehouse, 
Dhubri, the work order has been issued to the contractor and the construction 
work is likely to commence shortly. 
 
The Project Report in respect of construction of 7,000 MT capacity at 
Central Warehouse, Sorbhog is at advance stage of finalization. Construction of 
both these capacities will be undertaken during 2012-13. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
O.M.No.G-20017/12/2012-AC dated the 1st August, 2012] 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                      VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
11th December, 2012                        Chairman, 
20 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 

 
APPENDIX I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2012 -13) HELD 
ON TUESDAY, THE 11th DECEMBER, 2012 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room No. 
62, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
  Shri Vilas Muttemwar, M.P. -  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
4. Shri Kantilal Bhuria 
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
6. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
7. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
8. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
9. Shri A. Sai Prathap 
10. Shri C. Rajendran 
11. Shri Chandulal Sahu 
RAJYA SABHA 
12. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
13. Shri Lalhming Liana 
14. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
15. Dr. T. N. Seema 
16. Shri Birendra Singh 
17. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
     1. Shri P. K. Misra - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou - Under Secretary 

 At the outset, the Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members of the 
Committee to the sitting convened to hear the views  and suggestion Prof. M. S. 
Swaminathan, M.P., Rajya Sabha and Chairman, M. S. Swaminathan Research 
Foundation on the various provisions of „The National Food Security Bill, 2011‟ 
and to consider and adopt the draft Report of the Committee (2012 -13) on the  
action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Seventeenth Report of the Committee (2011 -12) on DFG (2012-
13) pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution).  
 
2. XXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXXXX  
3. XXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXXXX 
4. The  Hon‟ble Chairman highlighted the important recommendations 
contained in the draft Report. The Committee then took up for consideration the 
draft Report and after due deliberation, the Committee unanimously adopted the 
draft Report without any amendments/modifications. The Committee then 
authorized the Chairman to finalize the aforesaid Report and present the same to 
Parliament in the current Session of Parliament. 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
********* 
 

APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS  OF THE  ACTION  TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWELFTH 
REPORT  OF  THE  STANDING  COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2011-12) (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
  
(i) Total number of Recommendations:-  27 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
 
 Serial Nos.:- 1, 3, 5,  6, 7, 8, 13, 14, 16, 17, 19, 21, 23, 25, 26 
and 27. 
    
Para Nos.:-  2.6, 3.14, 3.17, 3.33, 3.42, 3.52, 4.23, 4.42, 4.44, 
4.48, 5.9, 5.17, 6.10, 6.20, 7.7 and 7.13.       
          (Chapter – II, Total - 16) 
Percentage: 59.26% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government 
Serial Nos.:- 10, 11, 12, 18, 22 and 24   
(Para Nos.: – 4.7, 4.12, 4.17, 5.7, 6.7and 6.15) 
           (Chapter – III, Total - 6) 
Percentage: 22.22% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
Serial No.:-  2 and 15.   
(Para No.:– 3.7 and 4.43) 
            (Chapter – IV, Total -2)   
Percentage: 7.41% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
interim replies of the Government have been received. 
   Serial No.:- 4, 9 and 20. 
   (Para No. :– 3.15, 3.60 and 5.13) 
    (Chapter – V, Total - 3) 
Percentage: 11.11% 