 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND                       
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION  
(2012-2013) 
 
   FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-ninth Report of   the Committee on Demands for Grants 
(2013-14) pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
 
THIRTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2013/ Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka) 
31 


 
 
 
 
THIRTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD,  
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND 
 PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(2012-2013) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twenty- ninth Report of   the Committee on Demands for Grants 
(2013-14) pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on -30.08.2013    
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on -30.08.2013 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2013/   Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka) 
 


 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
 
Composition of the Committee …………………………………………          (ii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………...          (iv) 
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………………               1  
 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been   
accepted by the Government……………………………     20 
  
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies……  40 
 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee ………………………………………..       42 
 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited………………………………………………       45 
   
APPENDICES 
(I)     Minutes of the 32nd sitting of the Committee held on     
27th August, 2013 …………………………………..  49 
 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
          recommendations contained in the Twenty-ninth Report               
          of the Committee ……………………………………      51   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION – 2012-13 
 
Shri Vilas Muttemwar  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Shivraj Bhaiya 
4. Shri Kantilal Bhuria 
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary  
6. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
7. Shri Sanjay Dhotre  
8. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
9. Shri Abdul Mannan Hossain 
10. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav   
11. Shri Sohan Potai 
12. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
13. Shri C. Rajendran 
14. Shri Purnmasi Ram  
15. Shri Chandulal Sahu (Chandu Bhaiya) 
16. Shri Adhi Sankar 
17. Shri Suresh K. Shetkar@@ 
18. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
19. Shri  Laxman Tudu 
20. Vacant** 
21. Vacant*** 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
23. Shri Lalhming Liana 
24. Smt Rajani Patil@ 
25. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
26. Ms. Rekha  
27. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy 
28. Dr. T.N. Seema 
29. Shri Birender Singh 
30. Shri Veer Singh 
31. Shri Kaptan Singh Solanki 
___________________________________________________________ 
Shri Lalchand Kataria, MP ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent his appointment as 
Minister of State w.e.f 28.10.2012. 
**Vice Shri A. Sai Prathap has been nom inated to the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
w.e.f.09.01.2013. 
@Smt Rajani Patil has been nominated to the Committee on FCA&PD w.e.f. 18.03.2013. 
@@ Shri Suresh K. Shetkar has been nominated to the Committee on FCA&PD w.e.f. 01.05.2013. 
*** Vice Shri N. Chaluvaraya Swamy, MP resigned from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 21.05.2013. 
(ii)

 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. K. Misra  -  Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 
4. Smt. Shikha  - Executive Assistant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution (2012 -13) having been authorized by the Committee to submit 
the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty -first Report on Action Tak en by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -
ninth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) pertaining to the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs). 
 
2.  The Twenty -ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in            
Rajya Sabha on 30 th April, 2013. The Government vide their OM dated                                    
29th July, 2013 have furnished their replies indicating Action Taken on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 27th August, 2013.  
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.  
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Comments of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the text of the Report. 
  
 
 
  
 
NEW DELHI                      VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
27 August, 2013                 Chairman, 
05 Sravana 1935 (Saka)                     Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -ninth Report  (15 th Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
 
1.2 The Twenty -ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on   
30th April, 2013. It contained 27 observations/ recommendations. Action Taken Replies in 
respect of all the 27 observations/recommendations conta ined in the Report have been 
received and these have been categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Serial Nos. – 1, 2, 5,  6, 7,  10, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 
                      23, 25, 26 and 27. 
 
(Para. Nos. – 2.28, 2.29, 3.9, 3.19, 3.20, 3.39, 3.50, 3.54, 4.8, 
                       4.21, 4.22, 5.11, 6.19, 7.12, 7.13, 8.8, 8.9              
                       and 9.6). 
           (Chapter –II, Total   18) 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government: 
 
  Serial Nos. -  11 and 21. 
 
  (Para. Nos. – 3.49 and 6.21) 
              (Chapter –III, Total 2) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of  the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
 
Serial Nos. -  8, 9  and 20. 
 
(Para. Nos. – 3.32, 3.33 and 6.20)  
             (Chapter – IV, Total 3)   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the interim 
replies of the Government have been received: 
 
   Serial Nos. - 3, 4, 14 and 24 
 
   (Para. Nos. –2.30, 3.8, 3.61 and 7.18) 
       (Chapter – V, Total 4) 

 
 
 
 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the replies in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations for which only interim replies have been 
received from the Government as reproduced in Chapter V as well as replies 
to the  observations/recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report, 
be furnished to the Committee within three months from the presentation of 
the Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee strongly emphasize that utmost importance should be 
given to the implementation of Observations/Recommendations accepted by 
the Government. In case where it is not possible for the Government to 
implement the recommendations in l etter and spirit for any reason, the 
matter should be reported to the Committee in time with reasons for non -
implementation. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some 
of the recommendations. 
 
A. Need for operationalisatio n of Consumer Fora as well as Case 
Monitoring System in various States/UTs for effective functioning of 
CONFONET Scheme 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5 Para No. 3.9) 
 
1.6 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows: -  
 
"The Committee note that the Scheme of 'Computerization and Computer 
Networking of Consumer Fora in the Country, (CONFONET)' which was 
launched during the 10th Plan period in March, 2005 is proposed to be 
extended during 12th Plan with a total outlay of Rs. 70.00 crores.  An 
amount of Rs. 6.60 crore has been released to NIC for the activities to be 
undertaken under the CONFONET Scheme during the year 2012 -13. The 
Committee feel the initiative taken by the Department in implementing the 
Case Monitoring System under the CONF ONET Project for capturing the 
entire life cycle of consumer complaints cases from registration till its 
disposal will go a long way in addressing the grievances of the Consumer 
and also instill faith of the consumers in the System. The Committee are, 
however, concerned to note that out of 640 locations being covered, only 
340 Consumer Fora are operational so far and 288 Consumer Fora are 

 
 
 
 
uploading cause lists while 191 Consumer Fora are uploading judgements. 
The Committee also note that the Department has taken replacement of 
Hardware, simplified the software to avoid specialized training and continue 
technical support manpower to ensure smooth functioning of the Scheme 
till particular location gets fully operational. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should take all necessary steps to replace 
old hardware with new ones and also ensure that the Case Monitoring 
System is operational in all Consumer Fora. The Committee further urge 
the Department to ensure operationalization of Consumer F ora  in all the 
Districts of the country during the 12th Plan period." 
 
1.7 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
"Director General (NIC) has been requested to take all necessary steps to 
replace old hardware and ensure that the Case Monitoring System (CMS) 
is operational in all Consumer Fora, all the State/UT Governments have 
also been requested to ensure operationalisation of Consumer Fora in all 
the Districts of their State during the 12th Plan period." 
 
 

 
 
 
 
1.8 Noting that out o f 640 locations being covered, only 340 Consumer 
Fora were operational and 288 Consumer Fora were uploading cause lists 
while 191 Consumer Fora were uploading judgements, the Committee in 
their earlier Report had recommended the Department to take all nece ssary 
steps to replace old hardware with new ones and to ensure that the Case 
Monitoring System is operational in all Consumer Fora and had urged the 
Department to ensure operationalisation of Consumer Fora in all the 
Districts of the country during the 12 th Plan period.  In their action taken 
reply, the Government have stated that Director General (NIC) has been 
requested to take all necessary steps to replace old hardware and ensure 
that the Case Monitoring System is operational in all Consumer Fora. All the 
State/UT Governments have also been requested to ensure 
operationalisation of Consumer Fora in all the Districts of their State during 
the 12th Plan period.  The Committee are not satisfied with the action taken 
reply of the Government as it does not i ndicate whether any Consumer Fora 
has actually replaced the old hardware with new ones. The reply is also 
silent about the number of Consumer Fora which have been operationalised 
till date, the number of them were uploading judgements and cause lists. 
The Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised about the number of 
Consumer Fora operational at present as well as Case Monitoring System 
operationalised in various States/UTs in pursuant to their recommendation. 

 
 
 
 
 
B. Need to follow the revised guidelines  of the Department and optimum 
utilisation of funds released to States/UTs for improving infrastructure of 
Consumer Fora 
 
Recommendation (S. No.7, Para No. 3.20) 
 
1.9 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows: -  
 
"The Committee note that under the Scheme 'Strengthening of Consumer 
Fora', financial assistance is provided for construction of Building and Non -
Building Assets to State Commissions and District Fora. An amount of Rs. 
3.84 crore has been released to 4 eligible States d uring 2012 -13 against 
total outlay of Rs. 25 crore. Further, an amount of Rs. 1.40 crore is being 
released to Uttar Pradesh Government shortly and another proposal for 
sanctioning of a sum of Rs. 57.00 lakh to Tripura Government is under 
consideration. The  Committee also note that the guidelines for the 12th 
Plan have been thoroughly revamped based upon the experiences and 
shortcomings observed during the last Plan period. The Committee further 
note that a total amount of Rs. 190 crores has been released to  various 
States and UTs for improving infrastructure in Consumer Fora. Various 
steps such as filling up of vacancies, setting up of circuit benches, holding 
of Lok Adalats etc. have also been taken for strengthening infrastructure of 
Consumer Fora and for speedy disposal of consumer grievances. The 
Committee desire that the Department should take pro -active role and 
strictly follow up with various States/UTs to ensure that the revised 
guidelines are followed and the funds released to them are utilized prope rly 
so that sufficient infrastructure of Consumer Fora is created in all the 
States/UTs in the country."   
 
 
1.10 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
"The revised guidelines have been circulated to all the States/ UTs through 
D.O. letters and Secretaries of States have been sensitized about proper 
utilization of funds through Video Conferencing by Secretary (Consumer 
Affairs)." 

 
 
 
 
 
1.11 Noting that the guidelines for the 12th Plan have been thoroughly 
revamped by the Department based upon the experiences and shortcomings 
observed during the last plan period and that a total amount of Rs. 190 
crores has been released to various States and UTs for improving 
infrastructure in Consumer Fora, the Committee in their original report had 
desired that the Department should take pro -active role and strictly follow 
up with various States/UTs to ensure that the revised guidelines are 
followed and the funds released to them are utilized properly so that 
sufficient infrastructure of Consumer Fora  is created in all the States/UTs in 
the country.  The Government, in their action taken reply, have merely stated 
that the revised guidelines have been circulated to all the States/UTs 
through D.O. letters and Secretaries of States have been sensitized a bout 
proper utilization of funds through video conferencing by Secretary 
(Consumer Affairs).  The Committee find the reply of the Government as 
vague and non -committal. The Committee would, therefore, like to be 
apprised of the actual number of Consumer Fo ra created by the States/UTs 
in pursuant to their recommendation alongwith the amount of funds 
released and utilized by them. 

 
 
 
 
C. Need for setting up of the Mediation Centers to expedite disposal of 
pending cases in Consumer Fora 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 8, Para No. 3.32) 
 
1.12 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows: -  
 
"The Committee note that besides the National Commission in New Delhi, 
35 State Commissions and 632 District Fora have been established in the 
country for providing  simple, inexpensive and time bound redressal of 
grievances against defective goods, deficient services, restrictive/unfair 
trade practices etc. adopted by any trader or person through summary 
trials. The Presidents of the National Commission and State Com missions 
have been empowered to constitute Benches with one or more members 
for speedy disposal of grievances of consumers. The Committee, however, 
are concerned to note that a large number of cases are pending in the 
National Commission, State Commissions  and District Fora as these 
Consumer Fora could dispose of 86.55%, 84.13% and 92.35% cases 
respectively. The Committee find that non -filling up of vacancies by 
States/UTs, lack of adequate supporting staff, rising number of complaints 
etc. are the reasons for pendency of cases. The Ministry has decided to set 
up mediation centres, similar to Lok Adalat, in each District of India under 
the direct supervision of the District Forum to expedite disposal of pending 
cases. The Committee hope that the Government w ould pursue with the 
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance to expeditiously obtain 
their approval of the Memorandum for the scheme 'Consumer Counseling 
and Mediation' so that Mediation Centres are set up in every district of the 
country for speedy disposal of pending cases."    
    
1.13 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
"Chief Secretaries/ Administrators of all States/UTs have been requested 
through letters and also through Video Conferencing by Secretary 
(Consumer Affairs), Govt. of India to ensure timely filling up of vacancies in 
Consumer Fora. As regards the setting up of the Mediation Centers, the 
Government is providing financial assistance to the State Governments 
during the 12th Plan."  

 
 
 
 
1.14 While observing t hat a large number of cases were pending in the 
National Commission, State Commissions and District Fora due to non -
filling up of vacancies by the States/UTs, lack of adequate supporting staff, 
rising number of complaints etc. and that the Ministry had dec ided to set up 
Mediation Centres in each District of India under the direct supervision of 
the District Forum to expedite disposal of pending cases, the Committee 
had expressed the hope that the Government would pursue with the 
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance to expeditiously obtain 
their approval of the Memorandum for the scheme 'Consumer Counseling 
and Mediation' so that Mediation Centres were set up in every district of the 
country for speedy disposal of pending cases. The Government in t heir 
action taken reply stated that Chief Secretaries/Administrators of all 
States/UTs have been requested through letters and also through video 
conferencing by Secretary (Consumer Affairs), Government of India to 
ensure timely filling up of vacancies in Consumer Fora.  As regards the 
setting up of the Mediation Centres, the Government is providing financial 
assistance to the State Governments during the 12th Plan. The Committee 
deplore the casual approach of the Department as they have merely 
furnished stereotyped reply to most of the recommendations. 
 The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
desire that the Government should obtain approval of the Memorandum for 
the scheme "Consumer Counseling and Mediation" from the Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance so that Mediation Centres are set 
up in every district of the country for speedy disposal of pending cases. 

 
 
 
 
D. Need to bring competition in selection procedure in order to ensure 
filling up of vacant post in Consumer Fora 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 9, Para No. 3.33) 
 
1.15 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows: -  
 
"The Committee are unhappy to note that as on 06.03.2013, as many as 3 
posts of President and 22 Members are lying vacant in the  State 
Commissions. Besides 100 posts of President and 249 posts of Members 
are also lying vacant in the District Forum across the country. The 
Committee note that the Department have requested the State 
Governments from time to time to take advance action  for filling up 
vacancies of Presidents and Members and also maintain a panel of 
candidates for filling up further vacancies. Hon'ble Minister of the 
Department have also impressed upon the Hon'ble Chief Minister and Chief 
Secretaries of States/UTs to take immediate steps to fill up the vacancies in 
the Consumer Fora. The Committee also note that States are being asked 
to bring competition in selection procedure as done by Maharashtra. While 
appreciating the efforts made by the Department, the Committee are , 
however, constrained to say that too many posts of Presidents and 
Members are still lying vacant in various State Commissions and District 
Forums. The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to make more 
earnest efforts in persuading the States/UTs to fill up the vacancies in all 
the Consumer Fora so that cases are not kept pending due to vacancies in 
the State Commissions/District Fora." 
 
1.16    The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
"Chief Secretaries/Administrators of all S tates/UTs have been  requested 
through letters and also through Video Conferencing by Secretary 
(Consumer Affairs), Govt. of India to make earnest efforts to fill up the 
vacancies in all the Consumer Fora so that the cases are not kept 
pending."  

 
 
 
 
1.17 Expressing their unhappiness that too many posts of Presidents and 
Members are lying vacant in State Commissions and District Forum despite 
the fact that Hon'ble Minister of the Department have impressed upon the 
Hon'ble Chief Ministers and Chief Secretaries of States/UTs to take 
immediate steps to fill up the vacancies in the Consumer Fora, the 
Committee had urged the Department to make more earnest efforts in 
persuading the States/UTs to fill up the vacancies in all the Consumer Fora 
so that cases are not ke pt pending due to vacancies in the State 
Commissions/Districts Fora.  In their action taken reply, the Government 
have merely stated that Chief Secretaries/Administrators of all the 
States/UTs have been requested through letters and also through Video 
Conferencing by Secretary (Consumer Affairs), Government of India to make 
earnest effort to fill up the vacancies in all the Consumer Fora so that the 
cases are not kept pending.  
 The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Government 
which reflects  casual approach towards their considered recommendation 
on such important issues. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire that the Government should take necessary 
action to persuade all States/UTs to fill up the vacanc ies in all the Consumer 
Fora.   

 
 
 
 
E. Need to create separate interest bearing account by State 
Government as well as Consumer Affairs Department for better 
implementation of the Consumer Welfare Fund Scheme 
 
Recommendation (S. No.10, Para No. 3.39) 
 
1.18 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows: - 
"The Committee note that Consumer Welfare Fund was created to provide 
financial assistance to promote and protect the welfare of the consumers, 
create consumer awareness and strengthen consumer movement in the 
country. The financial assistance by the Central Government for setting up 
Consumer Welfare Fund has been enhanced to Rs. 10 crore as Corpus 
Fund and the Central Government share has also been increased to the 
ratio of 75:25 and in case of special category States, the ratio is 90:10. The 
Committee also note that 21 States have created CWF in their respective 
States whereas no response has been received from the remaining 
States/UTs so far.  Delay in creation of a separate independen t interest - 
bearing account by State Government and also delay in depositing their 
own share of Rs. 2.5 crores is creating difficulties in implementation of the 
scheme. Also most of the States do not have separate Consumer Affairs 
Department and it is most ly attached with Food and Civil Supplies 
Department whose official are pre -occupied with supply chain of food 
product and Public Distribution System.  The Committee feel that all the 
States/UTs should be impressed upon to create separate independent 
interest bearing account as well as separate Consumer Department in their 
respective States/UTs for better implementation of the scheme.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to take the matter with 
the State Government at the highest level and als o urge the remaining 
States/UTs to set up Consumer Welfare Funds in order to promote and 
protect the welfare of the Consumers."  
 
1.19 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
"The valuable recommendation of the Committee has been n oted.  
Secretary (Consumer Affairs) in a recent video conference with all 
States/UTs has impressed upon them to create separate account for 
Corpus Funds and also for creating separate Administrative Department for 
Consumer Affairs." 

 
 
 
 
1.20 Having noted that delay in creation of a separate independent interest 
bearing account by State Government and also delay in depositing their own 
share of Rs. 2.5 crores is creating difficulties in implementation of the 
Consumer Welfare Fund Scheme and that most of the Sta tes do not have 
separate Consumer Affairs Department, the Committee had recommended 
the Department to take up the matter with the State Government at the 
highest level and also urge the remaining States/UTs to set up Consumer 
Welfare Funds in order to prom ote and protect the welfare of the 
consumers.  The Government in their action taken reply have stated that the 
valuable recommendation of the Committee had been noted. Secretary 
(Consumer Affairs) in a recent Video Conference with all States/UTs have 
impressed upon them to create separate account for Corpus Funds and also 
for creating separate Administrative Department for Consumer Affairs.  The 
Committee would urge the Government to take necessary steps so that all 
the State Governments/UT Administrations do create separate Corpus Fund 
Accounts as well as separate Consumer Departments in their respective 
States/UTs.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by 
each of the States/UTs in this regard.  

 
 
 
 
F. Need for strengthening price monito ring mechanism to contain the 
rise and prices of essential commodities   
 
Recommendation (S. No.15, Para No. 4.8) 
 
1.21 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows: - 
 
"The Committee note that the Price Monitoring Cell (PMC) of Department of 
Consumer Affairs has been monitoring retail and wholesale prices of 
essential commodities based on the information furnished by the State 
Food and Civil Supplies Department. With the addition of 4 essential 
commodities in the year 2010 -11, the Department is presently monitoring 
the prices of 22 essential commodities on daily basis from 55 centres of the 
country. The Price Monitoring Cell generally studies the international and 
domestic market trends of major commodities from various sources and the 
information is incorporated in the notes for high level meetings of the 
Committee of Secretaries (COS) and Cabinet Committee on Prices (CCP) 
for taking considered policy decisions on prices. The Committee are 
concerned that retail prices of pulses, edi ble oils, tea and onion keep rising 
though the retail prices of urad dal, vanaspati and sunflower declined over 
the last one year. Retail prices of most of the 22 essential commodities also 
registered an upward trend over a period of one year and the variation is as 
high as Rs. 37 in case of loose tea, Rs. 17 in onion and Rs. 18 in Gram dal. 
Though the Government have taken several steps to contain rise in prices 
of essential commodities such as reducing import duty to zero, duty free 
import of while and ra w sugar, ban in export of edible oils, imposition of 
stock limit from time to time, etc., yet the prices of essential commodities 
still increasing. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Department in consultation with other concerned depart ments should step 
up their efforts to contain rise in prices of essential commodities by 
strengthening monitoring mechanism, market interventions etc."  
 
1.22  The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
"The Department has noted the s uggestion to strengthen price monitoring 
mechanism, market intervention etc to contain rise in prices of essential 
commodities.  Accordingly additional infrastructure is being created under 
various Plan Schemes." 

 
 
 
 
1.23 While noting that the Department is presently monitoring the prices of 
22 essential commodities on a daily basis from 55 centres of the country 
and that the Government have taken several steps to contain rise in prices 
of essential commodities such as reducing import duty to zero, duty free 
import of white and raw sugar, ban in export of edible oils and imposition of 
stock limit from time to time, etc, yet the prices of essential commodities 
were still increasing, the Committee had strongly recommended that the 
Department, in consultation with other concerned Departments, should step 
up their efforts to contain rise in prices of essential commodities by 
strengthening monitoring mechanism, market interventions, etc.  In their 
action taken reply, the Government have stated that the Department has  
noted the suggestion to strengthen price monitoring mechanism, market 
intervention, etc. to contain rise in prices of essential commodities.  
Accordingly, additional infrastructure is being created under various Plan 
Schemes.  The Committee hope that the creation of requisite infrastructure 
would help in strengthening price monitoring mechanism in time to come.  
The Committee, therefore, desire to be apprised of the details of additional 
infrastructure being created under various Plan Schemes, at the earliest. 

 
 
 
 
 
G. Need to increase number of food items under Food Safety 
Management System and monitor maintenance of standards while granting 
licence to private entrepreneurs 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 20, Para No. 6.20) 
 
1.24 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows: - 
 
"While observing the physical targets and achievements of the BIS for the 
scheme System Certification, the Committee note that the achievement 
was 54 against the target of 150 during 2012 -13.  The Committee are not 
convinced with the reasons furnished by the Department that there are 
other certifying bodies for Management System Certification and the 
certification schemes under Management Systems are voluntary in nature. 
The Committee feel that, though, certification sch eme under management 
systems are voluntary in nature the Department has failed to achieve even 
40% of their target.  The Committee also note that there are only 7 licences 
in operation under the scheme Food Safety Management Systems as per 
IS/ISO 22000 and  5 licences for Service Quality Management System as 
per IS/15700.  In this context, the Committee were informed that three 
schemes were yet to be approved and 'Creating Awareness Through 
Publicity of BIS certified products' scheme was dropped as it had 
overlapping objectives with other schemes of the Department.   
 
The Committee are shocked to note that during the year 2012 -13, 
i.e. the first year of 12th Plan, the BE of the new schemes proposed under 
the Plan period was 9.40 crores which was drastically r evised to Rs. 0.20 
crore and till December 2012 Rs. 0.19 crores was spent.  The Committee 
are disappointed to note the casual approach of the Ministry towards their 
mandate. The Committee feel that there is lack of proper planning, 
farsightedness and coordination on the part of the Ministry.  The Committee 
also feel that scheme Creating Awareness Through Publicity of BIS product 
proposed under 12th plan is very important for creating awareness 
regarding standards.  Therefore, the Committee recommend that cr eating 
awareness through publicity of BIS, being the primary responsibility of the 
Department should continue as a scheme.  
 
The Committee, further, recommend that under Food Safety 
Management System, number of licence should also be increased on other 
essential food items other than milk and milk products so that maximum 
food items should be covered and come under the purview of BIS 
certification.  But at the same time, the Committee desire that the 
Department should ensure and monitor maintenance of stand ards while 
granting licence to private entrepreneurs."     
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
1.25 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
"BIS has been informed of Committee’s observations on very few license 
on Food Safety Management Systems (IS/ISO/22000) and Service Quality 
Management System (IS/15700) and the need for regular checking of 
standards of private entrepreneurs." 
 
 

 
 
 
 
1.26 While observing that there are only 7 licences in operation under the 
scheme Food Safety Management Systems as per IS/ISO/22000 a nd 5 
licences for Service Quality Management System as per IS/15700 and that 
the scheme for 'Creating Awareness Through Publicity of BIS certified 
products' was dropped as it had overlapping objectives with other schemes 
of the Department, the Committee ha d recommended that creating 
awareness through publicity of BIS product certification, being the primary 
responsibility of the Department, should continue as a scheme.  The 
Committee further recommended that under Food Safety Management 
System, number of licence should also be increased on other essential food 
items other than milk and milk products so that maximum food items should 
be covered and come under the purview of BIS certification.  The Committee 
had also desired that the Department should ensure a nd monitor 
maintenance of standards while granting licence to private entrepreneurs. 
The Government, in their action taken reply, have merely stated that BIS has 
been informed of the Committee's observations on very few license on Food 
Safety Management System (IS/ISO/22000) and Service Quality Management 
System (IS/15700) and the need for regular checking of standards of private 
entrepreneurs. The Committee deplore the attitude of the Ministry in taking 
their considered recommendation in a casual manner.  The Ministry have 
merely informed BIS about Committee's observation without spelling out the 
steps taken in this direction.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that creating awareness through publicity of BIS product 
certification should continue as a scheme.  The Department may also take 
necessary steps to increase the number of licence on other essential food 
items to bring them under BIS Certification.   

 
 
 
 
H. Need to expedite Recruitment Rules to fill up vacant post in FMC on  
permanent basis 
 
Recommendation (S.No.22, Para No. 7.12) 
 
1.27 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows: - 
 
"The Committee note that the Forward Market Commission has an effective 
strength of 71 officers/staff against the sanc tioned strength of 132 
officer/staff including all the Group A, B, C & D posts.  The Committee were 
surprised to note that the strength of officers/staff even went down in 
comparison to last year. The Committee further observe that in the Group 
'A' categor y against the sanctioned strength of 51, only 21 posts are in 
position and 26 posts are vacant.  Similarly, in Group 'B' 4 against the 
sanctioned of 18, and 50% of the posts under Group 'C' are unfulfilled.  The 
Committee also find that besides there being  a large number of vacancies, 
the SCs/OBCs communities are also not adequately represented in Group 
'A, B & C' categories and STs are not represented at all in three categories 
of employees other than Group 'D'.  The Committee, are of the view, that 
existence of such a large number of vacancies in a small organisation like 
FMC would not only hamper its functioning but would rather diminish 
effectiveness of the organisation. The Committee, therefore, reiterating its 
recommendation made during Demands for Gra nts (2012 -13), strongly 
urge the Department/FMC to make further sincere efforts to fill up all the 
vacancies in all categories of post."  
 
1.28 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
"The FMC is taking regular actions to fill up t he vacancies of 39 Group A 
posts. The Recruitment Rules for these posts have been submitted for 
approval of the competent authority. However, since the approval is yet to 
be received, these posts are being filled up on deputation basis. During 
2012-2013 action was initiated to fill up 23 vacancies and 13 Officers were 
selected for appointment on deputation, out of which 6 Officers have 
already joined. All efforts are being made to fill up the vacant posts 
expeditiously." 
 

 
 
 
 
1.29 Expressing the view that the existence of a large number of vacancies 
in a small organisation like Forward Market Commission (FMC) might 
hamper the functioning as well as effectiveness of the organisation, the 
Committee had reiterated its earlier recommendation made during Demands 
for Grants (2012-13) and strongly urged the Department/FMC to make further 
sincere efforts to fill up all the vacancies in all categories of post.  The 
Government in their action taken reply have stated that the FMC is taking 
regular actions to fill up the va cancies of Group A posts.  The Recruitment 
Rules for these Posts have been submitted for approval of the competent 
authority.  However, since the approval is yet to be received, these posts are 
being filled up on deputation basis.  The Government have furt her stated 
that during 2012 -13 action was initiated to fill up 23 vacancies and 13 
officers were selected for appointment on deputation, out of which 6 
Officers have already joined.  All efforts are being made to fill up the vacant 
posts expeditiously. The  Committee are of the view that filling up vacant 
posts on deputation basis due to non -approval of the Recruitment Rules 
might lead to a situation where persons appointed on deputation might 
return to their parent organisation, resulting in the various pos ts of the 
organisation becoming vacant again.  The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Government to make earnest efforts for getting the Recruitment Rules 
approved by the Competent Authority so that posts in all categories are 
filled up on permanent basis. 

 
 
 
 
Chapter-II 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE 
 BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 1, Para No. 2.28) 
 
The Committee note that during the 11 th Plan period the total amount 
allocated to the Department of Consumer Affairs as Budget E stimates was Rs. 
1076.00 crores which was subsequently reduced at Revised Estimate stage to Rs. 
857.00 crores whereas the total actual expenditure incurred during the entire 11th 
Plan period was Rs. 757.93 crores having unspent balance of Rs. 100 crores.  In 
the 12th Plan period during the year 2012 -13, the BE was kept at Rs. 241.00 
crores which was revised to Rs. 150.00 crores at RE stage and the actual 
expenditure incurred upto February, 2013 was only Rs. 125.15 crores. The 
Committee find that the perform ance of the Department is unsatisfactory not due 
to scarcity of funds but due to non -utilization of funds.  A detailed study of 
schemes in 11th Five -Year Plan document produced before the Committee, 
shows that under the scheme Consumer Protection/Capacity Building/Consumer 
Helpline, the average expenditure in percentage utilization was never satisfactory. 
Since the year 2007 -08 it varies from 37.60% to 67.77%, which is very low.  
Similarly, under the scheme, Bureau of Indian Standards, since 2007 -08 except 
the year 2011-12, where percentage utilization was 94.21%, percentage utilization 
was as low as 2.78% in the year 2008 -09.   The Committee, further note that 
under the same Scheme, the Department was able to spend only 11.68% of total 
allocation of 11th five-year Plan.  Similarly, under the scheme Weight & Measures, 
National Test House and Forward Market Commission total percentage utilization 
were 81.37%, 66.44% and 33.31% respectively in 11th Five -Year Plan.  The 
Committee strongly feel that since last si x years there has been trend of 
miscalculation while preparing the Budget Estimates and under utilisation of the 
funds allocated at Revised Estimate stage. The Committee are disappointed to 
note that performance of the Department is not up to the expectati ons as the 
Department was not able to spend the allocated funds in the stipulated time period 
and therefore, did not achieve desired outcome. The Committee feel that the 
Department could have opened more Centres of Bureau of Indian Standards and 
Hallmarking Centres in the Country, had intensive awareness campaign for 
consumer welfare and initiated consumer helpline in States which are not covered 
till date so that funds could not remain unutilized in the said period. The 
Committee are of the view that this continuous oversight and improper 
assessment of the Department reflects deterioration in their performance. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should make proper 
assessment and broaden their activities on project/schemes in accordance with 
the funds allocated so that funds do not remain unutilized and performance of the 
Department can be improved.  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 The valuable Recommendations of the Committee have been noted by 
Department and BIS for strict compliance in  future.  Spread of awareness about 
Consumer helplines, and Hall marking activities of BIS will be substantially 
increased as recommended. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs, 
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C Dated 29.7.2013] 

 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 2, Para No. 2.29) 
 
2.3 The Committee note that from the very first year of the 12th Plan period i.e. 
2012-13 the momentum of funds utilization under various ongoing 
schemes/projects is unsatisfactory.  The Commit tee are unhappy to note that 
under the scheme Consumer Awareness (Publicity) only Rs. 56.53 crores was 
spent against the BE of Rs. 89.00 crores upto 28.02.2013.  Similarly, under the 
scheme Strengthening of Price Monitoring Cell, for the year 2012-13 against BE of 
Rs. 3 crores, which was reduced to Rs. 0.75 crores at RE stage, the Actual 
Expenditure was nil. The Committee observed the same pattern of BE, RE and 
Actual Expenditure of all ongoing Plan schemes in 11th Plan period that continued 
in Ist year of 12th Plan too.   
 
  The Committee are not convinced by the reasons given by the Department 
that due to requirement of holding Expenditure Finance Committee Meeting 
(EFC)/Standing Finance Committee (SFC) in first year of 12th Plan they could not 
perform as most of the schemes were awaiting EFC approval from Planning 
Commission and expenditure is always the least in the first year of every plan. It 
goes without saying that the Department of Consumer Affairs are entrusted with 
the larger responsibility of prov iding welfare to the consumers of such a vast 
country, the Government has to bring changes in their way of functioning.  The 
Committee feel that the Department needs methodological changes to carry out 
their mandate. The Committee, therefore, strongly reco mmend that the 
Department should strictly review their performance in 11th five year Plan and 
take pre -emptive steps so that 12th Plan period does not suffer with the same 
infirmities as experienced during the 11th Plan period and total outlay of 12th Plan  
period could be properly utilized in effective implementation of various 
schemes/projects run by the Department".  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.4 Observation of the Committee has been noted. The Department has 
recently amended the guidelines of various sc hemes providing for more 
decentralization and enhancement of norms. This will ensure higher and faster 
utilization of funds in future schemes.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C  Dated 29.7.2013] 
  

 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No.5, Para No. 3.9) 
 
 
2.5 The Committee note that the Scheme of 'Computerization and Computer 
Networking of Consumer Fora in the Country, (CONFONET)' which was launched 
during the 10th Plan period in March, 2 005 is proposed to be extended during 
12th Plan with a total outlay of Rs. 70.00 crores. An amount of Rs. 6.60 crore has 
been released to NIC for the activities to be undertaken under the CONFONET 
Scheme during the year 2012 -13. The Committee feel the init iative taken by the 
Department in implementing the Case Monitoring System under the CONFONET 
Project for capturing the entire life cycle of consumer complaints cases from 
registration till its disposal will go a long way in addressing the grievances of the  
Consumer and also instill faith of the consumers in the System. The Committee 
are, however, concerned to note that out of 640 locations being covered, only 340 
Consumer Fora are operational so far and 288 Consumer Fora are uploading 
cause lists while 191 Consumer Fora are uploading judgements. The Committee 
also note that the Department has taken replacement of Hardware, simplified the 
software to avoid specialized training and continue technical support manpower to 
ensure smooth functioning of the Scheme till particular location gets fully 
operational. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should 
take all necessary steps to replace old hardware with new ones and also ensure 
that the Case Monitoring System is operational in all Consumer Fo ra. The 
Committee further urge the Department to ensure operationalization of Consumer 
Fora  in all the Districts of the country during the 12th Plan period. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 Director General (NIC) has been requested to take all necessary step s to 
replace old hardware and ensure that the Case Monitoring System (CMS) is 
operational in all Consumer Fora, all the State/UT Governments have also been 
requested to ensure operationalisation of Consumer Fora in all the Districts of 
their State during the 12th Plan period. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C  Dated 29.7.2013] 
 
 
 
 (Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter-I of the Report)

 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No.6, Para No. 3.19) 
 
2.7 The Committee observe that for the Scheme 'Strengthening of Consumer 
Fora', the BE were Rs. 19.00 crore and Rs. 25.00 crore during the year 2011 -12 
and 2012 -13 respectively which were drastically reduced to Rs. 9.35 crore and  
Rs. 5.48 crore at RE st age and the Actual Expenditure incurred were Rs. 6.77 
crore and Rs. 3.84 crore only. The Department stated that 2012 -13 being the first 
year of the 12th Plan, the schemes required appraisal and approval by the 
competent authority like Standing Finance Comm ittee/Expenditure Finance 
Committee, etc. which is a time consuming procedure and are the reasons for 
major variation at BE and RE stage. The Committee further note that allocation of 
funds at RE stage were less due to non-fulfillment of the pre-conditions for release 
of central assistance namely providing land for construction of building, creation of 
posts of President/Members in Consumer Fora, furnishing of Utilization 
Certificates of grants released earlier etc. by various States. The Committee are 
not fully convinced with the reasons cited by the Department regarding non -
utilization of allocated funds in full because such issues could be sorted out by 
timely action and regular consultation with the States. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the De partment should make earnest efforts to utilize the 
allocated funds in full so as to strengthen the Consumer Fora in the country.  The 
Committee further desire that the Department should take up the matter with the 
States and ensure that they fulfill the d esired pre-conditions for release of Central 
Assistance under the scheme.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 Chief Secretaries / Administrators of all States/ UTs have been requested 
through letters and also through Video Conferencing by Secretary (Consumer 
Affairs), Govt. of India to ensure full utilisation of allocated funds and also to 
ensure that the States fulfill the desired pre -conditions for release of Central 
Assistance under the scheme.  
  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C  Dated 29.7.2013] 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No.7, Para No. 3.20) 
 
 
2.9 The Committee note that under the Scheme 'Strengthening of Consumer 
Fora', financial assistance is provided for construction of Bu ilding and Non -
Building Assets to State Commissions and District Fora. An amount of Rs. 3.84 
crore has been released to 4 eligible States during 2012 -13 against total outlay of 
Rs. 25 crore. Further, an amount of Rs. 1.40 crore is being released to Uttar 
Pradesh Government shortly and another proposal for sanctioning of a sum of Rs. 
57.00 lakh to Tripura Government is under consideration. The Committee also 
note that the guidelines for the 12th Plan have been thoroughly revamped based 
upon the experiences and shortcomings observed during the last Plan period. The 
Committee further note that a total amount of Rs. 190 crores has been released to 
various States and UTs for improving infrastructure in Consumer Fora. Various 
steps such as filling up of vacancies,  setting up of circuit benches, holding of Lok 
Adalats etc. have also been taken for strengthening infrastructure of Consumer 
Fora and for speedy disposal of consumer grievances. The Committee desire that 
the Department should take pro -active role and stri ctly follow up with various 
States/UTs to ensure that the revised guidelines are followed and the funds 
released to them are utilized properly so that sufficient infrastructure of  Consumer 
Fora is created in all the States/UTs in the country.   
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10 The revised guidelines have been circulated to all the States/ UTs through 
D.O. letters and Secretaries of States have been sensitized about proper 
utilization of funds through Video Conferencing by Secretary (Consumer Affairs).  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C Dated 29.7.2013] 
 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No.10, Para No. 3.39) 
 
2.11 The Committee note  that Consumer Welfare Fund was created to provide 
financial assistance to promote and protect the welfare of the consumers, create 
consumer awareness and strengthen consumer movement in the country. The 
financial assistance by the Central Government for s etting up Consumer Welfare 
Fund has been enhanced to Rs. 10 crore as Corpus Fund and the Central 
Government share has also been increased to the ratio of 75:25 and in case of 
special category States, the ratio is 90:10. The Committee also note that 21 
States have created CWF in their respective States whereas no response has 
been received from the remaining States/UTs so far.  Delay in creation of a 
separate independent interest - bearing account by State Government and also 
delay in depositing their own sha re of Rs. 2.5 crores is creating difficulties in 
implementation of the scheme. Also most of the States do not have separate 
Consumer Affairs Department and it is mostly attached with Food and Civil 
Supplies Department whose official are pre -occupied with s upply chain of food 
product and Public Distribution System.  The Committee feel that all the 
States/UTs should be impressed upon to create separate independent interest 
bearing account as well as separate Consumer Department in their respective 
States/UTs for better implementation of the scheme.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Department to take the matter with the State Government at the 
highest level and also urge the remaining States/UTs to set up Consumer Welfare 
Funds in order to promote and protect the welfare of the Consumers.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.12 The valuable recommendation of the Committee has been noted.  
Secretary (Consumer Affairs) in a recent video conference with all States/UTs  
has impressed upon them to create separate acc ount for Corpus Funds and also 
for creating separate Administrative Department for Consumer Affairs. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C  Dated 29.7.2013] 
 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.20 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No.12, Para No. 3.50) 
 
 
2.13 The Committee note that for setting up of Consumer Clubs in Schools/ 
Colleges a grant of Rs. 10,000/- per consumer club is admissible and this scheme 
has been decent ralized and transferred to the Governments of States/UTs w.e.f. 
1.4.2004. Proposals can be submitted now to the Nodal Officer in the Food, Public 
Distribution and Consumer Affairs Department of the respective States/UTs by 
eligible organizations/VCOs. The Committee also note that an amount of Rs. 317 
lakhs have been released since 2008 -09 and 7749 consumer clubs have been 
sanctioned in 23 States/UTs. The Department have been vigorously pursuing the 
remaining States/UTs to implement the scheme. The Committee  feel that setting 
up consumer clubs in Schools/Colleges would go a long way in creating 
awareness about the consumer rights amongst the school/college students. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should pursuade and 
convince the remaining States/UTs to set up Consumer Clubs in as many schools 
and colleges as possible.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.14 The Department has been vigorously taking up the matter of setting up of 
Consumer Club with the concerned States/UTs through reminders/vid eo 
conferencing.  A video conference was conducted by this department on 27 th, 
28th& 30th May, 2013 highlighting the importance of setting up of consumer Clubs 
for making younger generation aware about the Consumer Rights. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C  Dated 29.7.2013] 

 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No.13, Para No. 3.54) 
 
2.15 The Committee note that the Consumer Protection Cell Scheme aims to 
render secretarial assistance to t he Department in administering the Consumer 
Protection Act and other related activities including holding of review meetings, 
annual conferences of National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission 
(NCDRC) and Central Consumer Protection Council (CCPC). Paym ent of 
professional fees to Government counsels in court cases arising out of consumer 
issues etc. are also met out of the provisions under the Consumer Protection Cell 
Head. Though the State Governments are responsible to constitute State 
Consumer Protection Council (SCPC) and District Consumer Protection Councils 
(DCPCs) under the Consumer Protection Act, the Committee feel that the 
Department should monitor and keep themselves informed of the meetings held 
and decisions taken by the SCPC/DCPCs. The Commi ttee, therefore, recommend 
that the Central Consumer Protection Council should monitor the meetings of the 
SCPCs/DCPCs.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.16 The suggestions have been noted for compliance and will be taken in the 
Agenda items of CCPC Meeting. Mo reover, all the State/UT Governments have 
also been requested to constitute and to hold meetings of State Consumer 
Protection Councils (SCPCs) and District Consumer Protection Councils (DCPCs) 
as per the provisions of Consumer Protection Act, 1986.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C  Dated 29.7.2013] 

 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No.15, Para No. 4.8) 
  
2.17 The Committee note that the Price Monitoring Cell (PMC) of Department of 
Consumer Affairs has been monitoring retail and wholesale prices of essential 
commodities based on the information furnished by the State Food and Civil 
Supplies Department. With the addition of 4 essential commodities in the year 
2010-11, the Department is presently monitoring the prices of 22 essential 
commodities on daily basis from 55 centres of the country. The Price Monitoring 
Cell generally studies the international and domestic market trends of major 
commodities from various sources and the information is incorporated in the notes 
for high level meetings of the Committee of Secretaries (COS) and Cabinet 
Committee on Prices (CCP) for taking considered policy decisions on prices. The 
Committee are concerned that retail prices of pulses, edible oils, tea and onion 
keep rising though the retail prices of urad dal, vanaspati and sunflower declined 
over the last one year. Retail prices of most of the 22 essential commodities also 
registered an upward trend over a period of one year and the variation is as hig h 
as Rs. 37 in case of loose tea, Rs. 17 in onion and Rs. 18 in Gram dal. Though 
the Government have taken several steps to contain rise in prices of essential 
commodities such as reducing import duty to zero, duty free import of white and 
raw sugar, ban i n export of edible oils, imposition of stock limit from time to time, 
etc., yet the prices of essential commodities still increasing. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Department in consultation with other 
concerned departments should s tep up their efforts to contain rise in prices of 
essential commodities by strengthening monitoring mechanism, market 
interventions etc.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.18 The Department has noted the suggestion to strengthen price monitoring 
mechanism, marke t intervention etc to contain rise in prices of essential 
commodities.  Accordingly additional infrastructure is being created under various 
Plan Schemes. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C Dated 29.7.2013] 
 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.23 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No.16, Para No. 4.21) 
 
2.19 The Committee note that the task of Price Monitoring Cell is to monitor the 
Prices of 22 essential Commodities colle cted from 55 centres spread across the 
country through the Civil Supplies Department of the States/UT Governments and 
other matters related to price scenario. The Department proposes to add 10 
Centres annually to increase the number of collecting centres t o 100 by the end of 
the XII Plan. The Department organized a 'National Workshop on Prices' in July, 
2010 to have an interface between the officials of PMC and States to discuss the 
technicalities of price collection and reporting. In house training was als o provided 
to the PMC officials for better modes of presentation and other possible 
applications of data through MS Excel. The Committee appreciate the efforts 
made and steps taken by the Department to improve the functioning of the PMC. 
The Committee, how ever, urge the Department to make more earnest efforts to 
improve the efficient functioning of the PMC by organizing frequent workshops, 
training of officials and opening of reporting centres etc.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.20 The recommendation of the C ommittee has been noted for compliance. In 
fact, under the proposed new scheme of  ‘Strengthening of the Price Monitoring 
Cell’, with an allocation of Rs.1081 lakhs for the XII Plan (2012 -2017),  an 
allocation of Rs.184 lakh has been   made for the year 20 13-14. Of this amount, 
Rs. Rs.76 lakh has been proposed towards Strengthening of Price Monitoring at 
the Centre which is to be achieved as indicated below: 
  
1.   Organising regional workshops/ training programmes to facilitate 
capacity building of existing manpower in PMC. 
2.   Subscribing to the web services of Professional Organisations 
engaged in the field.  This is required to undertake research work related to 
availability and trend of prices of essential commodities. 
3.   Hiring professionals (Domain  experts) from the open market that 
may include Agricultural Economists, Statisticians and Econometricians for 
a more detailed analysis. 
4.    Engaging private organisations for conducting research studies and 
surveys. 
 
        Necessarily, the price data being obtained have to be made sufficiently 
authentic, representative and robust. To facilitate this, the number of centres 
reporting prices across the country is proposed to be increased from 57 at present 
to about 100 during the XII Plan Period.  During each year of the Plan Period, 10 
new centres are proposed to be included. After consultation with States and 
concerned Central Ministries, additional items are also proposed to be included for 
price monitoring.   
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C  Dated 29.7.2013] 

 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No.17, Para No. 4.22) 
 
2.21 The Committee observe that no expenditure was incurred against the BE of 
Rs. 2.70 crore in the year 2012 -13 under the scheme strengthening of Price 
Monitoring Cell. Again BE of Rs. 1.65 crore has been proposed for the year 2013 -
14. A plan scheme of PMC has been shown for budgetary purposes alongwith 
Forward Market Commission (FMC) for which approval of Expenditure Fin ance 
Committee (EFC) was required. The Department is also facing problems in 
collection and reporting of prices such as lack of uniform mechanism for 
transmission of data, methodology of collection, authentication and validation of 
data by the States/UTs, absence of nodal officers in some States, inadequate 
studies to explain trends in prices, research to understand the nature of demand 
for specific commodities etc. To overcome these problems, the Department has 
taken various measures to strengthen the PMC in States by way of organizing 
training programmes, subscribing the web services of professional organizations, 
hiring of professionals and engaging private organizations for conducting research 
studies and surveys. The Department has also asked all the St ates/UTs to 
nominate nodal officers with whom the Department should interact for information 
or clarification. While appreciating the steps taken by the Department for 
strengthening the PMC and State PMCs, the Committee recommend that 
thorough training be given to manpower employed in collection and tabulation of 
data, organize regular workshop at regional and national levels and upgrade the 
IT infrastructure including software systems etc, so as to improve the efficiency 
and reliability of the PMC and State PMCs.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.22 While strengthening price monitoring at Centre, it is also proposed to 
strengthen the reporting units in the States.  During the year 2013 -14 an amount 
of Rs.99 lakh is earmarked towards this which also includes all ocations to North 
East States and UTs. The details in this regard are as follows: 
 
  Strengthening of Price Monitoring Cell in States 
 
1.   By getting trained manpower employed in the collection and 
tabulation of data at the State level  and where necessary with support  of a  
Data Entry Operator (DEO) to be selected by the State Governments 
dedicated to price collection and monitoring. 
2.    By organizing regular workshops at the regional and national level to 
get the feedback from field workers and discus s the practical problems 
being faced in the collection and reporting of prices. 
3.   By providing IT infrastructure such as computers, printers and UPS 
etc. in respect of new centers to be taken up and upgradation in respect of 
hardware already given.   

 
 
 
 
 
  
  Strengthening of IT infrastructure at the Central level 
       
IT infrastructure is to be strengthened at the Centre i.e., at National 
Informatics Centre (NIC), for which an amount of Rs.9 lakh has been 
proposed for 2013-14. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs, 
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C  Dated 29.7.2013] 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No.18, Para No. 5.11) 
 
 
2.23 The Committee note that existing practice for verification of sophisticated 
Weight & Measures i nstruments is done through Legal Metrology Department of 
the States/UTs. However, for sharing the workload for increasing the capacity and 
available infrastructure of testing, the Union Government has drafted new rules, 
which provide for setting up Governm ent Approved Test Centres (GATC) all over 
the country for which legal vetting and notification of the rules are in process.  The 
Committee have been informed that under the scheme Strengthening Legal 
Metrology Infrastructure of States/UTs, new proposal for  the construction of 
Controller office in 12 States and establishment of Research & Development 
(R&D) Centres in 5 States is proposed.  The Committee observe that in the 12th 
Plan, Rs. 300 crores have been allocated under the head Weights and Measures 
and Rs. 53.76 crores was granted for the first year of the 12th Plan i.e. 2012 -13.  
The Committee are disappointed to note that despite having so many proposals, 
the Department were able to spend only 39.60 crores out of Rs. 53.76 crores. The 
Committee hope th at the Government will make every sincere effort to complete 
the project of opening controller office in 12 States and R&D Centres in 5 States 
on urgent basis by utilizing the fund allocated for the purpose within a definite time 
period.  The Committee are of the view, that the Department should make earnest 
efforts to open Government Approved Test Centres (GATC) all over the country 
for advantage of the consumer at large so that the workload for increasing the 
capacity and available infrastructure of testi ng in States could be shared. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the action taken in regard to above 
proposals made by the Department, during the year 2013-14. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.24 The Department is making sincere effort to complete  the project of 
constructing controller offices in 12 States and R&D Centres in 5 States on urgent 
basis by utilizing the fund allocated for the purpose within a definite time period. 
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and all necessary 
steps are being taken to open Government Approved Test Centres (GATC) all 
over the country for advantage of the consumer at large. The Rules governing 
GATC has been vetted by Ministry of Law in June 2014 and is being published in 
Gazette. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C Dated 29.7.2013] 
  

 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No.19, Para No. 6.19) 
 
2.25 The Committee note that under the Plan Scheme on Gold Hallmarking, 
central assistance fo r setting up Assaying & Hallmarking Centres has been 
extended in locations where no centre exists. The Committee also note that as on 
31.01.2013 there were 200 Assaying & Hallmarking Centres established in the 
country of which 20 Centres were set up in 201 2-13 (upto 31.01.2013).  The 
Committee are disappointed to note that in the year 2012 -13 the Department has 
failed to set up any Assaying & Hallmarking Centres by providing central 
assistance. The Committee observed that under Gold Hallmarking Scheme 
certain modifications have been made and the financial assistance for setting up 
of Assaying & Hallmarking Centre under the schemes, was revised from 15% to 
30% to private entrepreneur and 50% to PSUs.  For North East States/Special 
Category States/Rural Areas the assistance was revised from existing rate of 30% 
to 50% to private entrepreneur and 75% to PSUs.   
  
While noting that setting up of Assaying & Hallmarking Centres is a market 
driven activity where promoters are private entrepreneurs, the Committee fee l that 
the Department should concentrate on popularizing this scheme through 
consumer awareness campaign by making the consumer aware of the benefits of 
Hallmarked Gold Jewellery so as to increase the demand of Hallmarked Jewellery 
in the market.  This would encourage the entrepreneurs to setup more Assaying & 
Hallmarking Centres in the country. The Committee further reiterate their earlier 
recommendation made in the 18th Report on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) that 
the Department should review the formaliti es of the Government scheme to 
simplify the procedure & suitably increase the financial assistance given under the 
Hallmarking scheme so as to attract private entrepreneurs to come forward not 
only in metropolitan cities but also in remote rural areas and open more centres of 
assaying and hallmarking throughout the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.26 It has been decided to continue the Scheme for setting up of A&H Centres 
in the 12th Plan.  
Procedure of accepting applications in form of Expression of Int erest from 
entrepreneurs for setting up of A&H Centres at deficient locations, North East 
States, Special Category States and Rural areas has been liberalized. Now an 
entrepreneur can apply for subsidy for an A&H Centre in above referred areas at 
any time of the year for which perpetual invitation on BIS website has been 
hosted.  
Consumer Awareness Programmes are regularly conducted on benefits of 
purchasing Hallmarked Jewellery. Department of Consumer Affairs, also releases 
advertisements both print and el ectronic medium on advantage of Hallmarked 
Jewellery.  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C  Dated 29.7.2013] 

 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No.22, Para No. 7.12) 
 
 
2.27 The Committee note that the Forward Market Commission has an effective 
strength of 71 officers/staff against the sanctioned strength of 132 officer/staff 
including all the Group A, B, C & D posts.  The Committee were surprised to note 
that the strength of officers/staff  even went down in comparison to last year. The 
Committee further observe that in the Group 'A' category against the sanctioned 
strength of 51, only 21 posts are in position and 26 posts are vacant.  Similarly, in 
Group 'B' 4 against the sanctioned of 18, and 50% of the posts under Group 'C' 
are unfulfilled.  The Committee also find that besides there being a large number 
of vacancies, the SCs/OBCs communities are also not adequately represented in 
Group 'A, B & C' categories and STs are not represented at all in three categories 
of employees other than Group 'D'.  The Committee, are of the view, that 
existence of such a large number of vacancies in a small organisation like FMC 
would not only hamper its functioning but would rather diminish effectiveness of  
the organisation. The Committee, therefore, reiterating its recommendation made 
during Demands for Grants (2012 -13), strongly urge the Department/FMC to 
make further sincere efforts to fill up all the vacancies in all categories of post.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.28 The FMC is taking regular actions to fill up the vacancies of 39 Group A 
posts. The Recruitment Rules for these posts have been submitted for approval of 
the competent authority. However, since the approval is yet to be received, these 
posts are being filled up on deputation basis. During 2012 -2013 action was 
initiated to fill up 23 vacancies and 13 Officers were selected for appointment on 
deputation, out of which 6 Officers have already joined. All efforts are being made 
to fill up the vacant posts expeditiously. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C Dated 29.7.2013] 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.29 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No.23, Para No. 7.13) 
 
 
2.29 The Committee, further note that despite employing officers on deputation, 
there is always scarcity of officers and staff with the FMC.  The Committee note 
that there is no proper procedure for recruitment to employ officers/staff in the 
FMC, due to which only higher posts which comes under Group 'A' are filled and 
other category of Group 'B' and 'C' posts of Economic Officer, Stenographers, 
Junior Research Assistants, Upper Division Clerks, Lower Division Clerks are 
majorly vacant.  
 
The Committee feel that, though, FMC is a small organisations but it is very 
necessary to have its working staff strength to run the organisation efficiently as 
FMC is entrusted with important economic regulatory functions that should not be 
hamper by these problems .  Non-availability of suitable candidates on Group B & 
C posts, as only higher posts can be filled up by the deputation process, the 
Committee feel that other than deputation, Department/FMC may consider to 
establish a proper recruitment Cell to fill up t he vacant posts in the category of 
Group 'B' and 'C' so that FMC can recruit officers/staffs of its own and will not 
depend upon other organisations to have adequate manpower to perform 
efficiently.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.30 For filling up the vacan cies falling under Group B and C, a team consisting 
of Director and Deputy Director has been formed. The action for finalization of 
RRs and filling up the post of other Group B and C is being expedited, in due 
compliance of recommendation of the Standing Committee. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C  Dated 29.7.2013] 

 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No.25, Para No. 8.8) 
 
 
2.31 The Committee note that for prevention of unethical trade pr actices like 
hoarding and black -marketing etc. the "Prevention of Black -Marketing and 
Maintenance of Supplies Act, 1980" is being implemented by the State 
Governments/UT Administrations. The Committee further note that based on the 
provisions under the Sub -Section 4 of the Section 3 of the Act, the State 
Governments which are passing detention order, are reporting the facts together 
with the grounds of detention as well as other connected particulars to the 
Department of Consumer Affairs within the stipulat ed period of 7 days. The 
Committee have been informed that during the year 2012, 231 detention orders 
were reported to Central Government by three States namely Tamil Nadu, Gujarat 
and Maharashtra. The Committee appreciate the gesture shown by these States  
and hope that this will be followed by other States as well as it would help in 
preventing unethical trade practices in the country in times to come. The 
Committee, therefore recommend the Department to take follow up action with 
these State Governments i n accordance with the grounds of detention furnished 
by them so as to prevent such practices in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.32 In view of the above recommendations of the Standing Committee, a D.O. 
letter (dated 29 th May, 2013) has been sent by Sec retary (CA) to Chief 
Secretaries/ Administrators of all States/UT Admns and requesting them to action 
under the provisions of both the EC Act 1955 and PBM Act 1980. A Video 
Conference was also  held on 27 th and 28 th May, 2013 by Secretary (CA) with 
State Secretaries in charge of Consumer Affairs of all States/UTs and reiterated 
the need for enforcement of the provisions of EC Act 1955 and PBM Act 1980. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C  Dated 29.7.2013] 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 26, Para No. 8.9) 
 
2.33 The Committee note that there is low conviction vis -à-vis the number of 
persons arrested and prosecuted during 2012 as the number of persons arrested, 
prosecuted and convicted were 4022, 3256 and 413 respectively. The same trend 
was observed in the previous years. However the number of persons convicted 
during 2012 has increased from 30 when compared from the previous year. The 
Committee further note that some of the States na mely Bihar, Chhattisgarh, 
Gujarat and Punjab have furnished the reasons for instance witnesses not turning 
up or even if they do turn up their turning hostile, not drawing up proper FIRs 
which is thrown out by the courts, cases investigated by the police go off track and 
are not investigated properly, transfer of judges and lack of special courts/Fast 
Track Courts for low conviction. The Committee feel that the provision of the Act 
to prevent unethical trade practices like hoarding and black -marketing is not taken 
in true spirit by the various organizations of the Government of the States/UTs. 
Taking this issue merely through video conferencing will not resolve the matter. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to co -ordinate with all 
States/UTs and discuss the matter at higher level so as to resolve the various 
reasons furnished by the States for low convictions. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.34 In view of the above recommendations of the Standing Committee, a D.O. 
letter (dated 29 th May, 2013) ha s been sent by Secretary (CA) to Chief 
Secretaries/ Administrators of all States/UT Admns and requesting them to action 
under the provisions of both the EC Act 1955 and PBM Act 1980. A Video 
Conference was also held on 27 th and 28 th May, 2013 by Secretary (CA) with 
State Secretaries in charge of Consumer Affairs of all States/UTs and reiterated 
the need for enforcement of the provisions of EC Act 1955 and PBM Act 1980. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C  Dated 29.7.2013] 

 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 27, Para No. 9.6) 
 
2.35 The Committee note that in response to Special Leave Petition (SLP) filed 
by the workers of Super Bazaar, the Hon'ble Supreme Court allowed the 
Government to try and revise the Super Bazaar through open bidding. As a 
consequence, M/s Writers and Publishers Ltd. has been accepted as the highest 
bidder. The Committee are surprised to note that despite Supreme Court's orders 
dated 14.03.2011 which empower the Cent ral Registrar, Multi -State Cooperative 
Society to issue directions from time to time and which shall be complied to by the 
highest bidder, there is an indication of non -implementation of directions as can 
be inferred from fresh petition filed in Supreme Co urt by the workers. The 
Committee have been further informed that the Hon'ble Supreme Court has fixed 
the next date of hearing on 01.05.2013. The Committee feel that waiting till the 
date of hearing of Supreme Court will further affect the effective functi oning of 
Super Bazaar. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department 
themselves should take up the matter to check the authenticity of the petition filed 
by the workers against non -implementation of the orders of Supreme Court and 
strict action should be taken in case of non-compliance of the said orders.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.36 In due compliance of Hon’ble Supreme Court’s latest order dated 
10.5.2013 the Department has started hearing all stake holders like Trade 
Unions, Suppliers, bidder etc to explore possibility of floating a scheme or a new 
business plan to resume Super Bazar. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C Dated 29.7.2013] 

 
 
 
 
Chapter-III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 11, Para No. 3.49) 
 
The Committee note that the National Consumer Helpline Scheme was set 
up in collaboration with the Delhi Universit y at a cost of Rs. 3.13 crore. The Delhi 
University has been granted an amount of Rs. 378 lakh for taking up the second 
phase of the National Consumer Helpline (i.e. from 1st April, 2010 to 31st march, 
2013). The Committee also note that 28 States/UTs have  been sanctioned funds 
for setting up State Consumer Helpline on similar lines as the National Consumer 
Helpline. The State Consumer Helpline will extend services in regional language 
of the State concerned besides Hindi and English.  The State Consumer He lpline 
is presently functional in 16 States/UTs only. While arrangements have been 
made with the IIPA, New Delhi and ASCI, Hyderabad to train the helpline staff, the 
Department has advised the State Governments to take the help of NGOs/VCOs 
to run the Stat e Consumer Helplines, if necessary. Standard software has been 
developed and supplied free of cost.  The Committee are, however, of the view 
that while it is essential to ensure that the National Consumer Helpline as well as 
the State Consumer Helplines ar e functional at all times, there is also need to 
create awareness of the consumers about the existence of these helplines. 
Moreover, State Consumer Helplines should be set up in the remaining 
States/UTs also. The Committee, therefore, recommend that while ensuring that 
these helplines are functioning efficiently, the remaining States/UTs should be 
persuaded to set up State Consumer Helplines at the earliest by extending 
financial assistance to them.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.2 National Consumer Helpline was setup by the department in collaboration 
with university of Delhi in 2005.  The 2 nd phase of project was sanctioned in 
March, 2010 at a cost of Rs. 378 lakh for a period of three years.  The project 
period expired on 31 st March, 2010. The Department ha s now approved the 
extension of National Consumer Helpline to its 3 rd phase at a cost of Rs. 4 crore 
for a period of three years in order to address Consumer Redressal. 
  
The department has been vigoursly pursuing remaining State/UTs for 
implementation of State Consumer Helpline. A D.O. letter in this regard from Secy 
(CA) to concerned State/UTs was issued on 13 th June, 2013 highlighting the 
necessity of implementing the scheme.  A video conference was conducted by the 
department on 27 th, 28 th& 30 th May, 20 13 with state secretaries in charge of 
Consumer Affairs exhorting them  to ensure that the scheme is implemented in all 
Sates/UTs. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C  Dated 29.7.2013] 

 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No.21, Para No. 6.21) 
 
3.3 As regard to Human Resource Development and Capacity Building in 
educational institutions, the Committee observe that balance amount available 
with the BIS as on 31.03.2012 was Rs. 41.80 lakhs aga inst total amount of Rs. 50 
lakhs released for the Scheme. T he Committee were informed that the scheme of 
Human Resource Development/Capacity Building in Educational Institutions was 
approved on 27th March, 2008 with an outlay of Rs. 7.00 crores and 21 
Institutions/Universities were short -listed for introduction of the curriculum.  
Evolution of curriculum was in progress in consultation with the identified 
Universities/Institutes. The Committee are disappointed to note that the scheme 
could not make headway  as introduction of standardization in curriculum in the 
educational institutions is not under the purview of BIS, therefore, it was 
recommended that this scheme need not be continued under the 12 th Plan. 
Accordingly the balance amount of Rs 49.98551 (incl uding interest) was 
surrendered. 
    
The Committee are shocked to know that it took the Department four years 
to realize that i ntroduction of the process of Standardization and Standards 
relating to important socio -economic sectors in curriculum of Profess ional, 
Technical and Higher Education Institutions does not come under the purview of 
Bureau of Indian Standards.  The Committee take strong note of the lethargic 
approach of the Ministry and, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department 
should strictly follow the mandate before making schemes which are not under the 
purview of the Ministry so that the crucial funds are not wasted in this manner.  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.4 Observations of the Committee has been noted for future guidance. 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C Dated 29.7.2013] 
 

 
 
 
 
Chapter-IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 8, Para No. 3.32) 
 
The Committee note that besides the National Commission in New Delhi, 
35 State Commissions and 632 District Fora have been established in the country 
for providing simple, inexpensive and time bound redressal of grievances against 
defective goods, deficient services, restrictive/unfair trade practices etc. adopted 
by any trader or person through summary trials. The Presidents of the National 
Commission and State Commissions have been empowered to constitute 
Benches with one or more members for speedy disposal of grievances of 
consumers. The Committee, however, are concerned to note that a large number 
of cases are pending in the National Commission, State Commissions and District 
Fora as these Consumer Fora could d ispose of 86.55%, 84.13% and 92.35% 
cases respectively. The Committee find that non -filling up of vacancies by 
States/UTs, lack of adequate supporting staff, rising number of complaints etc. are 
the reasons for pendency of cases. The Ministry has decided t o set up mediation 
centres, similar to Lok Adalat, in each District of India under the direct supervision 
of the District Forum to expedite disposal of pending cases. The Committee hope 
that the Government would pursue with the Planning Commission and the Ministry 
of Finance to expeditiously obtain their approval of the Memorandum for the 
scheme 'Consumer Counseling and Mediation' so that Mediation Centres are set 
up in every district of the country for speedy disposal of pending cases.    
    
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.2 Chief Secretaries/ Administrators of all States/UTs have been requested 
through letters and also through Video Conferencing by Secretary (Consumer 
Affairs), Govt. of India to ensure timely filling up of vacancies in Consumer Fora. 
As regards the setting up of the Mediation Centers, the Government is providing 
financial assistance to the State Governments during the 12th Plan.   
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C  Dated 29.7.2013] 
 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 9, Para No. 3.33) 
 
4.3 The Committee are unhappy to note that as on 06.03.2013, as many as 3 
posts of President and 22 Members are lying vacant in the S tate Commissions. 
Besides 100 posts of President and 249 posts of Members are also lying vacant in 
the District Forum across the country. The Committee note that the Department 
have requested the State Governments from time to time to take advance action 
for filling up vacancies of Presidents and Members and also maintain a panel of 
candidates for filling up further vacancies. Hon'ble Minister of the Department 
have also impressed upon the Hon'ble Chief Minister and Chief Secretaries of 
States/UTs to take immediate steps to fill up the vacancies in the Consumer Fora. 
The Committee also note that States are being asked to bring competition in 
selection procedure as done by Maharashtra. While appreciating the efforts made 
by the Department, the Committee are, however, constrained to say that too many 
posts of Presidents and Members are still lying vacant in various State 
Commissions and District Forums. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Department to make more earnest efforts in persuading the States/UTs to fi ll up 
the vacancies in all the Consumer Fora so that cases are not kept pending due to 
vacancies in the State Commissions/District Fora. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.4 Chief Secretaries/Administrators of all States/UTs have been  requested 
through letters a nd also through Video Conferencing by Secretary (Consumer 
Affairs), Govt. of India to make earnest efforts to fill up the vacancies in all the 
Consumer Fora so that the cases are not kept pending.  
  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C Dated 29.7.2013] 
 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.17 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 20, Para No. 6.20) 
 
4.5 While observing the physical targets and achievements of the BIS for the  
scheme System Certification, the Committee note that the achievement was 54 
against the target of 150 during 2012 -13.  The Committee are not convinced with 
the reasons furnished by the Department that there are other certifying bodies for 
Management Syste m Certification and the certification schemes under 
Management Systems are voluntary in nature. The Committee feel that, though, 
certification scheme under management systems are voluntary in nature the 
Department has failed to achieve even 40% of their ta rget.  The Committee also 
note that there are only 7 licences in operation under the scheme Food Safety 
Management Systems as per IS/ISO 22000 and 5 licences for Service Quality 
Management System as per IS/15700.  In this context, the Committee were 
informed that three schemes were yet to be approved and 'Creating Awareness 
Through Publicity of BIS certified products' scheme was dropped as it had 
overlapping objectives with other schemes of the Department.   
 
The Committee are shocked to note that during th e year 2012 -13, i.e. the 
first year of 12th Plan, the BE of the new schemes proposed under the Plan 
period was 9.40 crores which was drastically revised to Rs. 0.20 crore and till 
December 2012 Rs. 0.19 crores was spent.  The Committee are disappointed to 
note the casual approach of the Ministry towards their mandate. The Committee 
feel that there is lack of proper planning, farsightedness and coordination on the 
part of the Ministry.  The Committee also feel that scheme Creating Awareness 
Through Publicity of BIS product proposed under 12th plan is very important for 
creating awareness regarding standards.  Therefore, the Committee recommend 
that creating awareness through publicity of BIS, being the primary responsibility 
of the Department should continue as a scheme.  
 
The Committee, further, recommend that under Food Safety Management 
System, number of licence should also be increased on other essential food items 
other than milk and milk products so that maximum food items should be covered 
and come unde r the purview of BIS certification.  But at the same time, the 
Committee desire that the Department should ensure and monitor maintenance of 
standards while granting licence to private entrepreneurs.     
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.6 BIS has been informed of Committee’s observations on very few license on 
Food Safety Management Systems (IS/ISO/22000) and Service Quality 
Management System ( IS/15700) and the need for regular checking of standards 
of private entrepreneurs. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C  Dated 29.7.2013] 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.26 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
 
 
 
Chapter-V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 3, Para No. 2.30) 
 
The Committee are unhappy to note that during the last three years 
number of Utilization Certificates received from the States/UTs in respect of funds 
allocated to implement various schemes/projects of t he Department have not 
been submitted on time.  The Committee note that during the year 2010 -11 under 
the ongoing scheme Consumer Protection, States like Punjab, Tripura, Nagaland, 
Kerala, Sikkim and Gujarat have not furnished Utilisation Certificates.  Si milarly, in 
the same year, under the head Consumer Welfare (publicity), States like Tamil 
Nadu, (special project), Mizoram, Sikkim (special project) were provided Rs. 48 
lakh, Rs. 16 lakh and 8 lakh respectively for which Utilization Certificates were not 
submitted.  Likewise, under the scheme Weight & Measures the Utilisation 
Certificates of some of NE States viz. Assam, Manipur, Mizoram, Sikim and 
Tripura were still pending.  Under BIS scheme, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, 
Sikkim and Mizoram did not repor t utilization on time inspite of several reminders 
sent. The Committee, were informed that the State Governments could not utilize 
the funds due to difficulty in finding the land for the construction work, delay in 
releasing the funds by the State Governme nts themselves and long time taken by 
the construction work.  The Committee were also informed that the Department 
makes constant efforts to obtain Utilization Certificates by written reminders, 
messages, video conferences telephonic request and personal i nteractions. The 
Committee also note that some of States like Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, 
Odisha and Sikkim have not been provided further financial Assistance due to 
non-receipt of Utilisation Certificates of the grants released earlier.  Appreciating 
these measures, the Committee feel that, other than stopping financial assistance 
to States in case Utilisation Certificates are not submitted on time, the Department 
may consider to impose penalty of paying interest on unutilized fund by the State 
Governments till the funds are not utilized or Utilization Certificate is not 
submitted. The Committee feel that Department should also constantly monitor 
the physical output in terms of construction works and assets created by the 
States. In case of States, which could not utilize the fund due to difficulty in finding 
land, the Department should vigorously pursue such State Governments to 
remove this bottleneck at the earliest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.2 The Comments of the committee have been noted for strict compliance in 
future. The suggestions for charging interest in cases of idle unutilised funds in the  
hands of States and UTs is under examination in consultation with  Finance and 
Planning Divisions. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C  Dated 29.7.2013] 

 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 4, Para No. 3.8) 
 
5.3 The Committee note that Consumer Protection Unit of the Department is 
mandated to administer the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 . The Government has 
been striving to ensure that the Act remain vibrant and meets the objectives for 
which the Act has been amended thrice during the years 1991, 1993 and 2002. 
The Act is being amended again through the Consumer Protection (Amendment) 
Bill, 2011 on which the Committee have already submitted their report to the 
Parliament on 19.12.2012. The Committee have made several observations/ 
recommendations with regard to widening the provisions of the Act, facilitating 
quicker disposal of cases, rat ionalizing the qualifications and procedure for 
selection of President/Members of the Consumer Fora at the State level and 
Members at the National level. The Committee hope that the Government will 
accept all their observations/recommendations and implemen t them in letter and 
spirit and ensure that the objectives of the Act are achieved.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.4 The report has been circulated to NCDRC and State Governments for 
appropriate implementation of Committee’s observations / recommendations.  As 
for as observations relating to amendment bill are concerned, these are being 
examined in consultation with various stakeholders.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C Dated 29.7.2013] 

 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 14, Para No. 3.61) 
 
5.5 The Committee note that consumer awareness is essential for good 
governance though it may not be an easy task to educate the entire population of 
the country with different background and level  of literacy. The Committee are 
aware that the Department is making various publicity campaigns through the print 
and electronic media including 'Jago-Grahak-Jago' campaign to create awareness 
amongst the consumers. The Department has conducted a study in the year 2012 
though IIM, Lucknow to ascertain awareness level of consumers in the country 
with a sample size of 2000 persons of which 400 were selected from NE region.  
Such study is proposed to be commissioned during the 12th Plan to ascertain 
extent of awareness in remote or backward areas among various States. The 
Committee appreciate that the Department has accorded priority concern to 
tackling the menace of misleading advertisements and recently issued campaigns 
covering issues of real estate, educati on, banking, pharmaceuticals, consumer 
rights, hallmarking, misleading advertisements, wastage of food etc. The 
Committee are happy to note that the National Law University, Bangalore has 
been assigned the task of drafting a legislation on Misleading Adver tisement. The 
Committee are, however, concerned that rampant misleading advertisement on 
various products and services remained unchecked till today. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Department should vigorously pursue with 
the Nationa l Law University, Bangalore and the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting to expeditiously complete drafting of the legislation and obtain 
comments thereon respectively.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.6 National Law University is actively working on draf ting a legislation on 
Misleading advertisement. Meanwhile, the Department has mooted a proposal to 
constitute an Inter -Ministerial Committee to take up the case of unfair trade 
practices including misleading advertisements in Consumer Fora. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C  Dated 29.7.2013] 

 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 24, Para No. 7.18) 
 
5.7 The Committee are happy to note that the shift from conventional Price 
Ticker Board(PTB) to GPRS enabled ticker boards, the Committee also note that 
the project for dissemination of spot and futures prices in commodities of 
relevance is implemented in consultation  with AGMARKNET.  During the year 
2012-13 under phase IV, 409 PTBs have bee n installed till January, 2013 at 
various locations having heavy farmer footfall.  The Committee while examining 
installation of PTBs under Price Dissemination Project in each phase find that so 
far 1863 PTBs have been installed since 2009 -10, whereas in s ome of the UTs 
like Andaman Nicobar, Lakshadweep, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and 
North East Region viz. Sikkim, Meghalaya and Mizoram not a single PTBs has 
been installed. Besides this, targets under phase NER (2010 -11) as well as under 
phase IV, th ere has been shortfall in achievement of physical targets.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that work relating to installation of PTBs in NE 
Region, phase IV and other projects under phase IV may be expedited. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.8 Commission h as asked National Exchanges to study the feasibility of 
installation of Price Ticker Boards in UTs like Andaman and Nicobar Islands, 
Lakshadweep, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu and NER states such as 
Sikkim, Meghalaya and Mizoram. Once their report is received, the Commission 
will take necessary follow up action in this regard.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
Department of Consumer Affairs,  
O.M No. H-11012/5/2013-P&C  Dated 29.7.2013] 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                      VILAS MUTTEMWAR, 
27 August, 2013                 Chairman, 
05 Sravana 1935 (Saka)                     Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 

 
 
 
 
Appendix-I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND               
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 27th AUGUST, 2013 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs. in Room No. 115 -A, First 
floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
     Shri Vilas Muttemwar     -     Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arvind Kumar Chaudhary 
3. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
4. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
5. Shri Purnmasi Ram 
6. Shri C. Rajendran   
RAJYA SABHA 
7. Dr. Bhushanlal Jangde 
8. Smt. Rajani Patil 
9. Dr. T.N. Seema 
10. Shri Veer Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.K.Misra  - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Veena Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou  - Under Secretary 
 
 At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting 
convened for con sideration and adoption of two draft Reports of the Committee 
(2012-13) on (i) 'Bureau of Indian Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2012' and (ii) the 
Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations of the 
Committee contained in the Twenty -ninth Report of the Committee (2012 -13) on 
Demands for Grants (2013 -14) pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs).  

 
 
 
 
 
3. xxxxxxx    xxxxxxxxxxx   xxxxxxxxxxxx.  
 
4. The Committee then took up f or consideration the draft Report on the 
Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations of the 
Committee contained in the Twenty -ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2013 -
14) and unanimously adopted the same without any amendments/modifications. 
 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the aforesaid 
Reports and present the same to the Parliament during the current Monsoon 
Session of Parliament.  
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
********* 

 
 
 
 
 
Appendix-II 
(Vide Para No. 3 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-NINTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations:            27 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Serial Nos. – 1, 2, 5,  6, 7,  10, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 
                      23, 25, 26 and 27. 
 
(Para. Nos. – 2.28, 2.29, 3.9, 3.19, 3.20, 3.39, 3.50, 3.54, 4.8, 
                       4.21, 4.22, 5.11, 6.19, 7.12, 7.13, 8.8, 8.9              
                       and 9.6). 
           (Chapter –II, Total   18) 
Percentage: 66.67 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do  not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government: 
 
  Serial Nos. -  11 and 21. 
 
  (Para. Nos. – 3.49 and 6.21) 
              (Chapter –III, Total 2) 
Percentage: 7.41 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
 
Serial Nos. -  8, 9  and 20. 
 
(Para. Nos. – 3.32, 3.33 and 6.20)  
             (Chapter – IV, Total 3)  
Percentage: 11.11  
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which th e interim 
replies of the Government have been received: 
 
   Serial Nos. - 3, 4, 14 and 24 
 
   (Para. Nos. –2.30, 3.8, 3.61 and 7.18) 
       (Chapter – V, Total 4) 
Percentage: 14.81 