 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
               AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2017-2018) 
 
 
       
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the  Fifteenth Report of the Committee (201 6-
17) on Demands for Grants (201 7-18) pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution) 
 
 
 EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 December, 2017/ Pausa 1939 (Saka) 
(i)
18 


EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2017-2018) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report of   the Committee (201 6-
17) on Demands for Grants (2 017-18) pertaining to the  Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution)} 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28.12.2017 
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 28.12.2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
   December, 2017/ Pausa 1939 (Saka) 
(ii) 
 


 
CONTENTS 
 
            
Composition of the Committee ………………………………………                  (iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………...         (v) 
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………………         1          
 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government……………………………       23 
  
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
 the Government’s replies………………………………...       30 
 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee ………………………………………..        42 
 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are  
still awaited………………………………………………        46 
   
Annexure 
 
I. Status of HTS claims submitted by FCI          48 
 
II. Element-wise increase in Establishment Cost considered in 2016 -
17 (R.E) as compared to 2015-16           57 
 
III. A statement showing Establishment Cost of Fo od Corporation of 
India for the past 6 years i.e. from 2011 -12 to 2016 -17(R.E) vis-à-
Vis Annual Turnover             59 
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of Second sitting of the Committee held  on 23 October, 
2017               60 
 
(II) Analysis  of the  action  taken by the  government on the 
observations/ recommendations contained in the  
Fifteenth report  of  the  Standing  Committee on Food, Consumer 
Affairs and Public Distribution (2016-17)           62 
 
(iii) 

Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution (2017-18). 
 
Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy, Chairperson  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Anto Antony 
3. Shri R. K. Bharathimohan 
4. Shri Babu Lal Choudhary 
5. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
6. Shri Dinesh Kashyap 
7. Shri Dharmendra Kumar  
8. Shri Ravinder Kushawaha 
9. Smt. Sakuntala Laguri 
10. Dr. Swami Sakshi Ji Maharaj 
11. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
12. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
13. Shri Ram Chander Paswan 
14. Shri C.S. Putta Raju 
15. Smt. Priyanka Singh Rawat 
16. Shri  Midhun Reddy 
17. Shri Bhola Singh 
18. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuriya 
19. Shri Shibu Soren 
20. Shri Bhagwanth Khuba 
21. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
 
Rajya  Sabha 
 
22. Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
23. Smt. Misha Bharti 
24. Shri Ripun Bora 
25. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
26. Smt. M. C. Mary Kom 
27. Ms. Rekha 
28. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
29. Shri Veer Singh 
30. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
31. Vacant 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy        - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Lovekesh Kumar Sharma   - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou      - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Darshana Gulati Khanduja - Sr. Executive Assistant 
___________________________________________________________________ 
 
 (IV) 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
  
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution (201 7-18) having been authorized by the Committee to 
submit the Report on their behalf, present this Eighteenth Report on Action 
Taken by the  Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Fifteenth Report of the Committee (201 6-17) on Demands for Grants (201 7-
18) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department 
of Food and Public Distribution). 
 
2.  The Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 20 March, 2017 . The Government have furnished their replies indicating 
Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Report on 13 June, 
2017. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 23 October, 2017. 
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.  
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience,  the Observations/Comments of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the text of the Report. 
  
 
 
 
  
 
NEW DELHI;                    J.C. DIVAKAR REDDY, 
  23 October, 2017                                      Chairperson, 
1 Kartika 1939 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Food, 
   Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 
 
 
 
 
(V)

 
REPORT 
CHAPTER - I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution deals with the action taken by the Gov ernment on                      
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report                        
of the Committee (201 6-17), (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (201 7-18) 
pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affair s, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
 
1.2 The Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 20th March, 2017 . It contained 13 observations/ 
recommendations. Action taken replies in respect o f all the 13 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report have been received and 
these have been categorized as follows:- 
(i)  Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government - 
 
Para Nos.:- 4.52, 4.53, 5.7, 5.15, 6.9 and 6.13 
   
   
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government - 
  
 Para Nos.:-  3.8, 4.39, 5.10 and 6.5 
 
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies   of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee -  
 
Para Nos.:- 4.9 and 4.28 
 
   (iv) Recommendations in respect of which the interim replies of 
the Government have been received -   
 
   Para No. :- 4.20 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I and final replies in 

 
respect of recommendation for which only interim reply has  been given by 
the Government, be furnished to the Committee expeditiously.  
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations. 
 
A.  Need for promoting Decentralized Procurement Scheme (DCP)  
 
Recommendation (Para No.  4.9) 
 
1.5 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
 "The Committee regret to note that even after 20 years of launc hing of the 
Decentralized Procurement Scheme (DCP) and despite the various steps taken 
to convince the States/UTs to adopt it,  the scheme has been adopted by only 14 
States/UTs for Rice and 8 States for Wheat respectively. Considering that the 
DCP Scheme has the objective to ensure MSP to farmers, encourage 
procurement in non -traditional States besides enabling procurement of 
foodgrains more suited to local taste, the Committee are fully convinced that the 
remaining States/UTs should also adopt the DCP Sch eme at the earliest. It has 
become all the more essential for the States/UTs to adopt the scheme in order 
the save the transportation cost as a result thereof to reduce food subsidy bill. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly desire that the Department should  make all 
possible efforts to convince the remaining States/UTs and to provide maximum 
assistance to enable them to adopt DCP Scheme in this fiscal itself.  The 
Committee further feel that to encourage the remaining States to adopt the DCP 
Scheme, the Depa rtment need to interact proactively with States to ascertain 
reasons for their lack of interest to adopt the scheme and suggest remedial 
measures including extending some concessions or incentives for limited period 
till those States are able to implement the scheme in a satisfactory manner.” 
 
 
1.6 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
 "States are being encouraged to take up Decentralized Procurement 
System (DCP) for foodgrains. As on date 14 States have adopted DCP mode of 
procurement for Rice and 8 States adopted DCP mode for Wheat. Jharkhand 
(One district only) and Maharashtra have adopted DCP for rice from Kharif 
Marketing Season (KMS) 2016 -17. Recently, the State Government of Haryana 
was again requested to adopt DCP operations for wheat.”  
  
 

 
1.7 The Committee in their original report noted that even after 20 years 
of launching the  DCP Scheme and despite various steps/initiatives taken 
by the Department, only 14 States have adopted the scheme for rice and 8 
States for wheat a nd, therefore, desired that the Department sh ould make 
every possible effort  to convince the remaining States/UTs to adopt the 
Scheme at the earliest. In their Action Taken Reply, the Department merely 
stated that the States are being encouraged to take up  the DCP Scheme 
without elaborating on any concrete steps that have been  taken/are being 
taken in this regard. The Department are also silent as to whether they have 
ascertained the reasons for lack of interest of the remaining States/UTs to 
implement the scheme. The Committee , therefore,  strongly feel that  they 
should be apprised of the  steps taken  in detail both  to encourage the 
States/UTs to adopt DCP scheme and also the reasons for lack of interest 
of the remaining States/UTs to adopt DCP Scheme . Further, the Committee 
desire that the steps taken in this regard along with the remedial measures 
suggested for the remaining States/UTs for adoption of the DCP Scheme be 
apprised to them not later than a month of the presentation of this Report 
to the Houses of Parliament. 

 
 
B. Need to fix timeline for completion of study by NITI Ayog for 
evaluation of DCP Scheme.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.20) 
 
1.8 The Committee earlier observed/recommended as under: 
 
 "The Committee note that the amount of food subsidy rela ted to FCI and 
DCP States is continuously on the rise due to increase in MSP of Wheat and 
Rice vis-à-vis Central Issue Price (CIP), increased off take of foodgrains under 
TPDS etc. Implementation of NFSA in all States/UTs has also considerably 
contributed to ever increasing food subsidy bill. While appreciating the various 
steps taken by the Department to reduce food subsidy bill such as issue of bonds 
by FCI at lower coupon rates, improving the operational efficiency of FCI, 
negotiating with the bank of th e consortium of food credit to reduce the rate of 
interest on cash credit etc., the Committee, however, desire the Department to 
make vigorous efforts to explore all possibilities of containing food subsidy bill 
without compromising on the regular supply a nd availability of subsidized 
foodgrains.  They further note that the assertion of the Department that 
involvement of private sector in procurement and storage of foodgrains at 
comparative rates could help in lowering the pace of increase in food subsidy 
and the expenses at comparative rates towards incidentals like transportation, 
storage etc. could result in lower food subsidy. However, they also note that no 
study has been initiated by the Department on this aspect. The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Department to initiate a study from independent consultants 
on this aspect so that food subsidy outgo could be reduced to some extent.”  
 
  
1.9 The Ministry in their action taken reply stated:- 
 
 "The private agencies have been engaged for a period of three  years 
through a competitive bidding process by FCI in Eastern Uttar Pradesh, 
Jharkhand and West Bengal for paddy/rice procurement and to expand the 
coverage of MSP operations to such identified clusters of Districts/ Parts of the 
Districts, where outreach  of Government agencies has been weak and State 
Governments have consented for FCI to engage the private agencies to reach 
out to the paddy farmers for improvement. Private agencies engaged for 3, 2, 4 
clusters in Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand and West Bengal respectively.  
 

 
 NITI AAYOG is already conducting a comprehensive study for evaluation 
of Decentralized Procurement (DCP) Scheme for procurement of wheat/paddy 
under Minimum Support Price (MSP).” 
 
 
 

 
1.10  In their original report, the Committee , inter-alia, observed that the 
Department has not initiated a ny study on the aspect of involvement of 
private sector in procurement and storage of foodgrains with the ultimate 
aim of reducing the ever increasing food subsidy. The Department in its 
Action Taken Reply have stated that NITI Aayog is already conducting a 
comprehensive study for evaluation of DCP Scheme for procu rement of 
wheat/paddy under MSP. The Committee desire to be apprised of the 
timeline by which NITI Aayog would complete the study on DCP Scheme  
and also whether the Department has prepared any plan to act urgently on 
the recommendations of the study  as and when completed by NITI Aayog. 
They find that the reply is silent on the aspect of study of NITI Aayog , if the 
same would cover the aspect of invo lvement of private sector in 
procurement and storage of foodgrains aimed at reducing the outgo on 
food subsidy. They, therefore, desire to be apprised of the timeline fixed, if 
any, for the study of NITI Aayog as well as the recommendations made by 
the study in respect of DCP Scheme at the earliest.  

 
 
C. Need for expeditious settlement of Hill Transport Subsidy bills. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.28) 
 
1.11 The Committee recommended as follows:- 
 
 "The Committee note that under Hill Transport Subsidy, (HTS) the Union 
Government reimburses the transportation cost of foodgrains from base depot of 
FCI upto the designated principal distribution centres in States which are 
predominantly in hilly areas. The Committee note that an amount of Rs. 4464.51 
crore is pend ing with FCI for being paid to States/UTs viz. Mizoram, Tripura, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Lakshadweep and Sikkim, while no 
claim has been received from Meghalaya and Nagaland on account of 
transportation of foodgrains under HTS. The Depart ment did not indicate the 
reasons for non -submission of HTS bills  by the two States of Meghalaya and 
Nagaland which proves that Government is not serious towards settlement of 
claims. The Committee, therefore, recommend  that Department/FCI should find 
out the reasons for non-submission of HTS claims by these two States and make 
sincere efforts for liquidation of outstanding dues of these States/UTs so that 
State/UT Governments are able to lift the foodgrains regularly for distribution to 
the poor and need y population in the States/UTs. They further recommend that 
the entire amount pending settlement be reimbursed to the concerned States 
within six months of presentation of this Report. They desire to be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard.” 
  
 
1.12 The Ministry in their action taken note stated:- 
 
 "With regard to speedy settlement of pending claims, States have been 
requested to submit their HTS claims in time with FCI along with requisite 
documents. From the status of HTS claims submitted by FCI (at Annexure -I) 
from 2006-07 onwards, it can be seen that FCI has been reimbursing admissible 
claims regularly to the different States.  
 
 Reasons for pendency of HTS claim of Mizoram and Tripura  is given in 
annexed status.    
 
 It has been informed by FCI  that Nagaland has submitted their HTS 
claims which have been returned to the State Government for rectification. 
Similarly, once the claims are received from State of Meghalaya, FCI will be 
settling their HTS claims as per guidelines. 

 
 Sincere efforts are  being made by this Department for liquidation of 
outstanding HTS bills by FCI.  In this regard, in a meeting  held on 09.05.2017 in 
the Department with the officials from FCI, NFSA & Finance division of this 
Department, FCI has been requested to take acti on for liquidation of outstanding 
HTS claims of concerned States as per extant guidelines and provide action 
taken report immediately.  In fact, this Department has been repeatedly 
requesting all concerned State Governments for timely submission of their c laim 
with appropriate documentations. It is submitted that HTS claims are reimbursed 
regularly to the State Government once they submit their claims with FCI as per 
laid down guidelines and documents.” 
 
  

 
1.13  The Committee in their original report desired that the entire amount 
of Rs. 4464.51 crore pending with FCI for payment to various States  in 
respect of Hill Transport Subsidy be reimbursed to concerned States within 
6 months of its presentation  of their Report . The Committee note from the 
Action Taken reply of the Department that as on 31.05.2017, total amount 
claimed on account of HTS by States is Rs. 45670.44 lakhs out of which   
Rs. 16084.77 lakh s have been reimbursed and bills amounting to              
Rs. 19200.71 lakhs were disallowed. While bills amounting to Rs. 25919.25 
lakhs have been returned , bills amounting to Rs. 1790.95 lakhs is presently 
pending out of which bills amounting to Rs. 1167.19 lakhs are pending for 
more than one year. The analysis of the information given in Annexure -I to 
this reply also reveals that the State of Meghalaya has not preferred any 
claim on this account for the period 2006 -07 to 2016 -17 which the 
Committee strongly feel would necessitate them to direct the Department 
to ascertain and inform them the reasons for wh ich the State of Meghalaya 
is not preferring any claim for reimbursement of expenditure on this 
account. This may reveal the best practices, if any, the State may be 
adopting that does not require them to claim any reimbursement from the 
Union Government o n this account. Besides, n on-submission of bills, 
submission of improper bills or without proper documentation are stated to 
be the main reasons for pendency of bills.  
 Further, the Department also in its final action taken statement on a 
recommendation o f 13 th Report (Demands for Grants 2016 -17) also 
informed the Committee that the States availing HTS scheme have also 
implemented N ational Food Security Act, 2013 and the Department is 

 
considering revision of guidelines for reimbursement of transportation 
claims through provision of NFSA, 2013 only and to suspend 
reimbursement through HTS scheme. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
all pending bills under HTS Scheme be fully liquidated before the scheme 
is suspended by simplifying the procedure of reimburs ement, if necessary 
and further ensure that the guidelines for reimbursement of transportation 
claims und er the provisions of NFSA, 2013 be also made as simple and 
easy to comply with by States as possible.  They desire to be apprised of 
the information wit h regard to the State of Meghalaya as observed above 
and the further action taken in this regard.  

 
 
D. Need to seeding of Aadhaar Card Number in Ration Cards.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.53) 
 
1.14 The Committee earlier recommended as follows:- 
 
"The Comm ittee further note that the ‘End -to-End Computerization of 
TPDS Operations’ scheme is a Mission Mode Project (MMP) under the National 
e-Governance programme. Under the scheme, online allocation of foodgrains 
has been implemented fully in 29 States/UTs, Sup ply Chain has been 
computerized in 19 States/UTs, Online grievance redressal mechanism for 
registration and tracking is now available in 33 States/UTs and Toll free helpline 
for TPDS has been established in all 36 States/UTs. Though the achievements 
under the scheme appear very encouraging, the Committee are constrained to 
note that implementation of online allocation is pending in Arunachal Pradesh, 
Lakshadweep, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland due to challenges of network 
connectivity and power supply issu es. Supply Chain automation is also similarly 
pending in North -Eastern and hilly States except Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. 
Further, seeding of Aadhaar Card Number in Ration Cards in Assam and 
Meghalaya is NIL while it is only 17% in Bihar, 62% in J&K, 1.2 8% in Manipur, 
11.99% in Mizoram, 6.5% in Nagaland and 73% in Uttar Pradesh. The 
Committee regret to observe that a lot more work remains to be done on the 
ground in order to claim a satisfactory progress/achievement in the End -to-End 
Computerization of TP DS operations in the country. The Committee, therefore, 
very strongly feel that the Department should continuously focus their attention 
for completion of the project in all States/UTs of the country in a time bound 
manner to complete implementation in this fiscal year at least.” 
 
1.15 The Ministry in their action taken reply stated as noted below:- 
 
 "The department is making vigorous efforts to complete the all key 
activities under computerization scheme in all States/UTs. In addition to meetings 
and VCs held with the officers of the State/UT governments, a conference of 
Food Ministers and Secretaries of the state governments was also held under the 
chairmanship of Hon’ble Minster for CA,F&PD on 19.01.2017 wherein progress 
made by various states was review ed and it was emphasized that all key 
activities under computerization scheme should be completed at the earliest. So 
far 30 States/UTs have computerized Online Allocation and 20 States including 
Tripura and Himachal Pradesh have Computerized Supply Chain Management of 
TPDS operations. Since UTs of Chandigarh and Puducherry have been 

 
implementing Cash transfer scheme for foodgrains, they are not required to 
implement online allocation and supply chain management. Further, due to its 
geographical condition a nd connectivity issues UT of Lakshadweep has been 
exempted for supply chain management. Overall seeding of Aadhaar in Ration 
cards across the country has now increased from 73% to 77%. At present 
seeding of Aadhar in Ration Cards is 55% in Bihar, 62% in Ja mmu & Kashmir, 
1.28% in Manipur, 11.99% in Mizoram, 6.5% in Nagaland and 76% in Uttar 
Pradesh. Hon’ble Minister for CA, F&PD has also written to Chief Ministers of 
States to expedite completion of pending activities.” 
 

 
  
 
1.16 The Committee in their earli er report pointed out that seeding of 
Aadhaar Card Number in Ration Cards in Assam and Meghalaya is NIL 
while it was only 17% in  Bihar, 62% in J&K, 1.28% in Manipur,  11.99% in 
Mizoram, 6.5% in Nagaland and 73% in U.P. and desired that the 
Department should complete the project on Computerization of TPDS 
operations in a time bound manner. The Department in its action taken 
reply have informed that overall seeding of Aadhaar in Ration cards across 
the country has now increased from 73% to 77%. At present, seeding of 
Aadhar in Ration Cards is 55% in Bihar, 62% in Jammu & Kashmir, 1.28% in 
Manipur, 11.99% in Mizoram, 6.5% in Nag aland and 76% in Uttar Pradesh 
and Hon’ble Minister for CA, F&PD has also written to Chief Ministers of 
States to expedite completion of  pending activities. However, they feel that 
the Department should follow -up the communication to Chief Ministers of 
States by specifying timelines to expedite the work relating to seeding of 
Aadhaar Card Number in Ration Cards for completion by all the States/UTs 
in the country. The Committee further urge the Government to look into the 
problem areas in this regard and apprise them of the steps taken to pro -
actively engage the States that are lagging in this direction.  

 
 
 
E. Need for early liquidation of outstanding dues of FCI  
 
(Recommendation Para No. 5.7) 
 
1.17 The Committee in their earlier report observed/ recommended as follows:- 
 
 
"The Committee note with concern that an amount of Rs. 2876.90 crore is 
outstanding against the Ministry of Rural  Deve lopment and Ministry of Human 
Resource Development and others on account of foodgrains provided to them by 
FCI for various welfare schemes on payment basis. The Committee have been 
informed that outstanding amount against Ministry of Rural Development as o n 
30.11.2016 is Rs. 2452.96 crore excluding Rs. 221.99 crore pertaining to the 
State of Chhattisgarh. The amount outstanding against Ministry of Human 
Resource Development as on 30.11.2016 is Rs. 285 crore. The problem of 
outstanding dues with respect to Ministry of Rural Development has arisen due to 
non-availability of the bills for which advice of CGA and CCA has been sought. 
On the advice of O/o CGA and CCA DFPD, vide this Deptt. letter dated 
15.07.2016, FCI and Ministry of Rural Development were reques ted to settle the 
outstanding dues. To take care of regular dues of FCI towards Mid -day-Meal 
(MDM) Scheme, a revolving fund of Rs.400 crore has been maintained by 
Ministry of HRD. The Committee have also been informed that FCI has raised 
part bills with Mi nistry of HRD. The outstanding amount is yet to be received by 
FCI. The Committee find that despite various steps taken by the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution, huge amount is still outstanding for several years. 
The Committee once again urge the  Department/FCI to take necessary steps for 
the expeditious settlement of outstanding amount with Ministry of Rural 
Development and Ministry of HRD in a time bound manner to avoid undue 
burden on an ever increasing food subsidy bill.”  
  
1.18 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
 " The distribution of food grains under various welfare schemes of Ministry 
is a continuous process and the dues arriving out of this distribution are 
reimbursed regularly as per the frequency of the bil ls preferred by FCI from time 
to time against various Ministries. 
 At present, there are two major issues of outstanding dues related with 
Ministry of rural Development and Ministry of HRD. As on 31.01.21017, an 
amount of Rs.2452.96 crore is outstanding ag ainst MoRD. FCI has raised bills 
with MoRD and outstanding amount is yet to be received by FCI. 

 
 
 In so far as dues of FCI with MoHRD for allocation of foodgrains under 
MDM scehme is concerned, it is mentioned that after introduction of 
decentralized payment system as well as regular monitoring by MoHRD, FCI and 
Department of Food & PD, an amount of Rs.289.80 crore was outstanding 
against MoHRD as on 31.01.2017.” 
  

 
1.19 The Committee observed that an amount of Rs. 2452.96 crore against 
Ministry of Rural De velopment (MoRD) and Rs. 285 crore against Ministry 
of Human Resource Development (MoHRD) were outstanding as on 
30.11.2016 for payment to FCI on account of foodgrains provided to them 
and urged the Department/FCI to take necessary steps for settlement of 
this outstanding amount in a time bound manner. The Committee are 
dismayed to note from the Action Taken Reply of the Ministry that instead 
of that amount getting liquidated, the same amount i.e. Rs. 2452.96 crore is 
still outstanding against MoRD and the amount outstanding against 
MoHRD has also increased to Rs. 289.80 crore as on 31.01.2017 . The 
Committee are anguish ed to say that the  Department are not  paying any 
heed to their observations/recommendations regarding  the inability of 
Central Ministries in making timely payment to FCI. The Committee, 
therefore, caution the Department to pay due attention to their 
observations/recommendations and take appropriate steps to  get 
liquidated the outstanding dues of  Central Ministries to the FCI  at the 
earliest. The Committee also be apprised of the Action Taken in this regard. 

 
 
F. Need to have review/study to suggest maximum utilization of owned 
capacity by FCI 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.15) 
 
1.20 The Committee in their earlier report recommended as: 
 
“The Commit tee observe that the capacity utilization of FCI for covered 
storage capacity owned during the last four years is 58% whereas hired storage 
was 80% respectively.  In case of CAP storage capacity owned and utilization 
was 33% while hired storage was utilize d to an extent of 105%. The Committee 
are of the view that a more proper planning and management of owned storage 
capacity utilization could result in saving a good amount of revenue on hiring 
storage facilities. The Committee, therefore, recommend that De partment/FCI 
should take effective steps to make maximum use of owned storage capacity, 
before hiring the godowns of private parties and other agencies. They desire that 
a review/study be made on this aspect to suggest remedial measures to increase 
capacity utilization of owned storage of FCI vis-à-vis the hired storage.”  
 
 
1.21 The Ministry in their action taken reply stated as under: 
 
 “With reference to kind observation of Standing Committee on low 
capacity utilization of FCI own godowns, FCI has submit ted that owing to 
following reasons their Godowns are not utilized upto optimum capacity:- 
 
(i) The utilization of hired capacities is given priority as in case of Godowns 
constructed under Pvt. Entrepreneurship Guarantee (PEG) Scheme, FCI has to 
pay fixed rentals for these godowns irrespective of utilization. 
 
(ii) Some of the FCI owned godowns remain under Zero Physical verification 
and stocks are completely issued out top verify shortages etc. if any.  
  
(iii) In order to control high cost of handling in  FCI owned depots due to 
departmental labour, the low cost hired depots are preferred. 
 
(iv) Non- utilization of FCI owned silos which were constructed in 1960 and 
1970 and have become non-operative, 21,000 MT (Mayapuri under Delhi region) 
and 72,000 MT (C handeri, under UP Region), 32,000 MT (Gaya under Bihar 
Region) and 20,000 MT (Khurja under UP region) also contribute in low capacity 
utilization. 

 
 
(v) While some depots have come within city premises, some remain under 
repair & maintenance and hence these depots cannot be utilized effectively.  
 
 As regards review/study to be made to suggest remedial measures for 
increasing higher capacity utilization of FCI’s owned storage vis -à-vis hired 
storage, an RFP has been prepared by the FCI. The Department has al so 
advised FCI to make the specific provisions in the proposed study to address the 
issues raised by the Standing Committee on low capacity utilization of owned 
godowns.”  
 
 

 
1.22 The Committee ha d earlier desired that a review/study be made to 
suggest rem edial measures to increase capacity utilization of owned 
storage of FCI viz -a-viz the hired storage. In their Action Taken R eply, the 
Department has stated that RF P has been prepared by the FCI and also 
advised FCI to make the specific provisions in the pr oposed study to 
address the issues raised by the Committee on low capacity utilization o f 
owned godowns. The Committee desire that  the Department/FCI should 
complete the study in a specific timeframe  and suggest suitable measures 
to increase maximize utilization of owned capacity throughout the country  
so as to not only improve the capacity utilization of owned godowns but 
also save for other uses the amount being spent on rentals for hired 
godowns. They desire to be apprised of the action taken in this matter.  

 
G. Need for expeditious liquidation of cane price arrears. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6.13) 
 
1.23 The Committee in their earlier report recommended as: 
 
 "The Committee note that the Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966 stipulates 
payment of cane price arr ears within 14 days of supply, failing which interest @ 
15% per annum on amount due for the delayed period beyond 14 days is 
payable. Considering this, the Committee are deeply concerned to note that as 
on 31.01.2017 huge cane price arrears to the tune of Rs. 11758.97 crore is 
outstanding since the year 2013-14 onwards, out of which Rs. 9402 crore pertain 
to sugar season 2016 -17 alone. The various steps taken by the Government to 
clear the cane price arrears such as incentives for exporting raw sugar, 
remunerative price for supplies of ethanol, interest subvention @ 10% per annum 
on soft loan etc. appears to have an impact on clearing the cane price arrears. 
While they note that various incentives etc. are doled out to the sugar mills, yet 
the sugarcane arrears payable to the farmers are mounting over the years which 
is a matter of serious concern and in their considered opinion could adversely 
effect the acreage under sugarcane cultivation in the coming years. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly urge the Depa rtment of Food and Public 
Distribution to prevail upon the State Governments to take immediate steps to 
clear all outstanding cane price arrears at the earliest possible so that acreage of 
cultivation does not dip which might force the Government to resort  to imports 
and avoidable outgo of foreign exchange in future.”  
  
 
1.24 The Ministry in their action taken reply stated as under: 
 
"The Sugarcane (Control) Order,1966 stipulates payment of cane price 
within 14 days of supply, failing which interest at the  rate of 15% per annum on 
amount due for the delayed period beyond 14 days is payable. The powers for 
enforcing this provisions are delegated and vested with the State Govts./UT 
Admns. who have necessary field formations for implementation of the said 
provision. The Central Government advices the State Governments from time to 
time to ensure timely payment to the cane growers and take strict action against 
the defaulting sugar mills for non -payment of cane price dues. The State 
Governments takes necessary a ction like filing FIR, issue of Recovery 
Certificates etc. against the defaulting sugar mills for recovery of pending 
sugarcane dues. Due to various measures taken by the Government, as on 
11.04.2017, 99.3% of cane dues payments of farmers for 2014 -15 sugar season 
and 98.4% for 2015 -16 sugar season have already been cleared.  Cane price 
arrears for 2016 -17 season has come down to Rs. 9149 crores which is lowest 

 
during last five corresponding sugar seasons. C urrent sugar season 2016 -17 is 
still going on and payment of sugarcane dues to farmers is an ongoing process. 
The dues position of farmers changes continuously on account of fresh supplies 
received and payment made for previous supplies.” 
  

 
 
1.25  The Committee in their original report had desired the Department to 
prevail upon State Governments to take immediate steps to clear all cane 
price arrears. The Department in its Action Taken reply has stated that due 
to various measures taken by the Government, as on 11.04.2017, 99.3% of 
cane dues payments of f armers for 2014 -15 sugar season and 98.4% for 
2015-16 sugar season have already been cleared.  Cane price arrears for 
2016-17 season has come down to Rs. 9149 crores which is lowest during 
last five corresponding sugar seasons. C urrent sugar season 2016 -17 is 
still going on and payment of sugarcane dues to farmers is an ongoing 
process. The Committee urge the Department to continue to make sincere 
efforts so that cane price arrears for 2016 -17 season also come to a 
minimum level and do not rise further.  

 
  
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
  ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.52) 
 
2.1  The Committee note that the Department is implementing an umbrella 
scheme of ‘Strengthening of PDS’ comprising five components viz. 
Computerization of TPDS operations, Strengthening of PDS and capacity 
building; consultancy, training and Research; Financial Assistance for State Food 
Commission for non -building assets; and Strengthening of Quality Control 
Mechanism. The Committee are, h owever, surprised to note that no allocation 
has been provided in the BE of 2017-18 for the umbrella scheme despite seeking 
allocation of Rs. 51.33 crore. The Committee are of the view that all the five 
components under the umbrella scheme are very importa nt for the socio -
economic development of the people of the country. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend the Department to vigorously pursue the matter with the 
Ministry of Finance to make sufficient allocation of funds for all the five 
components in the interest of the socio -economic development of the citizens of 
the country as also to remove the bottlenecks in the effective implementation of 
all these five components of the scheme.   
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 Based on appraisal and approval of various components of the umbrella 
scheme for its continuation beyond March, 2017, the Ministry of Finance has 
been requested for necessary budgetary allocation and is being followed up. 
 
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
       O.M. No.G-20017/8/2017-AC Dated the 13th June, 2017] 
 
  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.53) 
 
2.3 The Committee further note that the ‘End-to-End Computerization of TPDS 
Operations’ scheme is a Mission Mode Projec t (MMP) under the National e -
Governance programme. Under the scheme, online allocation of foodgrains has 

 
been implemented fully in 29 States/UTs, Supply Chain has been computerized in 
19 States/UTs, Online grievance redressal mechanism for registration and  tracking 
is now available in 33 States/UTs and Toll free helpline for TPDS has been 
established in all 36 States/UTs. Though the achievements under the scheme 
appear very encouraging, the Committee are constrained to note that 
implementation of online allocation is pending in Arunachal Pradesh, Lakshadweep, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland due to challenges of network connectivity and 
power supply issues. Supply Chain automation is also similarly pending in North -
Eastern and hilly States except Rajasthan an d Uttar Pradesh. Further, seeding of 
Aadhaar Card Number in Ration Cards in Assam and Meghalaya is NIL while it is 
only 17% in Bihar, 62% in J&K, 1.28% in Manipur, 11.99% in Mizoram, 6.5% in 
Nagaland and 73% in Uttar Pradesh. The Committee regret to observ e that a lot 
more work remains to be done on the ground in order to claim a satisfactory 
progress/achievement in the End-to-End Computerization of TPDS operations in the 
country. The Committee, therefore, very strongly feel that the Department should 
continuously focus their attention for completion of the project in all States/UTs of 
the country in a time bound manner to complete implementation in this fiscal year at 
least. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 The department is making vigorous efforts to complete the all key 
activities under computerization scheme in all States/UTs. In addition to meetings 
and VCs held with the officers of the State/UT governments, a conference of Food 
Ministers and Secretaries of the state governments was also held under the 
chairmanship of Hon’ble Minster for CA,F&PD on 19.01.2017 wherein progress 
made by various states was reviewed and it was emphasized that all key activities 
under computerization scheme should be completed at the earliest. So far 30 
States/UTs have computerized  Online Allocation and 20 States including Tripura 
and Himachal Pradesh have Computerized Supply Chain Management of TPDS 
operations. Since UTs of Chandigarh and Puducherry have been implementing 
Cash transfer scheme for foodgrains, they are not required t o implement online 
allocation and supply chain management. Further, due to its geographical condition 
and connectivity issues UT of Lakshadweep has been exempted for supply chain 
management. Overall seeding of Aadhaar in Ration cards across the country has  
now increased from 73% to 77%. At present seeding of Aadhar in Ration Cards is 
55% in Bihar, 62% in Jammu & Kashmir, 1.28% in Manipur, 11.99% in Mizoram, 
6.5% in Nagaland and 76% in Uttar Pradesh. Hon’ble Minister for CA, F&PD has 
also written to Chief Ministers of States to expedite completion of pending activities. 
 
   [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
                                      O.M. No.G-20017/8/2017-AC Dated the 13th June, 2017] 

 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.1.16  of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.7) 
 
2.5 The Committee note with concern that an amount of Rs. 2876.90 crore is 
outstanding against the Ministry of Rural  Development a nd Ministry of Human 
Resource Development and others on account of foodgrains provided to them by 
FCI for various welfare schemes on payment basis. The Committee have been 
informed that outstanding amount against Ministry of Rural Development as on 
30.11.2016 is Rs. 2452.96 crore excluding Rs. 221.99 crore pertaining to the 
State of Chhattisgarh. The amount outstanding against Ministry of Human 
Resource Development as on 30.11.2016 is Rs. 285 crore. The problem of 
outstanding dues with respect to Ministry of Rural Development has arisen due to 
non-availability of the bills for which advice of CGA and CCA has been sought. 
On the advice of O/o CGA and CCA DFPD, vide this Deptt. letter dated 
15.07.2016, FCI and Ministry of Rural Development were requested to se ttle the 
outstanding dues. To take care of regular dues of FCI towards Mid -day-Meal 
(MDM) Scheme, a revolving fund of Rs.400 crore has been maintained by 
Ministry of HRD. The Committee have also been informed that FCI has raised 
part bills with Ministry of  HRD. The outstanding amount is yet to be received by 
FCI. The Committee find that despite various steps taken by the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution, huge amount is still outstanding for several years. 
The Committee once again urge the Departme nt/FCI to take necessary steps for 
the expeditious settlement of outstanding amount with Ministry of Rural 
Development and Ministry of HRD in a time bound manner to avoid undue 
burden on an ever increasing food subsidy bill.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 The distribution of food grains under various welfare schemes of Ministry 
is a continuous process and the dues arriving out of this distribution are 
reimbursed regularly as per the frequency of the bills preferred by FCI from time 
to time against various Ministries. 
 
 At present, there are two major issues of outstanding dues related with 
Ministry of rural Development and Ministry of HRD. As on 31.01.21017, an 

 
amount of Rs.2452.96 crore is outstanding against MoRD. FCI has raised bills 
with MoRD and outstanding amount is yet to be received by FCI. 
 
 In so far as dues of FCI with MoHRD for allocation of foodgrains under 
MDM scehme is concerned, it is mentioned that after introduction of 
decentralized payment system as well as regular monitoring by MoHRD, FCI and 
Department of Food & PD, an amount of Rs.289.80 crore was outstanding 
against MoHRD as on 31.01.2017. 
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
       O.M. No.G-20017/8/2017-AC Dated the 13th June, 2017] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.1.19  of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.15) 
 
2.7 The Committee observe that the capacity utilization of FCI for covered 
storage capacity owned during the last four year s is 58% whereas hired storage 
was 80% respectively.  In case of CAP storage capacity owned and utilization 
was 33% while hired storage was utilized to an extent of 105%. The Committee 
are of the view that a more proper planning and management of owned sto rage 
capacity utilization could result in saving a good amount of revenue on hiring 
storage facilities. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Department/FCI 
should take effective steps to make maximum use of owned storage capacity, 
before hiring the godowns of private parties and other agencies. They desire that 
a review/study be made on this aspect to suggest remedial measures to increase 
capacity utilization of owned storage of FCI vis-à-vis the hired storage.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 With reference to kind observation of Standing Committee on low capacity 
utilization of FCI own godowns, FCI has submitted that owing to following 
reasons their Godowns are not utilized upto optimum capacity:- 
 
(i) The utilization of hired capacities is given priorit y as in case of Godowns 
constructed under Pvt. Entrepreneurship Guarantee (PEG) Scheme, FCI has to 
pay fixed rentals for these godowns irrespective of utilization. 

 
 
(ii) Some of the FCI owned godowns remain under Zero Physical verification 
and stocks are completely issued out top verify shortages etc. if any.  
  
(iii) In order to control high cost of handling in FCI owned depots due to 
departmental labour, the low cost hired depots are preferred. 
 
(iv) Non- utilization of FCI owned silos which were construc ted in 1960 and 
1970 and have become non-operative, 21,000 MT (Mayapuri under Delhi region) 
and 72,000 MT (Chanderi, under UP Region), 32,000 MT (Gaya under Bihar 
Region) and 20,000 MT (Khurja under UP region) also contribute in low capacity 
utilization. 
 
(v) While some depots have come within city premises, some remain under 
repair & maintenance and hence these depots cannot be utilized effectively.  
 
 As regards review/study to be made to suggest remedial measures for 
increasing higher capacity utilizatio n of FCI’s owned storage vis -à-vis hired 
storage, an RFP has been prepared by the FCI. The Department has also 
advised FCI to make the specific provisions in the proposed study to address the 
issues raised by the Standing Committee on low capacity utilizat ion of owned 
godowns.  
 
 
     [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
       O.M. No.G-20017/8/2017-AC Dated the 13th June, 2017] 
 
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.1.22  of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.9) 
 
2.9 The Committee note that BE for the year 2016 -17 under Sugar 
Development Fund was Rs. 550 crores and it was reduced to Rs. 491.95 crore at 
RE stage and the Actual Expenditure was only Rs. 327.12 cr ore. According to 
the Sugar Development Fund (SDF) Act, the fund has to be utilized for the 
purpose of loans for the rehabilitation and modernization of any sugar factory, 
undertaking any scheme for development of sugarcane, carry out any research 
project for promotion and development of sugar industry, defraying expenditure 
to a sugar factory on internal transport and freight charges etc. The Committee 

 
further observe that there are about 136 Sick Sugar Units in the country that 
could avail loan from the S DF for their revival and modernization. Considering 
this, the Committee fail to understand how the Department could not fully utilize 
even the Revised Estimate of Rs. 491.95 crore that was reduced from the BE of 
Rs. 550 crore in the year 2016 -17. The Commi ttee, therefore, strongly 
recommend the Department to fruitfully utilize the 2017 -18 BE allocation under 
the SDF with a view to not only revive the Sick Sugar Mills in the country but also 
to ensure maintenance of buffer stock to stabilize the price of sug ar and defray 
all other expenditure provided for under the provisions of the SDF Act.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.10 As regards to utilization of funds during financial year 2016 -17, it may be 
noted that Rs.550.00 cr. was allocated under BE 2016 -17 for the Sugar 
Development Fund Loan Schemes namely, Modernization/Rehabilitation, 
Bagasse based Cogeneration of power, Production of anhydrous alcohol or 
Ethanol from alcohol or molasses, conversion of existing ethanol plant into Zero 
Liquid Discharge and  Development of Sugarcane in the area of sugar factory. 
Against this, RE 2016 -17 of Rs. 491.95 cr. was made and Actual Expenditure 
(AE) of Rs. 473.24 cr. (i.e. 96.20% of RE) was incurred during 2016 -17 for these 
SDF loan schemes.  
Further, for enabling max imum utilization of the allocated amount BE 
2017-18 of SDF loan schemes, this Department has taken several steps to 
optimize the utilisation of funds under SDF. This Department assures that the 
2017-18 BE allocation will be fruitfully utilized to support t he Sugar Mills in 
accordance with the SDF Act/Rules. 
 As regards the issue of maintaining buffer stock to stabilize the price of 
price of sugar, it is stated that since the sugar sector has been deregulated and 
there are no levy requirements & release mech anism, the maintenance of buffer 
stock is not practicable.  
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
       O.M. No.G-20017/8/2017-AC Dated the 13th June, 2017] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.13) 
 
2.11 The Committee note that the Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966 stipulates 
payment of cane price arrears within 14 days of supply, failing which interest @ 
15% per annum on amount due for the delayed period beyond 14 days is 
payable. Considering this,  the Committee are deeply concerned to note that as 

 
on 31.01.2017 huge cane price arrears to the tune of Rs. 11758.97 crore is 
outstanding since the year 2013-14 onwards, out of which Rs. 9402 crore pertain 
to sugar season 2016 -17 alone. The various steps taken by the Government to 
clear the cane price arrears such as incentives for exporting raw sugar, 
remunerative price for supplies of ethanol, interest subvention @ 10% per annum 
on soft loan etc. appears to have an impact on clearing the cane price arrea rs. 
While they note that various incentives etc. are doled out to the sugar mills, yet 
the sugarcane arrears payable to the farmers are mounting over the years which 
is a matter of serious concern and in their considered opinion could adversely 
effect the acreage under sugarcane cultivation in the coming years. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly urge the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution to prevail upon the State Governments to take immediate steps to 
clear all outstanding cane price arrears at the  earliest possible so that acreage of 
cultivation does not dip which might force the Government to resort to imports 
and avoidable outgo of foreign exchange in future.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.12 The Sugarcane (Control) Order,1966 stipulates payment of  cane price 
within 14 days of supply, failing which interest at the rate of 15% per annum on 
amount due for the delayed period beyond 14 days is payable. The powers for 
enforcing this provisions are delegated and vested with the State Govts./UT 
Admns. who have necessary field formations for implementation of the said 
provision. The Central Government advices the State Governments from time to 
time to ensure timely payment to the cane growers and take strict action against 
the defaulting sugar mills for non -payment of cane price dues. The State 
Governments takes necessary action like filing FIR, issue of Recovery 
Certificates etc. against the defaulting sugar mills for recovery of pending 
sugarcane dues. Due to various measures taken by the Government, as on 
11.04.2017, 99.3% of cane dues payments of farmers for 2014 -15 sugar season 
and 98.4% for 2015 -16 sugar season have already been cleared.  Cane price 
arrears for 2016 -17 season has come down to Rs. 9149 crores which is lowest 
during last five corresponding  sugar seasons. C urrent sugar season 2016 -17 is 
still going on and payment of sugarcane dues to farmers is an ongoing process. 
The dues position of farmers changes continuously on account of fresh supplies 
received and payment made for previous supplies. 
        [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
                                                           O.M. No.G-20017/8/2017-AC Dated the 13th June, 2017] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.25 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 

 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S 
 REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.8) 
 
3.1 The Committee note that BE for plan expendit ure during the year 2016-17 
was Rs. 150 crore which was reduced to Rs. 147 crore at RE stage but actual 
expenditure was only Rs. 104.1951 crore. In case of non -plan schemes also, BE 
during the year 2016 -17 was Rs. 152554.11 crore which was raised at RE sta ge 
to Rs. 192045.51 crore but actual expenditure as on 31.12.2016 was only Rs. 
155330.62 crore. This trend of increases in BE at RE stage and less than actual 
projected expenditures had been viewed seriously by the Committee in their 
earlier Reports which in their considered opinion reflects poorly and is indicative 
of lack of proper planning by the Department that needs to be avoided. The 
Committee are also not convinced with the reasons cited by the Department for 
less than projected expenditure on factor s such as identification and acquisition 
of land by States, difficult terrains, inclement weather, law and order problem in 
North-East regions etc. The Committee are of the considered opinion that such 
issues should be taken care of at the planning stage a nd with better coordination 
with State/UTs. The Committee are, therefore, not satisfied with the overall 
performance of the Department in so far as expenditure during 2016 -17 is 
concerned.  
 
The Committee further note that BE for 2017 -18 shows a quantum ju mp 
over that of 2016 -17 at Rs. 150952.64 crore on the Renenue side and Rs. 
50523.05 crore on the Capital side and a total of Rs. 201475.69 crore against Rs. 
152704.11 crore in BE 2016 -17 an increase of Rs. 48771.58 crore while the 
expenditure with respect to BE 2016 -17 stands at 83.84% only. The Committee 
feel this situation needs a massive improvement when viewed in the context of 
the increase of about Rs. 50,000 crore in the outlay for 2017 -18. The Committee, 
however, hope that with the merger of plan and  non-plan activities from the year 
2017-18, the Ministry will now focus on revenue and capital expenditure instead 
of Plan and Non -plan expenditure and thereby improve the overall performance 
in the ensuing financial year. The Committee further expect the Ministry to make 
all out effort to further strengthen its monitoring over the implementation of all the 
schemes/projects and ensure timely completion.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 1.      Construction of Godowns by FCI/ State Governments: 
 
Allocation against Plan Scheme “Construction of food storage godowns by 
FCI and State Govts. under BE 2016 -17 was Rs.52.00 Crore and the same was 
also retained in RE 2016 -17 also.  As on 31/03/2017, the whole allocated funds 
have been released and hence expenditure made was 100%.  Hence, the entire 
funds which was projects under BE 2016 -17 have been released to FCI and 
State Governments to carry out ongoing construction works. Similarly for BE 
2017-18, the projection of funds have been made to Rs.60.00 crore increasing by 
15% only from BE 2016 -17 in view of additional anticipated expenditure of 
Rs.8.04 Crore to be made to Govt. of Arunachal Pradesh for construction of PDS 
godowns  in the border areas of the State pursuance to Department of Border 
Management, Ministry of Home Affairs letter No. 12/42/2014 -BADP(Part-I) dated 
05/08/2016.  It is also projected that the entire BE allocation would be utilized in 
2017-18. 
 
2. Assistance to Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority:  
 
  Under Plan Scheme namely, Assista nce to WDRA, BE for 2016 -17 was 
Rs. 18 crore which was reduced at RE stage to Rs. 15 crore.  Funds available for 
RE 2016-17 was released in full and no funds were surrendered at end of the 
year.  BE 2017 -18 is of Rs. 15 crore against the proposed BE of Rs.  30 crore, 
which appears to be insufficient. As for monitoring mechanism, there is already a 
suitable monitoring mechanism in place for the said scheme. Progress of the 
scheme is monitored by Secretary (FPD) in every month during Senior Officers’ 
Meeting a s well as by concerned Joint Secretary at division level from time to 
time. Being a central sector scheme, grants-in-aid are released to WDRA and not 
to States/ UTs. 
 
3. Strengthening of PDS Operations:  
 
(i)      End to end Computerization of TPDS Operations:  
 
Under Plan Scheme Component “End -to-end Computerization of TPDS 
Operations”, Rs. 75 crore was provided during BE 2016 -17 which was increased 
to Rs.75.28 crore in RE 2016 -17. However, the department could issue sanction 
orders only for an amount of R s. 53.64 crore for releasing payments to 
States/UTs, NIC, NICSI, etc. The variation is due to non -submission of financial 
proposals by States/UTs. It is submitted that the computerization scheme is 

 
being implemented on cost sharing basis with States/UTs. C entral share of funds 
is released to States/UTs in three installments of 60%, 30% and 10% on 
fulfillment of following conditions:- 
 
First Installment (60%) –  
 
i. Submission of State specific proposal as per template provided by 
DoFPD. 
ii. Signing of MoU between State/UT and DoFPD. 
iii. Setting up of institutional mechanism at State/UT level i.e. formation of 
State Apex Committee and SPeMT. 
iv. Furnishing of Utilization Certificates (UCs) by States/UTs concerned 
for funds released under the two pilot schemes 
 
 
Second Installment (30%) –  
 
i. Submission of Utilization Certificates (UCs) to the extent of 60% of the 
funds released by DoFPD as first installment.  
ii. Release of matching funds i.e. 60% of State/UTs share. 
iii. Operationalization of following components under the Scheme acro ss 
the State/UT-  
a) Complete digitization of beneficiary and other databases, 
b) Online allocation of foodgrains up to FPS level based on the 
digitized beneficiary data, 
c) Setting up of Transparency Portal, 
d) Grievance redressal mechanism. 
iv. Security audit of state p ortal through STQC or any agency empanelled 
by CERT-In.  
 
Third (Final) Installment (10%)-  
 
i. Submission of Utilization Certificates (UCs) of the funds released by 
DoFPD as first & second installment duly supported by annual audited 
statement of accounts.  
ii. Release of matching funds (balance 40%) of State/UTs share. 
iii. Completion of activities under Supply Chain Management. 
iv. Quality certification of the portal by any agency empaneled by CERT-In 
v. Compliance of the data formats used in the portal to be validated by 
NIC. 
vi. Assessment of the scheme as per DoFPD’s guidelines/ instructions. 

 
 Second installment of Central share could be released only to 17 
States/UTs as no other States/UTs fulfilled the conditions for release of 2nd 
installment. Further, no States/UTs fulfi lled the condition for release of 3rd 
installment of central share. As a result funds provisioned for release of 2nd/3rd 
installment in respect of some States/UTs had to be surrendered.  
 Since some States/UTs could not complete some of the key activities 
under component-I of the computerization scheme, it has been decided with the 
approval of Ministry of Finance to extend validity of the scheme by one year upto 
31.03.2018. Matter is being pursued vigorously with States/UTs requesting them 
to complete pending activities at the earliest and also submit claims for release of 
central share at the earliest. 
 
 
(ii) Strengthening of PDS and Capacity Building: 
 
(A) PDS – Training  –  
Under the Plan Scheme component i.e. PDS -Training, funds are released 
to the State/UT Government on receipt of appropriate and complete proposals 
from the State/UT Governments.  Release of funds is further subject to receipt of 
Utilization Certificates (UCs) from these State/UTs for the releases made to them 
under the scheme in the past. As  proposals received from some States were 
incomplete, the same could not be considered for release of funds and the matter 
has been vigorously followed up with the State/UTs for sending appropriate and 
complete proposals and also for furnishing Utilization Certificates for the releases 
made under the schemes in the past, in time. 
 
 (B)        PDS - Evaluation, Monitoring and Research: 
 
Under the Plan Scheme component i.e. PDS -Evaluation, Monitoring and 
Research, funds are released to Agencies/Institutions/O rganizations for 
conducting evaluation study of implementation of TPDS/NFSA after finalization of 
appropriate Agency/Institution/Organization through inviting of bids or 
outsourcing by choice and finalization of term of references with them which 
takes time. Bids were received from 08 interesting institutes/agencies for carrying 
out an evaluation study on implementation of NFSA in 12 States. 06 
institutes/agencies could technically qualify. However, appropriate 
Agency/Institution/Organization could not be f inalized during F.Y. 2016 -17 and 
funds could not be released 
 

 
 (C)   Financial Assistance to States for Generating Awareness amongst 
TPDS beneficiaries about their entitlement and redressal 
mechanism:- 
 
Plan Scheme component “Financial Assistance to States  for Generating 
Awareness amongst TPDS beneficiaries about their entitlement and redressal 
mechanism”, the expenditure is dependent on submission of proposal by States 
and receipt of UCs for the funds allocated during the previous years. In BE and 
RE 2016-17, there was a provision of Rs. 50.00 lakhs in the Financial Year 2016 -
17. Out of Rs. 50.00 lakhs, Rs. 22.50 lakhs was released/sanctioned under three 
Major Heads of the Scheme during 2016-17. 
           
(iii) Consultancies, Training and Research: 
 
 
(A)  Consultancies for Research/ monitoring in domestic / global markets 
for foodgrains:  
 
The table showing Budget Estimate (BE), Revised Estimate (RE) and 
Actual Expenditure for the last few years is given below. It may be seen that BE 
was never raised at the  RE Stage and the actual expenditure was always lesser 
than the corresponding RE. 
 
 (Rs. Lakh ) 
* Payment till December, 2016 has been done. 
 
 (B) e-Governance: 
Sl. 
No. 
Subject Information 
Percentage 
Utilization 
1. Name of the 
Central 
Sector 
Scheme 
Consultancies for Research/monitoring in 
domestic/global markets for foodgrains 
 
 Year BE RE Actual Expenditure  
1. 2011-12 29.22 28.01 13.39  
2. 2012-13 30.00 12.00 9.79765 81.60 % 
3. 2013-14 18.00 10.86 10.48 96.50 % 
4. 2014-15 40.00 15.00 12.56181 83.73 % 
5. 2015-16 25.00 9.00 7.81088 86.67 %  
6. 2016-17  12.00 12.00 9.9964*      83.30% 
7. 2017-18 13.00 -- --  

 
 e-Governance, a part of Sub -Scheme; Consultancy Training & Research 
under umbrella Plan Scheme : Strengthening of PDS Operations. Out of total  
allocation Rs. 40 lakhs under  Major Head 2408, Food and Ware Housing, 
01.004-Research and Evaluation, (Minor Head) 03.01 -Technical Studies, 
Consultancy; 03.01.50 –Other Charges” expenditure of Rs.  30.80659 lakhs has 
been incurred on behalf of ICT Division  against BE of Rs. 28 lakhs keeping in 
view RE, 2016 -17 of Rs. 35 lakhs and Rs. 9.99640 lakhs has been incurred by 
Policy Section.  Thus total expenditure goes to Rs. 40.80299 lakhs. Accordingly 
re-appropriation was done by Budget Section.  
 
(Rs. lakh) 
Financial Year BE RE Actual 
Expenditure 
Surrendered 
2016-17 28.00 35.00 30.80659 Nil 
 
 
(iv)    Strengthening of Quality Control Mechanism:-  
 
 (i). Details showing B.E., R.E. and Actual Expenditure for the year 2016 -17 
made under the Plan components are as follows:- 
( Rs Crore) 
2016-17 B.E. R.E. Actual 
Expenditure 
% against 
R.E. 
Plan component 
“Strengthening of Quality 
Control mechanism” 
2.00 1.8 1.78 99.99 
 
(ii).     Strict monitoring has been done to ensure budgetary expenditure as per 
MEP of the allotte d budget. Accordingly the actual expenditure for 2016 -17 is 
more than 99% of R.E. as denoted in the table above. 
 
(iii)     Instructions have been issued to IGMRI and field stations of QCC to strictly 
comply with the expenditure proposed under B.E for the year 2017-18. 
 
(v)     Financial Assistance to States/UTs Food Commission for Non-
Building Assets:  
During 2016-17 an allocation of Rs.1.0 crore was made for the component 
- Financial assistance to States/UTs for non -building assets for State Food 
Commissions. Funds under this component are released on the basis of 

 
proposals of State Governments. During the year, based on complete proposals 
received from State Governments of Bihar and Odisha, Rs.55.62 lakh was 
released to them. The balance amount was surren dered for want of complete 
proposal from other States. 
 
Non-Plan Expenditure 2016-17:  
 
 BE 2016 -17 in c ase of Non -Plan schemes was increased from ₹ 
152554.11 crores to ₹ 192045.51 crores at RE 2016 -17 stage and actual 
expenditure was ₹ 139947.89  crores (provisional) in respect of Non -Plan 
Schemes as on 31.03.2017.  
 
 Increase in RE 2016-17 was mainly due to increase in the limit of non-plan 
loan ‘Ways & Means Advance Payable to FCI’ from ₹ 10,000 crores to ₹ 50,000 
crores through 1 st Supplementary Demands for Grants 2016 -17 by Ministry of 
Finance. It is to mention that this loan is released to FCI as per its  cash flow 
requirement and is repaid by FCI with interest within the same financial year. The 
net expenditure under ‘Ways & Means Advance (WMA) Payable to FCI’ comes to 
NIL at the close of every financial year. 
 
 So far as the less expenditure during 2016-17 is concerned, it is submitted 
that in a policy decision taken by the Cabinet, NSSF loan of ₹ 45000 crores was 
sanctioned to FCI in the month of March, 2017 to clear the arrears in a phased 
manner, withholding Ways and Means Advance of ₹ 27000 crores. Further, in an 
another policy decision, Ministry of Finance vide letter No. 5/5/2016 -NS dated 
31.03.2017 sanctioned additional NSSF loan of ₹ 25000 crores to FCI with 
direction to surrender the Food Subsidy of  ₹ 25000 crores from total food 
subsidy of  ₹ 103334.61 crores already released to FCI by Oct, 2016. 
Accordingly, ₹ 25000 crores was surrender ed on 31.03.2017 from food subsidy 
and final expenditure for 2016 -17 came down to ₹ 139947.89 crores 
(provisional). 
 
 Excluding surrender of WMA of ₹ 27000 crores and Food Subsidy of ₹ 
25000 crores (due to policy decision), % of expenditure for 2016 -17 (Non-Plan) 
comes to 99.93%. 
 
Non-Plan Budget 2017-18: 
         (₹ in crores) 
 Demand for 2017-18 # BE 2017-18 
Revenue 179115.35 150952.64 
Capital  10523.05  50523.05* 
Total 189638.40 201475.69 

 
 * due to increase in the limit of non -plan loan ‘Ways & Means  Advance 
(WMA) Payable to FCI’ from  ₹ 10,000 crores to ₹ 50,000 crores 
 
 # excluding anticipated arrears/shortfall in allocation of ₹ 85000 crores 
approx. under food subsidy up to 31.03.2017 
 
 It is clear from the above table that the budget allocation fo r 2017-18 of ₹ 
151475.69 (excluding loan provision under WMA) is much less than the demand 
of ₹ 179638.40 crores. During 2016 -17, several efforts were made by the 
Department from higher level to clear the arrears accumulated under food 
subsidy scheme which  resulted in the sanction of NSSF loan of   ₹ 70000 crore 
to clear the arrears in a phased manner. 
 
 The Department always pushes its utmost effort to keep the budget 
realistic and the expenditure is regularly monitored at the higher level vis -à-vis 
Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP). In the monthly review meeting of the senior 
officers held on 19.04.2017, the Secretary (F&PD) directed all the grant 
controlling authorities to incur expenditure strictly as per MEP. During April, 2017 
against MEP of ₹ 50581.77 cr ores the Department has already released ₹ 
64071.77 crores in consultation with Ministry of Finance. It is also expected that 
after the merger of Plan and Non -Plan expenditure, the overall performance of 
the Department will improve even more during current financial year. 
 
   
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
       O.M. No.G-20017/8/2017-AC Dated the 13th June, 2017] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.39) 
 
3.3 The Committee note that the Public  Distribution System has become, over 
the years, an important part of the Government’s policy for management of food 
economy in the country. Further, the National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) 
that entitles upto 75% of the rural population and 50% of the urban population for  
receiving subsidized foodgrains under the Targeted Public Distribution System 
(TPDS)  has  been implemented by all States/UTs. The Committee further note 
that digitization work has been completed in all States/UTs and upto 73% ration 
cards have been seeded with Aadhaar Numbers. Public Distribution System 
(Control) Order, 2001 and TPDS Control order 2015 mandates the State/UT 
Governments to issue ration cards to eligible applicants and to conduct periodical 
checking of ration cards to w eed out ineligible and bogus ration cards as well as 
bogus units in ration cards. As per reports available from States/UTs, 2.33 crore 
bogus/ineligible ration cards have been deleted in 29 States/UTs. While 

 
appreciating the steps taken by the Government in  this regard, the Committee, 
however, urge the Department to conduct such periodical checking on a regular 
basis to eliminate  bogus ration cards as well as bogus units in the ration card 
with a view to curb the various problems in the existing Public Distribution System 
such as leakages and diversion and improve the transparency and efficiency in 
the functioning of PDS for the benefit of the intended beneficiaries i.e. poorest of 
the poor.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.4 Targeted Public Distribution System  (TPDS) is operated under the joint 
responsibility of the Central and the State/ Union Territory (UT) Governments. 
Central Government is responsible for procurement, allocation and transportation 
of foodgrains upto the designated depots of the Food Corpora tion of India. The 
operational responsibilities for allocation of foodgrains within the States/UTs, 
identification of eligible beneficiaries under TPDS and supervision over and 
monitoring of functioning of fair Price Shops (PFPSs), etc. rest with the 
concerned State/UT Governments. 
 
 TPDS (Control) Order, 2015 stipulates that State/UT Governments are 
required to review the lists of beneficiaries every year for the purpose of deletion 
of ineligible families and inclusion of eligible families. State/UT Govern ments 
have been requested from time to time to carry out drives for reviewing the list of 
beneficiaries under TPDS. The exercise of deletion of deletion of bogus/ineligible 
cards and inclusion of eligible families is a continuous process and State/UT 
Governments are to periodically carry out the same.  
 
 All States/UTs have also been requested to seed the Aadhar numbers in 
Ration Card database. This will enable removal of bogus/ineligible ration cards 
and better targeting of food subsidy, facilitate availab ility of foodgrains to 
intended beneficiaries a fair price Shops (FPS), check leakages and diversions 
etc. As on 09.05.2017, 100% digitization of ration cards and approx 77% seeding 
of Aadhar has been achieved.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
       O.M. No.G-20017/8/2017-AC Dated the 13th June, 2017] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.10) 
 
3.5 The Committee in their Tenth Report on Demands for Grants for 2016 -17 
had earlier opined that meeting the establishment cost of FCI out of food subsidy 

 
is erroneous and urged the Department/FCI to devise other means to recoup its 
establishment cost from the current financial year. The Committee are surprised 
to note that the Ministry had ignored the Co mmittee’s advise in this regard as the 
BE for the Establishment Cost of FCI has shown an upward trend in 2016 -17 i.e. 
Rs. 2584 crore as compared to the year 2015 -16 i.e. Rs. 1749 crore. The 
Committee, therefore, again urge the Department to take steps not only to bring 
down the establishment cost of FCI but also to devise other means of meeting 
the same.  They further implore upon the Ministry to desist from disregarding/fail 
to implement their instant recommendation without any sound reasoning. They 
desire to be apprised of the concrete steps taken in this direction. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.6 The Establishment Cost of Food Corporation of India in F.Y -2015-16 was                   
Rs. 1749 Crores and the Revised Budget estimation for 2016 -17 was Rs. 25 84 
Crores whereby anticipated increase of Rs. 835 Crores was made.  
    
 Element-wise increase in Establishment Cost considered in 2016 -17 (R.E) 
as compared to 2015 -16 is enclosed herewith at Annexure-II. As is evident, the 
factors considered for increase in 2016 -17 (R.E) in Establishment Cost are 
primarily as under:-  
 
PARTICULARS/DISCRIPTION AMOUNT 
(Rs.in 
Crores) 
Post-Retirement Medical Scheme had been introduced in the 
Corporation duly approved by Department of Food and Public 
Distribution under Ministr y of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution conveyed vide its letter dated 11th November’2016. 
46.50 
Provision of 50% of arrears for Defined Contribution Pension Scheme 
duly approved by Department of Food and Public Distribution under 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution conveyed 
vide its letter dated 11th November’2016. 
469.50 
Upward revision of Productivity Linked Incentive (PLI).      70.22 
Provision for anticipatory increase in Pay Bill due to proposed Fresh 
Recruitment of 9295 employees in 2016-17. 
     65.36 
Annual increase in D.A/Other Allowances       145.96 
Proportionate increase in Contribution towards Provident Fund vis -à-vis 
increase in Pay Bill/D.A. 
      25.12 
TOTAL      822.66 
 

 
 A statement showing Establis hment Cost of Food Corporation of India for 
the past 6 years i.e. from 2011 -12 to 2016 -17(R.E) vis-à-Vis Annual Turnover is 
enclosed at Annexure- III which clearly depicts that efforts had been instigated 
so as restrain Establishment Cost at its minimal on  percentage basis to Annual 
Turnover of the Corporation. 
   
Food Corporation of India is implementing food programs of Govt. of India. 
It is apparent that for implementation of any welfare program some cost of 
administrative cost is bound to happen. Even t he State procuring agencies are 
given 2.5% of M.S.P as administrative cost on procurement operation only. 
Whereas in FCI operations the includes Procurement / take over from State 
agencies, movement of foodgrains to other states, Storage of Buffer Stocks a nd 
distribution to State Governments/UTs as well. 
 
 There have been continuous efforts and practices adopted in Food 
Corporation of India so as to keep the Establishment Cost at its minimal. Hence, 
the observation that the demand raised by FCI for subsidy is erroneous appears 
not to be justified. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
       O.M. No.G-20017/8/2017-AC Dated the 13th June, 2017] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.5) 
 
3.7 The Committee  note that India is one of the largest producers of 
sugarcane and is also the largest consumer of sugar in the world. The 
Committee are, therefore, concerned to note that acreage under sugarcane 
cultivation has been declining over the years from 50.67 lakh  hectare in 2014-15 
to 45.17 lakh hectare in 2016 -17. As a result thereof, sugar production in the 
country will be less in proportion to the fall in acreage of sugarcane. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Department to make earnest efforts to encourage 
sugarcane farmers to take all possible steps to increase sugar production in the 
country by devising incentives including timely declaration of Fair and 
Remunerative Price of Sugarcane so as to meet domestic demand and 
consumption of sugar and avoid possible imports of sugar.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.8 During the current sugar season 2016 -17, the production of sugar 
decreased due to impact of drought in some major sugar producing States 
namely, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh  and 
Gujarat during last season.  However, as reported by Directorate of Sugarcane 

 
Development, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, the plantation area 
under sugarcane is likely to increase for the coming sugar season 2017 -18 due 
to ample rainfall in the country during the current rainy season. 
 
       The Fair and Remunerative Price of Sugarcane is determined by the Central 
Government for every sugar season, which is uniform throughout the country and 
linked to recovery. The FRP, so fixed, is base d on the recommendation of 
Commission for Agricultural Costs and Price (CACP) and after consultation with 
State Governments and other stake holders. Various factors indicated in Clause 
3(1) of the Sugarcane Control Order, 1966, including sugar prices, are taken into 
account by CACP while recommending the FRP. The FRP of Sugarcane is 
determined well in advance before commencement of the every sugar season. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
       O.M. No.G-20017/8/2017-AC Dated the 13th June, 2017] 

 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.9) 
 
4.1 The Committee regret to note t hat even after 20 years of launching of the 
Decentralized Procurement Scheme (DCP) and despite the various steps taken 
to convince the States/UTs to adopt it,  the scheme has been adopted by only 14 
States/UTs for Rice and 8 States for Wheat respectively. Considering that the 
DCP Scheme has the objective to ensure MSP to farmers, encourage 
procurement in non -traditional States besides enabling procurement of 
foodgrains more suited to local taste, the Committee are fully convinced that the 
remaining States/UTs should also adopt the DCP Scheme at the earliest. It has 
become all the more essential for the States/UTs to adopt the scheme in order 
the save the transportation cost as a result thereof to reduce food subsidy bill. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly d esire that the Department should make all 
possible efforts to convince the remaining States/UTs and to provide maximum 
assistance to enable them to adopt DCP Scheme in this fiscal itself.  The 
Committee further feel that to encourage the remaining States t o adopt the DCP 
Scheme, the Department need to interact proactively with States to ascertain 
reasons for their lack of interest to adopt the scheme and suggest remedial 
measures including extending some concessions or incentives for limited period 
till those States are able to implement the scheme in a satisfactory manner. 
  
Reply of the Government 
4.2 States are being encouraged to take up Decentralized Procurement 
System (DCP) for foodgrains. As on date 14 States have adopted DCP mode of 
procurement for R ice and 8 States adopted DCP mode for Wheat. Jharkhand 
(One district only) and Maharashtra have adopted DCP for rice from Kharif 
Marketing Season (KMS) 2016 -17. Recently, the State Government of Haryana 
was again requested to adopt DCP operations for wheat.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
O.M. No.G-20017/8/2017-AC Dated the 13th June, 2017] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.1.7  of Chapter -I of the Report) 

 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.28) 
 
4.3 The Committee note that under Hill Transport Subsidy, (HTS) the Union 
Government reimburses the transportation cost of foodgrains from base depot of 
FCI upto the designated principal distribution centres in States which are 
predominantly in hilly areas. The Committee note that an amount of Rs. 4464.51 
crore is pending with FCI for being paid to States/UTs viz. Mizoram, Tripura, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Lakshadweep and Sikkim, while no 
claim has been received from Me ghalaya and Nagaland on account of 
transportation of foodgrains under HTS. The Department did not indicate the 
reasons for non -submission of HTS bills  by the two States of Meghalaya and 
Nagaland which proves that Government is not serious towards settleme nt of 
claims. The Committee, therefore, recommend  that Department/FCI should find 
out the reasons for non-submission of HTS claims by these two States and make 
sincere efforts for liquidation of outstanding dues of these States/UTs so that 
State/UT Governments are able to lift the foodgrains regularly for distribution to 
the poor and needy population in the States/UTs. They further recommend that 
the entire amount pending settlement be reimbursed to the concerned States 
within six months of presentation of this Report. They desire to be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard.  
  
Reply of the Government 
4.4 With regard to speedy settlement of pending claims, States have been 
requested to submit their HTS claims in time with FCI along with requisite 
documents. From the status of HTS claims submitted by FCI ( at Annexure -I) 
from 2006-07 onwards, it can be seen that FCI has been reimbursing admissible 
claims regularly to the different States.  
 
 Reasons for pendency of HTS claim of Mizoram and Tripura  is given in 
annexed status.   In case of Arunachal Pradesh, the amount of HTS claims of 
Government of Arunachal Pradesh rose form Rs. 64.36 crores in 2002 -03 to Rs. 
410 crores in 2003 -04 and 338.27 crores in 2004 -05 without any substantial 
change in quantity of food grains delivered in the State. This has resulted in audit 
objections and subsequently recovery of excess payment made against HTS 
claims. In this connection, a High Level Committee under chairmanship of Shri 
Saumitra Choudhuri was formed in year 2010  by GoI and thereafter, detailed 
guidelines for processing HTS bills were issued by FCI RO (Northeast) on 
19.2.2014. Accordingly, State Governments have been requested to comply and 
to ensure guidelines instructions issued are followed by them. Efforts hav e been 
made to resolve the issue for speedy settlement of HTS claims by holding 
meeting at Krishi Bhawan on 15.06.2016 & meeting at the field level on 
27.06.2016 between FCI & State Government officials. 
 

 
 For Himachal Pradesh , meetings along with FCI offi cials from 
Headquarter and field have been organized with State by this Department to 
resolve the issues related with HTS.  A Cell has been created by FCI for speedy 
settlement of long pending HTS bills. In various meetings held with Government 
of Jammu & Kashmir, State was informed for non -submission of HTS claims 
with relevant documents/records and was requested to raise HTS claim on 
monthly basis with supporting documents such as copies of release orders, gate 
passes issued by FCI, proof of payment to tr ansporters, copies of GRs for 
transporters, proof of receipt of foodgrains at PDC, etc. In case of Lakshadweep 
(UT), FCI informed that release of foodgrains has commenced from FSD, 
Androth from 2014 -15 and there will be no claims for HTS from 2014 -15 
onwards. Government of Sikkim has furnished HTS bills till December, 2015 for 
which reimbursement had been made. FCI has informed that there is no 
simplification required for Andaman & Nicobar  Islands because of no HTS 
claims is pending. 
 
 It has been informed by FCI that Nagaland has submitted their HTS 
claims which have been returned to the State Government for rectification. 
Similarly, once the claims are received from State of Meghalaya, FCI will be 
settling their HTS claims as per guidelines. As such most o f the HTS claims of 
the States have been reimbursed by FCI. In case of any deficiency in the claims, 
FCI has been requesting State Governments to submit their bills after 
rectification of the deficiency.   
 
 Sincere efforts are being made by this Departmen t for liquidation of 
outstanding HTS bills by FCI.  In this regard, in a meeting  held on 09.05.2017 in 
the Department with the officials from FCI, NFSA & Finance division of this 
Department, FCI has been requested to take action for liquidation of outstan ding 
HTS claims of concerned States as per extant guidelines and provide action 
taken report immediately.  In fact, this Department has been repeatedly 
requesting all concerned State Governments for timely submission of their claim 
with appropriate documen tations.   As per procedure of HTS claims, it is for the 
concerned States to submit HTS claims with complete documents in time with 
FCI.  FCI has reported that most of the HTS bills could not be settled on account 
of non submission of bills by State Govern ments, submission of improper bills or 
without proper documentation by States.  It is submitted that HTS claims are 
reimbursed regularly to the State Government once they submit their claims with 
FCI as per laid down guidelines and documents. 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
O.M. No.G-20017/8/2017-AC Dated the 13th June, 2017] 

 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.1.13  of Chapter -I of the Report) 

 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.20) 
 
5.1 The Committee note that the amount of food subsidy related to FCI and 
DCP States is continuously on the rise due to increase in MSP of Wheat and 
Rice vis-à-vis Central Issue Price (CIP), increased off take of foodgrains under 
TPDS etc. Implementation of NFSA in all States/UTs has also considerably 
contributed to ever increasing food subsidy bill. While appreciating the various 
steps taken by the Department to reduce food subsidy bill such as issue of bonds 
by FCI at lower coupon rates, improving the operational efficiency of FCI, 
negotiating with the bank of the consortium of food credit to reduce the rate of 
interest on cash credit  etc., the Committee, however, desire the Department to 
make vigorous efforts to explore all possibilities of containing food subsidy bill 
without compromising on the regular supply and availability of subsidized 
foodgrains.  They further note that the ass ertion of the Department that 
involvement of private sector in procurement and storage of foodgrains at 
comparative rates could help in lowering the pace of increase in food subsidy 
and the expenses at comparative rates towards incidentals like transportat ion, 
storage etc. could result in lower food subsidy. However, they also note that no 
study has been initiated by the Department on this aspect. The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Department to initiate a study from independent consultants 
on this aspect so that food subsidy outgo could be reduced to some extent.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 The private agencies have been engaged for a period of three years 
through a competitive bidding process by FCI in Eastern Uttar Pradesh, 
Jharkhand and West Bengal  for paddy/rice procurement and to expand the 
coverage of MSP operations to such identified clusters of Districts/ Parts of the 
Districts, where outreach of Government agencies has been weak and State 
Governments have consented for FCI to engage the privat e agencies to reach 
out to the paddy farmers for improvement. Private agencies engaged for 3, 2, 4 
clusters in Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand and West Bengal respectively.  
 
 NITI AAYOG is already conducting a comprehensive study for evaluation 
of Decentralized Procurement (DCP) Scheme for procurement of wheat/paddy 
under Minimum Support Price (MSP). 

 
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
O.M. No.G-20017/8/2017-AC Dated the 13th June, 2017] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.1.10  of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                    J.C. DIVAKAR REDDY, 
23 October, 2017                                               Chairperson, 
1, Kartika1939(Saka)                                      Standing Committee on Food, 
   Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 
Annexure - I 
Statement  showing  the  details of  HTS  Claims of  States/UTs, total amount to be released, reasons for Non-release of HTS 
 
As on: 31.05.2017 
        
(Amount in Rupees 
Lakh) 
State/UT Year Amount claimed Amount 
reimbursed  
Amount 
disallowed 
Bills 
returned 
Amount 
pending 
for less 
than 6 
months 
Amount 
pending for 
more than 6 
months 
upto 1 year 
Amount 
pending for 
more than 
1 year 
Total 
Amount 
pending 
Reasons for pendency 
                      
Mizoram 2006-07 558.19 544.28 13.91 0 0 0 0 0   
2007-08 217.77 212.25 5.52 0 0 0 0 0   
2008-09 60.09 57.52 2.57 0 0 0 0 0   
2009-10 534.99 384.46 150.53 0 0 0 0 0   
2010-11 312.32 304.47 7.84 214.06 0 0 0 0   
2011-12 95.77 88.5 7.27 1.15 19.95 0 237.06 257.01 
Certificate of 1) 
Distance, 2) Rate, 3) 
Approved PDC list, 4) 
Contractor 
appointment letter not 
available 
2012-13 63.31 59.88 3.43 0 0 0 317.86 317.86 
Certificate of 1) 
Distance, 2) Rate, 3) 
Approved PDC list, 4) 
Contractor 
appointment letter not 
available 
2013-14 0 0 0 0 0 0 612.27 612.27 
Certificate of 1) 
Distance, 2) Rate, 3) 
Approved PDC list, 4) 

 
Contractor 
appointment letter not 
available 
2014-15 0 0 0 215.61   0 0     
2015-16 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0   
2016-17 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0   
Total 1842.44 1651.36 191.07 430.82 19.95 0 1167.19 1187.14 
  
Tripura 2006-07 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0   
2007-08 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0   
2008-09 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0   
2009-10 3.06 2.01 1.05 0 0 0 0 0 
  
2010-11 4.63 3.87 0.76 0 0 0 0 0   
2011-12 42.99 34.86 8.12 0 0 0 0 0   
2012-13 23.99 21.61 2.39 0 0 0 0 0 
  
2013-14 31.31 28.13 3.18 6.24   0 0 0   
2014-15 c 0 0 8.6 21.21 0 0 21.21 Bills are under 
process. 
2015-16 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0   
2016-17 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
  

 
Total 105.98 90.48 15.5 14.84 21.21 0 0 21.21 
  
Meghalaya 
2006-07 to 
2016-17 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
There are no claims 
from the State 
Government of 
Meghalaya. 
Manipur 
2006-07 to 
2013-14 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
There are no claims 
from the State 
Government of 
Manipur. 
2014-15 531.55 0 531.55 531.55 0 0 0 0 
Deficiencies in the bills 
submitted by State 
Govt. 
2015-16 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0   
2016-17 283.41 0 283.41 283.41 0 0 0 0 
Deficiencies in the bills 
submitted by State 
Govt. 
  
814.96 0 814.96 814.96 0 0 0 0 
  
Nagaland 
2006-07 47.96 0 0 47.96 0 0 0 0 
Bills returned for 
rectification. 
2007-08 46.98 0 0 46.98 0 0 0 0 Bills returned for 
rectification. 
2008-09 45.03 0 0 45.03 0 0 0 0 
Bills returned for 
rectification. 
2009-10 45.03 0 0 45.03 0 0 0 0 Bills returned  
2010-11 15.46 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 bills have been 
returned on 
12.04.2017 to State 
Govt. for necessary 
correction and 
rectification. 
2011-12 67.33 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2012-13 72.05 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2013-14 23.5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 

 
2014-15 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0   
2015-16 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0   
2016-17 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0   
Total 363.34 0 0 185 0 0 0 0 
  
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
2006-07 21031 3938 17093 21031 0 0 0 0 
GoI conveyed 
approval of Rs.39.38 
crore for claims upto 
2006-07 subject to 
adjustment against 
outstanding amount as 
per the Internal Audit 
of FCI.   However, on 
scrutiny it is found by 
FCI, RO that (i) no 
proof of payment to 
the transporters and 
(ii) no 
acknowledgement 
receipt of stock from 
each PDC recipient 
centres has been 
furnished by Govt. of 
Arunachal Pradesh, 
for want of which, the 
bills amount could not 
be settled. ZO (NE), 
then based on the 
report of RO (Assam) 
instructed to return all 
HTS claims pertaining 
to 2004-05 to 2006-07 
to Govt. of AP for 
necessary 
rectifications. 2088 
HTS bills for the period 

 
of 2004-05 to 2006-07 
were handed over to 
Govt. of AP. 
2007-08 3671 2407 0 0 0 0 0 0 
FCI, Assam Region 
paid Rs. 45.76 crores 
as Prov. Advance to 
Govt. of Ar. Pradesh 
as per instruction of 
GOI. Accordingly, 
State Govt. had 
submitted claim bills 
numbering 1256 to 
FCI. The claim bills 
were all duplicate in 
nature. However, on 
scrutiny by the 
concerned District 
offices all bills bear 
deficiencies and hence 
the same were 
returned to GOAP for 
necessary rectification. 
But the returned bills 
were not re-submitted 
to FCI for further 
course of action. In 
this regard, request 
was made vide this 
office letter no. S&S 
4(129)/2012-
13/HTS/Ar.Pr/Part XIV 
dated 16.09.2013 & 
01.11.2013 to Govt. of 
Arunachal Pradesh to 
re-submit the HTS bills 
with required 
rectification/ 
documentation within 
30th Sept'2013 as 
2008-09 2430 2169 0 0 0 0 0 0 

 
instructed by ZO (NE) 
and FCI Hqrs. But till 
date no response is 
received from State 
Govt.  
2009-10 251.63 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 These bills were 
returned to State Govt. 
by FCI on account 
deficiencies noticed. 
Some of the bills did 
not comply with the 
guidelines laid down 
as per 
recommendatons of 
Suamitra Choudhary 
committee, which are 
under review by Joint 
committee of FCI and 
State Govt. 
2010-12 850.42 0 0 0   0 0 0 
2012-13 2204.79 0 0 0   0 0 0 
2013-14 1164.54 0 0 0   0 0 0 
2014-15 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 No bill received. 
2015-16 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
No bill received. 
2016-17 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 No bill received. 
Total 31603.38 8514 17093 21031 0 0 0 0 
  
Himachal Pradesh 2006-07 164.32 155.42 8.90 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
  
2007-08 338.68 315.87 22.81 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
  
2008-09 291.99 283.98 8.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
  
2009-10 351.37 337.22 14.15 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00   

 
2010-11 566.43 562.66 3.77 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00   
2011-12 641.24 574.58 5.59 58.88 2.19 0.00 0.00 2.19 
 
2012-13 733.03 564.41 3.54 104.99 60.09 0.00 0.00 60.09   
2013-14 729.68 377.33 67.11 212.65 72.59 0.00 0.00 72.59   
2014-15 948.12 92.85 41.11 483.14 331.02 0.00 0.00 331.02   
2015-16 183.01 20.32 0.89 93.59 48.57 19.64 0.00 68.21   
2016-17 48.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 45.19 3.31 0.00 48.50   
Total 4996.37 3284.64 175.88 953.25 559.65 22.95 0.00 582.60 
  
Jammu and  
Kashmir 2006-07 735.3 582.49 152.81 0 0 0 0 0 
  
2007-08 866.18 701.29 164.89 0 0 0 0 0   
2008-09 860.53 124.44 
125.11 
610.98 0 0 0 0 
Bills returned for want 
of requisite 
documents. 
2009-10 889.94 0 173.31 716.63 0 0 0 0 
Bills returned for want 
of requisite 
documents. 
2010-11 768.27 0 0 768.27 0 0 0 0 
Bills returned for want 
of requisite 
documents. 
2011-12 299.79 0 0 299.79 0 0 0 0 
Bills returned for want 
of requisite 
documents. 
2012-13 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
No claims received 

 
2013-14 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 No claims received 
2014-15 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 No claims received 
2015-16 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 No claims received 
2016-17 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
No claims received 
Total 4420.01 1408.22 616.12 2395.67 0 0 0 0 
  
Sikkim 2006-07 87.03 53.95 11.69 21.39 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 No pending 
2007-08 106.81 84.18 8.98 13.65 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
No pending 
2008-09 111.19 93.30 12.60 5.30 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 No pending 
2009-10 111.15 90.25 13.55 7.34 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 No pending 
2010-11 131.60 88.89 33.03 9.67 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
No pending 
2011-12 168.57 119.92 26.04 22.61 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
No pending 
2012-13 165.00 121.92 41.92 1.16 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
No pending 
2013-14 173.32 113.25 60.07 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
No pending 
2014-15 189.98 160.45 29.53 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 No pending 
2015-16 170.63 119.29 51.35 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Claims for the year 
2015-16 has been 
settled upto Dec 2015 
2016-17 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
No claims lying 
pending after Dec 
2015 

 
Total 1415.28 1045.40 288.76 81.12 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
 Lakshadweep 2006-07 17.16 17.16 0 0 0 0 0 0   
2007-08 16.19 16.19 0 0 0 0 0 0   
2008-09 11.07 11.07 0 0 0 0 0 0 
  
2009-10 3.66 3.66 0 0 0 0 0 0   
2010-11 13.1 13.1 0 0 0 0 0 0   
2011-12 16.86 14.77 2.09 0 0 0 0 0 
  
2012-13 15.69 14.72 0.97 0 0 0 0 0   
2013-14 14.95 0 2.36 12.59 0 0 0 0 
Amount is pending for 
want of proof of 
payment made. 
2014-15 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 From 2014-15 
onwards release of 
foodgrains in respect 
of UT of Lakshadweep 
have commenced from 
FSD Androth and 
henceforth no HTS 
claims arise. 
2015-16 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2016-17 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total 108.68 90.67 5.42 12.59 0 0 0 0 
  
A&N Islands There are no claims of HTS as FCI is directly delivering wheat and rice under PDCs through a private liner. 
Grand Total   45670.44 16084.77 19200.71 25919.25 600.81 22.95 1167.19 1790.95  
 

 
Annexure II 
 
Staff  Cost 
 
  
Amount (Rs. in Crores) 
Particulars 2015-16   2016-17  
(RE) Difference 
Pay 474.64 540.00 65.36 
D.P 0.43 0.00 -0.43 
CDA/IDA 502.04 648.00 145.96 
Cash award 0.00 0.00 0.00 
CCA 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Contribution to PF etc. 117.48 142.60 25.12 
Contribution towards Post-
retirement Medical Scheme 0.00 46.50 46.50 
Contribution towards Post-
retirement Pension Scheme 0.00 469.50 469.50 
Conveyance 
Reimbursement/Transport 
Subsidy 14.87 20.00 5.13 
Dusting Operator Allowances 0.33 0.50 0.17 
E.L. (During service) 57.43 65.00 7.57 
Education Allowances 7.76 9.00 1.24 
Fringe Benefit 63.44 65.00 1.56 
HRA 87.56 97.00 9.44 
Incentive on family Planning 1.07 2.00 0.93 
IR on IDA 0.00 0.00 0.00 
LTC Encashment 1.11 3.00 1.89 
LTC Home town/Bharat 
Darshan 4.18 6.00 1.82 
Others Allowances 7.77 10.00 2.23 
Pay arrears 2.57 0.00 -2.57 
PLI 34.78 105.00 70.22 
Station C.A 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Tiffin Allowances 5.87 6.00 0.13 
VRS Deferred Expenditure 0.34 0.00 -0.34 
Washing Allowances 0.75 1.50 0.75 
Sub Total 1384.42 2236.60 852.18 

 
Medical Expenses 53.26 60.00 6.74 
OTA 35.33 40.00 4.67 
Pending OTA 0.00 5.00 5.00 
Welfare Expenses 27.72 30.00 2.28 
Sub Total 116.31 135.00 18.69 
Establishment Cost 1500.73 2371.60 870.87 
DCRG 190.33 153.20 -37.13 
E.L. (on retirement) 60.46 60.00 -0.46 
Total Establishment Cost 1751.52 2584.80 833.28 
Estt. Cost Capitalised 2.53 1.00 -1.53 
Net Staff Cost 1748.99 2583.80 834.81 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Annexure III 
 
 
Establishment Cost of Food Corporation of India 
      
Amount (Rs. in Crores) 
S.No. Particulars 2011-
12 
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 
(RE) 
1 Sales 26,145 39,294 38,264 29,755 29,269 20,008 
2 Subsidy 68,697 80,563 89,492 1,05,007 1,02,425 1,15,693 
3 Turnover 94,842 1,19,857 1,27,756 1,34,762 1,31,694 1,35,701 
4 Establishment Cost 2,263 2,198 2,061 2,034 1,749 2,584 
5 Establishment Cost as a 
Percentage of Turnover 
2.39% 1.83% 1.61% 1.51% 1.33% 1.90% 
        

 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
                       
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (201 7-18) HELD 
ON MONDAY, 23 OCTOBER, 2017 
 
The Committee sat from 1 530 hrs. to 1615  hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy  - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri R.K.Bharathimohan 
3. Shri Babu Lal Chaudhary 
4. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
5. Shri Dinesh Kashyap 
6. Shri Dharmendra Kumar 
7. Smt. Sakuntala Laguri 
8. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
9. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
10. Shri Bhola Singh 
11. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunpuria 
12. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13. Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
14. Shri Ripun Bora 
15. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
16. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
17. Shri Veer Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Lovekesh Kumar Sharma - Director 
2. Shri Khakhai Zou  - Additional Director 

 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson  welcomed the Members to the sitting 
of the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the Draft Reports 
on Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the 1 5th and 16th Reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
(2017-18) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distributi on 
pertaining to the (i) Department of Food and Public Distribution, and (ii) 
Department of Consumer Affairs respectively.  
 
3. Thereafter the Committee took up for consideration the Draft Reports. 
After due deliberations, the Committee unanimously adopted the said two Action 
Taken Reports without any amendment/modification. 
 
4.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson  to finalize the aforesaid 
Draft Reports and present the same to Parliament in the ensuing Winter Session 
of Parliament. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
********* 

 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS  OF THE  ACTION  TAKE N BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE  FIFTEENTH  REPORT  
OF  TH E  STANDING  COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFA IRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION (2016-17) 
(SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA)   
(i) Total number of Recommendations:        13 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government : 
 
Para Nos. .:- 4.52, 4.53, 5.7, 5.15, 6.9 and 6.13 
    
          (Chapter – II, Total - 6) 
Percentage : 46.16% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to purs ue in view of the replies received from the 
Government 
 
Para Nos. 3.8, 4.39, 5.10 and 6.5 
                     (Chapter – III, Total - 4) 
Percentage : 30.76% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been acce pted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
Para Nos. 4.9 and 4.28 
 
            (Chapter – IV, Total -2)   
Percentage : 15.38% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
interim replies of the Government have been received. 
    
   Para No.:- 4.20  
    (Chapter – V, Total - 1) 
Percentage : 7.7% 
  
 