 
 
 
ST
ANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
               AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2016-2017) 
 
 
       
SIXTEENTH LOK
 SABHA 
 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the Committee      
(2015-16) on Demands for Grants (2016-17) pertaining to the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 February, 2017/ Magha, 1938 (Saka) 
 
 
1
4 


 
FOU
RTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2016-2017) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of   the Committee   
(2015-16) on Demands for Grants (2016-17) pertaining to the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs)} 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
   February, 2017/ Magha, 1938 (Saka) 
 
 
 


 
 
CON
TENTS 
 
            
Composition of the Committee …………………………………………     (iv)              
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………...        (v) 
        
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………………          1                 
 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government……………………………        15       
  
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
 the Government’s replies………………………………...       20        
 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee ………………………………………..        26        
 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are  
still awaited………………………………………………        28        
   
Annexure 
 
A. Procurement of Equipments for Legal Metrology  
                     Departments of States........................................              
 
B.  Establishment of RRSLs......................................                44 
   
 
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the  Fifth sitting of the Committee held                          
on 09.01.2017......................................................               55 
 
(II) Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the 
Committee (2015-16)..............................................            57  
 
 
 
 
 
 

Co
mposition of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution (2016-17). 
 
Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy, Chairperson  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Ant
o Antony 
3. Shri R. K. Bharathimohan 
4. Shri Babu Lal Choudhary 
5. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
6. Shri Dinesh Kashyap 
7. Shri Dharmendra Kumar  
8. Shri Ravinder Kushawaha 
9. Smt. Sakuntala Laguri 
10. Dr. Swami Sakshi Ji Maharaj 
11. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
12. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
13. Shri Ram Chander Paswan 
14. Shri C.S. Putta Raju 
15. Smt. Priyanka Singh Rawat 
16. Shri  Midhun Reddy 
17. Shri Bhola Singh 
18. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuriya
# 
19. Shri Shib
u Soren 
20. Shri Bhagwanth Khuba# 
21. Shri N
andi Yellaiah 
 
Rajya  Sabha
 
 
22. Shri Sha
di Lal Batra 
23. Smt. Misha Bharti 
24. Shri Ripun Bora 
25. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
26. Smt. M. C. Mary Kom 
27. Ms. Rekha 
28. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
29. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
30. Shri Veer Singh 
31. Vacant
@ 
 
LOK
 SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy       - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Lovekesh Kumar Sharma   - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou      - Additional Director 
4. Dong Lianthang Tonsing  - Executive Officer 
__
________________________________________________________________________ 
   *Shri Pr
abhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava, M.P. (Lok Sabha) ceased to be a Member of the Standing Committee of FCA & PD w.e.f.  
  19thOctober, 2016. 
   # Bhagwanth Khuba, M.P. (Lok Sabha) and Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuriya, M.P. (Lok Sabha) have been nominated as Members of  
  the Standing Committee of FCA& PD w.e.f. 19th October, 2016. 
   @ Shri Mithun Chakraborty, MP (RS) ceased to be a member of the Committee upon his resignation from the membership of Rajya  
  Sabha w.e.f. 28.12.2016. 

 
INT
RODUCTION 
  
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution (2016-17) having been authorized by the Committee to 
submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fourteenth Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Eleventh Report of the Committee (2015-16) on Demands for Grants     
(2016-17) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs). 
 
2.  The Eleventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 3 May, 2016. The Government have furnished their replies indicating Action 
Taken on the recommendations contained in the Report on 22 August, 2016. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 9 January, 2017. 
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.  
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Comments of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the text of the Report. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
NEW DELH
I;                    J.C. DIVAKAR REDDY, 
24 January, 2017                                      Chairperson, 
4 Magha, 1938(Saka)                                           Standing Committee on Food, 
        Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1 
REPOR
T 
CHAPTER - I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on                      
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report                        
of the Committee (2015-16), (16 th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2016-17) 
pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
 
1.2 The Eleventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 3rd May, 2016. It contained 13 observations/ recommendations. 
Action taken replies in respect of all the 13 observations/recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received and these have been categorized as 
follows:- 
(i)  Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government - 
 
Para Nos.:- 2.8, 3.39, 3.73, and 3.77 
  
   
(ii) Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government - 
  
 Para No.:-  1.4, 3.56 and 3.83 
 
(iii) Recommendations in respect of which replies   of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee -  
 
Para No.:- 3.38 
 
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which the interim replies of 
the Government have been received -   
 
   Para No. :- 3.11, 3.37, 3.40, 3.46 and 3.68 
 
 
 

 
 
2 
 
1.3 Th
e Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I and final replies in 
respect of recommendations for which only interim replies have been given 
by the Government, should be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 
The Committee strongly emphasize that utmost importance should be 
given to the implementation of Observations/Recommendations accepted 
by the Government. In case where it is not possible for the Government to 
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the 
matter should be reported to Committee in time with reasons for non-
implementation. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations. 
 
A.  Need for proper utilization of funds 
 
Recommend
ation (Para No.  2.8) 
 
1.5 The Committee in their earlier report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
 "The Committee note that against Actual Expenditure incurred of Rs. 
131.93 crore under the combined heads of Revenue and Capital on Plan Side 
and Rs. 69.47 crore on the non-plan side during the year 2014-15, the 
Department was allocated Rs. 180.00 crore on plan side and Rs. 81.77 crore on 
non-plan side at BE in 2015-16. This allocation was reduced to Rs. 176. 47 crore 
and Rs. 129.66 crore at RE stage while the Actual Expenditure incurred was Rs. 
139.63 crore and Rs. 120.50 crore under Plan scheme and Non-plan scheme 
respectively. The Committee are surprised to note that the Department was 
allocated Rs. 20.70 crore at BE and RE stages under Capital head during the 
same year but no expenditure was incurred under both Plan and Non-plan 
Schemes. The Committee are constrained to say that the upward/downward 
variation of funds at BE/RE/AE stages indicates lack of proper planning and 
monitoring on the part of the Department which needs to be avoided in future. 
The Committee also would like to be apprised of the reasons for 
upward/downward revision of budget allocation.  
 

 
 
3 
T
he Committee further note that the Department has been allotted Rs. 
1050 crore under plan and Rs. 191.61 crore under non-plan totaling Rs. 1241.61 
crore for the year 2016-17. The allocation of Rs. 1050 crore under the Plan 
Scheme includes Rs. 900 crore towards Price Stabilization Fund. Keeping in 
view the fact that the Department of Consumer Affairs has been entrusted with a 
very important responsibility of ensuring stability of prices of commodities, their 
continued availability in the market at reasonable prices and to control 
speculative activities etc. the Committee strongly urge the Department to strictly 
monitor the expenditure of funds from the initial stage itself so that the allocated 
funds are properly utilized during the financial year itself unlike the previous 
years." 
 
 
1.6 The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
 
"Dur
ing the year 2015-16 BE of Rs 2 crore was allotted for Plan 
scheme of Strengthening of Price Monitoring Cell, against the allocated BE, a 
total actual expenditure of Rs 1.26 crore was incurred toward infrastructure and 
other support for Strengthening of Price Monitoring mechanism both at Centre 
and State/UTs. The allocated amount was not fully utilized for State/UTs because 
of lack of proposals received as per guidelines especially from NE States/UTs 
and Non submission of Utilization Certification for earlier grants. The BE 
allocated for 2016-17 is Rs 1 crore for the plan scheme of Strengthening of Price 
Monitoring Cell.  
In respect of Price Stabilization Fund (PSF), it is clarified that out of Rs 
900 crores allocated in BE 2016-17, around Rs 831 crores has been released to 
the procuring agencies for procurement of Rabi pulses and import of pulses for 
creating the buffer stock of 1.5 lakh MT. Expenditure under is PSF released with 
the approval of the Price Stabilization Fund Management Committee (PSFMC). 
The procurement operations along with the expenditures under PSF are also 
constantly reviewed by the PSFMC. 
" 
 
1.7 Th
e Committee in their original Report had expressed their concern 
over the  unplanned upward/downward revision of funds for Budget 
Allocations and urged upon the Government to strictly monitor the 
expenditure of funds right from the initial stage so that allocated funds are 
properly utilized during the financial year itself. In their Action Taken Reply 
the Department of Consumer Affair has cited lack of proposals received as 
per guidelines from the North-East States/UTs and non submission of 
utilization certificates for earlier grants as reasons for improper/under- 

 
 
4 
ut
ilization of funds. They, however, find that Action Taken Reply does not 
indicate the remedial measures taken by the Department to   persuade such 
North-Eastern States/UTs to expedite the submission of proposals for 
proper utilization of allocated funds during the financial year itself and 
furnishing of utilization certificates for earlier grants so as to enable the 
Department to monitor the progress of the scheme. They desire to be 
apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
 
B. Need for increased allocations from Ministry of Finance  
 
Recommend
ation (Para No. 3.11) 
 
1.8 The Committee earlier observed/recommend as under: 
 
 "The Committee note that the BE for 2016-17 has been fixed at Rs. 60.00 
crore. The Committee, however, are dismayed to note that even after utilizing the 
budget fully during 2015-16, the Department has not been given increased funds 
under this scheme. The Committee understand the challenges of the Department 
in spreading consumer awareness among people and are of the view that a 
sustained national campaign is required to educate the consumers about their 
rights and welfare. The Committee further note that under this scheme, the 
Department also releases funds to States for educating consumers based on 
awareness programmes on local themes and other advertisements in local 
exhibitions, street plays, cultural functions etc. to educate the citizens about 
consumer rights. The Committee are of the firm view that the scheme of 
consumer awareness should be further strengthened for which allocation of more 
funds is required to extend the spread of scheme to various parts of the country 
so that citizens are aware about their rights and the mechanism available for 
redressal of their grievances or complaints they suffer from. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should approach the Ministry of 
Finance for increased allocations for the scheme at the RE stage. They be 
apprised of the steps taken in this regard with outcome thereof." 
 
1.9 The Ministry in their action taken reply stated as under:- 
 
 "At the time of Revised Estimates, Ministry of Finance would be 
approached for more funds for Consumer Awareness Campaign." 
 

 
 
5 
1.1
0  The Committee in their earlier Report had noted the meager level of 
Budgetary allocation of Rs. 60 crore for consumers protection schemes for 
the year 2016-17 to the Department  even though the allocation for previous 
year was fully utilized. The Committee had recommended that the Ministry 
of  Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution should approach the Ministry 
of Finance for allocation of more funds. The Ministry in the Action Taken 
reply assured that the Ministry of Finance would be approached for the 
same at Revised Estimate (RE) stage. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the steps taken and achievements made by the Department of 
Consumer Affairs in the matter as the issue of consumer protection is a 
serious matter calling for attention of the Government. 
 
C. Need for Additional funds for Computerization and Networking 
(CONFONET) 
 
Recommend
ation (Para No. 3.37) 
 
1.11 The Committee recommended as follows:- 
 
 "The Committee note that the Department of Consumer Affairs 
administers Consumer Protection Act, 1986. Under Consumer Protection Unit 
various schemes/projects are being implemented to improve the functioning of 
consumer fora. A scheme for Strengthening Consumer Fora Phase-II, a scheme 
for Computerization and Networking namely CONFONET, State Consumer 
Helplines are some of the important programmes being implemented under 
Consumer Protection Unit. The Budget allocated under this scheme during the 
year 2016-17 is Rs. 34.00 crore. The Committee note that during 2015-16, the  
Department had allocated Rs. 45.00 crore for Consumer Protection Schemes 
and incurred actual expenditure of Rs. 31.54 crore (upto 31.01.2016) indicating a 
utilization of 70.08%. The Committee are disappointed to further note that the 
allocations under the scheme for 2016-17 has been reduced to Rs. 34.00 crore 
against RE of Rs. 45.00 crore out of which Rs. 31.54 crore was spent. The 
Committee are of the view that Consumer Protection is a very important 
component of the Department of Consumer Affairs and the strengthening of 
various consumer for a envisaged under this scheme needs to be fully supported 
with adequate funds. They, therefore, recommend that the Department should 
seek additional funds under this scheme, during the course of the year from the 
Ministry the Finance. They desire to be apprised of the outcome of the efforts 
made in this direction."  

 
 
6 
 
 
1.12 T
he Ministry in their action taken note stated:- 
 
"The Department has diligently noted the recommendations of the honorable 
Committee that the additional fund should be sought under the Plan Schemes at 
the RE stage for the current financial year and will be acted upon at appropriate 
point of time. In this regard, it is also being considered to strengthen of the 
existing scheme and seek funds for product testing laboratories, establishing of 
consumer studies and research cells in the next three years for which budgetary 
support will be requested.” 
 
1.13  The Committee in their earlier Report had expressed their 
disappointment over the poor level of Budgetary allocation i.e. Rs. 34 crore 
for the Financial Year 2016-17 in respect of CONFONET as compared to 
previous year's RE i.e. 45 crore and had recommended that the Department 
of Consumer Affairs should seek adequate funds for CONFONET from the 
Ministry of Finance. The Ministry has stated that they would act on it at the 
appropriate point of time and also to seek funds for product testing 
laboratories, establishing of consumer studies and research cells in the 
next three years. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps 
taken by the Department for seeking additional funds at  RE stage for 
strengthening of consumer fora phase - II, a scheme for Computerization 
and Networking and achievements made in this direction. 
 
D. Need for faster disposal of cases in the Consumer Courts and Fora  
 
Recommend
ation (Para No. 3.38) 
 
1.14 The Committee recommended in the earlier Report as follows:- 
 
 "The Committee note that as on 29.02.2016 the percentage of disposal of 
cases at the National, State and District Fora stands at 89.76%, 86.11% and 
92.21% respectively with a total 395129 pending cases and overall percentage of 
disposals at 91.20%. They are further constrained to note that out of 657 District 
Fora, 626 are functional as on 31.12.2015 and 86 posts of President and 252 
posts of members are vacant in different fora as on 29.02.2016. They strongly 

 
 
7 
fee
l that the vacancies need to be filled up in a time bound manner which would 
go a long way in reducing the pendency position. The Committee find that though 
the performance of the consumer fora in the country is more or less satisfactory 
as per records, however, they are constrained to observe that the grievances of 
consumers in various sectors of the economy are not being adequately 
addressed. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should urge 
upon the State Commission/District Fora to make every effort to dispose of the 
pending cases with them at the earliest.  
 
The Committee further note that timely justice is essential for the 
consumers and disposal of cases in a reasonable time would inspire the 
confidence of consumers to get their grievances redressed by the various 
consumer fora and strengthen the consumer movement in the country. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department of Consumer 
Affairs should strictly monitor the disposal of cases at regular intervals and offer 
necessary guidance to State and District Fora in expediting the disposal of 
cases." 
  
1.15 The Ministry in their action taken note stated:- 
 
 "As per the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, it is the 
responsibility of the State/UT Governments to fill up the vacancies of President 
and Member in the State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissions (State 
Commissions and the District Consumer Disputes Redressal Fora (District Fora). 
The Central Government has been writing to the State/UT Governments from 
time to time to take advance action for filling up of the vacancies. This matter has 
also been taken up with the Chief Ministers of all States at the level of the 
Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution. 
 As per the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, the National 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (NCDRC) has administrative control 
over the State Commissions and District Fora with regard to calling for periodical 
return regarding the institution, disposal, pendency of cases. The NCDRC is also 
empowered to generally overseeing the functioning of the State Commissions 
and District Fora to ensure that the objects and purposes of the Act are best 
served without any way interfering with their quasi-judicial freedom.  
 
In addition to above, the Central Government has been holding National 
Conferences and regional Consultation Meetings with the Presidents of the State 
Commissions and the State Governments where the matter regarding disposal of 
cases are reviewed and they are impressed upon for expediting disposal of 
pending cases." 
  
1.16 The Committee in its earlier report had noted that overall percentage 
of disposal of cases in the Consumer Courts is 91.20% ; out of 657 fora, 
626 district fora are functioning  as on 31.12.2015; 86 posts of President 
and 252 posts of Members were lying vacant as on 29.02.2016; and that 

 
 
8 
griev
ances of consumers are being inadequately addressed. They, 
therefore, desired that every effort to dispose of pending cases be made 
and disposal of cases be strictly monitored at regular intervals. The 
Government has stated in their Action Taken reply that they have been 
writing to the States/UT Governments to take advance action to fill 
vacancies, taken up the matter repeatedly with the Chief Minister of the 
concerned States at the level of the Union Minister. They also stated that 
National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (NCDRC) has 
administrative control  over the State Commissions and District Fora and 
that the Central Government has been holding National Conferences and 
Regional Consultation meetings with Presidents of the State Commissions 
and the State Governments where the matter regarding disposal of cases 
are reviewed and the state agencies are impressed upon to expedite 
disposal of pending cases. While claiming that overall percentage of 
disposal of cases stood at 91.20%  the Government is silent on specific 
action taken and the results obtained therefrom, with regard  to filling up of 
vacancies to the posts of President and Members of different fora. They 
strongly feel that instead of owning responsibility, the Department shifted 
the blame on NCDRC. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that efforts to dispose of pending cases be made and 
vacant posts of President and Members of the fora got filled in a time 
bound manner. The Committee would expect a much better picture in the 
year 2017-18 and desire further that they may be apprised of the  
achievements in this regard within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
 
E. Need for proper utilization of unspent balances and timely furnishing 
of utilization certificates 
 
Recommend
ation (Para No. 3.39) 
 
1.17 The Committee earlier recommended as follows:- 
 
 "The Committee furthermore note that unspent balances under Consumer 
Protection Unit as on 01.04.2014 and 01.04.2015 stand at Rs. 34.14 crore and 
Rs. 59.53 crore respectively. This is reportedly due to non-settlement of 
utilization certificates in respect of previous year’s grants. The Committee find 

 
 
9 
tha
t between these two years, unspent balances increased by about Rs. 15 
crore. They desire the Department to take up this matter of unspent balances 
and non-receipt of utilizations certificates earnestly with all concerned States to 
rectify the anomalous situation. They are of the firm view that rising unspent 
balances would result in lesser allocations in succeeding years which in turn 
would weaken the consumer movement in the form of monitoring pendency of 
cases etc. They desire to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard." 
 
1.18 The Ministry in their action taken reply stated as noted below:- 
 
"The Department of Consumer Affairs has been writing to the State 
Governments from time to time to utilise the grants already released and to 
furnish utilisation certificates along with fresh proposals for further financial 
assistance. In the Regional Consultation Meetings with the State Governments 
the representatives of the State Governments are impressed upon furnishing the 
utilisation certificates in respect of the grants released. The officers of the level of 
Director/Deputy Secretary have also been visiting different States to discuss the 
problems faced by the State Governments in the implementation of the schemes 
and to review the utilisation position of the grants."  
 
1.19 The Committee in their previous report had taken note of the rising 
unspent balances under Consumer Protection Unit from Rs. 34.14 crore 
during the year 2014 to Rs. 59.53 crore in 2015, an increase of Rs. 15 crore. 
The Committee while appreciating the steps taken by the Department in 
writing to the State Governments from time to time to utilize the grant 
already released and to furnish utilization certificates with fresh proposals 
for further financial assistance, has impressed upon them to get a 
utilization certificate in respect of grant released and discuss the problems 
with different States. The Committee desire to be apprised of the current 
status of unspent balances and pendency of utilization certificates under 
the Consumer Protection Unit with the broad objective of reducing the level 
of unspent balances in future under the head so as to ensure effective 
utilization of allocated amounts. 
 
F. Need for evaluation study of the status of CONFONET  
 
(R
ecommendation Para No. 3.40) 
 
1.20 The Committee in their earlier report observed/ recommended as follows:- 
 
 "The Committee note that the scheme of Computerization and Computer 
Networking of Consumer Fora in the country (CONFONET) was launched in 

 
 
10 
M
arch, 2005. Under the scheme, the consumer fora at all the 3 tiers were to be 
fully computerized to enable access to information and quicker disposal of cases. 
Hardware, software and technical manpower are provided to the Consumer 
Forum. An On-line Case Monitoring System Application has also been 
developed. 
  
The Committee note that against the target of 613 for computerization 
during 2015-16, hardware had been supplied to 586, manpower was provided to 
595 and 526 consumer foras are using on-line case management system. The 
Committee observe that in this age of computerization and with the Government 
initiative for Digital India, the Department should take up the computerization of 
consumer fora in right earnest and complete them quickly so that the entire 
consumer movement would get a fillip to its activities. The Department should 
also conduct a thorough review of the last ten years' efforts that were gone into 
the scheme by an independent evaluation agency and complete computerization 
of the remaining consumer fora in a time bound manner preferably by 2018-19. 
 
The Committee note that for using the On-line Case Management System 
Application, internet connectivity is required at the Consumer Forum. However, 
due to certain technical problems in Uttarakhand, the computers are yet to be 
installed. The Committee note that similarly there are internet connectivity 
problems in Assam, Bihar and North-Eastern States. The Committee recommend 
that the Department should hold review meetings with concerned States and 
such issues be resolved at the earliest so that the On-line Case Management 
System can be used by all Consumer For a uninterruptedly." 
 
1.21 The Ministry in their action taken reply to have stated as under:- 
 
 "As on 27th June’2016, new set of hardware has been supplied at 598 
consumer fora (NCDRC, 34 State Commissions & 563 District Consumer fora) 
during 12th plan period under Confonet Scheme. Manpower has been provided 
at 596 field locations where Hardware was supplied.  
For supplying hardware and deployment of technical manpower in the 
Consumer Fora, NIC requests the State Governments/ State Commissions 
(through NIC State coordinators) to provide list of locations, their postal address, 
contact details of nodal officers and site readiness confirmation for the delivery 
and timely installation of the hardware. For want of these details it has not been 
possible to computerize some of the Consumer Fora. The Department wrote to 
the Secretaries of Consumer Affairs of all the States/UTs in March, 2015 to 
provide the list of balance locations, if any, where new set of hardware and 
manpower is required under the scheme. In May, 2016, Deputy Director General 
(NIC) wrote to the states where some locations were left to be covered under 
Confonet. Recently, the Secretaries of Consumer Affairs in the States have been 
requested to ensure availability of internet connection for successful 
implementation of the Confonet scheme. 
The suggestion of the Committee to conduct a thorough review of the last 
ten years’ efforts that were gone into the scheme by an independent evaluation 
agency has been noted and action is being taken in this regard."  
 

 
 
11 
1.2
2 The Committee have noted with concern that even after 10 years of 
the launch of Computer Networking of Consumer Fora (CONFONET) in the 
country, some of the States particularly Bihar and the North-Eastern States 
still face connectivity problem. The Committee further note that the 
Department has been doing all they could to put things in order for which 
action is being taken by them to conduct a thorough review/evaluation of 
the same. The Committee desire to be apprised  of  the results of the 
evaluation study conducted, the recommendations made and the action 
taken to implement the suggestions of the evaluation study so as to 
integrate all consumer courts and fora over the net within a specified time. 
 
 
G. Delay in construction/renovation of buildings of Weights and 
 Measures Department  
 
(R
ecommendation Para No. 3.46) 
 
1.23 The Committee in their earlier report observed/ recommended as follows:- 
 
 
 "  The Committee note that the Legal Metrology Division of the Department 
of Consumer Affairs oversees the implementation of the Legal Metrology Act, 
2009 which is aimed to safeguard the interest of consumers to get the correct 
quantity for the price charged by ensuring use of the correct, tested, calibrated 
and certified weights and measures. The Legal Metrology Rules mandate certain 
consumer-friendly declarations like the name and address of the manufacturer/ 
packer, the name of the commodity, the net quantity, the MRP, the month and 
year of manufacture/packing etc. The Committee hope that the funds allotted to 
the scheme 'Weights and Measures' during the year 2016-17 of Rs. 16.45 crore 
at BE would be judiciously utilized by the Department with the objective of 
achieving the set goal. 
 
The Committee note that certain procedural difficulties are being faced by the 
Legal Metrology Division in implementation of its schemes like non-finalization of 
tenders by DGS&D and non-utilization of funds by CPWD for 
construction/renovation of buildings etc. The Committee are unhappy at such 
delays and the reasons furnished are not satisfactory and convincing and require 
intervention by senior officials in the Department of Consumer Affairs and Legal 
Metrology Division. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all irritant issues 
be sorted out with DGS&D and CPWD should hold regular interactions with 
DGS&D and ensure that the requirements of the Legal Metrology Division are 
made available and the infrastructure is set up as envisaged in the plans in a 
time bound manner. They desire the Department to closely monitor the progress 
of implementation." 

 
 
12 
 
1.2
4 The Ministry in their action taken reply to have stated as under:- 
 
 "The issues will be sorted out with DGS&D and CPWD. Regular 
interactions will be held with DGS&D to ensure the requirements of the Legal 
Metrology Division and to setup the infrastructure as envisaged in the plans in a 
time bound manner. The Department will closely monitor the progress of 
implementation and will make every sincere effort to get the funds utilised by the 
DGS&D.  
 Concerted efforts were made for procurement of standards equipments 
with DGS&D by way of meeting with senior officers of DGS&D and sending 
regular letters asking the status of the indents and tenders floated by them.  A 
copy of some of the letters issued to DGS&D is at Annexure-A.  The possibility 
of floating of e-tenders by this Department itself is also under consideration.   
 Also efforts were made with State Government and CPWD for 
establishment of two new RRSLs at Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh and Nagpur, 
Maharashtra.  Meetings with CPWD officers were also called.  A copy of minute 
of meeting and letters is at Annexure-B."  
 
1.25 The Committee, in its previous report had noted the fact that the 
Department of Consumer Affairs through Legal Metrology Act, has the 
mandate to safeguard the consumers' interest and to ensure use of correct, 
tested, calibrated and certified weighing and measuring instruments. The 
Committee had also noted that the Government has made efforts in 
conjunction with State Governments and CPWD for establishment of two 
new Regional Research Standards Laboratories (RRSLs) at Varanasi, Uttar 
Pradesh and Nagpur, Maharashtra for which meetings with CPWD officials 
was also called. The Committee desire that  efforts may be made to achieve 
concrete results in this regard and the Department of Consumer Affairs 
may set specific timeline for establishment and operationalization of the 
RRSLs. The Committee would like to be apprised of the developments in 
this regard. 
 
H. Need for a review of the hallmarking scheme 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.68) 
 
1.26.   The Committee in their earlier report observed/ recommended as follows:- 
 

 
 
13 
 "The
 Committee note that there are two schemes under implementation 
by the  Department of Consumer Affairs namely Hallmarking Scheme for setting 
up of Gold Assaying & Hallmarking centres and National System for 
Standardization Scheme to promote the standardization at national and 
international level. The Committee feel that the 373 Assaying & Hallmarking 
centres in the country as on date are unable to meet the expectations of the 
consumers. There are two components of the hallmarking schemes namely 
Infrastructure Building and Capacity Building. Under infrastructure building, one 
time financial assistance for setting up of gold assaying and hallmarking centres 
where no such centre exist, 30% to private entrepreneurs and 50% to PSUs is 
provided. However, the same increases to 50% to private entrepreneurs and 
70% to PSUs in case of North East States. Under the component of capacity 
building, training programmes like Artisan Training, A&H Personnel Training and 
BIS Officers Training are conducted. 
 
The Committee are concerned with the less than satisfactory working of 
A&H sector as these sectors do not seem to have made much of a difference to 
the consumers in purchase of gold. The Committee have observed during their 
study tour last year to Udaipur A&H centre that proper testings are not being 
done before hallmark seal are made available for the gold which needs to be 
ensured by BIS/Department of Consumer Affairs very strictly. This scheme needs 
appropriate monitoring and regular testing of samples from the centres. The 
Committee are of the considered view that the consumers should have the 
benefit of hallmark gold not only at the time of buying but also at a time of selling. 
At present, there seems to be no benefit for a seller if he sells a hallmark or non-
hallmark gold which fetches a similar value. The Committee would expect the 
Department of Consumer Affairs to review the functioning of hallmarking scheme 
and take necessary steps to improve its functioning among the consumers and 
traders. The Committee further view that this is a good scheme and needs proper 
implementation by the Department of Consumer Affairs and therefore 
recommend that the Department conduct a thorough review of the functioning of 
the scheme as well as A&H centres immediately by an independent external 
evaluator in a time bound manner and take corrective action wherever required 
as suggested by the reviewing agency. They would like to be apprised of the 
action taken on this aspect at an early date." 
 
1.27 The Ministry in their action taken reply to have stated as under:- 
 
"Possibilities of getting desired study done by a government agency on 
nomination basis are being explored. ‘Indian Institute of Public Administration’ 
has been contacted as they have done a similar study for BIS in the past. 
 
 As soon as the project of evaluation study is completed and its report 
becomes available, necessary action will be taken accordingly." 
 

 
 
14 
1.2
8 The Committee in its earlier report had, inter-alia, recommended that 
a thorough review of the functioning of the hallmarking scheme and the 
Assaying & Hallmarking Centres by an independent external evaluator be 
conducted in a time bound manner. The Department of Consumer Affairs in 
their Action Taken reply have stated that possibility of getting desired 
study by a Government agency on nomination basis is being explored. 
Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA) that did similar study on 
Bureau of Indian Standard (BIS) in the past, had been contacted. As soon 
as the project of evaluation study is completed and report becomes 
available, necessary action would be taken accordingly.  The Committee 
feel that the Department appears to be rather non-committal and casual 
while furnishing their Action Taken Reply to this very important 
recommendation as no efforts, whatsoever, seems to have been made for 
expeditious completion of the project evaluation study. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Department to have a re-look into this issue seriously 
and apprised them about the concrete steps taken to implement the 
Assaying and Hallmarking scheme in a time bound manner. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
15 
CH
APTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
  ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.8) 
 
 2.1 "The Committee note that against Actual Expenditure incurred of Rs. 
131.93 crore under the combined heads of Revenue and Capital on Plan Side 
and Rs. 69.47 crore on the non-plan side during the year 2014-15, the 
Department was allocated Rs. 180.00 crore on plan side and Rs. 81.77 crore on 
non-plan side at BE in 2015-16. This allocation was reduced to Rs. 176. 47 crore 
and Rs. 129.66 crore at RE stage while the Actual Expenditure incurred was Rs. 
139.63 crore and Rs. 120.50 crore under Plan scheme and Non-plan scheme 
respectively. The Committee are surprised to note that the Department was 
allocated Rs. 20.70 crore at BE and RE stages under Capital head during the 
same year but no expenditure was incurred under both Plan and Non-plan 
Schemes. The Committee are constrained to say that the upward/downward 
variation of funds at BE/RE/AE stages indicates lack of proper planning and 
monitoring on the part of the Department which needs to be avoided in future. 
The Committee also would like to be apprised of the reasons for 
upward/downward revision of budget allocation.  
 
The Committee further note that the Department has been allotted Rs. 
1050 crore under plan and Rs. 191.61 crore under non-plan totaling Rs. 1241.61 
crore for the year 2016-17. The allocation of Rs. 1050 crore under the Plan 
Scheme includes Rs. 900 crore towards Price Stabilization Fund. Keeping in 
view the fact that the Department of Consumer Affairs has been entrusted with a 
very important responsibility of ensuring stability of prices of commodities, their 
continued availability in the market at reasonable prices and to control 
speculative activities etc. the Committee strongly urge the Department to strictly 
monitor the expenditure of funds from the initial stage itself so that the allocated 
funds are properly utilized during the financial year itself unlike the previous 
years." 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 "During the year 2015-16 BE of Rs 2 crore was allotted for Plan scheme of 
Strengthening of Price Monitoring Cell, against the allocated BE, a total actual 
expenditure of Rs 1.26 crore was incurred toward infrastructure and other 
support for Strengthening of Price Monitoring mechanism both at Centre and 
State/UTs. The allocated amount was not fully utilized for State/UTs because of 
lack of proposals received as per guidelines especially from NE States/UTs and 
Non submission of Utilization Certification for earlier grants. The BE allocated for 
2016-17 is Rs 1 crore for the plan scheme of Strengthening of Price Monitoring 
Cell.  
 

 
 
16 
In 
respect of Price Stabilization Fund (PSF), it is clarified that out of Rs 
900 crores allocated in BE 2016-17, around Rs 831 crores has been released to 
the procuring agencies for procurement of Rabi pulses and import of pulses for 
creating the buffer stock of 1.5 lakh MT. Expenditure under is PSF released with 
the approval of the Price Stabilization Fund Management Committee (PSFMC). 
The procurement operations along with the expenditures under PSF are also 
constantly reviewed by the PSFMC." 
 
 
{(
Department of Consumer Affairs  
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.N-13/10/2016-P&C )} 
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.39) 
 
2.3 "The Committee furthermore note that unspent balances under Consumer 
Protection Unit as on 01.04.2014 and 01.04.2015 stand at Rs. 34.14 crore and 
Rs. 59.53 crore respectively. This is reportedly due to non-settlement of 
utilization certificates in respect of previous year’s grants. The Committee find 
that between these two years, unspent balances increased by about Rs. 15 
crore. They desire the Department to take up this matter of unspent balances 
and non-receipt of utilizations certificates earnestly with all concerned States to 
rectify the anomalous situation. They are of the firm view that rising unspent 
balances would result in lesser allocations in succeeding years which in turn 
would weaken the consumer movement in the form of monitoring pendency of 
cases etc. They desire to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 The Department of Consumer Affairs has been writing to the State 
Governments from time to time to utilise the grants already released and to 
furnish utilisation certificates along with fresh proposals for further financial 
assistance. In the Regional Consultation Meetings with the State Governments 
the representatives of the State Governments are impressed upon furnishing the 
utilisation certificates in respect of the grants released. The officers of the level of 
Director/Deputy Secretary have also been visiting different States to discuss the 
problems faced by the State Governments in the implementation of the schemes 
and to review the utilisation position of the grants. 
   
{(Department of Consumer Affairs  
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.N-13/10/2016-P&C )} 

 
 
17 
 
Co
mments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.19 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.73) 
 
2.5     "The Committee note that the Price Stabilization Fund which was a plan 
scheme earlier implemented by Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and 
Farmers Welfare has been transferred to the Department of Consumer Affairs 
w.e.f. 1/4/2016 and Rs. 900 crore have been allotted for the scheme during the 
year 2016-17. This scheme is primarily aimed to support market interventions for 
price control of perishable agrohorticultural commodities. The Committee further 
note that this price stabilization fund is used to advance interest free loans to 
State Governments and Central agencies to support their working capital and 
other expenses on procurement and distribution interventions of such 
commodities. For this purpose, the States will set up revolving fund to which 
Centre and States will contribute equally at the ratio of 50:50 whereas in respect 
of North East States the ratio will be 75:25. The fund is to be used for price 
stabilization operation for onion, potato and pulses. The Committee also note that 
the procurement of these commodities will be undertaken directly from farmers or 
farmers' organisations at farm gate/Mandis and made available at a more 
reasonable price to the consumers. Losses incurred, if any, in the operations will 
be shared between Center and States. 
 
They also note that the Department has been taking certain measures to 
keep a check on traders and importers/exporters to monitor prices of essential 
commodities such as pulses and onions etc. to arrest speculative tendencies in 
the markets. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of 
Consumer Affairs in coordination with the other Central Government Agencies 
and State Governments to ward off speculative tendencies and excessive 
profiteering by traders and ensure that essential commodities required for the 
common man is made available in a timely and efficient manner." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 In this regard, the recent steps taken in case of pulses are as below:- 
• Set up a mechanism for regular monitoring and exchange of information 
on hoarding, cartelization etc. amongst the concerned agencies. 
• Strict vigilance by the Government to prevent importers from mis-using the 
facilities of Customs Bonded Warehouse facility.  
• Action as per law is being taken against unscrupulous importers, traders 
and financiers engaged in pulses trade. 

 
 
18 
• T
ur and Urad from the buffer are also being allocated at subsidized rates  
(Rs 66/- per kg for Tur and Rs 82/- per kg for Urad) to the States/UTs  and 
the Central Agencies for retailing at not more than Rs 120/- per kg 
• Aggressive media campaign is also being undertaken to highlight the 
steps being undertaken by the Government mentioned above. 
 
{(Department of Consumer Affairs 
 (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
 O.M. No.N-13/10/2016-P&C )} 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.77) 
 
2.7 "The Committee note that the Department has been allocated Rs. 115.00 
crore in BE of 2016-17 against the Actual Expenditure of Rs. 10.00 crore only 
last year under the scheme Consumer Cooperatives and Subsidies. The 
Committee further note that the funds are allocated for the purpose of 
reimbursing upto 15% of the actual losses for import of pulses undertaken by 
NAFED, PEC, STC and MMTC and supplied to domestic markets during the 
years 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11. The percentage of reimbursement has 
since been increased upto 20% of losses and the vetted claim amount 
outstanding for reimbursement to the PSUs is Rs. 178.00 crore, out of which 
Rs.63.00 crore has since been reimbursed to the designated agencies. The 
Committee note that during last year certain Central Public Undertakings like 
MMTC and STC had suffered losses on account of import of pulses and these 
undertakings were reimbursed up to 20% losses after duly vetting of their 
accounts by Government agencies. The Committee desire that these PSUs and 
other Agencies are doing market intervention on the direction of the Government 
and hence need all support and should be adequately compensated for losses 
incurred in such activities. The Committee note that last year namely 2015-16 
was drought year and would caution the Department of Consumer Affairs to be 
well prepared for the current year and take all necessary actions including 
building of buffer stocks of essential commodities. The Committee hope that the 
Department would utilize the BE amount fully and liquidate the outstanding 
amounts at the earliest." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 "With respect to the vetted pending arrears of Rs 178 crores of the PSUs 
toward losses incurred on import of pulses, Rs 63 crores was released to the 
designated agencies during 2015-16. The balance of Rs 115 crores has also 
been reimbursed to the designated agencies from the allocation of Rs 115 crores 
from BE 2016-17. Department of Consumer Affairs through PSF has supported 
the procurement of 17,747 MT of onions as on 12.7.2016 for appropriate market 
intervention during the lean season. Also, 50,422.5 MT of Kharif pulses and 
69000 MT of Rabi pulses have already been procured toward building the buffer 

 
 
19 
stock 
of pulses. In addition, import of 48,500 MT of pulses has already been 
contracted as on 11.7.2016." 
 
{(
Department of Consumer Affairs 
 (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
 O.M. No.N-13/10/2016-P&C ) 
  

 
 
20 
CH
APTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S 
 REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.4) 
 
3.1 "The Committee note that the Action Taken Replies regarding the action 
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Fourth Report of the Committee were furnished by the Government on 10 
August, 2015 though the Report on Demand for Grants were presented to the 
House on 27 April, 2015 and the Statement of the Minister under Direction 73-A 
was made in Lok Sabha on 22 December, 2015 and Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18 
December, 2015. An analysis of the Action Taken  Notes revealed that the 
Government has accepted 50% Recommendations of the Committee. The 
Committee did not desire to pursue 16.67% Recommendations. 16.67% 
Recommendations have not been accepted by the Government thus requiring 
reiteration. Replies in case of 16.67% Recommendations are of interim nature. 
The Committee desire the Department to inform them the status of 
implementation of the recommendations which were of interim nature and those 
in respect of which the replies have not been accepted by the Committee at the 
earliest." 
 
Reply of the Government 
3.2 "Final action taken by the Government on the 16.67% recommendations 
at S.No. 1 and 4, that were not accepted by the Committee have been furnished 
to the Committee vide this Department’s O.M. no N-13/6/2015 dated 10th 
November 2015. Also, final action taken by the Government for the 16.67% 
recommendations at S.No. 7 and 10, that were interim in nature have been 
furnished to the Committee vide this Department’s O.M. of even no.s dated 
13/06/2015." 
   
{(
Department of Consumer Affairs  
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
 O.M. No.N-13/10/2016-P&C )} 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.56) 
 
3.3 "The Committee note that a plan scheme for construction of laboratory 
building is under implementation at three regional centres of National Test House 
at Mumbai, Jaipur and Chennai with a view to creating more space for expansion 
of the existing Test Facilities at NTH(WR), Mumbai. A G+4 Phase II building was 
conceived during 12th Five Year Plan with an estimated cost of 25.26 crore as 
prepared by CPWD (WZ), the construction of the building was initiated in the 
year 2013-14. Out of the allocation of Rs.12.88 crore over a period 2013-14 to 

 
 
21 
2015-16 
authorized to CPWD, an amount of Rs.7.12 crore could be utilized. The 
building is expected to be completed by the financial year 2016-17 subject to 
availability of sufficient fund under the major Plan Head "Land & Building". 
Similarly, construction of one additional floor over the existing Laboratory 
Building at NTH (NWR), Jaipur was conceived during the 12th Five Year Plan 
with a view to expanding the existing test facilities for based appliances, Testing 
for Food and Packaged Drinking Water. Construction was initiated in the year 
2013-14 but much of the allocated funds could not be utilized by CPWD for some 
tender related issues. So far, Rs.2.16 crore has been utilized by CPWD (NWZ) 
and the building is on the verge of completion. Further, construction of the 
Impulse Voltage Laboratories at NTH(SR), Chennai was conceived during the 
12th Five Year Plan with a view to create facilities for Testing of High Voltage 
Line Materials. The construction was initiated during the year 2014-15. During 
the year 2015-16 the construction process was hampered largely due to the 
Natural Calamity that occurred in Tamil Nadu.   Rs. 141.00 crore has been 
utilized by CPWD for this purpose. 
 
The Committee note that the requirement of funds projected for BE     
2016-17   (Rs.15.00 crore) for construction of the new buildings (Jaipur Rs. 1.00 
crore, Mumbai Rs. 11.00 crore and Chennai Rs. 3.00 crore) of the total 
requirement of Rs. 15.00 crore an allocation of Rs. 4.03 crore only was approved 
by Ministry of Finance. Accordingly, the internal distribution for construction 
activities got reduced – Rs. 0.50 crore to NTH Jaipur for completion of electrical 
works, Rs. 2.00 crore for NTH, Mumbai and Rs. 1.52 crore to NTH Chennai. 
 
The Committee feel that the pace of construction by CPWD is very slow 
and there is lack of coordination between the two Departments. Further there is 
huge gap of Rs. 10.97 crore between the requirement and final allocation for BE 
2016-17. Since current year is the last year of 12th Five Year Plan and at some 
places most of the work has been completed by the Agency, it should, therefore, 
be decided with the coordination of CPWD as to how much work could be 
completed by them and accordingly Ministry of Finance be approached for higher 
allocation of funds for this purpose. The Committee recommend that adequate 
funds be allocated for the purpose so that funds spent earlier for construction of 
laboratories could be utilized for testing services for consumers. Further all 
efforts should be made to locate savings from within the overall capital Budget of 
the Department. They also desire that these constructions should be completed 
in the current fiscal year. 
 
The Committee are also happy to note the effort of the Department for 
Green Power generation by installing of 100 KW Roof Top Solar Power Project 
on the roof of the NTH salt lake building which would help in saving some funds 
towards charges for electricity consumption. The Committee desire the 
Department to replicate this effort of generating Green Power at other places 
particularly where new construction is being undertaken or envisaged in the near 
future." 
 
 
 

 
 
22 
Repl
y of the Government 
3.4  
 
 CO-ORDINATION WITH CPWD: 
 
T
o increase the Co-ordination between National Test House & CPWD, 
one Nodal Officer has been appointed by DG-NTH from each Regional Centre. 
The Nodal Officers are responsible to regularly Co-ordinate with the CPWD 
authorities and monitor the progress of the Constructions. They also Co-ordinate 
with the Local Authorities and try to resolve issues arising in connection with the 
constructions. 
 
Regional In-Charges regularly hold meetings with the CPWD authorities 
and are trying to resolve issues which may hinder the progress of the work.  
 DG-NTH regularly visits the Regional Centres to review the performance 
of the Regions. He holds meetings with Higher Officers of the Respective centres 
of NTh and  Senior Officer of the CPWD to review the progress of construction 
and resolve issues related to the constructions, with in the powers vested in him. 
NTH interacts with Department of Consumer Affairs regularly (DoCA) to appraise 
the progress and issues requiring intervention of the competent authority of the 
Department. 
 
 The collective effect of the efforts have resulted into a significant development in 
the Pace of the construction. 
 
 
 ALLOCATION OF ADDITIONAL FUNDS.
 
 
T
here is a huge Gap between the Fund Allocated in the Financial Year of     
2016-17 and that of the demand raised by the CPWD authorities. 
 
The Total demand of CPWD for 2016-17 is  around Rs.22 crore whereas 
allocation is of Rs. 4 crore only. It will hamper the work and leave it incomplete. 
 
 CPWD Authorities of Jaipur, Chennai & Mumbai have indicated that the 
Construction may be completed within the current financial year of 2016-17 
provided the demand of funds raised by them should be provided at the earliest.  
 
Since, this is ongoing programme as approved for 12th Plan, the Department has 
projected demand of Rs. 19.62 crores through Ministry of Finance for 
enhancement of allocation by way of Supplementary Demand for Grants      
2016-17.    
 
 
 SAVINGS OF FUND FROM THE OVERALL CAPITAL BUDGET:
 
 
 NTH 
is allocated two types of grant under Capital Budget. One is for 
procurement of Machinery & Equipment and the other is for Construction of 

 
 
23 
Laboratory
 Buildings. Procurement of Machinery & Equipment is directly linked 
with the Revenue Earning of NTH and the  available fund of Rs.5.80 crore 
under this Plan Head in 2016-17 is not enough  to full-fill the gap in testing 
facilities and creation of new facilities. As a result, there is little scope for any 
savings from this particular capital head. 
  
2. NTH has requested for additional allocation of Rs.1.75 crore under the 
Head Machinery & Equipment during the year of 2016-17. The request of NTH 
for allocation of funds has been submitted to the Ministry of Finance through 1st 
Batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants for the year 2016-17. 
 
The efforts of generating Green power at other branches/laboratories particularly 
at Ghaziabad and Jaipur have been made by NTH. The inspection of the site has 
already been carried out by the agencies nominated for this purpose. The following 
Table shows the available Capacity of NTH for Generating Roof-Top Solar PV 
Power and action taken, so far, in this regard. 
Name of 
the 
Region 
Available 
roof Top 
Area in sq. 
m 
(23aprox..)
 
Appro
ximate 
Solar Power 
that can be 
generated 
( kWp ) 
Wor
k undertaken 
by /Inspection 
carried out by 
Work started on and 
present status // 
Date of inspection 
NT
H 
(ER), 
Salt 
Lake, 
Kolkata 
1000 100 
 
M/s Bluearth 
  
Ene
rgy Pvt. Ltd., 
Patna (as per 
directives of 
SECI) 
 
 
Installation & commissioning 
is completed. The Agreement 
to be signed jointly by 
DISCOM & NTH. The final 
connectivity to the “Net 
Metering” will be carried out 
shortly. 
NT
H 
(NR), 
Ghaziaba
d 
1859 
 
100 
 
Inspection 
carried out by 
M/s CEL, 
Sahibabad. As 
per the minutes 
of the meeting 
only Roof Top 
Area can be used 
for generating 
approximate 100 
kWp. 
Inspected on 28/04/2016 
NT
H 
(NWR), 
Jaipur 
1500 
 
50 
 
Inspection 
carried out by 
M/s REIL, 
Jaipur. As per the 
discussion the 
Official of REIL 
has stated that 
Inspected on 28/04/2016 

 
 
24 
a
pproximately 50 
kWp can be 
generated from 
the Roof Top 
only. 
NT
H 
(WR), 
Mumbai 
1367 
(916 will be 
available on 
completion 
of new 
building) 
100 
 
(Subject to 
inspection) 
  
NT
H 
(SR), 
Chennai 
2000 160 
(Subject to 
inspection)
 
  
NT
H 
(NER), 
Guwahati 
856 60 
(Subject to 
inspection) 
 Propo
sed to be 
set up within the 
available Plan 
Fund of NTH 
under ME 
(Plan) 2016-17  
 
NT
H 
(ER), 
Alipore, 
Kolkata 
4100 300 
(Subject to 
inspection) 
  
 
NTH has appo
inted the Nodal Officer to coordinate with DoCA. 
  {(
Department of Consumer Affairs  
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
 O.M. No.N-13/10/2016-P&C )} 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.83) 
 
3.5 "The committee note that the Department of Consumer Affairs grants 
funds to Voluntary Consumer Organizations (VCOs)/NGOs for undertaking 
comparative testing of products and services so as to provide consumers with 
unbiased information that will enable them to make rational choice, raise public 
awareness regarding quality and safety, educate customers about the product 
amongst the many in the market fulfilling their needs, draw public attention to 
unsafe and unfair trade practices and verify claims made by different brands 
against relevant national standard for the product etc. 
 
The Committee note the VOICE Society, New Delhi was sanctioned Rs. 
40 lakhs during 2014 for undertaking comparative testing of 6 products and 2 
services with the objective of disseminating empirical data. VOICE Society had 

 
 
25 
conducted 
comparative testing of packaged milk, honey, mixed fruit jam, besan, 
rice bran oil and broad band service evaluation etc. and the results have been 
disseminated through the website of VOICE Society and to the magazine 
Consumer Voice. Similarly, the Committee note that Dr. Ambedkar Law 
University, Chennai was sanctioned an amount of Rs. 94 lakhs for five years 
from 2011 to 2016 to achieve certain objectives, dissemination of knowledge of 
law with reference to consumer advocacy and Advertisement Standards Council 
of India (ASCI), New Delhi have been sanctioned Rs. 10 lakhs during 2015 for 
resolving complaints on misleading and false advertisements. The Committee 
has also noted that CERC, Ahmedabad has been released an amount of Rs. 20 
lakhs during 2015-16. 
 
The Committee note that such initiatives by the Ministry to encourage 
VCOs/NGOs to take up consumer awareness and consumer protection issues 
among the citizens in different parts of the country is a welcome step and more 
such initiatives and funding to different VCOs in diverse fields of consumer 
interest may be taken up. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
strictly monitor the performance of the VCOs in attainment of the objectives for 
which the funds are given to them in the areas of consumer awareness and 
consumer protection." 
 
Reply of the Government 
3.6 "Recommendations of Standing Committee have been noted. Grants were 
issued to the VCOs as per Guidelines of Consumer Welfare Fund and 
recommendation of Standing Committee. The implementation of activities for 
which funds granted are monitored regularly through audit and periodic review 
meetings conducted at various levels." 
 
 
{(Department of Consumer Affairs 
 (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution)  
O.M. No.N-13/10/2016-P&C )} 
 

 
 
26 
CH
APTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.38) 
 
4.1 "The Committee note that as on 29.02.2016 the percentage of disposal of 
cases at the National, State and District Fora stands at 89.76%, 86.11% and 
92.21% respectively with a total 395129 pending cases and overall percentage of 
disposals at 91.20%. They are further constrained to note that out of 657 District 
Fora, 626 are functional as on 31.12.2015 and 86 posts of President and 252 
posts of members are vacant in different fora as on 29.02.2016. They strongly 
feel that the vacancies need to be filled up in a time bound manner which would 
go a long way in reducing the pendency position. The 
Committee find that though the performance of the consumer fora in the country 
is more or less satisfactory as per records, however, they are constrained to 
observe that 
the grievances of consumers in various sectors of the economy are not being 
adequately addressed. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department 
should urge upon the State Commission/District Fora to make every effort to 
dispose of the pending cases with them at the earliest.  
 
The Committee further note that timely justice is essential for the 
consumers and disposal of cases in a reasonable time would inspire the 
confidence of consumers to get their grievances redressed by the various 
consumer fora and strengthen the consumer movement in the country. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department of Consumer 
Affairs should strictly monitor the disposal of cases at regular intervals and offer 
necessary guidance to State and District Fora in expediting the disposal of 
cases." 
  
Reply of the Government 
4.2 "As per the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, it is the 
responsibility of the State/UT Governments to fill up the vacancies of President 
and Member in the State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissions (State 
Commissions and the District Consumer Disputes Redressal Fora (District Fora). 
The Central Government has been writing to the State/UT Governments from 
time to time to take advance action for filling up of the vacancies. This matter has 
also been taken up with the Chief Ministers of all States at the level of the 
Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution. 
 As per the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, the National 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (NCDRC) has administrative control 
over the State Commissions and District Fora with regard to calling for periodical 
return regarding the institution, disposal, pendency of cases. The NCDRC is also 
empowered to generally overseeing the functioning of the State Commissions 

 
 
27 
and
 District Fora to ensure that the objects and purposes of the Act are best 
served without any way interfering with their quasi-judicial freedom.  
 
In addition to above, the Central Government has been holding National 
Conferences and regional Consultation Meetings with the Presidents of the State 
Commissions and the State Governments where the matter regarding disposal of 
cases are reviewed and they are impressed upon for expediting disposal of 
pending cases." 
  
{(Department of Consumer Affairs  
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
 O.M. No.N-13/10/2016-P&C )} 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter - I of the Report) 

 
 
28 
CH
APTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.11) 
 
5.1 "The Committee note that one of the important functions of the 
Department of Consumer Affairs is protection of consumer interest/welfare and 
the scheme of consumer awareness is a step in that direction. With a population 
of more than 120 crore people, the job of creating consumer awareness will be a 
challenging task more so with the diversities on account of language, socio-
economic profile, gender and demographic profile of the country. The 
Department has been carrying out 'Jago Grahak Jago' campaign on various 
issues relating to consumer rights and responsibilities across diverse subjects. 
The Committee also note that the Department has recently launched 'Joint 
Publicity Campaigns' in key sectors like health, Food, Finance service in 
partnership with other related Government Departments/Organizations like Food 
Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), Reserve Bank of India (RBI), 
National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority (NPPA) etc. These joint campaigns 
are made through various electronic and print media such as television, radio, 
news papers and outdoor advertisements. The Committee appreciate the 
Department for taking several steps to create awareness of consumers. 
 
The Committee note that the BE for 2016-17 has been fixed at Rs. 60.00 
crore. The Committee, however, are dismayed to note that even after utilizing the 
budget fully during 2015-16, the Department has not been given increased funds 
under this scheme. The Committee understand the challenges of the Department 
in spreading consumer awareness among people and are of the view that a 
sustained national campaign is required to educate the consumers about their 
rights and welfare. The Committee further note that under this scheme, the 
Department also releases funds to States for educating consumers based on 
awareness programmes on local themes and other advertisements in local 
exhibitions, street plays, cultural functions etc. to educate the citizens about 
consumer rights. The Committee are of the firm view that the scheme of 
consumer awareness should be further strengthened for which allocation of more 
funds is required to extend the spread of scheme to various parts of the country 
so that citizens are aware about their rights and the mechanism available for 
redressal of their grievances or complaints they suffer from. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should approach the Ministry of 
Finance for increased allocations for the scheme at the RE stage. They be 
apprised of the steps taken in this regard with outcome thereof." 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
29 
 
Repl
y of the Government 
 
5.2 "At the time of Revised Estimates, Ministry of Finance would be 
approached for more funds for Consumer Awareness Campaign." 
 
{(Department of Consumer Affairs 
 (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
 O.M. N-13/10/2016-P&C dated.)} 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.37) 
 
5.3 "The Committee note that the Department of Consumer Affairs 
administers Consumer Protection Act, 1986. Under Consumer Protection Unit 
various schemes/projects are being implemented to improve the functioning of 
consumer fora. A scheme for Strengthening Consumer Fora Phase-II, a scheme 
for Computerization and Networking namely CONFONET, State Consumer 
Helplines are some of the important programmes being implemented under 
Consumer Protection Unit. The Budget allocated under this scheme during the 
year 2016-17 is Rs. 34.00 crore. The Committee note that during 2015-16, the  
Department had allocated Rs. 45.00 crore for Consumer Protection Schemes 
and incurred actual expenditure of Rs. 31.54 crore (upto 31.01.2016) indicating a 
utilization of 70.08%. The Committee are disappointed to further note that the 
allocations under the scheme for 2016-17 has been reduced to Rs. 34.00 crore 
against RE of Rs. 45.00 crore out of which Rs. 31.54 crore was spent. The 
Committee are of the view that Consumer Protection is a very important 
component of the Department of Consumer Affairs and the strengthening of 
various consumer for a envisaged under this scheme needs to be fully supported 
with adequate funds. They, therefore, recommend that the Department should 
seek additional funds under this scheme, during the course of the year from the 
Ministry the Finance. They desire to be apprised of the outcome of the efforts 
made in this direction." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.4 "The Department has diligently noted the recommendations of the 
honorable Committee that the additional fund should be sought under the Plan 
Schemes at the RE stage for the current financial year and will be acted upon at 
appropriate point of time. In this regard, it is also being considered to strengthen 
of the existing scheme and seek funds for product testing laboratories, 
establishing of consumer studies and research cells in the next three years for 
which budgetary support will be requested." 
 
 

 
 
30 
{(
Department of Consumer Affairs 
 (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
 O.M. N-13/10/2016-P&C dated.)} 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.40) 
 
5.5 "The Committee note that the scheme of Computerization and Computer 
Networking of Consumer Fora in the country (CONFONET) was launched in 
March, 2005. Under the scheme, the consumer fora at all the 3 tiers were to be 
fully computerized to enable access to information and quicker disposal of cases. 
Hardware, software and technical manpower are provided to the Consumer 
Forum. An On-line Case Monitoring System Application has also been 
developed. 
  
The Committee note that against the target of 613 for computerization during 
2015-16, hardware had been supplied to 586, manpower was provided to 595 
and 526 consumer foras are using on-line case management system. The 
Committee observe that in this age of computerization and with the Government 
initiative for Digital India, the Department should take up the computerization of 
consumer fora in right earnest and complete them quickly so that the entire 
consumer movement would get a fillip to its activities. The Department should 
also conduct a thorough review of the last ten years' efforts that were gone into 
the scheme by an independent evaluation agency and complete computerization 
of the remaining consumer fora in a time bound manner preferably by 2018-19. 
 
The Committee note that for using the On-line Case Management System 
Application, internet connectivity is required at the Consumer Forum. However, 
due to certain technical problems in Uttarakhand, the computers are yet to be 
installed. The Committee note that similarly there are internet connectivity 
problems in Assam, Bihar and North-Eastern States. The Committee recommend 
that the Department should hold review meetings with concerned States and 
such issues be resolved at the earliest so that the On-line Case Management 
System can be used by all Consumer For a uninterruptedly." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.6 "As on 27th June’2016, new set of hardware has been supplied at 598 
consumer fora (NCDRC, 34 State Commissions & 563 District Consumer fora) 
during 12th plan period under Confonet Scheme. Manpower has been provided 
at 596 field locations where Hardware was supplied.  
 
For supplying hardware and deployment of technical manpower in the 
Consumer Fora, NIC requests the State Governments/ State Commissions 

 
 
31 
(throug
h NIC State coordinators) to provide list of locations, their postal address, 
contact details of nodal officers and site readiness confirmation for the delivery 
and timely installation of the hardware. For want of these details it has not been 
possible to computerize some of the Consumer Fora. The Department wrote to 
the Secretaries of Consumer Affairs of all the States/UTs in March, 2015 to 
provide the list of balance locations, if any, where new set of hardware and 
manpower is required under the scheme. In May, 2016, Deputy Director General 
(NIC) wrote to the states where some locations were left to be covered under 
Confonet. Recently, the Secretaries of Consumer Affairs in the States have been 
requested to ensure availability of internet connection for successful 
implementation of the Confonet scheme. 
 
The suggestion of the Committee to conduct a thorough review of the last 
ten years’ efforts that were gone into the scheme by an independent evaluation 
agency has been noted and action is being taken in this regard." 
 
 
{(
Department of Consumer Affairs 
 (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
 O.M. N-13/10/2016-P&C dated.)} 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.22 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.46) 
 
5.7 "  The Committee note that the Legal Metrology Division of the Department 
of Consumer Affairs oversees the implementation of the Legal Metrology Act, 
2009 which is aimed to safeguard the interest of consumers to get the correct 
quantity for the price charged by ensuring use of the correct, tested, calibrated 
and certified weights and measures. The Legal Metrology Rules mandate certain 
consumer-friendly declarations like the name and address of the manufacturer/ 
packer, the name of the commodity, the net quantity, the MRP, the month and 
year of manufacture/packing etc. The Committee hope that the funds allotted to 
the scheme 'Weights and Measures' during the year 2016-17 of Rs. 16.45 crore 
at BE would be judiciously utilized by the Department with the objective of 
achieving the set goal. 
 
The Committee note that certain procedural difficulties are being faced by 
the Legal Metrology Division in implementation of its schemes like non-
finalization of tenders by DGS&D and non-utilization of funds by CPWD for 
construction/renovation of buildings etc. The Committee are unhappy at such 
delays and the reasons furnished are not satisfactory and convincing and require 
intervention by senior officials in the Department of Consumer Affairs and Legal 
Metrology Division. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all irritant issues 
be sorted out with DGS&D and CPWD should hold regular interactions with 
DGS&D and ensure that the requirements of the Legal Metrology Division are 

 
 
32 
ma
de available and the infrastructure is set up as envisaged in the plans in a 
time bound manner. They desire the Department to closely monitor the progress 
of implementation." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.8 "The issues will be sorted out with DGS&D and CPWD. Regular 
interactions will be held with DGS&D to ensure the requirements of the Legal 
Metrology Division and to setup the infrastructure as envisaged in the plans in a 
time bound manner. The Department will closely monitor the progress of 
implementation and will make every sincere effort to get the funds utilised by the 
DGS&D.  
 Concerted efforts were made for procurement of standards equipments 
with DGS&D by way of meeting with senior officers of DGS&D and sending 
regular letters asking the status of the indents and tenders floated by them.  A 
copy of some of the letters issued to DGS&D is at Annexure-A.  The possibility 
of floating of e-tenders by this Department itself is also under consideration.   
 
 Also efforts were made with State Government and CPWD for 
establishment of two new RRSLs at Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh and Nagpur, 
Maharashtra.  Meetings with CPWD officers were also called.  A copy of minute 
of meeting and letters is at Annexure-B.." 
 
 
{(
Department of Consumer Affairs 
 (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
 O.M. N-13/10/2016-P&C dated.)} 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.25 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.68) 
 
5.9 "  The Committee note that there are two schemes under implementation 
by the  Department of Consumer Affairs namely Hallmarking Scheme for setting 
up of Gold Assaying & Hallmarking centres and National System for 
Standardization Scheme to promote the standardization at national and 
international level. The Committee feel that the 373 Assaying & Hallmarking 
centres in the country as on date are unable to meet the expectations of the 
consumers. There are two components of the hallmarking schemes namely 
Infrastructure Building and Capacity Building. Under infrastructure building, one 
time financial assistance for setting up of gold assaying and hallmarking centres 
where no such centre exist, 30% to private entrepreneurs and 50% to PSUs is 
provided. However, the same increases to 50% to private entrepreneurs and 
70% to PSUs in case of North East States. Under the component of capacity 

 
 
33 
building
, training programmes like Artisan Training, A&H Personnel Training and 
BIS Officers Training are conducted. 
 
 
 The Committee are concerned with the less than satisfactory working of 
A&H sector as these sectors do not seem to have made much of a difference to 
the consumers in purchase of gold. The Committee have observed during their 
study tour last year to Udaipur A&H centre that proper testings are not being 
done before hallmark seal are made available for the gold which needs to be 
ensured by BIS/Department of Consumer Affairs very strictly. This scheme needs 
appropriate monitoring and regular testing of samples from the centres. The 
Committee are of the considered view that the consumers should have the 
benefit of hallmark gold not only at the time of buying but also at a time of selling. 
At present, there seems to be no benefit for a seller if he sells a hallmark or non-
hallmark gold which fetches a similar value. The Committee would expect the 
Department of Consumer Affairs to review the functioning of hallmarking scheme 
and take necessary steps to improve its functioning among the consumers and 
traders.  
 
 The Committee further view that this is a good scheme and needs proper 
implementation by the Department of Consumer Affairs and therefore 
recommend that the Department conduct a thorough review of the functioning of 
the scheme as well as A&H centres immediately by an independent external 
evaluator in a time bound manner and take corrective action wherever required 
as suggested by the reviewing agency. They would like to be apprised of the 
action taken on this aspect at an early date." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
34 
Repl
y of the Government 
 
5.10 "Possibilities of getting desired study done by a government agency on 
nomination basis are being explored. ‘Indian Institute of Public Administration’ 
has been contacted as they have done a similar study for BIS in the past. 
 
 As soon as the project of evaluation study is completed and its report 
becomes available, necessary action will be taken accordingly." 
 
 
{(
Department of Consumer Affairs 
 (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) 
 O.M. N-13/10/2016-P&C dated.)} 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.28 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELH
I;                    J.C. DIVAKAR REDDY, 
9 January, 2017                                      Chairperson, 
19 Pausha, 1938(Saka)                                       Standing Committee on Food, 
   Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 

 
 
35 
A
NNEXURE  A 
 
 
 

 
 
36 
 

 
 
37 
 

 
 
38 
 

 
 
39 
 

 
 
40 
 

 
 
41 
 

 
 
42 
 

 
 
43 
 

 
 
44 
A
NNEXURE  B 
 
 

 
 
45 
 
 
 

 
 
46 
 

 
 
47 
 

 
 
48 
 

 
 
49 
 

 
 
50 
 

 
 
51 
 
 

 
 
52 
 

 
 
53 
 

 
 
54 
 

 
 
55 
 
 
A
PPENDIX  I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2016-17) HELD 
ON MONDAY, 9 JANUARY, 2017 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1145 hrs. in Committee Room No. 
‘53’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri J.C. Divakar Reddy  - Chairperson  
 
Members
 
 
Lo
k Sabha 
 
2. Shri Bab
u Lal Choudhary 
3. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
4. Shri Dinesh Kashyap 
5. Shri Dharmendra Kumar 
6. Shri Ravinder Kushawaha 
7. Smt. Sakuntala Laguri 
8. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
9. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
10. Shri Ram Chander Paswan 
11. Shri Bhola Singh 
12. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13. Shri Sha
di Lal Batra 
14. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1. Shri P
.V.L.N. Murthy  - Joint Secretary 
 

 
 
56 
 
2. At 
the start of the meeting, only three members were present. The 
Chairperson decided to wait for the members. After few minutes, other members 
started coming. After completion of the quorum, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed 
the Members to the sitting of the Committee convened for consideration and 
adoption of the Draft Reports on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the 10
th a
nd 11 th R
eports of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution pertaining to the (i) Department of Food and 
Public Distribution, and (ii) Department of Consumer Affairs.  
 
3. Thereafter the Committee took up for consideration the Draft Reports. 
After due deliberations, the Committee unanimously adopted the said two Action 
Taken Reports without any amendment/modification. 
 
4.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid 
Draft Reports and present the same to Parliament in the ensuing Budget Session 
of Parliament. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
********* 
 

 
 
57 
  
A
PPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Par
a No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
A
NALYSIS  OF THE  ACTION  TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ELEVENTH REPORT  
OF  THE  STANDING  COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION (2015-16) 
(SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
   
(i) T
otal number of Recommendations:        13 
 
(ii) Observ
ations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government : 
 
 Para Nos.
:- 2.8, 3.39, 3.73, 3.77. 
    
          (Chapter – II, Total - 4) 
Percentage : 30.76% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government 
 
Para Nos. 1.4, 3.56, 3.83. 
                     (Chapter – III, Total - 3) 
Percentage : 23.07% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
Para No. 3.38 
 
            (Chapter – IV, Total -1)   
Percentage : 7.70% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
interim replies of the Government have been received. 
    
   Para No.:- 3.11, 3.37, 3.40, 3.46 and 3.68 
  
    (Chapter – V, Total - 5) 
Percentage : 38.47% 
  
 