(i) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
               AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2020-2021) 
 
       
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the observations/ recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report of the Committee   (2019-2020) on Demands for 
Grants (2020-21) pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
8 


(ii) 
 
 EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2020-2021) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the observations/ recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report of the Committee          (2019-2020) on Demands for 
Grants (2020-21) pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on10.02.2021  
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 10.02.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
   February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 


(iii) 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Composition of the Committee ……………………………………… IV 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………... V 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………… 
 
1 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
  accepted by Government…………………………… 27 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
   Government’s replies………………………………... 
50 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted  
  by the Committee ……………………………………… 
51 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of Government are  
  still awaited……………………………………………… 
52 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held   on 
16.12.2020......................................................... ...      
 
53 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Fourth Report  
of the Committee (2020-2021) ………………………..           
55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(iv) 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution  (2020-2021):- 
 
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay, Chairperson  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Karadi Sanganna Amarappa 
4. Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat 
5. Shri G. S. Basavaraj 
6. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
7. Ms. Pratima Bhoumik 
8. Shri Anil Firojiya 
9. Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit  
10. Shri Bhagwant Mann  
11. Shri Khagen Murmu  
12. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai (Bakabhai) Patel  
13. Shri Subrat Pathak 
14. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari  
15. Smt. Himadri Singh 
16. Smt. Kavita Singh  
17. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
18. Shri Ajay Misra Teni  
19. Shri Saptagiri Ulaka  
20. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
21. Shri Ve.Vaithilingam 
 
Rajya  Sabha 
 
22. Smt. Shanta Chhetri 
23. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
24. Smt. Roopa Ganguly 
25. Shri K. G. Kenye 
26. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
27. Smt. M. C. Mary Kom 
28. Shri Rajmani Patel  
29. Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
30. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
31. Vacant 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Pawan Kumar         - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Lovekesh Kumar Sharma   - Director 
3. Shri G. Guite       - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Dong Lianthang Tonsing - Under Secretary 

(v) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution (2020-2021) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this 8th Report on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Committee 
(2019-2020) on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
 
2.  The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 13th 
March, 2020. The Government has furnished replies indicating Action Taken on the 
recommendations contained in the Report on 19th June, 2020. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
16.12.2020. 
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.  
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Comments of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the text of the Report. 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
NEW DELHI;            SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY 
16 December, 2020                               Chairperson, 
25 Agrahayana, 1942 (Saka)                             Standing Committee on Food, 
           Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution  

1 
 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER - I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the 
Committee (2019-2020), (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2020-21), 
pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs). 
 
1.2 The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table in 
Rajya Sabha on 13th March, 2020. It contained 20 observations/ 
recommendations. Action taken replies in respect of all the 20 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report have been received and 
these have been categorized as follows:- 
 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
Government : 
 
Para Nos.: 1.10, 2.10, 2.11, 2.17, 2.25, 2.32, 2.42, 2.43, 2.55, 
2.56, 2.68, 2.69, 2.70, 2.76, 2.87, 2.97, 2.98 and 
2.109. 
   
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’ replies : 
  
 Para Nos.:  2.24. 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
  of Government have not been accepted by the Committee : 
 
Para No.: Nil 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited :  
 
   Para No. : 2.26. 
 

2 
 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I and final reply in respect 
of recommendation for which only interim reply has been given by the 
Government, should be furnished to the Committee expeditiously.  
1.4 The Committee further emphasize that utmost importance should be given 
to the implementation of Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In case where it is not possible for the Government to implement 
the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee in time with reasons for non-implementation. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
the observations/recommendations. 
 
A.    Budget Utilization 
 
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No 1.10)  
1.6 The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that Budget Estimates (BE), Revised Estimates (RE) and Actual 
Expenditure (AE) during the year 2019-20 were Rs. 229182 lakh, Rs.206950 lakh and 
Rs.17397 lakh respectively, which means that only 8.4 per cent of the Revised 
Estimates was actually spent. While the spending pattern of the non-Scheme funds as 
proportion to RE was 70.55% of the RE, the actual expenditure of Scheme fund as 
proportion to the RE is 4.12%. The Committee are also concerned to note the lack of 
uniformity of spending pattern across the schemes/heads. For example, during the 
year 2019-20, 73% of RE for Consumer Protection (CP) and 72.8% of RE for 
Consumer Awareness & Publicity have actually been spent. Similarly, there are poor 

3 
 
spendings in Weights & Measures (W&M) and National Test House (NTH) which are 
59.3% and of 56.3% of RE respectively. The Ministry have stated that the prevailing 
and anticipated market scenario being dynamic has been responsible for “non-uniform 
spending pattern”. Also stoppage of campaign through the Doordarshan (DD), All India 
Radio (AIR), Bureau of Outreach and Communication (BOC), etc, due to non approval 
of creatives by AD, Approval Cell, non-completion of work by Central Public Works 
Department (CPWD) and non-finalisation of the specification and floating of 
indent/tender for procurement of timing instruments for Time Dissemination Project by 
National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi (NPL) are stated to be other reasons for the 
poor expenditure of funds. It is obvious that the nil spending in Price Stabilization Fund 
(PSF) which constitutes 93.3% of the total fund in the RE (Scheme) has dented the 
overall spending position.  However, even after leaving aside the PSF head, the actual 
expenditure in proportion to the RE is still as low as 68.96%. The reasons given by the 
Ministry for poor spending of funds such as non-completion of work by CPWD, non-
finalisation of tender for procurement of timing instruments by the NPL, stoppage of 
campaign through DD, AIR, BOC, etc, are not convincing. The Committee opine that 
with a closer monitoring, the expenditure rate could have been higher. The Committee 
desire that the Government should make efforts to identify the problems associated 
with agencies such as DD, AIR, BOC and the Approval Cell, CPWD and NPL through 
whom the projects/schemes are executed and plug the loopholes to ensure better fund 
utilization by the Government.” 
 
1.7 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“(Publicity)The Department is committed to increase consumer awareness through its 
publicity initiatives and take steps to optimally utilize the funds allocated. It will 
therefore try to identify the problems associated in utilizing funds through agencies 
such as DD, AIR, BOC and the Ad Approval Cell. 
(Legal Metrology) 
CPWD Work: All necessary steps will be taken to ensure that the major construction 
projects of laboratories buildings are completed at the earliest possible time. The 
construction work of Regional Reference Standards Laboratory (RRSL) at Varanasi 
has been started by CPWD, Varanasi. At Nagpur, the land for the construction of 

4 
 
RRSL has been procured from Government of Maharashtra.  The Town & Planning 
Department of Government of Maharashtra has completed the formalities of transfer 
the land in the name of this Department for the construction of RRSL, Nagpur. The 
construction of boundary wall is getting to be completed by CPWD, Nagpur.  The 
construction at Nagpur will start shortly after finalising the drawings and estimates of 
RRSL, Nagpur by CPWD.The civil work of hi-tech laboratory at RRSL, Bengaluru is 
almost completed and electrical work is going on.  During the previous financial year 
2019-20 the funds were authorised to CPWD which could not be utilised and therefore, 
funds are being authorised to CPWD during 2020-21 to complete the work during this 
Financial Year. 
Establishment of Time Dissemination infrastructure with NPL & ISRO: 
On the request of Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR), 
the Department of Consumer Affairs has decided to disseminate the Indian Standard 
Time through five Regional Reference Standards Laboratories of Legal Metrology 
located at Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Bhubaneswar, Faridabad and Guwahati with the 
cooperation of National Physical Laboratory (NPL) and a budget provision of Rs. 100 
crores was made.  An MoU with CSIR- NPL for executing the project for setting up of 
atomic clocks for dissemination of Indian Standard Time was signed on 
28.12.2018. Under the MoU, the hardware and software for setting up the time 
ensembles will be procured by NPL which shall also be responsible for installation and 
commissioning of the same including training on equipment operation to the LM 
personnel.   NPL will handhold LM and shall provide requisite technical support.  The 
MoU also envisages setting up of a Disaster Recovery Centre (DRC) at RRSL, 
Bengaluru.  The operational laboratory space and technical manpower would be 
provided by the RRSLs and the project would be funded by this Department. The 6th 
Meeting of the Prime Minister's Science, Technology and Innovation Advisory Council 
(PM-STIAC) was held on Tuesday, the 20th of August, 2019 under the chairmanship of 
Prof. K. Vijayaraghavan, Principal Scientific Advisor (PSA) to the Government of India, 
wherein this Department was invited to participate on an agenda item National Time 
Distribution Network.  The said meeting was also attended by NPL and ISRO.The 
second meeting with PSA was held on 09.12.2019, wherein PSA suggested that ISRO 
technology should be incorporated by NPL while adhering to the time lines given 
earlier by NPL.The third meeting with PSA was held on 03.01.2020, wherein it was 

5 
 
decided that NPL jointly with ISRO will review and finalize the timing equipment/ 
hardware specifications and thereafter NPL will procure the timing equipment as per 
such specifications.  ISRO will integrate the indigenous software with the time 
ensembles to be procured and installed by NPL and NPL will handhold LM for time 
dissemination to the end users. As per the directions given by PSA the specifications 
are being finalized by NPL in coordination with ISRO and the process of procurement 
of timing equipments will be initiated shortly.The allocated funds will be utilised within 
the financial year, 2020-21 productively. 
 
(National Test House) 
Under the head of Machinery and Equipment (M&E) a fund of Rs 1.29 crore 
could not be utilized within timeframe due to the following reasons: 
1) Rs 54 Lakhs for the equipment GCMS: 
June 2019: LC was opened and the firm could not supply the equipment and hence in 
November 2019 revised LC opened.Central Bank of India committed several mistakes 
while revising of LC and its amendments for which different letters were issued to the 
Central Bank of India on many occasions for incorporating the necessary corrections. 
Again amended AT was issued for change of place of inspection as requested by the 
supplier firm due to COVID 19. Final inspection held on 18.3.2020 and report received 
on 20.03.2020.After that due to COVID 19 outbreak the consignment could not be 
dispatched from Germany. 
 
2) Rs 68 Lakhs for the equipment Ion Chromatograph: 
 LC opened for 03 Ion Chromatograph during May 2019. 
 M/s Methrom, Switzerland the supplier informed in July 2020 that out of 3 
LC, 1 could not be recognized. Validity of LC was expired on 31.08.2019 and hence 
revised LC was issued in October 2019. Inspection work order placed during 
November 2019 based on tender process.Inspection was held and the report received 
on 26.02.2020. Consignment was picked up by the freight forwarder in March 2020. 
The consignment arrived at Chennai and Delhi Airport on 21.03.2020 and 22.03.2020 
respectively. After that due to COVID 19 outbreak started and communication could 
not be continued with the bank for which the payment could not be released. 

6 
 
3) Rs 1.73 Crore was authorized to CPWD(WZ) under head Major Works- Land and 
Building for completing the remaining portion of the project. The unitization certificate 
for the Major portion of the fund allocated was not submitted by CPWD leading to 
underutilization of the fund due to COVID 19 outbreak started.” 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
 
 
1.8  The Committee had recommended  in their Original Report that the 
Government should make efforts to identify the problems associated with 
agencies such as Doordarshan (DD), All India Radio (AIR), Bureau of Outreach 
and Communication (BOC), Ad Approval Cell, Central Public Works Department 
(CPWD) and National Physical Laboratory (NPL) through whom the 
projects/schemes of the Department of Consumer Affairs are executed and plug 
the loopholes to ensure better fund utilization by the Government. In reply, the 
Department has stated that it is committed to increase consumer awareness 
through its publicity initiatives and takes steps to optimally utilize the funds 
allocated and will try to identify the problems associated in utilizing funds 
through agencies such as DD, AIR, BOC and Ad Approval Cell.  
           Regarding Legal Metrology under which 59.3% of RE was spent during the 
year 2019-20, the Department has informed that all necessary steps will be taken 
to ensure that the major construction projects of laboratories buildings are 
completed at the earliest possible time, and the construction work of Regional 
Reference Standards Laboratory (RRSL) at Varanasi has been started by CPWD, 
Varanasi. The Department has also stated that at Nagpur, the land for the 
construction of RRSL has been procured from the Government of Maharashtra.  

7 
 
It has further informed that the Town & Planning Department of Government of 
Maharashtra has completed the formalities of transfer the land in the name of 
Consumer Affairs Department of the Union Government for the construction of 
RRSL, Nagpur and that the construction of boundary wall is getting to be 
completed by CPWD, Nagpur.  The Department has also stated that the 
construction at Nagpur will start shortly after finalising the drawings and 
estimates of RRSL, Nagpur by CPWD. The Committee hope that those projects 
are completed expeditiously. The Department has also informed about the civil 
work of hi-tech laboratory at RRSL, Bengaluru being almost complete and 
electrical work being undertaken. It is also stated that during the previous 
financial year 2019-20, the funds were authorised to CPWD which could not be 
utilised and as a result of which funds are being authorised to CPWD during 
2020-21 to complete the work during the Financial Year 2020-21. The Committee 
desire that as far as possible, funds allocated for one financial year should be 
utilised during that year itself.  
       Regarding Establishment of Time Dissemination infrastructure with National 
Physical Laboratory (NPL) and Indian Space Research Organisation, the 
Committee has been informed that on the request of Department of Scientific 
and Industrial Research (DSIR), the Department of Consumer Affairs had 
decided to disseminate the Indian Standard Time through five Regional 
Reference Standards Laboratories of Legal Metrology located at Ahmedabad, 
Bengaluru, Bhubaneswar, Faridabad and Guwahati with the cooperation of NPL 
for which a budget provision of Rs. 100 crore was made. An MoU with CSIR- NPL 
for executing the project for setting up of atomic clocks for dissemination of 

8 
 
Indian Standard Time was signed on 28.12.2018. Under the MoU, the hardware 
and software required for setting up the time ensembles will be procured by NPL 
which shall also be responsible for installation and commissioning of the same 
including training on equipment operation to LM personnel and that NPL will 
handhold LM and shall provide requisite technical support. The Committee have 
been informed that the MoU also envisages setting up of a Disaster Recovery 
Centre (DRC) at RRSL, Bengaluru and that the operational laboratory space and 
technical manpower would be provided by RRSLs and the project would be 
funded by the Department of Consumer Affairs. In this connection, the 
Department has stated that it had been invited to participate on an agenda item 
viz, National Time Distribution Network, during the 6th Meeting of the Prime 
Minister's Science, Technology and Innovation Advisory Council (PM-STIAC), 
held on Tuesday, the 20th August, 2019 under the chairmanship of Prof. K. 
Vijayaraghavan, Principal Scientific Advisor (PSA) to the Government of India, 
which was also attended by NPL and ISRO. The Department has also stated that 
during the second meeting held on 09.12.2019, PSA suggested that ISRO 
technology should be incorporated by NPL while adhering to the time lines given 
earlier by NPL. The Department has further stated that the third meeting was 
held on 03.01.2020, wherein it was decided that NPL jointly with ISRO will review 
and finalize the timing equipment/ hardware specifications and thereafter NPL 
will procure the timing equipment as per such specifications. ISRO will integrate 
the indigenous software with the time ensembles to be procured and installed by 
NPL which will handhold LM for time dissemination to the end users. As per the 
directions given by PSA the specifications are being finalized by NPL in 
coordination with ISRO and the process of procurement of timing equipments 

9 
 
will be initiated shortly. The Department has assured the Committee that the 
allocated funds will be utilised within the financial year, 2020-21 productively. 
The Committee hope that the project will be completed in time. As regards 
National Test House (NTH) where 56.3% of the Revised Estimates for the 
Financial Year 2019-20 was spent, the Department has stated that under the head 
of Machinery and Equipment Rs. 54 Lakh for GCMS (Gas Chromatography Mass 
Spectrometry) and Rs. 68 Lakh for and Ion Chromatograph and major portion of 
Rs. 1.73 crore under the head of Major Works – Land and Building, could not be 
utilized within the timeframe due to various reasons such as COVID-19 outbreak, 
mistakes committed by Central Bank of India and non submission of utilization 
certificates by CPWD. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the 
Government on the reasons for poor performance with regard to the projects in 
NTH. The Financial Year 2019-20 started much earlier than when the threat of 
COVID-19 loomed in the country. The concrete and meticulous planning and 
monitoring by the Department at the right stage could have helped avert the 
undesirable results/position. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Department of Consumer Affairs get the projects completed without any further 
loss of time. The Department should leave no stone unturned to ensure that in 
future the funds allocated are productively utilised in time. 
 
 
B.    Need to Notify Rules on Consumer Protection Act, 2019 
 
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No 2.10)  
1.9 The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as follows:- 

10 
 
“The Committee observe that the Department of Consumer Affairs administers 
Consumer Protection Act, 1986. Budget allocation for the year 2020-21 under this  
head for various schemes/projects which are being implemented, such as 
Strengthening of Consumer Fora, Computerization and Computer Networking of 
Consumer Fora (CONFONET), Consumer Protection Cell and Integrated Consumer 
Grievances Redressal System (ICGRS) is Rs.4900 lakh. The Government have also 
drafted 8 rules under the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, which will replace the 
Consumer Protection Act, 1986. Out of the 8 rules, 3 have been finalized and sent to 
Legislative Department for vetting. Rest of the rules are under finalization and will be 
sent to the Legislative Department for vetting. The Committee are of the view that 
Consumer Protection is a very important component of the Department of Consumer 
Affairs and the strengthening of various consumer fora/Commissions, computerization 
and helplines under this Scheme are essential for achieving the objectives/desired 
results envisaged under Consumer Protection Act, 1986. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Department should take steps so as to gear up the administrative, 
legal and technological mechanisms to meet the challenges that may come up when 
the rules of Consumer Protection Act, 2019 are ready and the new Act put into 
operation.” 
 
1.10 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“This has been noted.” 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
 
 
1.11 In their original Report, the Committee had recommended that the 
Department should take steps so as to gear up the administrative, legal and 
technological mechanisms to meet the challenges that may come up when the 
rules of Consumer Protection Act, 2019 are ready and the new Act put into 
operation. The Department of Consumer Affairs has stated in its reply that 

11 
 
observations of the Committee have been noted. The Committee are not satisfied 
with the casual attitude of the Government. In an atmosphere dominated by app 
based trade with no sufficient safeguards, the introduction and passage of the 
Consumer Protection Act, 2019 was like a stitch in time to usher in a new era of 
consumer justice with safety from vices like defective goods and services, 
misleading advertisements, etc. While reiterating their earlier recommendation, 
the Committee express their desire that even at late stage the Department would 
fulfill all the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 without any further 
loss of time. 
C. Need to Activate Consumer Protection Councils 
 
 
Recommendation No. 3 (Para No. 2.11)  
 
1.12 The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note with concern the fact that the Consumer Protection Councils at 
the district, State and national levels remain inactive and defunct many a time. The 
performance of the Councils as per the mandate would have brought about positive 
changes in the sphere of consumer rights in the country. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should activate and ensure that the Consumer 
Protection Councils at the District and State levels function as per their mandate. They 
would also desire to be apprised of corrective steps taken by the Government in this 
regard within three months of the presentation of this report.” 
 
1.13 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
"As per the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, the State/UT Governments are 
to establish the State Consumer Protection Councils (SCPC) and the District 
Consumer Protection Councils (DCPC). The Central Government has been writing to 
the States/UTs from time to time to constitute such Councils and furnish report about 
their meetings." 
 
 

12 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
 
1.14 The Committee had in their original report, recommended that the 
Government should activate and ensure that the Consumer Protection Councils  
(CPCs) at the Districts and State levels function as per their mandate. The 
Department has in the Action Taken Reply, stated that the Central Government 
has been writing to the States/UTs from time to time to constitute such Councils 
and furnish report about their meetings. But the reply is silent on the further 
action taken by the Union Government on the response thereto. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate that such Councils/bodies be activated for the welfare of 
consumers at the earliest. 
 
 
D.  Need to LiberaliseExpenditure in Favour of State Consumer 
Helplines 
 
 
Recommendation No. 6 (Para No. 2.25)  
 
1.15 The Committee in their Original report observed/recommended as 
follows:- 
 
"The Committee are also happy to note that the Helpline/Integrated Consumer 
GrievancesRedressal System has partnered with 620 convergence companies and 
pre-litigation settlement have been made in case of 94.58% of the grievances 
registered in 2018-19 and 91.92% of the grievances registered between April to 
December, 2019. It may be noted here that out of the total cases coming in the 
Consumer Fora/Commissions percentage of cases disposed of fell from 82.50% in 
2017 to 80.17% in 2018 to 73.78% in 2019 and further to 70.42% in 2020. The 
Committee recommend that the Government should make all out efforts to get as 
many consumer disputes as possible, filtered through the helplines established at the 
Centre, Zone and State levels by spreading awareness about the existence of such 
helplines through the JagoGrahakJago campaigns, the Bureau of Outreach and 
Communication (BOC), etc. The Committee believe that settlement of cases through 

13 
 
the Helpline has a good potential to bring about justice to consumer, and they, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should be mobilizing funds in favour of 
helplines by liberalizing their expenditure within the permissible financial rules." 
 
 
1.16 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated:- 
 
" Funds are released from the ICGRS Scheme for the State Consumer Helplines and 
the Zonal Consumer Helplines.” 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
 
1.17 The Committee had recommended in their Original Report that the 
Department of Consumer Affairs should be mobilizing funds in favour of 
helplines by liberalizing their expenditure within the permissible financial rules. 
In reply, the Ministry has stated that funds are released from the Integrated 
Consumer Grievance Redressal System (ICGRS) scheme for the State Consumer 
Helplines and the Zonal Consumer Helplines. The Committee desire the 
Government to look for ways to make further suitable increase, within the 
permissible limit, in the amount allocated for State Consumer Helplines. Efforts 
should also be made to further strengthen the mechanism of pre-litigation 
settlement.  
E. Utilisation of Grants Released for State Consumer Helplines. 
 
Recommendation No. 7 (Para No. 2.26)  
 
1.18 The Committee in their Original report observed/recommended as 
follows:- 
 
"The Committee further note that a total grant amounting to Rs. 240.12 lakh has 
been released to various States/UT Administrations under the Consumer Helpline 
Scheme during the years 2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019-20, out of which utilization 

14 
 
certificates (UCs) for just Rs. 55.36 lakh have been received. No UC have been 
received in respect of Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Rajasthan 
and West Bengal and UC on a part of the grant received was furnished by the State 
of Uttar Pradesh. The Committee desire the Department to vigorously pursue with 
the 7 States/UT Administrations to furnish Utilization Certificates in respect of grants 
under Consumer Helpline Scheme and apprise them the outcome thereof at the 
earliest." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.19 The Ministry in its action taken note has stated:- 
 
" The State/UT Governments concerned have been asked to furnish the pending UCs 
in respect of the grants released for State Consumer helplines." 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
 
1.20 The Committee in their Report on Demands for Grants (2020-21) had 
recommended that the Utilisation Certificates (UC) with regard to grant 
released under the Consumer Helpline Scheme during the years 2017-18, 2018-
19 and 2019-20 to Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Rajasthan, 
West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh, be vigorously pursued and the Committee be 
apprised of the outcome at the earliest. The Department in its action taken 
reply, has stated that utilization certificates for grants released have been 
asked for from the concerned States/UT Governments. The reply is, however, 
too general and does not reflect the desired level of commitment. The 
Committee opine that any action which lacks vigour would have little or no 
effect and may even set a bad precedent. The Committee, therefore, desire to 
be apprised of the time when the States/UTs were asked to furnish pending 
UCs and the manner in which the same is pursued alongwith results obtained  
therefrom.  

15 
 
F.   Need for Installation of New, and Replacing of Obsolete Computers in 
District Consumer Fora 
 
Recommendation No. 8 (Para No. 2.32)  
 
1.21 The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as 
follows:- 
 
"The Committee note that the scheme of Computerization and Computer Networking of 
Consumer Fora in the country (CONFONET) aims to digitalise the functioning of the 
Consumer Fora at all the three tiers throughout the country, i.e. National, State and 
District levels. Out of a budgetary allocation of Rs. 33.63 crore made in the year 2019-
20, an amount of Rs. 26.63 crore has been utilized. The Committee also note that for 
the year 2020-21, the allocation made is to the tune of Rs. 29.50 crore. Out of a total of 
708 Consumer Fora/Commissions existing in the country, 641 Consumer Fora have 
been provided with computers. Further, for the newly created District Consumer Fora 
[Haryana (1), Karnataka (1), Tamil Nadu(2)], site confirmation and Hardware required 
have been recently received and which would be taken up.  Under the scheme for 
supply of hardware to locations where old hardware has become 5 years old, work 
orders for supply of new Hardware at 420 locations including National Consumer 
Disputes Redressal Commission (NCDRC) and Department of Consumer Affairs had 
been issued through Government e-Marketplace (GeM) and hardware has been 
delivered/being delivered at few locations. At 4 locations in Arunachal Pradesh, 2 in 
Chhattisgarh, 2 in Daman and Diu, 1 in Haryana, 1 in J&K and 3 in Nagaland, 
computer hardware is yet to be installed. The Department has stated that they follow 
up the cases by sending emails to respective States. The Committee opine that more 
efforts than mere sending of emails by the Union Government are needed to convince 
the State Governments/UT Administrations to come up with the necessary modalities 
to enable timely installation of hardware at Consumer Fora in line with the slogan of 
‘Digital India’ initiative. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the matter should 
be pursued more vigorously with the  concerned States/UTs to ensure site readiness 
and informing NIC/State Coordinators at the earliest for necessary further action. Also, 
replacement of old obsolete Hardware should be carried out without any loss of time to 
facilitate efficient and uninterrupted monitoring and record keeping in the Consumer 
Fora." 
 
 
1.22 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
"The States concerned have been asked to make the sites ready and furnish a site 
readiness certificate in this regard to NIC so that computer hardware can be installed in 
aforementioned 13 DCFs." 
 
 

16 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
 
 
1.23 The Committee had in their original report, recommended that the matter of 
provision of computer hardware to Consumer Fora/Commission at 13 locations 
may be pursued vigorously with the concerned State Governments/UT 
Administrations and that replacement of old obsolete hardware should be carried 
out without any further loss of time. In reply, the Department of Consumer Affairs 
has stated that the States concerned have been asked to make the sites ready 
and to furnish site readiness certificate to NIC so that computer hardware could 
be installed in the 13 District Consumer Fora/Commissions. The Committee 
desire that the matter should be taken up on an urgent basis. Also, the 
Government should endeavour to replace the old obsolete computers on priority 
without any lost of time. 
 
 
 
G. Need to Expedite Major Construction Projects with regard to Legal 
Metrology Early 
 
Recommendation No. 11 (Para No. 2.55)  
 
1.24    The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee observe that the Department of Consumer Affairs are undertaking the 
strengthening of Weights & Measures (W&M) infrastructures of States/UTs as also of 
Regional Reference Standard Laboratories (RRSLs) and Indian Institute of Legal 
Metrology (IILM), Ranchi. Out of the BE of Rs.2000 lakh and RE of Rs. 1906 lakh, the 
Department of Consumer Affairs have stated that an amount of Rs. 1557 lakh, has 
been spent during 2019-20, which is 81.6% of the RE on release of grants-in-aid for 
construction of laboratories, annual maintenance of RRSLs, procurement of equipment 
and training of officers. RRSLs in locations like Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Bhubaneswar, 
Faridabad and Guwahati have been vital links in dissemination of values of National 
Standards of Legal Metrology down to commercial level. As such, the 

17 
 
operationalisation of such laboratories is an urgent necessity in a modern economy. 
While appreciating the Department’s performance in Strengthening of W&M 
infrastructure of States/UTs, the Committee desire to be apprised of the position with 
regard to the Strenthening of RRSLs and IILM, Ranchi. The Committee further 
recommend that the Government should take necessary steps to ensure that the major 
construction projects and maintenance of such laboratories are completed at the 
earliest possible time. They also urge the Department to complete procurement of 
equipments without loss of time.” 
 
1.25    The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“The construction work of Regional Reference Standards Laboratory (RRSL) at 
Varanasi has been started by CPWD, Varanasi.  At Nagpur, the land for the 
construction of RRSL has been procured from Government of Maharashtra.  The Town 
& Planning Department of Government of Maharashtra has completed the formalities 
of transfer the land in the name of this Department for the construction of RRSL, 
Nagpur. The construction of boundary wall is getting to be completed by CPWD, 
Nagpur.  The construction at Nagpur will start shortly after finalising the drawings and 
estimates of RRSL, Nagpur by CPWD. The civil work of hi-tech laboratory at RRSL, 
Bengaluru is almost completed and electrical work is going on.  During the previous 
financial year 2019-20 the funds were authorised to CPWD which could not be utilised 
and therefore, funds are being authorised to CPWD during 2020-21 to complete the 
work during this Financial Year.It is to submit that with regard to the position of 
strengthening of RRSLs and IILM, Ranchi under the Scheme “Strengthening of RRSLs 
& IILM, Ranchi” the maintenance of RRSLs and IILM, Ranchi is an ongoing exercise, 
based on the requirement of the Laboratory or IILM, Ranchi.  However, during the 
previous Financial Year no funds for Minor Works of IILM, Ranchi were requested by 
IILM, Ranchi, as it was completed during 2018-19 at an approximate cost of Rs. 45.0 
Lakhs by CPWD, Ranchi.  Hence, the Minor works/ maintenance of Civil and Electrical 
Works of RRSLs/ IILM, Ranchi is an ongoing process as per requirement of offices.  
The water meter testing facility has been established at RRSLs through Fluid Control 
Research Institute, Palakkad, Kerala and Mobile Vans for testing/ inspection of net 
contents etc. of Packaged Commodities and for carrying standard Equipments for 
inspection, calibration/ verification purposes will be procured during this year 2020-21 
through RITES.  The officers will be trained at institutes of National and International 
Repute.All necessary steps will be taken to ensure that the major construction projects 
and maintenance of such laboratories are completed at the earliest possible time.  The 
procurement of equipment will also be done at the earliest.” 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 

18 
 
 
 
1.26 The Committee had desired, in their original report, to be apprised of the 
position with regard to Strengthening of Regional Reference Standard 
Laboratories (RRSLs)  - Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Bhubaneswar, Faridabad and 
Guwahati and Indian Institute of Legal Metrology (IILM) – Ranchi. Also they had 
recommended the Government to take necessary steps to ensure that the major 
construction projects and maintenance of such laboratories were completed  at 
the earliest time. The Department has stated in reply that construction work of 
RRSL Varanasi has been started by CPWD, Varanasi. The Department has also 
stated that at Nagpur, the land for construction of RRSL has been procured from 
Maharashtra Government and formalities of transfer of land in the name of 
Department of Consumer Affairs of the Union Government has been completed 
by the Town and Planning Department of Government of Maharashtra. The 
Department has also informed that boundary wall is getting to be completed by 
CPWD, Nagpur and that construction will start shortly after finalizing the 
drawings and estimates of RRSL, Nagpur by CPWD. As regards maintenance of 
RRSLs and IILM, Ranchi, the Department has informed that the civil work of hi-
tech laboratory at RRSL, Bengaluru is almost completed and electrical work is 
going on. The funds pertaining to the year 2019-20 which could not be utilized 
are being authorized to CPWD during 2020-21 to complete the work. The 
Department has also stated that water meter testing facility has been established 
at RRSLs through Fluid Control Research Institute, Palakkad, Kerala and Mobile 
Vans for testing/inspection of net contents, etc. of packaged commodities and 
for carrying standard equipments for inspection, calibration/verification 
purposes will be procured  during the year 2020-21 through RITES and that the 

19 
 
officers will be trained at institutes of National and International Repute. The 
Department has assured that all necessary steps would be taken to ensure that 
the major construction projects and maintenance of such laboratories are 
completed at the earliest possible time and that procurement of equipment will 
also be done at the earliest. The Committee are happy to note the assurance of 
the Department for completion of construction projects and procurement of 
equipments at the earliest. They recommend that such matters should be 
expedited without any loss of time especially the construction works of RRSLs, 
Nagpur and Varanasi  which seem to have taken too long already. 
 
H. Need for Timely Execution of the Projects of Time Dissemination  
 
Recommendation No. 12 (Para No. 2.56)  
 
1.27    The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee note that the Government has undertaken the project of Time 
Dissemination in the year 2019-20 with a tentative timeline set at the year 2022 for 
executing the project, for setting up of atomic clocks for dissemination of Indian 
Standard Time (IST). They also note that a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has 
been signed with the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research- National Physical 
Laboratory (CSIR-NPL) in this regard. The Committee are fully convinced that a 
precise time synchronisation and robust, reliable and accurate timing systems have 
significant impact on all societal, industrial, strategic and many other sectors. They 
desire that care should be taken to most accurately synchronise all networks and 
computers in the country with a national clock while implementing the project for 
ensuring absolute national security and enhanced cyber security with minimal scope of 
errors in time dissemination. In this connection the Committee are, however, dismayed 
to note that due to non-finalization of the specifications and floating indent for 
procurement of timing instruments for Time Dissemination Project by The National 
Physical Laboratory, New Delhi, the project suffered a setback, due to which only an 
amount of Rs. 124 lakh out of allocation of Rs. 3000 lakh has been spent on the 
scheme. The Committee opine that this reflects upon weak implementation of the MoU 
signed with NPL. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to have a 
relook at the agreement with NPL with a view, if possible, to revise it within the existing 
legal confines so as not to miss the deadline of completion of the project by 2022. They 

20 
 
desire the Government to spend the allocation of Rs. 3000 lakh productively within the 
financial year, 2020-21.” 
 
 
1.28    The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
 
“Due care will be taken to most accurately synchronise all networks and computers in 
the country with a national clock while implementing the project for ensuring absolute 
national security and enhanced cyber security with minimal scope of errors in time 
dissemination. 
On the request of Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR), 
the Department of Consumer Affairs has decided to disseminate the Indian Standard 
Time through five Regional Reference Standards Laboratories of Legal Metrology 
located at Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Bhubaneswar, Faridabad and Guwahati with the 
cooperation of National Physical Laboratory (NPL) and a budget provision of Rs. 100 
crores was made.  AnMoU with CSIR- NPL for executing the project for setting up of 
atomic clocks for dissemination of Indian Standard Time was signed on 28.12.2018.   
Under the MoU, the hardware and software for setting up the time 
ensembles will be procured by NPL which shall also be responsible for installation and 
commissioning of the same including training on equipment operation to the LM 
personnel.   NPL will handhold LM and shall provide requisite technical support.  The 
MoU also envisages setting up of a Disaster Recovery Centre (DRC) at RRSL, 
Bengaluru.  The operational laboratory space and technical manpower would be 
provided by the RRSLs and the project would be funded by this Department.   
The 6th Meeting of the Prime Minister's Science, Technology and Innovation 
Advisory Council (PM-STIAC) was held on Tuesday, the 20th of August, 2019 under 
the chairmanship of Prof. K. Vijayaraghavan, Principal Scientific Advisor (PSA) to the 
Government of India, wherein this Department was invited to participate on an agenda 
item National Time Distribution Network.  The said meeting was also attended by NPL 
and ISRO.  
The second meeting with PSA was held on 09.12.2019, wherein PSA 
suggested that ISRO technology should be incorporated by NPL while adhering to the 
time lines given earlier by NPL. 
The third meeting with PSA was held on 03.01.2020, wherein it was decided 
that NPL jointly with ISRO will review and finalize the timing equipment/ hardware 
specifications and thereafter NPL will procure the timing equipment as per such 
specifications.  ISRO will integrate the indigenous software with the time ensembles to 
be procured and installed by NPL and NPL will handhold LM for time dissemination to 
the end users. 
As per the directions given by PSA the specifications are being finalized by 
NPL in coordination with ISRO and the process of procurement of timing equipments 

21 
 
will be initiated shortly. 
The decision with a view to associate ISRO and to define the responsibility 
of each party i.e. NPL, ISRO and Legal Metrology so as not to miss the deadline of 
completion of the project by 2022. The allocated funds will be utilised within the 
financial year, 2020-21 productively.” 
 
1.29 The Committee had desired in their original report that care should be 
taken to most accurately synchronise all networks of computers in the 
country with a national clock while implementing the project of Time 
Dissemination. They had recommended the Department to have a relook at 
the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed with Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research (CSIR) – National Physical Laboratory (NPL) with a 
view to not miss the deadlines for completion of the project by 2022. They had 
also desired that the Government should spend the amount of Rs. 3000 lakh 
productively within the year 2020-21. The Department has stated in reply that 
under the MoU the hardware and software for setting up the time ensembles 
will be procured by NPL which shall also be responsible for installation and 
commissioning of the same including training on equipment operation to the 
LM personnel. The Department was invited to participate in an agenda item, 
viz. National Time Distribution Network at the 6th meeting of the Prime 
Minister’s Science, Technology and Innovation Advisory Council (PM-STIAC) 
held on Tuesday, 20 August, 2019 under the Chairmanship of Prof. K. 
Vijayaraghavan, Principal Scientific Advisor (PSA) which was also attended 
by NPL and ISRO.  At the second meeting with PSA held on 09.12.2019, the 
PSA suggested that ISRO technology should be incorporated by NPL while 
adhering to the time lines given earlier by NPL. In the third meeting with PSA 
on 03.01.2020, it was decided that NPL jointly with ISRO will review and 

22 
 
finalise the timing equipment/hardware specifications and thereafter NPL will 
procure the timing equipment and that ISRO will integrate the indigenous 
software with the time ensembles to be procured and installed by NPL and the 
latter would handhold LM for time dissemination to the end users. The 
Department has also informed that as per direction given by PSA, the 
specifications are being finalized by NPL in coordination with ISRO and the 
process of procurement of timing equipments will be initiated shortly. The 
Committee are happy to note the involvement of the PSA to the Government 
of India in the issue of Time Dissemination. The Committee desire that the 
matter may be examined in granular details with a view to clearly demarcate 
the responsibilities of all concerned and ensure that they work in tandem to 
complete the project on time with the allocated fund. The Committee also 
desire that the Department should get itself updated on the status of the work 
done frequently, atleast once a week. 
 
I. Price Stabilization Fund  
 
Recommendation No. 18 (Para No. 2.97) 
 
1.30    The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee note that Price Stabilization Fund (PSF) was set up with an initial 
corpus of Rs. 500 crore to tackle inflationary trends of some agri-horticultural 
commodities. The Committee also note that price stabilization operations are 
determined by the Central Price Stabilization Fund Management Committee 
(CPSFMC), headed by Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs, which has held 45 
sittings since 1st April, 2016. They further note that over and above a balance quantity 
of about 2884 Metric Tonne (MT) pulses, a quantity of about 15.7 LMT pulses was 
transferred from PSS to PSF and a quantity of  about 1.4 LMT disposed of in 2019-20. 
A quantity of about 14.24 LMT pulses was in the stock. Also a buffer stock of about 
57300 MT of onion was created this year and released into the market. The Committee 
are of the opinion that price fluctuation is a serious issue for consumers, especially to 

23 
 
those belonging to irregular and low income groups. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should carry out market intervention operations with 
due diligence and sensitivity to the needs of consumers in various parts of the country, 
including the cyclone-prone areas like Odisha.” 
 
 
1.31    The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“Government has decided to build a buffer of around19.50 LMT of pulses for the 
current year. As the procurement since Rabi-17 was under MSP operation of PSS, 
pulses procured under Price Support Scheme (PSS) of Department of Agriculture, 
Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (DACFW) have since been channelized to PSF to 
the extent of meeting buffer requirements. This has ensured effective utilisation of PSS 
stocks towards stabilization efforts as calibrated releases are made from PSF. Thus, 
harmonization between PSS and PSF has been achieved with remunerative prices 
being assured to farmers and intervention on the supply side is undertaken to manage 
their prices in consumer interest. In various instances from time to time, States/UTs 
through video-conferencing, written communication, national consultation meetings, 
etc., are urged to lift stocks from buffer for utilization under their welfare schemes like 
PDS, MDM, ICDS which largely cater to the need of consumers with irregular/lower 
income groups as well as for direct retailing in the benefit of consumers. Vide DO No. 
PS-03/1/2017/PMC/pt.1 dated 11th December 2019, around 8.47 LMT of pulses were 
offered to States/UTs for utilization under their welfare schemes as well as direct 
retailing to improve availability and moderation of its prices. Pulses from buffer have 
also been supplied to Kerala towards flood relief measure in the past. Further, w.r.t. 
OMS, stock held by designated agencies is available for purchase nation-wide through 
transparent auction process to moderate prices. In addition to the above, advance 
provided under State-Level PSF based on assessment by concerned State and 
proposal sent by them as per due procedure. Such proposal as per Operational 
Guidelines of PSF may be utilized to cater to State-specific requirements based on 
their assessment. Centre's share of Rs.25 crore was released in June 2018 to Odisha 
state level PSF. The State had set up PSF for market intervention in onion, potato and 
pulses, till date the amount is un-utilized by the State Government.” 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
 
 
1.32 The Committee had recommended in their original report that the 
Government should carry out market intervention operations with the Price 
Stabilization Fund (PSF) with due diligence and sensitivity to the needs of 
consumers in various parts of the country, including the cyclone-prone areas 
like Odisha. The Department has stated in its Action Taken Reply that 

24 
 
Government has decided to build a buffer of around 19.50 LMT of pulses for the 
current year. The Department has also stated that as the procurement since 
Rabi-17 was under MSP operation of PSS, pulses procured under Price Support 
Scheme (PSS) of Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare 
(DACFW) have since been channelized to PSF to the extent of meeting buffer 
requirements which ensured effective utilisation of PSS stocks towards 
stabilization efforts as calibrated releases are made from PSF. The Department 
has stated that due to this,harmonization between PSS and PSF has been 
achieved with remunerative prices being assured to farmers and intervention 
undertaken on the supply side to manage their prices in consumer interest. The 
Department has also stated that in various instances from time to time, 
States/UTs through video-conferencing, written communication, national 
consultation meetings, etc., are urged to lift stocks from buffer for utilization 
under their welfare schemes like PDS, MDM, ICDS which largely cater to the need 
of consumers with irregular/lower income groups as well as for direct retailing 
for the benefit of consumers. The Department has further stated that w.r.t. OMS, 
stock held by designated agencies is available for purchase nation-wide through 
transparent auction process to moderate prices. In addition, the Department 
provides advance under State-Level PSF based on assessment by concerned 
State and proposal sent by them as per due procedure. Such proposal as per 
Operational Guidelines of PSF may be utilized to cater to State-specific 
requirements based on their assessment. In this direction the Department has 
specifically mentioned the release of Centre's share of Rs.25 crore  in June 2018 
to Odisha State level PSF, which had been set up for market intervention in 
onion, potato and pulses, remained un-utilized. The reply is, however, silent on 

25 
 
the follow up efforts, if any, made by the Department to convince the State 
Government to utilize the fund. While appreciating the efforts of the Department, 
the Committee desires the Department should find out the reasons for non 
utilisation of fund by the State Government of Odisha and vigorously pursue the 
matter at the highest level to ensure the productive use of the fund. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the achievement in the matter at the 
earliest. 
 
 
 
J. Need for Setting up of CWF in States/UTs. 
 
Recommendation No. 20 (Para No. 2.109)  
 
1.33    The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee note that   for the year 2019-20, an amount of Rs. 1950 lakh   had 
been  earmarked for Consumer Welfare   Fund (CWF) where the money which is  not 
refundable to the manufacturers, etc. is credited.  The actual utilization of the allocated 
fund is however Rs. 719 lakh (upto 31.12.2019).    They also note that  financial  
assistance from CWF is given to various  institutions  including Universities,  Voluntary 
Consumer Organisations (VCOs), Government Bodies and States for strengthening 
consumer movement. The Committee hope  and expect   that the financial allocation of 
Rs. 26100 lakh would  be utilized productively and optimally during the financial year 
2020-21.   The Committee have also been informed about details of Grants  released 
under CWF scheme during the years 2016-17, 2017-18, 2018-19   and 2019-20 to 
various institutions.   The Committee   desire that the Department should   ensure that 
such   institutions make   utilization of the funds in a   most productive   manner,   by 
insisting   on Utilization Certificates (UCs) from them.   The Committee also note that 
so    far 15 States/UTs have set up State Level Consumer Welfare Fund with 
contribution of 75% (90% in case of Special Category States/UTs) from the Union 
Government. The number of such States was 13 in the year 2018-19. The Committee 
are of the view that while the steps taken by the Government to convince the 
States/UTs to set up State Level CWF have yielded some results, however, the 
Committee are constrained to note that the growth pattern in the scenario is not 
satisfactory. Considering the urgent need to create consumer awareness and 
strengthening the consumer movement in the country, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the Department of Consumer Affairs should vigorously pursue and 

26 
 
impress upon the remaining States/UTs to set up the Consumer Welfare Fund on 
priority.” 
 
1.34    The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. The 
Department of Consumer Affairs has been continuously pursuing and impressing upon 
the remaining States / UTs to set up the Consumer Welfare Fund in their States and 
commits to do so more vigorously in future also.” 
 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food& Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
 
 
1.35 The Committee had recommended in their original report that the 
Department of Consumer Affairs should ensure that institutions funded from 
CWF during 2016-17, 2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019-20 furnish the utilization 
certificates. They had also recommended that the Department should impress 
upon States that have not set up State Level Consumer Welfare Fund, to do the 
same. In reply the Department has stated that recommendations of the 
Committee have been noted for compliance and that remaining States/UTs will 
be more vigorously pursued and impressed upon to set up the State Level 
Consumer Welfare Fund. The Committee desire that the information about status 
of Utilisation Certificate should be given by the Department at the earliest. They 
also desire the Department to continue its efforts to impress upon the States/UTs 
about the importance of setting up of State Level Consumer Welfare Fund for a 
better and more convenient consumer advocacy. 
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
 
 
 
 
 

28 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
  ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No. 1.10) 
 
2.1 "The Committee note that Budget Estimates (BE) and Revised Estimates (RE) 
and Actual Expenditure (AE) during the year 2019-20 were Rs. 229182 lakh, 
Rs.206950 lakh and Rs.17397 lakh respectively, which means that only 8.4 per cent of 
the Revised Estimates was actually spent. While the spending pattern of the non-
Scheme funds as proportion to RE was 70.55% of the RE, the actual expenditure of 
Scheme fund as proportion to the RE is 4.12%. The Committee are also concerned to 
note the lack of uniformity of spending pattern across the schemes/heads. For 
example, during the year 2019-20, 73% of RE for Consumer Protection (CP) and 
72.8% of RE for Consumer Awareness & Publicity have actually been spent. Similarly, 
there are poor spendings in Weights & Measures (W&M) and National Test House 
(NTH) which are 59.3% and of 56.3% of RE respectively. The Ministry have stated that 
the prevailing and anticipated market scenario being dynamic has been responsible for 
“non-uniform spending pattern”. Also stoppage of campaign through the Doordarshan 
(DD), All India Radio (AIR), Bureau of Outreach and Communication (BOC), etc, due to 
non approval of creatives by AD, Approval Cell, non-completion of work by Central 
Public Works Department (CPWD) and non-finalisation of the specification and floating 
of indent/tender for procurement of timing instruments for Time Dissemination Project 
by National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi (NPL) are stated to be other reasons for 
the poor expenditure of funds. It is obvious that the nil spending in Price Stabilization 
Fund (PSF) which constitutes 93.3% of the total fund in the RE (Scheme) has dented 
the overall spending position.  However, even after leaving aside the PSF head, the 
actual expenditure in proportion to the RE is still as low as 68.96%. The reasons given 
by the Ministry for poor spending of funds such as non-completion of work by CPWD, 
non-finalisation of tender for procurement of timing instruments by the NPL, stoppage 
of campaign through DD, AIR, BOC, etc, are not convincing. The Committee opine that 
with a closer monitoring, the expenditure rate could have been higher. The Committee 
desire that the Government should make efforts to identify the problems associated 
with agencies such as DD, AIR, BOC and the Approval Cell, CPWD and NPL through 
whom the projects/schemes are executed and plug the loopholes to ensure better fund 
utilization by the Government." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 " (Publicity)The Department is committed to increase consumer awareness 
through its publicity initiatives and take steps to optimally utilize the funds allocated. It 

29 
 
will therefore try to identify the problems associated in utilizing funds through agencies 
such as DD, AIR, BOC and the Ad Approval Cell. 
(Legal Metrology) 
CPWD Work: All necessary steps will be taken to ensure that the major 
construction projects of laboratories buildings are completed at the earliest possible 
time.  
The construction work of Regional Reference Standards Laboratory (RRSL) 
at Varanasi has been started by CPWD, Varanasi.  
At Nagpur, the land for the construction of RRSL has been procured from 
Government of Maharashtra.  The Town & Planning Department of Government of 
Maharashtra has completed the formalities of transfer the land in the name of this 
Department for the construction of RRSL, Nagpur. The construction of boundary wall is 
getting to be completed by CPWD, Nagpur.  The construction at Nagpur will start 
shortly after finalising the drawings and estimates of RRSL, Nagpur by CPWD. 
The civil work of hi-tech laboratory at RRSL, Bengaluru is almost completed 
and electrical work is going on.  During the previous financial year 2019-20 the funds 
were authorised to CPWD which could not be utilised and therefore, funds are being 
authorised to CPWD during 2020-21 to complete the work during this Financial Year. 
Establishment of Time Dissemination infrastructure with NPL & ISRO: 
On the request of Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR), 
the Department of Consumer Affairs has decided to disseminate the Indian Standard 
Time through five Regional Reference Standards Laboratories of Legal Metrology 
located at Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Bhubaneswar, Faridabad and Guwahati with the 
cooperation of National Physical Laboratory (NPL) and a budget provision of Rs. 100 
crores was made.  AnMoU with CSIR- NPL for executing the project for setting up of 
atomic clocks for dissemination of Indian Standard Time was signed on 28.12.2018.  
Under the MoU, the hardware and software for setting up the time 
ensembles will be procured by NPL which shall also be responsible for installation and 
commissioning of the same including training on equipment operation to the LM 
personnel.   NPL will handhold LM and shall provide requisite technical support.  The 
MoU also envisages setting up of a Disaster Recovery Centre (DRC) at RRSL, 
Bengaluru.  The operational laboratory space and technical manpower would be 
provided by the RRSLs and the project would be funded by this Department.  
The 6th Meeting of the Prime Minister's Science, Technology and Innovation 
Advisory Council (PM-STIAC) was held on Tuesday, the 20th of August, 2019 under 
the chairmanship of Prof. K. Vijayaraghavan, Principal Scientific Advisor (PSA) to the 
Government of India, wherein this Department was invited to participate on an agenda 
item National Time Distribution Network.  The said meeting was also attended by NPL 
and ISRO. 
The second meeting with PSA was held on 09.12.2019, wherein PSA 
suggested that ISRO technology should be incorporated by NPL while adhering to the 
time lines given earlier by NPL. 

30 
 
The third meeting with PSA was held on 03.01.2020, wherein it was decided 
that NPL jointly with ISRO will review and finalize the timing equipment/ hardware 
specifications and thereafter NPL will procure the timing equipment as per such 
specifications.  ISRO will integrate the indigenous software with the time ensembles to 
be procured and installed by NPL and NPL will handhold LM for time dissemination to 
the end users. 
As per the directions given by PSA the specifications are being finalized by 
NPL in coordination with ISRO and the process of procurement of timing equipments 
will be initiated shortly. 
The allocated funds will be utilised within the financial year, 2020-21 
productively. 
 
(National Test House) 
Under the head of Machinery and Equipment (M&E) a fund of Rs 1.29 crore 
could not be utilized within timeframe due to the following reasons: 
1) Rs 54 Lakhs for the equipment GCMS: 
June 2019: LC was opened and the firm could not supply the equipment and hence in 
November 2019 revised LC opened. 
 Central Bank of India committed several mistakes while revising of LC and 
its amendments for which different letters were issued to the Central Bank of India on 
many occasions for incorporating the necessary corrections.   
 Again amended AT was issued for change of place of inspection as 
requested by the supplier firm due to COVID 19. 
 Final inspection held on 18.3.2020 and report received on 20.03.2020. 
 After that due to COVID 19 outbreak the consignment could not be 
dispatched from Germany. 
2) Rs 68 Lakhs for the equipment Ion Chromatograph: 
 LC opened for 03 Ion Chromatograph during May 2019. 
 M/s Methrom, Switzerland the supplier informed in July 2020 that out of 3 
LC, 1 could not be recognized. Validity of LC was expired on 31.08.2019 and hence 
revised LC was issued in October 2019. Inspection work order placed during 
November 2019 based on tender process. 
 Inspection was held and the report received on 26.02.2020. Consignment 
was picked up by the freight forwarder in March 2020. The consignment arrived at 
Chennai and Delhi Airport on 21.03.2020 and 22.03.2020 respectively. After that due 
to COVID 19 outbreak started and communication could not be continued with the 
bank for which the payment could not be released. 
3) Rs 1.73 Crore was authorized to CPWD(WZ) under head Major Works- Land and 
Building for completing the remaining portion of the project. The unitization certificate 
for the Major portion of the fund allocated was not submitted by CPWD leading to 
underutilization of the fund due to COVID 19 outbreak started. " 
 

31 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
  
 
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No. 2.10) 
 
2.3 "The Committee observe that the Department of Consumer Affairs 
administers Consumer Protection Act, 1986. Budget allocation for the year 2020-
21 under this  head for various schemes/projects which are being implemented, 
such as Strengthening of Consumer Fora, Computerization and Computer 
Networking of Consumer For (CONFONET), Consumer Protection Cell and 
Integrated Consumer Grievances Redressal System (ICGRS) is Rs.4900 lakh. 
The Government have also drafted 8 rules under the Consumer Protection Act, 
2019, which will replace the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. Out of the 8 rules, 3 
have been finalized and sent to Legislative Department for vetting. Rest of the 
rules are under finalization and will be sent to the Legislative Department for 
vetting. The Committee are of the view that Consumer Protection is a very 
important component of the Department of Consumer Affairs and the 
strengthening of various consumer fora/Commissions, computerization and 
helplines under this Scheme are essential for achieving the objectives/desired 
results envisaged under Consumer Protection Act, 1986. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that Department should take steps so as to gear up the 
administrative, legal and technological mechanisms to meet the challenges that 
may come up when the rules of Consumer Protection Act, 2019 are ready and 
the new Act put into operation." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 “This has been noted.” 
   
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
 
Recommendation No. 3 (Para No. 2.11) 
 
2.5     " The Committee note with concern the fact that the Consumer Protection 
Councils at the district, State and national levels remain inactive and defunct many a 
time. The performance of the Councils as per the mandate would have brought about 
positive changes in the sphere of consumer rights in the country. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should activate and closely monitor 
situation in order to ensure that these Consumer Protection Councils at the District and 
State levels function as per their mandate. They would also desire to be apprised of 
corrective steps taken by the Government in this regard within three months of the 
presentation of this report." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6  “As per the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, the State/UT 
Governments are to establish the State Consumer Protection Councils (SCPC) and the 
District Consumer Protection Councils (DCPC). The Central Government has been 
writing to the States/UTs from time to time to constitute such Councils and furnish 
report about their meetings.”  
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 4 (Para No. 2.17) 
 
2.7 "The Committee note that for strengthening of Consumer Fora, the Government 
allocated an amount of Rs. 600 lakh out of which an amount of Rs. 444.22 lakh has 
been released to States/UTs. Strengthening of infrastructure of the consumer fora 
being vital for consumer empowerment, the Committee are of the view that monitoring 
of the progress of implementation of projects cannot be over emphasised. The 
Committee also note with concern the declining rate of disposal of cases in Consumer 
Fora from 82.50% in 2017 to 80.17% in 2018 to 73.78% in 2019 and to 70.42% in 
2020. The Government could have avoided this dismal scenario through better 
attention to the Mediation Centres. But it has come to knowledge of the Committee that 

33 
 
the Government neither have data relating to the 3 tiers of consumer disputes 
redressal fora, nor about Mediation Centres. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Union Government should maintain and update data relating to cases 
disposed of in Consumer Fora down to the district level and the Mediation Cells 
attached therewith and also regularly upgrade the level of sophistication of such Fora 
and Cells, as it would equip the Union Government to initiate steps to strengthen the 
Consumer Fora/Commissions appropriately. Also, the Department should obtain 
utilisation certificates for funds released for strengthening of Consumer Fora at the 
earliest." 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 " Under the CONFONET (Computerisation and Networking of Consumer Fora in 
the country) scheme, the Central Government has been proving computer hardware, 
software and technical manpower to the Consumer Fora in the country for 
computerisation of their functioning. This facilitates maintenance and updation of data 
related to cases disposed in Consumer Fora. The computer hardware is replaced 
every five years. In the financial year 2019-20, the old hardware of 418 Consumer Fora 
has been replaced with new ones. Under the scheme, an Online Case Monitoring 
System (OCMS) has been developed, which is used by the Consumer Fora to maintain 
the database of cases. There is also a website, “the CONFONET website” which has 
all the database of the cases in the Consumer Fora.  
The Central Government also writes to the States/UTs at regular intervals 
for furnishing the pending UCs in respect of the grant released under the scheme 
“Strengthening Consumer Fora”." 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
  
 
 
Recommendation No. 6 (Para No. 2.25) 
2.9 "The Committee are also happy to note that the Helpline/Integrated 
Consumer Grievances Redressal System has partnered with 620 convergence 
companies and pre-litigation settlement have been made in case of 94.58% of the 
grievances registered in 2018-19 and 91.92% of the grievances registered 
between April to December, 2019. It may be noted here that out of the total cases 
coming in the Consumer Fora/Commissions percentage of cases disposed of fell 
from 82.50% in 2017 to 80.17% in 2018 to 73.78% in 2019 and further to 70.42% 
in 2020. The Committee recommend that the Government should make all out 

34 
 
efforts to get as many consumer disputes as possible, filtered through the helplines 
established at the Centre, Zone and State levels by spreading awareness about 
the existence of such helplines through the JagoGrahakJago campaigns, the 
Bureau of Outreach and Communication (BOC), etc. The Committee believe that 
settlement of cases through the Helpline has a good potential to bring about justice 
to consumer, and they, therefore, recommend that the Department should be 
mobilizing funds in favour of helplines by liberalizing their expenditure within the 
permissible financial rules." 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 " Funds are released from the ICGRS Scheme for the State Consumer 
Helplines and the Zonal Consumer Helplines." 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.17 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 8 (Para No. 2.32) 
 
2.11 " The Committee note that the scheme of Computerization and Computer 
Networking of Consumer Fora in the country (CONFONET) aims to digitalise the 
functioning of the Consumer Fora at all the three tiers throughout the country, i.e. 
National, State and District levels. Out of a budgetary allocation of Rs. 33.63 crore 
made in the year 2019-20, an amount of Rs. 26.63 crore has been utilized. The 
Committee also note that for the year 2020-21, the allocation made is to the tune of Rs. 
29.50 crore. Out of a total of 708 Consumer Fora/Commissions existing in the country, 
641 Consumer Fora have been provided with computers. Further, for the newly 
created District Consumer Fora [Haryana (1), Karnataka (1), Tamil Nadu(2)], site 
confirmation and Hardware required have been recently received and which would be 
taken up.  Under the scheme for supply of hardware to locations where old hardware 
has become 5 years old, work orders for supply of new Hardware at 420 locations 
including National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (NCDRC) and 
Department of Consumer Affairs had been issued through Government e-Marketplace 
(GeM) and hardware has been delivered/being delivered at few locations. At 4 
locations in Arunachal Pradesh, 2 in Chhattisgarh, 2 in Daman and Diu, 1 in Haryana, 
1 in J&K and 3 in Nagaland, computer hardware is yet to be installed. The Department 

35 
 
has stated that they follow up the cases by sending emails to respective States. The 
Committee opine that more efforts than mere sending of emails by the Union 
Government are needed to convince the State Governments/UT Administrations to 
come up with the necessary modalities to enable timely installation of hardware at 
Consumer Fora in line with the slogan of ‘Digital India’ initiative. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the matter should be pursued more vigorously with the  
concerned States/UTs to ensure site readiness and informing NIC/State Coordinators 
at the earliest for necessary further action. Also, replacement of old obsolete Hardware 
should be carried out without any loss of time to facilitate efficient and uninterrupted 
monitoring and record keeping in the Consumer Fora." 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.12 " The States concerned have been asked to make the sites ready and furnish a 
site readiness certificate in this regard to NIC so that computer hardware can be 
installed in aforementioned 13 DCFs " 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.23 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 9 (Para No. 2.42) 
 
2.13 "The Committee note that the entire strategy of Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) activities under Consumer Awareness (Advertising and Publicity) 
scheme has been designed to launch and continue an effective and intensive 
awareness campaign to urban, semi-urban as well as rural and remote areas through 
the country-wide multi media campaign titled “JagoGrahakJago”. The awareness 
campaigns are undertaken through the Bureau of Outreach and Communication 
(BOC), Doordarshan (DD), All India Radio (AIR), LokSabhaTV (LSTV) and National 
Film Development Corporation (NFDC). The Committee also note that out of Rs. 62 
crore allocated during 2019-20, the Department spent an amount of Rs. 29.15 crore, 
and also that an allocation of Rs. 60 crore has been made for the year 2020-21. 
Further, they also note that the campaign has been taking up issues relevant to various 
categories of consumers. The Committee are of the opinion that messages conveyed 
through the campaign need to be clear, articulate, proper and catchy to dispel the 
possible sense of inhibition or predicament of consumers in approaching available 
facilities such as helplines, Consumer Fora/Commissions, test centres etc. Noting the 
fact and considering the need of active involvement of State Governments in the 

36 
 
campaign, an amount of Rs. 350 lakh has been released to 9 States as grant-in-aid 
while proposals from more than 10 States have been processed, the Committee desire 
that States should be given a clear idea on how to spend the money judiciously and 
optimally so as to achieve maximum results. Also, the views of the people’s 
representatives like MPs and MLAs may also be taken in such matters." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.14 "The Department will review the list of activities for which grants-in aid are 
released to States for generating consumer awareness so that the money spent is 
utilized judiciously and optimally. The States will also be requested to take note of the 
views of the Standing Committee for necessary action whenever grant-in-aid is 
released to the respective State/UT." 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
  
 
Recommendation No. 10 (Para No. 2.43) 
 
2.15 "The Committee note with concern that out of Rs. 7.18 crore allocated for 
miscellaneous/Non-BOC Mode/Social Media, an expenditure of only Rs. 2.08 crore (or 
a mere 28.9% of Rs. 7.18 crore) had been made during the year    2019-20. In a 
techno driven society of today, the campaign through social media is extremely 
important. The Committee, therefore, recommend that campaign through social media 
should be given an even more importance in future. Closely related with this, the 
Committee also note the apparent connect between advertising and publicity and the 
cases coming up in the consumer helplines, which is evident in the swelling number of 
calls received, i.e. from 455029 in 2017-18 to 649571 in 2019-20 (upto January, 2020). 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that advertisement and publicity campaigns 
should be fashioned accordingly. " 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.16 "The Department has engaged a social networking management agency 
through open tendering process to increase the use of social media for consumer 
awareness. Recently, the creatives being uploaded on social media have been 
focusing on generating awareness about National Consumer Helpline. " 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
  
Recommendation No. 11 (Para No. 2.55) 

37 
 
 
2.17 "The Committee observe that the Department of Consumer Affairs are 
undertaking the strengthening of Weights & Measures (W&M) infrastructures of 
States/UTs as also of Regional Reference Standard Laboratories (RRSLs) and Indian 
Institute of Legal Metrology (IILM), Ranchi. Out of the BE of Rs.2000 lakh and RE of 
Rs. 1906 lakh, the Department of Consumer Affairs have stated that an amount of Rs. 
1557 lakh, has been spent during 2019-20, which is 81.6% of the RE on release of 
grants-in-aid for construction of laboratories, annual maintenance of RRSLs, 
procurement of equipment and training of officers. RRSLs in locations like Ahmedabad, 
Bengaluru, Bhubaneswar, Faridabad and Guwahati have been vital links in 
dissemination of values of National Standards of Legal Metrology down to commercial 
level. As such, the operationalisation of such laboratories is an urgent necessity in a 
modern economy. While appreciating the Department’s performance in Strengthening 
of W&M infrastructure of States/UTs, the Committee desire to be apprised of the 
position with regard to the Strenthening of RRSLs and IILM, Ranchi. The Committee 
further recommend that the Government should take necessary steps to ensure that 
the major construction projects and maintenance of such laboratories are completed at 
the earliest possible time. They also urge the Department to complete procurement of 
equipments without loss of time. " 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.18 "The construction work of Regional Reference Standards Laboratory 
(RRSL) at Varanasi has been started by CPWD, Varanasi.   

38 
 
At Nagpur, the land for the construction of RRSL has been procured from Government 
of Maharashtra.  The Town & Planning Department of Government of Maharashtra has 
completed the formalities of transfer the land in the name of this Department for the 
construction of RRSL, Nagpur. The construction of boundary wall is getting to be 
completed by CPWD, Nagpur.  The construction at Nagpur will start shortly after 
finalising the drawings and estimates of RRSL, Nagpur by CPWD.  
The civil work of hi-tech laboratory at RRSL, Bengaluru is almost completed and 
electrical work is going on.  During the previous financial year 2019-20 the funds were 
authorised to CPWD which could not be utilised and therefore, funds are being 
authorised to CPWD during 2020-21 to complete the work during this Financial Year. 
It is to submit that with regard to the position of strengthening of RRSLs and IILM, 
Ranchi under the Scheme “Strengthening of RRSLs & IILM, Ranchi” the maintenance 
of RRSLs and IILM, Ranchi is an ongoing exercise, based on the requirement of the 
Laboratory or IILM, Ranchi.  However, during the previous Financial Year no funds for 
Minor Works of IILM, Ranchi were requested by IILM, Ranchi, as it was completed 
during 2018-19 at an approximate cost of Rs. 45.0 Lakhs by CPWD, Ranchi.  Hence, 
the Minor works/ maintenance of Civil and Electrical Works of RRSLs/ IILM, Ranchi is 
an ongoing process as per requirement of offices.   
The water meter testing facility has been established at RRSLs through Fluid Control 
Research Institute, Palakkad, Kerala and Mobile Vans for testing/ inspection of net 
contents etc. of Packaged Commodities and for carrying standard Equipments for 
inspection, calibration/ verification purposes will be procured during this year 2020-21 
through RITES.  The officers will be trained at institutes of National and International 
Repute. 
 
All necessary steps will be taken to ensure that the major construction projects and 
maintenance of such laboratories are completed at the earliest possible time.The 
procurement of equipment will also be done at the earliest. " 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.26 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 12 (Para No. 2.56) 
 
2.19 " The Committee note that the Government has undertaken the project of Time 
Dissemination in the year 2019-20 with a tentative timeline set at the year 2022 for 
executing the project, for setting up of atomic clocks for dissemination of Indian 
Standard Time (IST). They also note that a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has 
been signed with the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research- National Physical 

39 
 
Laboratory (CSIR-NPL) in this regard. The Committee are fully convinced that a 
precise time synchronisation and robust, reliable and accurate timing systems have 
significant impact on all societal, industrial, strategic and many other sectors. They 
desire that care should be taken to most accurately synchronise all networks and 
computers in the country with a national clock while implementing the project for 
ensuring absolute national security and enhanced cyber security with minimal scope of 
errors in time dissemination. In this connection the Committee are, however, dismayed 
to note that due to non-finalization of the specifications and floating indent for 
procurement of timing instruments for Time Dissemination Project by The National 
Physical Laboratory, New Delhi, the project suffered a setback, due to which only an 
amount of Rs. 124 lakh out of allocation of Rs. 3000 lakh has been spent on the 
scheme. The Committee opine that this reflects upon weak implementation of the MoU 
signed with NPL. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to have a 
relook at the agreement with NPL with a view, if possible, to revise it within the existing 
legal confines so as not to miss the deadline of completion of the project by 2022. They 
desire the Government to spend the allocation of Rs. 3000 lakh productively within the 
financial year, 2020-21. " 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.20 "Due care will be taken to most accurately synchronise all networks and 
computers in the country with a national clock while implementing the project for 
ensuring absolute national security and enhanced cyber security with minimal scope of 
errors in time dissemination. On the request of Department of Scientific and Industrial 
Research (DSIR), the Department of Consumer Affairs has decided to disseminate the 
Indian Standard Time through five Regional Reference Standards Laboratories of 
Legal Metrology located at Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Bhubaneswar, Faridabad and 
Guwahati with the cooperation of National Physical Laboratory (NPL) and a budget 
provision of Rs. 100 crores was made.  AnMoU with CSIR- NPL for executing the 
project for setting up of atomic clocks for dissemination of Indian Standard Time was 
signed on 28.12.2018.   
Under the MoU, the hardware and software for setting up the time 
ensembles will be procured by NPL which shall also be responsible for installation and 
commissioning of the same including training on equipment operation to the LM 
personnel.   NPL will handhold LM and shall provide requisite technical support.  The 
MoU also envisages setting up of a Disaster Recovery Centre (DRC) at RRSL, 

40 
 
Bengaluru.  The operational laboratory space and technical manpower would be 
provided by the RRSLs and the project would be funded by this Department.   
The 6th Meeting of the Prime Minister's Science, Technology and Innovation 
Advisory Council (PM-STIAC) was held on Tuesday, the 20th of August, 2019 under 
the chairmanship of Prof. K. Vijayaraghavan, Principal Scientific Advisor (PSA) to the 
Government of India, wherein this Department was invited to participate on an agenda 
item National Time Distribution Network.  The said meeting was also attended by NPL 
and ISRO.  
The second meeting with PSA was held on 09.12.2019, wherein PSA 
suggested that ISRO technology should be incorporated by NPL while adhering to the 
time lines given earlier by NPL. 
The third meeting with PSA was held on 03.01.2020, wherein it was decided 
that NPL jointly with ISRO will review and finalize the timing equipment/ hardware 
specifications and thereafter NPL will procure the timing equipment as per such 
specifications.  ISRO will integrate the indigenous software with the time ensembles to 
be procured and installed by NPL and NPL will handhold LM for time dissemination to 
the end users. 
As per the directions given by PSA the specifications are being finalized by 
NPL in coordination with ISRO and the process of procurement of timing equipments 
will be initiated shortly. 
The decision with a view to associate ISRO and to define the responsibility 
of each party i.e. NPL, ISRO and Legal Metrology so as not to miss the deadline of 
completion of the project by 2022. The allocated funds will be utilised within the 
financial year, 2020-21 productively." 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.29 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
  
 
Recommendation No. 13 (Para No. 2.68) 
 

41 
 
2.21 " The Committee note that Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) implements the 
National System for Standardization (NSS). Out of 20728 Indian Standards (IS) 
formulated, 6062 standards have been harmonised with ISO/IEC standards. During the 
year 2019-20, the BIS has reviewed 2406 standards and revised 313 standards. The 
Committee desire that utmost care be taken in regard to formulation of new ISs so as 
to achieve better integration of India with the world in trade and commerce." 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.22 " As a policy while developing any standard, new or revised, the possibility of 
harmonizing the Indian Standards with corresponding International Standards of 
ISO/IEC, to the extent possible keeping in consideration local conditions / technologies, 
is always considered by technical committees of BIS. This ensures that Indian 
Standards are in line with International requirements / practices so as to achieve 
integration of Indian products / services with the world in trade and commerce." 
 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
  
 
 
Recommendation No. 14 (Para No. 2.69) 
 
 
2.23 " The Committee observe that the Bureau of Indian Standards(BIS) has been 
implementing the Plan scheme for setting up of Gold Assaying and Hallmarking Centres 
(AHC) in India with Central assistance. They also note that 900 BIS recognized 
Assaying & Hallmarking Centres (AHCs) are currently in operation in the country. 
Further, the Implementation Committee, in its meeting held on 9 August, 2019 had 
given a go-ahead on 16 applications against Expression of Interest and the centres 
would be ready for assessment in 6 months. The Committee further note that with 
regard to capacity building, a total of 67 training programme for artisans, 28 for AHC 
personnel and 9 for BIS officers during the years 2016-17 to  2019-20 has been 
organized. India being one of the top consumers of gold jewellery items in the world, the 
Committee are of the view that setting up of more AHCs will go a long way in serving 
the interests of gold jewellery consumers, especially those residing in the small towns 
and remote areas. They, therefore, recommend that all possible efforts be made to 
enable early recognition of more AHCs in the larger interest of the consumers. Since 
awareness of the rights is extremely important in the matter of hallmarking of gold 
jewellery, the Committee further recommend that all jewellers should be made to display 
the addresses and contact numbers of nearby test laboratories/AHCs in their 

42 
 
bills/vouchers in respect of hallmarked gold jewellery sold by them for the convenience 
of consumers." 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.24 " At present 915 BIS recognized AHCs are in operation in the Country. The 
AHCs are set-up by private entrepreneurs and setting up of AHCs is a market driven 
activity where decision to open an AHC is taken by the entrepreneur based on 
commercial viability at that location. It is expected that as the hallmarking of gold 
jewellery and artefacts has been made mandatory from 15th January 2021, the 
demand would increase and the market would drive new AHCs to come up at locations 
where demand arises. Based on the recommendation of the Standing Committee, BIS 
has already revised the Guidelines for Grant, Operation, Renewal, and Cancellation of 
Certificate of Registration of Jewellers in January 2020. As per the revised Guidelines 
Doc. No. HM/Jeweller/Guidelines /1, January 2020, all the BIS Registered Jewellers in 
addition to the indication of separate description of each article, net weight of precious 
metal, purity in carat and fineness, and hallmarking charges in the bill or invoice of sale 
of hallmarked precious metal articles as specified in BIS (Hallmarking) Regulations, 
2018, also  have to  mention in the bill or invoice of sale of hallmarked precious metal 
articles that “the consumer can get the purity of the hallmarked jewellery/artefacts 
verified from any of the BIS recognized A&H centre. The list of BIS recognized A&H 
centre along with address and contact details is available on the website 
www.bis.gov.in.” 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 15 (Para No. 2.70) 
 
2.25 " The Committee also note that out of a total of 51 cases filed for violation of BIS 
Act, 2016 on hallmarking, 28 cases have been decided, all in favour of BIS. A total of 
23 cases are still pending for settlement in the States/UTs of Chandigarh (1), 
Chattisgarh (2), Delhi (3), Goa (1), Haryana (4), Kerala (1), Maharashtra (3), Odisha 
(2), Punjab (1), Tamil Nadu (2), Telangana (1) and West Bengal (2). The Committee 
desire that the Ministry/BIS should closely monitor the cases and also make concerted 
efforts to ensure that there is speedy settlement of cases which are pending in the 
Courts. The Committee would like to be apprised of further progress made in this 
regard." 

43 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.26 " Communication has been made to the Heads of the Regional Offices of BIS, 
under whose jurisdiction the cases are pending, with the request that the complaint 
officers as well as the empanelled Counsels handling these 23 pending court cases in 
12 States/UTs to follow up the cases vigorously for speedy settlement of the 
complaints in the interest of BIS.” 
 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
  
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.76) 
 
2.27 " The Committee note with appreciation the fact that National Test House 
(NTH) has completed 107 years of dedicated service to the nation under the 
administrative control of the Government of India. They also note that apart from the 
major and minor maintenance works already undertaken for NTH, the Government 
have plans to undertake major works for NTH, like construction works at NTH Mumbai 
and Chennai. The Department are also planning to procure Impulse Voltage 
Generator for NTH, Chennai, Tensile Testing Machine for Guwahati, QUV Accelerated 
Weathering Tester for Mumbai, equipment for Routine Testing of Transformers, 
Carbon SulphurAnalyser, Photo-biological Test Set up and Impulse Voltage Generator 
for Kolkata and Fourier Transform Infrared Spectometer for Ghaziabad. The NTH 
being an important institution for testing and quality evaluation of different kinds of 
products, the Committee urge to complete the major works undertaken, procurement 
of machineries and equipments, minor works or maintenance or upgradation of 
machinery and infrastructure in the various regions without any delay, on top priority." 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.28 " Projects under construction through CPWD: 
The construction of the G+4 Phase II building at Mumbai and Impulse 
Voltage Laboratory at Chennai have been executed by CPWD and majority of the work 
is completed due to continuous efforts of Regional In-Charges as well as Director 
General, NTH and DoCA. However, due to sudden outbreak of COVID – 19, Rs 1.25 

44 
 
crores out of Rs 1.73 crores authorized to CPWD(WZ), Mumbai could not be utilized. 
Furthermore, final bill in respect of construction of High Voltage Laboratory at 
NTH(SR), Chennai remains unsettled probably due to paucity of fund in the year 2019-
20. 
Necessary action will be initiated for timely completion of the remaining part 
of the project on receipt of the demand raised by the concern CPWD authorities 
through regional heads of NTH.  
 
Procurement of Machineries & Equipment: 
 
The tender enquiries for the procurement of Impulse Generator for both the 
regions of NTH(SR) Chennai and NTH(ER) Kolkata were floated through CPP. 
On technical evaluation of the bids submitted by the firms, it was found that no 
bid was technically qualified as per the recommendation of the duly constituted 
Purchase Committee and hence the tendering process was cancelled.  
The process for procurement of Impulse Generator for NTH(SR) will be 
initiated by floating fresh tender enquiries through CPP, as the building for Impulse 
Voltage Laboratory is completed at NTH(SR), Chennai. 
To strengthen the laboratories of NTH(NER),Guwahati, a functional 
laboratory for testing facility of Rubber, Plastic, Paper and Textile (RPPT) materials will 
be established and one tensile testing machine will be procured as per the requirement 
of the laboratory. Further, one Universal hardness testing machine will also be 
procured for Mechanical Laboratory of NTH (NER).  
The process of procurement of QUV Accelerated Weathering Tester for 
Mumbai, equipments for Routine Testing of Transformers, Carbon SulphurAnalyser, 
Photo-biological Test Set up and Impulse Voltage Generator for Kolkata and Fourier 
Transform Infrared Spectrometer for Ghaziabad, will be initiated as per the availability 
of fund.  
All out efforts will be made at regional as well as in the level of NTH (HQ) for timely 
upgradation& Maintenance of machinery and equipments and infrastructures in 
addition to the procurement of machines and equipments and completion of major 
works.” 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
  
 
 
Recommendation No. 17 (Para No. 2.87) 

45 
 
 
2.29 " The Committee observe that out of the BE of Rs. 200 lakh and RE of Rs. 160 
lakh, an expenditure of Rs. 110 lakh has been incurred during the year 2019-20 by 
the Department of Consumer Affairs for strengthening the existing mechanism of 
price monitoring, both at the Centre and State levels. For the year 2020-21, an 
amount of Rs. 200 lakh has been earmarked. The Committee note that regular 
monitoring is done by way of organising workshop (regional, zone wise and State 
workshop), inter-alia, to review the prices, its authenticity and ensuring regularity of 
price reporting from the 114 centres. Time to time, field visits are also being 
undertaken by officers of the Ministry, whenever necessary. The Committee are 
concerned to note that while States have come forward to increase the number of 
Price Reporting Centres, it is sometimes seen that all the centres do not report prices 
regularly and considerable follow up is required. The Committee are of the opinion 
that regular review and supervision of the price collection at these centres by State 
government officials will go a long way in improving the quality of this information, 
which is vital for timely intervention decisions. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the Government should utilize the allocated funds in a most prudent manner and 
ensure that the States/UTs report prices regularly, accurately and from the widest 
range of centres. They also recommend that the States/UTs may be reminded to 
exercise powers available as per relevant provisions of the law in the interest of the 
consumers. The Government should ensure that uniform price of essential 
commodities prevail across the States/Union Territories in the country." 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.30 " To make price data more representative, and improving coverage and building 
a robust system for collection and reporting of prices, States/UTs have been asked to 
identify and add new price reporting centres from semi-urban/rural areas also.20 new 
price reporting centres are to be added in the Price Reporting mechanism every year. 
 
Regular follow up with States/UTs regarding sending of financial proposals 
for strengthening of their Price Reporting Centres (PRC) as per the revised guidelines 
which additionally allows for engaging services of one Data Entry Operator per centre 
and a hand held device.  States/UTs have been asked to provide PFMS details and 
timely submission of Utilisation certificate required for releasing of funds under the 
Scheme for both recurrent and non recurrent components as per the revised guidelines 
on Strengthening of Price Monitoring Cell. 
 
5 Zonal Conferences cum training workshops proposed to be conducted for all the 
Price Reporting Centres spread across the country in the FY-2020-21.”  

46 
 
 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
 
Recommendation No. 18 (Para No. 2.97) 
 
2.31 " The Committee note that Price Stabilization Fund (PSF) was set up with an 
initial corpus of Rs. 500 crore to tackle inflationary trends of some agri-horticultural 
commodities. The Committee also note that price stabilization operations are 
determined by the Central Price Stabilization Fund Management Committee 
(CPSFMC), headed by Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs, which has held 45 
sittings since 1st April, 2016. They further note that over and above a balance quantity 
of about 2884 Metric Tonne (LMT) pulses, a quantity of about 15.7 LMT pulses was 
transferred from PSS to PSF and a quantity of  about 1.4 LMT disposed of in 2019-20. 
A quantity of about 14.24 LMT pulses was in the stock. Also a buffer stock of about 
57300 MT of onion was created this year and released into the market. The Committee 
are of the opinion that price fluctuation is a serious issue for consumers, especially to 
those belonging to irregular and low income groups. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should carry out market intervention operations with 
due diligence and sensitivity to the needs of consumers in various parts of the country, 
including the cyclone-prone areas like Odisha." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.32 " Government has been decided to build a buffer of around19.50 LMT of pulses 
for the current year. As the procurement since Rabi-17 was under MSP operation of 
PSS, pulses procured under Price Support Scheme (PSS) of Department of 
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (DACFW) have since been channelized 
to PSF to the extent of meeting buffer requirements. This has ensured effective 
utilisation of PSS stocks towards stabilization efforts as calibrated releases are made 
from PSF. Thus, harmonization between PSS and PSF has been achieved with 
remunerative prices being assured to farmers and intervention on the supply side is 
undertaken to manage their prices in consumer interest. In various instances from time 
to time, States/UTs through video-conferencing, written communication, national 
consultation meetings, etc., are urged to lift stocks from buffer for utilization under their 
welfare schemes like PDS, MDM, ICDS which largely cater to the need of consumers 
with irregular/lower income groups as well as for direct retailing in the benefit of 
consumers. Vide DO No. PS-03/1/2017/PMC/pt.1 dated 11th December 2019, around 
8.47 LMT of pulses were offered to States/UTs for utilization under their welfare 
schemes as well as direct retailing to improve availability and moderation of its prices. 

47 
 
Pulses from buffer have also been supplied to Kerala towards flood relief measure in 
the past. Further, w.r.t. OMS, stock held by designated agencies is available for 
purchase nation-wide through transparent auction process to moderate prices. In 
addition to the above, advance provided under State-Level PSF based on assessment 
by concerned State and proposal sent by them as per due procedure. Such proposal 
as per Operational Guidelines of PSF may be utilized to cater to State-specific 
requirements based on their assessment. Centre's share of Rs.25 crore was released 
in June 2018 to Odisha state level PSF. The State had set up PSF for market 
intervention in onion, potato and pulses, till date the amount is un-utilized by the State 
Government.” 
 
Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.32 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 19 (Para No. 2.98) 
 
2.33 " The Committee also note that State-evel corpus funds are created with Centre-
State sharing on 50:50 basis, which is 75:25 ratio in case of NE States. They also note 
that Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, West Bengal, Odisha, Assam and Tamil Nadu have 
set up State-level Price Stabilization Funds to tackle inflationary trends in commodities 
like onion, potatoes and pulses while the rest of the States have been urged to set-up 
State/UT level PSF. The Committee recommend that the States/UT may be vigorously 
pursued to set up the Fund to tackle situations of scarcity in pulses, onions and other 
essential commodities. The Committee also desire that in the event of requests or 
demands for such perishable commodities received from the States/UTs, the same 
should be favourably responded to." 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.34 " The matter of setting up of State-level PSF is pursued with States regularly 
through video-conferencing, written communication, national consultation meetings, 
etc. to tackle situation of scarcity in availability of pulses, onion and rise in their prices. 
States are urged to assess need w.r.t. setting up State-level PSF as per Operational 
Guidelines of PSF. Diverse responses have been observed from States/UTs. This is 
on account of diversity on various parameters such as 
 
a) whether the State/UT is a deficit/surplus state; 

48 
 
b) extent of price moderating impact through market flows - when arrivals from other 
States suffice and/or sufficient carry over stocks are available with trade, need for 
maintaining buffer stock may not be felt given the costs it entails 
c) to what extent price fluctuations are witnessed in the State - Nothwithstanding 
nation-wide average price increase, prices in given State/region may be short-term 
and comparatively less volatile and may not necessitate intervention by State-
Government 
d)  consumption pattern of the State 
e) extent of storage and retailing infrastructure/wherewithal to carry out necessary 
market interventions in an effective manner - lack of such infrastructure/mechanism  
results in absence of effective disposal mechanism required to intervene effectively 
in the market especially in case of perishables like onions. 
 
    2.   W.r.t. the long run, the following may be noted: 
a) stabilizing domestic production is key to stabilize prices. Agriculture being a State 
Subject, this comes under the purview of the States/UTs.Sustainable production 
would require enhancement in productivity and greater role of NFSM, inter-cropping, 
etc. On the other hand, procurement of rice, wheat and sugarcane at MSP may be 
rationalized keeping in view stability in their prices, self-sufficiency in production, 
ample buffer stocks. This is essential to enable shift towards less-water intensive 
crops and aligning cropping pattern based on environmental endowments and 
consumer demand, to stabilize prices. Enhanced availability will ensure access at 
affordable prices and much needed shift to recommended nutrition rich diets 
especially for irregular/low income groups which is also in line with the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs). 
b) A one-size fits all approach may not be best suited in the long run and it does not 
result in optimal resource allocation and blurs accountability which affects efficient 
utilization of resources and as well as efficiency of outcomes (States have been 
reluctant to lift onion and pulses from Central buffer stocks despite frequent and 
repeated requests made by the Centre). While States have been proactive in 
involving Centre in procurement operations, their involvement in disposal of stocks 
has been very lukewarm. The very fact that Agriculture is a State subject is 
testimony to its diverse nature across States and need for tailored approach. 
c) In this context, trend of total financial flows State-wise towards Agriculture 
Sector should be aggregated for necessary analysis and performance evaluation. 
Setting up a permanent version of Finance Commission in the nature of a Fiscal 
Secretariat may be pertinent in this regard. This would help in devolution of 
greater amount of untied funds to States in a phased manner over time for 
utilization in ways as deemed effective by them given their requirements. This is 

49 
 
essential to align production pattern based on consumer preferences and 
environmental endowments and provide needed flexibility to States to intervene in 
an efficient manner to achieve better outcomes as accountability would be 
delegated in a clearer manner” 
  
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
 
Recommendation No. 20 (Para No. 2.109) 
 
2.35 " The Committee note that   for the year 2019-20, an amount of Rs. 1950 lakh   
had been  earmarked for Consumer Welfare   Fund (CWF) where the money which is  
not refundable to the manufacturers, etc. is credited.  The actual utilization of the 
allocated fund is however Rs. 719 lakh (upto 31.12.2019).    They also note that  
financial  assistance from CWF is given to various  institutions  including Universities,  
Voluntary Consumer Organisations (VCOs), Government Bodies and States for 
strengthening consumer movement. The Committee hope  and expect   that the 
financial allocation of Rs. 26100 lakh would  be utilized productively and optimally 
during the financial year 2020-21.   The Committee have also been informed about 
details of Grants  released under CWF scheme during the years 2016-17, 2017-18, 
2018-19   and 2019-20 to various institutions.   The Committee   desire that the 
Department should   ensure that such   institutions make   utilization of the funds in a   
most productive   manner,   by insisting   on Utilization Certificates (UCs) from them.   
The Committee also note that so    far 15 States/UTs have set up State Level 
Consumer Welfare Fund with contribution of 75% (90% in case of Special Category 
States/UTs) from the Union Government. The number of such States was 13 in the 
year 2018-19. The Committee are of the view that while the steps taken by the 
Government to convince the States/UTs to set up State Level CWF have yielded some 
results, however, the Committee are constrained to note that the growth pattern in the 
scenario is not satisfactory. Considering the urgent need to create consumer 
awareness and strengthening the consumer movement in the country, the Committee 
strongly recommend that the Department of Consumer Affairs should vigorously 
pursue and impress upon the remaining States/UTs to set up the Consumer Welfare 
Fund on priority." 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.36 "Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. The 
Department of Consumer Affairs has been continuously pursuing and impressing upon 
the remaining States / UTs to set up the Consumer Welfare Fund in their States and 
commits to do so more vigorously in future also.” 
 

50 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.35 of Chapter -I of the Report) 

51 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S 
 REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 2.24) 
 
3.1 " The Committee note that the Government allocate funds under the scheme of 
Consumer helpline wherein the National Consumer Helpline, Zonal Consumer 
Helplines and State Consumer Helplines are integrated under the new scheme of 
Integrated Consumer Grievance Redressal System (ICGRS). The Financial Assistance 
from this scheme is being provided for social media initiatives such as developing 
applications etc. They, therefore, desire that the Government should deploy part of the 
fund for developing computer application for use in the Mediation Centres with a view 
to eventual integration of the centres with the entire network of the NCH/ICGRS 
through the INGRAM V2.3." 
Reply of the Government 
3.2 "As per the provisions of Consumer Protection Act, 2019, at the first hearing of 
the complaint after its admission, or at any later stage, if it appears to the District 
Commission that there exists elements of a settlement which may be acceptable to the 
parties, except in such cases as may be prescribed, it may direct the parties to give in 
writing, within five days, consent to have their dispute settled by mediation. The 
mediator shall prepare a settlement report of the settlement and forward the signed 
agreement along with such report to the concerned Commission. Therefore, the 
process through Mediation is a post-litigation mediation process. 
The Department runs National Consumer Helpline with a National Toll Free 
No. 1800-11-4000 and a short code 14404. A consumer can call to seek information, 
advice or guidance on the queries raised and file complaints. The complaints received 
on telephone Help-line, online, emails, SMS etc. are processed on the INGRAM portal 
which is equipped to perform backend operations. Furthermore, under the 
convergence model, which is an out of court dispute redressal mechanism, NCH 
partners with companies who have a proactive approach for efficient consumer 
complaint resolution. NCH escalates and follows up the complainants received at NCH 
with the convergence company, for speedy redressal. Thus, NCH acts as a bridge in 
building symbiotic synergies between consumers and service providers/Companies. 
Therefore, NCH works as a pre-litigation process. 
Mediation centres and NCH/ICGRS have different work sphere and complementary to 
each other and cannot be integrated." 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
 
 

52 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
NIL

53 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation No. 7 (Para No. 2.26) 
 
5.1 " The Committee further note that a total grant amounting to Rs. 240.12 lakh has 
been released to various States/UT Administrations under the Consumer Helpline 
Scheme during the years 2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019-20, out of which utilization 
certificates (UCs) for just Rs. 55.36 lakh have been received. No UC have been 
received in respect of Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Rajasthan and 
West Bengal and UC on a part of the grant received was furnished by the State of Uttar 
Pradesh. The Committee desire the Department to vigorously pursue with the 7 
States/UT Administrations to furnish Utilization Certificates in respect of grants under 
Consumer Helpline Scheme and apprise them the outcome thereof at the earliest." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 " The State/UT Governments concerned have been asked to furnish the pending 
UCs in respect the grants released for State Consumer helplines." 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-13/5/2020-P&C] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.20 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;            SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY 
16 December, 2020                               Chairperson, 
25 Agrahayana, 1942 (Saka)                             Standing Committee on Food, 
           Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 

54 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
                       
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2020-2021) 
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 16 DECEMBER, 2020 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay -   Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Karadi Sanganna Amarappa 
3. Ms. Pratima Bhoumik 
4. Shri Anil Firojiya 
5. Shri Bhagwant Mann 
6. Shri Khagen Murmu 
7. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai (Bakabhai) Patel 
8. Shri Subrat Pathak 
9. Smt. Himadri Singh 
10. Smt. Kavita Singh 
11. Shri Ajay Misra Teni 
12. Shri Saptagiri Ulaka 
13. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
14. Shri Ve. Vaithilingam 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
15. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
16. Smt. Roopa Ganguly 
17. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
18. Shri  Rajmani Patel 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Pawan Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Lovekesh Kumar Sharma - Director 
 
 

55 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to: (i)  adopt 4 draft Reports on Action Taken by the 
Government on observations/recommendations contained in Reports on 
Demands for Grants (2019-20) and also for the year 2020-21 pertaining to the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution and Department of Consumer Affairs; 
and (ii) XXXX XXXX  XXXX . The Committee unanimously adopted 
the 4 draft Action Taken Reports without any modifications/amendments.  
 XXXXX 
 
3. XXXX   XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  
4. XXXX   XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  
 
XXXXX 
 
XXXX   XXXX  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
********* 
XXXXX  Matter does not pertain to the Report 
 

56 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS  OF THE  ACTION  TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT  OF  
THE  STANDING  COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION (2019-20) 
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
   
(i) Total number of Recommendations:        20 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government : 
 
 Para Nos.:-  1.10, 2.10, 2.11, 2.17, 2.25, 2.32, 2.42, 2.43, 
2.55, 2.56, 2.68, 2.69, 2.70, 2.76, 2.87, 2.97, 
2.98 and 2.109. 
    
          (Chapter – II, Total - 18) 
Percentage : 90% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government 
 
Para Nos. 2.24. 
                     (Chapter – III, Total - 1) 
Percentage : 5% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration: 
 
Para Nos. NIL 
 
          (Chapter – IV, Total -Nil)   
Percentage : 0 
   (v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
interim replies of the Government have been received. 
    
   Para Nos.:- 2.26  
    (Chapter – V, Total - 1) 
Percentage : 5%  
 