i 
 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, 
FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023-2024) 
 
 
     
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the observations/ recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on the subject, “BIS – Hallmarking & Jewellery pertaining to the  
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution } 
 
THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 December, 2023/Agrahayana,1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
33 


ii 
 
THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023-2024) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the observations / recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on the subject, “BIS – Hallmarking & Jewellery pertaining to the  
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution } 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  11  December, 2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11  December, 2023 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
                December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Composition of the Committee 
 
(iv) 
Introduction 
 
(v) 
Chapter I Report 
 
1 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by Government 
 
5 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government replies 
 
11 
Chapter IV Observation/Recommendation which have not been 
accepted by Government 
 
12 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of Government are still awaited 
 
13 
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Committee (2023-24) 
held on 07.12.2023 
 
18 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-Seventh Report of the Standing Committee  on 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
20 
 
  

iv 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (2023-24) 
 
     Smt. Locket Chatterjee  -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
5. Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit 
6. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi 
7. Shri Faizal P.P. Mohammed 
5. Km. Debasree Chaudhuri 
6. Dr. Amar Singh 
7. Shri Anil Firojiya 
8. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
9. Shri Khagen Murmu 
10. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
11. Shri Subrat Pathak 
12. Smt. Himadri Singh 
13. Smt. Kavita Singh 
17. Shri Nandigam Suresh 
18. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
19. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
20. Shri Vaithilingam Ve. 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
23. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
24. Shri Rajmani Patel 
25. Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
26. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
27. Shri Baburam Nishad 
28. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam 
29.  Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
30    Vacant 
 31. Vacant 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai                      -           Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi            -  Director 
3. Sh. Dong Lianthang Tonsing        -  Deputy Secretary 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs , Food  and 
Public Distribution (2023-2024) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their  behalf, present this Thirty Third Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Seventh 
Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “BIS – Hallmarking & 
Jewellery” of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs). 
2.  The Twenty Seventh  Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 03.08.2023. The Government has furnished its replies indicating Action 
Taken on the recommendations contained in the Report on 06.11.2023. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
7th December, 2023. 
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.  
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the text of the Report. 
  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         LOCKET CHATTERJEE, 
7 December, 2023                  Chairperson, 
16 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)                                      Standing Committee on  
   Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 

1 
 
REPORT  
CHAPTER - I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty Seventh Report of the 
Committee (17th Lok Sabha) on “BIS – Hallmarking & Jewellery”, pertaining to the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs).  
1.2  The Twenty Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid  on the Table 
in Rajya Sabha on 3 rd August, 2023. It contained 12 recommendations/observations. 
Action taken replies in respect of all the 12 recommendations/observations contained in 
the Report have been received and these have been categorized as follows:-  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by Government :  
Para Nos.: 1.16, 3.7, 4.5, 4.10, 4.12 and 5.17 
(CHAPTER – II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies :  
Para Nos.: NIL 
(CHAPTER – III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee :  
Para No.: NIL  
(CHAPTER – IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which interim replies of 
Government have been received :  
Para No. : 2.21, 2.22, 3.12, 3.15, 3.19 and 5.8 
(CHAPTER – V) 
1.3  The Committee trust that importance will be given to the implementation of the 
recommendations accepted by the Government. The observations/recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and Chapter – V of this Report should be furnished to the 
Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report.  
 

2 
 
1.4  The Committee further emphasize that utmost importance should be given 
to the implementation of Recommenda tions/ Observations accepted by the 
Government. In case where it is not possible for the Government to implement 
the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to Committee in time with reasons for non implementation. 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
the recommendations/ observations. 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.12) 
A. ARTICLES WITH WEIGHT LESS THAN 2 GRAMS 
 1.6 The Committee in their original report observed/recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that The Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery and Gold Artefacts 
Order, 2020 dated 15 January, 2020   of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) Order dated 15 
January, 2020, in ter alia, has exempted an gold jewellery article with weight of 
less than two grams from Mandatory Hallmarking. The Committee are of the 
opinion that substantial number of people buy   goldjewellery items weighing 1 -2 
grams on the occasion of festivals, fun ctions or at regular intervals. In the 
absence of any quality assurance, these people are prone to cheating.   The 
Committee therefore opine that buyer of gold should be assured of quality and 
fineness of the gold jewellery. They, therefore suggest to recon sider / relook into 
the exemption granted to gold jewellery items weighing less than 2 grams from 
Hallmarking requirements and explore the feasibility of prescribing smaller HUID 
Id consisting merely a symbol or sign.”  
 1.7 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:-  
 
“In India most of the jewellery is hand -made and in view of the intricacies 
involved in designing of jewellery there may not be enough space in small 
jewellery for laser marking the four points. In view of the same the jewel lery less 
than 2g has been exempted from mandatory hallmarking order. However, 
wherever possible the jewellery below 2g may also be hallmarked if required.   
  
It is also informed that out of about 29 crore articles hallmarked with HUID since 
July, 2021, nearly 37% articles below 2g have been hallmarked.   
  
However, the recommendation will be considered in consultation with 
stakeholders. 
1.8 The Committee had in their original report suggested for a reconsidation of 
the exemption granted to gold jewellery items weighing less than 2 grams from 
Hallmarking requirements and explore the feasibility of prescribing smaller HUID 
Id consisting merely a symbol or sign. Th e Ministry in its action taken reply has 
agreed that whenever possible the jewellary below 2 grams may also be 

3 
 
hallmarked if required and has informed that 37% of the 29 crore articles 
hallmarkd with HUID since July 2021 are less than 2 gram. The Committee  while 
appreciating the facts mentioned by the Ministry and the assurance given by it, 
the Committee desire that the stakeholders may be educated and convinced 
about the need for hallmarking of the small articles which cater to the lower strata 
of the soci ety so that maximum number of gold articles are hallmarked. The 
Committee may be apprised about the progress made in this direction.  
  
Recommendation (Para no 3.15) 
B. SPECIAL CLASS OF KUNDAN, POLKI AND JADAAU 
1.9 The Committee in their original report observed/recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee observe that the Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery and Gold 
Artefacts (second amendment) Order, 2020 of DoCA    dated 23 June, 2021 has 
exempted the special category of jewellery, namely Kundan, Polki and Jadaau 
from the list of mandatory hallmarking.   The Committee are of the opinion   that 
such exemption makes studding one small stone in a jewellery item to bring the 
jewellery in the category of Kundan, Polki and Jadaau and not getting it 
hallmarked. They note th at the exemption has not been revoked after 
deliberations with representatives from the jewellery trade, Assaying & 
Hallmarking Centres, Gems &Jewellery export Promotion Council, consumer 
organizations, Quality Council of India. The Committee feel that a s uitable 
method may be worked out wherein the interests of consumers may be protected 
while accommodating the concerns of the jewellery trade. They, therefore, 
suggest that even if Kundan, Polki and Jadaau remain exempted from mandatory 
hallmarking, a syste m of marking the weight and /or caratage of gold before 
studding with stones may be explored for the convenience of consumers.” 
  
1.10 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“The suggestion of marking the weight and /or caratage of gold before studding 
with stones has been noted and be explored after consultation with the 
stakeholders.” 
1.11 The Committee had specifically recommended that  even if Kundan, Polki 
and Jadaau jewelleries remain exempted from mandatory hallmarking, a system 
of marking the weight and /or caratage of gold before studding with stones may 
be explored for the convenience of consumers.  The Department while noting the 
suggestion of the Committee, has assured that the issue would be explored in 
consultation wi th the stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Department should explore all the possibilities by emphasizing the importance of 
hallmarking of jewellery to the stakeholders and come out with a solution of 

4 
 
marking the weight and / or caratag e of gold before studding with stones under 
intimation to the Committee. 
  
Recommendation (Para no 3.19) 
 C. JEWELLERS WITH ANNUAL TURNOVER OF LESS THAN RS. 40 LAKH 
1.12 The Committee in their original report observed/recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that mandatory hallmarking order of the Government has 
certain exemptions which, inter alia, includes jewelers with an annual turnover of 
upto Rs. 40 lakh.   While noting the apprehensions of the consumer associations 
about the unscrupulous traders r esorting to selling jewellery without proper 
invoices and opening of sales entities in the name of employees, relatives, etc. to 
keep the turnover less than Rs 40 lakh per annum to remain exempted from 
mandatory hallmarking, the Committee hope that relevan t enforcement 
authorities may address suitably the issues raised by the consumer association.” 
Reply by the Government :- 
1.13 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“In view of difficulty for very small jewelers having an annual turnover of less 
than Rs 40 lakh to adhere to mandatory hallmarking, jewellers having turnover 
less than Rs 40 lakhs were exempted from mandatory hallmarking.  
  
It may also be noted that exemption upto Rs 40 lakh have also been provided in 
mandatory GST registration for goods sellers.  
  
However, the issue raised regarding selling jewellery without proper invoices and 
opening of sales entities in the name of employees, relatives, etc. to k eep the 
turnover less than Rs 40 lakh per annum to remain exempted will be taken up 
with stakeholders.” 
1.14 The Committee in their earlier recommendation, had highlighted the 
apprehensions of the consumer associations and suggested that enforcement 
authorities be made to address the issue of possible misuse of provision for 
exemption of jewellers with annual turnover of less than Rs. 40 Lakh. The Ministry 
in its reply, stated that the issue would be taken up with stake holders. The 
Committee while appreciating the assurance by the Ministry, desire that an action 
taken status be made available to the Committee within three month’s time. 
  
 
 
 

5 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation No. 1.16 
2.1 The Committee note that BIS is entrusted with the task of implementing hallmarking 
scheme and making India a leading market for gold jewellery in the world.   They also 
note that   (i) as per sub -section (2) of Section 10 of BIS Act, 2016, the Bureau may 
adopt as Indian Standard, any standard in such manner as may be prescribed; (ii)   the 
grades of gold and silver jewellery that are specified in the respective Indian standards 
are also available in ‘ISO 9202:2019 – Jewellery and Precious Metals – Fineness of 
precious metal alloys’ published by the International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO) which specifies a range of fineness of precious metal alloys; and (iii) articles 
meant for export which conforms to any specification required by the foreign buyers is  
exempted from mandatory hallmarking. While appreciating the path breaking initiative of 
the Govt of India   for  (a)  formulating and prescribing Indian Standards for precious 
metals such as gold and silver; and,  (ii)  introducing mandatory hallmarking of Jewellery 
which  ensures purity, quality and fineness and go a long way in protecting the interest 
of the consumers of the precious metals and jewellery, the Committee desire the 
Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) explore the possibility of aligning th e BIS 
Standards prescribed for precious metals and   jewellery  with  those of International 
Standards prescribed by International Organisation of Standards to promote exports of 
precious metal jewellery. 
  
Reply by the Government :- 
  
2.2 The issue of aligning the Indian Standards for precious metals has been 
referred to the concerned Technical Department assigned for formulating the 
Standards and following is submitted:  
  
i) ISO grades are at variance with that required in India.  
a. In case of gold ISO 9202 mentions 8, 9, 10, 14, 18, 22 and 24 carats whereas 
the grades prevalent in India are 14, 18, 20, 22, 23, 24carats and accordingly 
mentioned in IS 1417.   Also IS 1417 specifies that the detrimental elements like 
Cd, Ir, Ru, Os shal l not be present, whereas no such requirement is specified in 
ISO 9202.  
b. In case of silver, ISO 9202 mentions 800,925, 958, 990, 999 fineness whereas IS 
2112 mentions 800, 835, 900, 925, 970, 990, 999, 9995, 9999. Also IS specifies 
that the detrimental ele ments like Cd, Pb shall not be present, whereas no such 
requirement is specified in ISO 9202.  
ii. Further for exports purpose the standard followed in the country in which the 
material is being exported has to be complied.  

6 
 
iii. However, it is to inform that India n Standard, IS 1418 prescribed for the assaying 
and hallmarking of gold jeweller   is completely aligned with the ISO Standard, 
ISO 11426.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M. No. N-19/3/2023-P&C dated 06.11.2023 
 
 
Recommendation (Para no 3.7) 
  
2.3 The data on the achievements of the hallmarking scheme since 2017 -18 shows 
that number of operative Jeweller/ licenses / registered which stood at 23,342 in 
201718 has increased to 1,58,439 in 2022-23, an increase of more than 6.5 times. The 
number of operative AHCs at 608 in 201718 has gone up to 1409 in 2022 -23, an 
increase of 2.3 times. Surveillance audits of AHCs conducted at 336 in 2017 -18 has 
increased to 941 (2.8 times) in 202 2-23. Similarly, number of articles hallmarked has 
witnessed quantum jump – from 4.17 crore pieces in 2017 -18 to 11.73 crore pieces in 
2022-23, an increase of 2.8 times. The above mentioned performance indicators amply 
make it clear that the scheme has received positive response from the consumers. With 
hallmarking of precious metals – gold and silver jewellery / artefacts made compulsory, 
the Committee have no doubt that hallmarking will witness explosive growth in the 
coming years. The Committee are glad to note that within two years of launch of the 
Scheme, AHCs have been set up in 341 districts and the process of making 
hallmarking mandatory was completed in 288 districts and is in the process of 
implementation in additional 53 districts.   Thus, so far, 45% of the districts are covered 
under the hallmarking Scheme. The Committee recommend that suitable plans may be 
formulated to cover the remaining districts for compulsory hallmarking in a defined 
timeframe. 
  
Reply by the Government:- 
  
2.4 At the time of implementation of mandatory hallmarking 948 AHCs were 
operating in 256 districts of the country, which have now increased to 1497 spreading 
in about 346 districts. Mandatory hallmarking has been implemented at first point of 
sale so that if hallmarking centre is not present in the city, a BIS registered jeweler can 
purchase the already hallmarked jewellery and sell it in his outlet. Also, the jeweller can 
hallmark the Jewellery /artefacts from nearby Assaying & Hallmarking Centres which 
are situated in nearby districts.  
  
Further for increasing the spread of AHCs in deficient locations, Govt. also provides 
subsidy to the tune of upto 75% of the total cost of machinery and equipment for 
setting up the AHC at deficient locations.  
  
In addition to the above, BIS has launched the scheme for setting up of Offsite centres 
(OSC) by the BIS Recognised AHCs with the objective to provide the jewellers easy 
access to the hallmarking facility. An OSC is conceived of as an extended arm of AHC. 
As on date, 60 OSCs setup by BIS Recognised AHCs are operational.   

7 
 
  
It may also be noted that setting up of A&H centres is a market driven activity where 
decision to open an AHC at a particular location is taken by the private entrepreneur 
based on the demand at that location. It is expected that market would drive more AHC 
to come at locations where there are no centres at present 
  
  
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M. No. N-19/3/2023-P&C dated 06.11.2023 
 
 
Recommendation (Para no 4.5) 
  
2.5 The Committee note that the mandate of Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) is to 
promote and monitor quality of goods and services.   They also note that regular market 
surveys of gold jewellery carried out in the year 2006 found that the average shortage in 
purity was 13.5% which was higher than the   average shortage of purity   found   in the 
survey conducted in 2001 i.e. 11%. On the contrary, test reports of hallmarked jewellery 
in the year 2020 -21 reveals an aver age shortage of purity of 0.5%. The Committee are 
of the view that introduction and implementation of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
(Hallmarking) Regulations, 2018, the average shortage in purity of jewellery has 
considerably come down.  The Committee are glad to note that the BIS has organized a 
number of training programmes for the personnel of AHCs, artisans and undertaken 
awareness among jewellers and strengthened surveillance over jewellers and AHCs so 
as to keep effective monitoring over the scheme.   The Committee desire the 
Department to conduct market surveys at frequent intervals and further intensify their 
monitoring mechanism. 
  
Reply by the Government:- 
 2.6 For effective monitoring over the scheme the market surveillance of the 
registered jewelers has been increased manifold. In comparison to 356 samples drawn 
from jewellers during 2020 -21 and 12995 samples drawn from jewellers during 2021 -
22,  during FY 2022 -23  38,846 samples of hallmarked jewellery were drawn from 
jewellers for testing at BIS referral assay labs.  
  
It is also informed that for monitoring the entire work -flow in an AHC, right from the 
receipt of the jewellery to hallmarking, has been automated where by it is possible to 
verify that every piece of jewellery has gone through all  the specified process of 
hallmarking. Further the integration of testing equipment used in AHCs viz. Laser 
machine, XRF and microbalance with the BIS software is also in advance stages of 
implementation where by a unique HUID number is marked on each jewellery article.  
  

8 
 
However, as desired by Committee BIS is also conducting hallmarking survey in 
districts not covered under mandatory hallmarking.  
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M. No. N-19/3/2023-P&C dated 06.11.2023 
 
 
Recommendation (Para no 4.10) 
  
2.7 The Committee note that BIS has taken publicity/outreach initiatives through Print 
and electronic media radio, TV and social media.   As far as complaints related to purity 
of gold is concerned, there are a total of 45 purity related complaints during the last 5 
years. The Committee learned that BIS has a well -established procedure for handling of 
complaints related to purity of hallmarked jewellery procured by customers. The 
Department informed that after formal registration of the complaint through Consumer 
Engagement Portal of BIS, the complaint is investigated and during the investigation, 
the sample of jewellery is collected for testing in BIS lab.   Jewellers have been 
instructed by  BIS that the bill or invoice of sale of hallmarked precious metal articles 
shall also mention that the consumer can get the purity of the hallmarked 
jewellery/artefacts verified from any of the BIS recognized A&H centre. In this regard, 
the Committee desi re that information about such facilities may be in suitably included 
in the publicity/outreach initiatives of the BIS and that the information regarding 
Consumer Engagement Portal of BIS be distinctly displayed in the jewellery markets/ 
shops in order to improve the outreach of the portal. 
  
Reply by the Government:- 
  
2.8 The recommendation of the committee as cited in its report has been noted for 
compliance. 
 
  [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M. No. N-19/3/2023-P&C dated 06.11.2023 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
Recommendation (Para no 4.12) 
  
2.9 The Committee note that the Customer who uses the BIS Care app can trace the 
source and date of manufacturing and Hallmarking as the Manak App/ BIS Care App 
shows the manufacturer’s name and manufactured date once HUID number is entered 
in the App. This has prompted some stakeholders to raise the issue of privacy.   While 
noting that such transparency provision is similar to the other product certification 
schemes being operated by BIS, they suggest that no change may be made in this 
regard and these features – source and date of manufacturing, of the Manak App may 
be retained as it will protect the interest of the consumers. 
Reply by the Government:- 
  
2.10 The date of hallmarking of the article has been retained in the BIS Care App.   In 
view of the difficulties expressed by jewellers the name of the jewellerhas not been 
displayed, however, as the registration number of the jeweler is being displayed on the 
app. the consu mer may trace the name of the jeweller from this registration number 
from BIS website.   
  
However, matter will be reviewed in consultation with stakeholders for name of the 
jeweller.  
  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M. No. N-19/3/2023-P&C dated 06.11.2023 
 
 
Recommendation (Para no 5.17) 
  
2.11 The Committee observe that the Government extend financial assistance to 
private entrepreneurs and PSUs for ‘Setting up of Gold Assaying and Hallmarking 
Centres’(AHC) in India, to the tune of 30% and 50% respectively.   The assistance is 
50% and 75% for private entrepreneurs and PSUs respectively in the case of North 
East/ Special Category States/ Rural Areas.   The Committee also note that highe r 
financial assistance to PSUs is stated to have been given on the basis of proven 
credibility. They also note that BIS is regularly inviting expression of interest for setting 
up of AHCs in deficient locations with Central assistance. Out of the 1423 AHCs , as on 
30.5.2023, 89 AHCs have been established with financial assistance of the Central 
Government as per the request received. The Committee are of the view that private 
entrepreneurs in NE and far flung areas needs to be encouraged to set up AHCs and 
the possibility of change in the incentives may also be explored.   

10 
 
Reply by the Government:- 
  
2.12 The rate of financial assistance (% of the total cost of machinery and equipment 
given to A&H Centre as assistance) for ‘Setting up of Gold Assaying and Hal lmarking 
Centres’ in India where no Assaying & Hallmarking Centre (assisted or otherwise) 
exists,have been revised by Government of India w.e.f. 9 December 2010 and are 
given below:     
  
  
Area  Earlier    Revised Rate  
Private      PSU  
Normal  15%  30%    50%  
NE/SCS/RA  30%  50%    75%  
             
NE – North East States; SCS - Special Category States; RA – Rural Areas  
  
However, the recommendation of the committee regarding the change in the incentives 
for private entrepreneurs in NE and far flung areas for encouraging to set up AHCs   has 
been noted. 
   
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M. No. N-19/3/2023-P&C dated 06.11.2023 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

13 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation ( Para no 2.21) 
  
5.1        The Committee are happy to note that with the introduction of HUID portal, all 
the process of hallmarking have   been made  online with minimum human intervention. 
The Committee observe that the HUID portal in its present form does not have the 
features of saving the information offline and this may have increased the workload of 
Assaying & hallmarking Centres (AHCs) users in times of technical lag, network 
disconnection, malfunction of the online system and at the time of application outage.   
DoCA has acknowledged the issue and submitted that the option would be explored 
upon stabilisatio n and improvement of the current system. The Committee appreciate 
the same and urge DoCA to explore the offline option and it may be put in place after 
thorough examination of various aspects at the earliest.   
  
  
Reply by the Government:- 
  
5.2 Issues of technical lag and network disconnection were observed initially at the 
time of launch in July 2021 in software system for HUID. However, the same has now 
been rectified with increase of server capacity and other improvements. In fact no 
downtime has been reported in the system in the last six months.  
  
However, the recommendation will be discussed with the concerned stakeholders. 
  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M. No. N-19/3/2023-P&C dated 06.11.2023 
 
Recommendation (Para no 2.22) 
  
5.3 The Committee are of the opinion that user manuals should be updated at 
regular intervals to enable enhanced user adoption. They are further of the view that 
user manuals in local langua ges will be of immense help to the substantial number of 
common people across the country who buys gold. The Committee accordingly 
recommend that this may be given utmost importance and implemented at the earliest.   
  
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
Reply by the Government:- 
  
5.4 The user manuals have been taken up for updation and will also be translated in 
local language for display in Branch Offices.    
   
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M. No. N-19/3/2023-P&C dated 06.11.2023 
 
 
Recommendation (Para no 3.12) 
  
5.5 The Committee note that The Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery and Gold Artefacts 
Order, 2020 dated 15 January, 2020   of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affair s) Order dated 15 January, 2020, 
inter alia, has exempted an gold jewellery article with weight of less than two grams 
from Mandatory Hallmarking. The Committee are of the opinion that substantial number 
of people buy   goldjewellery items weighing 1 -2 gram s on the occasion of festivals, 
functions or at regular intervals. In the absence of any quality assurance, these people 
are prone to cheating.   The Committee therefore opine that buyer of gold should be 
assured of quality and fineness of the gold jeweller y.They, therefore suggest to 
reconsider / relook into the exemption granted to gold jewellery items weighing less than 
2 grams from Hallmarking requirements and explore the feasibility of prescribing smaller 
HUID Id consisting merely a symbol or sign.   
  
Reply by the Government:- 
5.6 In India most of the jewellery is hand-made and in view of the intricacies involved 
in designing of jewellery there may not be enough space in small jewellery for laser 
marking the four points. In view of the same the jeweller y less than 2g has been 
exempted from mandatory hallmarking order. However, wherever possible the jewellery 
below 2g may also be hallmarked if required.   
  
It is also informed that out of about 29 crore articles hallmarked with HUID since July, 
2021, nearly 37% articles below 2g have been hallmarked.   
  
However, the recommendation will be considered in consultation with stakeholders. 
  
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M. No. N-19/3/2023-P&C dated 06.11.2023 

15 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see in Para No. 1.8 if Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para no 3.15) 
  
5.7 The Committee observe that the Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery and Gold 
Artefacts (second amendment) Order, 2020 of DoCA    dated 23 June, 2021 has 
exempted the special category of jewellery, namely Kundan, Polki and Jadaau from the 
list of mandatory hallmarking.   The Committee ar e of the opinion   that such exemption 
makes studding one small stone in a jewellery item to bring the jewellery in the category 
of Kundan, Polki and Jadaau and not getting it hallmarked. They note that the 
exemption has not been revoked after deliberations  with representatives from the 
jewellery trade, Assaying & Hallmarking Centres, Gems &Jewellery export Promotion 
Council, consumer organizations, Quality Council of India. The Committee feel that a 
suitable method may be worked out wherein the interests of  consumers may be 
protected while accommodating the concerns of the jewellery trade. They, therefore, 
suggest that even if Kundan, Polki and Jadaau remain exempted from mandatory 
hallmarking, a system of marking the weight and /or caratage of gold before s tudding 
with stones may be explored for the convenience of consumers. 
  
Reply by the Government:- 
5.8 The suggestion of marking the weight and /or caratage of gold before studding 
with stones has been noted and be explored after consultation with the stakeholders. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M. No. N-19/3/2023-P&C dated 06.11.2023 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see in Para No. 1.11 if Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para no 3.19) 
 5.9 The Committee note that mandatory hallmarking order of the Government has 
certain exemptions which, inter alia, includes jewelers with an annual turnover of 
uptoRs. 40 lakh.   While noting the apprehensions of the consumer associations about 
the unscr upulous traders resorting to selling jewellery without proper invoices and 

16 
 
opening of sales entities in the name of employees, relatives, etc. to keep the turnover 
less than Rs 40 lakh per annum to remain exempted from mandatory hallmarking, the 
Committee hope that relevant  enforcement authorities may address  suitably the issues 
raised by the consumer association. 
  
Reply by the Government :- 
5.10 In view of difficulty for very small jewelers having an annual turnover of less than 
Rs 40 lakh to adhere to ma ndatory hallmarking, jewellers having turnover less than Rs 
40 lakhs were exempted from mandatory hallmarking.  
  
It may also be noted that exemption uptoRs 40 lakh have also been provided in 
mandatory GST registration for goods sellers.  
  
However, the issue raised regarding selling jewellery without proper invoices and 
opening of sales entities in the name of employees, relatives, etc. to keep the turnover 
less than Rs 40 lakh per annum to remain exempted will be taken up with stakeholders. 
  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M. No. N-19/3/2023-P&C dated 06.11.2023 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see in Para No. 1.14 if Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para no 5.8) 
 5.11 The Committee note that as per the Guidelines for Recognition & Operation of 
Assaying and Hallmarking Centres (AHCs), any Assaying and Hallmarking Centre 
(AHC) may apply for recognition with self -certified copies of necessary documents and 
within 15 days, a Recognition  Assessment of the AHC to determine whether the AHC 
has created the necessary infrastructure for assaying and hallmarking according to IS 
15820:2009, is carried out. They also note that if the assessment report is found in 
order, DDGR grants recognition in  respect of gold and/or silver hallmarking.The 
Committee further note that till March, 2023, 796 recognitions were granted and 727 
were got renewed. In this context, the Committee suggest that timelines for every step 
in the process for granting recognitio n should prescribed and such timelines should 
adhered to. 
  
 

17 
 
Reply by the Government:- 
  
5.12 The entire process of grant of recognition to AHC including application 
submission by AHC, the auditor allotment and audit report submission has been made 
online to avoid any delay. As the recognition to AHC depends on the satisfactory 
verification of infrastructure capability and competence to carry out the assaying and 
hallmarking through preliminary inspection no timeline has been prescribed at present.  
  
However, the suggestion of the committee has been noted for suitably incorporating in 
the guidelines. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
O.M. No. N-19/3/2023-P&C dated 06.11.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         LOCKET CHATTERJEE, 
7 December, 2023                  Chairperson, 
16 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)                                      Standing Committee on  
   Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
 
 
  

18 
 
    APPENDIX - I 
    
MINUTES OF THE  FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (202 3-2024) HELD ON 
THURSDAY,  7TH DECEMBER, 2023 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room No. 4, 
Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt.Locket Chatterjee  - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
4. Shri Anil Firojiya 
5. Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit 
6. Shri Khagen Murmu 
7. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
8. Dr. Amar Singh 
9. Smt. Kavita Singh 
10. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
11. Shri Vaithilingam Ve. 
  
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 12. Shri C.Ve Shanmugam 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai                 - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi                 - Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan                 - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Dong Lianthang Tonsing            -     Deputy Secretary 
 

19 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the following Draft Reports of 
the Committee: 
(i) Thirty Third Report on Action Taken   by   the   Government   on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Twenty Seventh Report of 
the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘BIS -Hallmarking & 
Jewellery’ of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Fo od and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs); 
 
(ii) Xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
(iii) Xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
(iv) Xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the above mentioned Draft 
Reports of the Committee.  
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft Reports 
without any amendments/modifications.  
5.  The Committee then authorized Hon’ble Chairperson to finalize and present the 
aforesaid Reports. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
xxxx Matter does not pertain to Report   

20 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND  
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2022-23) 
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
(i) Total number of Recommendations:                 12 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 Para Nos. 1.16, 3.7, 4.5, 4.10, 4.12 and 5.17   
            (Chapter – II, Total -6) 
              Percentage:  50 % 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
 of the replies received from the Government 
 Para No. Nil 
                     (Chapter – III, Total - 0) 
             Percentage:   0 % 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
 not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
 Para No.  Nil 
            (Chapter – IV, Total - 0)   
                Percentage: 0% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the interim replies of the 
 Government have been received. 
 Para No.   2.21, 2.22, 3.12, 3.15, 3.19 and 5.8 
   (Chapter – V, Total - 6 ) 
           Percentage: 50 % 
 
 
 