i 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
 AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023-2024) 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
FUNCTIONING OF WAREHOUSING DEVELOPMENT AND  
REGULATORY AUTHORITY (WDRA) 
 
 
 
THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 December 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
38 


ii 
 
 
THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023-2024) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
FUNCTIONING OF WAREHOUSING DEVELOPMENT AND  
REGULATORY AUTHORITY (WDRA) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  19.12.2023 
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on   19.12.2023 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
December 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
  


iii 
 
 
  CONTENTS 
  Page 
No. 
 Composition of the Committee  v 
 Introduction vi 
 REPORT  
I Introductory 1 
II Legislative framework 1 
III Objectives of WDRA 2 
 IV Power and Functions of WDRA 3 
 V Composition of WDRA 3 
 VI Activities of WDRA 4 
 VII Registration of Warehouses 5 
 VIII Registration of SWC’s warehouses 7 
 IX Requirements for registration of Warehouses 11 
 X  Negotiable Warehousing Receipts (NWR) 15 
 XI Electronic Negotiable Warehousing Receipts (e-NWR) 16 
XII Pledge Finance against e-NWRs 19 
XIII Infrastructural Relaxations and Financial Concessions 22 
XIV Matters pertaining to e-NWR 24 
XV Suggestions of CWC 31 
XVI Transformation Plan of WDRA 36 
XVII Publicity/Awareness/Training Programs 37 
XVIII Recent Changes in WDRA Regulations 41 
 ANNEXURES  
I    State wise warehouses registered with WDRA, upto 
30.11.2023 
 
43 
 

iv 
 
 
 
  
II Details of the requirements for registration of warehouse 44 
 
III State wise Pledge Finance for FY 2023-24 up to  15.10.2023 45 
 
IV Repository wise charges 46 
APPEDICES  
1 Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting of the Committee (2022-
2023) held on 1 August, 2023 
52 
2 Minutes of the Third  sitting of the Committee (2023-24) held 
on  5 December ,2023 
55 
3. Minutes of the  Seventh  sitting of the Committee (2023-24) 
held on 18 December, 2023 
58 

v 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (2023-24) 
 
     Smt. Locket Chatterjee  -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
5. Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit 
6. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi 
7. Shri Faizal P.P. Mohammed 
5. Km. Debasree Chaudhuri 
6. Dr. Amar Singh 
7. Shri Anil Firojiya 
8. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
9. Shri Khagen Murmu 
10. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
11. Shri Subrat Pathak 
12. Smt. Himadri Singh 
13. Smt. Kavita Singh 
17. Shri Nandigam Suresh 
18. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
19. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
20. Shri Vaithilingam Ve. 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
23. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
24. Shri Rajmani Patel 
25. Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
26. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
27. Shri Baburam Nishad 
28. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam 
29.  Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
30    Vacant 
 31. Vacant 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai                      -           Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi            -  Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan                     -  Deputy Secretary 
 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs , Food and Public 
Distribution (2023-2024) having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on 
their behalf, present this Thirty Eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha ) on the subject 
‘Functioning of Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority (WDRA) ’ pertaining to 
the Ministry of  Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and 
Public Distribution). 
2.  The subject was selected by the Committee for examination and report . The 
Committee was briefed on the subject by the representatives of the Central Warehousi ng 
Corporation (CWC) on 01.08.2023  and the representatives of the Warehousing Development 
and Regulatory Authority (WDRA), Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) on 05.12.2023. 
 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Officers of Central Warehousing 
Corporation (CWC) and  Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority (WDRA) , 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution) for placing before them the detailed written notes on the subject and for 
furnishing the information to the Committee, desired in connection with the examination of the 
subject.  
 
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on       
18.12.2023. 
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the Report. 
 
 
 
  NEW DELHI;                            LOCKET CHATTERJEE, 
 18  December, 2023                              Chairperson, 
 27 Agrahayana,1945 (Saka)                                             Standing Committee on  
      Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 

1 
 
REPORT 
I. Introductory 
Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority (WDRA) is a Statutory 
Regulatory Authority governed by Department of Food and Public Distribution under the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, GOI. As per sect ion 24 of 
the Warehousing (Development and Regulation) Act, 2007, a Warehousing 
Development and Regulatory Authority(WDRA) has been constituted w.e.f. 26 th October 
2010 for implementing provisions of the Act.                                                                                        
II. Legislative framework 
2. The Warehousing (Development and Regulation) Act, 2007 provides for the 
establishment of the WDRA to exercise the powers conferred on it and to perform the 
functions assigned to it under the Act, Rules and Regulations for the development and 
regulation of warehouses, negotiability of warehouse receipts and promote orderly 
growth of the warehousing business in the country. Subsequently, Government of India 
vide their Gazette Notification da ted 26th October 2010, notified the constitution of 
Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority (WDRA) under the Warehousing 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 2007.  
3. Initially the Act was  extended to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. While, later vide Notification No. S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October, 2019, 
this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and the Union 
territory of Ladakh. 
4. Under the Act, there are following Rules which enable the provisions of the Act : 
 
i. The Warehousing (Development and Regulatory) Authority Annual Report and 
Returns Rules, 2010  
ii. The Salaries, Allowances and other Terms and Conditions of Service of 
Chairperson and Members of Warehousing (Development and Regulatory) 
Authority Rules, 2010 (Latest Amendment on 18th October, 2012) 
iii. The Warehousing (Devel opment and Regulation) Appellate Authority Procedure 
Rules, 2010  
iv. The Warehousing (Development and Regulatory) Authori ty - Financial and 
Managerial Powers Rules, 2010  

2 
 
v. The Warehousing (Development and  Regulatory) Authority Annual Statement of 
Accounts & Records Rules, 2010 
vi. The Warehousing (Development and Regulatory) Authority, appointment of 
Chairperson and other members Rules, 2013  (Latest Amendment on 21st 
October, 2020) 
vii. The Warehousing (Development and Regulation) Registration of Warehouses 
Rules, 2017  (Latest Amendment on 20th October, 2023) 
5. Further, there are following regulations have been framed under the Act: 
i. Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority (Maintenance of Records 
and Accounts of Warehousing Business) Regulations, 2012  
ii. The W arehousing Development and Regulatory Authority (Meetings) 
Regulations, 2012 
iii. The Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority (Conditions of service 
of the Officers and other Employees) Regulations, 2016   (Latest Amendment on 
5th November, 2021) 
iv. Warehousing Development and Regulatory Author ity (Electronic Negotiable 
Warehouse Receipts) Regulations, 2017 
III. Objectives of WDRA 
6. Following are the objectives of WDRA: 
 Implementation of Scientific Warehousing in India. 
 Creating awareness about the benefits of warehousing among farmers /trader s 
/Warehouse Service Providers (WSP). 
 Licensing and Monitoring of Warehouses as per the provisions of Warehousing 
(Development & Regulation) Act 2007 & Warehousing (Development & 
Regulation) Registration of Warehouses Rules, 2017. 
 Implementation of e -NWR (Electronic Negotiable Warehouse Receipts) in India 
as per the provisions of Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority 
(Electronic Negotiable Warehouse Receipts) Regulations, 2017. 
 Regular Inspection of Stocks deposited as e -NWR in regulated warehous es to 
ensure the quality and quantity. 
 Implementation of Grievance redressal/ arbitration in case of disputes in the 
ecosystem. 
 To stop distress sale of agricultural produce of the farmers. 
 To increase liquidity in the rural areas by way of pledge financing. 
 To create fiduciary trust of financers in the warehouse receipt. 
 
 

3 
 
IV. Power and Functions of WDRA 
 
7. Section 35 of the Act provides for the powers and functions of the Authority. The 
Authority is mandated to regulate and ensure implementation of vario us provisions of 
the Act and to promote orderly growth of the warehousing business. The powers and 
functions of the Authority include the following: 
(i) to issue to the applicants fulfilling the requirements for warehousemen a 
certificate of registration i n respect of warehouses, or renew, modify, 
withdraw, suspend or cancel such registration; 
(ii) to specify the duties and responsibilities of the warehouseman; 
(iii) to specify the qualifications, code of conduct and practical training for 
warehousemen and staff engaged in efficient conduct of warehousing 
business; 
(iv) to regulate the process of pledge, creation of charges and enforcement 
thereof in respect of goods deposited with the warehouse; 
(v) to make regulations laying down the standards for approval  of certifying 
agencies for grading of goods; 
(vi) to determine the rate of, and levy, the fees and other charges for carrying 
out the provisions of this Act; 
(vii) to call for information from, undertaking inspection of, conducting 
enquiries and  investigations including audit of the warehouses, and other 
organisations connected with the warehousing business 
(viii) to regulate the rates, advantages, terms and conditions that may be 
offered by warehousemen in respect of warehousing business;  
(ix) to specify, by regulations, the form and manner in which books of account 
shall be  maintained and statement of accounts shall be rendered by 
warehousemen; 
(x) to maintain a panel of arbitrators and to nominate arbitrators from such 
panel in disputes between warehouses and warehouse receipt holder; 
(xi) to regulate and develop electronic system of holding and transfer of credit 
balances of fungible goods deposited in the warehouses. 
 
V. Composition of WDRA  
8. The Authority consists of a Chairperson and two full time Members appointed by 
the Central  Government. The Act provides that the Chairperson and every other 
Member shall hold office  for a term not exceeding five years from the date on which 
he enters upon his office and shall be  eligible for re -appointment, provi ded that no 
person shall hold office as the Chairperson or  Member after he has attained the age 
of sixty five years. 

4 
 
 
VI. Activities of WDRA 
9. As per the annual report 2022-23 of Department of Food and Public Distribution, 
The Authority has undertaken the following activities: 
i. Empanelment of Inspection Agencies : The requirement of physical 
infrastructure of warehouse(s) are to be inspected through the Inspection 
Agency (IA) nominated by the WDRA prior to their registration to ensure that 
basic requirements  of scientific storage of agricultural and other commodities 
are fully met by these warehouses. Currently 08 Inspection Agencies are 
actively working with WDRA for undertaking various warehouse inspections on 
behalf of WDRA. 
ii. Notification of Agricultural an d Non- Agricultural Commodities: The 
Authority has so far notified 136 agricultural commodities including cereals, 
pulses, oilseeds, vegetable oils, spices, edible nuts, rubber, tobacco, tea, coffee 
etc. and has also notified 24 horticulture commodities su ch as Potato, Onion, 
Garlic, Ginger, Turmeric, Apple, Resins etc. 09 non -agricultural commodities 
such as aluminum, copper, nickel, lead, zinc, tin, brass, steel and iron ore have 
also been notified. 
iii. eNWRs (Electronic Negotiable Warehouse Receip ts): On 26.09.2017, 
the electronic Negotiable Warehouse Receipt (eNWR) and WDRA Portal was 
launched. Two repositories, M/s CDSL Commodity Repository Limited (CCRL) 
sponsored by M/s Central Depository Services Limited (CDSL) and M/s National 
Electronic Repository Limi ted (NERL) sponsored by M/s National Commodity 
and Derivatives Exchange (NCDEX) were issued registration certificate for 
setting up repository systems for creation and management of e-NWRs. 
iv. Introduction of NWR System in cold storages : The Authority in 
consultation with the National Horticulture Mission (NHM) and National 
Horticulture Board (NHB), had also introduced NWR system for cold storages 
so that the growers / farmers producing horticultural commodities may store 
these commodities in cold storages and may avail loan against NWRs issued by 
the registered cold storages. 
v. Training and Awareness programme : For capacity building in the 
warehousing sector, training programmes for warehousemen of the registered 
warehouses are being regularly organized by the A uthority through various 
training partner institutions. 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
VII. Registration of Warehouses 
10. WDRA in their background note submitted to the Committee informed that 
Warehouses which intend to issue negotiable warehouse receipts (NWRs) are required 
to be registered with the WDRA. Otherwise registration of warehouses with WDRA is 
not mandatory. Government notified new registration rules, namely, the Warehousing 
(Development and Regulation) Registration of Warehousing Rules, 2017, with effect 
from 23.02.2017 , to simplify the registration process. The new rules permit 
warehousemen to approach WDRA for registration directly without an accreditation 
agency. The entire registration process excluding physical inspection of the warehouses 
has been made online w.e.f. November 1, 2017.  
11. Since inception, the WDRA registered 6929 warehouses with storage capacity of 
411Lakh MT, out of which the valid warehouse registration number is 4916  with storage 
capacity of 363 Lakh MT as on 30.11.2023.   
The table of state wise  warehouses registered with WDRA, upto 30.11.2023  is 
enclosed at Annexure 1.  
 
12. In this regard, the representatives of WDRA deposited before the Committee at 
their sitting held on 05.12.2023 as under:  
 
“.........There is a graph which shows the registr ation of warehouses 
in WDRA. As of date, about 4914 warehouses are registered in 
WDRA.  That is the cumulative figure but the graph shows the annual 
registration since 2010 -11 when the WDRA was established. I am 
happy to tell you Madam that in the year 202 2-23, we managed to 
register 1522 warehouses compared to 610 in the previous year and 
337 warehouses in the 2021. This shows year on year growth of 150 
per cent. We are confident that this year also, we will continue to 
grow and our registered warehouses w ill definitely cross 5000. We 
are hoping for the target of 6000 which is an aspirational goal....” 
 
13. The Committee asked the WDRA to furnish the data of those warehouses which 
are not registered with WDRA. In response, WDRA in their written replies to t he 
Committee submitted that  WDRA does not maintain data of warehouses not 
registered by it. However, it is submitted that NABARD has conducted a geo -tagging 
survey of agricultural warehouses. As per the master data as on 27 -01-2021shared 

6 
 
by NABARD with WDRA, a total of 107781 warehouses are geo tagged. Out of which 
99286 are operational and 8495 are non-operational warehouses.  
 
14.  Regarding the number of warehouses registered by WDRA, during their sitting 
held on 04.12.2023, the representatives of the Au thority deposited before the 
committee following: The number of warehouses registered with WDRA has 
witnessed significant increase over the recent years. A total of 1522 warehouses 
were registered in the FY 2022 -23 which is a 150% improvement over the prev ious 
year. Present trends of registration also indicate growth.  
 
15. Number of Warehouses Registered (Year wise) as on 30 thNov’ 2023* as as 
under: 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
240
92 68
234
588
214 261
607
1005
337
610
1522
1151
 
16. The Committee learn that Warehousing Development and Regulatory 
Authority (WDRA) was constituted on 26th October 2010, as per the provisions of 
Warehousing (Development and Regulation) Act, 2007.  One of the main objective 
of WDRA is Licensing and Monitoring of Warehouses as per the provisions of 
Warehousing (Development & Regulation) Act 2007 & Warehousing (Development 
& Regulation) Registration of Warehouses Rules, 2017. The Committee note that   
since inception, the WDRA has registered 6929 warehouses with storage capacity 
of 411Lakh MT, out of which the valid warehouse registration number is 4916 with 
storage capacity of 363 Lakh MT as on 30.11.2023. Further, the Committee are 

7 
 
happy to note that during FY 2022 -23, 1522 warehouses were registered in 
comparison to 610 registration during FY 2021 -22 expressing 150% growth in 
registration of warehouses than the previous financial year i.e 2021 -22. They note 
with satisfaction that so far, 1151 warehouses have been registered during 
current financial year . The Committee  firmly believe that the Department and 
WDRA will put forth their dedicated efforts  towards increasing the number of 
registration of warehouses which will eventually help in developing a progressive 
ecosystem for warehousing in the country.  They further, recommend that if need 
be, possibility of opening regional offices of WDR A be explored as it would not 
only enhance coordination with state warehousing corporations, but also provide 
platform for clear understanding of the work of WDRA and ensure better 
outreach. 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
VIII. Registration of SWC’s Warehouses 
17 Regarding the status of registration of warehouses of State Warehousing 
Corporation (SWCs) under WDRA, the WDRA in their written replied informed the 
Committee that out of 19 State Warehousing Corporations, some of the warehouses of 
15 SWCs are registered under WDRA. The details are as under: 
 
Details of State Warehouses Registered with WDRA 
S. No Name of SWC 
No. Of 
warehouses 
registered as 
on       
30-11-2023 
 1 
Madhya Pradesh  State Warehousing and Logistics 
Corporation 
196 
 2 Maharashtra State Warehousing Corporation 195 
 3 Uttar Pradesh  State Warehousing Corporation 178 
 4 Chhattisgarh State Warehousing Corporation 121 

8 
 
 5 Haryana State Warehousing Corporation 111 
 6 Rajasthan State warehousing Corporation 97 
 7 Andhra Pradesh  State Warehousing Corporation 91 
 8 Telangana State Warehousing Corporation 75 
 9 Tamil Nadu State Warehousing corporation 60 
 10 Odisha State Warehousing Corporation 46 
 11 Bihar State Warehousing Corporation 43 
 12 Karnataka State warehouse corporation 21 
 13 Uttarakhand State Warehousing Corporation 6 
 14 Assam State Warehousing Corporation 3 
 15 West Bengal State Warehousing Corporation 1 
    
 
  Grand Total 1244 
 
18.  They further informed that it is essential to increase the number of warehouses 
under the ambit of WDRA’s regulation, to extend the benefits of regulation to a larger 
number of people. Several measures have been taken towards this, including 
outreach programmes to warehousemen. The Food Corporation of India has decided 
to insist on WDRA registratio n for all third -party warehouses used for storing publicly 
procured stocks. Similarly, the MPWLC has issued orders stating that all private 
warehouses which are hired by it shall have WDRA registration. These decisions 
have helped in increasing warehouse r egistration with WDRA. Secretary, DFPD has 
written to the Chief Secretaries of all States, asking them to follow the lead taken by 
the Madhya Pradesh Government. WDRA plans to follow up the matter with all State 
Governments, besides taking other measures to increase warehouse registration with 
it. Targeting of selected crop clusters for warehouse registration and pledge finance 
such as coffee in Coorg, areca nut in Mangalore, fruits and nuts in Kashmir, chilli in 
Guntur, has been initiated.  
 
 
 
 

9 
 
 
19. In this regard, the representatives of WDRA deposited before the Committee on 
05.12.2023 as under: 
“……Some organisations like FCI have taken a decision that only 
WDRA registered warehouses will be used for storing their stock 
in private warehouses.  Madhya Prade sh Logistics and 
Warehousing Corporation has also taken a decision that it will 
deal only with private warehouses having WDRA registration.  
इसक े कारण  क ु छ हद तक वेयरहाउस  रजिस्ट्रेशन बढा है। Now, it has 
already crossed 4900 warehouses.  It was only around 1800 
warehouses about two years back....”  
20. The Committee asked the WDRA the  reason that no warehouse of Kerala, 
Gujarat, Meghalaya and, P unjab State Warehousing Corporations is registered, the 
WDRA in their written reply provided to the Committee, submitted that  as on 08 -12-
2023, 15 out of 19 SWCs registered with WDRA as warehouseman. Kerala, Gujarat, 
Meghalaya, Punjab SWCs are not yet registered with WDRA.   
It is submitted that WDRA registers only those warehouseman and warehouses 
which meet the standards prescribed by WDRA. A warehouseman has to have 
minimum net worth prescribed in the WDRA warehouse registration Rules.  
SWCs of Kerala a nd Punjab do not have required networth for registering its 
warehouses. From, 12 -07-2023, GoI, allowed entities created under either central and 
state legislations to register warehouses even with negative net worth provided those 
entities give an indemnit y bond from the respective governments.  Kerala and Punjab 
SWCs were informed about this amendment and advised to register with WDRA. Kerala 
SWC has applied for registration and it is under process.  
Gujarat and Meghalaya SWCs were advised by the DFPD and WDRA to register. 
However, both the  SWCs are yet to register with WDRA. It is submitted that WDRA 
registration is not mandatory for warehouses, except when they intend to issue NWRs. 
 
21. The Committee observe that as on 30.11.2023 there are 1244 warehouses of 
15 State Warehousing Corporations registered under WDRA provisions . They 
further informed that  it is essential to increase the number of  warehouses under 

10 
 
the ambit of WDRA’s regulation, to extend the benefits of regulation to a larger 
number of people. Moreover, Food Corporation of India has decided to insist on 
WDRA registration for all third -party warehouses used for storing publicly 
procured stocks and similar orders have been issued by MPWLC. The Committee 
are satisfied to note that WDRA themselves are self conscious regarding 
expansion of registered warehouses and making efforts by running outreach 
programs for warehousemen . The Committee feel that bringing all warehouse 
holding organizations on a single platform will help in developing a homogenous 
warehousing niche in the country.  The Committee, therefore, desire that WDRA 
should reach out all the state Warehousing corporations and pursue them for 
registering and apprise the Committee accordingly.  
(Recommendation No. 2) 
22. The Committee note that warehouses of Kerala, Gujarat, Meghalaya and 
Punjab State Warehousing Corporations are not registered with WDRA. The 
reason stated by WDRA is  that WDRA registers only those warehouseman and 
warehouses which meet the standards prescribed by WDRA. A warehouseman 
has to have minimum net worth prescribed in the WDRA warehouse registration 
Rules.  SWCs of Kerala and Punjab do not have required networth for registering 
its warehouses. In this regard, the Committee are delighted to note that from,     
12-07-2023, Govt. o f India, has allowed entities created under either central and 
state legislations to register warehouses even with negative net worth provided 
those entities give an indemnity bond from the respective governments.  Kerala 
and Punjab SWCs have been informed  about this amendment and advised to 
register with WDRA. Kerala SWC has applied for registration and Gujarat along 
with Meghalaya SWCs have been advised by the DFPD and WDRA to register. 
While appreciating the considered efforts of the Government to bring all State 
Warehousing Corporation under the ambit of WDRA registration, the Committee 
desire that the registration of Kerala SWC should be expedited and Department 
and WDRA both should pursue Punjab, Gujarat and Meghalaya SWCs to apply for 
WDRA registrations under the new relaxations. 
(Recommendation No. 3) 

11 
 
IX. Requirements for registration of Warehouses 
23. WDRA further informed about the various requirements for registration of 
Warehouses which are enumerated here as under: 
a. Infrastructure Requirements for Warehouses: The infrastructure requirements 
in a warehouse are covered under the following categories: 
i. Construction &structural requirements.  
ii. Laboratory facilities including equipment for physical and chemical analysis of 
goods.  
iii. Equipment and infrastruc ture required for handling/ preservation / maintenance 
of stocks. 
iv. Arrangements for weighment of goods.  
v. Firefighting arrangements. 
vi. Security Arrangements. 
vii. Office facilities. 
Details of the requirements are given at Annexure-2. 
b. Infrastructure Requirement for  Cold Storages : Besides the above points 
mentioned for the warehouses, the cold storages have to meet following 
additional norms: 
i. Construction to be in accordance with the technical standards prescribed 
under the schemes of Organizations/Department/Ministr y of Central/State 
Government.  
ii. To comply with any other nationally or internationally recognized standard 
design practice for thermal load.  
c. Requirement of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs):   WDRA has 
stipulated model SOPs for scientific storage of goo ds in the Warehousing 
(Development and Regulation) Registration of Warehouses Rules 2017.  
However, warehouses are free to adopt better / improved SOPs for effective 
and efficient operation of their warehouses. 
d. Minimum Net worth Requirements: Details of minimum net worth requirements 
of applicant for registration of warehouse storing both agricultural and 
nonagricultural goods is as follows: 

12 
 
Storage capacity (inTons) Net worth Requirement (in Rupees) 
Upto 500 0.04 Crores 
501 – 1000 0.08 Crores 
1001-1500 0.12 Crores 
1501 – 2000 0.16 Crores 
2001 MT and Above 
Capacity 
Capacity in (MT) *Rs. 1000 with a 
maximum cap of Rs. 50 Crores 
 
These net worth figures were notified by the DFPD on 18 -09-2023 pursuant to proposal 
sent by WDRA to rationalize the net worth requirements.  
Note: If the applicant or warehouseman is a Farmer Producer Organization or a Primary 
Agricultural Cooperative Credit Society or a Self Help Group, the net worth requirement 
specified in the Table shall not apply, but they shall not have deficit net worth. 
e. Security Deposit: -The warehouseman shall maintain a Security Deposit to be 
held by the Authority during period of registration. The Security Deposit has two 
components, i.e. fixed and dynamic Security Deposit 
(a) Fixed Security Deposit: The fixed Security Deposit amount is per warehouse 
belonging to the warehouseman registered with WDRA. Fixed Security Deposit is 
required to be deposited with WDRA at time of registration of warehouse: 
i. For warehouseman with total capacity of all agriwarehous es upto 2000 MT 
belonging to the warehouseman registered with WDRA, the fixed Security 
Deposit is Rs. 50,000/- per warehouse.  
ii. For warehouseman with total capacity of all agriwarehouses above 2000 MT 
belonging to the warehouseman registered with WDRA, the fixed Security 
Deposit is Rs. 1 lakh per warehouse.  
iii. For warehouseman, storing only non - agricultural commodities the fixed 
security deposit is Rs. 1,00,000/- per warehouse. 
(b) Dynamic Security Deposit (DSD): 
i. DSD is arrived based on the maximum value of negot iable and non -
negotiable warehouse receipts outstanding in all the registered 
warehouses of the warehouseman on any day during the preceding 
month. For the warehouseman storing agriculture goods, the requirement 
of dynamic Security Deposit is 3%,1.5%,1% an d 0.5%in the first slab, 

13 
 
second slab, third slab and fourth slab, respectively.  Where the applicant/ 
warehouseman is a Farmer Producer Organization or a PACCS, the total 
Security Deposit would be Rs. 50,000 (total) per warehouse covering both 
the dynamic and fixed Security Deposit. 
ii. For the warehouseman storing non - agriculture goods  the dynamic 
Security Deposit is 0.3% (zero point three percent) of the maximum value 
of negotiable and non -negotiable warehouse receipts outstanding in all 
the registered wareho uses of the warehouseman on any day during the 
preceding month. 
f. Inspection of Warehouses: Applicant warehouses have to provide all the 
documents on matters listed above along with the application for registration as 
prescribed under Warehousing (Develop ment and Regulation) Registration of 
Warehousing Rules, 2017.If an application is found in order, the Authority may cause a 
physical inspection of the warehouse concerned to satisfy itself about fulfilment of the 
infrastructure requirement by the warehouse  and other particulars as specified by the 
Authority in the inspection guidelines. The Authority has empaneled nine Inspection 
Agencies for undertaking various inspections on its behalf. 
24 On the matter of inspections of warehouses, the representatives of WD RA 
deposited before the Committee at their sitting held on 05.12.2023 as under:  
“....Our inspection of all the registered warehouses is a very important 
task as far as WDRA is concerned because this is necessary to 
maintain the sanctity of e-NWR.  If the quantity and quality shown in e-
NWR is not actually available on ground, it will lead to huge problems.  
So, we do roughly about 300 inspections in a month on a random basis 
based on a computer -based algorithm so that warehousemen know 
that they can be ins pected.  They will maintain the quantity and quality 
of the stock.  इसक े कारण  क ु छ हद तक बैंक का ट्रस्ट् बढ गया है। They know 
that there will be less possibility of a fraud if they lend against WDRA 
registered warehouse receipts....” 
 
25. The WDRA further informed the Committee that i f the applicant meets all the 
eligibility requirements and submits the security deposit as provided under the rules, the 
Authority issues a certificate of registration to the applicant in respect of the warehouse 
to the applicant which shall be valid for a period of five years from the date of is sue of 
the certificate, subject to the maintenance of ownership or continuous effective control 
over the warehouse concerned by the warehouseman. 

14 
 
26.  On being asked about the application fees for registration or renewal of 
registration of warehouse, the W DRA informed that Application fee for registration and 
renewal of warehouse storing agricultural goods varies from Rs. 5,000/ - to Rs. 30,000/- 
and warehouses storing both agricultural and non-agricultural goods or non -agricultural 
goods only varies from Rs . 50, 000/- to Rs. 100,000/- depending on the capacity of the 
warehouse. Where the applicant/ warehouseman is a Farmer Producer Organisation or 
a Primary Agricultural Co -operative Society or Self Help Group (SHG), the application 
fee shall be Rs. 500  per warehouse. However, application fees for all applicants have 
been waived both for registration or renewal of warehouses storing only agricultural 
goods till 25th Oct, 2025 to encourage more registration. 
27. The Committee note that application fee for regis tration and renewal of 
warehouse storing agricultural goods varies from Rs. 5,000/ - to Rs. 30,000/ - and 
warehouses storing both agricultural and non -agricultural goods or non -
agricultural goods only varies from Rs. 50, 000/- to Rs. 100,000/- depending on the 
capacity of the warehouse.  Further, the application fee for warehouses where the 
applicant / warehousemen is a Farmer Producer Organisation or a Primary 
Agricultural Co-operative Society or Self Help Group (SHG), has been  fixed at Rs. 
500per warehouse.  The Committee understand that fee payable for registration 
play a vital role in registration  and renewal of warehouses with WDRA and thus 
appreciate the specific steps like keeping small application fee for an applicant / 
warehousemen being Farmer Producer Organisation or a Primary Agricultural Co-
operative Society or Self Help Group (SHG)  and all applicants have been waived 
both for registration or renewal of warehouses storing only agricultural goods till 
25th Oct, 2025 to encourage mo re registration. The Committee expect that WDRA 
will continue their support to such applicants in future as well  and also consider 
the similar waiver scheme for the warehouses storing both agricultural and non -
agricultural or non -agricultural goods so that more and more wareh ouses are 
registered with WDRA.  
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
 

15 
 
X. Negotiable Warehousing Receipts (NWR) 
28. The main objective of WDRA is to implement Negotiable Warehouse Receipt 
(NWR) System in the country, which would help farmers to store their produce in 
scientific storage godowns near by their farms and to seek loan from banks against their 
NWR. 
29. Section 2(m) of the Warehousing (Development and Regulation) Act, 2007 
defines Negotiable Warehouse Receipt as under: 
“negotiable warehouse receipt" means a wa rehouse receipt under 
which the goods represented therein are deliverable to the depositor 
or order, the of endorsement which has the effect of transfer of 
goods represented thereby and the endorsee for which takes a good 
title;” 
30. Section 11 of the Act gives a broad framework of the contents of a NWR. Section 
12 of the Act provides for negotiability of a warehouse receipt. The format of NWR was 
finalised by the Authority in consultation with the Indian Banks Association (IBA). The 
physical NWR books cont aining various security features were printed by the Security 
Printing and Minting Corporation of India Limited. The NWR books were being issued to 
the registered warehouses by the Authority to be issued against deposits. The physical 
NWRs have unique feat ures such as anti -copy, endless text, fine line patterns and 
micro-printing with rainbow colouring. 
31. Annual Report (2021 -22) of WDRA has enumerated the following benefits of 
NWRs:  
(i) Increased liquidity in rural areas 
(ii) Encouragement of scientific storage o f goods and thereby reducing post 
harvest losses. 
(iii) Lower cost of financing 
(iv) Shorter and more efficient supply chains. 
(v) Enhanced rewards for standard section, grading and quality 
(vi) Better price risk management. 
(vii) Better returns to farmers and better ser vices (qual ity of goods) to the 
consumers. 

16 
 
 
XI. Electronic Negotiable Warehousing Receipts (e-NWR) 
32.  As per Section 11 of the Act a warehouse receipt can either be in writing or in 
electronic form. Further as per Section 2 of the said Act, a Warehouse Receipt has 
been defined as an acknowledgement in writing or in electronic form issued by a 
Warehouseman or his duly authorised representative (including depository by whatever 
name called) of the receipt for storage of goods not owned by the warehouseman.  With 
the prior approval of the Central Government and in consultation with the Warehousing 
Advisory Committee (WAC), the Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority 
(Electronic Negotiable Warehouse Receipts) Regulations, 2017 were notified by the 
Authority on 29 th June 2017 relating to electronic Negotiable Warehouse Receipt 
(eNWR) to be issued by registered warehouses on the electronic repository system 
against the deposited goods.  The Authority launched electronic Negotiable Warehouse 
Receipt (e-NWR) on 26th Se ptember, 2017 to be issued by registered warehouses on 
electronic repository system. The Authority has also notified that with effect from         
1st August 2019 all registered warehouses shall issue NWRs only in electronic form. 
33. Annual Report (2021 -22) of WDRA has enumerated the salient features of e -
NWRs as under: 
(i) An eNWR is available only in electronic form. 
(ii) The single source of information for the eNWR is the repository system where 
eNWR is issued by registered warehouses. 
(iii) Confidentiality, integrity and availability of the e -NWR information is provided 
by the Repository system. 
(iv) An eNWR has time validity. 
(v) All eNWRs can be traded through off -market or on -market in Commodity 
Exchanges platforms. 
(vi) An eNWR can be auctioned under certain conditions such as  loan not repaid, 
on expiry and delivery not taken, and on likely damage or spoilage of the 
commodity in the warehouse. 
(vii) e-NWR can be transferred fully or in part 
 

17 
 
34. WDRA in their background note submitted to the Committee also highlighted the 
benefits of e-NMR as under:  
a) Since eNWRs are issued by WDRA registered warehouses having 
requisite infrastructure for scientific warehousing and following standard 
operating procedure, the stocks deposited will be maintained as per the 
quality and quantity reflected on eNWR. 
 
b) eNWR is duly recognized by banks as a credible and secure instrument, 
facilitates an easy and adequate pledge finance.   
 
c) Being electronic in nature eNWR can be traded many times quickly 
creating opportunities for a better price discovery.  
 
d) The eNWR is integrated with the eNAM. 
 
e) The eNWR indicates quality standards/grades of the commodities stored 
in the warehouses. 
 
Hence, eNWR can increase the liquidity in the rural areas, encourage scientific 
warehousing of goods, lowers cost of financing, imp rove supply chains and price risk 
management.  
35. They further informed that Committee that in 2022 -23 total 64462 eNWRs have 
been issued. The number of NMR and E -NMR issued since 2011 -12 are given in the 
table below:  
F.Y.  NWR eNWR Total 
(NWR + 
eNWR) 
2011-12 8056 - 8056 
2012-13 8242 - 8242 
2013-14 6121 - 6121 
2014-15 16993 - 16993 
2015-16 15178 - 15178 
2016-17 19350 - 19350 
2017-18 12199 114 12313 

18 
 
2018-19 11782 77332 89114 
2019-20 3698 134939 138637 
2020-21 - 88480 88480 
2021-22 - 94736 94736 
2022-23 - 64462 64462 
2023-24 (up 
to30.11.2023) 
 41752 41752 
Total 101619 501815 603434 
 
36. The Committee note that under Section 2 of the Warehousing 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 2007, a Warehouse Receipt has been defined 
as an acknowledgement i n writing or in electronic form issued by a 
Warehouseman or his duly authorised representative (including depository by 
whatever name called) of the receipt for storage of goods not owned by the 
warehouseman. As per Section 11 of the Act a warehouse receip t can either be in 
writing or in electronic form. One of the objectives of WDRA is implementation of 
e-NWR (Electronic Negotiable Warehouse Receipts) in India as per the provisions 
of Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority (Electronic Negotiable 
Warehouse Receipts) Regulations, 2017.  Accordingly, the Authority launched 
electronic Negotiable Warehouse Receipt (e -NWR) on 26th September, 2017 to be 
issued by registered warehouses on electronic repository system. The Committee 
are delighted to note th at all NWRs issued by registered warehouses are only e -
NWRs with effect from 1st August 2019. While appreciating the progressive step s 
taken by WDRA in bring the eNWR in place  and considering the advantages of 
eNWR over physical receipts, the Committee desire that benefits of eNWR should 
be popularized more among warehousemen and outreach of the same may be 
expanded. 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
 

19 
 
XII. Pledge Finance against e-NWRs 
37. WDRA in their written submission to the Committee informed that as envisaged 
in the objectives of the Warehousing (D&R) Act 2007 aimed to “facilitate finance against 
NWRs”, “improving liquidity in rural areas”, “improving lending portfolio of banks”, 
WDRA took this as a key area of work. WDRA had approached RBI several times to 
make eNWR mandatory for pledge financing, or at least give preferential treatment to 
eNWR based loans. However, RBI declined this request, because the number of WDRA 
registered warehouses were on the lower side. However, RBI  has enhanced Priority 
Sector Lending (PSL) limit for e -NWRs from Rs. 50 Lakhs to Rs. 75 Lakhs while other 
warehouse receipts PSL limit is capped up to  Rs.50 Lakhs only (vide RBI Master 
Directions dated April 29, 2021). 
Under Modified Interest Subvention (IS) Scheme, 1.5% IS extended to sma ll and 
marginal farmers having KCC for a further period of up to six months post -harvest, on 
the produce stored in registered warehouses.  WDRA has approached Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare for providing Prompt Repayment Incentive (PRI) to 
eNWR based pledge finance to encourage farmers to deposit their stock in WDRA 
registered warehouses.  
Now WDRA is directly approaching banks to increase their post -harvest lending 
against eNWRs. Accordingly, dialogue was initiated with both public and priva te sector 
banks to improve pledge finance against e - NWRs. Pursuant to an MoU signed by 
WDRA with the State Bank of India, the bank has already brought out a special product 
for loaning against eNWR, the Produce Marketing loan which offers lower interest r ate, 
zero processing fees, no additional collateral etc. Loans given by SBI against eNWR 
has increased recently.  
Details of Pledge finance extended against e -NWR year -wise is given in the 
graph below:- 

20 
 
*Data as on 30-11-2023.  
State- wise details of Pledge finance is enclosed at Annexure-3. 
38. In regards to the pledge financing, the representatives of WDRA deposited 
before the Committee at their sitting held on 05.12.2023 as under: 
“...Coming back to the pledge financing perfor mance, if you look at the graphs, 
you will see that pledge finance has also increased very steeply. The growth rate 
in the last year was 64 per cent. It has been a continuous increase since 2019-20 
when it was Rs.380 crore. Then it went up to Rs.732 crore.  Last to last year, it 
was Rs.1,492 crore. We have got Rs.2,442 crore as on date. I am quite confident 
that we will cross Rs.4,000 crore this year... 
.......The total loan market in the country for post -harvest finance is to the tune of 
Rs.40,000 crore. If we get Rs.4,000 crore, we would be ten per cent holder of the 
market. This figure can definitely be improved. We will always try to achieve that 
target.” 
39. The Committee observe that it is envisaged in the objectives of the 
Warehousing (D&R) Act 2007, W DRA is aimed to “facilitate finance against 
NWRs”, “improving liquidity in rural areas”, “improving lending portfolio of 
banks”. The Committee appreciate the efforts of WDRA in this directions as they 
have approached RBI several times to make eNWR mandator y for pledge 
financing, or at least give preferential treatment to eNWR based loans. The 
Committee acknowledge the fact that it is the result of persuasion of WDRA with 

21 
 
RBI that despite declining the request for preferential treatment to eNWRs on the 
ground of  low number of registered warehouses , RBI has enhanced Priority 
Sector Lending (PSL) limit for e -NWRs from Rs. 50 Lakhs to Rs. 75 Lakhs .  The 
Committee also desire that WDRA should keep on pursuing RBI for making 
preferential treatment to eNWR once the  number of registered warehouses 
increase and the effect of preferential treatment  of eNWR would further enhanced 
the number of registered warehouses.  The Committee would be interested in 
knowing the impact of these developments in achieving the objective s of the 
Warehousing (D&R) Act, 2007. 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
40. The Committee are also happy to note WDRA is directly approaching banks 
to increase their post -harvest lending against eNWRs and initiated the dialogue 
with both public and private sector ban ks to improve pledge finance against e - 
NWRs. As a result, the State Bank of India has brought out a special product for 
loaning against eNWR with low interest rate, zero processing fees and no 
additional collateral. While appreciating the efforts of WDRA in the direction of 
promoting eNWR for getting preferential treatment, the Committee recommend 
that WDRA should keep on exploring other avenues for promotion of eNWR. 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
41. The Committee note that pledge finance against eNWRs has been Rs. 732 
Cr., 1492 Cr. and 2442 Cr. for the years 2020-21, 2021-22 and 2022-23 respectively. 
Further, it has reached to Rs. 2081 Cr till 30.11.2023 for the year 2023 -24. The 
Committee are delighted to observe the growth of pledge financing against eNWR 
for last three years and hope that loan values against eNWR will maintain the 
pace of manifold increase in future as well. They also desire that WDRA should 
also continue to put forth their earnest efforts to create an environment for 
promoting eNWR and pledge financing.  
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
 

22 
 
 
XIII. Infrastructural Relaxations and Financial Concessions 
42. In regard to the relaxations and financial concessions being extended to farmers 
and their associations, WDRA informed the Committee that they are provin g following 
special relaxations to Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) and Primary Agricultural 
Cooperative Credit Societies (PACCSs):  
A. Special relaxation for warehouses owned by Farmer Producer 
Organizations (FPOs) and Primary Agricultural Cooperative Cr edit 
Societies (PACCSs)  
 
1) The Authority has given relaxations in registration requirements of warehouses 
operated by Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), Primary Agricultural 
Cooperative Societies (PACSs) and Self -Help Groups (SHGs) as they operate   
in small capacity warehouses in rural areas, in close proximity of farmers.  These 
farmer led institutions cater mainly to the needs of the member farmers. The 
concessions accorded to these organizations by WDRA for registration of 
warehouse(s) are summarized as under: 
 
2) Where the applicant/warehouseman is a FPO/PACCS/SHG, the application fee 
is Rs. 500 per warehouse while for others the fee varies from Rs. 5000 to Rs. 
30,000/- depending on the capacity of the warehouse. (However, the application 
fees has been waived for all agri warehouse applicants till 25 Oct, 2025).  
3) Where the applicant/warehouseman is a FPO/PACCS/SHG, the net worth 
required is to be only positive irrespective of the capacity of warehouse, while for 
others it is specified with respect to the capacity of warehouse. 
4) Where the applicant/warehouseman is a FPO/PACCS, total Security deposit 
requirement is Rs. 50000/- per warehouse in the form of a Bank Guarantee (BG) 
or bank Fixed Deposit (FD) i.e.fixed irrespective of the value of eNWRs/eNNWRs 
(electronic-negotiable warehouse receipts/ electronic non -negotiable warehouse 
receipts) issued by it, while for others it is minimum of Rs.50,000/ - or Rs.100,000 
(depending on the capacity of the warehouse) plus a percentage of value of e -
NWRs and e-NNWRs issued. 
 
 
B. Relaxation in infrastructure requirements for registration provided to the 
Primary Agricultural Cooperative Societies (PACSs) warehouse(s) by the 
Authority: 
 
1) In case the warehouse is located on a raised well drained site not liable for 
flooding / in undation and is away from a place likely to be affected by seepage 
water a plinth height of at least 30 cm may be accepted,  
 
2) The minimum limit for capacity to be registered in case of PACSs warehouses 
will be 100 MT.  

23 
 
 
3) Availability of parking and maneuver ing space for vehicles shall not be insisted 
upon in case of PACS warehouses as these are small capacity units operated for 
the benefit of the member farmers. 
 
4) Other than the Secretary of the society one more staff of the PACS shall be 
engaged (on full or part time basis) for storage and preservation of the goods in 
the warehouse. Availability of security guards may be desirable but not insisted 
upon for registration of the warehouse.  
 
5) Availability of a pucca boundary wall / barbed wire fencing shall not b e insisted 
upon. However, the warehouse should have adequate arrangement for locking of 
godown and safety/security of stocks.  
 
6) PACSs warehouses up to 500 MT capacity shall have at least one fire 
extinguisher (of requisite type) and six fire buckets. For w arehouses having 
capacity more than 500 MT the prescribed norms for other warehouses shall be 
followed, which is three fire extinguishers and fifteen fire buckets for capacity up 
to 1500 MT. 
 
43. The Committee note with satisfaction that WDRA is extending special 
relaxations to warehouses owned by Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), 
Primary Agricultural Cooperative Credit Societies (PACCSs) and Self Help Groups 
(SHGs) such as relaxation in registration requirements, minimal registration fees 
of Rs.500/ - per warehouse irrespective of its capacity, positive net worth and 
security deposit of Rs.50,000/- irrespective of value of eNWR/eNNWR issued by 
warehouse. Further, some relaxations have also given in infrastructure 
requirements for registration of warehous es as minimum limit for capacity to be 
registered in case of PACSs warehouses is kept at 100 MT. The Committee agree 
that these steps taken by WDRA will not only support Farmer Producer 
Organizations (FPOs), Primary Agricultural Cooperative Credit Societie s 
(PACCSs) and Self Help Groups (SHGs) but also encourage them to build/register 
their warehouses with WDRA. While appreciating the efforts made by WDRA in 
this direction, the Committee desire that WDRA should continue the stride of 
endorsing small capacity warehouses owned by FPOs, PACCSs and SHGs which 
will eventually help in developing/ expanding warehousing ecosystem specially in 
the rural areas of the country.  
(Recommendation No. 9) 

24 
 
XIV. Matters pertaining to e-NWR 
44. During their sitting with Centra l Warehousing Corporation  
(CWC) held on 01.08.2023, apprised the Committee regarding some issues in e-NWRs 
issued by WDRA registered warehouses of CWC /others which is creating hindrance in 
the popularity of e-NWRs. The representatives of CWC deposited before the Committee 
as under: 
“इस प्रणाली के बाद क ु छ समस्यायें आई हैं, उनको  मैं आपक े सामने लाना चाहूंगा। 
एनडब्ल्यूआर के बेजसस पर  बैंक्स फाइनेंजसूंग करते  हैं, उसमें ईएनडब्ल्यूआर को कोई 
स्पेशल प्रेफरेंस नहीूं है। िो वेयर  हाउसेज़ रजिस्ट्डड नहीूं हैं, उनकी िो मैनुअल र सीद है, 
बैंक्स उन पर  भी लोन देते हैं। मतलब डब्ल्यूडीआरए से रजिस्ट्रेशन कोई मैनडेट्री नहीूं है। 
प्राइवेट् में बहुत सारे  ऐसे वेयर  हाउसेज़ हैं, िो डब्ल्यूडीआरए के साथ रजिस्ट्डड नहीूं हैं। 
हमारे  जितने भी वेयरहाउसेज़  हैं, हमारे  जलए मैनडेट्री है और  हमने सभी वेयर हाउसेज़ को 
िो फ ू डग्रेन स्ट्ोर करते  हैं, ऐसे 374 वेयरहाउसेज़हैं, उन सबको हमने रजिस्ट्र जकया हुआ 
है। इसमें हमें एक समस्या आती है। ईएनडब्ल्यूआर को इश्यू करने  में एक कॉस्ट् 
इनवाल्व्ड है। 
उनक े ररपॉजिट्री एक चािड लगाती हैं, जिसे हमने यहाूं दशाडया है। 25 रुपये  प्रजत मैजट्रक 
ट्न के जहसाब से जकसान के जलए देना होता है। दो ररपॉजिट्री हैं, जिनक े अलग-अलग रेट् 
हैं। उदाहरण  के जलए, अगर  कोई जकसान एक हिार मैजट्रक ट्न फ ू डग्रेन लेकर  आता है 
तो सीसीआरएल उसको 25 रुपये  प्रजत मीजट्रक ट्न के जहसाब से चािड लगाएगा। 
एनईआरएल  35 रुपये  के जहसाब से लगाएगा और  25 हिार रुपये  उसको चािड देना 
पड़ेगा। 
अगर  वह जकसी प्राइवेट् वेयरहाउस  में िाता है िो डब्ल्यूडीआर से रजिस्ट्रड नहीूं है, वहाूं 
उसको यह चािड नहीूं देना पड़ता है। वैसे भी उसको बैंक से लोन जमल िाता है, कोई 
जवशेष लाभ हम जकसान को दे सक ें, इसका कोई जवशेष लाभ नहीूं जमल रहा  है। हमने 
डब्ल्यूडीआर के साथ रजिस्ट्रेशन कराया  है। इसक े अलावा दूसरे  भी चािेि हैं, नॉन-
जनगोजशएबल वेयरहाउस  ररसीट् होती है, जिसमें प्लेिफाइनेन्सूंगन हीूं हो सकती, अगर  
बैंक से लोन नहीूं लेना है। उसमें भी यह चािड लगता है। हमारे  पास कोई भी प्राइवेट् 
फ ू डग्रेन चाहे ट्रेडर आएगा या जकसानआएगा, उसको एक्सट्रा कॉस्ट्इनकर  करनी  पड़ती 
है।  
 
45. The issues raised by CWC were forwarded to WDRA for their written comments. 
The matters raised by WDRA and their respective reply(ies) as submitted by WDRA are 
elaborated in the successive paras. 

25 
 
46.  One of the concern that CWC raised is that no special preference to eNWRs are 
given by banks in terms of easy access to pledge loans, loans at cheaper interest rates. 
In their written response to the Committee, WDRA informed that the position regarding 
preference to pledge finance against e -NWRs by banks in terms of easy access to  
pledge loans at cheaper interest rates is as follows:  
a) After completion of WDRA’s transformation plan,  announced in the budget 
speech of 2014 (para  124), WDRA took up the issue of pledge finance 
against the e-NWRs with the banking sector regulator i.e., Reserve Bank of 
India. The then Chairman, WDRA wrote to the Deputy Governor of RBI on 
28-11-2017 highlighting WDRA’s regulatory ecosystem and benefit s of e -
NWR along with a request to issue directions to all scheduled commercial 
banks to provide loans against only e -NWRs for all agricultural and 
horticultural goods. Several discussions and communications through 
emails were done with RBI.  
b) Later, the D epartment of Food and Public Distribution (DFPD) took up the 
matter with RBI. The then Secretary, DFPD wrote a letter dated 21 -05-
2019 to the Governor, RBI with a request to issue suitable instructions to 
replace the word ‘warehouse receipt’ with ‘Negotiab le Warehouse 
Receipt/e-NWR’ in the Master Directions on Priority Sector Lending. 
However, RBI reiterated its previous decision i.e., NWR is one of the 
categories of warehouse receipts, it qualifies as an instrument eligible for 
pledge/hypothecation of agriculture produce under priority sector lending.  
c) Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) also wrote to RBI to examine 
WDRA’s proposal. SEBI’s decision of mandatory use of e -NWRs for 
delivery for derivative commodity exchanges was also highlighted in DEA’s 
letter. However, RBI expressed its inability to accede to this request. 
d) Hon’ble Minister for Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution also 
sent  a letter dated 23 -10-2020 to Governor, RBI suggesting to replace the 
word ‘warehouse receipt’ with ‘Negotiabl e Warehouse Receipt/e -NWR’ in 
its Master Directions on Priority Sector Lending and also to give a suitable 
risk weight to e-NWRs. Another DO letter dated 27-02-2021 was written by 
Hon’ble Minister. However, RBI replied that in the prevailing circumstances 
it may not be prudent at that juncture to mandate banks to lend solely 
against NWR/e-NWR issued by registered warehouses.  
e) Besides this, various inter departmental communications were exchanged.  
f) However, as a cumulative effect, RBI enhanced the priority s ector lending 
limit to Rs. 75 Lakhs from Rs. 50 Lakhs to e -NWRs based pledge finance 
while other warehouse receipts limit continued to be Rs. 50 Lakhs only. 
This was a positive development. 

26 
 
g) However, RBI has neither conceded to issue directions to give agri cultural 
pledge finance loans against e -NWRs only, nor to give  suitable risk 
weightage to e -NWRs vis -à-vis ordinary warehouse receipts or to give a 
forward looking statement. Instead, RBI Governor in his reply to Hon’ble 
Minister dated 04-05-2021 highlighted that WDRA does not have any credit 
guarantee mechanism and the number of warehouses registered with 
WDRA were too low.  
h) Later, in a change of strategy, WDRA took up this issue with Indian Banks 
Association (IBA) and Banks directly. Several discussions were held with 
them. As a result, IBA issued a letter dated 23 -11-2021 advising all its 
member banks to consider extending loans against e -NWRs only with in a 
period of one year.  
i) After constant follow-up by WRDA, the State Bank of India (SBI) launched 
a l oan product (Produce Market Loan) with attractive loan features like 
waiver of processing fee, non -insistence of secondary collateral, and 
reduced interest rate. Interest rate for e -NWR based pledge finance fixed 
by SBI is only MCLR (marginal cost of lendi ng rate) + 0.8 % which is much 
less when compared to ordinary warehouse receipt loan rate of interest. 
WDRA also entered into an MoU with SBI to promote e -NWR based 
pledge finance.  
j) DFPD and WDRA took up the issue with Department of Financial Services 
(DFS). DFS has issued a letter to all Public Sector Banks to consider 
launching a product similar to that of SBI.  
k) Besides this, DFS has also written to all Convenors of State Level Bankers 
Committee to include e -NWR based pledge finance as a permanent 
agenda point.  
l) WDRA has also entered into MoUs with other banks. So far, WDRA has 
exchanged MoUs with SBI, PNB and Federal Bank. MoUs with Bank of 
Baroda, Bank of India and Axis Bank are expected shortly.  
m) From the above it is clear that now banks recognise the b enefits of e-NWR 
ecosystem and have started giving preferential treatment to e -NWRs. PNB 
has decided to issue loans against only e -NWRs. This is a work in 
progress, slowly banks are moving in the direction of e -NWR system. This 
is evident from the figures of pledge finance against e -NWRs. e -NWR 
based pledge finance is improving YoY. For example, in the F.Y. 2021 -22, 
Rs. 1492 crores pledge finance was extended where as in the FY 2022 -23, 
it improved to Rs. 2442 Crores. In the current  FY 2023 -24 , about Rs. 
1311 Crores pledge finance has been extended as on 20 -08-2027. WDRA 
has submitted an action plan to DFPD, wherein it is projected that the 
pledge finance can reach Rs. 4000 Crores in the FY. 2023 -24. A graph 
representing Year wise pledge finance figures is provided below. 

27 
 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
2010-11
2011-12
2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16
2016-17
2017-18
2018-19
2019-20
2020-21
2021-22
2022-23
2023-24*
0
591
106 108 388 203 149 119 164 380 732
1492
2442
1311
Loan Value in Rs. Crores
 
n) In order to give further push and keep up the momentum, WDRA is 
organizing national level conferences with Banks. WDRA in association 
with NABARD conducted a half -day conference with heads of priority 
sector an d MSME verticals on 13 -01-2023 at Mumbai. A daylong 
conference was held on 18 -08-2023 with the chairmen of RRBs at New 
Delhi.  
47. Another concern of CWC was regarding the charges for eNMR. CWC deposited 
that Cost of generation of eNWR (charges of repositories ) is discouraging the farmers 
and traders from availing services of WDRA registered warehouses resulting in sharp 
drop in general custom business at CWC registered centers. Depositors who represent 
small traders and farming community question the need of p aying additional amount at 
times more than storage charges which they feel unnecessary.  The tariff charged by 
repositories of WDRA i.e. NERL and CCRL is given as under :- 
  CCRL  CCRL  NERL  NERL  
  Farmer/FPOs 
(Rs.) Others (Rs.) Farmer/FPOs 
(Rs.) 
Others 
(Rs.) 
Per MT e-NWR 
Charges 25 30 35 80 
 
  Further, charges for each eNNWR (electronic Non Negotiable Warehouse 
Receipts) are same as eNWR in case of CCRL and fixed at Rs. 40/ -  in case of NERL 
for farmers and FPO and min. Rs. 100 per eNNWR as per Qty sla b of (0 -25) and Rs. 
600 for Qty slab above 200 in case of   depositors other than Farmer/FPOs. 
48. In regard to the above issue, WDRA in their written replies to the Committee, 
submitted as under: 

28 
 
a.  Issue related to e -NWR charges was taken up by WDRA. As a result of the 
meetings, charges for farmers and FPOs were fixed separately at lower level. 
At present different charges exist for the farmer/FPO and non -farmers. 
Repository wise charges are enclosed in Annexure-4. NERL has also capped 
the total charges per  e-NWR, regardless of tonnage or operations at Rs. 500  
per e-NWR.  
b. As per the existing provisions of W (D&R) Act and 
Rules/Regulations/directions issued therein, issue of e -NWRs against 
deposited goods is not mandatory. The depositor may, instead, request  for 
issue of non-negotiable warehouse receipts.  Existing rules stipulates that only 
NWRs have to be issued in electronic form. It is the choice of the depositor to 
opt for e -NWR or not. WDRA registered warehouses can issue NNWR in 
physical form also whic h add no repository costs to either warehousemen or 
depositors.  
c. As on 30 -08-2023 only 65 CWC warehouses issued e -NWRs out of 358 
registered CWC warehouses with WDRA. Total e -NWRs covers only 0.61% of 
CWC’s registered capacity. Hence, it can be inferred from the above that CWC 
is aware of the fact that NNWR can be issued in physical form.  
d. With regard to e -NWR charges, WDRA is acting on any complaints received 
from depositors. It would be pertinent to mention that, earlier CWC had 
communicated about the rep ository charges to WDRA. After that WDRA took 
up the issue with repositories and issued directions to repositories to cap the 
non-farmers’ charges for a maximum amount of Rs. 20 per MT. In case of 
farmers, DFPD held meetings with repositories and it was fu rther reduced to 
Rs. 5 per MT for farmers.  
e. It is reiterated that NERL has capped the total charges per e -NWR for farmers 
and FPOs, regardless of tonnage  or operations at Rs. 500 per e -NWR. The 
process of rationalization/reduction of repository charges is an ongoing 
process and WDRA continues to take steps towards this and explore various 
methods for reduction of these charges. We are also looking at the modalities 
of establishing a new repository. We have taken up the matter with UTIITSL, 
which is a Govern ment of India owned company, and they have submitted a 
report to WDRA in this regard.  
 
49. Another important issue that was raised by representatives of CWC was relating 
to Unregistered Warehouses which are continuing to issue Warehousing Receipt free of 
cost and same instrument is being accepted by banks for pledge financing.  
50. In regard to the issue of issuing of warehousing receipts by unregistered 
Warehouse, the WDRA in their written submission to the Committee informed as under: 

29 
 
a. As per the existing pro visions of W (D&R) Act and Rules/Regulations/directions 
issued therein, issue of e -NWRs against deposited goods is not mandatory. The 
depositor may, instead, request for issue of non -negotiable warehouse receipts.  
Existing rules stipulates that only NWRs have to be issued in electronic form. It is 
the choice of the depositor to opt for e -NWR or not. WDRA registered 
warehouses can issue NNWR in physical form also which add no repository 
costs to either warehousemen or depositors.  
b. It is a matter of fact tha t at present physical warehouse receipts are less costly 
than the digital receipts i.e., e -NWRs. However, digital receipts are far superior 
than the physical receipts in respect of its utility. Benefits of the e -NWRs over 
physical receipts are given below: 
 
Paper Based NWR/ Stock 
Receipt 
e-NWR 
Can be shared with prospective 
buyer in a one to one mode only  
Help farmers / depositors to have 
access to a large number of buyers 
nationwide with better bargaining 
powers; 
Can not be split  eNWRs can be split wit h obligation 
to transfer only a part of the 
commodity 
Prone to Loss, mutilation, tampering, 
fudging WR information etc.  
No possibility of any such 
eventuality  
Inherent difficulties in efficient 
clearing and trading in a transparent 
manner  
Promote an e fficient clearing, 
settlement and delivery system with 
transparency in trading of 
agricultural produce 
Difficult to share vital information of 
the WR with multiple stake holders  
It’s easy to share vital information of 
the WR with multiple stake holders 
like bankers, commodity 
exchanges, government etc.  
Risk of issuing of duplicate 
NWR/WR without following the 
procedure 
Need for duplicate e -NWR doesn’t 
arise 
No monitoring and surveillance Regularly monitored by WDRA  
Difficulty in transferring NWRs 
between multiple parties in the 
course of many transactions 
Being electronic in nature multiple 
transfers can be made 
electronically/digitally 
 
c. In repository system, provision for marking lien on e -NWRs is available to 
banks/financial institutions. Once a li en is marked no other transactions are 
allowed on the e -NWR. This eliminates the double financing on warehouse 
receipts. On the other hand, frauds in physical warehouse receipts financing are 
not uncommon. Many banks have either stopped or reduced their ex posure to 
warehouse receipt finance.   

30 
 
d. It is therefore bank’s outlook, subject to RBI directions, as to which kind of 
warehouse receipt they accept for extending pledge finance. If any bank extends 
loan against the paper based warehouse receipts, it does s o at its own risk, and 
the same may be reflected in the interest rates charged. As per the feedback 
received from depositors and warehouseman, banks like SBI and PNB are 
offering loans against e -NWR at a comparatively lower interest rates vis -a-vis 
paper based receipts.  
e. RBI in its communication with WDRA and Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution informed that the NWR is one of the categories of  Warehouse 
Receipts, it qualifies as an instrument eligible for pledge/hypothecation of 
agriculture produce under the priority sector. RBI denied to replace the word 
‘warehouse receipt’ with ‘NWR/e -NWR’ and did not assign suitable risk weights. 
RBI has only given higher priority sector lending limit i.e., Rs. 75 Lakhs to e -
NWRs vis-à-vis other warehouse receipts.  
f. There is a proposal for amending W (D&R) Act.  This step can help in removing 
the dichotomy existing in the warehouse receipt finance. It is expected that banks 
will migrate to e -NWR system. This can also result in the lowering of the 
repository charges too.  
g. Besides this, a credit guarantee scheme is also under consideration. A 
committee appointed to frame the scheme guidelines has submitted its report to 
DFPD for necessary action. It is expected that the credit guarantee scheme will 
attract more banks to e -NWR ecosystem and reduce lending against physical 
warehouse receipts.  
h. Even now the rise in the e -NWR based pledge finance suggests that banks are 
showing increasing trust and migrating to the e-NWR system.  
 
51. Regarding the grading of A griculture produce, the CWC raised their point that as 
far as agri produce is concern grading is the integral part of the e -NWR. Even after       
13 years of being in existence, the grade designations adopted by WDRA are not 
robust. Recently, anomaly in th e grade designation of Maize was noticed and intimated 
to WDRA accordingly correction has been made. Further request of correction in grade 
designation of cotton bales is pending with the authority. 
 
52. In response to the aforementioned concern raised by CWC,  WDRA in their 
written reply submitted as under: 
a. As per the section 2 (j) of the W (D&R) Act, 2007 "grade" means the quality 
standard of any goods as notified as grade designation by the Central 
Government under the Agricultural Produce (Grading and Markin g) Act, 1937 or 
any other law for the time being in force.  

31 
 
b. Accordingly, WDRA adopted standards notified by the various Government 
agencies like AGMARK, BIS, FSSAI, commodity boards, etc.  
c. Hence, as evident from the section 2 (j) of the Act, WDRA does not notify the 
standards, it only adopts the standards issued by the competent Government 
bodies. Further, where different grades for the same commodity are issued by 
such competent bodies, all such grades are adopted by WDRA.  
d. It is odd that after more than 1 0 years of registering warehouses with WDRA, 
CWC has stated that the grade designations issued by WDRA are not robust. If 
this was the case, as a Mini -Ratna PSU, they should have informed us of this 
much earlier. WDRA would have responded to any issue quic kly, as they have 
themselves admitted was done  for the case of maize which was referred to us 
recently.  
e. In this regard it would be pertinent to mention that serious allegations have been 
made against CWC recently regarding storage of cotton in one of the ir 
warehouses in Maharashtra by one public sector bank, Central Bank of India, 
and another private sector bank, Axis Bank ltd. The matter is being inquired into 
as per the provisions of the W (D&R) Act, 2007. Since CWC has sent the letter 
regarding grading  standards of cotton, after receipt of this complaint. this is a 
matter which will have to be examined carefully.  Further action in the matter will 
be taken as per the law. 
f. WDRA also receives requests from the industry to notify goods for the purpose of 
issuing e -NWRs. In case of any problems or non -availability of the grades, 
WDRA also takes up matters with the agencies like AGAMARK and BIS. 
Recently, in the case of non -Agricultural commodities several rounds of 
discussion were held with BIS before adopti ng the parameters. AGMARK also 
invites WDRA for meetings while deciding the grades of commodities.  
XV. Suggestions of CWC 
53. During the sitting of the Committee held on 1.08.2023 , the representatives of 
CWC put forth some of their suggestions w.r.t. WDRA as under: 
“उसमें हमारे  सुझाव इस प्रकार से हैं। डब्ल्यूडीआर का रजिस्ट्रेशन सभी के जलए 
मेनडट्री कर  जदया िाना चाजहए, एक लेवल प्लेइूंग फील्ड होना चाजहए िो नॉन-
गवनडमेंट्वेयरहाउसेि हैं, उनक े जलए भी मेनडेट्री होना चाजहए ताजक वह 
स्ट्ैन्डडडएसओपीस्ट्ोरेि के जलए फॉलो कर  सक ें और  फामडसड को इसका बेजनजफट् 
जमलना चाजहए।  
 एफसीआई, नेफ े ड, जसजवलसप्लाई कॉरपोरेशन , कॉट्न कॉरपोरेशन , िो बल्क 
जडपॉजिट्सड हैं, उनको इसट्रक्शन होना चाजहए जक वह अपना मालडब्ल्यूडीआर 
रजिस्ट्रडवेयरहाउस में ही रखें, अभी तक वह दूसरे  वेयरहाउसेि में रखते  आए हैं। “ 
 

32 
 
54. They, further added as under: 
“…………फामडसड और  फामडसडप्रोड्यूसआगेनाइिेशस हैं, इसक े जलए डब्ल्यूडीआर 
इश्यू करने  कॉस्ट् फ्री होना चाजहए, चािड नहीूं जकया िाना चाजहए। चाहे सन्िडी के रूप  
में जदया िाएया जकसी और  प्रकार से फ्री जकया िाए। 
हमारा  एक और  सुझाव इसी से िुड़ा है कज िो वेयर  हाउजसस प्राइवेट् में रजिस्ट्रेशन 
नहीूं कर  रहे  हैं, उनक े जलए इूंसेंजट्व स्कीम बनाई िाए ताजक उनको प्रोत्साहन जमले,” 
 
55. The suggestions given by CWC were forwarded to WDRA for their comments. 
The comments so received from WDRA on the suggestio ns of CWC are enumerated as 
under: 

33 
 
 
Sl. No. Suggestion given by CWC Comment of WDRA 
1 Mandatory WDRA 
registration for all 
warehouses (including pvt) 
As regards mandatory registration for all 
warehouses storing notified commodities 
to ensure scientific st orage etc., it was 
proposed to make registration mandatory 
by WDRA in its Act amendment proposal 
in January, 2018. This proposal was 
examined in DFPD and the Legislative 
Department and several changes were 
made. As regards mandatory registration, 
it was fe lt, that this should be done 
gradually so that it does not disrupt the 
warehousing and agricultural commodities 
market. Specifically, it was decided in 
DFPD that there can be such a provision 
for mandatory registration, but DFPD 
would have the powers to ex empt any 
warehouse or category of warehouses 
from this provision, so that warehouses 
would be brought gradually into the ambit 
of this rule. That Amendment proposal is 
at an advance stage of consideration. 
 
2 Bulk depositors storing 
Agri-commodities, like  FCI, 
NAFED, Civil Supplies 
Corporation, CCI and 
others should be 
instructed to store stocks 
in WDRA registered 
warehouses only and avail 
e-NNWR.   
This is a matter for DFPD to take action. 
WDRA is a regulatory body taking action 
as per the W (D&R) Act 200 7. As of now, 
the Act does not provide for mandatory 
registration of warehouses with it, except 
for those warehouses issuing, or intending 
to issue negotiable warehouse receipts.    
Recently, FCI has taken a decision to hire 
only WDRA registered warehouses  for 
storing procurement stocks. Accordingly, 
more warehouses from various parts of 
the country started registering with WDRA. 
It has also come to the notice that the 
Madhya Pradesh Warehousing and 
Logistics Corporation has also adopted a 
similar approach.  It has decided to deal 
with  godowns registered with WDRA only.  
As mentioned in the above para, it is up to 

34 
 
the DFPD or other departments of Central 
and State Governments or the relevant 
agencies to decide whether to mandate 
storage in WDRA registered wa rehouses 
or not.  
3 Cost of e -NWR for farmers 
& FPOs to be entirely made 
free to avail pledge 
financing. Also the 
generation of e -NNWR 
should be free of cost to 
encourage the participation 
of traders 
It had been stated that the repository 
charges have bee n reduced for 
farmers/FPOs after WDRA’s persuasion 
with repositories.  
In addition , it is informed that, WDRA’s 
repositories are commercial entities. To 
recent letters asking for reduction of e -
NNWR charges, they have asked for 
reconsideration on grounds of incurring 
losses. They have submitted their balance 
sheets. Nevertheless, WDRA is exploring 
different ways to reduce eNWR/eNNWR 
charges.  
4 Pledge financing of e -NWR 
in banks: Enrolment of all 
banks for pledge financing 
against e -NWR at nearest 
warehouse to facilitate 
farmers and depositors 
WDRA has been engaged in a drive to 
enrol all private sector and public sector 
banks including RRBs on its repositories 
to initiate pledge financing. The results 
have been very good.  
Recently, a conference of all RRB s, 
across the country was held in New Delhi  
on 18 -08-2023 to encourage them to 
onboard on e-NWR ecosystem. 
WDRA is also engaging with remaining 
banks such as Small Finance Banks and 
Pvt sector banks to onboard on the 
repositories.  

35 
 
5 No bank should be al lowed 
to provide financing facility 
against paper warehouse 
receipt  
 
As indicated earlier, WDRA and DFPD 
have been pressing this point with RBI for 
several years without result. In view of the 
lack of response from RBI, WDRA 
changed its strategy to approa ch private 
and public sector banks directly, and has 
achieved good results.  MoUs have been 
signed with banks, and special products 
launched. So far, WDRA has exchanged 
MoUs with SBI, PNB and Federal Bank. 
MoUs with Bank of Baroda, Bank of India 
and Axis Bank are expected shortly.  
6 Possible incentives to 
warehouses for 
registration with WDRA to 
promote e -NWRs so that 
more WSPs are 
encouraged to apply for 
WDRA registration which 
will help in strengthening 
the e-NWR ecosystem.  
 
The proper solution lies in  making 
registration of all warehouses storing 
notified commodities mandatory. 
All State Governments and Central 
Government organisations may make 
WDRA registration mandatory for WSPs, if 
they have to do business with the 
Governments, or if their construct ion is 
financed through Government grants. This 
will help in reduction of post -harvest 
losses due to better infrastructural facilities 
in WDRA registered warehouses.   
 

36 
 
 
XVI. Transformation Plan of WDRA 
56. WDRA embarked on a Transformation Plan since 2014, with following objectives: 
 Creating an IT based monitoring and surveillance system for NWRs. 
 Simplification of rules and regulations to minimize compliance costs. 
 
57. The major focus under the Transformation Plan has been to provide better 
services to the users of NWRs and registered warehouses through: 
i. Market surveys and studies to generate information about the warehousing 
sector 
ii. Rewriting of the rules and regulations concerning regulation of warehouses 
issuing NWRs. 
iii. Putting in place a robust system of wareh ouse inspection and supervision 
framework 
iv. Use of Information Technology in registration and monitoring of warehouses as 
well as 
v. internal office automation of WDRA. 
 
58. WDRA in their written note to the Committee infor med about the major 
achievements of the Transformation Plan as under: 
 
i. Electronic Negotiable Warehouse Receipts Regulations were notified on 
29.06.2017. 
ii. National Commodity and Derivatives Exchange Ltd. (NCDEX) and 
Central Depository Services Limited (CDSL) were finalized for setting up 
electronic repository system(s), who formed separate companies 
namely, National Electronic Repository Ltd. (NERL) and CDSL 
Commodity Repository Ltd. (CCRL) respectively. Both the Repositories 
have completed all the tasks for setting up the repository system and 
the Registration certificates have been issued to them on 26.09.2017 to 
commence operations. 
iii. The WDRA Portal for Online Warehouse Registration and Inspection 
Modules was launched on 26.09.2017. 
iv. Electronic Negotiable Warehouse Receipt (e -NWR) System was 
launched on 26.09.2017 and now from 01.08.2019 it has been made 
mandatory for all the registered warehouses to issue only eNWRs.  

37 
 
v. Earlier there were two application formats for registration with respect to 
individual and non -individual warehouseman. Now, for both these 
categories similar format has been prescribed.  
 
59. The Committee asked the WDRA to share steps taken for providing reliable, cost -
effective, value -added, integrated warehousing and logistics solution in a socially 
responsible and environment friend ly manner. In response, WDRA in their written replies 
submitted to the Committee informed that WDRA is a regulator, which prescribes 
minimum standards for developing the warehousing sector, scientific storage of goods 
and promotion of negotiable warehouse receipts, etc. Standards include minimum 
infrastructure required for scientific warehousing, adopting standard operating procedures 
to ensure right quality and quantity, regulating repositories for maintaining the data 
sanctity of eNWRs, etc. These standards are instrumental in reducing post-harvest losses 
and thereby improving trust of depositors in registered warehouses. The WDRA 
ecosystem is expected to improve supply chains by providing better logistic services to 
the stakeholders. Reduction of post -harvest losses is a step towards an environment 
friendly warehousing sector, which reduces the ecological stress, otherwise generated 
from the production of crops to recoup the losses. SOPs provide reliable warehousing 
practices. Strict adherence to SOPs help s in reducing storage losses caused by various 
factors.  
 
XVII. Publicity/Awareness/Training Programs 
60. To create awareness among farmers about the benefits of the negotiable 
warehouse receipt system and scientific storage, a wareness programmes for farme rs 
were organized through expert institutes. In FY 2022 -23, total 12,996 participants 
covered through FAPs which is 46% rise YoY. The year wise FAP figures are depicted 
as below: 
 

38 
 
 
 
In FY 2023-24, 142 FAPs have been conducted till 30-11-2023.  
 
61. WDRA f urther informed that t he capacity building programs are organized for 
registered warehouses focusing on equipping the warehousemen with required 
knowledge and skills for professional management of warehouses. In FY 2022 -23, total 
715 warehouse personnel we re trained which is 47% rise YoY. The year wise WTP 
figures are depicted as below: 
 
In FY 2022-23, 9 WTPs have been conducted till 30-11-2023. 
 
62. Regarding the outreach programs organized by WDRA, it is informed that  WDRA 
has taken up vigorous outreach activities in different parts of the country with all 

39 
 
stakeholders including banks, warehouse owners and depositors through conferences, 
seminars and workshops.  Besides, WDRA has increased its participation in 
exhibitions. The activities of WDRA have been taken note of at the international level. 
WDRA has received foreign delegations from Kenya, Senegal, Ivory Coast and 
International Finance Corporation, who came to study WDRA system.  
 
63. On the matter  of publicity, WDRA informed the Committee that i n order to 
increase awareness about the benefits of e -NWRs, safe scientific storage practices and 
WDRA eco system, WDRA has undertaken publicity through audio -visual media and 
social media. Publicity campaigns were run in February to March, 2023 and August to 
November, 2023 on Doordarshan. Videos have been uploaded on You Tube in 11 
languages. Regular tweets are issued on the activities of WDRA.  
 
64. In the same context, representatives of WDRA informed the Committee at their 
sitting held on 05.12.2023 as under:  
“….Apart from this, last year, we also started a special training 
programme called Assaying Training Programme  because we found 
that the quality of assaying of the assayers in various warehouses may 
not be very good and they had to be trained. So, we ha ve started 
Assaying Training Programmes. इसमें ज्यादा प्रोग्रेस अभी तक नहीूं हुआहै । 
Last year, we did only two of these programmes. It is our intention to 
increase these training programmes and make it as technical and 
sophisticated as possible so that there is a cadre of good trained 
assayers in warehouses all across the country. We are working on this.  
Now, another aspect of capacity building and outreach is that we also 
do farmers’ awareness programmes. These are one-day programmes. 
िहाूं पर  हम फामडसड, बैंक्स तथा अन्य स्ट्ेकहोल्डसड को बुलाते हैं, लेजकन इनमें मुख्य 
रूप  से जकसानोूं को ही हम बुलाते हैं। उनको डब्ल्यूडीआरए के वेयरहाउसेि में 
अपना धान स्ट्ोर करने  के जलए, उसक े फायदोूं के बारे  में बताया िाता है, उनको 
प्लेिफाइनेंजसूंग के बारे  में बताया िाता है…” 
 
65. They further stated as under: 
“....हम लोग ज्यादा वेयरहाउस  ट्रेजनूंग प्रोग्राम्स नहीूं करतेहैं । But we are 
increasing it. We have done 17 programmes in 2023. That was in 

40 
 
comparison to 13 programmes in the previous year and 14 
programmes in 2021. We have taken a decision recently that we will 
do these training programmes not only for our registered warehouses 
but we will also include some of the unregistered warehouses so that 
these warehouses can come to know about the benefits of WDRA 
registered warehouse and they will act as an outreach for us. “ 
 
66. The Committee note that WDRA organizes various awareness programmes 
for farmers through expert institutes  to create awareness among farmers about 
the benefits of the negotiable warehouse receip t system and scientific storage . 
During 2022 -23, 258 awar eness programmes were conducted in comparison to 
177 programmes in 2021 -22. Further, during 2022 -23, 17 capacity building 
programs were organized by WDRA for registered warehouses focusing on 
equipping the warehousemen with required knowledge and skills fo r professional 
management of warehouses through which total 715 warehouse personnel were 
trained. Besides, WDRA has taken up vigorous outreach activities in different 
parts of the country with all stakeholders including banks, warehouse owners 
and deposito rs through conferences, seminars and workshops. In addition, 
Publicity campaigns were run in February to March, 2023 and August to 
November, 2023 on Doordarshan and Videos in 11 languages have been uploaded 
on You Tube. The Committee are pleased to kno w that WDRA has been focusing 
on increasing their outreach through multiple means . They desire that WDRA 
should take the lead in organizing more training and awareness programmes 
throughout the country. The Committee recommend the WDRA to formulate 
regional/state committees to analyze the need of such programmes at regional 
level and prepare a yearly plan for a rigourous outreach programme  involving 
local bodies, Gram panchayats etc. so that the benefits of e -NWRs and practices 
of safe scientific storage practi ces would touch all corners of the country. In this 
endeavour, involvement of people’s representatives can also be explored at all 
levels by WDRA.   
(Recommendation No. 10) 
  

41 
 
XVIII. Recent Changes in WDRA Regulations 
67. WDRA in their written submission to  the Committee informed about the various 
recent changes has been taken place in WDRA Regulations as under: 
(a) Rationalization of Net worth: 
WDRA has rationalized minimum networth requirement for the warehouses 
storing agriculture and/or non -agriculture goods . Networth requirement has been 
reduced and maximum networth required for registration of any capacity of warehouses 
is reduced from Rs. 100 Crores to Rs. 50 Crores. Latest networth requirement for 
registration of warehouses is given below 
Storage capacity (in Tons) Net worth Requirement (in Rupees) 
Upto 500 0.04 Crores 
501 – 1000 0.08 Crores 
1001-1500 0.12 Crores 
1501 – 2000 0.16 Crores 
2001 MT and Above 
Capacity 
Capacity in (MT) *Rs. 1000 with a 
maximum cap of Rs. 50 Crores 
*  Illustration: A wareho use with a capacity of 10,000 MT required to have minimum 
net worth of Rs. 1,00,00,000/- (10000 MT*Rs. 1000= Rs. 1,00,00,000) 
 
(b) Inclusion of SWCs with negative net worth: 
GoI permitted the Authority to allow entities created under the Act of Parliament 
or S tate Legislature which does not meet the minimum net worth requirement, to 
submit an indemnity bond specified in the prescribed form, executed by the 
concerned State Government and a resolution from its board of directors confirming 
the furnishing of such indemnity bond, along with its application for registration. This 
step helps in registering warehouses of entities created under an Act of Parliament or 
State Legislature and do not possess required networth to obtain registration with 
WDRA. 
 
(c) Introduction of New Insurance regime: 
 
WDRA insists for comprehensive insurance coverage of goods stored in the 
registered warehouses. Hence various types of insurance policies are being 
submitted by warehouseman at the time of registration. To reduce burden of 
insurance cost on warehouseman, WDRA introduced a new insurance regime while 
also continuing with old regime. In the new regime warehouseman may obtain 
insurance on the basis of self -declared value of stock subject to minimum declared 
value of Rs. 1,00,000. Insur ance coverage is to be upgraded as per the arrival of 

42 
 
stock in the warehouse.  
 
(d) Fee waiver 
To promote registration with WDRA, GoIhas waived application/ renewal fee for 
registration or renewal of warehouses storing only agricultural goods till 25th October , 
2025.  
 
(e) Act Amendment 
A proposal for amendment of the Warehousing (D&R) Act is on the anvil. Detailed 
stakeholder consultations have been done with State Governments, banks and 
financial institutions, warehousemen and others. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      New Delhi;                                       LOCKET CHATTERJEE, 
18 December, 2023                              Chairperson, 
27 Agrahayana,1945 (Saka)                                                    Standing Committee on 
Consumer Affairs, Food and  Public Distribution

43 
 
Annexure 1. 
State wise warehouses registered with WDRA, upto 30.11.2023 
Sl. No. State Registered Warehouses Capacity in (MT) 
1 ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS 0 0 
2 ANDHRA PRADESH 183 2492391 
3 ARUNACHAL PRADESH 0 0 
4 ASSAM 7 87269 
5 BIHAR 70 559117 
6 CHANDIGARH 1 10550 
7 CHHATTISGARH 135 1894884 
8 DADRA & NAGAR HAVELI 0 0 
9 DAMAN & DIU 0 0 
10 GOA 1 12902 
11 GUJARAT 188 1029761 
12 HARYANA 143 2261108 
13 HIMACHAL PRADESH 3 8850 
14 JAMMU & KASHMIR 6 71340 
15 JHARKHAND 24 163861 
16 KARNATAKA 61 873399 
17 KERALA 12 179857 
18 LAKSHADWEEP 0 0 
19 MADHYA PRADESH 1454 9371884 
20 MAHARASHTRA 340 2633639 
21 MANIPUR 0 0 
22 MEGHALAYA 0 0 
23 MIZORAM 0 0 
24 NAGALAND 1 13000 
25 NCT OF DELHI 2 32458 
26 ODISHA 73 788165 
27 PUDUCHERRY 1 7350 
28 PUNJAB 30 955368 
29 RAJASTHAN 391 3649150 
30 SIKKIM 0 0 
31 TAMIL NADU 1333 1750689 
32 TELANGANA 154 2042373 
33 TRIPURA 1 19250 
34 UTTARAKHAND 12 111673 
35 UTTAR PRADESH 258 4455470 
36 WEST BENGAL 32 461370 
  Total 4916 35937128 

44 
 
 
Annexure-2 
Details of the requirements for registration of warehouse 
Requirements for registration of warehouse: The requirements for registration of 
warehouses under the new registration rules are broadly as follows:  
 The warehouse should be constructed as per Bureau of Indi an Standards 
(BIS)/FCI/CWC specifications and storage worthy. In case of c old storages, the 
norms prescribed by NHB/ NHM/ SHM/ NCCD/MoFPI/APEDA/State 
Governments shall be followed. 
 The applicant should be a fit and proper person. 
 The warehouse should have adequate security arrangements. 
 The warehouse should have adequate trained staff with expertise for the 
scientific storage of goods. 
 The warehouse should have requisite equipment for weighment and insect/pest 
management. 
 The warehouse should have adequate insurance of the stocks against fire, flood, 
theft, burglary, misappropriation, riots, strikes or terrorism. 
 The warehouse should have requisite networth as provided under rules. 
 The warehouseman shall be compliant to local laws for carrying out the busi ness 
of warehousing. 
 The warehouse should follow a Standard Operating Procedure for various 
warehouse operations as prescribed by the Authority. 
 The warehouseman should furnish application fee and security deposit as 
specified by the Authority under the rules/guidelines.   

45 
 
 
Annexure 3 
State wise Pledge Finance for FY 2023-24 up to 15.10.2023 
     
S.No. State 
NERL Pledge 
Finance  
(in Rs. Crores) 
CCRL Pledge 
Finance  
 (in Rs. Crores) 
Total Pledge 
Finance   
(in Rs. Crores) 
1 ANDHRA PRADESH  75.01 2.25 77.26 
2 GUJARAT 254.98 6.85 261.83 
3 HARYANA 19.96 31.96 51.92 
4 
HIMACHAL 
PRADESH    0.16 0.16 
5 KARNATAKA 85.87 37.90 123.77 
6 MADHYA PRADESH  194.17 34.80 228.97 
7 MAHARASHTRA 54.17 14.27 68.44 
8 ODISHA 2.15   2.15 
9 PUDUCHERRY 0.97 0.72 1.70 
10 PUNJAB 13.58   13.58 
11 RAJASTHAN 479.44 89.05 568.49 
12 TAMIL NADU 129.10 16.80 145.90 
13 TELANGANA 23.23   23.23 
14 UTTAR PRADESH  31.61 30.67 62.28 
GRAND TOTAL 1364.25 265.43 1629.69 
      

46 
 
Annexure 4  
Repository wise charges
 
 

47 
 


48 
 
 
 
 


49 
 
 
 
 

50 
 
 


51 
 
 
  

52 
 
APPENDIX I 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2022 -2023) HELD ON 
TUESDAY, 1 AUGUST, 2023 
 
The Committee sat from 1515 hrs. to 1615 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’,  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Locket Chatterjee  - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Ms. Debasree Chaudhuri 
4. Shri Anil Firojiya 
5. Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit 
6. Shri Khagen Murmu 
7. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
8. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
9. Dr. Amar Singh 
10. Smt. Himadri Singh 
11. Smt. Kavita Singh 
12. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
13. Shri Ve. Vaithilingam 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
15. Dr. Fauzia Khan 

53 
 
16. Shri Harbhajan Singh 
17. Ms. Dola Sen  
18. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   - Director 
3. Shri Mohit Rajan    - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Dong Lianthang Tonsing    -         Deputy Secretary 
 
 
        Representatives of the Central Warehousing Corporation  
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri Amit Kumar Singh Managing Director 
2.  Shri R.K. Bansal Group General Manager(Com) 
3.  Dr. Anurag Tripathi General Manager (Tech) 
   
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for briefing by the Representatives of Central Warehousing 
Corporation in connection with examination of the subject 'Functioning of Warehousing 
Development and Regulatory Authority’.  
[The witnesses were then called in.] 
3. The Chairperson, then welcomed the representatives of the Central 
Warehousing Corporation to the sitting and invited their attention to Direction 55 of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the proceedings. 
4. The Chairperson in the welcome remarks requested the witnesses to apprise the 
Committee about inter -relation between the WDRA and CWC, promoting e-NWR 
(Electronic Negotiable Warehouse Receipts), facilitating the Repositories and the 
Repository participant’s of WDRA i.e. M/s National Electronic Repository Limited 

54 
 
(NERL) and CDSL Commodity Repository Limited (CCR L) in registration process of 
depositors, maintaining scientific warehousing in the warehouses as per the standard 
requirement of WDRA etc.  
5. The representatives of the Central Warehousing Corporation with the permission 
of Hon’ble Chairperson made a power point presentation highlighting various aspects of 
the subject ‘'Functioning of Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority’ such 
as functions and objectives of Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority 
(WDRA), role of Central Warehousing Co rporation (CWC) as Warehouseman, issues 
on E-NWRS issued by WDRA Registered Warehouses,  suggestions given by CWC 
etc. 
6. The Committee then sought certain clarifications on the issues related to the 
subject such as views of CWC on promoting e-NWR (Electronic Negotiable Warehouse 
Receipts) and e-NNWR in India instead of physical warehouse receipts, steps taken by 
CWC on creating awareness about the benefits of warehousing among farmers /traders 
/Warehouse Service Providers (WSP), WDRA registered warehouses and e-NWR 
ecosystem., challenges in e -NWRs issued by WDRA registered  warehouses of CWC,  
Farmers Extension Service Scheme etc. The representatives of the Corporation replied 
to various queries raised/clarifications sought by the Members on the subject. The 
Committee directed the Corporation to furnish the written replies to those 
queries/clarifications which could not be clarified/replied to.  
7. The Hon’ble Chairperson thanked the Representatives of the  Central 
Warehousing Corporation f or appearing before t he Committee and furnishing valuable 
information on the subject. 
[The Witnesses then withdrew] 
 
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

55 
 
APPENDIX II 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023 -2024) HELD ON 
TUESDAY, 5TH DECEMBER, 2023 
  The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs. in Committee Room No. 4,  
Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
 Smt. Locket Chatterjee - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
3. Ms. Debasree Chaudhuri 
4. Shri Rajendra D. Gavit 
5. Shri Khagen Murmu 
6. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
7. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
8. Dr. Amar Singh 
9. Smt. Himadri Singh 
10. Smt. Kavita Singh 
11. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
Rajya Sabha 
12. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
13. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
14. Shri Baburam Nishad 
15. Shri Rajmani Patel 
16. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai             - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   - Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan    - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Dong Lianthang Tonsing            - Deputy Secretary 

56 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
 1. Shri Sanjeev Chopra Secretary 
 2. Ms. Anita Karn Joint Secretary 
 3. Shri T K Manoj Kumar Chairman (WDRA)  
4. Shri Mukesh Kumar Jain Member (WDRA) 
5. Shri AK Shrivastava Member (WDRA) 
6. Shri Dheeraj Sahu Joint Secretary (WDRA) 
7. Shri Sai Pradeep G. Assistant Director (SAO), WDRA 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to have briefing by the representatives of the Warehousing 
Development and Regulatory Authority (WDRA) on the subject ‘Functioning of 
Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority’. 
(The witnesses were called in) 
3. The Chairperson, then welcomed the representatives of the  Department of Food 
and Public Distribution to the sitting and invited their attention to Direction 55 (1) of the 
‘Directions by the Speaker’ regarding confidentiality of the proceedings.   
4. The Chairperson in the welcome remarks requested the witnesses to apprise the 
Committee about functioning of the WDRA and its modus operandi, development of 
warehouses as a market across India and regulation of warehouses, Negotiability of 
warehouse receipts to enhance the credibility and reliability of receipts, promoting e-
NWR (Electronic Negotiable Warehouse Receipts) and e -NNWR in India instead of 
physical warehouse receipts, creating awareness about the benefits of warehousing 
among farmers /traders /Warehouse Service Providers (WSP), WDRA registered 
warehouses an d e-NWR ecosystem , maintaining scientific warehousing in the 
warehouses as per the standard requirement of WDRA etc.  
 

57 
 
 
5. The representatives of the Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority 
(WDRA) made a power point presentation before the Committ ee on the various aspects 
of the subject ‘Functioning of Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority’ such 
as Functions of WDRA,  Registration of Warehouses,  Transformation Plan of WDRA , 
Publicity, Awareness, Training Programs etc. 
6. The Committee the n sought certain clarifications on the issues related to the 
subject such as promoting e-NWR (Electronic Negotiable Warehouse Receipts) and e -
NNWR in India instead of physical warehouse receipts, challenges/complaints WDRA 
receive w.r.t e-NWRs, steps taken by WDRA for creating awareness about the benefits 
of warehousing among farmers /traders /Warehouse Service Providers (WSP) and        
e-NWR ecosystem, Pledge Finance against e-NWRs, steps taken for Providing reliable, 
cost-effective, value-added, integrated warehousing and logistics solution in a socially 
responsible and environment friendly manner  etc. The representatives of the 
Department/WDRA replied to various queries raised/clarifications sought by the 
Members on the subject.  The Committee directed t he Department/WDRA to furnish the 
written replies to those queries/clarifications which could not be clarified/replied to.  
7. The Hon’ble Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Department of Food 
and Public Distribution/WDRA for appearing before t he Committee and furnishing 
valuable information on the subject. 
[The Witnesses then withdrew] 
 A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
************* 
  

58 
 
APPENDIX III 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING C OMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023 -24) HELD ON 
MONDAY, 18 DECEMBER, 2023 
The Committee sat from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Committee Room No.                    
‘1’, Block-A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Smt. Locket Chatterjee  -    Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Ms. Debasree Chaudhuri 
4. Shri Khagen Murmu 
5. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
6. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
7. Smt. Himadri Singh 
8. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
9. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
10. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
11. Shri Baburam Nishad 
12. Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
 
  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   - Director 
3. Shri Dong Lianthang Tonsing - Deputy Secretary 

59 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welco med the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the following Draft Reports: 
(i)  xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx; 
(ii) Draft Report on the subject, ‘Functioning of Warehousing Development and 
Regulatory Authority’ pertaining to the Department of Food and Public Distribution. 
3. Thereafter the Committee took up for consideration the Draft Reports 
4. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted both the Draft Reports without 
any amendments/modifications.  
5.  The Committee t hen authorized Hon’ble Chairperson to finalize the report and 
present/lay the same in both Houses of Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
___________________________________________________________ 
  
xxxx Matter does not relate to the Report. 
 
 