i 
 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, 
FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023-2024) 
 
 
     
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the observations/ recommendations 
contained in the Thirty First Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
the subject “ Coarse grains Production and Distribution ” pertaining to the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution)} 
 
THIRTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 December, 2023/Agrahayana,1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
35 


ii 
 
THIRTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023-2024) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the observations / recommendations 
contained in the Thirty First Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
the subject “Coarse grains Production and Distribution”  pertaining to the  Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution)} 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13 December, 2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14 December, 2023 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
                December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 


iii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Composition of the Committee 
 
(iv) 
Introduction 
 
(v) 
Chapter I Report 
 
1 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by Government 
 
5 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government replies 
 
12 
Chapter IV Observation/Recommendation which have not been 
accepted by Government 
 
13 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of Government are still awaited 
 
14 
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Committee (2023-24) 
held on 07.12.2023 
 
16 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Thirty First Report of the Standing Committee  on 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
18 
 
  

iv 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (2023-24) 
 
     Smt. Locket Chatterjee  -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
5. Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit 
6. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi 
7. Shri Faizal P.P. Mohammed 
5. Km. Debasree Chaudhuri 
6. Dr. Amar Singh 
7. Shri Anil Firojiya 
8. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
9. Shri Khagen Murmu 
10. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
11. Shri Subrat Pathak 
12. Smt. Himadri Singh 
13. Smt. Kavita Singh 
17. Shri Nandigam Suresh 
18. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
19. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
20. Shri Vaithilingam Ve. 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
23. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
24. Shri Rajmani Patel 
25. Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
26. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
27. Shri Baburam Nishad 
28. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam 
29.  Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
30    Vacant 
 31. Vacant 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai                      -           Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi            -  Director 
3. Sh. Dong Lianthang Tonding        -  Deputy Secretary 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs , Food  and 
Public Distribution (2023-2024) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their  behalf, present this Thirty Fifth Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty First Report 
of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “ Coarse grains Production 
and Distribution ” of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
2.  The Thirty First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
07.08.2023. The Government has furnished its replies indicating Action Taken on the 
recommendations contained in the Report on 24.11.2023. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
7th December, 2023. 
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.  
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the text of the Report. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         LOCKET CHATTERJEE, 
7 December, 2023                  Chairperson, 
16 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)                                      Standing Committee on  
   Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 

1 
 
REPORT  
CHAPTER - I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirty First Report of the Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha) on “Coarse grai ns Production and Distribution”, pertaining to the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and 
Public Distribution).  
1.2  The Thirty First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table in 
Rajya Sabha on 7th August, 2023. It contained 9 recommendations/observations. Action 
taken replies in respect of all the 9 recommendations/observations contained in the 
Report have been received and these have been categorized as follows:-  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by Government :  
Para Nos.: 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 
(Chapter – II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies :  
Para Nos.: NIL 
(Chapter – III) 
(iii) Recommendations /Observations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee :  
Para No.: NIL  
(Chapter – IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which interim replies of 
Government have been received :  
Para No. : 3 and 9 
(Chapter –V) 
1.3  The Committee trust that importance will be given to the implementation of the 
recommendations accepted by the Government. The observations/recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I of this Report should be furnished to the Committee within th ree 
months of the presentation of this Report. 
 

2 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
the recommendations/ observations. 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 3) 
A. Allocation and Distribution 
1.5 The Committee in their original report observed/recommended as follows:- 
“The total allocation of Coarse grains to various states for distribution under 
TPDS/ OWS which stood at 73,000 tonnes in 2014 -15 has increased to 5,85,500 
tonnes in 2022-23, a growth of eight times over a period of  9 years. This is likely 
to go up further to 9,20,000 tonnes in 2023 -24. Total quantity of coarse grains 
distributed during the last three years i.e 2020 -21, 2021 -22 and 2022 -23 is 
4,37,338 Metric Tonnes (MTs), 8,36,592, and 6,43,615 MTs respectively. The 
Committee strongly believe that without the Dept of Food & Public Distribution's 
careful planning, strategy, and its meticulous implementation such a growth could 
not have been possible. They, therefore appreciate the department for huge 
increase in alloca tion and distribution over the last few years. The Committee 
hope the Dept will continue to make efforts to cover more states in the coming 
years.” 
1.6 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“Department of Food & PD is allocating Coar se grains (Millets) also called as 
Nutri-Cereals under the Public Distribution System to States /UTs as per request 
made by them. Nutri - Cereals are allocated in terms of National Food Security 
Act, 2013. From 1 st January, 2023 the aforesaid allocation is being made at free 
of cost. The allocation of approved quantity of Nutri - Cereals for distribution 
under PDS is made by this Department in lieu of equal quantity of wheat /rice 
while ensuring that the overall quantity of rice, wheat and Nutri -Cereals has to be 
within the upper ceiling fixed in respect of each State/ UTs under NFSA. The 
Department will continue its efforts to include more States. In KMS 2023 -24, 
coarse grains/millets are expected to be procured/distributed under the TPDS in 
14 States.” 
1.7 The Committee had expressed their hope that  the Government will 
continue to make efforts to cover more states for coarse grains  allocation and 
distribution in the coming years.  The Committee are happy to note that in KMS 
(2023-24) coarse grains/millets are expected to be procured/distributed under the 
TPDS in 14 States  and the Department has assured to continue its efforts to 
include more States  in it . The Committee appreciate the commitment of the 
Department to expand the number of States where the commodit y is being 

3 
 
distributed and desire to be apprised on regular basis about the outcome of the 
efforts made in this regard. 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.-9) 
B. Setting up of shops for selling millets exclusively in every district. 
1.8 The Committee in their original report observed/recommended as follows:- 
“With a view to give impetus to the consumption of Coarse grains and millet 
based food products, the Committee suggest the Govt. to consider setting up of 
at least one shop initially selling exclusively Mil lets and Millet based products 
preferably by Khadi and Village lndustries Commission (KVIC), Tribes lndia, Self 
Help Groups (SHGs) especially run by women, etc in every district of the country. 
The Committee believe this initiative will introduce the varie ty of Coarse grains to 
the people at one place and will give them liberty to choose Coarse grains as per 
their taste and choice. Further, it will extend support to made in lndia products by 
exporting coarse grains thereby giving meaning to 'local for vocal ' in general and 
self Help Groups and women in particular as the country is progressing with the 
idea of Atam Nirbhar Bharat.The efforts made by the Govt. to promote extensive 
use of the Millets (Shree Anna) will aid to the campaign of the Govt. local for 
Vocal.” 
1.9 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“At present, Khadi and Village Industries commission (KVIC) does not have any 
specific scheme for Millets. However, Agro Based Food Processing Industry 
(ABFPI), one of the components of Gramodyog Vikas Yojana (GVY), being 
implemented by KVIC, have the provision for setting up of pilot plant/Common 
Facility Centres (CFCs) on millets with the help of Centre of Excellence (CoEs) 
based on commercial viability, innovativeness, ease of adapt ation, high return on 
investment and employment potential. A project proposal has been received by 
KVIC from Tamil Nadu Agriculture University, one of the CoEs of ABFPI, for 
setting up of a pilot plant on millet processing, which is under consideration. 
Besides, KVIC is also planning to work in the field of Millets in coordination with 
Indian Institute of Millet Research (IIMR), Hyderabad.”  
1.10 The Committee had in their original Report suggested the Government to 
consider setting up of at least one shop initially selling exclusively Millets and 
Millet based products preferably by Khadi and Village lndustries Commission 
(KVIC), Tribes lndia, Self Help Groups (SHGs) especially run by women, etc in 

4 
 
every district of the country. In its reply, the Department has only stated that a 
project proposal has been received by KVIC from Tamil Nadu Agriculture 
University, one of the Centres of Excellence (CoEs) of Agro Based Food 
Processing Industry (ABFPI) , for setting up of a pilot plant on millet processing, 
which is  under consideration. It has also informed the Committee that  KVIC is 
also planning to work in the field of Millets in coordination with Indian Institute of 
Millet Research (IIMR), Hyderabad . The Committee, while appreciating the plans 
for setting up of pilot plant on millet processing and plans to work in coordination 
with research bodies like IIMR, Hyderabad, like to be apprised about the  actual 
efforts made by the Government in the direction of setting up of shops selling 
exclusively Millets and Millet b ased products in each district of the country and 
promise extensive use of Millets. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No.-1)     
Production of coarse grains 
2.1 The committee are pleased to note that production of coarse grains has gone up 
from 430.59 Lakh Metric Tonnes (LMTs) in 2018 -19 to 587.25 LMTs in 2022 -23 , an 
increase of 22.5 % growth during the afore mentioned five year period. The average 
production of coarse grains during the last five years stood at 492 LMTs of which 
production of Maize accounts for substantial part. Out of average production of 480.40 
LMTs for five years (2017 -18 to 2021-2022) of six major coarse grains -Sorghum, Pearl 
Millet, Finger Millets, Small Millets, Maize and Barley, maize production stood at 301.22 
i.e. 63% . 
The Committee learn that several initiatives taken by the Govt. such as 
awareness campaigns about the health benefits of consuming coarse grains especially 
millets, const itution of six Task Forces in 2021, engaging with various farmers 
producers organizations (FPOs), chefs, etc to promote Millets carried out during the last 
few years have contributed enormously to the increase in production of coarse grains. 
The Committee believe that such efforts by Govt. will continue in future and will help in 
increasing production and consumption of coarse grains in the country. 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare mentioned that as per the last data 
available, production of coarse grains has gone up from 430.59 Lakh Metric 
Tonne(LMT) in 2018 -19 to 573.19 LMT in 2022 -23, with an increase of 33.1 % growth 
during the aforementioned five -year period. The average production of coarse grains 
during the last five years stood at 501.10 LMT of which production of Maize accounts for 
substantial part. Out of average production of 501.10 LMTs for five years (2018 -19 to 
2022-23 of six major coarse grains -Sorghum, Pearl Millet, Finger Millets, Small Millets, 
Maize a nd Barley), maize production stood at 319.89 LMT i.e. 63.84%. The various 
initiatives are ongoing which will lead to an increase in production and consumption of 
millets. 
Department of Food & Public Distribution 
O.M. No-14-14/2018-Py-III(361133) 
 
 
 

6 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.-2) 
Procurement of coarse Grains under TPDS /OWS 
2.3 It could be seen that procurement of coarse grains is regulated by guidelines for 
allocation, distribution, and disposal of coarse grains (Jowar, Bajra, Maize & Ragi etc.). 
These guidelines entitle states to procure the said coarse grains in Decentralized 
Procurement mode from farmers at Minimum support price (MSP) for distribution under 
Targeted Public Distribution system (TPDS)/Other welfare Schemes (OWS) such as 
lntegrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS) and PM Poshan under the central pool 
subject to the prior approval of Government of lndia (Gol) on the detailed procurement 
plan prepared by the state Government in consultation with Food Corporation of lndia 
(FCl). 
ln regard t o the procurement of coarse grains for distribution under Targeted 
Public Distribution System (TPDS) / Other Welfare Schemes (OWS) namely lntegrated 
Child Development Scheme (ICDS) and PM Poshan, the Committee observe that there 
is substantial increase in procurement of coarse grains (Jowar, Bajra, Maize and Ragi) 
during the last six years as mentioned in Annexure-II. The procurement of coarse grains 
by states which stood at 70,462 Metric Tonnes (MTs) in 2017 -18 has witnessed nine 
fold increase to 6,36,686 Metric Tonnes in 2022 -23. The off take of coarse grains for 
distribution under TPDS/OWS which was confined to two states -Haryana and 
Maharashtra in 2017 -18 has now increased to nine states - viz. Gujarat, Haryana, 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Ut tar Pradesh, Odisha, Uttarakhand and 
Tamil Nadu in 2022 -23. The data given at Annexure -ll further shows that depending on 
the local preferences states are lifting the stocks of either combination of various millets. 
The Committee also note that states are allowed to procure under Decentralised 
Procurement (DCP) mode at Minimum Support Price (MSP) for distribution under 
TPDS/ OWS subject to approval of the Govt. of lndia and this arrangement, the 
Committee believe, will result in cost optimisation for states  as well. The Committee 
note with satisfaction that increased production and subsequent off take by more states 
indicates their acceptability of coarse grains for distribution under TPDS/ OWS schemes 
and this is a sign of success of the of the Govt's polic y. The Committee hope that the 
remaining states also start procuring coarse grains for distribution under TPDS OWS 
schemes. The Committee are satisfied to note that the revision in the guidelines of 2014 
for procurement, allocation, distribution and dispos al in 2021/22 to (i) address the 
difficulties being faced by the State Government, (ii) to increase the procurement of 
coarse grains, distribution periods enhanced to 6 -10 months from earlier period 3 
months, and (iii)provide for inter -state transportation of surplus millets through FCI also 
played a major role in increasing number of states opting for procurement of millets. 
 
 
 

7 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 In order t o further widen scope of procurement of coarse grains/millets, it has 
been decided to allow the procurement of following minor/pseudo millets for  3 years 
(from 2023) at  cost based on the MSP of Ragi: 
Minor Millet- Foxtail Millet  (Kangani/Kakun), Proso Millet  (Cheena), Kodo Millet 
(Kodo) ,little millet (Kutki)   
Pseudo Millets-(Buck-wheat (kuttu) and Ameranthus(Chaulai). 
 
Department of Food & Public Distribution 
O.M. No-14-14/2018-Py-III(361133) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.-4) 
Minimum Support Price (MSP) 
2.5 The data furnished by the Department shows that MSP for five coarse grains viz. 
Jowar, Bajra, Ragi, Maize and Barley have increased by 108%, 100 %, 148%, 59 %and 
50% respectively during a period of 10 years. The Committee further note that MSP of 
coarse grains/millets has been increased by the Govt. more than 2O% from Rs.2,897 
per quintal in 2018-19 to Rs. 3,578 per quintal in 2022 -23, i.e., a period of five years. 
The Committee are of the view that the decision of the Govt. announced in union budget 
for 2018-19 to keep MSP at a level of one and half times of the cost of production has 
increased the MSP of Jowar, Bajra, Ragi , Maize and Barley from Rs.2430, Rs.1950, 
Rs.2897, Rs.1700 and Rs. 1440 per quintal in 2018 -19 to Rs. 2970,Rs.2350, Rs.3578, 
Rs.1962 and Rs,1735 respectively in 2022 -23. The Committee commend the efforts of 
the Gvt w.r. t increasing the MSP for Coarse grains and acknowledge that the 
remunerative prices for Coarse grains have played a key role in attracting the farmers to 
cultivate coarse grains resulting in higher production. The committee believe that there 
will be spur in investment in cultivating Shree Anna and the resultant increase in 
production of Millets (Shree Anna) will aid the government initiatives for 'Local for vocal' 
and also Atma  Nirbhar Bharat. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare mentioned that Government fixes 
Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) for 22 mandated agriculture crops including five 
coarse grains i.e. Jowar, bajra ,ragi , maize, and barely, on the basis of the 
recommendation of the commission for  agriculture cost & prices (CACP), after 
considering the view of State Governments and Central Ministries/ Departments 

8 
 
concerned .while recommending MSPs , CACP  considers Important factors like cost of 
production overall demand -supply condi tion, domestic and international prices, inter –
crop prices parity, terms of trade between agriculture and non - agriculture sectors ,the 
likely effect on the rest of the economy, besides ensuring rational utilization of land, 
water and other production res ource and a minimum of 50 percent as the margin over 
cost of production. The Union Budget for 2018 -19 had announced the pre - determined 
principle to keep MSPs at levels of one and half time of the cost of production. 
Accordingly, Government had increased MSPs for all mandated Kharif , Ragi, and other 
commercial crops with a minimum margin of 50 percent over all India weighted average 
cost of production from year 2018-19 on words.  
Department of Food & Public Distribution 
O.M. No-14-14/2018-Py-III(361133) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.-5) 
Initiatives for promoting Coarse grains especially Millets 
2.7 Apart from incentivizing farmers through remunerative prices in the form of MSP, 
the Govt. of lndia has taken many steps to create awareness of the health benefits and 
to popularise consumption of coarse grains specially millets. The proposal of the Govt. 
of lndia to United Nations   Organisation (UN0) to declare 2023 as lnternational Year of 
Millets (IYOM) was approved by UN General assembly (UNGA) in2021. The Commi ttee 
believe that it is a diplomatic victory and is a sign of growing soft power of lndia a 
international level apart from achieving the objective of making millets consumption as a 
people movement. The Committee suggest that coarse grains grown exclusively in lndia 
may be considered for export. As part of celebration of IYOM 23, the Committee 
observe that Gol has (i) organised awareness campaigns such as Global Millets 
Conference (Shree Anna conference) at Delhi where in delegates from '102 countries , 
Chefs , reps of international research institutions, diplomats, etc have participated (ii) 
carried out promotional campaigns with stake holders such as Farmers Producers 
Organisations (FPOs), Chefs, display of Millets at trade fairs, organising special 
luncheon with foreign ambassadors of different countries, & 'Millet Luncheon for M.Ps in 
Parliament House Complex, etc., (iv) roped in State Govts to do activities to popularise 
millet consumption, (v) nurtured '185 Millet Start -ups at llMRs business incubator - 
Nutrihub, etc. Further activities are planned to be carried out in the rest of the year 
2023. The Committee are happy to note that promotional campaigns are slated to be 
carried out during G-20 and SCO presidency in India through Millets exhibition during all 
working group meetings of G20 and SCO, arranging millet based lunch and curated 
millet gift hampers for all the dignitaries. The Committee strongly believe that these 
campaigns will create ever lasting impact about the millets across the world. The 
Committee while appreciating the huge success of Govt. of lndia at UN for getting its 
proposal for declaring 2023 as IYOM approved by UNGA, earnestly hope that their 

9 
 
efforts to increase the consumption of millets will reap rich dividends in the years to 
come which will go a long way in changing the food habits of the people in favour of 
consumption of millets.  
Reply of the Government 
2.8 The committee appreciated the huge success of Govt. of lndia at UN for getting 
its proposal for declaring 2023 as IYOM approved by UNGA. The Ministry of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare has noted the recommendation of the committee. 
Department of Food & Public Distribution 
O.M. No-14-14/2018-Py-III(361133) 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.-6) 
National Food Security Mission 
2.9 It is heartening to note that Govt. under the National Food Security Mission ( 
NFSM), is focusing on low productivity and high potential districts including cultivation of 
coarse grain and millets in rain fed areas, fallow lands and waste lands. The Commit tee 
also note that Govt. is implementing cropping system centric interventions in a mission 
mode approach through active engagement of all stake holders at various levels, agro -
climatic zone -wise planning and cluster approach for productivity enhancement, 
promotion and extension of improved technologies etc. Under this programme, 3 
National centres of excellence have been established i.e. CCS Haryana Agricultural 
University, Hisar for pearl millet, lndian lnstitute of Millets Research, Hyderabad for 
Sorghum and University of Agricultural Sciences, Bengaluru for small millets. The 
Committee are pleased to note that the efforts of Govt. to increase the production 
resulted into encouraging the ten states namely Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Chattisg arh, Tamil Nadu, Odisha, Assam, Rajasthan and Himachal 
Pradesh to launch their own millet missions. The Committee commend the steps taken 
by the Govt. in popularizing coarse grains especially Millets (Shree Anna), which has 
been staple food in many parts o f the country because of its nutritious value, during this 
Amrit kaal. 
 
 

10 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 The Committee commend the steps taken by the Govt. in popularizing coarse 
grains especially Millets (Shree Anna) and Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers W elfare 
has noted the recommendation of the committee. 
Department of Food & Public Distribution 
O.M. No-14-14/2018-Py-III(361133) 
Recommendation (Serial No.-7) 
Primary processing facilities - Extension of financial support 
2.11 The Committee are apprised that in order to address primary processing facility 
for millets, the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers welfare are supporting rural farmers 
through the Farmers Producers organizations to purchase primary Processing 
Equipment with the financial support of NABARD, National Cooperative Development 
Corporation (NCDC), Small Farmers Agri -business consortium (SFAC) and other state 
government agencies.  
Further, The lndian lnstitute of Millets Research, Hyderabad till date has assiste d 
15 FPOs (out of 31 IIMR supported FPOs) to procure primary processing Units, located 
at Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Arunachal 
Pradesh and Meghalaya states. The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Govt. in 
providing primary processing facilitates to farmers by arranging financial support from 
NABARD, National Cooperative Development Corporation (NCDC), Small Farmers 
Agri-business consortium(SFAC) and other state government agencies to purchase 
equipment for setting up of Primary processing facility for millets. The Committee are of 
the view that this policy intervention will strengthen the existing supply chain of millets 
by engaging farmers into groups as FPOs and will further boost the millets consumption 
in the country. 
Reply of the Government 
2.12 Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare mentioned that the Government is 
implementing a scheme for formation and promotion of FPOs including millets. This will 
further strengthen the supply chain of millets and boo st the millets consumption in the 
country. 
Department of Food & Public Distribution 
O.M. No-14-14/2018-Py-III(361133) 
 
 

11 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.-8) 
Millet's distribution under TPDS in addition to Rice and wheat  
2.13 The Committee in their earlier report No. 24 on the Demands for Grants (2023 -
24) pertaining to the Department of Food and Public Distribution suggested the Ministry 
that the beneficiaries of different schemes should be given option to bundle millets 
along with wheat and rice within their entitled quantity. Further, considering the fact that 
more and more states are opting for millets, with a view to encourage remaining states 
to opt for nutritious and healthy millets in combination with rice and wheat, the 
Committee suggest the Govt. of India to explore the possibility of distributing millets in 
addition to rice / wheat under TPDS and Other Welfare Schemes (ICDS & PM Poshan). 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 The Targeted Public Distribution System (TDPS) is now governed as per 
provisions of the National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA).Under the Act, the term 
“Food grains“  is defined as rice, wheat or coarse grains or any combination thereof 
conforming to such quality norms as may be determined, by order , by the Central 
Government from time to time. In order to improve the level of nutrition among the 
beneficiaries covered under the NFSA, all the States /UTs have been advised to 
procure millets and distribute to NFSA beneficiaries as per local consumption 
preference and as per guideline issued by the Central Government from time to time.  
Department of Food & Public Distribution 
O.M. No-14-14/2018-Py-III(361133) 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
- NIL - 
  

13 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
- NIL - 
 
  

14 
 
CHAPTER – V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH INTERIM 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN RECEIVED  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.-3) 
Allocation and Distribution 
5.1 The total allocation of Coarse grains to various states for distribution under 
TPDS/ OWS which stood at 73,000 tonnes in 2014-15 has increased to 5,85,500 tonnes 
in 2022 -23, a growth of eight times over a period of 9 years. This is likely to go up 
further to 9,20,000 tonnes in 2023 -24. Total quantity of coarse grains distributed during 
the last three years i.e 2020-21, 2021-22 and 2022-23 is 4,37,338 Metric Tonnes (MTs), 
8,36,592, and 6,43,615 MTs respectively. The Committee strongly believe that without 
the Dept of Food & Public Distribution's careful planning, strategy, and its meticulous 
implementation such a growth could not have been possible . They, therefore appreciate 
the department for huge increase in allocation and distribution over the last few years. 
The Committee hope the Dept will continue to make efforts to cover more states in the 
coming years. 
Reply of the Government 
5.2 Department of Food & PD is allocating Coarse grains (Millets) also called as 
Nutri-Cereals under the Public Distribution System to States /UTs as per request made 
by them. Nutri - Cereals are allocated in terms of National Food Security Act, 2013. 
From 1 st January, 2 023 the aforesaid allocation is being made at free of cost. The 
allocation of approved quantity of Nutri - Cereals for distribution under PDS is made by 
this Department in lieu of equal quantity of wheat /rice while ensuring that the overall 
quantity of ric e, wheat and Nutri -Cereals has to be within the upper ceiling fixed in 
respect of each State/ UTs under NFSA. The Department will continue its efforts to 
include more States. In KMS 2023 -24, coarse grains/millets are expected to be 
procured/distributed under the TPDS in 14 States. 
Department of Food & Public Distribution 
O.M. No-14-14/2018-Py-III (361133) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see in Para No. 1.7 if Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 

15 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.-9) 
Setting up of shops for selling millets exclusively in every district. 
5.3 With a view to give impetus to the consumption of Coarse grains and millet 
based food products, the Committee suggest the Govt. to consider setting up of at least 
one shop initially selling exclusively Millets and Millet based products preferably by 
Khadi and Village lndustries Commission (KVIC), Tribes lndia, Self Help Groups (SHGs) 
especially run by women, etc in every district of the country. The Committee believe this 
initiative will introduce the variety of Coarse gra ins to the people at one place and will 
give them liberty to choose Coarse grains as per their taste and choice. Further, it will 
extend support to made in lndia products by exporting coarse grains thereby giving 
meaning to 'local for vocal' in general and  self Help Groups and women in particular as 
the country is progressing with the idea of Atam Nirbhar Bharat.The efforts made by the 
Govt. to promote extensive use of the Millets (Shree Anna) will aid to the campaign of 
the Govt. local for Vocal. 
Reply of the Government 
5.4 At present, Khadi and Village Industries commission (KVIC) does not have any 
specific scheme for Millets. However, Agro Based Food Processing Industry (ABFPI), 
one of the components of Gramodyog Vikas Yojana (GVY), being implemented by 
KVIC, have the provision for setting up of pilot plant/Common Facility Centres (CFCs) 
on millets with the help of Centre of Excellence (CoEs) based on commercial viability, 
innovativeness, ease of adaptation, high return on investment and employment 
potential. A project proposal has been received by KVIC from Tamil Nadu Agriculture 
University, one of the CoEs of ABFPI, for setting up of a pilot plant on millet processing, 
which is under consideration. Besides, KVIC is also planning to work in the field of 
Millets in coordination with Indian Institute of Millet Research (IIMR), Hyderabad. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public  
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution 
O.M. No-14-14/2018-Py-III(361133) dated 24.11.2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see in Para No. 1.10 if Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         LOCKET CHATTERJEE, 
7 December, 2023                  Chairperson, 
16 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)                                      Standing Committee on  
   Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
  

16 
 
APPENDIX - I 
    
MINUTES OF THE  FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (202 3-2024) HELD ON 
THURSDAY,  7TH DECEMBER, 2023 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room No. 4, 
Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt.Locket Chatterjee  - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
4. Shri Anil Firojiya 
5. Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit 
6. Shri Khagen Murmu 
7. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
8. Dr. Amar Singh 
9. Smt. Kavita Singh 
10. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
11. Shri Vaithilingam Ve. 
  
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 12. Shri C.Ve Shanmugam 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai                 - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi                 - Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan                 - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Dong Lianthang Tonsing            -     Deputy Secretary 
 

17 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the following Draft Reports of 
the Committee: 
(i) Xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
(ii) Xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
(iii) Thirty Fifth  Report on Action Taken   by   the   Government   on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Thirty First  Report of the 
Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Coarse Grains Production 
and Distribution’  of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution);and  
 
(iv) Xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the above mentioned Draft 
Reports of the Committee.  
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft Reports 
without any amendments/modifications.  
5.  The Committee then authorize d Hon’ble Chairperson to finalize and present the 
aforesaid Reports. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
xxxx Matter does not pertain to Report 
 
  

18 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND  
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023-24) 
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
(i) Total number of Recommendations:                    9 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 Para Nos.1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8   
            (Chapter – II, Total - 7) 
              Percentage:   77.7 % 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pur sue in view 
 of the replies received from the Government 
 Para No. Nil 
                     (Chapter – III, Total - 0) 
             Percentage:   0 % 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
 not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
 Para No.  Nil 
            (Chapter – IV, Total - 0)   
                Percentage: 0% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the interim replies of the 
 Government have been received. 
 Para No.   3 and 9 
   (Chapter – V, Total - 2) 
           Percentage: 22.2 % 
 
 
 
 