i 
 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS,FOOD 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2022-2023) 
 
 
     
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the 
subject ‘Quality Control Cells(QCCs)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution)} 
 
 TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
                March, 2023/Chaitra,1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
26 


ii 
 
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2022-2023) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
{Action Taken  by  the   Government  on  the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) o n the 
subject ‘Quality Control Cells(QCCs)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution)} 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24.3.2023 
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 24.3.2023 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 March, 2023/ Chaitra,1945 (Saka) 
 
 


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
            
Composition of the Committee ………………………………………                iv         
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………...  V        
Chapter I Report……………………………………………………   1        
 
Chapter II Recommendations/ Observations which have been                 5 
accepted by Government……………………………             
  
Chapter III Recommendations/ Observations which the 14 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
 Government’s replies………………………………...                            
 
Chapter IV Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which              15 
replies of Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee ………………………………………..                 
 
Chapter V Recommendations/ Observations in respect of 16 
which final replies of Government are  
still awaited………………………………………………    
  
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the 11th  sitting of the Committee (2022-2023)         18 
 held on 23rd March 2023                   
   
 
(II) Analysis  of the  action  taken by the Government on                 20    
the observations/recommendations contained  
in the Twentieth Report  of  the  Standing  Committee  
on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha)                                       
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2022-23) 
 
 
Smt. Locket Chatterjee-    Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3.  Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4.  Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat 
5.  Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
6.  Shri Gangasandra Siddappa Basavaraj 
7.  Ms. Debasree Chaudhuri 
8.  Shri Anil Firojiya 
9.  Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit 
10.  Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi 
11.  Shri Khagen Murmu 
12.  Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
13.  Shri Subrat Pathak 
14.  Shri Ganesan Selvam 
15.  Dr. Amar Singh 
16.  Smt. Himadri Singh 
17.  Smt. Kavita Singh 
18.  Shri Nandigam Suresh 
19.  Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
20.  Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
21.  Shri Vaithilingam Ve. 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
23.  Dr. Fauzia Khan 
24. Shri Baburam Nishad 
25. Shri Rajmani Patel 
26. Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
27. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
28. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam 
29.  Shri Harbhajan Singh 
30.  Ms. Dola Sen 
31.  Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda            -  Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi    -  Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan              - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Darshana Gulati Khanduja  -  Under Secretary 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution (2022-2023) having been authorized by the Committee to present on 
their behalf, this Twenty Sixth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Quality Control Cells(QCCs)’ of the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Dist ribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution). 
2.  The Twentieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 19.07.2022  and laid in 
Rajya Sabha 07.04.2022. The Government has furnished its replies indicating Action 
Taken on the recommendations contained in the Report on 19.10.2022 and 25.10.2022. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
23rd March,2023. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.  
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the text of the Report. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;     LOCKET CHATTERJEE, 
23 March, 2023                  Chairperson, 
2 Chaitra,1945 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on  
   Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs , Food  and 
Public Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twentieth Report of the 
Committee (17 th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Quality Control Cells(QCCs)’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
 
1.2 The Twentieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 19.07.2022 and 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 07.04.2022. It contained 7 
recommendations/observations Action taken replies in respect of all the 7 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report have been received and 
these have been categorized as follows:- 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
Government - 
Rec. No.:- 1,2,5,6 and 7  
   
   (Chapter – II, Total -5) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies - 
  Rec. No..:-  4 
 (Chapter – III, Total -1) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee -  
Rec. No.:-  NIL 
 (Chapter – IV, Total -0) 
    
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  final replies of 
Government are still awaited -   
   Rec. No. :- 3 
 (Chapter – V, Total -1) 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations accepted by the Government. The 
Committee desire th at final action taken notes to the 
recommendations/observations contained in Chapter -I and final replies in  
respect of recommendation  contained in Chapter V  for which only interim 
reply has been given by  the Government, should be furnished to the 
Committee expeditiously. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations. 
Inspection conducted by QCCs  
 
Recommendation No. 5  
1.5 The Committee in their original report observed/recommended as follows:- 
"The Committee note that the foodgrains are inspected for quality 
assurance through inspections of Food Storage Depots (FSDs) 
and Fair Price Shops (FPSs) by the officers of Quality Control 
Cells (QCCs). The committee also note that the number of 
inspections carried out by QCCs at FSDs during 2018-19, 2019-20 
and 2020-21 were 1159, 940 and 641 respectively as against the 
targets of 1140, 1140 and 1040 respectively. Due to COVID 
pandemic/nationwide lockdown, the targets could not be achieved 
during 2019 -20 and  2020-21. The Committee are dismayed to 
note that during 2018 -19 and 2019 -20, no target for inspection of 
Fair Price Shops (FPSs) was fixed and no inspection thereof was 
carried out. Details on the number of foodgrains samples 
(wheat/rice) collected and te sted by the Quality Control Cells 
(QCCs) during the above three years were 3888, 2833 and 2855 
respectively. The Committee also note the various infrastructure 
related shortcomings and also the shortcomings related to 
technical aspects which have been obse rved during the course of 
inspections which affect the quality of foodgrains. The Committee 
feel that in a vast country like ours, where storage losses due to 
damaged foodgrains are very high and also to ensure good quality 
of foodgrains to ultimate benefi ciaries, the number of inspections 

3 
 
and sample analysis should be increased and strict action should 
be taken against the offenders. 
Discrepancies/shortcomings noticed during inspection of 
FSDs/FPSs are communicated to the concerned agencies for 
making future systematic improvements to avoid recurrence of any 
such lapse. Further, the Committee are happy to note that the 
Department is exploring the possibilities to introduce the latest 
technological interventions for quality assessment of foodgrains in 
collaboration with FCI. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Department should make vigorous steps/efforts in this regard to 
minimize the storage losses of foodgrains to prevent the food 
subsidy from rising further and also to reduce the burden on public 
exchequer and tax payer of the country.” 
 
1.6 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
"The Storage & Research Division, D/o Food and Public 
Distribution under the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution has a mandate to ensure, good quality foodgrains 
provided to the beneficiaries through various social security 
programmes. In pursuance to this, officer/official of QCC of S&R 
Division conducts inspection of various Food Storage Depots 
(FSDs) of FCI/state agencies, Central  Warehousing Corporation 
(CWC), State Warehousing Corporations (SWC), Rice Mills (RMs) 
Fair Price Shops (FPS), Rail Heads & Truck Heads, etc. Prior to 
2018, the inspections of FPS were conducted only after receipt of 
any references/complaints. Presently, t he FPS inspections were 
included under targeted activities during 2020. 
It may be mentioned that, the officers/officials working in eleven 
QCCs conduct regular monthly/ surprise checks to ensure the 
quality standards of foodgrains distributed through Publi c 
Distribution System (PDS)/Other Welfare Schemes (OWS). The 
discrepancies/ shortcomings noticed are communicated to 
concerned agencies for taking strict action against delinquents by 
rectification and for systemic improvements. Moreover, the 
information regarding the quantity of Non -FAQ stock found during 
the inspection is also intimated to FC ACs, D/o Food and Public 
Distribution for taking necessary action with regard to release of 
subsidy. 

4 
 
Considering the quantum of storage loss occurring due to damaged  
foodgrains, the frequency of inspections visits and sample analysis 
may be increased. However, this requires availability of adequate 
staff for achieving the targets efficiently.  
In this regard, the Division is in the process of revival of posts, 
promotions and new recruitments on priority basis. In an effort to 
minimise the storage losses of foodgrains, the department has 
already formulated a SoP for storage loss /gains with respect to the 
stored foodgrains.” 
  
1.7 In their Original Report, the Committee , inter-alia observed that the 
number of inspection and sample analysis should be increased to ensure 
good quality of foodgrains to beneficiaries and to prevent storage losses. 
The Department in their Action Taken Reply has stated that increasing the 
frequency of inspections  visits and sample analysis is subjected to 
availability of adequate staff. To achieve this, Division is in the process of 
revival of posts, promotion and new recruitment on priority basis. The 
Department has also informed that they have  already formulated a SOP for 
storage loss/gain for stored goods.  The Committee feel  that raising the 
number of inspection s and sample analysis will have significant effect on 
quality of food grains . The Committee, while reiterating their original 
recommendation desire the Department to expedite the process of revival 
of post s and new recruitments to raise the number of inspection and 
sample analysis thereby ensuring delivery of good quality foodgrains  to 
ultimate beneficiaries and preventing storage losses of foodgrains. 
  

5 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
  ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No.1 
 
2.1   The Committee note that Quality Control Cells (QCCs) are 
responsible for ensuring the quality of Central Pool foodgrains stock from 
procurement to distribution. Till date, only 11 Quality Control Cells have been 
set up in different States covering minimum 2 States/UTs. The Committee feel 
that number of QCCs is t oo less in the wake of implementation of the National 
Food Security Act, 2013 which has been implemented in all States/UTs of the 
country under which large proportion of the population is entitled to receive 
highly subsidized foodgrains. The Committee, the refore, recommend setting 
up more QCCs expeditiously for addressing the issue of quality check/control 
comprehensively and to prevent losses arising due to damaged foodgrains. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.2  1. At present there are eleven Quality Control Cells located at 
New Delhi, Bangalore, Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, Kolkata, Hyderabad, Lucknow, 
Pune, Chennai, Guwahati and Patna which are functioning under the direct 
control of the Department of Food & Public Distribution. The foodgrains are 
inspected for qual ity assurance through routine inspections of Food Storage 
Depots, Fair Price Shops, Rice Mills, Rail Heads/Truck Heads by the officers 
of these cells. Besides, the quality, it is also ensured during the inspections 
that the guidelines/instructions issued b y Government about proper storage 
and maintenance of foodgrains are followed by the Food Corporation of India 
(FCI), Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC), State Warehousing 
Corporations (SWCs) and State agencies. Further, these cells also attend 
various complaints received from MPs, VIPs, State Governments, media and 
consumers about the quality of foodgrains during procurement, storage and 
distribution. Discrepancies/shortcomings noticed during inspection/ 
investigations are communicated to the concerned a uthorities for taking 
remedial measures including action against the delinquents. 
2. The already present eleven Quality Control Cells under S&R Division are 
unable to function to its full fledged capacity due to acute shortage of staff 
and outdated laboratory equipments. In order to address these issues, the 
task of revival of posts, promotions of the eligible officers/officials and new 
recruitments have been taken up on priority basis. Further, the 
Department has undertaken various measures to strengthen the 

6 
 
infrastructure of the Quality Control Cells and laboratories present therein 
through the process of up gradation & introduction of new 
technologies/machines & instruments accompanied by training of staff.  
3. In pursuance to the announcements made by Hon’ble Prime Minister in 
his address on 75th Independence day, Government of India has approved 
supply of Fortified Rice (FR) throughout the Targeted Public Distribution 
System (TPDS) under National Food Security Act (NFSA), Integrated 
Child Development Service ( ICDS), Pradhan Mantri Poshan Shakti 
Nirman (PM POSHAN) and other welfare schemes (OWS) of Government 
of India in all the states and Union Territories (UTs) in phase wise manner. 
In connection to this, the Quality Control of Fortified Rice Kernel (FRK) & 
Fortified Rice will play a paramount importance in achieving the desired 
objectives. Keeping in view of this, the department is in the process of 
modernizing its labs with sophisticated/advanced equipments which are 
capable of detecting variation to added mi cronutrients in Fortified 
Rice(blow/above benchmark). 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
              O.M. No. 40-1/2021-QCC/231 Dated the 19th October, 
2022] 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
2.3 The Committee notes that the Department has prepared Revised 
Standard Operating Procedure (RSOP) for DCP States keeping in view the 
concerns/interests of the farmers as well as beneficiaries. The Department has 
also requested State Governments to ensure qu ality of foodgrains at the time of 
procurement.  
The RSOP is still under consultation with the State Governments. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to give final shape to RSOP 
and implement the same at the earliest to ensure timely paymen t to farmers and 
good quality foodgrains to poor beneficiaries. 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 A  Standard Operating Procedure (SoP) for monitoring quality of 
foodgrains stocks procured under Decentralized procurement (DCP) Scheme 
has been finalized and disse minated to all stakeholders for its strict compliance 
on dated 16.07.2021. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
              O.M. No. 40-1/2021-QCC/231 Dated the 19th October, 
2022] 
  

7 
 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
2.5 The Committee note that the foodgrains are inspected for quality 
assurance through inspections of Food Storage Depots (FSDs) and Fair Price 
Shops (FPSs) by the officers of Quality Control Cells (QCCs). The committee 
also note that the number of inspections carried out by QCCs at FSDs during 
2018-19, 2019-20 and 2020 -21 were 1159, 940 and 641 respectively as against 
the targets of 1140, 1140 and 1040 respectively. Due to COVID 
pandemic/nationwide lockdown, the targets could not be ac hieved during 2019 -
20 and 2020 -21. The Committee are dismayed to note that during 2018 -19 and 
2019-20, no target for inspection of Fair Price Shops (FPSs) was fixed and no 
inspection thereof was carried out. Details on the number of foodgrains samples 
(wheat/rice) collected and tested by the Quality Control Cells (QCCs) during the 
above three years were 3888, 2833 and 2855 respectively. The Committee also 
note the various infrastructure related shortcomings and also the shortcomings 
related to technical asp ects which have been observed during the course of 
inspections which affect the quality of foodgrains. The Committee feel that in a 
vast country like ours, where storage losses due to damaged foodgrains are very 
high and also to ensure good quality of food grains to ultimate beneficiaries, the 
number of inspections and sample analysis should be increased and strict action 
should be taken against the offenders. 
Discrepancies/shortcomings noticed during inspection of FSDs/FPSs are 
communicated to the concerned  agencies for making future systematic 
improvements to avoid recurrence of any such lapse. Further, the Committee are 
happy to note that the Department is exploring the possibilities to introduce the 
latest technological interventions for quality assessmen t of foodgrains in 
collaboration with FCI. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Department 
should make vigorous steps/efforts in this regard to minimize the storage losses 
of foodgrains to prevent the food subsidy from rising further and also to reduce  
the burden on public exchequer and tax payer of the country. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6  The Storage & Research Division, D/o Food and Public Distribution under 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution has a mandate to 
ensure, good q uality foodgrains provided to the beneficiaries through various 
social security programmes. In pursuance to this, officer/official of QCC of S&R 
Division conducts inspection of various Food Storage Depots (FSDs) of FCI/state 
agencies, Central Warehousing C orporation (CWC), State Warehousing 
Corporations (SWC), Rice Mills (RMs) Fair Price Shops (FPS), Rail Heads & 
Truck Heads, etc. Prior to 2018, the inspections of FPS were conducted only 
after receipt of any references/complaints. Presently, the FPS inspect ions were 
included under targeted activities during 2020. 
It may be mentioned that, the officers/officials working in eleven QCCs conduct 
regular monthly/ surprise checks to ensure the quality standards of foodgrains 
distributed through Public Distribution  System (PDS)/Other Welfare Schemes 

8 
 
(OWS). The discrepancies/ shortcomings noticed are communicated to 
concerned agencies for taking strict action against delinquents by rectification 
and for systemic improvements. Moreover, the information regarding the q uantity 
of Non-FAQ stock found during the inspection is also intimated to FC ACs, D/o 
Food and Public Distribution for taking necessary action with regard to release of 
subsidy. 
Considering the quantum of storage loss occurring due to damaged foodgrains, 
the frequency of inspections visits and sample analysis may be increased. 
However, this requires availability of adequate staff for achieving the targets 
efficiently.  
In this regard, the Division is in the process of revival of posts, promotions and 
new recruitments on priority basis. In an effort to minimise the storage losses of 
foodgrains, the department has already formulated a SoP for storage loss /gains 
with respect to the stored foodgrains. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
              O.M. No. 40-1/2021-QCC/231 Dated the 19th October, 
2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
2.7 The Committee notes that during 2018 -19, 2019-20 and 2020-21, 46, 142 
and 78 samples respectively were found to be of sub -standard quality in FCI 
godowns. The Government has also apprised the committee that during the year 
2018-19, disciplinary action was taken against delinquents and 6 major penalties 
and 55 minor penalties were imposed. Likewise in year 2019 -20, 3 major 
penalties and 63 minor penalties and 2020 -21, 02 major and 103 minor penalties 
were imposed. In respect to CWC, investigation of each cas e has been carried 
out and defaulting officials have been penalized. In case of stock received as 
such, quality complaints have been lodged and depositors have taken steps for 
disposal. The committee feels that strict action should be taken against the 
delinquent officials and they should not escape accountability for such unjustified 
losses as FCI is incurring huge amount on the food subsidy. The committee, 
therefore, recommend that FCI should fix its own standards/ checklist by framing 
State-wise SOP for ensuring safe storage of foodgrains so that employees may 
become extra vigilant in the matter of procurement of good quality of foodgrains 
and for its safe storage to mitigate the losses to these public corporations acting 

9 
 
for the benefit of community for distribution of subsidized foodgrains. The 
committee also desire that it should be continuous endeavor of FCI to minimize 
the operational cost by controlling the operational losses and other overheads. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.8  The details on the tran sit losses reported in Food Corporation of India 
(FCI) during last 3 years are as under: 
(Qty in LMT, Value in Crore Rs.) 
Year Qty Moved Qty of Loss % of loss Value of Loss 
2019-20* 409.64 0.94 0.23 257.92 
2020-21* 618.74 1.49 0.24 426.85 
2021-22 604.32 1.40 0.23 398.22 
2022-23 (1stQtr) 150.30 0.38 0.25 113.45 
(* indicates audited figures, figures for the year 2021 -22 and 2022 -23 are 
provisional) 
  
It may kindly be seen from above data that percentage of Transit losses is being 
maintained at bare minimum level. The increase in quantity and value of losses 
in absolute term during last 2 years is because FCI has moved about 200 LMT 
more stocks during 2020 -21 & 2021 -22 to meet requirements under PRADHAN 
MANTRI GARIB KALYAN ANNA YOJANA (PMGKAY) schemes launched during 
Covid-19 pandemic. Though in monetary terms the value has increased but in 
terms of percentage it remains almost same. The value has also increased due 
to higher rate applied for working out losses during 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 as 
compared to 2019-20. 
FCI own procedures and efforts undertaken to control Transit Losses (TL) 
I. Review of TL/ Destination Shortages 
i) Zone -wise/ Region -wise/ Dist. -wise/ Depot -wise trend of transit losses is 
being reviewed in every Monthly Performance Review Meetin gs as well as in 
special review meetings at different levels :- 
S. No. Reviewed at Level of review  MPR Frequency 
1 Hqrs Zones/ Regions 
Monthly 2 Zonal Regions/ D.O’s 
3 Regional D.O’s/ Depots 
4 District Depots 
ii)    Mandatory Joint Verification (JV) teams are being deputed to investigate 
all the transit losses cases of more than 0.75% on monthly basis. 
iii)   Independent Consignment Certification Squad (ICCS) are being 
deployed at the time of loading and unloading of rakes. 

10 
 
iv)   Various surprise checks are arranged at both ends at loading as well as 
unloading stations. 
  
II. Increased frequency of regular inspection/ investigation 
i)     Highest TL/ Destination Shortages of Zone & Region are being 
investigated by ED (Zone) and GM (Region) respect ively. If highest TL of a 
Region is investigated by ED (Zone) then 2nd highest TL of the Region will be 
investigated by the GM (Region) concerned. 
ii)  GM (SL/TL)/ DGM (SL/TL) of the Zone are investigating 3 cases of the 
different Regions and supervising l oading/ unloading of 3 rakes reporting 
higher trend of TL. 
iii) Chart of monthly investigations & rake supervisions being carried out by 
Z.O, R.O & D.O level is as under: 
 
S. No. Conducted by No. of TL 
investigations 
No. of Rake supervision 
during loading/ unloading 
1 ED (Zone) 1x5 = 5   
2 GM (R) * 1x24 = 24   
1 GM/ DGM at Z.O 3x5 = 15 3x5=15 
2 R.O  Highest 5 to 10 depots 
TL by Cat I Officer 
10% of rakes (by R.O 
Squad) 
3 DM/ AGM (QC)/ 
Cat I Officer of 
R.O 
  20% of rakes (if RTL of 
Depot >0.50%) 
10% of rakes (if RTL range 
of Depot is < 0.50%) 
(*Total there are 26 Regions, among which Delhi & H.P do not have RTL) 
iv)   Mobile squads have also been deployed in J&K, NEF, Assam, Arunachal 
Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh Regions from where the high incidences of 
losses were reported. 
III.  Administrative/ Disciplinary actions 
i)     JV (Joint Verification) is being conducted for TL more than 0.75% and 
after JV, responsibility is fixed upon the delinquents whosoever found 
responsible. 
ii)  The recovery of Rs. 33.54 Crore (from April, 2021 to March, 2022) has 
been imposed against staff, contractor and State Agencies out of which Rs. 
14.10Crore pertains to Transit Loss. During 2022 -23 (1stqtr), Rs. 1.81 Crore 
has been recovered from staff, contractor and Storage Agenci es against 
transit losses. 

11 
 
iii)  Disciplinary actions  have been taken against delinquents related to Rail 
Transit against 227 and 343 staff during the year 2020 -21 & 2021 -22 (upto 
Dec.,21) respectively. 
iv)  Depot Staff is being rotated wherever depot rep orting higher RTL 
continuously for six months. 
IV.  Systematic changes 
  
i)     The complete movement of foodgrains is being monitored on real time 
basis through DOS (Depot Online System). 
ii)   Polythene sheets are being spread on the floor of railway wag ons to 
retrieve the spilled over grains. 
iii)  CCTV Cameras have been installed in Depots. 
iv) An experiment is being conducted in six Districts by making use of high 
security seal to avoid tempering enroute pilferage beside the madeup bags 
accord at railhead are also being accounted properly. One the experiment is 
over and report is received then it will be replicated through the country for 
further improvement. 
V. Frequent regular/ surprise checks are being undertaken by HQRS 
Vigilance Division. 
The detai ls on the inspections conducted by Headquarters Vigilance Squad 
during the last three years are as below: 
Year No. of inspections conducted by Hqrs. Vigilance Squads 
2019-20 76 
2020-21 31 
2021-22 69 
Due to pandemic situation prevailing across the country during 2020-21 & 2021-
22, less squads were deputed from FCI Headquarters during the period. 
However, all the desired inspections were being conducted at field level 
formations to ensure effective monitoring. In the year 2022 -23, in a span of three 
and half months about 47 squads have been deputed to sensitive divisions to 
conduct surprise checks. 
VI. Damage foodgrains – investigation & fixing of responsibility 
As per procedure each and every damage foodgrain case is investigated and 
responsibility is fixed upon the delinquent officers/ officials. Same is critically 
examined during the course of District Categorization Committee (DCC) & 
Regional Categorization Committee (RCC). 
 
 

12 
 
Reasons for Transit Losses 
Since there is locational variance in product ion, procurement and consumption 
of foodgrains in the country, the surplus stocks procured in the procuring regions 
has to be inevitably moved to the deficit consuming regions. The procured 
foodgrains are mainly moved by rail from procuring regions to cons uming 
regions for distribution under National Food Security Act (NFSA) and other 
welfare schemes. Following factors are responsible for Transit Loss during 
movement of foodgrains by Rail: 
 Moisture driage of foodgrains during the transit – when the rakes ar e 
moved, it takes 7 to 8 days to reach destination and during transit, due to 
hot weather, stocks get dried up and significance moisture driage take 
place. 
 Difference in weight between dispatch & receipt points -when stocks 
moved from one depot, it weighs o n Electronic Lorry Weighbridge at both 
the ends. There is a standard error of +5 Kg in LWB. Rake of 74000 bags 
are transported in about 200 to 400 trucks depending upon the carrying 
capacity and at each point of time (dispatching as well as receiving) thes e 
trucks are weighed twice to take the tare weight as well as gross weight.  
 Driage of gunny weight due to driage in gunny moisture due to hot 
weather during transit. 
 Multiple handling during loading/ unloading operations. 
 Uses of hooks by labour during handling. 
 Poor texture of gunny bags etc. 
Due to above factors, certain quantity of loss during transit is inevitable.. 
However, with the sustained efforts being made by FCI, Transit losses are 
controlled and are maintained at barest minimum level. Transit l oss data of last 
10 years mentioned below is revealing that transit loss has been significantly 
reduced: 
(Qty in LMT, Value in Crore Rs.) 
Year Qty Moved Qty of Loss % of loss Value of Loss 
2012-13* 448.02 2.12 0.47 388.18 
2013-14* 527.85 2.43 0.46 475.99 
2014-15* 533.74 2.30 0.43 506.44 
2015-16* 437.36 1.30 0.30 298.86 
2016-17* 438.09 1.32 0.30 313.90 
2017-18* 456.72 1.12 0.25 286.40 
2018-19* 415.00 1.03 0.25 276.85 
2019-20* 409.64 0.94 0.23 257.92 
2020-21* 618.74 1.49 0.24 426.85 
2021-22 604.32 1.40 0.23 398.22 
2022-23  (1stQtr) 150.30 0.38 0.25 113.45 

13 
 
(* indicates audited figures, figures for the year 2021-22 and 2022-23 are 
provisional) 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
              O.M. No. 40-1/2021-QCC/231 Dated the 19th October, 
2022] 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
2.9 The Committee note that Department has taken/ taking various 
steps/measures to obviate storage losses. The Department has also informed 
that covered storage capacity has been added so that foodgrains can be stored 
in scientific covered storage and CAP stor age can be totally avoided. The 
Committee also note that road map has been drawn by the Government for 
phasing out of CAP storage capacity. In view of the implementation of the 
National Food Security Act in the entire country and ever increasing Food 
Subsidy Bill, the Committee strongly recommend that work for phasing out of 
CAP storage capacity be taken up expeditiously to minimise storage losses so 
that every paisa earmarked for poor people reaches at grass root level.  
  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10     Traditionally, wheat is  stored in Cover and Plinth (CAP) by State 
Agencies/FCI mainly in procuring regions. However, a policy decision was taken 
to phase out this capacity of CAP. Detailed action plan was prepared by FCI after 
deliberations with State Governments. It was also decided to create covered 
capacity so that there is no requirement to use CAP in future. FCI has proposed 
to create a capacity of 117.75 LMT storage capacity under proposed new 5 years 
guarantee scheme and is under consideration. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
              O.M. No. 40-1/2021-QCC/231 Dated the 19th October, 
2022] 
 
 
 
  

14 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS  WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S 
 REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No.4 
 
3.1 While examining the Demands for Grants in 2021 -22, the Committee 
observed that on the scheme of Quality Control Cells (QCCs), the budgetary 
allocation during the year 2021 -22 was Rs. 7.38 crore. The Committee note that 
there are only 11 QCCs all over the country. Keeping in view the implementation 
of National Food Security Act in the entire country, setting up of sufficient number 
of QCCs is very much important to prevent losses  due to sub-standard quality of 
foodgrains that leads to their damage. The Committee are of the view that 
strengthening of quality control mechanism is very important for the socio -
economic development of the poor people of the country. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends the Department to vigorously pursue the matter 
with Ministry of Finance to make sufficient allocation of funds for setting up of 
more QCCs in the country. 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 There are total eleven Quality Control Cells (QCCs) functioning all over 
the country. All these QCCs have in - house testing laboratories for quality 
analysis of foodgrains. However, in an effort to further strengthen the quality 
control mechanism, the department has already been initiated its lab upgradation 
in a phased manner. In first phase, three laboratories viz., Kolkata, Lucknow & 
Hyderabad will be upgraded.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
              O.M. No. 40-1/2021-QCC/231 Dated the 19th October, 
2022] 
 
 
  

15 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS  IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
  
-NIL- 
 
 
 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation  No. 3 
 
5.1 The Committee note that as per Public Distribution System (Control) 
Order, 2001, the State Government/UT Administration are to ensure that during 
storage, transportation and in distribution chain, the foodgrains retain their 
required quality specifications . The Committee are surprised that despite their 
being joint inspection of foodgrains stock in FCI godowns and presence of QCCs 
in the Department of Food and Public Distribution, there are so many complaints 
of beneficiaries getting inferior quality of foodgrains. The Committee feel that this 
could be the handiwork of some intermediaries which leads to diversion of good 
quality foodgrains i.e. wheat and rice and making the poor people getting inferior 
quality of foodgrains.  Sometimes, beneficiaries cannot communicate their 
grievances to the agencies concerned. The Committee also noted that the 24 X 
7 toll free grievance redressal at Tel. No. 1967 and 1800 have already been set 
up in different States/UTs but Committee are constrained to note that these 
helpline numbers are not helpful in solving day -to-day problems being faced by 
the beneficiaries and everybody knows that these toll -free numbers are not 
responsive to the needs of the users and most of the time the calls go 
unattended by the authorities. Prope r functioning of these helpline numbers will 
enhance transparency and public accountability in the implementation of 
Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS). The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Department should make independent surpri se visit and 
inspection at Fair Price Shops (FPSs) or entrust the job to some other 
independent agencies or vigilance committees to evaluate the situation and to 
take action thereon. The Committee also desire that CCTV monitoring of Fair 
Price Shop (FPS) c an also be helpful to monitor the distribution and diversion of 
PDS items at FPS. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Department and 
also the State Governments/UTs to streamline the functioning of these helpline 
numbers so as to make them functional/op erational in the interest of poor 
beneficiaries.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2  National Food Security Act (NFSA) contains provision for grievance 
redressal, transparency and accountability. This inter -alia includes two tier 
grievance redressal mechanism i.e. District Grievance Redressal Officer (DGRO) 
and State Food Commission (SFC).  The Act also provides for setting up 
Vigilance Committees at State, districts, blocks and FPSs level. Provision 

17 
 
regarding Vigilance Committees (VCs) has been reiterated in the TPDS (Control) 
Order 2015. States/UTs Governments are advised from time to time  to constitute 
the VCs at all levels and to hold regular meetings. VCs are required to 
periodically review the functioning of the Targeted Public Distribution System 
(TPDS) at all respective levels. 
 
The Helpline number 1967/1800 -State series number is ope rational in all the 
States/UTs for contacting and redressal of grievances and filing any type of 
complaints. With a view to streamline the functioning of helpline number to make 
them functional/operational in the interest of poor beneficiaries, States/UTs have 
been instructed under Clause 10 of TPDS (C) Order, 2015, to display the 
mechanism and authority for redressal of grievances with respect to quality and 
quantity of foodgrains under the TPDS including toll -free helpline number. It has 
also been instruc ted to ensure that information boards, preferably made of tin 
plates with colour painting, showing beneficiary rights and other information as 
mentioned under Clause 10(4) of the Order shall be displayed prominently in all 
the Fair Price Shops. 
 
Further, a s and when complaints are received in this Department from any 
source including individuals and organizations as well as through press reports, 
they are sent to the concerned State/UT Government for inquire and appropriate 
action under various provisions of the Act at their end and inform the Department 
immediately. As a part of the celebrations of ‘Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav’, 
Department of Food and Public Distribution is undertaking an initiative to visit 
around 5000 Fair price Shops (FPSs). The visit will b e undertaken by senior 
officers of the State and Union Government. For this purpose, an online portal 
along with a checklist containing major components of FPS functioning has been 
created. 
Department of Food and Public Distribution is pursuing with all St ates/UTs for 
installation of CCTV in their respective FPSs. So far, CCTV installation has been 
implemented in around 7000 ISO certified FPSs in Maharashtra and 38 FPSs in 
UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu. 
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)   
              O.M. No. 40-1/2021-QCC/281 Dated the 25th October, 
2022] 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;     LOCKET CHATTERJEE, 
  23  March , 2023                    Chairperson, 
2 Chaitra,1945 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on  
   Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 

18 
 
APPENDIX I 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2022 -2023) 
HELD ON THURSDAY, 23 MARCH, 2023 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1520 hrs. in Committee Room No.                    
‘3’, Block-A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
  Smt. Locket Chatterjee-     Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Ms. Debasree Chaudhuri 
3. Shri Anil Firojiya 
4. Shri Khagen Murmu 
5. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
6. Dr. Amar Singh 
7. Smt. Himadri Singh 
8. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
9. Shri Ve. Vaithilingam 
10. Smt. Kavita Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
12. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
13. Shri Baburam Nishad 
14. Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   - Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan   - Deputy Secretary 

19 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the Draft Report on 
the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
the subject ‘Quality Control Cells(QCCs)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution).  
3. Thereafter, the Committee too k up for consideration the Draft Action 
Taken Report on Twentieth Report of the Committee. 
4. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Report without 
any amendments/modifications.  
5.  The Committee then authorized Hon’ble Chairperson to f inalize and 
present the aforesaid Draft Report. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
********* 
 
  

20 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS  OF THE  ACTION  TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS  CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH 
REPORT  OF  THE  STANDING  COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS , 
FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2021-22) 
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
(i) Total number of Recommendations:        7 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government : 
 
Para Nos. :- 1,2,5,6 and 7 
   
                 (Chapter – II, Total 5) 
              Percentage :   71.42% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
Para Nos.:-  4 
                     (Chapter – III, Total - 1) 
             Percentage :  14.29% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 
Para Nos.    NIL 
            (Chapter – IV, Total -0)   
                Percentage : 0.00% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the interim 
replies of the Government have been received. 
 
Para No.:- 3 
    (Chapter – V, Total - 1) 
           Percentage : 14.29% 
 
 