i 
 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, 
FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023-2024) 
 
 
     
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the observations/ recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Eighth Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
the subject “Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana (PMGKAY) ” pertaining to the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and 
Public Distribution)} 
 
THIRTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
                    December, 2023/ Agrahayana,1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
34 


ii 
 
THIRTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023-2024) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
{Action Taken  by  the   Government  on  the observations/ recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Eighth Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabh a)  
on the subject “Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana (PMGKAY)” pertaining to 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food 
and Public Distribution)} 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12 December, 2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12 December, 2023 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
                December, 2023/ Agrahayana,1945 (Saka) 
 


iii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Composition of the Committee 
 
iv 
Introduction 
 
v 
Chapter I Report 
 
1 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by Government 
 
8 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government replies 
 
19 
Chapter IV Observation/Recommendation which have not been 
accepted by Government 
 
20 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of Government are still awaited 
 
21 
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Committee (2023-24) 
held on 07.12.2023 
 
22 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty Eighth Report of the Standing Committee  on 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
24 
 
  

iv 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (2023-24) 
 
     Smt. Locket Chatterjee  -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
5. Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit 
6. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi 
7. Shri Faizal P.P. Mohammed 
5. Km. Debasree Chaudhuri 
6. Dr. Amar Singh 
7. Shri Anil Firojiya 
8. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
9. Shri Khagen Murmu 
10. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
11. Shri Subrat Pathak 
12. Smt. Himadri Singh 
13. Smt. Kavita Singh 
17. Shri Nandigam Suresh 
18. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
19. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
20. Shri Vaithilingam Ve. 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
23. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
24. Shri Rajmani Patel 
25. Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
26. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
27. Shri Baburam Nishad 
28. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam 
29. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
30   Vacant 
 31. Vacant 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai                     -            Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi            -  Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan                     -  Deputy Secretary 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs , Food  and 
Public Distribution (2023-2024) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Thirty Fourth Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twent y Eighth 
Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “Pradhan Mantri 
Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana (PMGKAY)”  of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
2.  The Twenty Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 03.08.2023. The Government has furnished its replies indicating Action Taken on the 
recommendations contained in the Report on 03.11.2023. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
7th December, 2023. 
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.  
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the text of the Report. 
  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         LOCKET CHATTERJEE, 
7 December, 2023                      Chairperson, 
16 Agrahayana,1945 (Saka)                                         Standing Committee on  
   Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs , Food  and 
Public Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twent y Eighth Report of the 
Committee (17 th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna 
Yojana (PMGKAY)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
1.2 The Twenty Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha  and laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 03.08.2023. It contained                                                           
08 observations/recommendations. Action taken replies in respect of all the         
08 observations/ recommendations contained in the Report have been received 
and these have been categorized as follows:- 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
Government - 
Para Nos. :- 1,2,3,4,5,6,7&8   
   
   (Chapter – II, Total : 08) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the C ommittee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies - 
 Para. No.:- Nil 
 (Chapter – III, Total : 0) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee -  
Para No.:-  Nil  
 (Chapter – IV, Total : 0) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited -   
   Para No. :- Nil 
 (Chapter – V, Total : 0) 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations accepted by the Government. The 
Committee desire that final action taken notes to the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report 
should be furnished to the Committee within three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
 
1.5 The Committee in their original report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee note that PMGKAY completed 28 -month period over         
7 phases starting from April 2020 till December, 2022 with an earmarked 
total financial outlay of approximately Rs. 3.91 Lakh Crore, a nd total food 
grains allocation of nearly 1,118 Lakh Metric Tons (LMTs). During all the 
seven phases of the scheme, out of total allocation of 1,118 LMTs, 1037 
LMTs food grains were lifted and,1015 LMTs were distributed i.e., 
97.88% of the total lifted quantity. Similarly, as per provisional data, out of 
the planned outlay of Rs.3.91 lakh crore for subsidy under the scheme for 
the aforementioned seven phases, an amount of Rs. 3.42 lakh crore 
amounting to 87.5% of the planned outlay was incurred as per the r eply 
submitted by the department vide their communication dated 28 
July,2023. The Committee are glad to note that the performance of the 
PMGKAY in both physical and financial terms has b een outstanding. The 
Committee appreciate the efforts put in by the De partment of Food and 
Public Distribution and also Food Corporation of India (FCI) in making the 
scheme a grand success which went a long way in addressing the food 
grains requirements of the poor throughout the country during the 
extremely difficult period  of Covid-19 period. The Committee suggest the 
strategy, planning, execution and the experience gained by FCI in moving 
the foodgrains across the country in times of crisis situations arising out 
of pandemics like Covid 19 should be well documented and be shared 
with other organisations involved in managing logistics in crisis 
situations.” 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
 
 
 
1.6 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“In the wake of economic disruptions caused by the unprecedented 
outbreak of COVID -19 in the country in early 2020, the Government in 
March 2020 had announced the distribution of additional free -of-cost 
foodgrains (Rice/Wheat) to about 80 Crore National Food Security Act 
(NFSA) beneficiaries at the scale of 5 Kg per person per month under the 
PM Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana (PM -GKAY), over and above the regular 
monthly NFSA foodgrains i.e. regular entitlements of their ration cards. 
Thereby, effectively doubling the quantity of monthly foodgrains being 
normally delivered to the NFSA households, so that  the poor, needy and 
the vulnerable households/beneficiaries do not suffer on account of non -
availability of adequate foodgrains during the times of economic crisis. 
As a result of above PMGKAY scheme, FCI had to conduct 
additional movement of foodgrains, and was required to move around 600 
LMT per year as against about 400 LMT per year in pre-pandemic era. 
Strategy and Planning of FCI in moving of foodgrains during COVID 
period 
Food Corporation of India had to perform the herculean task of 
ensuring that foodgrains remain available for NFSA and PMGKAY in every 
nook and corner of the country, despite restriction and shortage of 
manpower due to Covid and ensuing lockdown. 
• First and the most, important task was to make available foodgrain 
all over the country  by moving the stock from surplus states to deficit 
states. For rice; the surplus states were Punjab, Haryana, Telangana, 
Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Andhra Pradesh; whereas for wheat, the 
surplus states were Punjab, Haryana and Madhya Pradesh. It was 
necessary that the sufficient stock remained available in these states, for 
this even in the lockdown conditions procurement was undertaken. 
• Further, various stakeholders in the movement operations like staff, 
labours, contractors were to be motivated to work u nder these difficult 
situations. In the era of lockdown, when work from home had become a 
necessity, movement operations and rake loading required the availability 
of manpower at the workplace, for this it was necessary that the 
manpower planning be done e fficiently. This included motivating the staff, 
labour and personnel of contractors. 
• Further it was necessary that sufficient persons are available for 
rake loading operations which could be arranged by shifting of labours. 
Matter was required to be take n up with state govt. / district administration 
for allowing the mobilization of staff. 

4 
 
• Necessary steps were also required for ensuring safety of person 
by providing them with the necessary equipment like mask, sanitizer etc. 
• It was also necessary to t ake railways on board to supply the 
increased number of rakes and regular coordination with railways was 
required for the same. 
Result of Execution in moving of foodgrains during COVID period. 
Sufficient foodgrain were positioned at FCI warehouses across the 
length and breadth of the country to meet the demand of NFSA, OWS as 
well as PMGKAY. FCI successfully moved foodgrain to every nook and 
corner of the country during pandemic period (despite restrictions of 
centre & state government) in close coordination with Indian Railways. 
The collaboration and coordination of DFPD, FCI, State/UT administration, 
Indian railways resulted into : 
• Increased allocation : Annual allocation of foodgrains to states 
increased from 600 LMT to 1100 LMT necessitating spurt in l ogistics 
arrangement. 
• Increased annual movement : against the normal average annual 
movement of 400 LMT, FCI has moved around 600 LMT in 2020 -21 and 
2021-22 to meet the enhanced demand of foodgrains despite restrictions 
imposed during lockdown. 
• Increased rake movement : against the normal average of about 
940 rakes per month, FCI moved around 1450 rakes per month. 
• Record number of rakes in a single day : a record number of 102 
rakes were loaded in a single day i.e., on 22nd April 2020 which was 
widely appreciated. 
Due to collaboration of railways, FCI was able to move around 500 
more rakes per month as against around 940 rakes per month during non -
PMGKAY period. During the Covid period, FCI moved 611.61 LMT of 
foodgrains through 18087 rakes during 2021 -22 & 594.51 LMT through 
17418 rakes during 2020 -21 whereas during the non - Covid period, FCI 
moved 389.18 LMT of foodgrains through 10523 rakes during 2019 -20 
and 383.43 LMT through 10550 rakes during 2018 -19 i.e. percentage 
increased in movement of foodgrains during Covid-19 period as compared 
to non-covid period is 56%. 
On an average, daily rakes movement during 2021 -22 was 50 
rakes and in 2020 -21 was 48 rakes, which was 29 rakes in both 2019 -20 
and 2018-19.  
Experiencing Various Challenges & Successfully O vercoming the 
Same: 
I. FCI successfully executed the herculean task of supplying 
foodgrain under various GoI schemes to such a large population of the 
country, that too amid the covid -19 restrictions owing to the presence of 

5 
 
extensive and established TPDS infrastructure in place. To distribute the 
grain, the central and State/UT governments relied on its robust logistical 
network, which involved the use of massive rail & road transportation 
network supported by air & sea logistics. Last mile gaps in some no n-
motorable, hilly/difficult terrains were covered through use of horses/mules 
and even helicopters of the Indian air force and army. The experience of 
States/UTs serving remote and in accessible areas through airdrops, in -
land water transportation, use of  horses/mules, etc. came of great use in 
ensuring timely supply of food grains all over the country including remote 
and inaccessible areas. 
II. Nationwide lockdown was announced, many hindrances such as 
shortage of labourers, truck drivers, loading -unloading supervisory as well 
as ground staff were faced suddenly. These issues were tackled at all 
levels and top management of FCI chalked out a comprehensive plan. A 
high-level committee was formed which monitored the stock position, 
movement of rakes, requir ement of foodgrains, problems faced by field 
offices for immediate resolution etc. Many immediate steps were taken 
such as work force involved in assignments related to back office, was 
allowed work from home, deployment of ground staff on rotation basis, 
requesting railways and other institutions involved in movement operations 
to cooperate. 
III. First and foremost requirement was the availability of sufficient 
number of rakes, for which railways also rose to the occasion and supplied 
the required number o f rakes. Further, it was also ensured by the railway 
that rakes reaches the destination on time avoiding enroute delays. 
Railways were keen to supply maximum rakes for rail movement and 
many facilities such as reducing demurrage charges, increasing free ti me 
for loading/unloading, removal of centres/route restrictions, loading of 
rakes outside circuit, extension of non -levy of dynamic pricing on food 
grains during busy season etc were provided. This support of railways was 
utmost necessary due to which FCI was able to move 102 rakes on a 
single day. Many new rail heads of Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh were 
operated. 
IV. The major challenge was noticed when PMGKAY was extended 
along with OMSS(D). With extension of PMGKAY, the requirement of not 
only rail, but r oad movement also got increased resulting into less 
availability of stocks on many adjacent places from where road movement 
was not possible. FCI compensated that with rail movement. 
V. Another challenge was that since all staff was not working from 
office, the flow of necessary information got hampered which resulted into 
non-availability of authentic data even for day -to-day movement 
operations. Apart from this, the exact stock position pan India on daily 
basis was required for apprising the same to FCI Hqrs. and DFPD. 

6 
 
            To address this issue FCI turned to digital platforms, one of the 
commonly used tools available was Google sheet which came handy and 
a Google form linked to the same was generated. This helped a lot 
because the reach of official computer system pan India was difficult to be 
ensured and the ownership/authenticity of data through telephonic 
conversations could not be ensured. The Google sheet/form resolved this 
issue as the data could be fed through mobile from any place, at any time 
and the authenticity/ownership could also be known. The time of any 
modification/revision in data could also be known. The formats in which 
the data was to be supplied could be modified as and when required. The 
reports could be shared any time over phone through Whatsapp. 
           The data collected through Google forms were compiled to prepare 
region-wise daily stock position and sufficiency of stocks. the same was 
shared with high level coordination committee of FCI and subsequently 
with DFPD.  Further, a   team was appointed to collect data regarding 
truck/rake wise loading/unloading from all regions and share with high 
level co- ordination committee. This information channel helped in precise 
planning of movement on monthly, weekly, and daily basis and in turn   
fulfilling the demands of deficit regions precisely. 
VI. Another IT tool became the part of office work culture, video 
conferencing. This was extensively used and through this officers/officials 
interacted extensively for immediate resolution of issues. 
VII  One another challenge was the coordinating different  
stakeholders/manpower, as   rake loading is very labour intensive 
operation and involves FCI staff, labour, contract  labours, contractors, 
truck drivers etc. to ensure health & hygiene of each workforce  involved in 
rake loading FCI introduced many remedial actions like providing sanitizer,  
gloves, mask etc to protect oneself from infections to all staff, labours etc 
            Staff and labour were motivated to work at railheads  and the staff 
and labour of FCI magnificently rose to the situation and worked day and 
night to ensure loading stocks.  During initial phase of covid -19, when all 
country was struggling with the supply of sufficient protective gears, FCI 
officers arranged the same. Another steps taken to safeguard the labour 
and staff was to sanitize all the trucks/wagons before loading. All efforts 
were made for maximizing use of available resource with safety & security 
of workforce working at railhead during the pandemic . Special permission 
for transit of FCI staff/labour and vehicles was sought from state 
administration and district administration so that loading of rakes is not 
affected. FCI labourers were moved out on temporary basis from one 
state to another state to meet out the movement/PDS  requirements and 
other exigencies. Arrangements were made in depots so that the  
labourers involved in loading can stay overnight. To further motivate the 
staff and labour working in these difficult situations, DFPD and FCI 
announced an ex-gratia benefit for personnel losing life due to covid. The 

7 
 
special part of this scheme was that it involved the contractual labours 
also in its ambit. 
Result of Coordinated Efforts : 
State governments also extended full support in these difficult times to 
distribute the grain, the central and State/UT governments relied on its 
robust logistical network, which involved the use of massive rail & road 
transportation network supported by air & sea logistics with last mile gaps 
in some non-motorable, hilly/difficult terrains being plugged through use of 
horses/mules to even helicopters of the Indian air force and army. 
Thus, with the coordinated efforts of all involved, DFPD and FCI was able 
to ensure timely supply of foodgrains under PMGKAY ma king it a success 
and also ensured: 
• Food security for crores of vulnerable individuals and families 
across India. 
• Mitigated the risk of starvation -related deaths by improving the 
nutritional intake of vulnerable populations. 
• Provided much -needed reli ef to the economically disadvantaged 
sections of society by reducing their financial burden. 
• Contributed in maintaining social stability during the crisis. 
• Mitigated mass migration from urban to rural areas by providing 
food assistance to those in need. 
• Targeted vulnerable sections of society, including daily wage 
earners, migrant workers, and marginalized communities. By including 
these groups, the scheme aimed to promote social inclusion and ensure 
that no one was left behind during the crisis  
 
1.7 The Committee, inter-alia had suggested that the strategy, planning, 
execution and the experience gained by FCI in moving the foodgrains 
across the country in times of crisis situations aris ing out of pandemics 
like Covid -19 should be well documented and be shared with other 
organisations involved in managing logistics in such difficult situations. 
The Department in their Action Taken Reply has precisely submitted the 
strategy and planning of FCI in moving of foodgrains during COVID period. 
The Ministry has also s hared the results of execution in moving of 
foodgrains during COVID  period, experience of various challenges / 
hindrances faced by them and the way they successfully overcome  the 
same. The Committee, while reiterating their original recommendation 
desire the Department to document/preserve the whole process of 
planning to execution and experiences in moving foodgrains during Covid 
period at the earliest  as well as share the same with oth er 
Departments/organizations for reference and guidance purposes. 

8 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
  ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
2.1 With a view to prevent and minimize the loss of lives during Covid -19 
crisis, restrictions on the movement of the people and also on different forms of 
transportation, had to be imposed in the country like in many other countries. 
This unprecedented situation adversely impacted the livelihoods and the 
consequent food securi ty of the large number of people especially the 
disadvantaged sections. It is in this context, the Government had rolled out a 
scheme, aptly named “Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana (PMGKAY)” 
under which additional 5 Kg food grains per person per mon th, were provided to 
eligible beneficiaries free -of-cost, over and above their normal NFSA 
entitlements. The total number of the beneficiaries under the scheme stood at 
81.35 crore. The Committee are of the view that the scheme showed the abiding 
commitment of the Govt to the people who are in distress due to crisis situation 
arising out of Covid19 and is a step in the right direction. The Committee, 
therefore, appreciate the timely intervention by the Government by launching the 
PMGKAY at the time when it was required the most. 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 The Committee has admired the efforts for implementation of PM -GKAY, 
which showed the abiding commitment of the Government to the people who 
were in distress due to crisis situation arose out of Covid -19 and is a step in the 
right direction. Therefore, no further action is required on account of DFPD. 
DFPD will continue to work towards its commitments.  
  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
O.M. No. 8-8/2023-BP-III(e-383749) Dated the 03.11.2023] 
  

9 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
2.3 The Committee note that PMGKAY completed 28 -month period over         
7 phases starting from April 2020 till December, 2022 with an earmarked total 
financial outlay  of approximately Rs. 3.91 Lakh Crore, and total food grains 
allocation of nearly 1,118 Lakh Metric Tons (LMTs). During all the seven phases 
of the scheme, out of total allocation of 1,118 LMTs, 1037 LMTs food grains were 
lifted and,1015 LMTs were distribu ted i.e., 97.88% of the total lifted quantity. 
Similarly, as per provisional data, out of the planned outlay of Rs.3.91 lakh crore 
for subsidy under the scheme for the aforementioned seven phases, an amount 
of Rs. 3.42 lakh crore amounting to 87.5% of the planned outlay was incurred as 
per the reply submitted by the department vide their communication dated 28 
July,2023. The Committee are glad to note that the performance of the PMGKAY 
in both physical and financial terms has been outstanding. The Committee   
appreciate the efforts put in by the Department of Food and Public Distribution 
and also Food Corporation of India (FCI) in making the scheme a grand success 
which went a long way in addressing the food grains requirements of the poor 
throughout the coun try during the extremely difficult period of Covid -19 period. 
The Committee suggest the strategy, planning, execution and the experience 
gained by FCI in moving the foodgrains across the country in times of crisis 
situations arising out of pandemics like C ovid 19 should be well documented and 
be shared with other organisations involved in managing logistics in crisis 
situations. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 In the wake of economic disruptions caused by the unprecedented 
outbreak of COVID -19 in the country in early 2020, the Government in March 
2020 had announced the distribution of additional free -of-cost foodgrains 
(Rice/Wheat) to about 80 Crore National Food Security Act (NFSA) beneficiaries 
at the scale of 5 Kg per person per month under the PM Garib Kal yan Anna 
Yojana (PM-GKAY), over and above the regular monthly NFSA foodgrains i.e. 
regular entitlements of their ration cards. Thereby, effectively doubling the 
quantity of monthly foodgrains being normally delivered to the NFSA households, 
so that the poor, needy and the vulnerable households/beneficiaries do not suffer 
on account of non -availability of adequate foodgrains during the times of 
economic crisis. 
As a result of above PMGKAY scheme, FCI had to conduct additional movement 
of foodgrains, and was required to move around 600 LMT per year as against 
about 400 LMT per year in pre-pandemic era. 
Strategy and Planning of FCI in moving of foodgrains during COVID period 
Food Corporation of India had to perform the herculean task of ensuring that 
foodgrains remain available for NFSA and PMGKAY in every nook and corner of 

10 
 
the country, despite restriction and shortage of manpower due to Covid and 
ensuing lockdown. 
• First and the most, important task was to make available foodgrain all over 
the country by moving the stock from surplus states to deficit states. For rice; the 
surplus states were Punjab, Haryana, Telangana, Chhattisgarh, Odisha and 
Andhra Pradesh; whereas for wheat, the surplus states were Punjab, Haryana 
and Madhya Pradesh. It was necessary that the sufficient stock remained 
available in these states, for this even in the lockdown conditions procurement 
was undertaken. 
• Further, various stakeholders in the movement operations like staff, 
labours, contractors were to be motivated to work under the se difficult situations. 
In the era of lockdown, when work from home had become a necessity, 
movement operations and rake loading required the availability of manpower at 
the workplace, for this it was necessary that the manpower planning be done 
efficiently. This included motivating the staff, labour and personnel of contractors. 
• Further it was necessary that sufficient persons are available for rake 
loading operations which could be arranged by shifting of labours. Matter was 
required to be taken up wit h state govt. / district administration for allowing the 
mobilization of staff. 
• Necessary steps were also required for ensuring safety of person by 
providing them with the necessary equipment like mask, sanitizer etc. 
• It was also necessary to take rail ways on board to supply the increased 
number of rakes and regular coordination with railways was required for the 
same. 
Result of Execution in moving of foodgrains during COVID period. 
Sufficient foodgrain were positioned at FCI warehouses across the length and 
breadth of the country to meet the demand of NFSA, OWS as well as PMGKAY. 
FCI successfully moved foodgrain to every nook and corner of the country during 
pandemic period (despite restrictions of centre & state government) in close 
coordination with Indian Railways. 
The collaboration and coordination of DFPD, FCI, State/UT administration, Indian 
railways resulted into : 
• Increased allocation : Annual allocation of foodgrains to states increased 
from 600 LMT to 1100 LMT necessitating spurt in logistics arrangement. 
• Increased annual movement : against the normal average annual 
movement of 400 LMT, FCI has moved around 600 LMT in 2020 -21 and 2021-22 
to meet the enhanced demand of foodgrains despite restrictions imposed during 
lockdown. 
• Increased rake movement: against the normal average of about 940 rakes 
per month, FCI moved around 1450 rakes per month. 

11 
 
• Record number of rakes in a single day : a record number of 102 rakes 
were loaded in a single day i.e., on 22nd April 2020 which was widely 
appreciated. 
Due to collaboration of railways, FCI was able to move around 500 more rakes 
per month as against around 940 rakes per month during non -PMGKAY period. 
During the Covid period, FCI moved 611.61 LMT of foodgrains through 18087 
rakes during 2021 -22 & 5 94.51 LMT through 17418 rakes during 2020 -21 
whereas during the non - Covid period, FCI moved 389.18 LMT of foodgrains 
through 10523 rakes during 2019 -20 and 383.43 LMT through 10550 rakes 
during 2018 -19 i.e. percentage increased in movement of foodgrains d uring 
Covid-19 period as compared to non-covid period is 56%. 
On an average, daily rakes movement during 2021-22 was 50 rakes and in 2020-
21 was 48 rakes, which was 29 rakes in both 2019-20 and 2018-19.  
Experiencing Various Challenges & Successfully Overcoming the Same: 
I. FCI successfully executed the herculean task of supplying foodgrain under 
various GoI schemes to such a large population of the country, that too 
amid the covid -19 restrictions owing to the presence of extensive and 
established TPDS infr astructure in place. To distribute the grain, the 
central and State/UT governments relied on its robust logistical network, 
which involved the use of massive rail & road transportation network 
supported by air & sea logistics. Last mile gaps in some non -motorable, 
hilly/difficult terrains were covered through use of horses/mules and even 
helicopters of the Indian air force and army. The experience of States/UTs 
serving remote and in accessible areas through airdrops, in -land water 
transportation, use of hor ses/mules, etc. came of great use in ensuring 
timely supply of food grains all over the country including remote and 
inaccessible areas. 
II. Nationwide lockdown was announced, many hindrances such as shortage 
of labourers, truck drivers, loading -unloading supervisory as well as 
ground staff were faced suddenly. These issues were tackled at all levels 
and top management of FCI chalked out a comprehensive plan. A high -
level committee was formed which monitored the stock position, 
movement of rakes, requiremen t of foodgrains, problems faced by field 
offices for immediate resolution etc. Many immediate steps were taken 
such as work force involved in assignments related to back office, was 
allowed work from home, deployment of ground staff on rotation basis, 
requesting railways and other institutions involved in movement operations 
to cooperate. 
III. First and foremost requirement was the availability of sufficient number of 
rakes, for which railways also rose to the occasion and supplied the 
required number of ra kes. Further, it was also ensured by the railway that 
rakes reaches the destination on time avoiding enroute delays. Railways 
were keen to supply maximum rakes for rail movement and many facilities 

12 
 
such as reducing demurrage charges, increasing free time f or 
loading/unloading, removal of centres/route restrictions, loading of rakes 
outside circuit, extension of non -levy of dynamic pricing on food grains 
during busy season etc were provided. This support of railways was 
utmost necessary due to which FCI was able to move 102 rakes on a 
single day. Many new rail heads of Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh were 
operated. 
IV. The major challenge was noticed when PMGKAY was extended along 
with OMSS(D). With extension of PMGKAY, the requirement of not only 
rail, but road movement also got increased resulting into less availability of 
stocks on many adjacent places from where road movement was not 
possible. FCI compensated that with rail movement. 
V. Another challenge was that since all staff was not working from office, the 
flow of necessary information got hampered which resulted into non -
availability of authentic data even for day -to-day movement operations. 
Apart from this, the exact stock position pan India on daily basis was 
required for apprising the same to FCI Hqrs. and DFPD. 
            To address this issue FCI turned to digital platforms, one of the 
commonly used tools available was Google sheet which came handy and a 
Google form linked to the same was generated. This helped a lot because the 
reach of official c omputer system pan India was difficult to be ensured and the 
ownership/authenticity of data through telephonic conversations could not be 
ensured. The Google sheet/form resolved this issue as the data could be fed 
through mobile from any place, at any time  and the authenticity/ownership could 
also be known. The time of any modification/revision in data could also be 
known. The formats in which the data was to be supplied could be modified as 
and when required. The reports could be shared any time over phone  through 
Whatsapp. 
            The data collected through Google forms were compiled to prepare 
region-wise daily stock position and sufficiency of stocks. the same was shared 
with high level coordination committee of FCI and subsequently with DFPD. 
Further, a   team was appointed to collect data regarding truck/rake wise 
loading/unloading from all regions and share with high level co - ordination 
committee. This information channel helped in precise planning of movement on 
monthly, weekly, and daily basis a nd in turn   fulfilling the demands of deficit 
regions precisely. 
VI. Another IT tool became the part of office work culture, video conferencing. 
This was extensively used and through this officers/officials interacted 
extensively for immediate resolution of issues. 
VII One another challenge was the coordinating different 
stakeholders/manpower, as   rake loading is very labour intensive 
operation and involves FCI staff, labour, contract  labours, contractors, 
truck drivers etc. to ensure health & hygiene of each workforce  involved in 

13 
 
rake loading FCI introduced many remedial actions like providing sanitizer,  
gloves, mask etc to protect oneself from infections to all staff, labours etc 
            Staff and labour were motivated to work at railheads and the  staff and 
labour of FCI magnificently rose to the situation and worked day and night to 
ensure loading stocks.  During initial phase of covid -19, when all country was 
struggling with the supply of sufficient protective gears, FCI officers arranged the 
same. Another steps taken to safeguard the labour and staff was to sanitize all 
the trucks/wagons before loading. All efforts were made for maximizing use of 
available resource with safety & security of workforce working at railhead during 
the pandemic. Special permission for transit of FCI staff/labour and vehicles was 
sought from state administration and district administration so that loading of 
rakes is not affected. FCI labourers were moved out on temporary basis from one 
state to another state to meet out  the movement/PDS  requirements and other 
exigencies. Arrangements were made in depots so that the  labourers involved in 
loading can stay overnight. To further motivate the staff and labour working in 
these difficult situations, DFPD and FCI announced an ex-gratia benefit for 
personnel losing life due to covid. The special part of this scheme was that it 
involved the contractual labours also in its ambit. 
Result of Coordinated Efforts : 
State governments also extended full support in these difficult times to distribute 
the grain, the central and State/UT governments relied on its robust logistical 
network, which involved the use of massive rail & road transportation network 
supported by air & sea logistics with last mile gaps in some non -motorable, 
hilly/difficult terrains being plugged through use of horses/mules to even 
helicopters of the Indian air force and army. 
Thus, with the coordinated efforts of all involved, DFPD and FCI was able to 
ensure timely supply of foodgrains under PMGKAY making it a succes s and also 
ensured: 
• Food security for crores of vulnerable individuals and families across 
India. 
• Mitigated the risk of starvation -related deaths by improving the nutritional 
intake of vulnerable populations. 
• Provided much-needed relief to the econom ically disadvantaged sections 
of society by reducing their financial burden. 
• Contributed in maintaining social stability during the crisis. 
• Mitigated mass migration from urban to rural areas by providing food 
assistance to those in need. 
• Targeted vul nerable sections of society, including daily wage earners, 
migrant workers, and marginalized communities. By including these groups, the 
scheme aimed to promote social inclusion and ensure that no one was left 
behind during the crisis  

14 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
O.M. No. 8-8/2023-BP-III(e-383749) Dated the 03.11.2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
2.5 The Committee observe from the data furnished by the Department that till 
December, 2022, the food grains under the NFSA were being distributed @ Rs.3, 
2 and 1 per kg for rice, wheat and coarse grains respectively and additional food 
grains under the PMGKAY were being distributed free of cost. They further noted 
that the Government, in order to remove the financial burden and to ensure 
nationwide uniformity and effective implementation of the Act, has decided to 
provide food grains free of cost to Antyodaya Ann a Yojana (AAY) households 
and Priority Households (PHH) beneficiaries under NFSA, for a period of one 
year beginning from 1 January 2023. The Committee learn that two food subsidy 
schemes have been subsumed under New Integrated Pradhan Mantri Garib 
Kalyan Anna Yojana (PMGKAY) under this scheme Free foodgrain is being 
distributed through Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) from 1st January 
2023. Under this scheme, the cost towards intra -State movement & handling of 
foodgrains and fair price shop dealers’ margin is shared between the Central and 
State Government as per the provisions of the Food Security (Assistance to 
State Governments) Rules, 2015 as amended from time to time. The Committee 
have no doubt that the New Integrated Pradhan Mantri Garib Ka lyan Anna 
Yojana (PMGKAY) will go a long way in fulfilling the foodgrains requirements of 
people of the country. They further appreciate the Department for continuing the 
scheme in new integrated form empathizing with the needs of the beneficiaries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 The Committee has admired the Department for continuing the PMGKAY 
scheme in new integrated form. Therefore, no specific further action is required 
on account of DFPD. DFPD will continue their efforts for effective implementation 
of Government's food security schemes.   
   
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
O.M. No. 8-8/2023-BP-III(e-383749) Dated the 03.11.2023] 
 
 

15 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
2.7 It is heartening to note that the Department of Food and Public Distribution 
and Food Corporation of India (FCI) have made tireless efforts during the difficult 
two years 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 in ensuring the foodgrains reach to the poorest 
of the poor. The enormous amount of l ogistics involved in the efforts as reflected 
in the increased (i) movement of foodgrains at 600 LMT as against the average 
movement of 400LMT; and, (ii) rake movement of 1450 per month as against 940 
rakes per month, to lift the increased allocations to various states /UTs during the 
afore mentioned two years, is a testimony to the commitment and dedication of 
the Department and FCI towards service of the nation in times of crisis. The 
Committee believe that without the dedicated efforts of the Department and FCI, 
ensuring food security, mitigating starvation related deaths, maintaining social 
stability, would not have been possible during the unprecedented public health 
emergencies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 The Committee has commended the role of the Department and FCI for 
ensuring food security during the unprecedented public health emergencies.  
 In fact total food grain quantity transported during Non -Covid period in FY 
2018-2019 and 2019 -2020 was 383.43 & 389.18  (In LMT) and rakes 
(inter+intra)  is 10550 & 10523 respectively  whereas during Covid -19 
period in FY 2020 -2021 and 2021 -2022 is  total quantity was 594.51 & 
611.61 (In LMT) and rakes (inter+intra) is 17418 & 18087 respectively. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
                        O.M. No. 8-8/2023-BP-III(e-383749) Dated the 03.11.2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
2.9 The Committee note that the Department has engaged 13 Monitoring 
Institutions (MIs) of repute to undertake concurrent evaluation of the 
implementation of National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) in all States/UTs for 
03 years (2020 -23). The questionnaires d evised for the evaluation exercise 
include questions on the receipt of free foodgrains under PMGKAY. As per the 
reports of the first two years (2020 -22) submitted by the MIs, it is inferred that 
most of the surveyed households in all the states/UTs receive d full entitlements 
(5 kg food grains) free of under PMGKAY. The Committee also note that survey 
reports of the MIs which are available in the public domain shows that 98% of the 
beneficiaries were satisfied with the quantity and quality of food grains pro vided 

16 
 
to them. The Committee appreciate the Govt for enabling the Department and 
FCI to supply quality foodgrains during the Covid -19 crisis which prevented loss 
of many precious lives. The Committee also appreciate the Govt. for imparting 
transparency to the entire exercise by putting in public domain the comments of 
the beneficiaries about the quality and sufficiency of the foodgrains. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 The Committee has acknowledged the efforts for  imparting transparency 
to the evaluation exercise being undertaken by the engaged Monitoring 
Institutions. As such no specific further action is required on account of DFPD. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
                        O.M. No. 8-8/2023-BP-III(e-383749) Dated the 03.11.2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
2.11 The Committee are happy to note that the Department/FCI was able to 
deliver food grains amid the COVID -19 restrictions even in far flung areas  of the 
country and was also able to pull off the herculean task of feeding such a large 
population residing in all corners of the country irrespective of terrain and 
topography. Further, the Committee praise the fact that the extensive TPDS 
infrastructure, strong logistical network involving all modes of surface transport 
i.e., rail and road transportation supported by air & sea logistics cumulatively 
helped covering last mile gaps even in some non-motorable, hilly/difficult terrains. 
Use of unconventional  transport or mode of conveyances like horses/mules for 
reaching out far flung and most difficult terrain areas on one hand and deploying 
modern modes of transport like in -land water transportation and even helicopters 
of the Indian Air Force and Army, on the other hand to ensure regular supply of 
food grains shows the comprehensive approach of the Department towards their 
commitment for ensuring food security. The Committee not only praise but also 
highly commend the role, response and coordination of the Department with 
other agencies during the imperative situation which has set an example for 
future rejoinder in similar situations. 
Reply of the Government 
2.12 The Committee has appreciated the role, response and coordination of the 
Department during this  crucial COVID -19 situation.  As such no specific further 
action is required on account of DFPD.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
                        O.M. No. 8-8/2023-BP-III(e-383749) Dated the 03.11.2023] 

17 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
 
2.13 The Committee strongly believe that one of the reasons for resounding 
success of the PMGKAY is the campaigns launched to generate awareness 
about the scheme across different media - print, electronic (radio and TV) social 
media such as Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, etc. The Committee are happy to 
note that these campaigns were also carried out in 10 regional languages to 
have maximum impact. The Committee also noted th at installation of creative tin 
plates at Fair Price Shops (FPSs), display of the banners at high footfall locations 
such as petrol pumps/ CNG stations, Post offices, railway stations, etc. spread 
across 36 states/ UTs. The very fact that 98% of the benefi ciaries have 
expressed their satisfaction is reflective of the success of intensive and extensive 
awareness campaigns carried out about the scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 The Committee has admired the mass awareness campaigns of PM -
GKAY conducted by DFPD. As such, no specific further action is required on 
account of DFPD. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
                        O.M. No. 8-8/2023-BP-III(e-383749) Dated the 03.11.2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.8) 
 
2.15 The Committee note that the Government have included coarse grains for 
distribution under PMGKAY scheme, as they are highly nutritive, nonacid 
forming, gluten free and possess dietary properties. About 5.8 lakh metric ones 
of Coarsegrains such as jowar, ragiand bajra have been distributed to the 
beneficiaries in six states namely Karnataka, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil 
Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and Kerala. The Committee are happy to note that 
coarse grains are included in the di stribution under PMGKAY and suggest 
suitable steps be taken to encourage the consumption of coarse grains. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.16 Coarse grains are allocated under National Food Security Act, 2013. From 
1st January, 2023 the aforesaid allocation is being made at free of cost for one 
year. The allocation of approved quantity of Coarse grains for distribution under 
PDS is made by this Department in lieu of equal quantity of wheat/rice (as 

18 
 
requested by State) while ensuring that the overall quantity of rice, wheat and 
Coarse grains has to be within the upper ceiling fixed in respect of each State/UT 
under NFSA. 
2.   The revised guidelines for Coarse Grains has been issued in year 2021/22 to 
obviate  difficulties being faced by the State Government  and to increase the 
procurement of coarse grains, distribution periods enhanced to 6 -10 months from 
earlier period 3 months.  
3.   Provision o f inter-state transportation of surplus millets through FCI is also 
incorporated to cater for advance demand placed by consuming state before the 
start of procurement. 
4.       A provision of advance subsidy as being given in case of distribution of 
wheat/rice has been added in the guidelines of procurement, allocation, 
distribution and disposal of coarse grains, which would ease the financial burden 
on the States/UTs. 
5.       Increase in Administrative charges on acquisition stage for coarse grains 
procurement from 1% to 2% of MSP, to incentivize procurement of millets.  
6.     To widen scope of procurement of coarse grains/millets, it has been decided 
to allow the procurement of following minor/pseudo millets: 
Minor Millet - Foxtail Millet(Kangani/Kakun), Proso Millet(Cheena), Kodo 
Millet(Kodo) ,little millet(Kutki)   
Pseudo Millets-(Black-wheat (kuttu) and Ameranthus(Chaulai). 
This arrangement has been put in place for the 3 years at costs, based on the 
MSP of Ragi. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) 
                        O.M. No. 8-8/2023-BP-III(e-383749) Dated the 03.11.2023] 
  

19 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S 
 REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
  

20 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS  IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

21 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         LOCKET CHATTERJEE, 
7 December, 2023                  Chairperson, 
16 Agrahayana,1945 (Saka)                                          Standing Committee on  
   Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 

22 
 
APPENDIX I 
   
    
MINUTES OF THE  FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (202 3-2024) 
HELD ON THURSDAY,  7TH DECEMBER, 2023 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room No. 4, 
Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt.Locket Chatterjee  - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
4. Shri Anil Firojiya 
5. Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit 
6. Shri Khagen Murmu 
7. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
8. Dr. Amar Singh 
9. Smt. Kavita Singh 
10. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
11. Shri Vaithilingam Ve. 
  
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 12. Shri C.Ve Shanmugam 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai                 - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi                 - Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan                 - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Dong Lianthang Tonsing            -     Deputy Secretary 
 

23 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the following Draft 
Reports of the Committee: 
(i) xxxx     xxxx     xxxx    xxxx ; 
 
(ii) Thirty Fourth Report on Action Taken   by   the   Government   on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Twenty Eighth Report 
of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Pradhan 
Mantri Garib Kalyan  Anna Yojana’ (PMGKAY)  of the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and 
Public Distribution); 
 
(iii) xxxx    xxxx     xxxx     xxxx ;and  
 
(iv) xxxx    xxxx     xxxx     xxxx.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for conside ration the above mentioned 
Draft Reports of the Committee.  
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft 
Reports without any amendments/modifications.  
5.  The Committee then authorized Hon’ble Chairperson to finalize and 
present the aforesaid Reports. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
___________________________________________________________ 
  
xxxx Matter does not relate to the Report. 
  

24 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS  OF THE  ACTION  TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY 
EIGHTH REPORT  OF  THE  STANDING  COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023-24) 
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
(i) Total number of Recommendations:        08 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government : 
 
Para Nos. :- 1,2,3,4,5,6,7 & 8   
   
            (Chapter – II, Total - 08) 
              Percentage :   100% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
Para No.:-  NIL 
                     (Chapter – III, Total - 0) 
             Percentage :  0.00% 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 
Para No. :-   NIL 
            (Chapter – IV, Total -0)   
                Percentage : 0.00% 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the interim 
replies of the Government have been received. 
 
Para No.:- NIL 
 
    (Chapter – V, Total - 0) 
           Percentage : 0.00% 