 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
        AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2021-2022) 
 
 
       
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the recommendations/ observations 
contained in the Eleventh Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
the subject ‘Price Rise of Essential Commodities – Causes & Effects’ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department o f 
Consumer Affairs)} 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 December 2021/   Agrahayana 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
(i) 
 
16 


 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2021-2022) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the recommendations/ observations 
contained in the Eleventh Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
the subject ‘Price Rise of Essential Commodities – Causes & Effects’ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department o f 
Consumer Affairs)} 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.12.2021 
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 07.12.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
   December, 2021/  Agrahayana 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
(ii) 


 
CONTENTS 
 
            
Composition of the Committee ………………………………………                        (iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………...                  (v) 
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………………                1  
 
Chapter II Recommendations/ Observations which have been 
accepted by Government……………………………              13 
  
Chapter III Recommendations/ Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
 Government’s replies………………………………...                         44  
 
Chapter IV Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee ………………………………………..                         49  
 
Chapter V Recommendations/ Observations in respect of 
which final replies of Government are  
still awaited………………………………………………   50 
   
 
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of  3rd sitting of the Committee held on 01.12.2021               52   
         
 
(II) Analysis  of the  action  taken by the Government on                     
the recommendations/ observations contained  
in the Eleventh Report  of  the  Standing  Committee  
on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution  
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha)                54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)  

Composition of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution (2021-2022) 
 
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay, Chairperson  
Lok Sabha 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat 
4. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
5. Shri G. S. Basavaraj 
6. Ms. Debasree Chaudhuri 
7. Shri Sunny Deol 
8. Shri Anil Firojiya 
9. Shri Selvam G. 
10. Shri Rajendra D. Gavit 
11. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi  
12. Shri Bhagwant Mann  
13. Shri Khagen Murmu  
14. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai (Bakabhai) Patel  
15. Shri Subrat Pathak  
16. Smt. Himadri Singh 
17. Smt. Kavita Singh  
18. Shri Nandigam Suresh 
19. Shri Saptagiri Ulaka  
20. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
21. Shri Ve.Vaithilingam 
  
Rajya  Sabha 
22. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
23. Smt. Roopa Ganguly 
24. Shri K. G. Kenye 
25. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
26. Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
27. Shri Rajmani Patel  
28. Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
29. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
30. Shri Ramji 
31. Shri G. K. Vasan 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri Pawan Kumar - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi -  Director 
3. Sh. Ginsuanlian Guite – Deputy Secretary 
________ 
 
(iv) 

INTRODUCTION 
  
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution (2021-2022) having been authorized by the Committee to submit 
the Report on their behalf, present this Sixteenth Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in the Eleventh  
Report of the Committee ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha ) o n the subject ‘Price Rise of 
Essential Commodities – Causes & Effects’  of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
 
2.  The Eleventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
19.03.2021. The Government has furnished its replies indicating Action Taken on the 
recommendations contained in the Report on 21 October, 2021. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 01 December, 2021. 
 
4.  An an alysis of the action taken by the Government on Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.  
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee have been printed in thick ty pe in the text of the 
Report. 
  
 
 
 
  
 
NEW DELHI;     SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY, 
01 December, 2021                      Chairperson, 
10  Agrahayana 1943 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Food, 
   Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER - I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations  contained in the Eleventh Report of the 
Committee (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Price Rise of Essential Commodities 
- Causes & Effects’ pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
 
1.2 The Eleventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 19.03.2021. It contained 21 recommendations/observations. 
Action taken replies in respect of all the 21 recommendations/observations 
contained in the Report have been received and these have been categorized as 
follows:- 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
Government - 
 
Rec. Nos.:- 1, 3, 4, 5, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21  
   
   
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies - 
  
 Rec. Nos.:-  2, 6, 7, 10 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee -  
 
Rec. Nos.:-  NIL 
 
   (iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited -   
 
   Rec. Nos. :- 8  
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
recommendations/ observations  contained in Chapter I and final reply in 
respect of recommendation for which only interim replies has been given 

2 
 
by the Government, sho uld be f urnished to the Committee expeditiously. 
The Committee strongly emphasize that utmost importance should be 
given to the implementation of recommendation/observations accepted by 
the Government. In case where it is not possible for the Government to  
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the 
matter should  be reported to the Committee in time with reasons for non -
implementation.  
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations. 
 
A. Need to implement effectively the  new post -budget (2021 -22) 
strategy for ‘Operations Greens’ scheme.  
 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 13)  
 
1.5 The Committee in their original report observed/recommended as follows:- 
 
"The Department of Consumer Af fairs apprised the Committee that 
to stabilize the prices of essential food items, the Government has 
taken various measures from time to time, including (i) 
appropriately utilizing trade and fiscal policy instruments like import 
duty, Minimum Export Price  (MEP), export restrictions, etc. to 
regulate domestic availability and moderate prices; (ii) imposition of 
stock limits and advising States for effective action against 
hoarders and black marketeers; (iii) provision of higher Minimum 
Support Prices (MSP) to incentivize farmers for increasing 
production. In this regard, the Committee note that a new scheme 
called ‘Operation Greens’ was introduced by the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries for integrated development of Tomato, Onion 
and Potato (TDP) value  chain, with an outlay of Rs. 500 crore to 
promote Farmer Producers Organizations (FPOs), agri -logistics, 
processing facilities and professional management. The Committee 
believe that Operation Greens besides benefiting the farmers, will 
go a long way in augmenting domestic production and availability of 
tomato, onion and potato in the country, thereby stabilizing and 
moderating their prices for the benefit of the consumers. The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Government to take concerted 
steps to closely monitor the progress of ‘Operation Greens’ scheme 
across the States/UTs. The Government may also make an 

3 
 
evaluation of the progress of the scheme and make enhanced 
financial allocation for the scheme, if required.” 
 
1.6 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
"Operation Greens Scheme was announced in the Union Budget 
for 2018 -19 with financial outlays of Rs. 500 crores to promote 
FPOs, agri -logistics, processing facilities and professional 
management for Tomato, Onion and Potato (TOP) crops. The 
Scheme was launched in November 2018 on a pilot basis with the 
objective to promote setting up of Integrated Value Chain 
Development Project for TOP crops in the selected clusters. Along 
with, secondary processing facilities, the scheme envisage  
investment in farm gate infrastructure for primary 
processing/storages facilities. Farmer in this production clusters are 
being organized in to FPOs to manage production, adopt 
processable or dual use variety of crops, engage in post -harvest 
activity, value additions and marketing of TOP produce. 
Brief of the scheme 
Strategies of Scheme: The scheme has two -pronged strategy of 
Price stabilization measures (for short term) and value chain 
development projects (for long term). 
(i) Short term: price stabilization measures (Transportation 
& Storage – 50% subsidy) - During the glut situation at the time of 
harvest, evacuation of surplus production from the producing area 
to the consumption centres and subsidy is provided at the rate of 
50% on transportation and storage. 
OG-TOP to TOTAL:  The scope of short term measures under 
Operation Greens scheme was extended from TOP to TOTAL (41 
notified fruits and vegetables) w.e.f. 11.06.2020 as a part of 
Aatmanirbhar Bharat Package announcement by Hon’ble Finance 
Minister due t o supply chain disruption amid Covid pandemic, 
based on SFC recommendation, by Minister, FPI on 10.06.2020.  
• Guidelines for providing 50% freight subsidy for movement of 
notified fruits and vegetables through Kisan Rail notified on 
12.10.2020. Subsequently , Ministry allowed transport subsidy on 
any Fruit & Vegetable through Kisan rail service provided by Indian 
Railways.  
• Guidelines for providing 50% Air freight subsidy for movement of 
notified fruits & vegetables from NER and Himalayan States issued 

4 
 
on 02.11.2020. Subsequently, Ministry allowed transport subsidy on 
any Fruit & Vegetable through air from NER and Himalayan States. 
• Guidelines for providing 50% subsidy to eligible entities through 
NAFED for transportation and/or storage of apple from Jammu and 
Kashmir, issued on 27.11.2020.  
 
(ii) Long term: Value chain development Projects -Projects 
are implemented in identified clusters for TOP crops in major 
producing States for development of value chain. Farmers in the 
production clusters are being organized into  FPOs to manage 
production, post-harvest activities, value addition and marketing of 
the TOP produce. Grant-in-aid is provided on an average @ 50% of 
eligible project cost /70% in case of SC/ST/FPOs. So far six 
projects have been sanctioned under the schem e and are under 
implementation stage and the details of the same are provided in 
the table below: 
Integrated value chain development projects Sanctioned under Operation 
Greens 
(Rs. in Cr) 
S. 
No
. 
Name of PIA Location of 
Cluster 
Name of 
Crop 
Approval 
date 
Total 
Project 
Cost 
Grant-
in-aid 
1 M/s Andhra Pradesh 
Food Processing 
Society 
Chittor, 
Anantapur, 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Tomato 20.03.2019 109.99 48.82 
2 M/s Nedspice 
Dehydration India 
LLP 
Bhavnagar, 
Gujarat 
Onion 20.03.2019 63.64 25.22 
3 M/s Khemanand 
Dudh & Kris hi 
Producer Company 
Ltd 
Ahmednagar, 
Maharashtra 
Onion 08.01.2020 31.33 14.60 
4 M/s Banaskantha 
District Cooperative 
Producer Union Ltd 
Banaskantha, 
Gujarat 
 
Potato 08.01.2020 103.87 30.56 
5 M/s Vangi Foods Kheda, Gujarat Tomato 05.03.2020 18.50 4.51 
6 M/s Smartagri 
Agroville 
Nashik, 
Maharashtra 
Onion 03.02.2021 35.97 13.11 
Total 363.30 136.82 
 
Budget Announcement 2021 -22: In pursuance of budget 
announcement 2021-22, the scope of long term strategy i.e. Value 
Chain Develo pment Projects under Operation Greens Scheme is 
going to be expanded from TOP to Twenty -Two Perishable 

5 
 
products in order to boost value addition in agriculture and allied 
products and their exports.   
 
The list of 19 perishable products identified in addit ion to TOP 
crops with the approval of Hon’ble Minister, FPI is as under. 
Fruits (10): Mango, Banana, Apple, Pineapple, 
Kinnow/Mandarin/Orange, Grapes, Aonla/Amla, Pomegranate, 
Gvava, Litchi. 
Vegetables (8): Peas, Carrot, Cauliflower, Beans, Bitter gourd, 
Okra, Garlic, Ginger.              
Marine (1):          Shrimp.  
Strategy for implementation of budget announcement 2021-22 
is as under: - 
i. Production clusters will be identified for perishable products on the 
basis of production data of Horticulture Divisio n, M/o Agriculture 
and validation by respective States and other stakeholders. 
ii. Gaps in the value chain will be identified by conducting 
Infrastructure Gap Assessment Studies in selected production 
clusters. 
iii. In parallel, scheme guidelines are being drafted. 
iv. The intervention by Ministry would be limited to fill those gaps in 
value chain of 22 perishables to reduce the post-harvest losses and 
increase sales realization for farmers. Other concerned Ministries, 
State Governments and their Institutions etc. would  also be 
requested to fill those gaps in the value chain. 
Details of Expenditure Since beginning 
      ₹ in Crore 
Year BE RE AE 
2018-19 0 200 5.50  
2019-20 200 32.48 2.84  
2020-21 127.5 38.21 38.21  
2021-22 73.4 - 39.80  
Total Expenditure till date  86.35  
  
1.7 The Committee note that for ‘Operation Greens’ scheme introduced 
in 2018-19 for integrated development of Tomato, Onion and Potato (TOP) 
in the country, a total expenditure of Rs. 86.35 crore has been incurred. 

6 
 
Given the propensity of tomato, onion and potato towards price volatility in 
the recent past years, the Committee would like to reiterate their 
recommendation that the Government should take concerted steps to 
continue to closely monitor the  progress of ‘Operation Greens’ scheme 
across the States/UTs, and also make an evaluation of the progress of the 
scheme, highlighting achievements made and problems encountered. The 
Committee also note that in pursuant of budget announcement 2021-22, the 
scope of long -term strategy, i.e. Value Chain Development Projects under 
‘Operations Greens’ scheme is going to be expanded from TOP to 22 
perishable products in order to boost value addition in agriculture and 
allied products and their exports. The Committee also note the strategy for 
implementation of the budget announcement 2021 -22. The Committee urge 
the Government to ensure effective implementation of the said strategy to 
achieve bumper production in the 22 identified perishable products and 
also boost their exports. The Committee also desire that  the Government 
should explore the feasibility of undertaking a comparative study on post -
harvest practices of a few other countries with a view to replicating such 
practices in India, where applicable. The Committee further note the actual 
expenditure achieved in respect of ‘Operations Green’ scheme, i.e. Rs. 5.50 
crore against RE of Rs. 200 crore in 2018 -19, Rs. 2.84 crore against BE of 
Rs. 200 crore in 2019 -20, Rs. 38.21 crore against BE of Rs. 127.5 crore in 
2020-21 and Rs. 39.80 crore against BE of Rs.  73.4 crore in 2021 -22. The 
abysmally low figures on actual expenditure incurred on the scheme during 
the last three years speak volume about the need to make vigorous efforts 
by the Government, and the Committee hope to see better achievements in 

7 
 
regard to implementation of the ‘Operation Greens’ scheme in this aspect 
as well.   
B. Price Stabilization Fund 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
1.8 The Committee in the original report observed/recommended as under: 
 
"The Committee note that the Price Stabilization  Fund (PSF) was 
set up in the year 2014 -15, which advances interest -free loans to 
State Governments/UTs and Central Agencies to support their 
working capital and other expenses that they might incur on 
procurement and distribution interventions for the 
prescribed/stipulated commodities. The PSF is centrally managed 
by the Price Stabilization Fund Management Committee (PSFMC), 
which will approve all proposals from the State Governments and 
Central Agencies. The Committee desire that the proposals 
received by PSFMC should be processed within a fixed time frame 
and funds released with a view to moderating volatility in prices of 
commodities like onions, potatoes and pulses to prevent rise in 
prices and scarcity.”  
 
1.9 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated:- 
 
"The Central Corpus Fund for price stabilization is available for 
providing interest free working capital to the States/UTs for market 
intervention for price control based on proposal for creating State -
level Price Stabilisation Fund submitted t o the PSFMC. The State 
level Corpus is created with a sharing pattern between GoI and 
State in the ratio of 50: 50, and 75:25 in case the North Eastern 
States. Centre's share is released in 2 equal instalments. 
Till date Department of Consumer Affairs has released funds to six 
State Governments for setting up a State Level PSF. Details of 
release are as under: 
 
 
 

8 
 
State 
Total PSF 
Fund 
requirement 
(₹crore) 
State's 
Share 
(₹crore) 
Centre's Share Released(₹crore) 
1st 
instalment 
2nd 
instalment Total 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
100 50 25 
(2015-16) 
25 
(2017-18) 
50 
Telangana 18.31 9.15 4.575 
(2015-16) 
4.575 
(2015-16) 
9.15 
West Bengal 10 5 2.50 
(2015-16) 
- 2.50 
Odisha 100 50 25 
(2018-19) 
- 25 
Tamil Nadu 10 5 2.50 
(2019-20) 
- 2.50 
Assam 200 50 75 
(2019-20) 
- 75 
Total Released 164.15 
 
The Department is continuously taking up with the State/UTs to 
create State Level PSF through letters and in meetings such as the 
National Consultation Meeting of Ministers of States/UTs in -charge 
of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs , Zonal Conferences 
on Price Monitoring and regular VC meetings on Price Monitoring 
with the States and UTs.” 
 
1.10  The Committee note the Department’s reply that under the Price 
Stabilization Fund set up in 2014 -15, the Central Corpus Fund for price 
stabilization is available for providing interest -free working capital to 
States/UTs for market intervention for price control based on proposal for 
creating State -level Price Stabilization Fund submitted to the Price 
Stabilization Management Committee (PSFMC)  and that the State -level 
corpus is created with a sharing pattern between Government of India and 
State in the ratio of 50:50, and  in the ratio of 75:25 in case of the North -
Eastern States. Centre’s share of the fund is released in 2 equal 

9 
 
instalments. The  Committee further note that the Department of Consumer 
Affairs has released Central funds totalling Rs. 164.35 crore to 6 State 
Governments i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Telengana, West Bengal, Odisha, Tamil 
Nadu and Assam for setting up State-level Price Stabilization Funds (PSFs). 
Surprisingly however, only 2 States, namely, Andhra Pradesh and 
Telangana have received the two instalments in full, while the remaining 4 
States, namely, West Bengal, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Assam are yet to get 
the second instalment  of the Centre’s share. The Committee, therefore, 
urge the Government to take follow -up steps to ensure that the second 
instalment of the Centre’s share of PSF fund is released to the above -
stated 4 States without delay. They also recommend that the Govern ment 
pursue all the remaining States/UTs to submit proposals for creation of 
State-level PSFs within a stipulated time -frame in order to achieve the 
better moderation of price volatility of essential commodities in the 
country.  
 
C.     Revamping and monitoring of Public Distribution System 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16)  
 
1.11 The Committee recommended as follows:- 
 
"The Committee observe that the Public Distribution System (PDS) 
has evolved as a system for distribution of foodgrains at affordable 
prices in th e country. In June, 1997, the Government introduced 
‘Targeted Public Distribution System’ (TPDS) to focus on the poor, 
followed by a scheme called ‘Antyodaya Anna Yojana’ (AAY) 
introduced in December, 2000 which aims to make TPDS more 
focused and targeted to poor and the poorest of poor. About 2.5 
crore households are presently covered under AAY across the 
country. Under National Food Security Act (NFSA) enacted in 2013, 

10 
 
eligible households/beneficiaries comprise of Antyodaya Anna 
Yojana (AAY) households an d persons belonging to Priority 
Households (PHH) categories. AAY households, which constitute 
the poorest-of-the poor, are entitled to receive 35 kg of foodgrains 
per household, whereas households covered under PHH category 
are entitled to receive 5 kg of foodgrains per person per month at 
highly subsidized prices of Rs. 3/2/1 per kg for rice/wheat/coarse 
grains respectively. The Committee note that TPDS is presently 
operated under the joint responsibility of the Central and the State 
Governments, where the  Central Government has assumed the 
responsibility of procurement, storage, transportation and allocation 
of foodgrains to all States/UTs and the operational responsibility of 
allocation of foodgrains within States/UTs, identification of eligible 
families under NFSA, issuance of ration cards, distribution of 
foodgrains through Fair Price Shops (FPSs) and licensing and 
monitoring of FPSs, etc. rests with the respective State/UT 
Governments. The Committee desire the Government to put in 
place an institutional  mechanism for robust monitoring of TPDS for 
increasing its efficiency and utility.” 
 
1.12 The Ministry in its action taken note has stated:- 
 
"Institutional mechanism for robust monitoring of TPDS is already 
provided for under the Chapter XI of the Nation al Food Security Act 
(NFSA), 2013 and mandates all State/UT Governments to conduct 
periodic social audits on the functioning of the Targeted Public 
Distribution System including the fair price shops. Accordingly, the 
States/UTs are periodically instructed to conduct the social audits in 
this regard. 
28. (1) Every local authority, or any other authority or body, as may 
be authorised by the State Government, shall conduct or cause to 
be conducted, periodic social audits on the functioning of fair price 
shops, Targeted Public Distribution System and other welfare 
schemes, and cause to publicise its findings and take necessary 
action, in such manner as may be prescribed by the State 
Government. 
Further, the National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) also provides 
that  
1. For ensuring transparency and proper functioning of the Targeted 
Public Distribution System and accountability of the functionaries in 

11 
 
such system, every State Government shall set up Vigilance 
Committees as specified in the Public Distribution System  (Control) 
Order, 2001, made under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, as 
amended from time to time, at the State, District, Block and fair 
price shop levels consisting of such persons, as may be prescribed 
by the State Government giving due representatio n to the local 
authorities, the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, women 
and destitute persons or persons with disability. 
2. The Vigilance Committees shall perform the following functions, 
namely: — 
(a) regularly supervise the implementation of all sche mes under this 
Act; 
(b) inform the District Grievance Redressal Officer, in writing, of any 
violation of the provisions of this Act; and 
(c) inform the District Grievance Redressal Officer, in writing, of any 
malpractice or misappropriation of funds found by it. 
 
Further, the Targeted Public Distribution System (Control) Order, 
2015 provides that the State Government shall set up vigilance 
committees for the Targeted Public Distribution System at the 
State, District, Block and fair price shop levels as per the provisions 
of the Food Security Act to perform functions as specified in the 
said Act. Meetings of the vigilance committees shall be held at least 
once every quarter at all levels and the date and periodicity of the 
meeting shall be notified by the Sta te Governments and given wide 
publicity. The State Government shall send a report annually to the 
Central Government on the functioning of vigilance committees." 
  
1.13 The Committee note the Department’s reply that for robust 
monitoring of Targeted Public  Distribution system (TPDS) in the country, 
institutional mechanism is already provided for under the Chapter XI of 
the National Food Security Act (NFSA), 2013 which mandates all State/UT 
Governments to conduct periodic social audits on the functioning of the 
TPDS, including the Fair Price Shops (FPSs), and that the States/UTs are 
accordingly periodically instructed to conduct the social audits in this 
regard. The Committee further note that the Targeted Public Distribution 

12 
 
System (Control) Order, 2015 prov ides for the setting up of ‘Vigilance 
Committees’ by the State Government at the State, District, Block and Fair 
Price Shop levels as per the provisions of the National Food Security Act, 
2013 to perform functions specified in the said Act, viz. (a) regula rly 
supervise the implementation of all schemes under this Act; (b) inform the 
District Grievance Redressal Officer, in writing, of any violation of the 
provisions of this Act; and (c) inform the District Grievance Redressal 
Officer, in writing, of any mal practice or misappropriation of funds found 
by it. The order also provides that meetings of the Vigilance Committees 
shall be held at least once every quarter at all levels, and the date and 
periodicity of the meeting shall be notified by the State Governm ents and 
given wide publicity, and further that the State Government shall send a 
report annually to the Central Government on the functioning of the 
Vigilance Committees. The Committee note that a very crucial mandate 
has been vested in the Vigilance Comm ittees set up under NFSA, 2013 
and the TPDS (Control) Order, 2015 for monitoring of TPDS in the country. 
They desire the Government to furnish the details about the 
status/working of these Committees in each State/UT since the 
enforcement of the Targeted P ublic Distribution System, including the 
details regarding all States/UTs which have constituted or not constituted 
the Committees so far. The Committee would like to be updated about this 
matter within three months of presentation of this Report.   

13 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS  WHICH HAVE BEEN 
  ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
2.1 The Committee observe that at present, there are 7 (seven) commodities 
included in the Schedule of essential commodities under the Essential 
Commodities Act (EC Act), 1955, viz. (1) Drugs; (2) Fertilizers (whether organic, 
inorganic or mixed); (3) Foodstuffs, including edible oilseeds and oils; (4) Hank 
yarn made wholly from cotton; (5) Petroleum and petroleum products; (6) Raw 
jute and jute textile;  (7) (i) Seeds of food crops and seeds of fruits and 
vegetables; (ii) Seeds of cattle fodder; (iii) Jute seeds; and (iv) Cotton seeds. The 
Committee also observe that the Department, as and when required, in 
consultation with Ministries/Departments concern ed as well as State 
Governments, take decision for listing or delisting of a commodity in the list of 
essential commodities. They also note that after major amendments of 2006, the 
only instance when amendment in the Schedule was made was in 2009 when 
cotton seed was notified as an essential commodity under the EC Act, 1955. The 
Committee are of the view that a proper mechanism may be evolved to 
periodically review the inclusion/deletion of commodities under the 61 Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 after due consultations with the concerned Departments 
and State Governments/UT authorities. The Committee also recommend that the 
Government may consider for the inclusion of more consumables in the list of 
essential commodities, particularly those which directly a ffect the health of all 
consumers, and which are useful for village and town dwellers, and subsidize 
these products. Such items may also be included in the list of commodities 
monitored by the Price Monitoring Division (PMD), which may go a long way in 
improving the health and welfare of needy consumers at large. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 Government keeps a close watch on the prices of major commodities and 
as and when required in consultation with the concerned Ministries/ Departments 
commodities are n otified for inclusion  in / deletion from the list of essential 
commodities. Presently, the following 7 commodities are notified in the list of 
essential commodities: 
S.No. Commodity 
1 Drugs 
2 Fertilizers, whether inorganic, organic or mixed 

14 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.7  of Chapter -I of the Report) 
  
Recommendation No. 3 
 
2.3 The Committee note that rice, wheat, atta, gram dal, arhar dal, moong dal, 
urad dal, masoor dal attract nil Goods and Services Tax (GST) for unbranded 
and 5% for branded and packed in unit container, and tea, sugar, vanaspati, 
groundnut oil, mustard oil, UHT (ultra high temperature) milk, soya oil, palm oil, 
and sunflower oil attract GST at the rate of 5%. The Committee further note that 
the export of wheat/rice attract no export duty, and that no redundant 
controls/restrictions on movement and distri bution, particularly of agricultural 
commodities existed during the last 3 (three) years. The Committee would like 
the Government to take all necessary steps to further streamline the free 
movement of essential commodities in the country to ensure affordab le prices of 
such items for all citizens. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4  The Central Government vide Order   "Removal of Licensing 
Requirements, Stock Limits and Movement   Restrictions on Specified Foodstuffs 
Order, 2016 dated  29.9.2016" has removed  licensing requirements, stock limits 
and movement restrictions on certain foodstuffs. These Orders provided that any 
dealer may freely buy, stock, sell, transport, distribute, dispose, acquire, use or 
consume, any quantity of specified food stuffs  and shall not re quire a permit or 
license therefor, under any order issued under the  Act, save as otherwise 
provided under the Order.   The Orders also provide that State Government shall 
obtain prior approval of the Central Government for issuing of any order for the 
3 ‘Foodstuffs’* including edible oilseeds and oil 
4 Hank yarn made wholly of cotton 
5 Petroleum and Petroleum Products 
6 Raw jute and jute textiles 
7 (i) Seeds of food crops, fruits and vegetables 
 (ii) Seeds of cattle fodder 
 (iii) Jute seeds; and 
 (iv) Cotton seed 

15 
 
purposes of regulating by licenses, permit or otherwise, the storage, transport, 
distribution, disposal, acquisition, use or consumption of any of the commodities. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
2.5 The Committee note that Producer Price Index (PPI) is an index designed 
to measure the average change in the price of goods and services from the point 
of view o f the producer, either as they leave the place of production (called 
‘Output PPI’), or as they enter the production process (called ‘Input PPI’). It is 
stated to be an improvement over the Wholesale Price Index (WPI), which is 
currently in use in the count ry, being free from the bias of multiple counting 
inherent in an aggregate commodity based index like WPI. The Committee also 
note that a Working Group on PPI was constituted on 21st August, 2014 under 
the Chairmanship of Dr. B.N. Goldar, exMember, National Statistics Commission, 
which submitted its report on 31st August, 2017, which has been uploaded in the 
website of the office of Economic Advisor. The Committee further note that the 
technical decision of migration from WPI to PPI will be examined by the Working 
Group and Technical Advisory Committee on Series of Prices and Cost of Living, 
and that the final decision of feasibility of shifting and its modalities will be 
decided by the Committee of Secretaries. They also note that the exercise for 
revision of base year has commenced with the setting up of Working Group for 
revision of WPI on 25th June, 2019 under the Chairmanship of Prof. Ramesh 
Chand, which was to submit its report in June, 2020, but its term has been 
extended for another year, i.e. till June, 2021. While appreciating the fact that PPI 
would provide a more accurate reflection of the price changes of the relevant 
economic activities, and give a reliable and internationally comparable picture of 
prices fixed by producers, the Committee neverth eless, desire that the 
Government should consider the subject of switch -over from WPI to PPI after 
making proper study and examination of the entire ramifications and also after 
making wide consultations with the States/UTs, i.e. after the requisite modali ties 
have been duly completed. The Committee further hope that the Working Group 
under the Chairmanship of Prof. Ramesh Chand will submit its report within the 
extended term, i.e. June, 2021. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the 
gist of recommendations of the Working Group under Prof. Ramesh Chand in the 
matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 

16 
 
 
2.6  The year 2017-18 may be considered as the new base year of Wholesale 
Price Index (WPI). The Input Output Table (IOT) and Supply Use Table (SUT) 
are currentl y available up to 2015 -16, and not available for the new base year 
2017-18. The PPI weight of 2017 -18 may be updated once the MOSPI release 
the Use Table.  
The Working Group has recommended to release PPI on experimental basis and 
its weight of 2017-18 may be updated once the MOSPI release the IOT and SUT. 
The Business Services Price Index (BSPI) may be disseminated separately and 
it will be merged with WPI/PPI, once stability and robustness is achieved. In 
Phase-I, six service price indices namely; BSPI - Banking, BSPI-Insurance, BSPI- 
Securities, BSPI - Telecom, BSPI - Air Transport and BSPI - Railways may be 
released as separate indices and a combined BSPI may also be explored based 
on the price indices of the above services and their weights as per their val ue of 
output in National Account Statistics. 
The Report of the Working Group will be technically examined by Technical 
Advisory Committee on Series of Prices and Cost of Living, Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation (MOSPI) and also by Nation al Statistical 
Commission, an autonomous body. The final decision of feasibility of shifting and 
its modalities will be decided by the Committee of Secretaries (CoS). 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.  1.10  of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
2.7 The Committee observe that the Food Safety and Standards Authority of  
India (FSSAI) was established in 2008 under Section 4 of Food Safety and 
Standards Act (FSS Act), 2006 to carry out the mandate of the Act, viz. to make 
regulations on food standards. The Committee were informed that FSSAI 
interacts with State Governments  through meetings of Central Advisory 
Committee (CAC) in which Food Safety Commissioners of all States/UTs are 
represented, and a total of 27 CAC meetings have been held from 2010 -11 to 
2019-20. Further, as per the information provided by the Department of  
Consumer Affairs, Food Safety Officers are taking samples of food regularly for 
analysis in food laboratories, based on which designated officers launch 

17 
 
prosecution against defaulting food business operators under FSS Act, 2006. A 
look at the data provide d by the Department, however, revealed that while 
between the years 2016-17 and 2019-20, there was an increase in the number of 
food samples analyzed from 78340 to 118775, the number of samples found 
non-conforming from 18325 to 29589, and the number of ci vil/criminal cases 
launched from 13080 to 27412, but the number of convictions actually fell from 
1605 to 821 during the same period. The Committee are of the opinion that these 
trends undoubtedly indicate a slackening of efforts by FSSAI regarding 
enforcement work on food safety standards in the country. The Committee are 
convinced that the qualitative and safety aspect of food items is as important as 
its quantitative aspect, and they, therefore, urge the Government to add vigour to 
existing efforts on te sting and analysis of food items, and ensure that there is no 
slackening of enforcement of food safety standards against the defaulting food 
business operators and stringent action is taken against them. They also feel that 
the total number of 27 meetings held by CAC between 2010 -11 and 2019 -20 is 
too few and far between, and that more interactions by CAC with State 
Governments/UT Administrations will be helpful for FSSAI to fulfill its mandate in 
a more efficient manner. Noting that FSSAI has its presence at 22 points of entry 
at six locations, viz. Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Tuticorin and Kochi, the 
Committee desire that efforts should be made to increase the number of such 
locations from 6 at present to atleast 10 numbers by including more ports and  
trade centres. Side by side, vigorous efforts should be made to ensure that all 
food business operators comply with the quality parameters of food items which 
are stored in godowns. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 Enforcement 
The enforcement of FSS Act, 200 6, Rules and Regulations made thereunder 
primarily lies with States/Union Territories, for which the Act provides for 
complete enforcement machinery by the States/UTs comprising the 
Commissioner of Food Safety in each State to be assisted by Designated 
Officers and Food Safety Officers.   The Commissioner of Food Safety in States / 
Union Territories is empowered to take appropriate measures under Food Safety 
& Standard Act, Rules & Regulations 2011.  FSSAI regularly advises States/UTs 
through Quarterly meeting of Central Advisory Committee, Video Conference and 
periodical interactions at highest level and through written communication to 
recruit sufficient and competent  regulatory staff  and  improve the laboratory 
infrastructure for effective compliance and en forcement of provisions of FSS Act, 
2006, Rules and Regulations made thereunder.  Availability of manpower and 
enforcement activities undertaken by States/UTs are discussed in detail in every 

18 
 
quarterly CAC meeting. As a result of FSSAI’s advocacy, a number of States 
including Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Haryana, Goa, Chhattisgarh, Orissa, Jammu 
and Kashmir etc are in the process of creation of additional posts/recruitment of 
Food Safety Officers. Further, to strengthen the enforcement machinery, FSSAI 
has underta ken recruitment of Central Food Safety Officers (CFSOs) and 35 
such officers have since joined FSSAI.  They will be responsible for enforcement 
activities in respect of FBOs holding Central License. Recruitment process for 
another 37 posts of CFSOs has been initiated.  
FSSAI is also assisting States/UTs in building up of adequate number of 
laboratories including microbiology labs in all States/UTs and upgrading the lab 
infrastructure which includes installation of high - end equipments and training of 
laboratory staff. So far, 39 State Food Safety Labs have been taken up for 
upgradation in 29 States/UTs and a sum of Rs. 314.48 cr has already been 
released for the purpose. Further, FSSAI has also provided 118 mobile food 
testing labs called “Food Safety on Wh eels” (FSWs)to various States/UTs for 
carrying out 3 key activities viz. testing, training and awareness through FSWs. 
These mobile labs enhance the outreach of functionaries in States and help 
conduct activities even in far flung areas.    More FSWs are b eing provided to 
States/UTs subject to their willingness.  
The State enforcement officers are regularly conducting inspection, surveillance 
and sampling to ensure the availability of safe and wholesome food for human 
consumption. Samples are being collecte d from manufacturers, wholesalers, 
retailers etc.  from various premises of  these  FBOs including godowns.  In 
cases where violations have been observed, legal action has been initiated 
against the defaulting Food Business Operators (FBOs) under the provi sions of 
FSS Act, 2006.  
 Due to persistent efforts made by the State enforcement machinery and 
availability of adequate number of labs, number of samples analysed has 
increased over the years.  Despite conditions created by CoVID 19 during last 
two years, enforcement machinery did its best to ensure the availability of safe 
and wholesome food, while maintaining the continuity of food value chains.   
It is also mentioned that non -conforming food samples covers not only cases 
involving adulteration but also samples with labelling deficiencies, sub -standard 
cases etc. Increase in number of non conforming samples is relatable to increase 
in number of samples analysed and does not reflect on performance of 
enforcement machinery.  Also, due to upgradation, State Food Safety labs are 
giving more accurate results.  
As regards fine and conviction, it is stated that as   per FSS Act, 2006, the cases 
which involve only fine i.e. civil cases are filed before the court of Adjudicating 

19 
 
Officer and in such cases, only pena lties, as decided by the Adjudicating Officer, 
are imposed on defaulting Food Business Operators. However, cases wherein 
provision for punishment with imprisonment has been prescribed under the Act, 
i.e. criminal cases are filed before the CJM court.  It i s submitted that number of 
civil cases decided have increased considerably over the past three years. 
Further, the number of cases launched, both civil as well as criminal, have also 
increased over the last three years and the same will be decided in due course of 
time.   
Details of Food Samples analysed during last three years and numbers of 
samples found non-conforming are as under:- 
S. 
No. 
Year No. of 
Samples 
Analysed 
No. of 
Samples 
found non-
conforming 
No. of Cases 
launched 
No. of Case 
decided 
Total 
Amount of 
Penalties 
raised (Rs.) 
  
Civil Criminal Civil Criminal     
1 2018-
19 
106459 30415 18550 2813 12734  701  32,57,78,08
7   
2 2019-
20 
118775 29589 27412 4681 16881 821 59,38,46,35
9   
3 2020-
21 
107829 28347 24195 3869 15532 520 50, 
75,46,934   
  
CAC and Interaction with States   
 Section 12 (3) of FSS Act, 2006 provides that the Central Advisory Committee 
shall meet regularly and not less than three times a year.   For the last two years 
meetings of CAC are being held regularly on quarterly basis.  Till date, 33 
meetings of CAC have been conducted with 4 meetings conducted in last 
financial year (2020-21) and 2 meetings so far in the current financial year 
 To make the CAC meetings more interactive and result oriented, FSSAI has 
made “Review of perf ormance of States and UTs” a standing agenda item for 
CAC meetings. For this purpose, FSSAI has developed a comprehensive 
reporting system.  A dedicated portal has been developed for States and UTs to 
upload their performance reports on quarterly basis.   The Quarterly Performance 
Report has 14 forms capturing data on various aspects of food safety like 
administrative set up, licensing/registration, samples and testing, adjudication, 
enforcement activities, consumer grievances, trainings, implementation of F SSAI 
initiatives etc. 
 Quarterly Performance Report is discussed in Central Advisory Committee and 
taken up with states for addressing the gaps and improving the food safety 
system. Moreover, the states are also invited to make presentations on the best 

20 
 
practices and their achievements/performance in the CAC meetings for guidance 
of other States/UTs. 
 FSSAI has also increased interaction with States through visit of Senior Officers 
to States to discuss food safety issues and to take stock of the implementat ion of 
various initiatives of FSSAI for improving the Food Safety eco -system. In past 
two years, CEO /Chairperson FSSAI visited Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Puducherry, Kerala, Punjab, Gujarat, 
Telangana, Odisha, Rajas than, Uttarakhand, Mizoram, Maharashtra etc.   
Opportunity was also taken to apprise the Chief Minister/Health Minister/Chief 
Secretary of the State about the position of food safety with suggestions for 
improvement. Further, in order to improve interface w ith the States/UTs, FSSAI 
conducts Video Conferencing (VC) sessions with the Food Safety Departments 
of States/UTs. FSSAI representatives are also participating in the State Level 
Advisory Committee meetings of States/UTs. 
Financial and Technical Assistance to States/UTs under MoUs 
 FSSAI has taken a landmark step in 2020 -21 with signing of bilateral 
Memorandum of Understandings (MoUs) with  States/UTs to improve their food 
safety system and address the gaps. Under the MoU, an annual Action Plan is 
decided in consultation with States and   financial & technical assistance is 
provided to States on the model of joint funding pattern. The Action Plan covers 
various activities like upgrading State Food Safety Laboratory, organizing 
awareness camps, carrying out enforcement & surveillance activities, setting up 
help desks, samples and testing, capacity building, IEC activities and 
participation in FSSAI initiatives. This initiative will go a long way to improve the 
overall food safety ecosystem and make it more robust in the country. 
 Under this initiative, Rs. 64.66 crore were released to 24 States/UTs in 2020 -21 
for annual action plan 2020 -21 and during current financial year Rs. 25.95 crore 
have been released so far to 16 States/UTs towards first instalment for annual 
action plan 2021 -22. The proposals received from remaining States/UTs are at 
different stages of processing for approval and signing by the respective 
States/UTs. 
 Increase in import locations where FSSAI is present   
 Earlier, FSSAI had its presenc e at 22 points of entry at six locations, viz. Delhi, 
Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Tuticorin and Kochi. Subsequently FSSAI has 
opened new Food Import offices at Krishnapatnam, Vishakhapatnam, Kandla, 
Mundra, Bangalore and Hyderabad. Hence presently FSSAI has its own officials 
notified as Authorised Officers at 12 locations covering 53 Points of entry of food 
imports.  At other 97 Points of Entry, Custom Officials have been notified by 
FSSAI for carrying out food import clearance work. A total of 150 Points of Entry 

21 
 
for import of food consignments are, thus,   covered by FSSAI directly as well as 
by notifying Customs officers as Authorised Officers and these 150 Points of 
Entry have been notified as food import entry points by DGFT. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
2.9 As per the Schedule of Essential Commodities Act (EC Act), 1955, 
‘Petroleum and Petroleum Prod ucts’ have been included in the list of Essential 
Commodities. The prices of petrol and diesel have been made market -
determined by the Government from 26.06.2010 and 19.10.2014 respectively, 
and the Public Sector Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) take decisio n on pricing 
of petrol and diesel in line with their international product prices, exchange rate, 
tax structure, inland freight and other cost elements. The Government modulates 
the effective cost to consumer for subsidized domestic LPG, whereas the prices  
of non -subsidized domestic LPG are determined by the OMCs in line with 
changes in international markets. The Committee note that during the period 
from 2010 -11 to 2018 -19, the Central Excise duty on Petroleum, Oil and 
Lubricants (POL) grew from Rs. 76,547  crore to Rs. 2,29,247 crore while the 
customs duty on POL witnessed increase from Rs. 26,282 crore to Rs. 39,123 
crore during the same period. The Committee are of the opinion that the taxes 
levied on petroleum products, specially on petrol and diesel are  on the higher 
side, and need a revision after making an evaluation of the prevailing oil pricing 
regime existing in the country and also making comparative assessment of the 
same with the systems prevailing in this regard in other countries. 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 Calibrated changes in excise duty rates on petroleum products have been 
done by the Government to provide much needed resources for infrastructure 
and other developmental item of expenditure keeping in view the present fiscal 
position. Reve nue from excise duty and cesses levied on these products has 
helped in generating the resources for development of infrastructure. Further on 
account of Covid -19 and its impact on the economy, the Government has 
undertaken a number of measures which requir ed additional resources. Also, in 
the Budget, 2021 -22, the Central Government imposed an Agriculture 
Infrastructure and Development Cess (AIDC) on petrol and diesel to finance the 
agriculture infrastructure. 

22 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 
 
 
Recommendation  No. 11 
 
2.11 The Committee are apprised that the Government has taken general as 
well as specific measures from time to time to mitigate the price rise. The general 
measures taken up include (i) advisories to States/UTs to take steps to keep 
prices of essential commodities including pulses, edible oil, etc. under control at 
various fora such as National Consultation meeting o f Ministers of States & UTs 
in-charge of Food and Consumer Affairs, (ii) advisories to State Governments for 
taking strict action against hoarding and black marketing under the Essential 
Commodities Act (EC Act), 1955 and the Prevention of Black -marketing and 
Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act (PBMSEC Act), 1980, 
wherever applicable, (iii) periodic review meeting on price and availability of 
essential commodities at the level of Ministers, Committee of Secretaries 
(COSs), Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC), Price Stabilization Fund Management 
Committee (PSFMC) and other Departmental level review meetings, and (iv) 
higher Minimum Support Price (MSP) to incentivize production and thereby 
enhance availability of food items. Among the specific m easures taken by the 
Government in respect of pulses are (i) creation of a buffer stock of 20.50 lakh 
tonnes of pulses through domestic procurement of 16.71 lakh tonnes and imports 
of 3.79 lakh tonnes, for appropriate market intervention, (ii) entering int o a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with Mozambigue, which resulted in 
import of 1.50 lakh metric tonnes (MT) of pulses during 2018 -19, (iii) ban on 
export of all pulses except kabuli chana, and (iv) allowing import of tur at import 
duty of 10%, channa a t 60% and masur at 50% due to improved production in 
2016-17. For controlling price of edible oils, Minimum Support Price was 
increased for oilseeds, export of edible oils was allowed only in branded 
consumer packs of up to 5 kg. with a minimum export pric e of US $ 900 per MT, 
and import duty on crude palm oil and soya oil were suitably adjusted to 
encourage domestic production of oilseeds. As for vegetables, (i) a buffer stock 
of 57,372.90 MT of onion was created under PSF through domestic procurement 
from Maharashtra and Gujarat, (ii) stock limit on traders across the country was 
imposed on 29 September, 2019, viz. 10 MT on retail traders and 50 MT on 
wholesale traders under EC Act, 1955, (iii) onions were supplied to Haryana, 
Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Ut tar Pradesh at no -profit, no-loss basis to improve 
availability, (iv) benefit to onion exporters under Merchandize Exports from India 
Scheme (MEIS) was withdrawn on 11.06.2019 and Minimum Export Price (MEP) 

23 
 
at $ 850/MT was imposed on 13.09.2019, (v) ban on  export of onions was 
imposed on 29 September, 2019, and (vi) stock limits were imposed across the 
country. The Committee desire the Government to continue to keep a close 
watch on the production, procurement and distribution aspects of all the 22 
essential commodities so that there are no scarcities in any part of the country. 
Buffer stocks may be created for these commodities (wherever applicable) in 
order to avoid artificial scarcities and thus limiting the avenues for price rise of 
such commodities and their costly imports. Further, given the fact that agricultural 
productivity is a key for price stability and control, the Department of Consumer 
Affairs may also impress upon the Ministry of Agriculture, Cooperation and 
Farmers Welfare the need for giving  impetus to increasing farm output and 
productivity at periodic review or consultative meetings held by the Government. 
 
Action taken by the Government 
 
2.12    The Government keeps a close watch on the production and availability 
of essential commodities through regular reviews by the IMC and CoS. These 
Committees reviewed, on regular basis, the situation of prices and price trends of 
essential agri-horticulture commodities, measures to enhance availability through 
increase domestic production and through imports. Ministry of Agricultureand 
Farmers Welfare (DAFW) is a major stakeholder in all these meetings and 
continues to undertake measures to increase production and productivity. 
Buffer stock of pulses and onion has been maintained for price stabilizatio n in 
2020-21 and 2021 -22. Though pulses buffer is built primarily by transferring 
stocks procured under the Price Support Scheme (PSS) of the Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DAFW), procurement had also been 
undertaken directly under the Pric e Stabilisation Fund (PSF) as and when 
required. The procurement for the buffer gives support to farmers and disposal 
from the buffer cools down retail prices for consumers. Calibrated release of 
pulses and onions from the buffer has been initiated to moderate the prices in the 
market. Apart from open market releases, onions from the buffer have been 
offered to States/UTs @ Rs.21 per kg. for supplies to the retail consumers. 
The Department introduced Retail Intervention Mechanism in September, 2020 
as another channel of market intervention to moderate prices, in addition to the 
existing open market sale (OMS) route of disposal. The retail intervention 
mechanism targets a direct and immediate impact on retail prices by offering 
pulses at discounted prices to States/UTs for supply through retail outlets such 
as FPS, Dairy & Horticulture outlets, Consumer Cooperative Society outlets etc. 
During 2020-21, a total of 81,201 MT of milled Tur has been supplied to States 
and 2.03 LMT of Tur whole was disposed through OMS to cool down the prices. 

24 
 
In 2020-21, 1 LMT onion buffer was created and the stocks were released from 
September, 2020 both through OMS and supplies to States/UTs and 
Government agencies such as Safal, KendriyaBhandar etc. for making the 
onions to retai l consumers.Ban on export of onion was imposed from 14 th 
September, 2020 to 31st December, 2020, and stock limit was imposed under EC 
Act, 1955from 23.10.2020 to 31 st December, 2020. For 2021-22, the onion buffer 
has been increased to 2 LMT to ensure effec tive market intervention to moderate 
prices. 
In order to ensure smooth and seamless import of pulses to augment domestic 
availability Tur, Urad and Moong have been shifted from Restricted to Free 
category from 15 th May, 2021 till 31 st October, 2021 which w as subsequently 
extended to 31 st December, 2021 in respect of Tur and Urad. In respect of 
Masur,the basic import duty and Agriculture Infrastructure and Development 
Cess have been brought down to zero and 10% respectively. The Memorandum 
of Understanding ( MoU) with Mozambique has been extended for another 5 
years (till March, 2026) for annual import of 2 LMT Tur. In addition, 5 -year MoUs 
have been signed with Myanmar for annual import of 2.5 LMT of Urad and 1 LMT 
of Tur, and with Malawi for annual import of 0.50 LMT of Tur. 
All above policy interventions have been made by Government to augment 
availability of pulses and cool down retail prices. 
To soften the prices of edible oils, the basic duty on edible crude oils viz.,Crude 
Palm Oil, Crude Sunflower Oil a nd Crude Soyabean oils have been rationalised 
to bring the effective duty to 24.75% for each of these crude oils. Similarly, basic 
import duty on Refined Sunflower oil, Refined Soyabean oil and Refined RBD 
Palmolein oil have been rationalised to bring the effective duty to 35.75% for 
each of these refined oils. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
2.13 The Com mittee note that the Price Monitoring Division (PMD), set up in 
1998, was initially tasked with monitoring prices of 14 essential food items across 
18 centres in the country. The number of Price Reporting Centres (PRCs) has 
increased to 122, while the cove rage of commodities monitored by PMD has 
expanded to 22, viz. five item groups, namely, Cereals (Rice & Wheat), Pulses 
(Gram, Tur, Urad, Moong, Masur), Edible Oils (Groundnut Oil, Mustard Oil, 
Vanaspati, Soya Oil, Sunflower Oil, Palm Oil), Vegetables (Pota to, Onion, 
Tomato), and other items (Atta, Sugar, Gur, Milk, Tea and Salt), The examination 

25 
 
of the subject has revealed that while the number of PRCs in the country has 
increased to 122, the number of PRCs in some States are less in number. For 
example, th e States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Jharkhand, Manipur, 
Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura have only a single Price Reporting Centre each. 
Delhi NCT and UT of Chandigarh also have one PRC each. Some bigger States 
like Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Kar nataka, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and 
Uttarakhand have only four PRCs each; and Punjab has only 3 PRCs. The 
Committee desire that an evaluation of the adequacy of the number of Price 
Reporting Centres may be made by the Government to make an overall 
assessment of the functioning and performance of these Centres with a view to 
increasing the number of PRCs, where needed. The Committee also note that 
one PRC, at Kohima (Nagaland) has been discontinued due to irregular and 
inconsistent reporting and they desire t he Government to take urgent steps to 
ascertain the problems faced by this PRC in order to take corrective measures to 
revive it without any loss of time. Noting further that 106 PRCs had been 
provided financial assistance for procuring Desktop Computer, M ultipurpose 
Printer (only black and white) -cum-Scanner-Photocopier-Fax machine, UPS, 
Handheld device with geotagging facilities, etc. as per guidelines of the Scheme 
for Strengthening of Price Monitoring Cell, the Committee recommend that the 
Government should make concerted efforts to ensure that the remaining PRCs 
are also provided with the needed financial assistance to procure these 
equipments and hardware to enable them 80 to carry out the task of monitoring 
of essential commodities in an efficient man ner. The Committee desire to be 
apprised of action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.14     The number of price reporting centres has increased from 114 in 2019 -
20 to 135 in 2020-21, and further to 167 as on 30.09.2021. Apart from increasing  
the number of price reporting centres, the Department has achieved significant 
improvement in the quality of price reporting by operationalising Mobile App for 
price reporting from 1 st January, 2021. Daily price report through Mobile App 
ensures, through geotagging of data, that prices are reported from the 
market/shop location, minimize possible human errors and improved the ease of 
price reporting. 
The Department is in constant interaction with the States/UTs, including 
Nagaland, for proposing additional  price reporting centres, improving the 
functioning of the centres and on other issues such as price data discrepancies, 
regularity, utilization of funds released for the centres etc. The Government of 
Nagaland has also been specifically requested to reviv e the Kohima price 
reporting centre. 

26 
 
The scheme, 'Strengthening of Price Monitoring Cell’, has been subjected to 
evaluation, appraisal and approval for continuation during the 15 th Finance 
Commission award period. Accordingly, the guidelines under which fi nancial 
assistances are provided to the States/UTs for price reporting centres has also 
been subjected to revision in accordance with the approved scheme. As per the 
modified guidelines States/UTs are eligible for Grant -in aid for remuneration of 
Data Entr y Operator, Smart Phone, Sim Card/ Data Card and for conducting 
training/Seminar/Workshop for better price reporting and monitoring. The details 
of item-wise admissible financial assistance is as below: 
Item / Component Norms /rate of assistance 
(in Rs.) 
Periodicity 
of 
assistance  
1) Remuneration of contractual 
employee  
Rs. 288000  
@ 24000 PM/Per DEO Annual  
2)Smart phone Rs.10,000 2 years 
3)Sim card / data card Rs.6,000  Annual  
B) Conducting Training 
/Workshop/Seminar/Conference in 
State/UT 
Rs.1,00,000  Annual  
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
 
2.15 The Department of Consumer Affairs apprised the Committee that to 
stabilize the prices of essential food items, the Government has taken various 
measures from time to time, including (i) appropriately utilizing trade and fiscal 
policy instruments like import duty, Minimum Export Price (MEP), export 
restrictions, etc. to regulate domestic availability and moderate prices; (ii) 
imposition of stock limits and advising States for effective action against hoarders 
and black marketeers; (iii) provision of higher Minimum Support Prices (MSP) to 
incentivize farmers for increasing production. In this regard, the Committee note 
that a new scheme called ‘Operation Greens’ was introduced by the Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries for integrated development of Tomato, Onion and 
Potato (TDP) value chain, with an out lay of Rs. 500 crore to promote Farmer 
Producers Organizations (FPOs), agri -logistics, processing facilities and 
professional management. The Committee believe that Operation Greens 
besides benefiting the farmers, will go a long way in 81 augmenting domest ic 

27 
 
production and availability of tomato, onion and potato in the country, thereby 
stabilizing and moderating their prices for the benefit of the consumers. The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Government to take concerted steps to closely 
monitor the prog ress of ‘Operation Greens’ scheme across the States/UTs. The 
Government may also make an evaluation of the progress of the scheme and 
make enhanced financial allocation for the scheme, if required. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.16     Operation Greens Scheme  was announced in the Union Budget for 
2018-19 with financial outlays of Rs. 500 crores to promote FPOs, agri -logistics, 
processing facilities and professional management for Tomato, Onion and Potato 
(TOP) crops. The Scheme was launched in November 2018 on  a pilot basis with 
the objective to promote setting up of Integrated Value Chain Development 
Project for TOP crops in the selected clusters. Along with, secondary processing 
facilities, the scheme envisage investment in farm gate infrastructure for primar y 
processing/storages facilities. Farmer in this production clusters are being 
organized in to FPOs to manage production, adopt processable or dual use 
variety of crops, engage in post-harvest activity, value additions and marketing of 
TOP produce. 
Brief of the scheme 
Strategies of Scheme: The scheme has two -pronged strategy of Price 
stabilization measures (for short term) and value chain development projects (for 
long term). 
(i) Short term: price stabilization measures (Transportation & Storage – 50% 
subsidy) - During the glut situation at the time of harvest, evacuation of surplus 
production from the producing area to the consumption centers and subsidy is 
provided at the rate of 50% on transportation and storage. 
OG-TOP to TOTAL: The scope of short term measu res under Operation Greens 
scheme was extended from TOP to TOTAL (41 notified fruits and vegetables) 
w.e.f. 11.06.2020 as a part of Aatmanirbhar Bharat Package announcement by 
Hon’ble Finance Minister due to supply chain disruption amid Covid pandemic, 
based on SFC recommendation, by Minister, FPI on 10.06.2020.  
• Guidelines for providing 50% freight subsidy for movement of notified fruits 
and vegetables through Kisan Rail notified on 12.10.2020. Subsequently, 
Ministry allowed transport subsidy on any Fruit & Vegetable through Kisan 
rail service provided by Indian Railways.  
• Guidelines for providing 50% Air freight subsidy for movement of notified 
fruits & vegetables from NER and Himalayan States issued on 02.11.2020. 

28 
 
Subsequently, Ministry allowed transport subsidy on any Fruit & Vegetable 
through air from NER and Himalayan States. 
• Guidelines for providing 50% subsidy to eligible entities through NAFED for 
transportation and/or storage of apple from Jammu and Kashmir, issued on 
27.11.2020.  
 
(ii) Long term: Value chain development Projects -Projects are implemented in 
identified clusters for TOP crops in major producing States for development of 
value chain. Farmers in the production clusters are being organized into FPOs to 
manage production, post -harvest activitie s, value addition and marketing of the 
TOP produce. Grant -in-aid is provided on an average @ 50% of eligible project 
cost /70% in case of SC/ST/FPOs. So far six projects have been sanctioned 
under the scheme and are under implementation stage and the detai ls of the 
same are provided in the table below: 
Integrated value chain development projects Sanctioned under Operation Greens 
(Rs. in Cr) 
S. 
No
. 
Name of PIA Location of 
Cluster 
Name of 
Crop 
Approval 
date 
Total 
Project 
Cost 
Grant-
in-aid 
1 M/s Andhra Pradesh 
Food Processing 
Society 
Chittor, 
Anantapur, 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Tomato 20.03.2019 109.99 48.82 
2 M/s Nedspice 
Dehydration India 
LLP 
Bhavnagar, 
Gujarat 
Onion 20.03.2019 63.64 25.22 
3 M/s Khemanand 
Dudh & Krishi 
Producer Company 
Ltd 
Ahmednagar, 
Maharashtra 
Onion 08.01.2020 31.33 14.60 
4 M/s Banaskantha 
District Cooperative 
Producer Union Ltd 
Banaskantha, 
Gujarat 
 
Potato 08.01.2020 103.87 30.56 
5 M/s Vangi Foods Kheda, Gujarat Tomato 05.03.2020 18.50 4.51 
6 M/s Smartagri 
Agroville 
Nashik, 
Maharashtra 
Onion 03.02.2021 35.97 13.11 
Total 363.30 136.82 
 
Budget Announcement 2021 -22: In pursuance of budget announcement 2021 -
22, the scope of long term strategy i.e. Value Chain Development Projects under 
Operation Greens Scheme is go ing to be expanded from TOP to Twenty -Two 
Perishable products in order to boost value addition in agriculture and allied 
products and their exports.   
 

29 
 
The list of 19 perishable products identified in addition to TOP crops with the 
approval of Hon’ble Minister, FPI is as under. 
Fruits (10):     Mango, Banana, Apple, Pineapple, Kinnow/Mandarin/Orange, 
Grapes, Aonla/Amla, Pomegranate, Gvava, Litchi. 
Vegetables (8): Peas, Carrot, Cauliflower, Beans, Bitter gourd, Okra, Garlic, 
Ginger.              
Marine (1):          Shrimp.  
Strategy for implementation of budget announcement 2021-22 is as under: - 
i. Production clusters will be identified for perishable products on the basis 
of production data of Horticulture Division, M/o Agriculture and validation by 
respective States and other stakeholders. 
ii. Gaps in the value chain will be identified by conducting Infrastructure Gap 
Assessment Studies in selected production clusters. 
iii. In parallel, scheme guidelines are being drafted. 
iv. The intervention by Ministry would be limited  to fill those gaps in value 
chain of 22 perishables to reduce the post -harvest losses and increase sales 
realization for farmers. Other concerned Ministries, State Governments and 
their Institutions etc. would also be requested to fill those gaps in the v alue 
chain. 
Details of Expenditure Since beginning 
      ₹ in Crore 
Year BE RE AE 
2018-19 0 200 5.50  
2019-20 200 32.48 2.84  
2020-21 127.5 38.21 38.21  
2021-22 73.4 - 39.80  
Total Expenditure till date  86.35  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para  No. 1.7 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
 

30 
 
2.17 The Committee note that there are 12 Marketing Intelligence Units (MIUs) 
under the Directorate of Economics & Statistics (DES), Ministry of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare, which report prices of 176 agricultural commodities from 
wholesale markets spread across the country. The wholesale prices are collected 
during the peak hours of transaction every Friday, and DES maintains these 
weekly wholesale prices reported by MIUs and provides the same as inputs for 
various meetings, assessing the agricultural price situation in the  country for 
policy/decision making and to the Department for the promotion of Industry and 
Internal Trade (DPIIT), Ministry of Commerce and Industry for the computation of 
Wholesale Price Index (WPI). In cases of abnormal price movements of 
agricultural commodities, the MIUs are directed immediately to submit reports on 
those agricultural commodities subjected to price volatility. The Committee desire 
the Government to take suitable steps for strengthening the organization and 
functioning of marketing inte lligence in the country, by streamlining the work of 
DES and 12 Market Intelligence Units as well as by increasing the number of 
MIUs presently operating across the country.  
The Committee are also disappointed to note the Department’s reply that no 
record is maintained about the details of key decisions taken as a result of 
feedback received from Price Monitoring Division (PMD) since its inception. The 
Committee expect and desire the Department to keep track of at least the details 
of key decisions taken b y the Government based on feedback received from 
PMD for making necessary reference and evaluation vis -à-vis their 
implementation aspects as and when called for.  
Noting further that 17 meetings of Reconstituted Price Stabilization Fund 
Management Committe e (PSFMC), 35 meetings of Inter -Ministerial Committee 
(IMC), 9 meetings of Committee of Secretaries (CoS) on review of prices of 
essential commodities, 2 meetings of Committee of Ministers and 35 meetings on 
weekly review of management of buffer stock unde r PSF were held during 2019, 
the Committee desire that the Government should hold such meetings more 
frequently at the highest level of the Government, if required, and take corrective, 
follow-up measures for controlling and moderating the prices of essent ial 
commodities in the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.18     This has been noted. The daily report of prices and indicative price 
trends duly analysed by the PMD forms an important input for deliberations by 
the PSFMC, IMC and CoS for taking appropri ate decisions for release of stocks 
from the buffer, export -import policy etc. Apart from prices, PMD also analysed 

31 
 
the historical production, mandi arrivals and availability of agri -horticulture 
commodities status and trends and their correlation with pri ce levels and trends 
to arrive at indicative availability and price situation for the near future. The 
overall quantum of market releases of onions from the buffer are guided by the 
price situation and targeting of the releases are guided by prevailing pri ces in 
major mandis and consuming centres on the basis of reports from PMD. 
Increasing trend in Tur prices from September, 2020 reported by PMD formed 
the basis for open market release of 2.03 LMT and offers to States/UTs under 
retail intervention mechanis m for supply to retail consumers during October, 
2020 to February, 2021 which brought about salubrious impact on Tur prices. 
The analysis of annual variability of pulses against the retail prices constitutes an 
important input for determining import policy  such as deciding the quantity of 
annual import quota, shifting import of Tur, Urad and Moong from Restricted 
category to Free category for certain period to facilitate seamless import of these 
pulses, and reduction in effective duty on Masur.  
The meetings of PSFMC, IMC and CoS are held on a regular basis. In 2021, 29 
IMC meetings, 12 CoS meetings and 2 PSFMC meetings have been held till 
date. The PSFMC is concerned with the management and implementation of the 
Price Stabilisation Fund for which major poli cy decisions are taken based on the 
deliberations and decision at the level IMC and CoS. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
 
2.19 The Committee note that the Price Stabilization Fund (PSF) was set up in 
the year 2014-15, which advances interest-free loans to State Governments/UTs 
and Central Agencies to support their working capital and other expenses that 
they might incur on procurement and distribution interventions for the 
prescribed/stipulated commodities. The PSF is centrally managed by the Price 
Stabilization Fund Management Committee (PSFMC), which will approve all 
proposals from the State Governments a nd Central Agencies. The Committee 
desire that the proposals received by PSFMC should be processed within a fixed 
time frame and funds released with a view to moderating volatility in prices of 

32 
 
commodities like onions, potatoes and pulses to prevent rise i n prices and 
scarcity. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.20     The Central Corpus Fund for price stabilization is available for providing 
interest free working capital to the States/UTs for market intervention for price 
control based on proposal for creating Sta te-level Price Stabilisation Fund 
submitted to the PSFMC. The State level Corpus is created with a sharing 
pattern between GoI and State in the ratio of 50: 50, and 75:25 in case the North 
Eastern States.Centre's share is released in 2 equal instalments. 
Till date Department of Consumer Affairs has released funds to six State 
Governments for setting up a State Level PSF. Details of release are as under: 
State 
Total PSF 
Fund 
requirement 
(₹crore) 
State's 
Share 
(₹crore) 
Centre's Share Released(₹crore) 
1st instalment 2nd 
instalment Total 
Andhra Pradesh 100 50 25 
(2015-16) 
25 
(2017-18) 
50 
Telangana 18.31 9.15 4.575 
(2015-16) 
4.575 
(2015-16) 
9.15 
West Bengal 10 5 2.50 
(2015-16) 
- 2.50 
Odisha 100 50 25 
(2018-19) 
- 25 
Tamil Nadu 10 5 2.50 
(2019-20) 
- 2.50 
Assam 200 50 75 
(2019-20) 
- 75 
Total Released 164.15 
 
The Department is continuously taking up with the State/UTs to create State 
Level PSF through letters and in meetings such as the National Consultation 
Meeting of Ministers of States/UTs in -charge of Food, Civil Supplies and 
Consumer Affairs, Zonal Conferences on Price Monitoring and regular VC 
meetings on Price Monitoring with the States and UTs. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 

33 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 16 
 
2.21 The Committee observe that the Public Distribution System (PDS) has 
evolved as a syst em for distribution of foodgrains at affordable prices in the 
country. In June, 1997, the Government introduced ‘Targeted Public Distribution 
System’ (TPDS) to focus on the poor, followed by a scheme called ‘Antyodaya 
Anna Yojana’ (AAY) introduced in Decem ber, 2000 which aims to make TPDS 
more focused and targeted to poor and the poorest of poor. About 2.5 crore 
households are presently covered under AAY across the country. Under National 
Food Security Act (NFSA) enacted in 2013, eligible households/benefic iaries 
comprise of Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) households and persons belonging 
to Priority Households (PHH) categories. AAY households, which constitute the 
poorest-of-thepoor, are entitled to receive 35 kg of foodgrains per household, 
whereas households covered under PHH category are entitled to receive 5 kg of 
foodgrains per person per month at highly subsidized prices of Rs. 3/2/1 per kg 
for rice/wheat/coarse grains respectively. The Committee note that TPDS is 
presently operated under the joint respons ibility of the Central and the State 
Governments, where the Central Government has assumed the responsibility of 
procurement, storage, transportation and allocation of foodgrains to all 
States/UTs and the operational responsibility of allocation of foodgra ins within 
States/UTs, identification of eligible families under NFSA, issuance of ration 
cards, distribution of foodgrains through Fair Price Shops (FPSs) and licensing 
and monitoring of FPSs, etc. rests with the respective State/UT Governments. 
The Committee desire the Government to put in place an institutional mechanism 
for robust monitoring of TPDS for increasing its efficiency and utility. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.22     Institutional mechanism for robust monitoring of TPDS is already 
provided for u nder the Chapter XI of the National Food Security Act (NFSA), 
2013 and mandates all State/UT Governments to conduct periodic social audits 
on the functioning of the Targeted Public Distribution System including the fair 
price shops. Accordingly, the States /UTs are periodically instructed to conduct 
the social audits in this regard. 
28. (1) Every local authority, or any other authority or body, as may be authorised 
by the State Government, shall conduct or cause to be conducted, periodic social 
audits on the functioning of fair price shops, Targeted Public Distribution System 
and other welfare schemes, and cause to publicise its findings and take 

34 
 
necessary action, in such manner as may be prescribed by the State 
Government. 
Further, the National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) also provides that  
1. For ensuring transparency and proper functioning of the Targeted Public 
Distribution System and accountability of the functionaries in such system, 
every State Government shall set up Vigilance Committees as specified in the 
Public Distribution System (Control) Order, 2001, made under the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955, as amended from time to time, at the State, District, 
Block and fair price shop levels consisting of such persons, as may be 
prescribed by the State Go vernment giving due representation to the local 
authorities, the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, women and destitute 
persons or persons with disability. 
2. The Vigilance Committees shall perform the following functions, namely: 
— 
(a) regularly supervise the implementation of all schemes under this Act; 
(b) inform the District Grievance Redressal Officer, in writing, of any violation 
of 
the provisions of this Act; and 
(c) inform the District Grievance Redressal Officer, in writing, of any 
malpractice or misappropriation of funds found by it. 
 
Further, the Targeted Public Distribution System (Control) Order, 2015 provides 
that the State Government shall set up vigilance committees for the Targeted 
Public Distribution System at the State, District, Block a nd fair price shop levels 
as per the provisions of the Food Security Act to perform functions as specified in 
the said Act. Meetings of the vigilance committees shall be held at least once 
every quarter at all levels and the date and periodicity of the mee ting shall be 
notified by the State Governments and given wide publicity. The State 
Government shall send a report annually to the Central Government on the 
functioning of vigilance committees. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 17 
 

35 
 
2.23 The Committee note that in order to bring in reforms in the functioning of 
Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) and also to bring transparency in the 
distribution of highly subsidized foodgrains across the country, the Department is 
implementing a scheme called ‘End -to-End Computerization of  Targeted Public 
Distribution System (TPDS) Operations’ entailing key activities under its 
Component-I, like, (a) digitization of ration cards/beneficiary database, (b) online 
allocation of foodgrains for system -generated allocation orders to bring 
transparency in allocation of foodgrains, up to the Fair Price Shops (FPSs) level, 
(c) Computerization of Supply Chain Management for ensuring timely availability 
of foodgrains at all FPSs, (d) Online grievance redressal/toll -free helplines and 
transparency porta ls, (e) automation of Fair Price Shops (FPSs) by installing 
electronic Point of Sale (ePoS) devices for transparent foodgrain distribution and 
biometric/Aadhaar authentication for unique identification of genuine 
beneficiaries under NFSA. In this connectio n, the Committee are happy to learn 
that under the scheme of ‘Integrated Management of Public Distribution System 
(IM-PDS) being implemented by the Department of Consumer Affairs in all 
States/UTs, financial assistance of Rs. 50.96 crore (40%) has been rel eased to 
31 States/UTs, NIC etc., after fulfillment of some requisite conditions. The 
Committee are also encouraged to note that, presently, at the national level, 
about 90% ration cards have been seeded with Aadhaar number of atleast one 
member of the hou sehold, whereas at the beneficiary level the Aadhaar seeding 
is about 86% at the national level. Further, online allocation of foodgrains upto 
FPS levels has started in all States/UTs except three UTs, namely, Chandigarh, 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli (Urban) and  Puducherry where the Direct Benefit 
Transfer (DBT)/Cash Transfer pilot is under way. The Committee hope and 
expect that the Government will endeavor to achieve its target of 100% Aadhaar 
seeding of ration cards across all the States/UTs in a time bound ma nner by 
making concerted efforts in the matter and also by engaging proactively with all 
the States/UTs which have not made good progress in this work. The Committee 
also desire the Government to take urgent steps to install ePoS devices in all 
Fair Price Shops (FPSs) as envisaged under the scheme of ‘End -to-End 
Computerization of Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) Operations’ in 
the country. The success of all these efforts would undoubtedly lead to removal 
of loopholes in the functioning of TPDS, viz. removal of bogus cards, 
leakage/diversion of foodgrains, and ensure quick grievance redressal, bringing 
in transparency and accountability in distribution of foodgrains in the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.24     The Department is regularly pur suing and is engaging proactively with 
the States/UTs to achieve 100% Aadhaar seeding of ration cards and for the 
installation of ePoS devices in all Fair Price Shops (FPSs). 

36 
 
Recently, UT of Delhi has achieved 100% Aadhaar seeding in Ration Cards and 
reported 100% FPS automation with installation of ePoS devices for transparent 
distribution of foodgrains under TPDS. 
Govt of West Bengal also reported that Aadhaar seeding of all ration cards is 
being taken up aggressively in the State by organising special dr ives for Aadhaar 
seeding including door to door campaign for the same. West Bengal already 
achieved 100% FPS Automation and started biometric authentication. Delhi and 
West Bengal have enabled ONORC w.e.f. July and August 2021 respectively. 
The State of As sam is also focusing on Aadhaar enrolment of its population and 
currently Aadhaar enrolment has increased to about 68.90% of the population 
and Aadhaar seeding in Ration Card has been completed in 28.3% Ration 
Cards. However, there are 28 lakh persons in t he State whose Aadhaar 
enrolment is on hold due to an ongoing litigation in the Hon’ble Supreme Court. 
The State has opened around 5000 Aadhaar enrolment centres and is 
encouraging the people to go for Aadhaar enrolment. The State plans to 
complete Aadhaar  enrolment of all persons in the State (except the above 
mentioned 28 lakhs person) by the end of this year. For FPS automation, the 
State Govt has placed an order for installation of ePOS devices at all FPS and is 
targeting to complete the installation of  ePOS devices in its FPSs by 31 -Dec-
2021. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 
 
Recommendation No. 18 
 
2.25 The Committee note that the Department is implementing a Central Sector 
Scheme, namely, ‘Integrated Management of Public Distribution System’ (IM -
PDS) in all States/UTs since April, 2018 with the objective to implement nation -
wide portability of ration cards under which eligib le households/beneficiaries 
covered under NFSA shall be able to draw entitled foodgrains from any FPS of 
their choice using their existing/same ration cards through the ‘One Nation, One 
Ration Card’ plan. The Committee note that upto December, 2020, the fa cility of 
portability of ration card under ‘One Nation, One Ration Card’ plan has been 
seamlessly enabled in 32 States/UTs covering about 69 crore beneficiaries (86% 
of NFSA population) to access their NFSA foodgrains/benefit anywhere in these 
States/UTs v iz. Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Bihar, Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, Goa, 
Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 

37 
 
Kerala, Ladakh, Lakshadweep, Madhya Pradesh, Maharash tra, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Odisha, Puducherry, Punjab, Rajasthan, 
Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Telengana, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand, and 
that at present almost about 1.3 to 1.5 crore monthly portability transactions 
under ‘One Nation, One Ration Card’ (including intra -State transactions) are 
being consistently recorded in these States/UTs. The Committee believe that this 
scheme would undoubtedly benefit large sections of the population, specially the 
country’s migratory population, and that concerted efforts should be made to fully 
implement such a system in all the States/UTs, after making consultations with 
the concerned States/UTs. The Committee further recommend that efforts 
regarding implementation of the scheme of Integrated Manage ment of Public 
Distribution System (IM -PDS) also be taken up with intra -State emphasis to 
ensure portability of ration cards in all the States/UTs of the country as well. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.26     ONORC is now enabled in 34 States/UTs (excluding Assam and 
Chhattisgarh). Work is underway on enabling ONORC in Assam and 
Chhattisgarh. 
Assam Govt has started the work on implementation of ONORC and has placed 
an order for install ation of ePOS devices at all 33,987 FPS for this purpose, out 
of which 100 ePOS devices have been installed and are undergoing testing. 
Similarly, in Chhattisgarh, work is underway on implementing ONORC for which 
the old ePOS devices at all FPS (12000 appr ox.) are getting replaced with new 
ePOS devices compliant with specifications, out of which around 200 ePOS 
devices have been replaced. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 
 
Recommendation No. 19 
 
2.27 The Committee note that the Food Corporation of India (FCI) sells excess 
stocks of wheat and rice from the Central Pool (accumulated due to open -ended 
procurement to support farmers) at pre -determined prices in the open market 
under ‘Open Market Sale Scheme’ (OMSS) through e -tender to enhance the 
supply, specially during the lean season in the deficit regions and thereby to 
moderate the open market prices. The OMSS (D) 2020 -21 policy was issued on 

38 
 
21.04.2020 to encourage retail sale, and it has been decided to sell wheat to 
small (private) traders desirous of purchasing wheat from 1 - 9 MT per person per 
depot from nominated FCI/State Agency depot at the reserve price under OMSS 
(D) duri ng 2020 -21 without participation in e -auction. Sale of wheat will be 
undertaken throughout the year upto 31.03.2021 in all procuring / non -procuring 
States. Sale of rice under OMSS (D) may be undertaken even in surplus/ deficit 
procuring States during proc urement of paddy/ rice, on the request of State 
Governments only, for meeting their additional requirements. The Committee 
desire the Government to ensure transparency and continuity in the operation of 
OMSS Scheme in the country. They also desire that eff orts be made to curb the 
tendencies of big business houses to procure essential commodities in bulk, 
thereby causing artificial shortages in market and jacking up their prices by taking 
penal actions under EC Act, 1955 and rules made thereunder. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.28     Under OMSS(D) Policy, FCI offload excess stock of wheat and rice 
which is above buffer stocking norms in the open market. There is a Committee 
constituted by the Government consisting of Secretary(Expenditure), 
Secretary(Food and P ublic Distribution), Secretary(Consumer Affairs) and 
Secretary(Commerce) to recommend quantity and price at which foodgrain 
stocks in excess of buffer and strategic norms are to be offloaded.  Considering 
huge surplus stocks of food grains in central pool stocks over and above the 
buffer requirement, on which Govt. has been incurring huge carrying cost and 
also to  avoid deterioration in quality of these food grains and to boost up 
sale, OMSS(D) Policy is reviewed and modified time to time. OMSS (D) policy   
for the year 2021 -22 for sale of excess  stocks of wheat and rice i.e. above 
stocking buffer norms, to bulk consumers/State Governments/UTs in the open 
market is issued on 30.04.2021. In view of resurgence of COVID-19 situation and 
to ease process of sale f or the State govts/UTs, FCI will give option to State 
Govts/UTs to lift stocks with or without e-auction at reserve price. 
(i) Reserve price of wheat for sale in the open market are fixed as under: 
1 Wheat URS of RMS 2019-20 Rs.1800/- per qtl.  (Pan India) 
2 Wheat URS of  RMS 2020-21 Rs. 2000/- per qtl.  (Pan India ) 
3 Wheat FAQ all crop years except of 
RMS  2021-22 
Rs. 2100/- per qtl.  (Pan India ) 
4 Wheat FAQ of RMS 2021-22 Rs. 2150/- per qtl.  (Pan India ) 
  
(ii)  The above reserve price for all cate gories of wheat will be kept uniform 
throughout the country without adding any further freight in order to scale up  the 

39 
 
sales and also to facilitate buyers to lift stocks from any place at ease without 
their dependence on the railways to move their stocks to their desired location. 
(iii)  Reserve price of rice for sale in the open market is fixed as under: 
Rice all crop years Rs. 2000/ - qtl. (Pan India ) for State and Central govts 
schemes/ programmes and for pvt. parties also participating 
in the ethanol production under biofuel policy. 
Rs.2200/qtls for  other Private Parties except for those who 
participate in OMC tenders for production of ethanol for 
whom reserve price is Rs. 2000/qtl 
  
Further, vide letter no. 1 -1/2020-Py.IV(E-370750) dated 30.04.2021, it is 
conveyed that retail scheme introduced vide Letter no 1 -1/2020-Py.IV(E-
370750),dated 21.04.2020  will continue till 31st  March 2022 or till further order, 
whichever is later. These schemes are as under:  
(i) To encourage retail sale, it has, therefor e, been decided to sell wheat to small 
(private) traders desirous of purchasing wheat from 1 -9 MT per person per depot 
from nominated FCI/ State Agency depots under OMSS(D) without participation 
in e-auction at the rate of Rs. 21/ kg for wheat. 
(ii) A reta il scheme for sale of wheat and rice to State Governments /UTs has 
been introduced under OMSS(D). Under this scheme, State/UT Governments 
may lift the allocated quantity of wheat and rice from the godowns of FCI and 
distribute it to retail consumers throug h their own Corporations/ cooperatives/ 
federations/ self -help groups or any other Government or Semi -Government 
organization. Similarly allocations to institutions like NAFED/NCCF/Kendriya 
Bhandar for sale to retail consumers for checking inflationary tre nd in food 
economy and to small processors may be considered. Accordingly, for this 
scheme, FCI may send proposal to this Department for necessary allocation to 
State Governments/ institutions like NAFED/NCCF/Kendriya Bhandar at the  rate 
of Rs. 21/ kg for wheat and Rs. 22/kg for rice. 
For avoiding situation of monopolizing sale under OMSS(D) 2021-22, by big 
business houses, following provisions are available under the Policy: 
(a)   Minimum and maximum quantity of wheat that a private buyer can bid is 10 
MT (in multiple of 10) and 5000 MT respectively. The maximum quantity for State 
Govt. Agencies in one tender is 50,000 MT. The minimum and maximum quantity 
of Rice that a bulk consumer/trader can bid in an e-auction is 50 MT and 3500 
MT respectively. The maximum quantity of rice that a State Govt. can bid in 
single e-auction is 50,000 MT. 

40 
 
(b) A decision has been conveyed to FCI that region/location wise quantity to be 
offered for sale under OMSS(D) 2021-22 may be notified on FCI’s website to 
make the process of sale more transparent. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 
 
Recommendation No. 20 
 
2.29 The Committee note that under the ‘Nat ional Food Security Mission’ 
(NFSM) launched in 2007 -08 and being implemented in identified districts of 28 
States and 2 Union Territories (UTs), the country achieved considerable 
increases in output of foodgrains during the period from 2014 -15 to 2018-19, viz. 
105.48 million tonnes to 116.48 million tonnes for rice, 86.53 million tonnes to 
103.60 million tonnes for wheat, 17.15 million tonnes to 22.07 million tonnes for 
pulses, and 42.86 million tonnes to 43.06 million tonnes for nutritional/coarse 
cereals. The total projected production for these foodgrains during 2019 -20 as 
per second advance estimate are 117.48 million tonnes, 106.21 million tonnes, 
23.02 million tonnes, and 45.24 million tonnes, for rice, wheat, pulses and 
nutritional/coarse cereals, re spectively, whereas the allocation for NFSM made 
for 2020 -21 is Rs. 1600.00 crore (BE). The Committee are convinced that 
enhancement of production of foodgrains comprising rice, wheat, pulses and 
coarse cereals is sine qua non for achieving enhanced availa bility of foodgrains 
for buffer stock and for the consumers, thereby contributing to stability of 
foodgrain prices in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Famers Welfare (Crops Division) may be impressed 
upon to spare no efforts in implementation of NFSM for achieving bumper output 
of foodgrains, thereby leading to moderating the prices of these food items for 
the benefit of the consumers of the country. They also hope and desire the 
Government to take necess ary steps to ensure that the allocation of Rs. 1600 
crore made for 2020 -21 is fully utilized, enabling the NFSM to achieve higher 
output of foodgrains, pulses and nutri/coarse cereals in the country. The 
Government should make a review/evaluation of the pe rformance of NFSM, and 
also take further necessary steps with a view to strengthening the mission. The 
Committee would like to be informed of the steps taken by the Government in 
this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.30     NFSM is being implemented sinc e 2007-08 in identified districts of 28 
States & 2 Union Territories (UTs) by the Crops Division, Department of 

41 
 
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare with the objective of increasing 
foodgrain production through area expansion and productivity impro vement. 
 Under NFSM, support is given for promotion of crops viz., rice, wheat, pulses, 
nutri cereals (jowar, bajra, ragi& small millets), coarse cereals (maize & barley) 
and commercial crops (cotton, jute & sugarcane). Assistance is given to the 
farmers, through States/Union Territories (UTs), for interventions like seed 
production, cluster demonstration on production and protection technology, 
certified seed distribution of newly released varieties/hybrids, integrated nutrient 
and pest management, distrib ution of plant protection chemicals, bio -pesticides, 
soil ameliorants, water saving devices like sprinkler sets, irrigation pipes, 
pumpsets and raingun, improved farm implements/tools etc., and trainings to 
farmers. The mission also provides support to Ind ian Council of Agricultural 
research (ICAR) & State Agriculture Universities (SAUs)/KrishiVigyanKendras 
(KVKs) for technology back stopping and transfer of technology to the farmer 
under supervision of Subject Matter Specialists/Scientists. The research 
organizations are supported for undertaking research projects that can help 
enhancing production and productivity of crops. 
Despite the devastating covid -19 pandemic, efforts were made by the 
Government to implement the mission in an efficient way and utiliz ation of 
1208.93 crores was ensured during the year 2020-21. Further, the government is 
focusing mainly on Pulses and Nutri Cereals and various initiatives are being 
undertaken to achieve bumper output of foodgrain crops.   
The Development Monitoring and E valuation Office (DMEO) of NITI Aayog has 
conducted the impact evaluation of NFSM scheme through Deloitte Touch 
Tohmatsu India LLP for the period 2017 -18 to 2019 -20. Based on the 
recommendations of the evaluation report, modifications have been made in the  
memorandum for Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) for National Food and 
Nutrition Security Mission (NFNSM) for the years 2021-22 to 2025-26. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 
 
Recommendation No. 21 
 
2.31 The Committee note that while the domestic demand for vegetable oils 
and fats has been increasing at the rate of 6% per annum, the domestic output 
has been increasing at about 2% per annum, which undoubtedly lead to supply -
demand mismatch, with the result that nearly 65% of the country’s edible oil 
requirement is met through import, of which the major component is palm oil. The 

42 
 
Committee also note that the Government has been im plementing ‘National 
Mission on Oilseeds and Oil Palm’ (NMOOP), a Centrally -sponsored scheme 
comprising of three Mini Missions (MM), one each for Oilseeds (MM -I), Oil Palm 
(MM-II) and Tree Borne Oilseeds (MM -III) since 2014 -15, and further that w.e.f. 
2018-19, the NMOOP scheme was merged with National Food Security Mission 
(NFSM) under the name of NFSM (OS & OP) and is being implemented through 
the State Department of Agriculture/Horticulture in 26 States for oilseeds, 13 
States for oil palm and 12 States f or Tree Borne Oil. A sum of Rs. 500 crore has 
been allocated for the scheme in 2020 -21. In this connection, the Committee 
observe that the import of edible oils in the country which was 138.5 lakh metric 
tonnes (LMT) in 2014 -15 declined slightly but still stood at 133.4 (LMT) in the 
year 2019-20, despite the ongoing NFSM (OS & OP). The Committee note that a 
new scheme, ‘Targeting Rice Fallow Areas’ (TRFA) was launched in 2016 -17 
which focusses on land that remains under -utilized after harvesting Kharif padd y 
crops. It is now under implementation in 6 (six) Eastern States, i.e. Assam, Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Odisha and West Bengal representing over 82% of the 
country’s rice fallow areas. The Committee desire the Government to evaluate 
and review the progress of NFSM (OS & OP) and take necessary remedial steps 
to address the associated shortcomings of the Mission (if any) so as to increase 
production and productivity of edible/vegetable oils in the country. They also 
hope and desire that the Government would make full utilization of Rs. 500 crore 
allocated for the scheme during 2020 -21. The Committee further recommend the 
Government to make concerted efforts to ensure that TRFA scheme is effectively 
implemented in 6 (six) rice -cultivating Eastern States,  leading to increased 
availability of edible/vegetable oils in the country, thereby contributing to 
moderation of prices of these food items for the consumers, as also lead to 
decreased dependence on import of edible oil by the country. The Committee 
also desire that adequate attention should be given to encourage oil palm 
cultivation in the country under TRFA Scheme through active participation of 
cooperative societies/ NGOs/ farmers’ associations, etc. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.32     A. National Mission of Edible Oils - Oil Palm (NMEO-OP) 
A separate mission for oil palm promotion; National Mission of Edible Oils - Oil 
Palm (NMEO-OP) has been started for increasing domestic availabil ity of edible 
oils in the country. The project is approved for 5 years from 2021 -22 to 2025-26. 
It is proposed to increase the area of oil palm by 6.5 lakh hectares to reach 10.00 
lakh hectares by 2025-26 (out of which 3.22 lakh hectares is for the Rest of  India 
and 3.38 lakh hectares for the North East and  Andaman & Nicobar Islands 

43 
 
(ANI)). Crude Palm Oil (CPO) production is expected to increase to 11.20 lakh 
tonnes in 2025-26. 
Government of India, for the first time has introduced the concept of Viability 
Price (VP) for the Fresh Fruit Bunches (FFBs) produce  by the farmers.  At 
present, there is no support from the Government of India for price assurance to 
the oil palm farmers for their produce of FFBs. 
Through this system of Viability Gap funding, the farm ers would be assured of 
this viability price for their produce.  Through this mechanism of Viability Gap 
funding, Government of India would guarantee benchmark price for the price 
assurance for the FFBs payment. Government will pay the difference between 
Formula and Viability price, in case formula price is less than viability price. It is 
based on a transparent and rational formula by introducing the system of fixing 
the viability price. 
B. National Mission on Edible Oils- Oilseeds (NMEO-OS) 
A separate miss ion on oilseeds (National Mission on Edible Oils -OS) is under 
consideration of government which aims to increase annual oilseeds production. 
National Mission on Edible Oils - Oilseeds (NMEO-OS) with the aim to enhance 
the edible oilseeds production and edi ble oils availability in the country by 
harnessing annual oilseed crops and to reduce import burden on edible oils. 
Under the NMEO -OS, it has been targeted to achieve a production of 54.10 
million tonnes from seven annual  edible oilseed crops by  the end of  2025-26, 
expecting an additional production of about 18.00 million tonnes over and above 
the current production of 36.10 million tonnes. Three major crops  i.e. Soybean, 
Rapeseed & Mustard and Groundnut will be focused as 7.54 million tonnes of 
edible oils constituting more than 88% of edible oils from annual oilseeds (8.56 
million tonnes) are harnessed form these three crops.    
Special projects have been planned under the Mission for expanding area and 
raising productivity. Oilseeds cultivation will be pr omoted by targeting rice fallow 
area, inter-cropping with other crops and expansion in high potential districts and 
non-traditional states/season. Special Missions for major oilseed crops like 
mustard, soybean and groundnut will aim at increasing productiv ity through high 
seed replacement by latest and high yielding varieties. 
Both these missions on edible oils; NMEO - Oil Palm and NMEO -Oilseeds are 
aimed at increasing edible oil production in the country and reducing import 
dependency for edible oils.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   

44 
 
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 

45 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS  WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S 
 REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
3.1 The Committee note that although the country has become surplus in 
most agricultural commodities, farmers have been unable to get better prices due 
to lack of investment in cold storage, warehous es, processing and export as 
entrepreneurs stated to be get discouraged by the regulatory mechanisms in the 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955. This has resulted in farmers suffering huge 
losses when there are bumper harvests, especially of perishable commodi ties, 
much of which could have been reduced with adequate processing facilities. The 
Committee also note that, as recommended by the High Powered Committee for 
Transformation of Indian Agriculture comprising the Department of Agriculture 
and Farmers’ Welfa re, NITI Aayog, and the Chief Ministers of the States of 
Punjab, Maharashtra, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Arunachal Pradesh and 
Uttar Pradesh, there is a need to create an environment based on ease of doing 
business and for removing the fear of freque nt statutory controls under the 
Essential Commodities Act in order to boost immediate investment in agriculture 
sector, increase competition and enhance farmers’ income. The Committee hope 
and expect that the recently enacted ‘The Essential Commodities (Am endment) 
Act, 2020’ which was aimed at addressing the issue will become a catalyst for 
unlocking vast untapped resources in the agriculture sector by creating an 
environment for enhanced investments in agriculture sector, fair and productive 
competition in  agricultural marketing and increase farmers’ income. They, 
therefore, recommend the Government to implement the Essential Commodities 
(Amendment) Act, 2020 in letter and spirit, and without let or hindrances so that 
the farmers and other stakeholders of f arming sector in this country receive the 
benefits intended under the said Act. Noting further that foodstuffs such as 
potato, onions and pulses 63 are part of a common man’s daily diet and that 
lakhs of people who do not get the benefits of Public Distrib ution System (PDS) 
may suffer adversely in the aftermath of the implementation of the new Act, the 
Committee also desire the Government to continue to keep a constant watchful 
eye on the prices of all essential commodities and to resort to the remedial 
provisions provided in the Essential Commodities (Amendment) Act, 2020 when 
called for. 
 

46 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 The Essential Commodities Act, 1955 was amended in 2020.   Through 
this amendment a new sub -section (1A) under Section 3 of the Essential 
Commodities (EC) Act, 1955 was inserted.   Section 3(1A) (a) now provides that 
foodstuffs, including cereals,   pulses, potato, onions, edible oil seeds and oils 
shall only be regulated under extra ordinary circumstances which may include 
war, famine, extra or dinary price rise and natural calamity of grave nature.   
Section 3(1A)(b) provides that any decision on imposing stock limit would be 
based on price triggers such as hundred per cent increase in retail price of 
horticultural produce and fifty percent incre ase in retail price of non -perishable 
agricultural foodstuff over the immediately preceding twelve months or average 
retail price of last five years whichever is lower.   Hon’ble Supreme Court vide its 
order dated 12.01.2021 has stayed implementation of the  Essential Commodities 
(Amendment) Act, 2020. 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
3.3 The Committee note that increase in cost of cultivation for inputs, specially 
fertilizers, wages, etc., influence the prices of food articles. The Committee 
further note that with limited area under irrigation, crops have become 
susceptible to the vagaries of Monsoon and w eather conditions like drought. The 
Committee desire that the Government should make a comprehensive study of 
the impact thereof on the cost of farm produce through a panel of experts, 
professionals, academicians, etc. and then to devise an effective actio n plan to 
address the problems associated with it. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.4    While recommending its price policy, the CACP considers all costs in a 
comprehensive manner and this includes all paid out costs, including fertilizers, 
wages, manures, irrigation charges, etc. Beside actual cost, CACP also monitors 
the trends in inputs prices through Composite Input Price Index(CIPI). Hence the 

47 
 
costs considered are very comprehensive and based on the methodology 
recommended by Expert Committees from time to time. 
             
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
3.5 The Committee are unhappy to note that around  30% of vegetables in the 
country perish during harvest, storage, grading, transport, packing and 
distribution. Further, there is wastage of vegetables along the supply chain due to 
poor post-harvest management and lack of cold chain and seasonality production 
creates fluctuations in prices. In this connection, the Committee note that the 
Government has taken various steps to spread awareness about proper use of 
storage and transportation techniques, and is  organizing various training 
programmes and awaren ess campaigns under schemes like Mission for 
Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH), National Food Security Mission 
(NFSM), etc. Other measures taken by the Government include awareness 
campaign, advertisements, etc. in print and electronic media to  raise awareness 
among the farmers, ‘Kisan Suvidha’ mobile application developed by the 
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare to facilitate 
dissemination of information to farmers on critical parameters including cold 
storages and godowns, and ‘Kisan Rath’ mobile application which was launched 
to facilitate farmers and traders in identifying the right mode of transportation of 
farm produce like cereals, coarse cereals, pulses, fruits, vegetables, oil seeds, 
spices, etc. The Committee de sire the Government to take effective steps to 
ensure that these schemes and measures do not remain merely on paper, but 
achieve their intended results and bring actual benefits to the farmers and 
traders. The Government should monitor the progress and suc cess of these 
schemes through annual appraisal and also by calling evaluations from the 
concerned State Governments so that the present unsustainable level of 
vegetable wastages at 30% in the country during harvest, storage, grading, 
transport, packing and  distribution is brought down to the minimum. The 
Committee further note that no study has been made so far about the post -
harvest crop/vegetables management practices of other countries, specially 
advanced (developed) countries. As such, the Committee fee l that the 
Government should initiate necessary steps to explore the feasibility of 
undertaking study/training in post -harvest practices of advanced countries with a 
view to replicating such practices in India, where applicable. The Committee also 
desire t hat the efforts should be made by the Government to disseminate 

48 
 
awareness among farmers about the crops to grow during particular seasons by 
use of all available media tools to avoid crop losses and ensure optimal utilization 
of storage capacities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.6 Despite the devastating covid -19 pandemic, efforts were made by the 
Government to implement NFSM in an efficient way and utilization of 1208.93 
crores was ensured during the year 2020 -21. The Development Monitoring and 
Evaluation Office (DMEO) of NITI Aayog has conducted the impact evaluation of 
NFSM scheme through Deloitte Touch Tohmatsu India LLP for the period 2017 -
18 to 2019 -20. Based on the recommendations of the evaluation report, 
modifications have been made in the memorandum f or Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) for National Food and Nutrition Security Mission (NFNSM) for 
the years 2021-22 to 2025-26. 
Operation Greens Scheme was announced in the Union Budget for 2018 -19 with 
financial outlays of Rs. 500 crores to promote FPOs , agri -logistics, processing 
facilities and professional management for Tomato, Onion and Potato (TOP) 
crops. As part of short -term price stabilization measures, during glut situation at 
the time of harvest, transportation and storage subsidy is provided a t 50% for 
evacuation of surplus production from the producing area to the consumption. 
This was extended from TOP to TOTAL (41 notified fruits and vegetables) w.e.f. 
11.06.2020 as a part of Aatmanirbhar Bharat Package announcement by Hon’ble 
Finance Minister due to supply chain disruption amid Covid pandemic, based on 
SFC recommendation, by Minister, FPI on 10.06.2020.  
  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 
 
Recommendation  No. 10 
 
3.7 The examination of the data furnished by the Department of Consumer 
Affairs has revealed that based on Consumer Food Price Index (CFPI), the all -
India food inflation rate spiraled from 1.1% in April, 2 019 to 7.89% in October, 
2019 reaching to a high 14.19% in December, 2019, whereas the corresponding 
figures decreased from 2.8% to ( -)0.86% during the year 2018. Explaining the 
reasons for this unhealthy scenario, the Department stated that the CFPI 
consists of ten sub -groups, viz., Cereals and products, Meat and fish, Egg, Milk 
and products, Oils and fats, Fruits, Vegetables, Pulses and products, Sugar & 

49 
 
Confectionery and Spices, and the rise in food inflation was because of 
‘vegetables’ sub -group, which had been registering moderate inflation rate till 
August, 2019 but started rising since September, 2019, reaching upto 15.47% in 
September, 2019 and 26.1% in October, 2019. Three items, namely, Onion, 
Garlic and Tomato were primarily responsible for these spikes in inflation rates of 
vegetables, resulting in significant rise in the food inflation during September and 
October, 2019. Noting from the Department’s reply that food inflation is a cause 
of concern for not only the common man, but also for the poli cy makers, the 
Committee desire that the Government should make concerted efforts to keep 
food inflation rate in the country to the minimum by adopting policies and 
measures to tackle the supply -side constraints which have been causing 
inflationary spurt i n food items from time to time. They also recommend that the 
Government should take concrete steps to monitor all existing schemes and 
programmes aimed at augmenting production of food crops. The Government 
should, in this connection, take measures to boos t the output of cereals, fruits, 
vegetables, pulses, oilseeds, etc. by injecting improved, high -yielding variety 
seeds. Proper attention may also be given to enhance the skills and know -how of 
the farmers cultivating such crops, specially growers of pulses  and oilseeds, who 
happen to be small and marginal farmers. The Government should make efforts 
to popularize the use and application of proper and updated agro -management 
techniques through provision of credit at concessional terms from financial 
institutions, banks etc. to enable the farmers to achieve higher yields from their 
investment, thereby resulting in increased output of essential food items in the 
country in the long-run. 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.8 Government fixes minimum support prices (MSPs) for 22 mandated 
agricultural crops on the basis of the recommendations of the Commission for 
Agricultural Costs & Prices (CACP), after considering the views of State 
Governments and Central Ministries/Departments concerned and other relevant 
factors. 
The U nion Budget for 2018 -19 had announced the pre -determined principle to 
keep MSPs at levels of one and half times of the cost of production. Since then, 
Government has been increasing MSPs for all mandated Kharif, Rabi and other 
Commercial crops with a retur n of 1.5 times over all India weighted average cost 
of production. The increase in MSP is expected to result in higher income of 
farmers, which will lead to higher capital formation, better input usage, and 
increase in productivity. This will enhance retur ns to the farmers for their 
produce.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  

50 
 
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS  IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
  
-NIL- 
 
 
 

51 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation No. 8  
 
5.1 The Committee observe that surplus production in the last 5 (five) sugar 
seasons and depressed international market had adversely impacted domestic 
sugar price which led to liquidity crisis of sugar mills and accumulation of cane 
price arrears of farmers. The Committee also note, in this connection, that to 
safeguard the interest of farmers, the Central Government fixes the Fair and 
Remunerative Price (FRP) of sugarcane for every sugar season, on the 
recommendation of the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CAC P) 
and after consultation with the State Governments and other stakeholders, 
wherein FRP so fixed is the minimum price for purchase of sugarcane from cane 
farmers by sugar mills. Further, the Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966 stipulates 
the payment of cane p rice within 14 days of supply, failing which interest at the 
rate of 15% per annum on amount due for the period beyond 14 days is payable, 
and that the State Governments/UT Administrations have been vested with the 
powers of enforcing this provision. The C ommittee desire that the sugarcane 
farmers should be ensured remunerative returns of their crops through FRP by 
the Government by taking steps for effective implementation of the Sugarcane 
(Control) Order, 1966 by the concerned State Governments/UT Adminis trations. 
Side by side, necessary steps are urgently called for to improve the liquidity of 
sugar mills, which are currently facing problem, by providing them liberal financial 
assistance from the Government. Such twin measures would bring stability to 
sugar prices in the country, while at the same time safeguarding the interests of 
cane farmers and sugar mill owners. The Committee appreciate that the Central 
Government has taken several measures in this direction, viz. extending 
assistance to sugar mills o n cane crushed, fixation of minimum selling price of 
sugar, fixing remunerative prices of ethanol, providing soft loan to sugar mills to 
clear cane dues, creation of buffer stock of sugar, extending loans from Sugar 
Development Fund to sugar mills for mode rnization and capacity expansion, etc. 
The Committee, however, desire the Government to continue to render all 
assistance to cane farmers and sugar mills not only by loan and financial aid, but 
by undertaking physical and financial evaluation of sugar mill s on annual basis. If 
need be, liberal financial assistance may also be extended from Price 
Stabilization Fund (PSF). 
 

52 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 To safeguard the interest of sugarcane farmers and to ensure 
remunerative returns of their crops through FRP , the Government of India has 
determined the ‘Fair and Remunerative Price’ of sugarcane payable by sugar 
factories for sugar season 2021 -22 at ₹ 290 per quintal for a basic recovery rate 
of 10%. To examine the recommendation of creation of price stabilizat ion fund 
and to examine other recommendations, a Committee has been constituted in 
DFPD. This Commitee is also examining    the other recommendations of CACP 
and Task Force constituted under NITI Aayog.  Three meetings have been held 
with States and other s take holders in this regard. Since last two -three months, 
the ex-mill prices of sugar are hovering in the range of 33 -34/kg thereby helping 
in the liquidity of sugar mills. Simultaneously, prices of sugar have been 
improved in the international market enab ling sugar mills to evacuate the excess 
sugar through export of sugar. However Government is continuously watching 
the sugar sector scenario and all the necessary steps are being taken to ensure 
that the interest of sugar cane farmers are well protected. T o overcome the 
problem of excess sugar and improve the liquidity of sugar sector, the 
government is promoting blending of ethanol in petrol by way of providing interest 
subvention for setting up of new distilleries, fixing remunerative prices of ethanol 
being supplied to Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) etc.   In sugar seasons 2018-
19, 2019-20 & 2020-21 about 3.37 LMT, 9.26 LMT & 20 LMT of sugar has been 
diverted to ethanol respectively. In the current sugar season 2021 -22, about 35 
LMT of sugar is estimated to be diverted; & by 2025-26 about 60 LMT of sugar is 
expected to be diverted towards ethanol. This would solve the problem  of 
excess sugarcane/ sugar and will  make the sugar sector profitable and 
viable. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)   
              O.M. No.T-10/2/2020-PMC Section  Dated the 
18.10.2021] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;     SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY, 
01 DECEMBER, 2021                 CHAIRPERSON, 
10 AGRAHAYANA 1943 (Saka)                           Standing Committee on 
Food, 
   Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 
 

53 
 
 
 

54 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
                       
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2021 -2022) 
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 01 DECEMBER, 2021 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1645 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat 
4. Ms. Debasree Chaudhuri 
5. Shri Anil Firojiya 
6. Shri Khagen Murmu 
7. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai (Bakabhai) Patel 
8. Smt. Kavita Singh 
9. Shri Ganesan Selvam  
10. Shri Saptagiri Ulaka 
11. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
12. Shri Ve. Vaithilingam 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
14. Smt. Roopa Ganguly 
15. Shri Ramji 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Pawan Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   - Director 

55 
 
 
XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the draft Reports on Action Taken by 
the Government on recommendations/observations contained in XXXXX
 XXXXX XXXXX  XXXXX (iii) 11 th Report (17th LS) on the 
subject ‘Price Rise of Essential Commodities – Causes & Effects’ pertaining to 
Department of Consumer Affairs; XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX 
XXXXX. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the Draft Report. 
After due deliberations, the Committee unanimously adopted the said Action 
Taken Report without any amendment/modification and authorized the 
Chairperson to carry out verbal and consequential changes, if any, therein. 
 XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX 
 
3. XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX 
4. XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX  
 
5. XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
********* 
 
 
XXXXX  XXXXX  Matter does not relate to the Report.  

56 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS  OF THE  ACTION  TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ELEVENTH REPORT  
OF  THE  STANDING  COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION (2021-22) 
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
   
(i) Total number of Recommendations:        21 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government : 
 
 Rec. Nos. :- 1, 3, 4, 5, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 
and 21 
   
                 (Chapter – II, Total -16) 
              Percentage :   76.19% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government 
 
Rec. Nos.:-  2, 6, 7 and 10 
 
                     (Chapter – III, Total - 4) 
             Percentage :  19.04% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
Rec. Nos.    NIL 
            (Chapter – IV, Total - 
0)   
                Percentage : 0.00% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the 
interim replies of the Government have been received. 
    
   Rec. No.:- 8 
    (Chapter – V, Total - 1) 
           Percentage : 4.76%  

57 
 
 