  
  STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS                 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2022-2023) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD     AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION  
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
{Action Taken  by the Government on the recommendations/  observations 
contained in the Nineteenth Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants (202 2-23) pertaining to the Ministry of  Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
(i)
23 


  
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2022-2023) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION  
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
{Action Taken  by the Government on   the recommendations/observations  
contained in the Nineteenth Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (202 2-23) pertaining to the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food  and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs)} 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 
09.12.2022 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 
09.12.2022 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
(ii) 


  
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
Composition of the Committee ………………………………………  IV 
INTRODUCTION   ……………………………………………………...  V 
Chapter  I Report……………………………………………………  1 
Chapter  II Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted  by Government……………………………  
 
5 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the  
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government’s   replies………………………………...  
25 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
replies of Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee ……………………………………… 
26 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
which final replies of Government are 
still awaited………………………………………………  
27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
(I) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held  on 
09.11.2022........................................................... 32 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Nineteenth  
Report of the Committee  (Seventeenth  Lok 
Sabha)..……..  
 
34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
(2022-2023):- 
Smt. Locket Chatterjee, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat  
5. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq  
6. Shri Gangasandra Siddappa Basavaraj  
7. Km. Debasree Chaudhuri 
8. Shri Anil Firojiya 
9. Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit 
10. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi  
11. Shri Khagen Murmu 
12. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel  
13. Shri Subrat Pathak 
14. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
15. Dr. Amar Singh 
16. Smt. Himadri Singh 
17. Smt. Kavita Singh 
18. Shri Nandigam Suresh 
19. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
20. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan  
21. Shri Vaithilingam Ve. 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey  
23. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
24. Shri Baburam Nishad 
25. Shri Rajmani Patel 
26. Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar  
27. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss  
28. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam  
29. Shri Harbhajan Singh 
30. Ms. Dola Sen* 
31. Vacant 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
1. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   - Director 
3. Shri Ram Lal Yadav   - Additional Director 
4. Shri Dong Lianthang Tonsing  - Under Secretary 
 
Committee constituted vide Bulletin Part II, Para No.5293 w.e.f. 13 September, 2022 
*Nominated vide Bulletin Part II, Para No.5313 w.e.f. 12 October, 2022 
 
(iv) 
 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs 
and Public Distribution (2022 -2023) having been authorized by the Committee to 
submit the  Report on their behalf, present this Twenty Third Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/  Recommendations contained in 
the Nineteenth Report of  the Committee (Seventeenth Lok  Sabha) on Demands 
for Grants (2022 -23) of  the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Consumer  Affairs). 
 
2. The Nineteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 22 March, 2022. The Government has furnished replies indicating 
Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Report on 15 June, 2022. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on  09 November, 2022. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Comments of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the text of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                             LOCKET CHATTERJEE 
10 November, 2022                                           Chairperson 
19 Kartika, 1944 (Saka)                        Standing Committee on  Food,   
                                                         Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER - I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Nin eteenth Report of the Committee 
(2021-2022), (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2022 -23), pertaining to the Ministry 
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
1.2 The Nineteenth Report  was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in  the Rajya Sabha 
on 22nd March, 2022. It contained 21 Observations/ Recommendations.  
1.3 Action taken replies in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report have been received and categorized as follows:- 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos.:  3.4, 4.34, 4.35, 4.36, 4.40, 6.11, 7.5, 8.44, 8.45, 8.46, 8.47, 8.48, 
8.49, 8.50 and 9.9 
Total:15 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations  which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 Para Nos.:  NIL                                                                             Total: NIL 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations  in respect of which replies   of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee  and which 
require reiteration: 

2 
 
Para No.:  4.37                                                                                           
                                                                              Total:01 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations  in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
 
   Para No. : 1.10, 4.38, 4.39, 5.9 and 6.12 
                                                                                                                              Total: 05 
  Chapter-V 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the implementation 
of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government.  The Committee 
desire that final action taken notes  to the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in Chapter I and Chapter -V of this Report should be furnished to them not later than 
three months of the presentation of this Report.    
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of the 
observations/recommendations. 
Strengthening of Consumer Commissions 
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No 4.37)  
1.6 The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that in 2021-22, the total allocation of Rs. 279.40 Lakh was released to 
the State of Karnataka for construction of District Consumer Commission building and non -
building assets. The Committee while appreciating the initiative, would like to be apprised of 
the status thereof. The Committee further note that the Department has received proposals 
from the States of Jharkhand, Chattisgarh, Karnataka, Kerala, Odisha, Nagaland and 

3 
 
Madhya Pradesh for release of funds under the scheme. The Department has informed that 
these requests are under scrutiny. The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to 
expedite finalization of their requests on priority basis and release the fund   immediately to 
avoid any hardships on this count.” 
1.7 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“It has been informed by Karnataka State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission 
that the above released amount of Rs. 279.40 Lakh is presently kept in the SB Account in 
the name of Registrar -cum-Administrative Officer, KSCDRC. The mapping process of both 
the nodal and implementing agency has been completed. The empowered committee 
constituted by the State Government has already approved the proposals.  The requisite 
steps will be taken for utilizing the amount sanctioned after receiving the proceedings of the 
Empowered Committee.  
As regards proposals received from  Jharkhand, Chattisgarh, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Odisha, Nagaland and Madhya Pradesh, it is inf ormed that the Department  has sought 
certain clarifications from these states regarding issues such as pending UC, submission of 
proposals in requisite pro forma, mandate form etc. The proposals shall be processed as 
soon as requisite clarifications are received from these states.” 
1.8 The Committee, in their Report, had desired to be apprised of the status of the 
fund of Rs. 279.40 lakh released to the State of Karnataka for construction of District 
Consumer Commission building and non -building assets. The  Department has 
submitted that the empowered committee of the State has approved the proposals 
and the requisite steps would be taken for utilizing the amount after receipt of the 
proceedings of the committee. The reply did not mention any time limit withi n which 
the proceedings of the Committee are required to be sent, processed and spending 
the allocated funds by the concerned.   The Committee, therefore , while reiterating 
their earlier recommendation, suggest the Department to vigorously pursue the matter 
for speedy construction of District Consumer Commission building and non -building 
assets. 

4 
 
    The Committee had further noted that the Department had received proposals 
from the States of Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Kerala, Odisha, Nagaland and 
Madhya Pradesh for release of fund under the Scheme and urged the Department to 
expedite finalization of their proposals on priority and release the fund to avoid 
hardships on this count. The Committee, however,  note that  the Department has 
provided a rout ine  reply stating that  it has sought certain clarifications from these 
States viz, pending UC, submission of proposals in requisite pro-forma, mandate form 
etc. which is not acceptable to the Committee. They note that even after lapse of 
enormous time si nce receipt of proposals, the Department has not been able to take 
any follow up action on its part. The Committee, therefore, while reiterating their  
earlier recommendation, urge the Department to  expedite  the finalization of the 
proposals.  
 
  

5 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No. 3.4) 
 
2.1     The Committee note that the Demands for Grants (2022 -23) of the Department of 
Consumer Affairs have been pegged at Rs.1599.00 Crore  for the Central Sector 
Schemes. These Schemes/programmes/projects are implemented by the Department 
of Consumer Affairs through its two Umbrella Schemes i.e., The Consumer Protection 
and Legal Metrology & Quality Assurance. The Committee note that besides  these 
umbrella schemes, the Department also implements Price Stabilization Fund (PSF) 
and Consumer Awareness (Advertising and Publicity) Programmes. While the 
Umbrella Scheme of Consumer Protection covers Schemes of Strengthening 
Consumer Commission, Comp uterization and Computer Networking of Consumer 
Commission in the Country (CONFONET), Integrated Consumer Grievances Redressal 
System (ICGRS), the Scheme of Legal Metrology and Quality Assurance covers 
Strengthening of the Legal Metrology, the National Tes t House and Gold Hall Marking, 
Standard related capacity building and research and development work. It goes 
without saying that the Schemes being implemented by the Government through the 
Department of Consumer Affairs are of utmost importance which encom pass a wide 
range of activities for the welfare of the consumers of the country. Though, the 
Committee note that the BE of Rs. 1599 Crore in 2022 -23 has been kept lower to the 
RE of corresponding period of 2021 -22 i.e. Rs. 2453.64 Crore and the Actual 
Expenditure of Rs. 2175.69 Crore (which remained lower to the allocation), yet they 
emphasize that the Department should take all out efforts   and leave no stone 
unturned to utilize this fund towards fullest execution of their Schemes in a judicious 
way with p roper planning, so that no amount is surrendered to the Government 
Exchequer and maximum people are benefitted thereby. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.2 Under the scheme for setting up of gold assaying/hallmarking centres with Central 
Assistance, no amount has been surrendered. The unspent amount is carried forward for 
expenditure in the next year. 
  

6 
 
Further for utilizing this fund towards fullest execution of the Schemes in a judicious way, BIS 
is inviting expression of interest (EOI) every year for setting  up of gold assaying/hallmarking 
centres with Central Assistance in deficient locations. Follow up is also done with applicants 
for assistance required if any towards early setting of the centre. 
Capacity building training programme for artisans, AHC perso nnel and BIS officers are also 
organised under the scheme every year. 
It is also informed that an EOI was also invited for setting up of AHC in deficient location with 
Central Assistance during 2021 -22 and 59 applicants for 51 deficient locations have been  
given go-ahead for setting up AHC in these deficient Districts. 
 
Recommendation No. 3 (Para No. 4.34) 
2.3 The Committee observe that the Department of Consumer Affairs has enacted the 
Consumer Protection Act, 2019 which came into force w.e.f. 20 July, 2020. They note that 
an amount of Rs. 44 Crore was earmarked for Consumer Protection for the year 2021 -22 
which was revised to Rs, 42 crore at RE Stage. To their utter dismay, they find that even this 
amount was not spent in full and was short of about 20. 2 % of the target as on 11.2.2022. 
The Committee understand that under this Head, various Schemes/Projects of the significant 
public importance such as strengthening of Consumer Fora, Computerization and Computer 
Networking of Consumer Fora (CONFONET), and  Integrated Consumer Grievances 
Redressal System (ICGRS) are financed and implemented. The Committee, therefore, are of 
the opinion that unless and until the earmarked funds are utilized as per the allocation, the 
intended targets of these Schemes aimed at  to safeguard the interests of the consumers in 
the country, will not be achieved. They, therefore, urge the Department to take stringent 
measures coupled with close monitoring of finances to make sure their full utilization. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.4 During F.Y. 2021-22, out of allocated budget of Rs. 42 crore at RE stage for scheme 
Consumer Protection, Rs. 41.78 crore were spent on schemes of Strengthening of 
Consumer Commissions, CONFONET and ICGRS making it to approximately 99.5% 
achievement. 
Recommendation No. 4 (Para No. 4.35)  
2.5 In their 19th Report, the Committee had recommended as under:- 

7 
 
“The Committee note that an amount of Rs. 10 Lakh and Rs. 65 lakh have been earmarked 
for the salary and Rent   expenses of the Central Consumer Protection Authority (CCPA), 
which has been empowered to conduct investigations into violations of consumer rights and 
institute Complaints. They also note that the CCPA is functional from a rented site for which 
Rs.1.01 crore  has been earmarked. Keeping in view of the magnitude of the consumers of 
the country and their complaints, the Committee are of the considered view that the CCPA 
should have their own campus having spacious space to discharge their duties and 
accommodate large number of consumers und er a single roof instead of running from a 
rented premise having space crunch or so. 
The Committee note that advertisements of various products are being launched on 
televisions, other electronic and print media without ascertaining their genuineness which  
mislead the consumers of the country to a great extent. The Committee observe that most of 
the consumers are not literate and or residing in remote, hilly and far -flung areas, are misled 
and easily trapped and brain -washed by such advertisements and as su ch are inclined to 
purchase the items so advertized without thinking the pros and cons and have to suffer a lot 
in due course. The Committee find it an act of deceit being perpetrated with the innocent 
consumers of the country. The Committee, therefore, re commend the Department to devise 
a mechanism to control this widespread menace and provide for a strict monitoring 
mechanism on fake adds to save the interests of the consumers. In this context, the 
Committee further desire that the Agency/company, whose a dds are found fake as such be 
de-listed for the advertisement in future with imposition of hefty penalty and/or punishment to 
check and balance these advertisements flooded on the electronic and print media, etc. The 
Committee also recommend the Department  to amend the relevant Acts for the purpose, if 
required.” 
2.6 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“The Consumer Protection Act, 2019 has come into force w.e.f 20 th July, 2020, 
under which Central Consumer Protection Authority (CCPA) has been established by the 
Central Government w.e.f 24 th July, 2020 to regulate matters relating to  violation of rights 
of consumer, unfair trade practices and false or misleading adver tisement which are 

8 
 
prejudicial to the interests of public and consumers and to promote, protect and enforce 
the right of consumers as a class. The CCPA is empowered to conduct investigations into 
violation of consumer rights, order recall of unsafe goods and services, as well take suo 
moto complaints where a Class of consumers is impacted due to a defective product or 
deficiency service and also impose penalties. 
 As of now, CCPA has issued 85 notices against misleading advertisement and unfair 
trade practice, wherein 38 cases are related to misleading advertisements. Subsequent to 
the notices issued, 14 companies have withdrawn their advertisements and 3 companies 
agreed for corrective advertisement. Further, CCPA has also imposed penalty in 05 cases 
wherein company's claims were found false and misleading or they adopted unfair mean 
to misguide the consumers. 
    CCPA directed Glaxo Smith Kline Asia to discontinue all advertisements for its 
Sensodyne product in India which showed endorsement by foreign Den tists, Practicing in 
UK and also directed to discontinue of advertisement which make claims “Recommended 
by Dentist World wide”; “World’s No.1 Sensitivity toothpaste” as the claims were 
unsubstantiated by the company. Further, CCPA has also imposed penalty  of Rs. 
10,00,000 for its false and misleading advertisement. 
     A penalty of Rs. 10,00,000 has also been imposed to Naaptol with the directions to 
discontinue all its misleading advertisements and false claim made in the advertisement 
regarding Magnetic Knee support – Instant pain relief for your knees, Acupressure Yoga 
Slippers/ Acupressure massage slippers, Gold Jewellery of Rs. 200 (misleading 
consumers by its name). Further, the company claimed in their advertisement that their 
products are available  for a limited time to pressurize consumers to make an immediate 
decision and depriving consumers’ sufficient time to make an informed decision. Company 
was thus found exploiting the consumers’ sentiments by creating an impression of scarcity 
in their mind s and not truthfully informing the consumer that it was a pre -recorded 
creative. 
     CCPA has directed Sure Vision India to discontinue the advertisement of their product 
"Sure Vision" which make the claims i.e. "It improves eye sight naturally; Eliminate s eye 

9 
 
strains; Exercise the cilliary muscles; World's best unisex correction apparatus” and also 
imposed penalty of Rs. 10, 00, 000, as the company has not conducted any 
scientific/Laboratory test with regard to the efficacy of the product. Further no spec ific 
marketing study/survey were conducted by them to substantiate their claim. 
     The Department of Consumer Affairs also runs an online portal called GAMA 
(Grievance Against Misleading Advertisements) where consumers can lodge complaints 
relating to mi sleading advertisements.  CCPA also take class action on the complaints 
registered on GAMA Portal which mislead the consumers. 
     Further, the Department of Consumer Affairs runs National Consumer Helpline (“NCH”) 
for creating awareness among consumers to  protect their rights and inform them of their 
responsibilities. Consumers can register their grievance on NCH via Toll Free Number, 
SMS, Online, App’s Consumer NCHAPP, UMANGAPP. Further a new toll free number 
“1915” has been launched by the Department. CC PA works closely with NCH and takes a 
class action in case of any misleading advertisement or unfair trade practice such as 
falsely represents that the goods are of a particular standard, quality, quantity, 
refund/replacement not provided on the receipt of  defective good or deficiency in services 
provided by the company. 
     CCPA has also issued advisories relating to preventing misleading advertisement 
during Covid -19 pandemic, when companies were taking advantage of the consumer 
sensitivity and another for adhering of Consumer Protection (E-commerce) Rules, 2020 by 
all marketplace e -commerce platforms for displaying information provided by sellers as 
per the E-Commerce Rules, 2020 on company’s websites. 
     Further,  CCPA has also issued Safety Notices t o alert and make consumers cautious 
against goods which do not hold valid ISI Mark and violate compulsory BIS standards   for 
the product i.e. Helmets, Pressure Cookers and Cooking gas cylinders and also for 
household goods including electric immersion wate r heaters, sewing machines, 
microwave ovens, domestic gas stoves with LPG etc. 

10 
 
   CCPA initiated country-wide campaign to prevent sale of spurious and counterfeit goods 
that violate Quality Control Orders (QCOs) published by the Government and raise 
awareness and consciousness among consumers to purchase goods that conform to BIS 
Standards. Daily use goods, which are commonly available in most households have 
been identified as part of the campaign, which are - Helmets, Pressure Cookers and 
Cooking Gas Cylinders. 
 In this regard, CCPA wrote to District Collectors across the country to investigate unfair 
trade practices and violation of consumer rights concerning manufacture and sale of the 
aforementioned goods. 
  CCPA has written to Chief Secretary of all states and UT’S to spread awareness and 
take requisite action under law and ensure compliance of compulsory standards to protect 
the interest of consumers. 
 CCPA has also written to Director General,  Bureau of Indian Standards  (BIS) to duly 
notify all the regional branch of BIS to take immediate cognizance of violation of 
compulsory standards and to take necessary action accordance with law for protection of 
consumer interest. 
 Enforcement action of BIS in case of Helmets as under:- 
 S. 
No 
Company Name Action Taken (Search and Seizure Operation) 
1 
M/s H U F Enterprises & 
M/s Fame Enterprises 
747 quantity of Helmets for riders of two wheeler 
motor vehicles without ISI Mark were seized.\ 
2 
M/s Ryder Auto 
Accessories 
85 quantity of Helmets for riders of two-wheeler 
motor vehicles, without ISI Mark were seized. 
3 
M/s Adeshwars Ryders 
Arena 
14 quantity of Helmets for riders of two -wheeler 
motor vehicles, without ISI Mark were seized. 

11 
 
4 
M/s Project Revolt LLP 
(M/s Lazy Ass bikers) 
90 quantity of Helmets for riders of two -wheeler 
motor vehicles, without ISI Mark were seized. 
  
 
 Enforcement action of BIS in case of Pressure Cookers as under:- 
 S. No Company Name Action Taken(Search and Seizure Operation) 
1 M/s Raja Ratan 
Industries 
Total 963 domestic pressure cooker was available 
and considered as misuse. 04 domestic pressure 
cookers of varied capacities (3L to 12 L) were 
seized and brought as evidence. Remaining 
quantity sealed and left with firm with issuance of 
superdari 
2 M/s Sohil Impex 
  
A total of 10 invoices were seized during the raid. 
Subsequently, another raid was carried out at 
factory premises where 20 number of pressure 
cookers, 20000 number of corrugated box for 
packing non-ISI domestic pressure cookers and 3 
numbers of sale invoices were seized.   
3 M/s Tekshiv Systems 
Pvt Ltd 
47 quantity of non -ISI domestic pressure cookers 
were seized. 
4 M/s Hardtrac Computer 
Services Pvt. Ltd 
  
02 numbers of non -ISI domestic pressure cookers 
and 3 invoices of sale were seized. 
  
  
 

12 
 
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 4.36) 
2.7 The Committee note that in order to supplement the efforts of the State Governments 
to run quasi -judicial Consumer Commissions commensurate to the Consumer Protection 
Act, 2019, the Department of Consumer Affairs is extending financial assistance to them to 
strengthen the infrastructure so that a minimum level of facilities are provided at each 
Consumer Commission required for their effective functioning. They, however, are 
constrained to note that in 2019 -20, Rs. 600 Lakh was proposed at BE Stage which was 
revised to Rs. 494 Lakh and the Actuals remained only to the tune of Rs. 353.62 Lakh. 
Again, in 2020 -21, the Actual Expenditure could not be met in full. The Committee find it to 
their utter dismay that even the reduced alloc ations are not being repeatedly met at AE 
Stage by the Department. The Committee do not understand the reasons for this 
trend.  Against this backdrop, the Committee remain apprehensive as to whether an amount 
of  Rs.600 Lakh in BE of 2022 -23 would hardly b e spent in full and the funds might be 
surrendered to Government Exchequer. The Committee hope that the Department will take 
strong measures in formulating the plan prudently and spend the entire funds allocated to 
the Department in 2022-23. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.8 Funds under the scheme of Strengthening of Consumer Commission are released 
based on the proposals received from concerned State/UT Govt./Administrator. The 
proposals are examined in the Department in light of documents submitted as per prescribed 
proforma, utilization of the previous grants, submissions of utilization certificates and 
registration of implementing agencies on PFMS portal. Concerned States/UTs are regularly 
requested through letters and meetings to furnish pending utilization  certificates, registration 
of implementing agencies on PFMS portal and to furnish complete proposals so that funds 
may be released under the scheme. 
  
Recommendation No. 9 (Para No. 4.40) 
2.9 The Committee note that an e -Daakhil portal has been designed/developed and 
implemented in NCDRC and 24 States/UTs which facilitates the consumers   for  online filing 
of complaints in 624 Consumer Commissions. They further note that it has been functional in 
some of the States/UTs whereas many States/UTs are deprived of the facility. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that this facility should be extended to all the Consumer 

13 
 
Commissions at the earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised of the latest st atus as 
obtaining in the matter. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.10 At present, e-Daakhil portal is operational in NCDRC and Consumer Commissions of 
31 State/UTs except in  J&K(UT), Ladakh(UT), Daman & Diu and DNH(UT), Mizoram and 
Puducherry. All efforts are be ing made to make e -Daakhil operational in remaining 
States/UTs. 
 
Recommendation No. 11 (Para No. 6.11) 
       2.11 The Committee note that Price Stabilization Fund (PSF) was set up with an 
initial Corpus of Rs. 500 Crore to tackle price volatility in some of the Agri -Horticultural 
Commodities like onion, potato and pulses to protect the interests of the consumers. The 
Committee also note that price stabilization operations are determined at the centre by the 
Central Price Stabilization Fund Management Commi ttee (CPSFMC), headed by Secretary, 
Department of Consumer Affairs, which has held 53 meetings after its reconstitution. The 
Committee are happy to note that the Department has spent 93.60%, 94.36% & 89.6% of 
the allocated funds under PSF in the years 2019 -20, 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 respectively. 
However, the Committee are constrained to note that a quantity of 51582.74 MT of onion 
has damaged due to spoilage during the years 2019 -20 to 2022-21.  They observe that the 
price of onions mounted to high during the  recent months and damage of such quantity of 
onion reflects poor management on the part of the Department who has also set a target of 
procurement of 2.5 LMT of onion apart from other Essential Commodities in ensuing Budget 
year of 2022-23. Keeping in view the vast procurement of onion and its price fluctuation, the 
Committee desire the Department to take due care for proper storage of onions so as to 
refrain price fluctuation as and when noticed for facilitating consumers and to prevent the 
black-marketing. The Committee, also recommend the Department to carry out market 
intervention operations with due diligence, utmost sensitivity and have proper monitoring to 
meet the needs of consumers particularly in those areas which are prone to price 
destabilizations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.12 The Department accorded utmost importance to reduction of storage loss in onion 
buffer stocks. In 2021-22, the percentage of loss on account of prolonged storage of onion in 

14 
 
the buffer has been reduced to 25.96% from about  28% in 2020 -21. Onion is traditionally 
stored in open ventilated chawls and the development of modern scientific technology is still 
under experimental stage. In order to develop technologies for primary processing, storage 
and valorisation of onion, the Department has initiated a hackathon under the guidance of 
Chief Innovation Officer, Ministry of Education.  The hackathon would cover comprehensive 
solution for the issues in respect of improvement in the design of KandhaChawls created by 
farmers, pre -harvest care,   primary processing such as drying, treatment for fungal 
infestation, storage at appropriate temperature and valorization. 
Onions from the buffer are being released in a targeted and calibrated manner to 
stabilize prices at local as well as national level by monitoring price trends in various centres, 
States/UTs and at the all-India level. 
 
Recommendation No. 13 (Para No. 7.5) 
2.13 The Committee note that under the Scheme of Consumer Awareness, print, electronic 
and outdoor awareness campaigns are undertaken. They find that a BE of Rs. 44.50 Crore 
was proposed for the year 2021 -22 and out of this proposal, only 51% i.e.Rs. 23 Crore was 
earmarked at RE Stage. The Committee find it to their utter dismay that out of this amount, 
the Department could utilise it to the tune of Rs.21.99 Crore i.e., 95.61% upto 11 February, 
2022.  In the Budget of 2022 -23, an amount of Rs. 25 Crore has been proposed. The 
Committee do not understand that the Department proposes hefty amount at BE Stage 
which is  revised drastically and even the revised funds are not fully utilized or remain 
unspent and are surrendered to Government Exchequer. The Committee, therefore, are of 
the firm opinion that the very purpose of the Scheme, thus, gets defeated and whole 
exercise of formulation of the Scheme proves to be of little avail, if the target of actual 
expenditure is not met in full and resultantly the amount has to be surrendered to the 
Government account. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to formulate the ir plans 
realistically so that Scheme of such a vital nature is not hampered and as such the 
consumers do not face any hardship on this account. The Committee note that the 
Department has focused on generating awareness through social media at zero 
dissemination cost. The Committee laud this initiative of the Department and opine that this 
will go a long way if implemented in letter and spirit with no cost to Exchequer. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.14 The BE of Rs 44.50 cr for 'Consumer Awareness' scheme was reduced to Rs 23.00 cr 
at RE stage due to reduction of budget of the entire Department at RE stage. Till  11th Feb, 

15 
 
2022, out of RE of Rs 23.00 cr, an expenditure of Rs 21.99 cr w as incurred, ie , 95.61%. 
Other than the expenditure incurred for various media campaigns, awareness has also been 
generated through social media, Panchayati Raj institutions, Gram Sabhas, and Mygov 
platform at zero dissemination cost. The Division had com mitted liabilities which were re -
worked due to reduced budget after 11th Feb, 2022 and the division was able to exhaust the 
entire budget of Rs 23 cr till 31st March, 2022. 
 
Recommendation No. 14 (Para No. 8.44) 
 2.15 The Committee note that the Department  of Consumer Affairs is undertaking the 
strengthening of Weights & Measures (W&M) infrastructures of States/UTs as also of 
Regional Reference Standard Laboratories (RRSLs), which serves as a vital link in 
dissemination of the values of National standards o f Legal Metrology down to the 
commercial level and the Indian Institute of Legal Metrology (IILM), Ranchi. They also note 
that out of the BE of Rs.15 Crore in 2021 -22, an amount of Rs.7.48 Crore was earmarked at 
RE Stage for the Scheme and the Actual Expen diture was made to the tune of Rs.6.51 
Crore as on 31.1.2022. The Committee find that still about Rs. one crore is yet to be spent. 
The Committee are not satisfied with this pace of spending for execution of the Scheme of 
paramount importance. The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to bring discipline in 
their finances and formulate plans prudently and allocate funds judiciously so that no hurdle 
is faced on this count. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.16 All necessary steps will be taken to ensure that t he finances are properly utilized and 
plans will be formulated for expenditure in a judicious manner. 
  
Recommendation No. 15 (Para No. 8.45)  
2.17 The Committee in their Original report observed/recommended as follows:- 
"The Committee note that the Department of Consumer Affairs had released grant -in-aid to 
State Governments for construction of laboratory buildings vis -a-vis Secondary Standard 
Laboratory (SSL), Working Standard Laboratory, Controller's office, etc. and rec eived 
requests from Mizoram, MP and Kerala. However, none of these States have submitted the 
Utilization Certificates and relevant documents for release of further aid. Resultantly, 

16 
 
subsequent grant -in-aid was not released. The Committee further note that component 
demand for supply of Standard Equipments to States/UTs was also not met. The Committee 
are not satisfied with the reasons attributed by the Department that the requests were 
received after BE was revised. They are of the opinion that there is som ething amiss 
between the Centre  and the States/UTs owing to improper coordination. Utmost alacrity was 
not shown on seeking the requests/demands/UCs from the States/UTs for release of funds 
in time. The Committee wish the Department to appoint their Coord inators having sound 
knowledge in the field to have complete coordination with States to refrain from any delay in 
release of funds for execution of the Centre's scheme in the States/UTs. The Committee 
also note that the Department have planned to organize  Training Programmes for Legal 
Metrology Officers of the State Governments. They appreciate this initiative of the Ministry 
and desire the Department to design the Programme keeping in view the challenges being 
encountered by them during discharge of  their duties."  
2.18 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated:- 
"Due care will be taken to ensure proper and timely utilisation of the grant in aid to the 
States/UTs for the Construction of Standard Laboratories and Controller’s offices. The 
funds for  the supply of Standard Equipments to States/UTs have been initiated for 
utilisation.  
          The Department will closely monitor the progress of implementation  and will make 
every sincere effort to get the funds utilised.” 
 
Recommendation No. 16 (Para No. 8.46) 
 2.19 The Committee are happy to note that the Department has taken steps for 
strengthening of RRSLs and IILM, Ranchi. They are, however, constrained to find that the 
land of RRSL, Nagpur, was under encroachment which delayed construction of the building. 
To their dismay, they find that the land was swapped and a Deputy Director rank officer has 
been requested to take necessary action for construction. On the other hand, the Committee 
have been apprised that in the absence of receipt of utilization certificate fo r earlier grant-in-
aid released by the Centre, next aid is not released. The Department has also informed that 
the requisition of the State was received after Budget was revised. The Committee opine 

17 
 
that, the Department should have the first hand knowledge  of the proposed construction of 
the Building for release of the fund The Committee find it a lackadaisical approach on the 
part of the Department which resulted into non -achievement of the targets and recommend 
the Department to coordinate with the States /UTs in right earnest in releasing grant for such 
vital Central Sector Schemes. The Committee note that the Department has made provisions 
for organizing training programmes for Central Government officials under Capacity Building 
Programme. They find that  these training programmes were not organized due to COVID 
Pandemic. However, on other hand, the workshop on New Initiatives on Legal Metrology Act, 
2009 for State Governments was successfully organized at NITS from 24 -25 November, 
2021. The Committee find it an act of carelessness and strongly recommend the Department 
to have uniformity  in organizing all its Programmes.  
   
Reply of the Government 
2.20 All the necessary efforts will be made to ensure that funds allocated for construction 
of laboratory bui ldings and capacity building of Legal Metrology Officers of States/ UTs/ 
UOI will be judiciously utilized in time without compromising on quality.  
The Department will closely monitor for organizing training programmes for Central 
Government and State Government officials under Capacity Building Programme.          
  
Recommendation No. 17 (Para No. 8.47) 
2.21 The Committee note that the Cabinet Secretariat had inter alia recommended in 2016 
that non -uniformity of time across different systems creates problems in investigation of 
cyber crimes by the Law Enforcement Agencies and resultantly synchronization of all 
networks and computers within the country with a National Clock is a must. For this purpose, 
implementation of Indian Standard Time (IST) and i ts dissemination will reduce the error in 
time dissemination to just a few milli to micro seconds. Accurate time dissemination would 
ensure national security and will enhance cyber security. The Committee are happy to note 
that the Department has undertaken the Project of Time Dissemination with a timeline set by 
march, 2023. The Committee do not understand the rationale behind the delay in 
establishing a very vital Project of the time dissemination having a bearing on the societal, 
industrial and internati onal trade, etc., but also national security and cyber crimes, which 
have been reached at paramount now -a-days. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Department to take swift action on the finalization of the Time Dissemination Project. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken for the purpose at the earliest. 

18 
 
Reply of the Government 
 2.22 The funds provided in RE during this financial year 2021 -22 are sufficient as the 
procurement of equipments for the project of time dissemination could not be started by 
National Physical Laboratory (NPL) in coordination with ISRO. 
However, all the necessary efforts will be made to ensure that funds allocated for 
procurement of equipment, construction of laboratory buildings and capacity building of  
Legal Metrology Officers of States/ UTs/ UOI will be judiciously utilized in time without 
compromising on quality.  
The Department will closely monitor the progress of implementation  and will make 
every sincere effort to get the funds utilised.     
Recommendation No. 18 (Para No. 8.48) 
2.23 The Committee note that the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) has been 
implementing the Plan Scheme for the setting up of Gold Assaying and Hallmarking Centres 
(AHCs) in the country by way of extending Central assistance. While under the Hallmarking 
Scheme, jewellers are granted registration, the Assaying and Hallmarking Centres are 
recognized to assay the purity of the jewellery submitted by the registered jewellers with 
declaration of purity, etc. The Committe e also note that hallmarking of 14, 18 and 22 carats 
of Gold Jewellery have been made mandatory for jewellers selling gold and artefacts. But, 
however, the Committee find that out of 85 applications, only 59 applicants could only be 
permitted to set up the  AHCs. However, the Department has assured the Committee that in 
2022-23, setting up of more AHC centres would be expedited in deficient districts with follow 
up action by BIS and assistance required in the matter. The Committee are of the view that 
setting up of more AHCs will go a long way in serving the interests of the consumers of gold 
jewellery and to promote quality of goods and services as mandated under BIS. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to make all out efforts for early settin g up 
of A&H Centres in the country to safeguard the interests of the consumers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.24 Under the Plan Scheme for setting up of Gold Hallmarking/Assaying Centres in India 
with Central Assistance financial is given to AHCs for ‘Setting  up of Gold Assaying and 
Hallmarking Centres’ in India where no Assaying & Hallmarking Centre (assisted or 
otherwise) exists i.e. assistance is given for setting up of centre at deficient locations only.  

19 
 
 The Implementation Committee set up by the Government decides on Implementation 
issues relating to selection of districts, screening of applications and decision on 
giving go-ahead to the applicants for setting up the AHC etc.  
 EOI was invited for setting up of AHC in deficient location with Centra l Assistance 
during 2021 -22. 85 applications received against the EOI were put up to the 
Implementation Committee in its 35th meeting held on 20.12.2021 at BIS, HQ, New 
Delhi.  The Committee deliberated on each of the application received and 59 
applicants for 51 deficient locations were given go -ahead for setting up AHC in these 
deficient Districts. 26 Applications were received for the Districts which were not 
deficient i.e. they already have an AHC and therefore as per the eligibility criteria of 
the sch eme these applications were not accepted for the purpose for providing 
Central Assistance by the Implementation Committee and the same was informed to 
the applicants.  
 As decided by the Implementation Committee all the Regional Offices of BIS have 
been advised for regular follow -up with the applicants of their region for an early set -
up of the centre. 
 
Recommendation No. 19 (Para No. 8.49) 
2.25 The Committee are happy to note that the Department has planned training 
programmes for the artisans, personnel  of Assaying and Hallmarking Centres (AHC)   and 
officers of BIS during the Budget year of 2022 -23 under their Capacity Building Programme. 
In their opinion, it is a good thinking especially seen against the scenario that the 
Department has set a target of hallmarking of 8 crore jewellery articles during the year 2022-
23. The Committee desire the Ministry to take robust measures in this regard and ensure 
due preparedness for running the Training Programmes as planned by the Department. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.26 As per the targets of the Plan Scheme the yearly targets for Capacity Building for FY 
2022-23 have been distributed to the five Regional Offices of BIS with an advice to achieve 
the targets. Constant follow -up is also being made in order to ensure that the targets are 
achieved. 
  
 
 

20 
 
Recommendation No. 20 (Para No. 8.50) 
2.27 The Committee are happy to note that the National Test House (NTH) has completed 
109 years of dedicated service to the nation under the administrative control of the Centre, 
yet they are constrained to find that during the Financial Year 2021 -22, an amount of Rs. 
23.50 Crore was proposed at BE Stage which was revised drastically downward and kept as 
low as Rs. 13.50 Crore at RE i.e. 57% to BE. The Committee fail to appreciate that  even 
after sharp reduction in BE, the Department was not able to spend the entire fund, which 
remained  to the tune of Rs. 9.39 Crore. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to be 
realistic in formulating the Plans and spent the earmarked fund judiciously.   
 
Reply of the Government 
2.28 The reasons for variation in the BE, RE and AE of 2021 -22 both in Capital and 
Revenue Heads is furnished below. 
 
(Rs. in Crore) 
Head 
of Account 
(Scheme) 
BE RE AE Remarks 
Revenue 
(3425) 
Office 
Expenses 
(OE) 
4.8 4.5 4.39 Almost, full amount has been utilized 
against this Head, unutilised amount is due 
to unfinished work for meeting the 
requirement of all the branches of NTH in 
respect of outsourcing of various services & 
other overhead expenditures of laboratories 
Traveling 
Expenses 
(DTE) 
0.65 0.45 0.45 Almost, full amount has been utilized for 
clearance of pending bills of official duty 
and transfer posting of officials in FY 2021 -
22. 

21 
 
Minor 
Works 
(MW) 
4 3.7 3.59 Almost, full amount has been utilized for 
day to day building maintenance work by 
CPWD & AMC & calibration of various 
equipments by all six NTH Regions in FY 
2021-22. 
Information 
Technology 
(IT) 
2.5 0.8 0.74 In this Head maximum amount has been 
utilised & remaining amount has been left 
unutilised due to non -mature of cases 
through GeM& the work order for MIS 
application was speeded over the FY 2022 -
23. 
Total 11.95 9.45 9.17 97% to RE 
 
 
(Rs. in Crore) 
Head of Account 
(Scheme) 
BE RE AE Remarks 
Capital (5425 & 4552) 
Machinery 
& Equipment (ME -
5425) 
7.6 2.2 1.98 Nowadays all proposals of 
procurement of equipments 
under ME (Scheme) are first 
approved by TAC followed by 
approval from DoCA. 
Thereafter the indents are 
prepared for floating T/E 
through CPP/ GeM as per 
Make In India guidelines. This 
is a lengthy process  and its 
takes Q1 & Q2 (min.) & for 
which necessary fund could 
not be utilised as per schedule. 
However, in this FY, total 8 
nos. of proposal are under 
process and supply order 
issued for seven nos. of 
equipments costing 6.26 crore. 

22 
 
Another seven cases are  
under process of costing Rs. 
3.5 Crore. 
Machinery& Equipment 
(ME-4552)/ 
Guwahati 
2.35 1.35 0.44 NE Region is allotted 10% of 
GBS in Plan Funds. Funds for 
NE region is allotted under a 
different Major Head 4552 than 
regular Capital Head 5425. 
Amount to be  utilised is re - 
appropriated to regular Capital 
Head. In absence of Revenue 
Head for NTH (NER), Guwahati 
10% of GBS is allotted under 
Capital Head 4552. Fund 
cannot be utilised even there is 
requirement exists to incur 
expenditure under Revenue 
Head. 
L&B (5425) 1.6 0.5 0.82 Authorisation of Rs. 0.82 Crore 
has been authorised to CPWD 
(SZ) for final bill settlement in 
respect of High Voltage 
laboratory at NTH(SR), 
Chennai. Re - appropriation of 
fund and utilise Rs. 0.22Cr from 
savings fund of ME(Scheme) 
Total 11.55 4.05 3.24 80% to RE 
Grand Total (Revenue 
+ 
23.5 13.5 12.41 92% to RE 

23 
 
Capital) 
  
Recommendation No. 21 (Para No. 9.9) 
 
2.29 The Committee note that the Department had  decided that the States/UTs willing to 
establish a Corpus Fund of Rs. 20.00 Crore for creating State Consumer Welfare Fund, 
would be supported by the Central Government by contributing 75% of total amount as the 
Centre’s share. For this eligibility, the  States/UTs would require to deposit their share in a 
non-plan, non-lapsable public account. However, the eligible State/UT would be free to draw 
their own guidelines commensurate with the centre's guidelines for administering the Fund. 
The Committee find that as of now only 17 States/UTs have established this Fund.  In their 
opinion, this number is not satisfactory. Considering the urgent need of creating consumer 
awareness in the scenario of increased technology and innovations to further empower the 
consumers rights and protect interests of the consumers, the Committee desire the 
Department to vigorously pursue the matter with the remaining States/UTs to create this fund 
as early as possible. 
Reply of the Government 
  
2.30 As per CWF guidelines, the central share can be given only to those States who have 
set up the Corpus fund by depositing the State share and a request is made for the Central 
share. 
  This Department has been vigorously following up the matter with the remaining 
States/UTs to create Corpus funds at the remaining 19 States/UTs.   In this direction, this 
Department vide  D.O letter dated 20th  April, 2022  at the level of Additional Secretary (CA) 
was sent to all  the remaining states requesting for setting up the corpus fund  and to deposit 
their share in a non -plan, non -lapsable public account  so that the share of Ce ntral 
Government could  be released. 
  Besides above D.O letter through Joint Secretary (CA) had already been sent on  02 
February, 2022 to the States where corpus fund has already been setup with 10.00 crore to 
enhance the same with 20.00 crore and submit the requisite documents to this Department 
so that the central share could  be released. 
  The States of UP and Uttarakhand have since set up the Corpus fund by depositing 
the State Share.   Approval of releasing the Central share has been obtained (subject  to the 

24 
 
ratification  of the same in the next meeting of the Standing Committee. UP and Uttarakhand 
will therefore become the 18th and 19th State respectively  to set up the Corpus Fund. 
  Some other States like Jharkhand, Sikkim, Mizoram etc. have request ed for 
enhancement of Corpus fund.  The files in this regard are under submission. 
  This Department has also been telephonically and through VCs  requesting all the 
remaining States to set up the Corpus Fund/enhancement of the fund at the earliest. 
 
 
 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
-   NIL  - 
 
 
  

26 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 6 (Para No. 4.37) 
 
4.1 The Committee note that in 2021 -22, the total allocation of Rs. 279.40 Lakh was 
released to the State of Karnataka for construction of District Consumer Commission 
building and non-building assets. The Committee while appreciating the initiative, would like 
to be apprised of the status thereof. The Committee further note that the Department has 
received proposals from the States of Jharkhand, Chattisgarh, Karnataka, Kerala, Odisha, 
Nagaland and Madhya Pradesh for release of funds under the scheme. The Department has 
informed that these requests are under scrutiny. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Department to expedite finalization of their requests on priority basis and release the 
fund  immediately to avoid any hardships on this count. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 4.2 It has been informed by Karnataka State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission 
that the above released amount of Rs. 279.40 Lakh is presently kept in the SB Account in 
the name of Registrar-cum-Administrative Officer, KSCDRC. The mapping process of both 
the nodal and implementing agency has been completed. The empowered committee 
constituted by the State Government has already approved the proposals. The requisite 
steps will be t aken for utilizing the amount sanctioned after receiving the proceedings of the 
Empowered Committee.  
            As regards proposals received from  Jharkhand, Chattisgarh, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Odisha, Nagaland and Madhya Pradesh, it is informed that the Dep artment has sought 
certain clarifications from these states regarding issues such as pending UC, submission of 
proposals in requisite pro forma, mandate form etc. The proposals shall be processed as 
soon as requisite clarifications are received from these states. 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 

27 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No. 1.10) 
5.1 The Committee note that Budget Estimates (BE), Revised Estimates (RE) and Actual 
Expenditure (AE) for the year 2021 -22 had been kept at Rs. Rs.2974.1 Crore Rs.2453.64 
Crore and Rs.2175.69 Crore respectively. The Committee further note that the BE during 
2021-22 was reduced by 17.5% at RE stage and kept at   Rs. 2453.64. Even, this reduced 
AE could not be met by the Department at Actual Stage and it fell short by 11.3%. The 
Committee note with concern that the BE of 2022 -23 has however been sharply reduced by 
70.2% compared to RE of 2021 -22 and has been kept as low as Rs.1724.88 Crore. If the 
allocation for PSF  i.e. Rs. 1500 Crore for 2022 -23 is deducted from the total amount of BE 
of Rs. 1724.88 Crore, this allocation remains to the tune of Rs. 224.88 Crore only  which is 
also 18% lower than the BE for 2021 -22 which was kept at Rs. 274.10 Crore. The reasons 
for the reduction has been attributed to the ceiling imposed by the MOF and downward 
revision of allocation for Price Stabilisation Fund. The Committee are app rehensive that this 
drastic reduction in the allocation for 2022 -23, the Department of Consumer Affairs would 
not be able to implement its Major Schemes, which are directly connected with the common 
people of the country.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to act proactively 
and approach the Ministry of Finance to convince them to lift ceiling imposed as such for 
augmenting the fund for its Major Schemes exclusively dedicated to the consumers in the 
country. At the same time, the Committee wo uld also impress upon the Department to take 
strong measures and keep a close monitoring of the Expenditure for proper implementation 
of Central Schemes with reference to the imperative demands and the targets fixed in 
respect of each of these Major Schemes. 
  
Reply of the Government 
5.2 The annual budget allocation under the Price Stabilisation Fund (PSF) are transferred 
to the PSF Corpus fund from which funds for PSF operations such as procurement, storage 
and disposal of pulses and onion are made. The sale proceeds from disposal of thes e 
commodities are ploughed back to the Corpus Fund. Currently, about Rs.5,400 crore is 
available in the PSF Corpus Fund which, together with the budget allocation of Rs.1500 in 

28 
 
2022-23 (BE) are expected to be sufficient to meet the requirements for PSF ope rations 
such as procurement of pulses and onion for the buffer. However, DoCAwill approach the 
M/o Finance for additional funds if any shortage arises through Supplementary Grant. 
 
Recommendation No. 7 (Para No. 4.38) 
5.3 The Committee note that the State Consumer Helpline Scheme has been 
discontinued. The Department has expressed the reason for this discontinuation to be 
overlapping with the work of the Zonal Consumer Helplines (ZCH). They also note that an 
amount of Rs. 464.24 Lakh has already been releas ed under this Scheme and most of the 
States/UTs either has not utilized it or it is under -utilized also these States/UTs have not 
furnished their Utilization Certificates. The Committee do not understand what action the 
Department is going to take for the unspent/under-utilized funds by the States. The 
Committee, therefore, suggest the Department to vigorously pursue the matters with the 
States/UT Administrations to furnish Utilization Certificates and accordingly apprise them of 
the complete action taken in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.4 Concerned State/UT Govts. are being regularly requested through meetings/video 
conferencing and letters to furnish pending Utilization Certificates against the funds released 
to State/UT Govts. under various schem es of this Department. Recently, meeting with 
Eastern States on 01.12.2021, Southern States on 25.01.2022, all State/District 
Commissions on 14.02.2022 and in groups of States/UTs on 04.03.2022, 07.03.2022 and 
01.04.2022 have been held wherein States/UTs w ere requested to furnish pending 
Utilization Certificates. A letter from the level of Joint Secretary (CA) has also recently been 
sent on 29.04.2022 to all concerned States/UTs in this regard. 
 
Recommendation No. 8 (Para No. 4.39) 
5.5 The Committee note that under the Scheme of Computerization and Computer 
Networking of Consumer Fora in the country (CONFONET), the Consumer Commissions at 
all the three tiers throughout the country are to be fully computerized to enable ease of 
access of information and quicker disposal of cases. They also note that hardware/software 
have been replaced in 31 State Commissions, 6 Circuit Benches (CB) and 378 District 
Commissions and procurement/supply of new set of hardware is under process for 200 more 

29 
 
locations which includes 3 State Commissions, 1 CB and 196 District Commissions. The 
Committee are constrained to note that the scheme of CONFONET has not been 
implemented owing to the sites not made ready   at 4 sites of   Arunachal Pradesh, 2 sites 
each of Chhattisgarh, Daman & Diu and Dadar& Nagar Haveli, 1 in J&K, 3 in Nagaland and 
1 in Laddakh. The Committee find it as a lackadaisical approach on the part of the 
Department and strongly recommend the Department to act proactively to accomplish the 
tasks as p er mandate so as to refrain from causing any hardships to the consumers on this 
count. The Committee note that the Department has made a provision of BE of Rs. 27.00 
Crore in the Budget of 2022 -23 with the targets of computerization of 13 Consumer 
Commissions and holding 6 training sessions to upskill 500 officials on the use of the 
Confonet system during the year 2022 -23. The Committee laud this initiative and desire the 
Department to vigorously speed up the modalities/site readiness, etc. required for installation 
of equipments/hardware at Consumer Commissions in conformity to the ‘Digital India’ 
initiative. 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.6 Apart from computerization of aforesaid 13 Consumer Commissions and training 
sessions, funds under CONFONET scheme for FY  2022-23 will also be used for 
also  replacement of old Hardwares in 20 Consumer Commissions, Date Center servers and 
software and for manpower support at approx. 650 Consumer Commissions.  
         As regard non -receipt of site -readiness certificate for 1 3 Consumer Commissions, the 
matter is being regularly taken up with concerned States/UTs from Department as well NIC 
(implementing agency). 
  
Recommendation No. 10 (Para No. 5.9) 
5.7 The Committee note that an amount Rs. 2.00 crore was proposed at BE stage which 
was revised downward and kept at Rs. 1.50 crore. They are constrained to note that out of 
this allocation, the Department has spent to the tune of Rs. 1.38 crore as on 11.2.202 2. The 
Committee apprehend that a little time is left in closure of the financial year 2021 -22 and the 
remaining amount hardly been spent. Resultantly, the amount will have to surrender to the 
Government Exchequer. They, therefore, desire the Department to  formulate their planning 
judiciously so as to leave no chance in spending the earmarked fund timely and consumers 
could not face any hardship on this count. The Committee further note that the Department 
plans to engage the service of independent professi onal organization for studies related to 
price. They also note that most of the powers under the Essential Act, 1955 and the 
Prevention of Black-Marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities, 1980 

30 
 
have been delegated to States as per order  dated 30.11.1974 and 9.6.1978. However, the 
central government regularly advises the States/UTs to implement relevant Acts effectively 
and enforcement is done through raids.   The Committee find that in view of such a very high 
raids/prosecution/conviction/detention, only 10005 persons were arrested and out of this 
number only 712 persons were convicted in 2020. Likewise, in 2021, out of 15450 arrested 
persons, only 1034 were convicted.   The Committee do not understand the rationale behind 
this downward tre nd in prosecution against raid. They apprehend that defaulters must have 
been taking the benefits of the loopholes of the provisions contained in the Acts or there may 
be connivance of  officials for their letting from being prosecuted who may, after letti ng from 
prosecution, again involve themselves in malpractices. The Committee, therefore, desire the 
Department to find out the reasons for non -conviction of the persons arrested and not 
prosecuted and take immediate action to refrain them from indulgence i n malpractices and if 
need be, to amend  the relevant Acts. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 5.8 For Strengthening of Price Monitoring Cell Scheme, the B.E has been allocated 
Rs.2.00 Crore for 2021 -22 which has been revised to Rs.1.50 Crore in R.E. The total 
expenditure has been incurred Rs. 1.44 Crore till 31.03.2022. 
 “Vide order dated 30.11.1974 and 09.06.1978, powers have been delegated to 
States /UTs to enforce both the Acts effectively. However, States/UTs are regularly 
requested to send the Action Taken  Reports through online and offline mode to 
assess the effectiveness of implementation of the provisions contained in these Acts. 
In this regard, a D.O. letter has been issued to the states of Andhra Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Maharashtra, Telengana, West Bengal, Gujarat and Tamil Nadu to specify 
the reasons for such low conviction rates and also to find whether the defaulters are 
taking advantage of any loopholes of the provisions of the Acts. 
  
In addition, States/UTs are also advised through different platforms  such as National 
Consultation Meetings, Video Conferencing etc. for proper implementation of these 
Acts and also to be vigilant so that no person can take advantage of any deficiency in 
the provisions contained in the Act.” 
 
Recommendation No. 12 (Para No. 6.12) 
5.9 The Committee note that State -level Corpus Funds are created with Centre -State 
sharing on 50:50 basis and with 75:25 basis in case of the NE States. They also note that 
between the years 2015 -16 to 2019 -20, a total of Centre’s share of Rs. 164.15 Crore had  

31 
 
been released for setting up of State Level Price Stabilisation Fund with Centre’s share of 
Rs. 50.00 Crore in Andhra Pradesh; Telangana; West Bengal; Odisha; Tamil Nadu; and 
Assam. Though the utilisation of the fund is monitored by the Department through  meetings/ 
video conferencing and by seeking States Utilization Certificates and Account Statements of 
the States concerned from time to time, yet the Committee find that many States either do 
not furnish the Utilization Certificates or delay in submitting  the same. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to take proactive steps for strict monitoring of the 
Account Statements of the States to make sure due spending on its part and seeking 
Utilization Certificates mandatorily from them.  
Reply of the Government 
5.10 The Department has sent  written request to create State Level PSF in a regular 
interval and also conveyed during National Consultation Meeting of Ministers of States/UTs 
in-charge of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs. Further i n Zonal Conference 
regarding Strengthening of Price Monitoring Cell at State/UTs, State/UTs are urged to create 
State/UT level PSF. 
DoCA has been making regular correspondence with Six States to whom advance has been 
granted for utilization of the Fund to   send the Utilization Certificates (UC). DoCA on 
8.3.2021 requested Telangana for sending revised UC. Reply is   still awaited. 
Further,  Andhra Pradesh was also requested on 31.3.2022 for sending UC for fund drawn 
only for PSF activities. Apart from above mentioned two states,  rest of four States i.e West 
Bengal, Odisha, Assam and Tamil Nadu   a reminder has been issued on 15.2.2022 
requesting them to use the Fund under State Level PSF and send the UCs. DoCA is 
proactively making regular communication to States for UCs/utilization of Fund. 
  
 
 
NEW DELHI;        LOCKET CHATTERJEE 
10 November, 2022       Chairperson, 
19 Kartika, 1944 (Saka)        Standing Committee on Food 
                 Consumer Affairs and 
                     Public Distribution

32  
APPENDIX I 
CONFIDENTIAL 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2022 -2023) HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, 9th NOVEMBER,2022 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in Committee Room ‘2’, Block ‘A’, Extension to Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
 Smt. Locket Chatterjee - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Anil Firojiya 
4. Shri Khagen Murmu 
5. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai (Bakabhai)Patel 
6. Shri Subrat Pathak 
7. Dr. Amar Singh 
8. Smt. Kavita Singh 
9. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
10. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
 
Rajya Sabha 
11. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
12. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
13. Shri Baburam Nishad 
14. Shri Rajmani Patel 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   - Director 
3. Shri Ram Lal Yadav                          - Additional Director 
4. Dr. Mohit Rajan    - Deputy Secretary 

33  
XXX XXX XXX 
2. XXX   Thereafter, the  Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the draft report on Action Taken by the 
Government on observations/recommendations contained in the 19 th Report (17 th LS) on 
Demands for Grants (2022 -23) pertaining to Department of Consumer Affairs; XXXXX 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for co nsideration the Draft Report. After due 
deliberations, the Committee unanimously adopted the said Action Taken Report without any 
amendment/modification and authorized the Chairperson to carry out verbal and 
consequential changes, if any, therein and present the same to the Parliament. 
XXX XXX XXX 
3. XXX XXX XXX 
4. XXX XXX XXX 
5. XXX XXX XXX 
6. XXX XXX XXX 
The Committee then adjourned. 
************* 
  

34  
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TENTH REPORT  
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2022-2023) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 21  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government :  
Para Nos.:- 3.4, 4.34, 4.35, 4.36, 4.40, 6.11, 7.5, 8.44, 8.45, 
8.46, 8.47, 8.48, 8.49, 8.50 and 9.9 
 
(Chapter – II, Total 15)          
Percentage : 71.43% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received 
from the Government: 
 
Para Nos.  
(Chapter – III, Total - NIL) 
Percentage : NIL% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of  the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
Para Nos. : 4.37 
(Chapter – IV, Total -01) 
Percentage : 4.76 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
interim replies of the Government have been received. 
 
Para Nos.:-  1.10, 4.38, 4.39, 5.9 and 6.12  
                     (Chapter – V, Total - 05)  
                       Percentage : 23.81% 