(i) 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2021-2022) 
 
 
       
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the recommendations /observations 
contained in the Twelfth Report of the Committee (17th Lok Sabha) on “Strengthening 
of Public Distribution System – Augmenting use of Technological Means and 
Implementation of ‘One Nation, One Ration Card’ Scheme ” pertaining to the Ministry 
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution)} 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
17 


(ii) 
 
SEVENTEEN REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2021-2022) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD & PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the observations/ recommendations 
contained in the Twelfth Report of the Committee (17th Lok Sabha) on “Strengthening 
of Public Distribution System  – Augmenting use of Technological Means and 
Implementation of ‘One Nation, One Ration Card’ Scheme ” pertaining to the Ministry 
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution)} 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7.12.2021 
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 7.12.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
   December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1942 (Saka) 


(iii) 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Composition of the Committee ……………………………………… IV 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………... VI 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………… 
 
1 
Chapter II Recommendations /Observations which have been 
  accepted by Government…………………………… 12 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
   Government’s replies………………………………... 
22 
Chapter IV Recommendations /Observations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted  
  by the Committee ……………………………………… 
27 
Chapter V Recommendations /Observations in respect of 
which final replies of Government are  
  still awaited……………………………………………… 
28 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held   on 
……………......................................................... ...      
 
24 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report  
of the Committee (17th Lok Sabha)…………………..            
26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(iv) 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution  (2021-2022):- 
 
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay, Chairperson  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat 
4. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
5. Shri G. S. Basavaraj 
6. Ms. Debasree Chaudhuri 
7. Shri Sunny Deol 
8. Shri Anil Firojiya 
9. Shri Selvam G. 
10. Shri Rajendra D. Gavit 
11. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi 
12. Shri Bhagwant Mann 
13. Shri Khagen Murmu 
14. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai (Bakabhai) Patel 
15. Shri Subrat Pathak 
16. Smt. Himadri Singh 
17. Smt. Kavita Singh 
18. Shri Nandigam Suresh 
19. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
20. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
21. Shri Ve.Vaithilingam 
 
Rajya  Sabha 
 
22. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
23. Smt. Roopa Ganguly 
24. Shri K. G. Kenye 
25. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
26. Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
27. Shri Rajmani Patel  
28. Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
29. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
30. Shri Ramji 
31. Shri G.K. Vasan 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Pawan Kumar         - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi     - Director 
3. Shri G.Guite    - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Dong Lianthang Tonsing - Under Secretary 
 
 

(v) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution (2021-2022) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Seventeenth Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in the Twelfth Report of 
the Comm ittee (17th Lok Sabha)  on “Strengthening of Public Distribution System – 
Augmenting use of Technological Means and Implementation of ‘One Nation, One 
Ration Card’ Scheme ” pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
 
2.  The Twelfth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 1 9th 
March, 2021 . The Government has furnished replies indicating Action Taken on the 
recommendations contained in the Report on 28th September, 2021. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
01 December, 2021. 
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.  
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Comments of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the text of the Report. 
  
 
 
 
  
 
NEW DELHI;              SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY 
01 December, 2021                  Chairperson, 
10 Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka)                                 Standing Committee on Food, 
    Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT  
CHAPTER - I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Committee 
(17th Lok Sabha) on “Strengthening Pu blic Distribution System - Augmenting use of 
Technological Means and Implementation of 'One Nation, One Ration Card' Scheme ”, 
pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department 
of Food and Public Distribution).  
1.2  The Twelfth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table in Rajya 
Sabha on 19th March, 2021. It contained 18 recommendations/observations. Action 
taken replies in respect of all the 18 recommendations/observations contained in the 
Report have been received and these have been categorized as follows:-  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by Government :  
Para Nos.: 1,2,3,6,8,10,11,12,13,14,15 and 18 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies :  
Para Nos.: 4,5,9,16,17 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee :  
Para No.: Nil  
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which interim r eplies of 
Government have been received :  
Para No. : 7  
1.3  The Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter I and final replies in 
respect of recommendation for which only interim reply has been given  by the 
Government, should be furnished to the Committee expeditiously.  
1.4  The Committee further emphasize that utmost importance should be given 
to the implementation of Recommendations/ Observations accepted by the 
Government. In case where it is not possible for the Government to implement 
the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to Committee in time with reasons for non implementation.  

2 
 
1.5  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
the recommendations/ observations. 
A. FUNDS UNDER IM-PDS 
(Recommendation Serial No. 1) 
1.6 The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as follows:-  
“The Committee note that to sustain the reforms brought in the functioning of Ta rgeted 
Public Distribution System (TPDS), the Department has started “Integrated 
Management of Public Distribution System” (IM -PDS), approved for implementation in 
all States/UTs with a total outlay of Rs. 127.30 Cr. w.e.f. April 2018 for a period of two 
years. The validity of the scheme has been extended up to 31.03.2022 without 
escalation in the total project cost. Upto December 2020, the facility for portability of 
ration card under One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) Scheme has been seamlessly 
enabled in  32 States/UTs, namely – Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Andhra Pradesh, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, Goa, 
Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Ladakh, Lakshadweep, Mad hya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Odisha, Puducherry, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, 
Telangana, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand. Funds to the tune of  
Rs.50,96,49,566 have been released under the Scheme. Assam ( which received 
Rs.88,80,000 during the Financial Year 2018 -19) and Chhattisgarh (which received Rs. 
92,35,200 during the Financial Year 2019 -20) have not on boarded the portability grid. 
The Committee desire the Government to also look into the requirement s of Ladakh, 
Chandigarh and Puducherry and release funds for these States/UTs, if required. Also 
funds utilization by States/UTs including the States of Assam and Chattisgarh should be 
scrupulously scrutinized and utilization certificates obtained from all  recipients of the 
funds.” 
1.7  The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:-  
“At present the facility for portability of ration card under One Nation One Ration Card 
(ONORC) plan has been seamlessly enabled in 34 States/UTs. (Delhi and Wes t Bengal 
are the latest to enable the same from July , 2021 and August, 2021 respectively). This 
Department is vigorously pursuing States of Assam and Chhattisgarh to enable ONORC 
at the earliest depending upon their technical readiness. The proposal of UT of Ladakh 
for release of funds under “Integrated Management of Public Distribution System” (IM -
PDS) scheme is under consideration. Further, this Department has requested UTs of 
Chandigarh and Puducherry to submit their proposals for release of funds under IM-
PDS scheme as per requisite conditions mentioned in Administrative Approval of the 
scheme. So far Utilization Certificates for amount of Rs. 23.11 crore has been received 
from States/UTs. State of Chhattisgarh has submitted Utilization Certificate for a mount 

3 
 
of Rs.85,83,975/ - out of total funds released Rs.92,35,200/ -. This Department is 
pursuing State of Assam to furnish Utilization Certificate at the earliest.” 
1.8 The Committee in their original report emphasized the need for scrutiny of 
funds utilization by the States of Assam and Chhattisgarh and obtaining 
utilization certificate s from all recipients. The Department of Food and Public 
Distribution has stated that Utilization Certificates (UC) for amount of Rs.23.11 
crore had been received from  States/UTs out of the total amout of 
Rs.50,96,49,566/- released under the scheme which means UC s of an amount of 
about Rs.27.85 crore are yet to be received from the States/UTs. The Department 
has further stated that the State of Chhattisgarh, which has n ot onboarded the 
Integrated Management of Public Distribution System (IM -PDS), has submitted 
Utilization Certificate for amount of Rs.85,83,975/ - out of total funds to the tune of 
Rs.92,35,200/ released to that State during the Financial Year 2019 -20.  Ano ther 
State which also has not onboarded the IM -PDS, viz  Assam also received 
Rs.88,80,000 during the Financial Year 2018 -19, but has still not furnished UC for 
the same.  In the reply, the Government has mentioned having pursued the State 
of Assam to furni sh UC for the total amount of Rs.88,80,000/ - while the reply is 
silent on the case of the State of Chhattisgarh which also has not furnished UC 
for an amount of Rs.6,51,225/-. Thus, the Ministry needs to apprise the Committee 
in this regard .  As regards th e recommendation for looking into the requirement 
of the UTs of Ladakh, Chandigarh and Puducherry, the Ministry has replied that it 
requested the UTs of Chandigarh and Puducherry to submit their proposals for 
release of funds under the IM -PDS.  The Committ ee desire the Government to 
furnish the complete status of furnishing of UC by all beneficiary States/UTs and 
also convince the States of Assam and Chhattisgarh to onboard the IM -PDS  
without any loss of time.  
 
B. GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL  
(Recommendation Serial No. 14) 
1.9 The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that with the setting up of toll -free number/online grievance 
redressal systems and the existence of District Grievance Redressal Officers (DGRO s) 
and State Food Commissions (SFCs), States/UTs are able to effectively address the 
grievances related to foodgrain distribution under the National Food Security Act, 2013 
(NFSA). They also note that the States/UTs of Delhi, Goa, J&K, Kerala, Manipur, 
Nagaland and Puducherry have designated some statutory body to function as State 
Food Commission and rest of the States/UTs have independently constituted State 
Food Commission. While appreciating the position of grievance redressal at the District 

4 
 
and State levels, the Committee desire the Union Government to ensure that 
States/UTs should keep the channels for grievance redressal open and accessible to 
the public at all times. The DGROs and SFCs should also be made to identify and keep 
record of the flaws in the system that come to their notice, if any, which would be used 
in any event of revision of the system in future.  
1.10 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“All States/UTs have operationalised toll free helpline nos. 1967/1800 -series for 
registration of beneficiaries’ complaints and grievance and their effective redressal 
under TPDS.” 
1.11 The Committee in their original Report recommended that District 
Grievance Redressal Officers (DGROs) and State Food Commissions (SFCs) 
should be made to identify and keep record of the flaws in the grievance 
redressal system in the implementation of the National Food Security Act, 2013 
(NFSA) for use in the event of revision of the system in future. The Department in 
its action taken reply has s tated that all States/UTs have operationalised toll free 
helpline nos. 1967/1800 -series for registration of beneficiaries’ complaints and 
grievance and their effective redressal under TPDS. While appreciating the 
existence of the helpline numbers, the Comm ittee once again express their zeal 
to concurrently keep on record the lacunae that surfaced in the course of 
implementation of the grievance redressal system of the One Nation, One Ration 
Card Scheme. 
 
C. VIGILANCE COMMITTEES 
(Recommendation Serial No. 15) 
1.12 The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as follows:- 
“Every State Government is required to set  up Vigilance Committees State, District, 
Block and FPS levels with regard to implementation of NFSA consisting of such persons 
as may be prescribed by the State Government giving due representation to the local 
authorities, the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Women and Destitute 
Persons or Persons with Disability and meetings held at least once every quarter at all 
levels. Howev er, there have hardly been any regular meetings of the State level 
Vigilance Committees except that of the State of Gujarat, that too 3 meetings per year 
(during the 7 year period from 2012 -13 to 2018 -19) out of 4 meetings in a year 
mandated by the TPDS Control Order, 2015. Arunachal Pradesh had such meeting only 
once in 2016 -17, Assam had such meeting only once in 2017 -18, Bihar had twice in 
2015-16, Chhattisgarh had 7 times in 2012 -13 and 8 times in 2013 -14, Karnataka had 
thrice in 2017 -18 and once in 201 8-19, Kerala had thrice in 2012 - 13, twice in 2013 -14 

5 
 
and once in 2014-15, Manipur had once each in 2012 -13 and 2013-14, Nagaland had 4 
times each in 2014-15 and 2015-16, Sikkim had once in 2013-14, Tamil Nadu and Uttar 
Pradesh had 4 times in 2018 -19. In r est of the States/UTs no State level Vigilance 
Committee meeting had ever taken place during the said 7 years. This speaks volumes 
about poor vigilance at the State level. Even the few States that held State Level 
Vigilance Committees meetings, the meeting s were held irregularly. For example, 
though Chattisgarh held such meeting in excess of the mandated 4 times in 2012 -13 
and 2013 -14, discontinued thereafter, Nagaland held such meeting 4 times each in 
2014-15 and 2015 -16, and didn’t continue thereafter. Si milarly, Tamil Nadu and Uttar 
Pradesh held the meetings 4 times each in 2018 -19 only. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Department of Food and Public Distribution should monitor 
regularly and ensure timely and regular convening of not o nly State Level Vigilance 
Committee meetings, but also at the District, Block and FPS levels so that NFSA 
beneficiaries actually reap the benefits of the welfare schemes of the Government. “ 
 
1.13 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) provides that  
(i). For ensuring transparency and proper functioning of the Targeted Public 
Distribution System and accountability of the functionaries in such system, every 
State Government shall set up Vig ilance Committees as specified in the Public 
Distribution System (Control) Order, 2001, made under the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955, as amended from time to time, at the State, District, 
Block and fair price shop levels consisting of such persons, as may be prescribed 
by the State Government giving due representation to the local authorities, the 
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, women and destitute persons or 
persons with disability.  
(ii). The Vigilance Committees shall perform the following func tions, namely: — 
(a) regularly supervise the implementation of all schemes under this Act; (b) 
inform the District Grievance Redressal Officer, in writing, of any violation of the 
provisions of this Act; and (c) inform the District Grievance Redressal Offic er, in 
writing, of any malpractice or misappropriation of funds found by it.  
Targeted Public Distribution System (Control) Order, 2015 provides that the State 
Government shall set up vigilance committees for the Targeted Public Distribution 
System at the State, District, Block and fair price shop levels as per the provisions of the 
Food Security Act to perform functions as specified in the said Act. Meetings of the 
vigilance committees shall be held at least once every quarter at all levels and the date 
and periodicity of the meeting shall be notified by the State Governments and given 
wide publicity. The State Government shall send a report annually to the Central 
Government on the functioning of vigilance committees.  

6 
 
Further, Department of Food and Publi c Distribution is regularly writing to 
States/UTs Government for convening of Vigilance Committees meetings at regular 
intervals.” 
1.14 The Committee, in their original report, recommended that the Department 
of Food and Public Distribution should monitor regularly and ensure timely and 
regular convening of not only State Level Vigilance Committee meetings, but also 
at the District, Block and FPS levels so that NFSA beneficiaries actually reap the 
benefits of the welfare schemes of the Government. In reply the Department, inter 
alia, stated that it is regularly writing to States/UT Government s for convening of 
Vigilance Committee meetings at regular intervals. While appreciating the 
Department for regularly writing to States/UTs with regard to convening of 
Vigilance Committees meetings, the Committee desire that the detailed report on 
such meetings may be asked from the States/UT Administrations for a more 
effective monitoring of the same. 
 
  

7 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 1 
 
“The Committee note that to sustain the reforms brought in the functioning of 
Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS), the Department has started “Integrated 
Management of Public Distribution System” (IM-PDS), approved for implementation in 
all States/UTs with a total outlay of Rs. 127.30 Cr. w.e.f. April 2018 for a period of two 
years. The validity of the scheme has been extended up to 31.03.2022 without 
escalation in the total project cost. Upto Dece mber 2020, the facility for portability of 
ration card under One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) Scheme has been seamlessly 
enabled in 32 States/UTs, namely –  Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Andhra Pradesh, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Ha veli and Daman & Diu, Goa, 
Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Ladakh, Lakshadweep, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Odisha, Puducherry, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu , 
Telangana, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand. Funds to the tune of 
Rs.50,96,49,566 have been released under the Scheme. Assam (which received 
Rs.88,80,000 during the Financial Year 2018 -19) and Chhattisgarh (which received Rs. 
92,35,200 during the F inancial Year 2019 -20) have not on boarded the portability grid.  
The Committee desire the Government to also look into the requirements of Ladakh, 
Chandigarh and Puducherry and release funds for these States/UTs, if required. Also 
funds utilization by States/UTs including the States of Assam and Chattisgarh should be 
scrupulously scrutinized and utilization certificates obtained from all recipients of the 
funds”.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“At present the facility for portability of ration card under One Na tion One Ration 
Card (ONORC) plan has been seamlessly enabled in 34 States/UTs. (Delhi and West 
Bengal are the latest to enable the same from July 2021 and August, 2021 
respectively). This Department is vigorously pursuing States of Assam and Chhattisgarh 
to enable ONORC at the earliest depending upon their technical readiness. The 
proposal of UT of Ladakh for release of funds under “Integrated Management of Public 
Distribution System” (IM-PDS) scheme is under consideration.  
 
Further, this Department has r equested UTs of Chandigarh and Puducherry to 
submit their proposals for release of funds under IM -PDS scheme as per requisite 
conditions mentioned in Administrative Approval of the scheme. So far Utilization 
Certificates for amount of Rs. 23.11 crore has b een received from States/UTs. State of 
Chhattisgarh has submitted Utilization Certificate for amount of Rs.85,83,975/ - out of 
total funds released Rs.92,35,200/ -. This Department is pursuing State of Assam to 
furnish Utilization Certificate at the earliest.”  
 
 
 

8 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
 
“The main objective of the One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) scheme is to 
introduce nation-wide portability in the distribution of foodgrains under the National Food 
Security Act, 2013 (NFSA), i.e. eligible ration card holders/beneficiaries covered under 
NFSA shall be able to lift their entitled foodgrains from any Fair Price Shop (FPS) of 
their choice anywhere in the country, by usin g their same/existing ration card after 
biometric/Aadhaar authentication on electronic Point of Sale (ePoS) device at the FPS. 
So far 32 States/UTs have onboarded the national portability grid. The Committee note 
that the National Informatics Centre (NIC) being central technical partner of the 
Department for the implementation of technology driven schemes for Public Distribution 
System reforms is supporting the Department through technical manpower for 
development of software applications/modules, software utilities, mobile applications 
and various other technical aspects of the scheme. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that NIC should be asked to take measures to rope in ordinary citizens in 
verification of the stocks at FPSs and working of the ePOS machi nes attached 
therewith. The Committee hope that the remaining States/UTs will be joining the 
Scheme at the earliest so that the beneficiaries under the NFSA are able to lift the 
foodgrains entitlement from any FPS in any State/UT across the nation by using  their 
existing ration card after biometric/Aadhaar authentication.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“The said recommendation is already provided for under the Chapter XI of the 
National Food Security Act (NFSA), 2013 and mandates all State/UT Governments to 
conduct periodic social audits on the functioning of the Targeted Public Distribution 
System including the fair price shops. Accordingly, the States/UTs are periodically 
instructed to conduct the social audits in this regard. 
 
28. (1) Every local authority, or any other authority or body, as may be authorised 
by the State Government, shall conduct or cause to be conducted, periodic social 
audits on the functioning of fair price shops, Targeted Public Distribution System 
and other  welfare schemes, and cause to p ublicise its findings and take 
necessary action, in  such manner as may be prescribed by the State 
Government. 
 
Further, NIC is only a technical body and does not possess expertise in 
conducting such 
social audits of stocks at the FPSs, functioning of the FPSs, etc.  
 
At present the facility for portability of ration card under One Nation One Ration 
Card (ONORC) plan has been seamlessly enabled in 34 States/UTs and beneficiaries 
under the NFSA are able to lift the foodgrains entitlement from any FPS in any S tate/UT 
across the  nation by using their existing ration card after biometric/Aadhaar 
authentication.” 

9 
 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 3 
 
“The Committee note that under the National Food Security Act (NFSA), 2013, 
identification of 100% of intended beneficiaries is completed in 15 States/UTs and that 
identification in  other States/Union Territories is at various stages of completion. The 
Committee also note  that the process of identification and deletion of 
bogus/ineligible/multiple ration cards, is  aided by the digitization of ration cards 
database and further supported by Aadhaar based  de-duplication of ration 
cards/beneficiaries. They desire that the functions of  identification/de-duplication may 
be coordinated with various Divisions/Departments of  the Government that are 
custodians of related matters including land records. For this the  tool/data base used in 
identification of beneficiary by States/UTs should be got linked to  such data as available 
elsewhere with potential to help in determining th e income of the  beneficiary family. As 
the population census is being prepared in the current year or the  next, the Committee 
desire that the Government should finalise the list of eligible households  taking into 
account COVID-19 pandemic and lockdown of t he economy resulting in  dislocation of 
families, reverse migration and change in income level of many families in  various 
States/UTs across the country.” 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“The Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) under the National Food 
Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) is operated under the joint responsibility of the Central and 
State/Union Territory (UT) Governments. Under the Act, it is the responsibility of the 
State Government to  identify— (a) the households to be covered under the Antyoday a 
Anna Yojana to the extent  specified by the Central Government, in accordance with the 
guidelines applicable to the  said scheme; and (b) the remaining households as priority 
households to be covered under the Targeted Public Distribution System, in accordance 
with such guidelines as the State Government may specify.  
 
Thus, the responsibility for identification of eligible households/ beneficiaries, and 
issuance  of their ration cards rests with the concerned State Government and the 
criteria for identification of the beneficiaries under the Priority Category may vary from 
the State to State. 
 
This Department in pursuant to the provisions of the TPDS (Control) Order, 2015 
under the National Food Security Act (NFSA), had issued instruction to all States/UTs to 
regularly  undertake the verification and deletion of ineligible/bogus ration 
cards/beneficiaries. As the  addition and deletion of ration cards/beneficiaries is a 
continuous process, and due to the   computerisation and implementation of information 
technology in PDS operations from 2013  onwards, the States/UTs are able to detect 
and delete the duplicate, ineligible, ghost ration  cards, besides de -duplication due to 
Aadhaar seeding, detection of deaths, permanent migration of beneficiaries etc. Against 
the deleted/cancelled ration cards, the States/UTs are periodically including new eligible 
and left-out households and are regularly issuing new ration cards up to their respective 

10 
 
ceiling of NFSA population coverage leading to  achievement of ‘Rightful Targe ting’ of 
beneficiaries or food subsidy.” 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 6 
 
“National Informatics Centre is supporting the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution through technical manpower for development of software applications with 
regard to implementation of One Nation, One Ration Card Scheme. They also note that 
the Department has difficulty in implementing Aadhaar based biometric transactions and 
that nearly 13,000 FPSs in the country are in chronically poorly connected areas. They 
also not e the fact that States have been advised for making alternative arrangements 
like Data Cards/ Mobile Hotspot for ensuring better internet connectivity which has been 
pursued with  Department of Telecom (DoT). The Committee appreciate the fact that 
Department has advised all States/UTs that genuine beneficiaries/ households shall not 
be denied from their  entitled foodgrains under NFSA only on the ground of not 
possessing an Aadhaar number,  or due to any technical failure of ePoS device. The 
Committee desire t hat NIC may be asked  to develop a device or mobile application for 
use of FPS dealers in such areas which may facilitate recording of transaction offline for 
eventual uploading of all sale transactions to  centralized ePoS servers or central 
repository. The  Committee also desire the Government  to consider the possibility of 
taking advantage of the fifth generation mobile technology for this purpose.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“Facility of recording offline FPS transactions for eventual uploading of all sale 
transactions to centralized ePoS servers of the State/UT is available in the software for 
ePOS devices and  this facility is now available across all ePoS devices.  Further, the 
concerned States have been asked to coordinate with CSC e -Governance Ltd  for 
availing the fibre internet connectivity under the BharatNet project.” 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 8 
 
“In the implementation of the National Food Security Act, 2013 and One Nation 
One Ration Card Scheme, FCI undertakes movement of foodgrains from FCI depots i n 
procuring /surplus regions to FCI depots in consuming /deficit regions and that lifting 
and movement of  foodgrains from FCI depots to State/UT depots for issue to PDS is 
being done by the  respective State/UTs. The Committee are, however, constrained to 
note that the Union  Government has no information about procedure on re -bonding of 
foodgrains in Fair Price  Shops (FPSs). The Committee, therefore, desire that the Union 
Government should have a relook at the issue with a view to issuing a broad guidelines 
applicable uniformly across all  the States/UTs, to be followed in reloading foodgrains 
stocks in FPS and the payment  thereof, invariably suggesting a minimum intervening 
time between communication of the  requirement of FPS dealer, who may need a good 
measure of independence in the matter,  to delivery/lifting. Also districts/places of a 
State/UT with preponderance of migrant workers  should be accurately identified for use 
in logistic planning. The Committee feel that such an  arrangement is necessary as the 
new dispensation empowers beneficiaries with portability of entitlement.” 

11 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“The ePoS application software and the backend Aadhaar enabled PDS 
(AePDS) system developed by the NIC, has enabled the commodity -wise grain -
accounting and d ay to  day transparency in the closing stock position of each FPS – 
centrally maintained by the States/UTs on their respective servers.  
 
Further, through the use of online allocation system in the backend, the 
States/UTs are able  to push the FPS -wise month ly allocation of foodgrains to ePoS 
devices of every FPS,  according to the number of AAY households and PHH 
beneficiaries attached to them.  Thereafter, the ePoS application software is capable of 
receiving the foodgrains (i.e.  acknowledging the receipt of foodgrains from State 
Godown) online with the biometric  authentication of the FPS dealers and updates the 
opening stock back in the ePoS/AePDS  (FPS automation) servers. The closing balance 
of foodgrains of previous month (before the  receipt of new allocati on) is already 
accounted for, at the time of generating fresh monthly  allocation orders, from the 
backend Online Allocation system at the State HQ for all the FPSs.” 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 10 
 
“The Committee note that 91% of the total available Fair Price Shops (FPSs) in 
the country as on 18.12.2020 are equipped with electronic point of sale (ePOS) device. 
A look at the  snapshot of the portability transactions under the One Nation, One Ration 
Card (ONORC) Scheme shows an encouraging rate in intra-State transaction whereas 
there is low rate of  inter-State transaction due to the Covid -19 related restrictions 
imposed by many States on  biometric authentication of beneficiaries and lack of 
awareness on part of beneficiaries. The  Committee also not e that regular time -to-time 
reviews of the implementation/rollout of ONORC scheme at the level of Hon’ble Minister 
of CA,F&PD with State Food Ministers and  at the level of Secretary (DFPD) and Joint 
Secretary with State Food Secretaries for  resolution of c hallenges/bottlenecks have 
been undertaken. The Committee also note that the Government has stepped up efforts 
for wide -publicity, awareness generation and identify  top migrants sending/receiving 
districts and collaborate with concerned DCs/DMs, industry  associations, civil societies, 
NGOs, etc. in such districts to undertake focused awareness  generation in those 
districts / identified places apart from Media campaign through FM and  Community 
radio channels across the States/UTs implementing ONORC. While ap preciating the 
efforts of the Government, the Committee desire that information in this regard may also 
be communicated on the Registered Mobile Numbers of beneficiaries and also 
prominently displayed on the Fair Price Shops.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“The Department had prepared the Information, Education and Communication 
(IEC) material including the specimens for Posters & Banners which have been shared 
with all States/UTs  and had requested them to put up the posters/banners, etc. at all 
respective Fair Price Shops for creating awareness about ONORC among all NFSA 
beneficiaries. Besides, the  Mera Ration mobile app provides a feature to all 

12 
 
beneficiaries to view their last few  transactions, including portable transaction done 
under ONORC, anytime and anywhere easily.  
 
Further, States/UTs have been advised to undertake multi -modal wide publicity 
and awareness generation about ONORC plan including through SMS on the registered 
mobile numbers of the beneficiaries.” 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 11 
 
“Under the National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA), Rice, Wheat and Coarse 
grains are distributed to the beneficiaries at highly subsidised prices of Rs. 3, 2 and 1 
per Kg.  respectively. The Committee also note with appreciation the fact that atta is 
being distributed in J&K, Sikkim and Tripura and fortified atta is distributed in Haryana 
and West Bengal. Such  practice, the Committee hope, would ease the problem of 
NFSA beneficiaries, who are poor  and unable to manage the time and resources for 
grinding/milling wheat into flour. The  Committee, therefore, desire that the Government 
should give option to beneficiaries in all  States/UTs under NFSA to receive wheat or 
atta within entitled quota, as per beneficiary’s preference.” 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“The Government has already provided an option to States/UTs for distribution of 
Wheat Flour (Atta) in lieu of wheat to ration card holders under NFSA, 2013.”  
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 12 
 
“The Committee observe that under the One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) 
Scheme, any member of a beneficiary family may withdraw required quantity of 
foodgrain (within entitled  quota) from any Fair Price Shop (FPS) of their choice after 
biometric/Aadhaar authentication on an electronic Point of Sale (ePoS) device and the 
remaining quantity of entitled  foodgrains may be lifted by other family members as per 
the TPDS Control Order 2015. A  beneficiary family may draw their full entitlement of 
foodgrains in more than one installment.  The Committee are of the view that the poor 
and illiterate beneficiaries in remote rural areas  may be made aware of the Schemes. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Order  should be communicated in 
simple language preferably in local dialect of the beneficiary  through her/his Registered 
Mobile Phone number and also prominently displayed on Fair Price Shops.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“The Department has instructed all States/UTs to communicate the provisions of  
ONORC to the beneficiaries in local languages and also to sensitise the FPS dealers for 
informing the beneficiaries about the same.  Besides, the Mera Ration mobile app which 
has currently been rolled out in Hindi, English  and 10 other regional languages provides 
a feature to all beneficiaries to view their last few  transactions, including por table 
transaction done under ONORC, anytime and anywhere  easily. Further, States/UTs 
have been advised to undertake multi -modal wide publicity and  awareness generation 

13 
 
about ONORC plan including through SMS on the registered mobile  numbers of the 
beneficiaries.” 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 13 
 
“The Committee observe that the Department issued directions under Section 38 
of the National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) to all the States/UTs stating, inter alia 
that disability as separate criteria within the eligibility criteria may be identified by all 
States/UTs for inclusion of persons with disability, subject to exclusion criteria, for 
coverage under  NFSA; preference be given to disabled person who happensto be at 
par with general  candidate/person; a database of disabled persons covered under 
NFSA shall be created/  maintained separately and suitable mechanism of monitoring 
and reporting accordingly be  put in place for compliance; no disabled person otherwise 
eligible should be denied on the  ground that  the State has exhausted its upper limit 
under NFSA; and that all States/UTs  shall ensure and direct the concerned District 
Administration to put in place an appropriate  mechanism and whole machinery may be 
mobilised in a mission mode for compliance of  these directions. States/UTs of 
Lakshdweep, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Telangana,  West Bengal and Rajasthan 
have submitted their action taken reports while rest of the  States/UTs have been 
reminded to do the same. The Committee, while appreciating the  steps taken by the 
Government, recommend that the Ministry should vigorously pursue the  rest of the 
States/UTs to furnish status of action taken by them on the directions issued by  the 
Union Government. The Committee also desire that the Ministry may consider  setting 
up an inter-ministerial co-ordination committee to make productive use of data available  
elsewhere in implementation of the NFSA and One Nation One Ration Card Scheme.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“The matter for inclusion of disabled persons as bene ficiaries under the NFSA is 
being vigorously pursued with the States/UTs at all levels in the Department through 
letters, Video Conferences and telephonically also.” 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 14 
 
“The Committee note that with the setting up of toll-free number/online grievance 
redressal systems and the existence of District Grievance Redressal Officers (DGROs) 
and State  Food Commissions (SFCs), States/UTs are able to effectively address the 
grievances related to foodgrain distribution under the National F ood Security Act, 2013 
(NFSA). They  also note that the States/UTs of Delhi, Goa, J&K, Kerala, Manipur, 
Nagaland and  Puducherry have designated some statutory body to function as State 
Food Commission  and rest of the States/UTs have independently constitute d State 
Food Commission. While appreciating the position of grievance redressal at the District 
and State levels, the  Committee desire the Union Government to ensure that 
States/UTs should keep the  channels for grievance redressal open and accessible to 
the public at all times. The DGROs  and SFCs should also be made to identify and keep 
record of the flaws in the system that  come to their notice, if any, which would be used 
in any event of revision of the system in future.” 
 

14 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“All States/UTs have operationalised toll free helpline nos. 1967/1800 -series for 
registration of beneficiaries’ complaints and grievance and their effective redressal 
under TPDS.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 15 
 
“Every State Government is required to setup Vigilance Committees State, 
District, Block and FPS levels with regard to implementation of NFSA consisting of such 
persons as may be  prescribed by the State Government giving due representation to 
the local authorities, the  Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Women and 
Destitute Persons or Persons with  Disability and meetings held at least once every 
quarter at all levels. However, there have  hardly been any regular meetings of the State 
level Vigilance Committees except that of the  State of Gujarat, that too 3 meetings per 
year (during the 7 year period from 2012 -13 to 2018-19) out of 4 meetings in a year 
mandated by the TPDS Control Order, 2015. Arunachal Pradesh had such meeting only 
once in 2016 -17, Assam had such meeting only once in  2017-18, Bihar had twice in 
2015-16, Chhattisgarh had 7 times in 2012 -13 and 8 times in  2013-14, Karnataka had 
thrice in 2017 -18 and once in 2018 -19, Kerala had thrice in 2012 - 13, twice in 2013-14 
and once in 2014-15, Manipur had once each in 2012 -13 and 2013-14, Nagaland had 4 
times each in 2014-15 and 2015-16, Sikkim had once in 2013-14, Tamil Nadu and Uttar 
Pradesh had 4 times in 2018 -19. In rest of the States/UTs no State level  Vigilance 
Committee meeting had ever taken place during the said 7 years. This speaks  volumes 
about poor vigilance at the State level. Even the few States that held State Level  
Vigilance Committees meetings, the meetings were held irregularly. For example, 
though Chattisgarh held such meeting in excess of the mandated 4 times in 2012 -13 
and 2013 -14, discontinued thereafter, Nagaland held such meeting 4 times each in 
2014-15 and 2015 -16, and didn’t continue thereafter. Similarly, Tamil Nadu and Uttar 
Pradesh held the  meetings 4 times each in 2018 -19 only. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Department of Food and Public Distribution should monitor 
regularly and ensure timely and  regular convening of not only State Level Vigilance 
Committee meetings, but also at the  District, Block and FPS levels so that NFSA 
beneficiaries actually reap the benefits of the welfare schemes of the Government.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) provides that  
 
1. For ensuring transparency and proper functioning of the Targeted Public 
Distribution System and accountability of the functionaries in such system, every 
State Government shall set up Vigilance Committees as specified in the Public 
Distribution System (Control) Order, 2001, made under the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955, as  amended from time to time, at the State, District, 
Block and fair price shop levels consisting of such persons, as may be prescribed 

15 
 
by the State Government giving  due representation to the local authorities, the 
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled  Tribes, women and destitute persons or 
persons with disability. 
2.  The Vigilance Committees shall perform the following functions, namely:— 
(a) regularly supervise the implementation of all schemes under this Act; 
(b) inform the District Grievance Redressal Officer, in writing, of any violation of 
the provisions of this Act; and 
(c) inform the District Grievance Redressal Officer, in writing, of any malpractice 
or misappropriation of funds found by it.  
 
Targeted Public Distribution System (Control) Order, 2015 provides that the State 
Government shall set up vigilance committees for the Targeted Public Distribution 
System at the State, District, Block and fair price shop levels as per the provisions of the 
Food Security  Act to perform functions as specified in the said Act. Meetings of the 
vigilance committees shall be held at least once every quarter at all levels and the date 
and periodicity of the  meeting shall be notified by the State Governments and given 
wide public ity. The State  Government shall send a report annually to the Central 
Government on the functioning of vigilance committees.  
 
Further, Department of Food and Public Distribution is regularly writing to 
States/UTs Government for convening of Vigilance Comm ittees meetings at regular 
intervals.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 18 
 
“The Committee note that the Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) system gives the 
option to  beneficiaries to buy foodgrains of their choice, diversify food options 
depending on dietary  preferences while it leads to Government savings due to high 
administrative burden and costs on account of procurement, storage and distribution of 
foodgrains through Fair Price  Shops. The Committee have also been informed about 
beneficiaries ending up spending higher cost in accessing DBT than erstwhile PDS due 
to distance, multiple visits, and higher waiting time for cash withdrawal each month. The 
Committee also note that there w ere reports of inadequate availability of the foodgrain 
in the open market. The system of DBT is  in operation in Union Territories of 
Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli (Urban) with  significant female headed households 
and Puducherry. Given the fact that the  provision mandating the eldest woman who is 
not less than eighteen years of age, in every eligible  household, shall be Head of the 
household for the purpose of issue of ration cards, for all  States/UTs implementing 
NFSA is applicable in DBT Cash system to o, misuse of the cash  by a male member of 
the family is not likely. The Committee, therefore, desire that the  Government should 
make a feasibility study on introducing DBT Cash as per suitability, in  urban areas, 
while allowing PDS infrastructure to functi on for the benefit of migrant  beneficiaries 

16 
 
hailing from rural areas to obtain their foodgrain entitlement under NFSA in  urban 
areas.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“The scheme of cash transfer of food subsidy is implemented as per provisions of 
the Cash  Transfer of Food Subsidy Rules, 2015, notified on 21.08.2015 under the 
National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) which inter alia provides food subsidy in cash 
directly into the  bank accounts of entitled households to enable purchase of entitled 
quantity of foodgrains from the open market. The scheme can be taken up in identified 
areas, subject to fulfillment  of certain conditions on the level of preparedness of the 
State/ Union Territory for its implementation like complete digitisation and de-duplication 
of beneficiary database, seeding  of bank account details and Aadhaar number, if 
available, in the digitised beneficiary  database, ensuring adequate availability of 
foodgrains in the open market and identification  of a State agency, having a separate 
bank account, to receive the cash subsidy from the  Central Government for the entitled 
households and to transfer the due amount of subsidy  into the bank accounts of entitled 
households through Public Financial Management System.  Identified area is defined 
under t he Rules as State or Union Territory or any specified area  within the State or 
Union Territory for which there is a written consent of the State  Government for 
implementation of the scheme. The States/Union Territories can either opt  to implement 
the cash transfer of food subsidy scheme or distribute foodgrains as per  provisions of 
NFSA through the network of fair price shops. Thus, the Cash Transfer  Scheme is 
optional for the States/ Union Territories.” 
 
 
  

17 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE  
GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 4 
 
“The Committee observe that as on 9.12.2020, 4,93,121 FPSs which is 91.6% of 
total 5,38,411 FPSs in the country are automated by installing electronic Point of Sale 
(ePoS) devices for transparent distribution of foodgrains under TPDS. They are happy 
to note that in 23 States/UTs, 100% of FPSs have been automated. However, the 
Committee are concerned that no FPS is operational on ePOS in Assam and NCT of 
Delhi. Moreover, West Bengal that already achieved 100% FPS Automation, has not 
started biometric authentication. All these drawbacks still linger even after Department 
had convened multiple meetings/Video Conferences with concerned stakeholders and 
also s ent number of letters from the level of Hon’ble Minister of CA,F&PD, Secretary 
(FPD) and Joint Secretary (BP&PD). They desire that the issue of Aadhaar seeding and 
FPS automation in Assam, Delhi and West Bengal be sorted out at the highest level so 
that the aim to empower all migrant beneficiaries in such States may be realized under 
the ONORC Scheme at the earliest.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“UT of Delhi has achieved 100% Aadhaar seeding in Ration Cards and reported 
100% FPS automation with installation of  ePoS devices for transparent distribution of 
foodgrains under TPDS. Govt of West Bengal also reported that Aadhaar seeding of all 
ration cards is being taken up aggressively in the State by organising special drives for 
Aadhaar seeding including door to d oor campaign for the same. West Bengal already 
achieved 100% FPS Automation and started biometric authentication. Delhi and West 
Bengal have enabled ONORC w.e.f. July and August 2021 respectively. 
 
The State of Assam is also focusing on Aadhaar enrolment o f its population and 
currently Aadhaar enrolment has increased to about 68.90% of the population and 
Aadhaar seeding in Ration Card has been completed in 28.3% Ration Cards. However, 
there are 28 lakh  persons in the State whose Aadhaar enrolment is on hold  due to an 
ongoing litigation in the Hon’ble Supreme Court. The State has opened around 5000 
Aadhaar enrolment centres and is encouraging the people to go for Aadhaar enrolment. 
The State plans to complete Aadhaar enrolment of all persons in the State (exc ept the 
above mentioned 28 lakhs person) by the end of this year. For FPS automation, the 
State Govt has placed an order for installation of ePOS devices at all FPS and is 
targeting to complete the installation of Epos devices in its FPSs by 31-Dec-2021.” 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 5 
 
“In order to acquire and install the requisite electronic Point of Sale (ePOS) 
devices in Fair Price Shops (FPSs), to facilitate implementation of the One Nation, One 

18 
 
Ration Card Scheme, the State Governments of Rajasthan, Ta mil Nadu, Odisha and 
Andhra Pradesh procure and maintain the devices through a vendor under State 
Purchased Model; in Karnataka, Chhattisgarh and Gujarat FPS owner procures and 
maintains the same under Owner Purchased Model; and rest of the States/UTs have  
adopted the System Integrator Model for complete rollout of FPS automation. A look at 
the status of FPS automation as on 9 December, 2020 shows that there is 100% 
automation in States that adopt the State Purchased Model, which is an encouraging 
sign. The  devices in Chattisgarh which adopted Owner Purchase Model are not 
compatible for performing biometric authentication. The Committee feel that in the 
States/Union Territories where FPS Dealers/Owner Purchase Model is adopted, 
compatibility of the devices for performing the required functions should be ensured.” 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“This Department with the help of technical partner NIC prepared the minimum 
technical specifications for ePoS devices to be installed in Fair Price Shops (FPSs) 
ensuring the compatibility of the ePoS devices for performing all required FPS functions. 
These minimum technical specifications for ePoS devices have been shared with all 
States/UTs.  
 
Further, Govt of Chhattisgarh has started replacing old ePoS devices with new 
devices which adhere to the minimum technical specifications and which is likely to be 
completed in next few months.” 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 9 
 
“The Committee observe that under the National Food Security Act (NFSA), 
2013, while Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) households, which constitute poorest of the 
poor are entitled to 35 kg of foodgrains per family per month, Priority Households (PHH) 
are entitled to 5 kg of foodgrains per person per month at a uniform rate of Rs. 3/2/1 for 
rice, wheat and coarse grains  respectively. They also note that: (i) Fair Price Shops 
(FPSs) have the opti on to issue paper/e -receipt to beneficiaries with details of 
commodities issued and balance remaining etc.; (ii) all States/UTs have set up toll -free 
helpline numbers 1967/1800 series and that States/UTs have been requested on 26 
June 2020 to operationaliz e the 14445 shortcode/ toll -free number for One Nation One 
Ration Card (ONORC) and utilize the same for information dissemination/awareness 
about ONORC scheme. The Committee desire the Government to make arrangements 
wherein all mobile phone numbers of all  members of the beneficiary family are 
registered which may be used to notify them of the stock position in FPS frequently 
visited by them. Also instead of leaving it to the FPS owners or State/UT Governments, 
vital information such as the beneficiary's en titlement, ration drawn and ration still in the 
balance, be got conveyed at all the Registered Mobile Numbers of the family by short 
messaging service (SMS) notification. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“Under the PDS reforms including digitisation of ration cards data, the States/UTs 
were also advised to undertake the seeding of mobile numbers of ration card holders 

19 
 
with their ration cards. Further, as part of the computerisation of the supply chain 
management the States/UTs provision was made for sending SMS not ification to the 
FPS dealers and some registered beneficiaries attached to the FPSs regarding the 
dispatch of foodgrains from the State Godowns and receipt of the same at the FPSs. 
However, in view of the cost considerations of sending bulk SMSs, the featu re is in use 
in only some States/UTs.  However, under the One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) 
plan, the Department has introduced a mobile application, namely ‘Mera Ration’, which 
besides providing features for maximum utilisation of the ration card portabi lity, also 
facilitates the beneficiaries to know their ration card entitlements, recent transactions, 
available/balance foodgrains, status of Aadhaar seeding with ration card, provide 
feedback to State/UT, etc. anytime and anywhere from the convenience of their mobile 
phones.” 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 16 
 
“In the operation of Targeted Public Distribution, State/UT Governments or their 
nominated agencies lift the stocks of foodgrains from the depots of Food Corporation of 
India (FCI), which has a total storage capacity of 409.49 Lakh Metric Tonne (LMT), 
against the allotment orders issued by the Government of India and distribute the same 
to the end consumers through their retail distribution network like Fair Price Shop (FPS), 
Co-operatives, etc. The FCI has implemented the Depot Online System (DOS) 
application, to automate all the operations at FCI Depots with the vision to transform the 
food supply chain management through innovative use of technology for ensuring 
transparency, reliability and efficiency of procurement, storage and distribution 
operations. C urrently, the application is functional in FCI owned depots across the 
country and is also being rolled out in hired godowns of FCI. The stock position and 
related details are available at all levels, in the form of reports and dashboard. The 
Committee also note the Government has approved action plan for  construction of 100 
LMT capacity Silo that apart from Silos with a capacity of 8.25 LMT at 16 Locations are 
being put to use and Silos with capacity of 21.50 LMT at 43 Locations are under various 
stages o f implementation,. The Committee note that apart from better preservation of 
foodgrain and enhancing shelf -life, Silos will bring flexibility and improve overall 
efficiency which will ultimately reduce losses. As such, they desire that the Government 
should, while ensuring modernization of storage facilities, accelerate the construction of 
such Silos and improve the efficiency level in existing storage facilities in the interest of 
the nation. Also the Government should ensure automation of FCI operations t hrough 
efficient application of Depot Online System (DOS) in FCI owned and hired godowns. 
They desire that such measures should be taken in right earnest to ensure that losses 
are minimised to the extent possible. The Committee also desire that vehicles 
transporting foodgrains should be tracked with GPS device.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“Steel Silo storage with bulk handling facility is highly mechanized and 
modernized way of storing of foodgrains in bulk. It ensures better preservation of 
foodgrains and en hances its shelf life. In order to upgrade and modernize the storage 
facilities, Government of India chalked out an Action Plan for construction of steel silos 
on PPP (Public Private Partnership) mode in the country. In 2007 -09, silos with capacity 
of 5.50  LMT were constructed under circuit model. After 2016, Silos with capacity of 

20 
 
10.625 LMT have been completed and put to use and 19.125 LMT silo capacity is under 
various stages of implementation.  
 
Earlier silos with Railway siding were considered. In orde r to fast track the 
progress of construction of steel silos, DFPD accorded “in -principle approval” on 
30.01.2020 for construction of silos under the Hub and Spoke model as proposed by 
FCI, excluding the capacity which has been completed or is under constru ction/tender 
process. Hub and Spoke model allows for rail movement between Hub silos and 
road/rail movement between spoke silos or Hub -spoke silos. Land for roadside silos is 
relatively easily available, as compared to land along rail side tracks. Further,  tender 
documents and list of locations for 108.375 LMT capacity of silos in PPP mode under 
Hub & Spoke model has been sent to DFPD for appraisal and approval. Currently, the 
DOS application is functional in 557 FCI owned and 1682 hired depots. The entire 
gamut of operations, including storage, quality, sales etc. have been captured in the 
application and the users in the field offices are performing operational transactions 
through the application, in both owned and hired godowns of FCI, across the country.” 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 17 
 
“The Committee observe that with greater infusion of technology and structural 
reforms and process re - engineering undertaken by the States/UTs for efficient 
implementation of Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) op erations, it has 
become necessary to keep the States/UTs, districts and sub -district level functionaries 
and other officials associated with Public Distribution System (PDS) abreast with the 
changes and latest happenings in PDS operations across different parts of the country, 
so that they can be active and informed participants in the process of change in view of 
the fact that there are several new initiatives in the areas of data analysis, viability of 
Fair Price Shops (FPSs), portability of ration cards,  dashboarding of data/reports, social 
audits, oversight and monitoring mechanism under the National Food Security Act, 2013 
(NFSA), etc. which need to be understood clearly and properly practiced as a routine. 
With these objectives, financial assistance @ Rs. 500/ - per trainee per day with a 
maximum assistance per training programme of Rs. 50,000/- and the maximum duration 
of the training programmes being five working days, is provided by the Central 
Government. In spite of the COVID-19 outbreak, online training has been imparted to 50 
participants from 5 North Eastern States – Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and 
Tripura and for over 35 participants from UT of Jammu & Kashmir. The Committee also 
note that the Integrated Management of Public Distribution S ystem (IM-PDS) scheme 
also includes activities like Improving the quality of implementation by introducing data 
security and information standards/benchmarks and providing handholding support to 
States/UTs and facilitating cross -learning and sharing of bes t practices among 
States/UTs. Besides, the Committee also note that the National Informatics Centre 
(NIC) State manpower train the State technical officers and other field level 
functionaries for smooth implementation of ONORC Scheme. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that training programmes, be it real time or online, should be 
continued with the view to ensuring hassle free operation of the technology driven food 
distribution system. In addition to this, emphasis should also be given on handholding 
support to FPS dealers by introducing a scheme of incentive for every visit and support 

21 
 
given to FPS by the technical officers or field level functionaries for smooth 
implementation of ONORC Scheme.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“This Department has been regular ly conducting in -depth trainings of 
State/District level officials and all FPS Dealers through Video Conferencing / 
Webcasting / Webinars. So far, more than 1,50,000 FPS dealers, District Supply 
Officers, Field Functionaries and State level officers of 30 States/UTs have attended 
training sessions conducted by this Department. To facilitate engaging and interactive 
virtual training for stakeholders a learning management system (LMS) with modules on 
ONORC, NFSA, Supply Chain Management, etc. has been created . Each module has 
interactive videos and an assessment component. The functionality of certification post 
successful completion of the training modules is also available on LMS. Further, the 
Department is in the process of developing e-training modules for online training of PDS 
functionaries in States/UTs.”  
 
 
 
 
 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
-  NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH INTERIM REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN RECEIVED 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 7 
 
“As per the ‘ Food Security (Assistance to State Government) Rules, National 
Food Security Act, 2013, for every quintal of foodgrain sold, the Fair Price Shop (FPS) 
dealer earns a margin of Rs. 70(+ Rs.17 as additional margin for sale through electronic 
point of sale device in General Category States with Central share of 50% and Rs. 143 
(+ Rs.17 as additional margin for sale through point of sale device in  Special Category 
States with Central share of 75% and that the matter of increasing the margin would be 
re-considered by the Expenditure Finance Commission for the next cycle of the Finance 
Commission and also to get a third party evaluation done. The fai r price shops are an 
important part of the system to ensure food security for more than 80 crore poor people 
in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the matter may be treated as 
urgent and decision in this regard may be taken at the earlie st possible duly following 
the prescribed procedures.” 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
“In order to revise the norms of expenditure towards intra -State movement & 
handling of foodgrains and fair price shop dealers’ and central share as specified in the 
Food Security (Assistance to State Governments) Rules, 2015, a note for Expenditure 
Finance Committee (EFC) has been sent to Department of Expenditure through 
Finance Division of this Department. However, the matter is pending as the Department 
of Expenditure h as advised that all the EFC notes of the Department would be 
considered together. Other EFCs of the Department are under finalisation.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;        SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY 
01 December, 2021        Chairperson, 

24 
 
10 Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka)     Standing Committee on Food, 
        Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
APPENDIX - I 
CONFIDENTIAL 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2021 -2022) HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, 01 DECEMBER, 2021 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1645 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat 
4. Ms. Debasree Chaudhuri 
5. Shri Anil Firojiya 
6. Shri Khagen Murmu 
7. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai (Bakabhai) Patel 
8. Smt. Kavita Singh 
9. Shri Ganesan Selvam  
10. Shri Saptagiri Ulaka 
11. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
12. Shri Ve. Vaithilingam 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
14. Smt. Roopa Ganguly 
15. Shri Ramji 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Pawan Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   - Director 

25 
 
XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the draft Report  on Action Taken by the 
Government on recommendations/observations contained in     XXXXX  XXXXX 
 XXXXX XXXXX (i)  12 th Report (17th LS) on the subject “Strengthening of 
Public Distribution System – Augmenting use of Technological Means and 
Implementation of ‘One  Nation, One Ration Card’ Scheme” pertaining to Department of 
Food and Public Distribution XXXXX  XXXXX XXXXX X XXXX. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the Draft Report. After due 
deliberations, the Committee unanimously adopted the said Action Taken Report 
without any amendment/modification and authorized the Chairperson to carry out verbal 
and consequential changes, if any, therein. 
 XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX 
 
3. XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX 
4. XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX  
5. XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
********* 
 
XXXXX  XXXXX  Matter does not relate to the Report.  
  

26 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE FIRST REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2019-20) (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 18 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government : 
Para Nos.:- 1,2,3,6,8,10,11,12,13,14,15 and 18 
 
 
(Chapter – II, Total - 12) 
Percentage : 66.66% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government : 
Para Nos. 4,5,9,16 and 17 
(Chapter – III, Total - 5) 
Percentage : 27.77% 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration : 
 
Para Nos. NIL 
(Chapter – IV, Total -Nil) 
Percentage : 0 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the interim replies of the  Government 
have been received. 
Para Nos.:- 7 
(Chapter – V, Total - 1) 
Percentage : 5.55% 
 
 
 
 