(i) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
               AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2021-2022) 
 
       
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Tenth Report of the Committee  ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha ) on 
Demands for Grants (2021 -22) pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
                                   December, 2021/Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
  
15 


(ii) 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2021-2022) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Tenth Report of the Committee  ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha ) on 
Demands for Grants (2021 -22) pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7.12.2021 
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 7.12.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
   December, 2021/  Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 


(iii) 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Composition of the Committee ……………………………………… IV 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………... V 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………… 
 
1 
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which have been 
  accepted by Government…………………………… 22 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
   Government’s replies………………………………... 
42 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted  
  by the Committee ……………………………………… 
44 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which final replies of Government are  
  still awaited……………………………………………… 
45 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held   on 
01.12.2021...........................................................      
 
46 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Tenth Report  
of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)..……..            
48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(iv) 
 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution  (2020-2021):- 
 
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay, Chairperson  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Karadi Sanganna Amarappa 
4. Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat 
5. Shri G. S. Basavaraj 
6. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
7. Shri Anil Firojiya 
8. Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit  
9. Shri Bhagwant Mann  
10. Shri Khagen Murmu  
11. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai (Bakabhai) Patel  
12. Shri Subrat Pathak 
13. Smt. Himadri Singh 
14. Smt. Kavita Singh  
15. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
16. Shri Nandigam Suresh 
17. Shri Saptagiri Ulaka  
18. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
19. Shri Ve.Vaithilingam 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya  Sabha 
 
22. Smt. Shanta Chhetri 
23. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
24. Smt. Roopa Ganguly 
25. Shri K. G. Kenye 
26. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
27. Smt. M. C. Mary Kom 
28. Shri Rajmani Patel  
29. Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
30. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
31. Vacant 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Pawan Kumar         - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Lovekesh Kumar Sharma   - Director 
3. Shri G. Guite       - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Dong Lianthang Tonsing - Under Secretary 

(v) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution (2021-2022) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this  Fifteenth Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Tenth Report of 
the Co mmittee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha ) on Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs). 
 
2.  The Tenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 1 9th 
March, 2021 . The Government has furnished replies indicating Action Taken on the 
recommendations contained in the Report on 25th June, 2021. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
01 December, 2021. 
 
4.  An analysis of the  action taken by the Government on Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.  
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Comments of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the text of the Report. 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
NEW DELHI;            SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY 
01 December, 2021                               Chairperson, 
10 Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka)                                Standing Committee on Food, 
                     Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 

1 
 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on                      
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Tenth Report                        
of the Committee (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2021-22),  pertaining 
to the Ministry of Consumer Affair s, Food and Public Distribution ( Department of 
Consumer Affairs) 
 
1.2 The Tenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Tab le of 
Rajya Sabha on 19 th March, 2021. It contained 21 observations/ 
recommendations. Action taken replies in respect of all the 21 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report have been received and 
these have been categorized as follows:- 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
Government - 
 
Para Nos.:- 2.9, 3.4, 4.26, 4.27, 4.28, 4.30, 5.7, 6.13, 6.14, 7.14, 
7.15, 7.16, 7.17, 8.13, 10.14, 10.16, 11.10. 
  
 (ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies - 
  
 Para No.:- 9.15 and 10.15. 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies  of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee -  
 
Para No.:- 4.29. 
 
 (iv) Recommendations/Observations in respec t of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited -   
 
   Para No. :- 11.9 

2 
 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter I and final replies in 
respect of recommendations for which only interim replies have been given 
by the Government, should be furnished to the Committee expeditiously.  
1.4 The Committee emphasize that utmost importance should be given to 
the implementation of Recommendations/Observations accepted by the 
government. In ca se where it is not possible for the Government to 
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the 
matter should be reported to Committee in time with reasons for 
non-implementation. 
 
 
A. BUDGET UTILIZATION 
 
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No 2.9) 
 
1.5 The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as follows:-  
 
“The Committee note that Budget Estimates (BE) and Revised Estimates (RE) 
and Actual Expenditure (AE) during the year 2020 -21 were Rs. 2561 crore, Rs. 
12298.91 crore and Rs. 8002.74 crore respectively, which means that only 65.07 
percent of the Revised Estimates was actually spent. The Ministry has stated that  
poor performance was due to Non -receipt of proposals from State/UT 
Governments, incomplete proposals received fro m State Governments further 
delaying fund release, non-utilisation of the previous grant and non-submission of 
the utilization certificate, Non -receipt of proposals from State/UT Governments 
and proposal for release of approximately Rs. 17 lakh to National  Productivity 
Council for conducting evaluation study still being under submission, are the 
reasons for the poor spending of funds.  The spending of the non -Scheme funds 
of Rs. 82.32 crore as proportion to RE of Rs. 357.26 crore was 23.04%. The 
Committee o pine that with a closer monitoring and better handling of the 
problems, the utilisation of allocated funds could have been higher resulting in 
achievement of the desired objectives. The Committee desire that the 
Government should make up for the poor perfo rmance during the year 2020 -21 

3 
 
by constant monitoring of the performance under each and every 
project/scheme/proposal during the financial year 2021-22.” 
 
 1.6  The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:-  
 
“All the necessary efforts will be made to  ensure that funds allocated will be 
judiciously utilized in time without compromising on quality. The Department will 
closely monitor the progress of implementation and will make every sincere 
effort to get the funds utilised.  Also, for monitor ing of the schemes, Monthly 
Expenditure Plan (MEP), Quarterly Expenditure Plan (QEP) and Output Outcome 
Monitoring Framework are reviewed periodically. 
Price Stablisation Fund(PSF) 
The Price Stabilization Fund had an RE allocation of Rs 11800 cr during the 
financial year. An amount of Rs 11135.30 cr was spent for stabilization of prices of 
pulses and onions.Therefore, 94.37% of the budget allocation was utilized for 
creation of buffer stocks for pulses and onions. These stocks were created to cool 
down the prices of pulses and onions in lean season and support the consumers. 
The, monitoring of prices and buffer stocks of pulses and onions is regularly 
undertaken in the Department and adequate funds are pledged for creation of 
buffer stocks based on market conditions. 
Consumer Awareness 
For consumer awareness activities, Department had received RE 
allocations amounting to Rs 42.5 crores and Rs 42.25 cr were utilized out of the 
budget allocated.Therefore 99.4% of the revised estimates were utilized for 
awareness activities. Although the budget under "Consumer Awareness"scheme 
for FY 2020 -21 was  almost completely utilised , the Department has noted the 
recommendations of the Committee and  all possible efforts will be made fo r 
monitoring utilization of funds.Departm ent pursues with States/UTs to submit 
proposals for release of Grant – in- Aids with adequate utilization reports and 
justifications to increase consumer awareness activities.  
 
Consumer Protection 
CPU Division pursued with State governments through letters and VC for  
(i)      getting themselves registered on PFMS for allocation of funds.  
(ii)     furnishing UCs for the grants already received by them 
(iii)    submitting complete proposals in the prescribed proforma for funds 
alongwith required enclosures 
  
The final Report (after incorporating the evaluation of Consumer Protection 
Cell which was left out an addendum) was received on 24.3.21 from NPC. Soon 
after, sanction order for release of final instalment was issued on 26.03.2021 and 
payment was released on 31.03.2021. 
 
Legal Metrology 
It is to submit that out of the BE of Rs. 35 crore and RE of Rs. 15.21 
crore the AE was Rs. 13.30 crore, which is 87.44% of the RE for the year 2020-21.  

4 
 
Further, an amount of Rs. 1.05 crore out of RE of Rs. 15.21 crore w as 
re-appropriated for time dissemination project to fulfil the immediate requirement 
of NICSI to procure the Routers, etc. for the said project for RRSLs. 
 
With regard to the position of strengthening of RRSLs and IILM, Ranchi 
under the Scheme “Strengthening of RRSLs & IILM, Ranchi” the maintenance of 
RRSLs and IILM, Ranchi is an ongoing exercise, based on the requirement of the 
Laboratory or IILM, Ranchi.  However, during the previous Financial Year no 
funds for Minor Works of IILM, Ranchi were requested by IILM, Ranchi, as it was 
completed during 2018 -19 at an approximate cost of Rs. 45.0 Lakhs by CPWD, 
Ranchi.  Hence, the Minor works/ maintenance of Civil and Electrical Works of 
RRSLs/ IILM, Ranchi is an ongoing process as per requirement of offices.   
The State Legal Metrology Departments will be strengthened by 
providing computers with printers and laptops etc. during this year 2021 -22 
through RITES.  The Grant in Aid will also be released to States for construction 
of laboratory buildings.  The officer s will be trained at institutes of National and 
International Repute. 
All necessary steps will be taken to ensure that the major construction 
projects and maintenance of such laboratories are completed at the earliest 
possible time.  The procurement of equ ipment will also be done at the earliest. 
 
Bureau of Indian Standards 
With regard to National System for Standardization (NSS), it is 
submitted that the NSS Scheme has been discontinued beyond 31 March 2021. 
As the NSS Scheme ceases to exist, no further ac tion is required to be taken in 
respect of Scheme for National System for Standardization  
With regard to the Hallmarking Scheme, it is informed that Setting up of 
Assaying & Hallmarking Centres has been delayed due to Covid -19 Pandemic 
situation in the co untry. BIS is regularly following up with the Assaying 
&Hallmarking Centres for early setup. 
 
Consumer Welfare Fund 
In respect of non scheme funds, it is submitted that Consumer Welfare 
Fund had a component of funds which is transferred to Ministry of Fina nce for 
GST activities and advertising and initially forms part of CWF non lapsable non 
scheme expenditure. Therefore, an amount of Rs 226 crores was not to be utilized 
from the establishment expenditure and was to transferred to Central Board of 
indirect taxes. The fund could only be transferred after receipt of authorizations 
and due accounts, which has since been completed.” 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
 

5 
 
1.7 The Com mittee recommended in their original report that the 
Government should make up for the poor performance of spending 65.07 
per cent of the Revised Estimate of the year 2020-21, by constant monitoring 
of the performance under each and every project/scheme/pr oposal during 
the financial year 2021 -22.  In  its reply, the Department has stated that it 
would make all the necessary efforts to  ensure that funds allocated are 
judiciously utilized in time without compromising on quality, would  closely 
monitor the progr ess of implementation and would make every sincere 
effort to get the funds utilised.  The Department has also stated that  
Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP), Quarterly Expenditure Plan (QEP) and 
Output Outcome Monitoring Framework have been reviewed periodica lly. 
Regarding Price Stablisation Fund (PSF), the Department has stated that 
94.37% of the budget allocation was utilized for creation of buffer stocks, 
which is done to cool down the prices of pulses and onions in lean season 
and support the consumers. As  regards consumer awareness, the 
Department has intimated spending of  99.4 per  cent of the Revised 
Estimates. Regarding Consumer Protection the Department has intimated 
that the CPU Division pursued with State G overnments through letters and 
Video Conferencing for (i)   getting themselves registered on P ublic 
Financial Management System for allocation of funds;  
(ii)  furnishing Utilisation Certificates for the grants already received by 
them; and (iii)   submitting complete proposals in the prescribed proform a 
for funds along  with required enclosures. With regard to the Legal 
Metrology, the Department has stated that  an expenditure of 87.44 per  cent 
of Revised Estimate s was incurred. As regards the Bureau of Indian 
Standards, the Department of Consumer Affairs has stated that the National 
System for Standardization (NSS) has been discontinued beyond 31 March, 
2021. The Department has also stated that setting up of Assaying & 
Hallmarking Centres were delayed due to Covid -19 Pandemic situation and 
that BIS  regul arly follows up with the centres for early set up. In respect of 
Consumer Welfare Fund, the Department has intimated that a proportion of 

6 
 
the fund meant to be transferred to Ministry of Finance could be done after 
receipt of authorizations. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of 
the Government on the reasons for poor performance. Concrete and 
meticulous planning and monitoring by the Department at the right stage 
could have helped avert the undesirable results/position. It is the opinion of 
the C ommittee that lack of proper planning at the right stage resulted in 
spending about 63 per cent of the RE. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the Department of Consumer Affairs get the projects completed by 
productive utilization of the allocated fund s.  As regards the issue of 
discontinuation of the National Scheme for Standardisation (NSS) 
mentioned by the Department in action taken reply to this recommendation, 
the same is not consistent with reply given on specific recommendation on 
NSS. This is a se rious issue which needs immediate clarification by the 
Department. 
 
 
B. NEED FOR EFFICIENT EXECUTION OF SCHEMES 
 
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No 3.4) 
 
1.8  The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as 
follows:-  
 
“The Committee note that the Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Department of 
Consumer Affairs make a net provision of Rs. 2,870.50 crore for Central sector 
schemes. The Schemes/programmes/projects are being implemented by the 
Department of Consumer Affairs through its two umbrella sc hemes namely (1) 
Consumer Protection, and (2) Legal Metrology & Quality Assurance. Apart from 
these two umbrella schemes, the Department also implements Price Stabilization 
Fund (PSF).  While the umbrella scheme of Consumer Protection covers 
Schemes of Str engthening Consumer Fora, Computerization and Computer 
Networking of Consumer Fora in the Country (CONFONET), Integrated 
Consumer Grievances Redressal System (ICGRS) and Consumer Awareness 
(Advertising & Publicity), The umbrella Legal Metrology and Quality  Assurance 
covers Strengthening of the Legal Metrology Infrastructure of States/UTs and 
Regional Reference Standards Laboratories (RRSLs) and Indian Institute of Legal 
Metrology (IILM), Ranchi, Strengthening of the NTH and Strengthening of Gold 
Hall Marking, Standard related capacity building and research and development 
work. The Committee opine that the schemes being implemented by the 

7 
 
Government through the Department of Consumer Affairs are of utmost 
importance which encompasses a wide range of activiti es. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should give topmost priority to efficient 
execution of the schemes under Consumer Protection and Legal Metrology and 
Quality Assurance.”  
 
1.9 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:-  
 
“ Legal Metrology: 
Sir, the funds provided in RE during this financial year 2020-21 were sufficient as 
the procurement of equipments for the project of time dissemination could not be 
started by National Physical Laboratory (NPL) in coordination with ISRO and 
therefore, funds will only be required during next Financial Year 2021-21 when the 
procurement of equipment will start. 
However, all the necessary efforts will be made to ensure that funds allocated for 
procurement of equipment, construction of laboratory buildings and capacity 
building of Legal Metrology Officers of States/ UTs/ UOI will be judiciously utilized 
in time without compromising on quality.   
The Department will closely monitor the progress of implementation and will make 
every sincere effort to get the funds utilised.    
 
Consumer Protection 
Department of Expenditure has prescribed that the State Govt. should get 
registered on PFMS in respect of the schemes of the Department before release 
of Funds.   As such, Department had pursued  with the States/UTs vide letters 
dated 31.08.2020 and 04.11.2020 and thorough VCs to  ensure that the above 
requirements are completed so that funds could be released to the States/UTs.  
The Department of Consumer Affairs issued sanction Order worth Rs 2.66 Crores 
(Out of the RE of Rs. 2.66 Crores).   But funds amounting to Rs 1.17 Crores  only 
could be released as only 4 States/UTs registered on PFMS.  Remaining Rs.1.49 
crores could not be released as they did not register the Scheme on PFMS. 
The Department had also approached the Ministry of Finance for relaxation of 
the condition of registration on PFMS portal vide letter dated 24.02.2021 which 
was not agreed to by the Ministry of Finance. 
  
Bureau of Indian Standards: 
With regard to National System for Standardization (NSS), it is submitted that the 
NSS Scheme has been discontinued beyond 31 March 2021. As the NSS 
Scheme ceases to exist, no further action is required to be taken in respect of 
Scheme for National System for Standardization  
With regard to the Hallmarking Scheme, it is informed that Setting up of Assaying 
& Hallmarking Centres has been delayed due to Covid -19 Pandemic situation in 
the country. BIS is regularly following up with the Assaying &Hallmarking Centres 
for early setup. 
 
 

8 
 
National Test House 
The National Test House is focusing on improvement of its scientific testing 
infrastructure and is therefore efficiently improving it’s machinery and equipment 
spending, improvements in IT and physical infrastructureby utilizing the budgetary 
allocations.” 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
 
1.10 The Committee in their Original Report on Demands for Grants urged  
the Department to give topmost priority to efficient e xecution of the 
schemes under Consumer Protection and Legal Metrology and Quality 
Assurance. In reply, the Department has stated that the funds provided  for 
Legal Metrology in RE during th e financial year 2020-21 were sufficient as 
the procurement of equip ments for the project of time dissemination could 
not be started by National Physical Laboratory (NPL) in coordination with 
ISRO and therefore, funds would only be required during the Financial Year 
2021-22 when the procurement of equipment would start, th at all the 
necessary efforts will be made to ensure that funds allocated for 
procurement of equipment, construction of laboratory buildings and 
capacity building of Legal Metrology Officers of States/ UTs/ UOI would be 
judiciously utilized in time without compromising on quality and that the 
Department would closely monitor the progress of implementation and 
would make every sincere effort to get the funds utilised.  Regarding 
Consumer Protection, the Department has intimated that Department of 
Expenditure had prescribed that the State Govt. should be got registered on 
PFMS in respect of the schemes of the Department before release of Funds 
due to which the Department had pursued with the States/UTs vide letters 
dated 31.08.2020 and 04.11.2020 and thorough VCs to ensure that the above 
requirements are completed so that funds could be released to the 
States/UTs. The reply also stated that the Department of Consumer Affairs 
issued sanction Order worth Rs 2.66  Crores (Out of the RE of Rs. 2.66 
Crores) but funds a mounting to Rs 1.17 Crores only could be released as 

9 
 
only 4 States/UTs registered on PFMS. Remaining Rs.1.49 crores could not 
be released as they did not register the Scheme on PFMS. The Department  
has also intimated having approached the Ministry of Finance for relaxation 
of the condition of registration on PFMS portal vide letter dated 24.02.2021 
which was not agreed to. Regarding Bureau of Indian Standards the 
Department has stated in the reply that the National System for 
Standardization (NSS), had been  discontinued beyond 31 March 2021 and 
as such no further action was required to be taken in respect of the Scheme. 
This needs to be clarified in the light of reply to specific recommendation on 
the issue of NSS. With regard to the Hallmarking Scheme, the Department 
has intimated that BIS is regularly following up with the Assaying &  
Hallmarking Centres for early set  up. As regards the National Test House 
(NTH) the Department has stated that the NTH is focusing on improvement 
of its scientific testing infra structure and is, therefore, efficiently improving 
its machinery and equipment spending, improvements in IT and physical 
infrastructure by utilizing the budgetary allocations. The Committee 
strongly recommend that the Department should get the schemes 
implemented in the most efficient and speedy manner.  
 
C. NEED FOR HIGHER DISPOSAL OF CASES 
 
Recommendation No. 4, (Para No 4.27) 
 
1.11  The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as 
follows:- 
 
 “The Committee note that for strengthening of Consu mer Fora, though the 
Government allocated an amount of Rs. 8.00 crore in the BE, 2020 -21, the 
amount was reduced to Rs. 2.66 crore in the Revised Estimate stage,  but no 
expenditure was incurred due to reasons such as non receipt of proposal, 
incomplete pro posals, non -utilisation of fund and non -submission of utilisation 
certificate.  The Committee are of the opinion that the dismal situation of not 
incurring of expenditure under the Strengthening of Consumer Fora (SCF) could 
have been avoided through better  attention to procedural formalities with regard 
to submission of proposals. Strengthening of infrastructure of the consumer fora 
being vital for consumer empowerment, the Committee are of the view that 
monitoring of the progress of implementation of proje cts cannot be over 

10 
 
emphasised. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Union Government 
should facilitate submission of application for SCF online and regularly update the 
level of sophistication of the system. The Committee also note with concern the  
declining rate of disposal of cases in Consumer Commissions from 79.56% in 
2018 to 73.98% in 2019 to 47.58 % in 2020 and to 54.18% in 2021. Also the 
Department has not maintained data of cases from consumer helpline registered 
in the Consumer Commissions, which would have been helpful in re-evaluation of 
the scheme of consumer protection. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Department of Consumer Affairs should devise measures to ensure higher 
disposal of cases in the Consumer Commissions and requ ire aggrieved 
consumers to specify whether they have exhausted their options in the Consumer 
Helplines while filing a case in the Consumer Commissions.”  
 
1.12  The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“The Committee recommendation reg arding devising system for online 
submission of proposals from State/UTs under SCF scheme has been noted. As 
regards declining rate of disposal of cases in Consumer Commissions, the same 
may be attributed to vacancies of Presidents and Members in various S tate 
Commissions and District Commissions as well as frequent adjournments. As per 
the provisions of Consumer Protection Act, 2019, it is the responsibility of State 
Govts. to fill up the vacancies in State/District Consumer Commissions. Central 
Govt. has taken up time and again with the State Govts. to fill up the vacancies in 
Consumer Commissions of their respective States.”  
  
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
 
1.13  The Committee recommended in their original report that the Union 
Government should facilitate submission of application online for 
Strengthening Consumer Forum and regularly update the level of 
sophistication of the system and also require d aggrieved consumer s 
approaching the consumer commissions, which suffer from declining rate 
of disposal of cases, to specify whether they have exhausted their options 
in the Consumer Helplines. The Department has stated in its reply that the 
recommendation has been noted and  that the declining rate of disposal of 
cases in Consumer Commissions is due to vacancies of Presidents and 
Members in various State Commissions and District Commissions as well 
as frequent adjournments . A ccording to the Department,  it is the 
responsibility of State Governments to fill up the vacancies in State/District 

11 
 
Consumer Commissions. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. The 
Department had been urged to ensure a simple procedural improvement of 
requiring the aggrieved consumer to spell out whether she/he ha d 
exhausted the options in consumer helplines. The Committee , therefore, 
reiterate that the Department should take effective steps for addressing the  
grievances of the aggrieved consumers and resolving their cases 
expeditiously.  
 
 
D. NEED TO OPEN STATE CONSUMER HELPLINES 
 
Recommendation No. 6 (Para No 4.29) 
 
1.14  The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as 
follows:-  
 
“The Committee also note that an amount of Rs.121.36 lakh has been released 
for the State Consumer Helpli ne to 5 States/UTs of Rajasthan, Chandigarh, Uttar 
Pradesh, Puducherry and Madhya Pradesh during the years 2018-19 to 2020-21. 
Out of that amount, Utilization Certificates for Rs. 23.56 lakh has been received by 
the Department of Consumer Affairs from Chan digarh and Puducherry. 
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh have not furnished the utilisation 
certificates. The helplines in Bihar, Nagaland and Puducherry are not functioning 
and Delhi, Goa and Ladakh have not sought funds under SCH Scheme. The 
Committee believe that settlement of cases through the Helpline has a good 
potential to bring about justice to consumer. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Department to vigorously pursue with the 3 States to furnish 
Utilization Certificates in respect of grants under Consumer Helpline Scheme and 
apprise them the outcome thereof at the earliest. States/UTs should be pursued to 
make the Helplines functional and Delhi, Goa and Ladakh should be persuaded 
utilise the facility of Grant-in-aid under the SCH Scheme.”  
 
1.15  The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“Uttar Pradesh have furnished Utilizations Certificates(UC) for full amount against 
the funds released during the year 2018 -19 and 2019 -20. As regards Govt. of 
Rajasthan, out of ₹27.24 lakhs released during 2018-19, UC for amount of ₹19.58 
lakhs have been received and UC for only ₹7.66 lakhs is pending. Govt. of 
Madhya Pradesh has been sanctioned an amount of Rs. 37.78 lakhs in 2020 -21, 
therefore it has time to submit utilization c ertificate upto 31.03.2022. Recently the 
letters were sent on 30.03.2021 to concerned State/UT Govts. for furnishing of 
Utlization Certificates under State Consumer Helpline Scheme.  As regards 
proposal for grants under SCH scheme to the States which have n ot availed this 

12 
 
grant so far such as Delhi, Goa and Ladakh, it is submitted that already six Zonal 
Consumer Helplines have been made functional which caters to various 
geographical regions and in regional languages of these regions, apart from NCH, 
which responds in English and Hindi.”  
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
 
1.16  The Committee, in their original report urged the Department to 
vigorously pursue with 3 States of  Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Madhya 
Pradesh to furnish Utilization Certificates in respect of grants under State 
Consumer Helpline Scheme (SCH) and apprise them the outcome thereof at 
the earliest, and persuade the States/UTs of Bihar, Nagaland and 
Puducherry to make the Helplines functional and Delhi, Goa and Ladakh to 
use the facility of Grant -in-aid under the SCH Scheme. In reply , the 
Department has stated that Uttar Pr adesh had furnished Utilization  
Certificates (UC) for full amount against the funds released during the years 
2018-19 and 2019-20, that Governments of Rajasthan ha s furnished UCs of 
just a portion of the fund and that letters were sent on 30.03.2021 to 
concerned State/UTs for furnishing of U Cs under State Consumer Helpline 
Scheme. As regar ds proposal for grants  under SCH scheme to the 
States/Union Territories which have not availed this grant so far such as 
Delhi, Goa and Ladakh, the Department has stated that six Zonal Consumer 
Helplines, which are already functional, cater to various geog raphical 
regions and in regional languages of these regions, apart from NCH, which 
responds in English and Hindi. It may be stated that the six ZCHs, that ar e 
functioning, are at Ahmedabad, Be ngaluru, Guwahati, Jaipur, Kolkata and 
Patna. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply furnished by the 
Department. They are of the opinion that the State of Rajasthan needs to be 
pursued for furnishing UCs vigorously. As regards the cases of States/UTs 
of Delhi, Goa and Ladakh which have not sought funds under t he SCH 
Scheme, the Committee are not convinced with the contention of the 
Department that the  existing ZCHs would cater to them  efficiently, at least 

13 
 
as regards the UT of Ladakh, residents of which might not understand 
either English or Hindi. The Commi ttee, therefore, reiterate  their earlier 
recommendation that States/UTs that have not sought funds under SCH 
Scheme, should be persuaded to utilise the facility of Grant-in-aid under the 
Scheme. 
 
E . ALLOCATION OF FUNDS FOR AWARENESS. 
 
Recommendation No. 8 (Para No 5.7) 
1.17  The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as 
follows:-  
 
“The Committee note that under the Scheme of Consumer Awareness, print, 
electronic and outdoor awareness campaigns are undertaken. Out of the Rs. 
42.50 crore alloc ated in the Revised Estimates, the Department utilised an 
amount of Rs. 40.08 crore (as on 09.02.2021) during 2020 -21. The Committee 
also note the fact that as a result of the awareness campaigns, dockets in 
consumer helplines registered an increase from 5 65579 in 2018-19 to 741094 in 
2019-20, which is 31.03%. The Committee also note that during the year 2021-22, 
an amount of Rs. 44.50 crore is allocated for Consumer Awareness (Publicity). 
The Department plans to utilise the fund for participation in fairs/ exhibitions, 
advertisement in print, television and radio. It also plans to spread awareness 
through social media platforms like Twitter, Facebook and Instagram. With such 
campaigns, the Department expects an overall increase in consumer complaints 
by 25% over each quarter of the year 2020-21. The Committee are of the opinion 
that messages conveyed through the campaign need to be clear, articulate, 
proper and catchy to dispel the possible sense of inhibition or predicament of 
consumers in approaching availa ble facilities such as helplines, Consumer 
Commissions, test centres, etc. The campaign should also be fashioned in such a 
way as to protect consumer from online fraud. Considering the fact that active 
involvement of State Governments in awareness campaign  is crucial in taking 
forward the movement to rural, remote and backward areas an amount of Rs. 118 
lakh has been released to the States of Madhya Pradesh and Tripura as 
grant-in-aid. The Committee desire that States should be given a clear idea on 
how to spend the money judiciously and optimally so as to achieve maximum 
results. In addition, the Committee recommend that States and UT 
Administrations may be asked to allocate a certain proportion of their annual 
budget to the respective Consumer Affairs Depa rtment for spreading consumer 
rights awareness, which would be consistent with the objectives of the Consumer 
Affairs Department of the Union Government.” 
 
 
 

14 
 
1.18  The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“Catchy creatives on specific t opics (including online fraud) for protecting the 
interests of the consumers are uploaded on social media platforms of the 
Department. Also, audio -visual creatives on Consumer Protection Act, 2019 
produced by the Department have been shared with States / U Ts for 
dissemination. The rest of the recommendations have been duly noted and 
follow-up with the States will be ensured.”  
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
1.19  The Committee in their Original Report recommended that States and 
UT Administrations may be asked to allocate a certain proportion of their 
annual budget to the respective Consumer Affairs Department for spreading 
consumer rights awareness, which would be consis tent with the objectives 
of the Consumer Affairs Department of the Union Government. In reply 
thereto, the Department has stated that the recommendation has been duly 
noted and follow-up with the States would be ensured  without indicating if 
any effort ha s been made in this regard . The Committee  are not satisfied 
with this monotonous reply and, therefore, desire that the States and Union 
Territory Administrations should be specifically asked to allocate a certain 
proportion of their annual budget to the re spective Consumer Affairs 
Department for spreading consumer rights awareness, which is consistent 
with the objectives of the Consumer Affairs Department of the Union 
Government. 
 
 
F. NATIONAL SYSTEM FOR STANDARDISATION 
 
Recommendation No. 11 (Para No 7.14) 
 
1.20  The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as 
follows:- 
 
“The Committee note that Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) implements the 
National System for Standardization (NSS). Out of 20989 Indian Standards (IS) 
formulated, 6565 standa rds have been aligned with ISO/IEC standards. That is 
84% of the total number of 7815 ISs for which corresponding international 

15 
 
standards exist. During the year 2020 -21, the BIS has reviewed 2174 standards 
and revised 293 standards. The Committee desire th at utmost care should be 
taken in regard to formulation of new ISs so as to achieve better integration of 
India with the world in trade and commerce.”  
  
 
1.21  The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS)  implemented the National System for 
Standardization (NSS). BIS has till date formulated 21901 standards. BIS intends 
to review 3380 existing ISs and formulate 1438 ISs (new & revision) during the 
year 2021-22. While formulating new Indian Standards efforts are made to ensure 
that these are aligned, to the extent possible, with relevant International 
Standards so as to achieve better integration of India with the world in trade and 
commerce. So far, out of 7848 Indian Standards (IS) having corresponding 
international standards, 6631 ISs are harmonized with corresponding international 
standards.”  
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
1.22  The Committee in their original report had recommended that utmost 
care should be taken in regard to formulation of new Indian Standards (IS) 
so as to achieve better integration of India with the world in trade and 
commerce. In reply the Department has stated that Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BI S) which implemented the National System for 
Standardization (NSS), has till date formulated 21901 standards, intends to 
review 3380 existing ISs and formulate 1438 ISs (new & revision) during the 
year 2021-22. The Department has also intimated that while formulating new 
Indian Standards efforts are made to ensure that these are aligned, to the 
extent possible, with relevant International Standards so as to achieve 
better integration of India with the world in trade and commerce. The 
Department has further stated that so far , out of 7848 IS having 
corresponding inter national standards, 6631 ISs have been  harmonized 
with corresponding international standards. While appreciating the increase 
in the figure of standards being harmonised with international sta ndard by 
66 (the figure was 6565  in March, 2021), the Committee  have also seen  
replies of the Department to the recommendations on the issues of “Budget 

16 
 
Utilization” and “Need for Efficient Ex ecution of Schemes” wherein it has 
been stated that that the Nation al System for Standardisati on has  been 
discontinued beyond 31 st March, 2021. The Committee, therefore, demand 
immediate clarification of the matter. 
 
G. NEED FOR SETTING UP OF ASSAYING AND HALLMARKING CENTRES 
 
Recommendation No. 12 (Para No 7.15) 
 
1.23  The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as 
follows:-  
 
“The Committee observe that the Bureau of Indian Standards(BIS) has been 
implementing the Plan scheme for setting up of Gold Assaying and Hallmarking 
Centres (AHC) in India with Centr al assistance. They also note that 938 BIS 
recognized Assaying & Hallmarking Centres (AHCs) are in operation in the 
country. Further, the Implementation Committee, in its meeting held on 9 October, 
2020 had given a go -ahead on 45 applications against 51 Ex pression of Interest 
and the applicants were advised to set up the centres within 6 months. The 
Committee are of the view that setting up of more AHCs will go a long way in 
serving the interests of gold jewellery consumers, especially those residing in the  
small towns and remote areas. They, therefore desire the Government to ensure 
completion of setting up of A&H Centres by the 45 eligible applicants by the month 
of April, 2021.” 
  
1.24  The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“Completion of setting up of A&H Centres by the 44 eligible applicants by the 
month of April, 2021 would be ensured.” 
  
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
 
1.25  The Committee in their report on Demands for Grants (2021-22) which 
was presented during the Budget S ession of Parliament, had expressed 
their desire for completion of setting up of Assaying & Hallmarking Centres 
(AHC) by the 45 eligible applicants, whose applications had been given a go 
ahead on 9 October, 2020.  The Ministry has stated in its reply furnished in 
the month of June, 2021 that completion of setting up of AHCs by the 44 
eligible applicants by the month of April, 2021 would be ensured. The 

17 
 
Committee are anguished and take serious view of the fact that the Ministry 
had not taken the Committee seriously and furnished one line reply which is 
factually incorrect. Even the case of 1 eligible applicant among the 45 has 
been omitted in the reply. The Committee, therefore, reprimand the Ministry 
to not take their considered view lightly in future and furnish the factual 
status of the case of setting up of AHCs  urgently considering the fact that 
mandatory hallmarking of jewellery has already been enforce d with effect 
from June 15, 2021. 
 
 H. NEED TO SETTLE PENDING CASES. 
 
 
Recommendation No. 14 (Para No 7.17) 
 
 
1.26  The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as 
follows:-  
 
“The Committee also note that out of a total number of 45 cases filed for violation 
of BIS Hallmarking Regulations, 2018, 21 cases are pending for disposal. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry/BIS should closely monitor the cases and also 
make concerted efforts to ensure that there is speedy settlement of cases. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of further progress made in this regard.”  
 
1.27  The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“Due to the COVID -19 pandemic, during the period from  01 April 2020  to 31 
March 2021, the number of cases decided by the Hon’bl e Courts was low. The 
number of total criminal complaints filed in various courts all over India till 25 April 
2021 is 47 for misuse of the Hallmark (violation of the provisions of the BIS Act, 
2016). The number of pending criminal complaints in the Courts  is 25 as on  25 
April 2021. It is to mention that in case of complaints filed by the Bureau for 
misuse of hallmark, the conviction rate is cent percent.”  
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
1.28  The Committee, in their report presented in March, 2021, urged the 
Ministry/BIS to closely monitor and make concerted efforts to ensure that 
there is speedy settlement of the 21  (out of the 45) cases pending with 
regard to violation of BIS Hallmarking Regulations, 2018. The Ministry in its 
reply has stated that due to the COVID-19 pandemic, during the period from 
01 April 2020 to 31 March 2021, the number of cases decided by the Hon’ble 
Courts was low, that the number of total criminal complaints filed in various 
courts all over India till 25 April 2021 is 47 for misuse of the Hallmark 
(violation of the provisions of the BIS Act, 2016) and the number of pending 
criminal complaints in the Courts is 25 as on 25 April 2021 and that i n case 
of complaints filed by the Bureau for misuse of hallmark, the conviction rate 
is cent per  cent. In the opinion of the Committee, even if conviction rate is 
cent per cent, the aggrieved party would have suffered as long as cases are 
delayed. The Comm ittee, therefore, recommend that priority should be 
given for early settlement of cases filed as also appeal cases.  
 
 
I. NEED FOR EARLY COMPLETION OF PROJECTS IN NATIONAL TEST 
HOUSE. 
Recommendation No. 15 (Para No 8.13) 
 
 
1.29  The Committee in their Orig inal Report observed/recommended as 
follows:-  
 
“The Committee note with appreciation the fact that National Test House (NTH) 
has completed 108 years of dedicated service to the nation under the 
administrative control of the Government of India. The Depart ment has initiated 
procurement of Impulse Generator for NTH (SR), Chennai and is also in the 
process of installation of Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (GCMS) for 
NTH (SR) Chennai, Ion Chromatograph for NTH (SR) Chennai, NTH (NWR) 
Jaipur and NTH (NR) Ghaziabad. The Committee also note that apart from the 
major and minor maintenance works already undertaken for NTH, the 
Government plans to complete major works for NTH (SR) Chennai. With an 
allocation of Rs. 23.50 crore for the year 2021 -22, the Government is planning to 
procure equipments for NTH (WR) Mumbai, NTH (NWR), Jaipur, NTH (ER), 
Kolkata, NTH (NR) Ghaziabad, NTH (SR) Chennai and NTH (NER) Guwahati. 
The Department has stated that the fund allocated under the head Minor Works 
would be utilized for regular maintenance works of the existing infrastructure at 

19 
 
the regional centres and for AMC & Calibrations of the existing equipment. The 
Department has also stated that the fund for Information and Technology would be 
utilized for upgradation of existing  MIS System, creating e -office, leased line, 
maintenance of the existing IT infrastructure and also for creating Digital 
Signature Certificates (DSC) for test and calibrations certificates. The NTH being 
an important institution for testing and quality eva luation of different kinds of 
products, the Committee urge the Government to complete undertaking of major 
works, procurement of machineries and equipments, minor or maintenance works 
or upgradation of machinery and IT infrastructure in the various regions  with 
efficiency and concrete planning at appropriate stage.”  
 
 
1.30  The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“GCMS has been procured, installed and commissioned successfully at NTH(SR) 
Chennai. Three(3) Ion Chromatographs have been procured, installed and 
commissioned successfully at NTH(SR) Chennai, NTH(NR) Ghaziabad and 
NTH(NWR) Jaipur respectively. During the year 2020 -21 a demand for 
authorization for Rs.0.82 Crore was sent to DoCA on 11.09.2020 as requested by 
CPWD(SZ) and proba bly due to paucity of fund the same may not have been 
authorised so far. With final authorization of above fund the project will be 
completed in all respect. Out of total allocation of Rs. 23.50 crore for the year 
2021-22, 7.6 crores 25 have been allocated  for procurement of Machinery and 
Equipments. 2 Nos AAS [for NTH(WR) and NTH(NWR)], FTIR [NTH(NR)], UTM & 
FTM, [for NTH(ER)], Shearing Bridge [ for NTH(NR)], Microwave Digester [for 
NTH(NWR)] & UTM [for NTH(NER)], Impulse Voltage Generator [for NTH(SR)] 
are proposed for procurement. Furthermore, many small equipments and 
machineries have been initiated for procurement to fill up the gap in testing, 
through the financial powers of regional centers of NTH. Rs. 2.5 Crore has been 
utilized under head Minor Work s(Scheme) for the f.y 2020 -21. For f.y 2021 -22 
Rs.4 Crores have been allocated under head Minor Works. The fund will be 
utilized towards Regular Maintenance of all regional office buildings, AMC and 
Calibration of Equipments. Rs. 0.65 Crore has been utiliz ed under head 
Information Technology for the f.y 2020 -21. All the old and obsolete devices 
(Router, Firewall, Core/LAN Distribution Switches etc) declared by its OEM have 
been replaced with new active components which are at present under warranty 
coverage. The internet band width of all six Regions of NTH has been upgraded 
to 6 mbps during Oct -Nov 2020. Among of the five existing servers (Application, 
DB1, DB2, Webserver and Mail Server), the Webserver and Mail Server have 
already been shifted to NIC Meghr aj cloud and deployment of MIS Application 
servers to cloud is in progress. Deployment of Application & Database servers to 
NIC Cloud will take place after development of New MIS Application with Digital 
Signature Certificate (DSC) feature for issuing test  and calibration certificates. 
The process of implementation of e -office has been initiated t hrough 
correspondence with NIC.” 
 

20 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
 
1.31  The Committee in their original report urged the Government to 
complete undertaking of major works, procurement of machineries and 
equipments, minor or maintenance works or upgradation of machinery and 
IT infrastructure in the various regions with efficiency a nd concrete 
planning at appropriate stage. The Government has in its reply stated that 
Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (GCMS) has been procured, 
installed and commissioned successfully at NTH(SR) Chennai. The 
Department has also stated that t hree(3) I on Chromatographs have been 
procured, installed and commissioned successfully at NTH(SR) Chennai, 
NTH(NR) Ghaziabad and NTH(NWR) Jaipur respectively. The reply has also 
stated that during the year 2020 -21 a demand for authorization for Rs.0.82 
Crore was se nt to D epartment of Consumer Affairs  on 11.09.2020 as 
requested by CPWD(SZ) and probably due to paucity of fund the same may 
not have been authorised so far and that with final authorization of above 
fund the project would be completed in all respect. The Department has 
further stated that out of total allocation of Rs. 23.50 crore for the year 
2021-22, Rs. 7.6 crores have been allocated for procurement of Machinery 
and Equipments, 2 Nos AAS [for NTH(WR) and NTH(NWR)], FTIR [NTH(NR)], 
UTM & FTM, [for NTH(ER )], Shearing Bridge [ for NTH(NR)], Microwave 
Digester [for NTH(NWR)] & UTM [for NTH(NER)], Impulse Voltage Generator 
[for NTH(SR)] are proposed for procurement. The Department has further 
stated that many small equipments and machineries have been initiat ed for 
procurement to fill up the gap in testing, through the fi nancial powers of 
regional cent res of NTH, that Rs. 2.5 Crore had been utilized under head 
Minor Works (Scheme) for the FY 2020-21, that the amount of Rs. 4 crores 
allocated for the  FY 2021-22 under head Minor Works would be utilized 
towards Regular Maintenance of all regional office buildings, AMC and 
Calibration of Equipments. The rep ly has also further stated that Rs. 0.65 

21 
 
crore has been utilized under head In formation Technology for the FY  
2020-21, that all the old and obsolete devices (Router, Firewall, Core/LAN 
Distribution Switches etc .) declared by its OEM have been replaced with 
new active components which are at present under warranty coverage, that 
the internet band width of all six R egions of NTH has been upgraded to 6 
mbps during Oct ober-November 2020. Further the Department has also 
intimated the Committee that among the five existing servers (Application, 
DB1, DB2, Webserver and Mail Server), the Webserver and Mail Server have 
already been shifted to NIC Meghraj cloud and deployment of MIS 
Application servers to cloud is in progress, that deployment of Application 
& Database servers to NIC Cloud would take place after development of 
New MIS Application with Digital Signature Certifi cate (DSC) feature for 
issuing test and calibration certificates and that the process of 
implementation of e-office has been initiated through correspondence with 
NIC. While the Committee’s recommendation with regard to procurement of 
Ion Chromatograph & G as Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (GCMS) 
and upgradation of hardware and band width has been complied with, the 
case of procurement of Impulse Generator for NTH (SR), Chennai is still 
gloomy and upgradation of software is still in progress. The Committee  
desire that the case of procurement of Impulse Generator should be taken 
at the highest level with a view to iron out problems in the way and early 
functioning of the facility. They also recommend that software upgradation 
should be completed at the earliest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
  ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No 2.9) 
2.1  “The Committee note that Budget Estimates (BE) and Revised Estimates 
(RE) and Actual Expenditure (AE) during the year 2 020-21 were Rs. 2561 crore, 
Rs. 12298.91 crore and Rs. 8002.74 crore respectively, which means that only 
65.07 percent of the Revised Estimates was actually spent. The Ministry has 
stated that  poor performance was due to Non -receipt of proposals from State/UT 
Governments, incomplete proposals received from State Governments further 
delaying fund release, non-utilisation of the previous grant and non-submission of 
the utilization certificate, Non -receipt of proposals from State/UT Governments 
and proposal f or release of approximately Rs. 17 lakh to National Productivity 
Council for conducting evaluation study still being under submission, are the 
reasons for the poor spending of funds.  The spending of the non -Scheme funds 
of Rs. 82.32 crore as proportion to  RE of Rs. 357.26 crore was 23.04%. The 
Committee opine that with a closer monitoring and better handling of the 
problems, the utilisation of allocated funds could have been higher resulting in 
achievement of the desired objectives. The Committee desire th at the 
Government should make up for the poor performance during the year 2020 -21 
by constant monitoring of the performance under each and every 
project/scheme/proposal during the financial year 2021-22”.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 “All the necessary efforts will be made to ensure that funds allocated will be 
judiciously utilized in time without compromising on quality. The Department will 
closely monitor the progress of implementation and will make every sincere effort 
to get the funds utilised.  Also,  for monitoring of the schemes, Monthly 
Expenditure Plan (MEP), Quarterly Expenditure Plan (QEP) and Output Outcome 
Monitoring Framework are reviewed periodically. 
 
Price Stablisation Fund(PSF) The Price Stabilization Fund had an RE allocation of 
Rs 11800 cr during the financial year. An amount of Rs 11135.30 cr was spent for 
stabilization of prices of pulses and onions.Therefore, 94.37% of the budget 
allocation was utilized for creation of buffer stocks for pulses and onions. These 
stocks were created to c ool down the prices of pulses and onions in lean season 
and support the consumers. The, monitoring of prices and buffer stocks of pulses 
and onions is regularly undertaken in the Department and adequate funds are 
pledged for creation of buffer stocks based on market conditions. 
 
Consumer Awareness 
For consumer awareness activities, Department had received RE 

23 
 
allocations amounting to Rs 42.5 crores and Rs 42.25 cr were utilized out of the 
budget allocated.Therefore 99.4% of the revised estimates were utilize d for 
awareness activities.Although the budget under "Consumer Awareness"scheme 
for FY 2020 -21 was almost completely utilised, the Department has noted the 
recommendations of the Committee and all possible efforts will be made for 
monitoring utilization of  funds.Department pursues with States/UTs to submit 
proposals for release of Grant – in- Aids with adequate utilization reports and 
justifications to increase consumer awareness activities.  
 
Consumer Protection 
CPU Division pursued with State governments through letters and VC for  
(i)      getting themselves registered on PFMS for allocation of funds.  
(ii)     furnishing UCs for the grants already received by them 
(iii)    submitting complete proposals in the prescribed proforma for funds 
alongwith required enclosures 
  
The final Report (after incorporating the evaluation of Consumer Protection 
Cell which was left out an addendum) was received on 24.3.21 from NPC. Soon 
after, sanction order for release of final instalment was issued on 26.03.2021 and 
payment was released on 31.03.2021. 
 
Legal Metrology 
It is to submit that out of the BE of Rs. 35 crore and RE of Rs. 15.21 
crore the AE was Rs. 13.30 crore, which is 87.44% of the RE for the year 2020-21.  
Further, an amount of Rs. 1.05 crore out of RE of Rs.  15.21 crore was 
re-appropriated for time dissemination project to fulfil the immediate requirement 
of NICSI to procure the Routers, etc. for the said project for RRSLs. With regard to 
the position of strengthening of RRSLs and IILM, Ranchi under the Schem e 
“Strengthening of RRSLs & IILM, Ranchi” the maintenance of RRSLs and IILM, 
Ranchi is an ongoing exercise, based on the requirement of the Laboratory or 
IILM, Ranchi.  However, during the previous Financial Year no funds for Minor 
Works of IILM, Ranchi we re requested by IILM, Ranchi, as it was completed 
during 2018 -19 at an approximate cost of Rs. 45.0 Lakhs by CPWD, Ranchi.  
Hence, the Minor works/ maintenance of Civil and Electrical Works of RRSLs/ 
IILM, Ranchi is an ongoing process as per requirement of  offices.  The State 
Legal Metrology Departments will be strengthened by providing computers with 
printers and laptops etc. during this year 2021 -22 through RITES.  The Grant in 
Aid will also be released to States for construction of laboratory buildings.  The 
officers will be trained at institutes of National and International Repute.  All 
necessary steps will be taken to ensure that the major construction projects and 
maintenance of such laboratories are completed at the earliest possible time.  
The procurement of equipment will also be done at the earliest. 
 
Bureau of Indian Standards 
With regard to National System for Standardization (NSS), it is 
submitted that the NSS Scheme has been discontinued beyond 31 March 2021. 

24 
 
As the NSS Scheme ceases to exist, n o further action is required to be taken in 
respect of Scheme for National System for Standardization . With regard to the 
Hallmarking Scheme, it is informed that Setting up of Assaying & Hallmarking 
Centres has been delayed due to Covid-19 Pandemic situation in the country. BIS 
is regularly following up with the Assaying &Hallmarking Centres for early setup. 
 
Consumer Welfare Fund 
In respect of non scheme funds, it is submitted that Consumer Welfare Fund had 
a component of funds which is transferred to Ministry of Finance for GST activities 
and advertising and initially forms part of CWF non lapsable non scheme 
expenditure. Therefore, an amount of Rs 226 crores was not to be utilized from 
the establishment expenditure and was to transferred to Central Board of indirect 
taxes. The fund could only be transferred after receipt of authorizations and due 
accounts, which has since been completed.” 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No 3.4) 
 
2.3  “The Committee note that the Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of the 
Department of Consumer Affairs make a net provision of Rs. 2,870.50 crore for 
Central sector schemes. The Schemes/programmes/projects are being 
implemented by the Department of Consumer Affairs through its two umbrella 
schemes namely (1) Consumer Protection, and (2) Legal Metrology & Quality 
Assurance. Apart from these two  umbrella schemes, the Department also 
implements Price Stabilization Fund (PSF).  While the umbrella scheme of 
Consumer Protection covers Schemes of Strengthening Consumer Fora, 
Computerization and Computer Networking of Consumer Fora in the Country 
(CONFONET), Integrated Consumer Grievances Redressal System (ICGRS) and 
Consumer Awareness (Advertising & Publicity), The umbrella Legal Metrology 
and Quality Assurance covers Strengthening of the Legal Metrology Infrastructure 
of States/UTs and Regional Refere nce Standards Laboratories (RRSLs) and 
Indian Institute of Legal Metrology (IILM), Ranchi, Strengthening of the NTH and 
Strengthening of Gold Hall Marking, Standard related capacity building and 
research and development work. The Committee opine that the s chemes being 
implemented by the Government through the Department of Consumer Affairs are 
of utmost importance which encompasses a wide range of activities. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should give topmost 
priority to efficient e xecution of the schemes under Consumer Protection and 
Legal Metrology and Quality Assurance.”  

25 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4  “ Legal Metrology: 
Sir, the funds provided in RE during this financial year 2020-21 were sufficient as 
the procurement of equipments for the project of time dissemination could not be 
started by National Physical Laboratory (NPL) in coordination with ISRO and 
therefore, funds will only be required during the Financial Year 2021 -22 when the 
procurement of equipment will start. 
However, all the necessary efforts will be made to ensure that funds allocated for 
procurement of equipment, construction of laboratory buildings and capacity 
building of Legal Metrology Officers of States/ UTs/ UOI will be judiciously utilized 
in time without compromising on quality.   
The Department will closely monitor the progress of implementation and will make 
every sincere effort to get the funds utilised.    
 
Consumer Protection 
Department of Expenditure has prescribed that the State Govt. should get 
registered on PFMS in respect of the schemes of the Department before release 
of Funds.   As such, Department had pursued with the States/UTs vide letters 
dated 31.08.2020 and 04.11.2020 and thorough VCs to  ensure that the above 
requirements are completed so that funds could be released to the States/UTs.  
The Department of Consumer Affairs issued sanction Order worth Rs 2.66 Crores 
(Out of the RE of Rs. 2.66 Crores).   But funds amounting to Rs 1.17 Crores  only 
could be released as only 4 States/UTs registered on PFMS.  Remaining Rs.1.49 
crores could not be released as they did not register the Scheme on PFMS. 
The Department had also approached the Ministry of Finance for relaxation of 
the condition of registration on PFMS portal vide letter dated 24.02.2021 whi ch 
was not agreed to by the Ministry of Finance. 
  
Bureau of Indian Standards: 
With regard to National System for Standardization (NSS), it is submitted that the 
NSS Scheme has been discontinued beyond 31 March 2021. As the NSS 
Scheme ceases to exist, no f urther action is required to be taken in respect of 
Scheme for National System for Standardization.  With regard to the Hallmarking 
Scheme, it is informed that Setting up of Assaying & Hallmarking Centres has 
been delayed due to Covid -19 Pandemic situation in the country. BIS is regularly 
following up with the Assaying &Hallmarking Centres for early setup. 
 
National Test House 
The National Test House is focusing on improvement of its scientific testing 
infrastructure and is therefore efficiently improving i ts machinery and equipment 
spending, improvements in IT and physical infrastructure by utilizing the budgetary 
allocations.” 
 

26 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 3 (Para No 4.26) 
 
2.5  “The Committee observe that Rs. 44 crore has been allocated at BE 
2021-22 for Consumer Protection. Under this head, various schemes/projects are 
being implemented, such as Strengthening of Consumer Fora, Computerization 
and Computer Networking of Consumer Fora (CONFONET), and Integrated 
Consumer Grievances Redressal System (ICGRS). The Consumer Protection 
Act, 2019 allows electronic filing of co mplaints and hearing and examination of 
parties through video -conferencing. The Committee are concerned with the fact 
that the Department has no data on digital transactions. They are of the view that 
the strengthening of various Consumer Commissions, comp uterization and 
helplines are essential for achieving the objectives/desired results envisaged 
under Consumer Protection Act, 2019. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that Department should take steps so that the administrative, legal and 
technological mechanisms are geared up to meet the challenges posed by the 
evolving ways of trade and commerce.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 “Department of Consumer Affairs has already taken many steps to gear 
up the mechanisms to meet the challenges posted by the evolv ing ways of trade 
and commerce such as 
 
Technological measures: 
As of now, eDaakhil portal facilitating e -filing of Consumer Cases has 
been launched in 17 States/UT and National Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commission. Online payment of fee is also availabl e.Action is underway for 
facilitating hearing through videoconferencing at all Consumer Commissions. 
Further, consumer can check status of consumer cases filed in Consumer 
Commission using CONFONET portal. 
 
Administrative measures: 
CP Act, 2019 provides fo r several administrative measures such as 
simplification of the adjudication process in the Consumer Commissions by 
introducing Mediation as an alternative dispute resolution mechanism, 
Enhancement of pecuniary jurisdiction of the Consumer Commissions, Fil ing of 
complaints from a consumer commission having jurisdiction over the place of 

27 
 
residence/work of consumer, Deemed admissibility of complaints if not admitted 
within twenty-one days etc. 
Legal measures: 
(i) Consumer Protection Act, 2019 has come into force from 20.07.2020. The 
Act provides for Product liability, Provision for penalty for adulteration of products 
and manufacture sale of spurious goods. 
(ii) Department has notified the E -Commerce Rules on 23 rd July, 2020, for 
protection of the interest and rights of consumers from unfair trade practices in e- 
commerce under section 94. Rules are intended to complement the Consumer 
Protection Act, 2020 (“Act”) by regulating all e -commerce activities and 
transactions by laying down duties and liabilities to be adhere d by e -commerce 
entities, marketplace e-commerce entities, sellers on marketplace, and inventory 
e- commerce entities. Mediation, 
(iii) CCPA established under the CP Act, 2019. CCPA with effect from 24.07.2020 
to regulate matters relating to violation of rights of consumers, unfair trade 
practices and false or misleading advertisements which are prejudicial to the 
interests of public and consumers and to promote, protect and enforce the rights 
of consumers as a class.” 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of  Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 4 (Para No. 4.27) 
2.7 "The Committee note that for strengthening of Consumer Fora, though the 
Government allocated an amount of Rs. 8.00 crore in the BE, 2020-21, the amount was 
reduced to Rs. 2.66 crore in the Revised Estimate stage,but no expenditure was 
incurred due to reasons such as non receipt of proposal, incomplete proposals, 
non-utilisation of fund and non-submission of utilisation certificate.  The Commit tee are 
of the opinion that the dismal situation of not incurring of expenditure under the 
Strengthening of Consumer Fora (SCF) could have been avoided through better 
attention to procedural formalities with regard to submission of proposals. 
Strengthening of infrastructure of the consumer fora being vital for consumer 
empowerment, the Committee are of the view that monitoring of the progress of 
implementation of projects cannot be over emphasised. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Union Governme nt should facilitate submission of application for 
SCF online and regularly update the level of sophistication of the system. The 
Committee also note with concern the declining rate of disposal of cases in Consumer 
Commissions from 79.56% in 2018 to 73.98%  in 2019 to 47.58 % in 2020 and to 
54.18% in 2021. Also the Department has not maintained data of cases from consumer 
helpline registered in the Consumer Commissions, which would have been helpful in 
re-evaluation of the scheme of consumer protection. The Committee, therefore, 

28 
 
recommend that the Department of Consumer Affairs should devise measures to 
ensure higher disposal of cases in the Consumer Commissions and require aggrieved 
consumers to specify whether they have exhausted their options in the Consum er 
Helplines while filing a case in the Consumer Commissions." 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 "The Committee recommendation regarding devising system for online 
submission of proposals from State/UTs under SCF scheme has been noted. As 
regards declining rate of disposal of cases in Consumer Commissions, the same 
may be attributed to vacancies of Presidents and Members in various State 
Commissions and District Commissions as well as frequent adjournments. As per 
the provisions of Consumer Protection Act, 2019 , it is the responsibility of State 
Govts. to fill up the vacancies in State/District Consumer Commissions. Central 
Govt. has taken up time and again with the State Govts. to fill up the vacancies in 
Consumer Commissions of their respective States." 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 4.28) 
2.9 " The Committee note that the Government has allocated funds to the tune 
of Rs. 9.00 crore for the Financial Year 2021 -22 for National Consumer Helpline 
(NCH), State Consumer Helplines in the States (SCH) and Zonal Consumer 
Helplines (ZCH).  During the year 2020 -21 the Dep artment spent    Rs. 4.91 
crore (61.4%) out of the allocation of Rs. 8.00 crore at the Revised Estimate 
stage.The Committee observe that 90.2% (194597) of the total grievances 
registered through convergence route (215814) between April, 2017 and March 
2018 had been settled by companies. The figure between April, 2018 to March, 
2019 (228342 out of 241420) is 94.6%, that between April, 2019 and March, 2020 
(269500 out of 289483) is 93.1 % and that between April, 2020 and January, 2021 
(246768 out of 293205) is 84.2 %. 28.5% of the grievances received in NCH during 
2020 pertained to e -commerce. The Committee also observe that the Department 
has planned to make an increase in performance in terms of handling of complaints 
in the helplines during the year 2021 -22 by 5% over each of the previous year’s 

29 
 
quarters. The Committee hope that the Department would make optimum utilisation 
of the allocated funds during the year 2021-22." 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 " The Department would endeavor to ensure optimum utiliza tion of the allocated 
funds under the various schemes of this Department including ICGRS Scheme." 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
  
Recommendation No. 7 (Para No. 4.30) 
 
2.11 "The Committee note that the scheme of Computerization and Computer 
Networking of Consumer Fora in the country (CONFONET) aims to digitalise the 
functioning of the Consumer Commissions at all the three tiers throughout the country, 
i.e. National, Stat e and District levels. During the year 2020 -21 the Department fully 
utilised the allocated amount of Rs. 29.50 crore.415 locations with 3 new locations of 
Consumer Commissions have been supplied with hardware. For the second phase 167 
locations and 32 new locations have been identified for supply of the Hardware. The 
Department has also stated that computer hardware is yet to be installed in 17 locations 
in the States/UTs of Arunachal Pradesh (4), Chhattisgarh (2), Daman & Diu (2), Haryana 
(1), J&K (1), Karnataka (2), Nagaland (3) and Tamil Nadu (2) where problems of sites not 
being ready are being faced in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, J&K and 
Nagaland. Regarding users traffic to CONFONET portal, the Committee note that 
between April, 2020 and February, 2021 a total of 41,60,589 page views and 23,75,929 
unique visits were recorded. The Committee appreciate the fact that in order to facilitate 
the consumers/advocates to file the complaint online, the eDaakhil portal has been 
launched in NCDRC  during September 2020, and thereafter the facility has been 
launched in 15 States/UTs.  The Department has intimated about its target of 
computerisation of 2 Consumer Commissions each during the first and second quarters 
and 4 Consumer Commissions each du ring the third and fourth quarters of the year 
2021-22. With an allocation of Rs. 26.00 crore during the year 2021-22, the Department 
expects an increase by 3% in data traffic  in Consumer Commissions over each quarter 
of 2020-21.  The Committee desire the  Department to convince States/UTs to come up 
with the necessary modalities to enable timely installation of hardware at Consumer 
Commissions in line with the slogan of ‘Digital India’ initiative. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the concerned Stat es/UTs should be pursued more vigorously to 
ensure site readiness and inform to NIC/State Coordinators at the earliest for necessary 
further action for replacement of old / obsolete Hardware without any loss of time. While 

30 
 
appreciating the facility of online case filing, the Committee also desire the Department 
to ensure that the facility of eDaakhil portal is extended to all the Consumer 
Commissions at the State and District levels at the earliest to ease the problems of 
consumers." 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.12 "Under the CONFONET scheme, hardware are supplied to Consumer 
Commissions when site readiness certificates and demand for the same are 
received from concerned State Govts. For Consumer Commissions where 
hardware could not be installed, as per the in formation received from NIC, 
hardware demand have not yet been received from concerned State Govts. mainly 
because at present these Consumer Commissions are non -functional. e-Daakhil 
portal is being constantly expanded in remaining States/UTs. At present, it is 
functional in State and District Commissions of 17 States/UTs as well as in 
National Commission. Three more States/UTs namely Lakshadweep, Himachal 
Pradesh and Telangana are ready to launch the portal." 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of C onsumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
  
 
Recommendation No. 8 (Para No. 5.7) 
 
2.13 "The Committee note that under the Scheme of Consumer Awareness, print, 
electronic and outdoor awareness campaigns are undertaken. Out of th e Rs. 42.50 
crore allocated in the Revised Estimates, the Department utilised an amount of Rs. 
40.08 crore (as on 09.02.2021) during 2020 -21. The Committee also note the fact that 
as a result of the awareness campaigns, dockets in consumer helplines regist ered an 
increase from 565579 in 2018 -19 to 741094 in 2019 -20, which is 31.03%. The 
Committee also note that during the year 2021 -22, an amount of Rs. 44.50 crore is 
allocated for Consumer Awareness (Publicity). The Department plans to utilise the fund 
for participation in fairs/exhibitions, advertisement in print, television and radio. It also 
plans to spread awareness through social media platforms like Twitter, Facebook and 
Instagram. With such campaigns, the Department expects an overall increase in 
consumer complaints by 25% over each quarter of the year 2020 -21. The Committee 
are of the opinion that messages conveyed through the campaign need to be clear, 
articulate, proper and catchy to dispel the possible sense of inhibition or predicament of 
consumers in approaching available facilities such as helplines, Consumer 
Commissions, test centres, etc. The campaign should also be fashioned in such a way 
as to protect consumer from online fraud. Considering the fact that active involvement 
of State Governments in awareness campaign is crucial in taking forward the movement 

31 
 
to rural, remote and backward areas an amount of Rs. 118 lakh has been released to 
the States of Madhya Pradesh and Tripura as grant -in-aid. The Committee desire that 
States should be given a clear idea on how to spend the money judiciously and 
optimally so as to achieve maximum results. In addition, the Committee recommend 
that States and UT Administrations may be asked to allocate a certain proportion of their 
annual budget to the respectiv e Consumer Affairs Department for spreading consumer 
rights awareness, which would be consistent with the objectives of the Consumer 
Affairs Department of the Union Government." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.14 "Catchy creatives on specific topics (including  online fraud) for protecting the 
interests of the consumers are uploaded on social media platforms of the Department. 
Also, audio -visual creatives on Consumer Protection Act, 2019 produced by the 
Department have been shared with States / UTs for dissemina tion. The rest of the 
recommendations have been duly noted and follow-up with the States will be ensured." 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.19 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 9 (Para No. 6.13) 
 
2.15 "The Committee observe that the Department of Consumer Affairs is undertaking 
the strengthening of Weights & Measures (W&M) infrastructures of States/UTs as also 
of Regional Reference Standard Laboratories (RRSLs) and Indian Institute of Legal 
Metrology (IILM), Ranchi. Out of the BE of Rs. 35 crore and RE of Rs. 15.21 crore and 
AE of Rs. 9.9 crore had been spent, which is 65.09% of the RE for the year 2020 -21. 
The funds were utilised on release of grants -in-aid for construction of laboratories, 
annual maintenance and boundary wall of RRSLs and procurement of equipment and 
training of officers. RRSLs in locations like Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Bhubaneswar, 
Faridabad and Guwahati have been vital link in dissemination of values of National 
Standards of Legal Metrology down to commercial level. As such, the operationalisation 
of such laboratories is an urgent necessity in a modern economy. The Committee is 
dismayed to l earn that implementation of projects suffer due to non submission of 
complete proposal for Grant in aid by States/UTs, non -finalisation of technical 

32 
 
specifications by State Governments/RRSLs & IILM, Ranchi, non -utilisation of fund by 
CPWD and non -finalisation of specifications and floating of indents/tender for 
procurement of instrument by Rail India Technical and Economic Service Limited 
(RITES). The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should take 
necessary steps to ensure timely completion of major and minor works, procurement of 
equipments and capacity building of officers. The Committee desire to be apprised of 
the position with regard to the Strengthening of Legal Metrology infrastructure of 
States/UTs and RRSLs and IILM, Ranchi." 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.16 "It is to submit that Out of the BE of Rs. 35 crore and RE of Rs. 15.21 crore the AE 
of Rs. 13.30 crore had been spent, which is 87.44% of the RE for the year 2020 -21.  
Further, an amount of Rs. 1.05 crore out of RE of Rs. 15.21 crore was re-appropriated for 
time dissemination project to fulfil the immediate requirement of NICSI to procure the 
Routers, etc. for the said project for RRSLs.With regard to the position of strengthening 
of RRSLs and IILM, Ranchi under the Scheme “Strengthening of RRSLs & IILM, Ranchi” 
the maintenance of RRSLs and IILM, Ranchi is an ongoing exercise, based on the 
requirement of the Laboratory or IILM, Ranchi.  However, during the previous Financial 
Year no funds for Minor Works of IILM, Ranchi were requested by IILM, Ranchi, as it was 
completed during 2018-19 at an approximate cost of Rs. 45.0 Lakhs by CPWD, Ranchi.  
Hence, the Minor works/ maintenance of Civil and Electrical Works of RRSLs/ IILM, 
Ranchi is an ongoing process as per requirement of offices.T he State Legal Metrology 
Departments will be strengthened by providing computers with printers and laptops etc. 
during this year 2021 -22 through RITES.  The Grant in Aid will also be released to 
States for construction of laboratory buildings.  The officers will be trained at institutes of 
National and International Repute. All necessary steps will be taken to ensure that the 
major construction projects and maintenance of such laboratories are completed at the 
earliest possible time.  The procurement of equ ipment will also be done at the earliest. " 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
  
 
Recommendation No. 10 (Para No. 6.14) 
 
2.17 " The Government has undertaken the project of Time Dissemination with a 
tentative timeline originally set at the year 2022 and and later at the year 2023 for 
executing the project, for setting up of atomic clocks for dissemination of Indian 
Standard Time (IST). The Committee note that non uniformity o f time across different 

33 
 
systems creates problems in investigation of cyber crime by the Law Enforcement 
Authorities (LEAs). Hence synchronisation of all networks and computers within the 
country with the national clock is a must. The Committee are of the o pinion that a 
precise time synchronisation and robust, reliable and accurate timing systems have 
significant impact on all societal, industrial, strategic and many other sectors like 
monitoring power grid failures, international trade, banking systems, aut omatic 
signalling in road & railways, weather forecasting, disaster managements, etc. They had 
expressed their desire that care should be taken to most accurately synchronise all 
networks and computers in the country with a national clock while implementin g the 
project for ensuring absolute national security and enhanced cyber security with 
minimal scope of errors in time dissemination.The Committee are, however, dismayed 
to note that NPL could not float indent/tender for procurement of timing instruments and 
that CPWD could not utilize the funds allocated for construction/renovation of 
Laboratories Buildings and hence the project of Time Dissemination suffered a setback, 
due to which only an amount of Rs. 24.88 crore out of allocation of Rs. 27.53 crore at 
RE stage has been spent on the scheme. The Committee opine that non -utilisation of 
the full amount of allocation during the year 2020 -21 reflects upon either the lack of 
accurate planning or weak implementation of the project which should not be repeated 
in future. During the Year 2021 -22 the Department plans to utilise the allocation of Rs. 
30 crore to fund Minor Works, for renovation of Laboratories, Procurement of Equipment 
and establishment expenses. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government 
to ensure proper stamping of Indian Standard Time in various transactions timely and, in 
any case, not to miss the deadline of completion of the project by 2023. They desire the 
Government to spend the allocation of Rs. 30 crore productively within the finan cial 
year, 2021-22. " 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.18  "Due care will be taken to most accurately synchronise all networks and 
computers in the country with a national clock while implementing the project for 
ensuring absolute national security and enhanced  cyber security with minimal 
scope of errors in time dissemination. On the request of Department of Scientific 
and Industrial Research (DSIR), the Department of Consumer Affairs has decided 
to disseminate the Indian Standard Time through five Regional Refe rence 
Standards Laboratories of Legal Metrology located at Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, 
Bhubaneswar, Faridabad and Guwahati with the cooperation of National Physical 
Laboratory (NPL) and a budget provision of Rs. 100 crores was made.  AnMoU 
with CSIR - NPL for exe cuting the project for setting up of atomic clocks for 
dissemination of Indian Standard Time was signed on 28.12.2018. With 
coordination of NPL and ISRO it will be ensured that the project is completed 
within timeline by 2023. The allocated funds will also  be utilised within the 
financial year, 2021-22 productively. " 

34 
 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 11 (Para No. 7.14) 
 
2.19 " The Committee note that B ureau of Indian Standards (BIS) implements the 
National System for Standardization (NSS). Out of 20989 Indian Standards (IS) 
formulated, 6565 standards have been aligned with ISO/IEC standards. That is 84% of 
the total number of 7815 ISs for which correspo nding international standards exist. 
During the year 2020 -21, the BIS has reviewed 2174 standards and revised 293 
standards. The Committee desire that utmost care should be taken in regard to 
formulation of new ISs so as to achieve better integration of India with the world in trade 
and commerce. " 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.20 "Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) implemented the National System for 
Standardization (NSS). BIS has till date formulated 21901 standards. BIS intends to 
review 3380 existing ISs and  formulate 1438 ISs (new & revision) during the year 
2021-22. While formulating new Indian Standards efforts are made to ensure that these 
are aligned, to the extent possible, with relevant International Standards so as to 
achieve better integration of Ind ia with the world in trade and commerce. So far, out of 
7848 Indian Standards (IS) having corresponding international standards, 6631 ISs are 
harmonized with corresponding international standards." 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Aff airs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.22 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
  
 
Recommendation No. 12 (Para No. 7.15) 
 
2.21 "The Committee observe that the Bureau of Indian Standards(BIS) h as been 
implementing the Plan scheme for setting up of Gold Assaying and Hallmarking Centres 
(AHC) in India with Central assistance. They also note that 938 BIS recognized 

35 
 
Assaying & Hallmarking Centres (AHCs) are in operation in the country. Further, the 
Implementation Committee, in its meeting held on 9 October, 2020 had given a 
go-ahead on 45 applications against 51 Expression of Interest and the applicants were 
advised to set up the centres within 6 months. The Committee are of the view that 
setting up of more AHCs will go a long way in serving the interests of gold jewellery 
consumers, especially those residing in the small towns and remote areas. They, 
therefore desire the Government to ensure completion of setting up of A&H Centres by 
the 45 eligible applicants by the month of April, 2021." 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.22 "Completion of setting up of A&H Centres by the 44 eligible applicants by the 
month of April, 2021 would be ensured." 
 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs,  Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.25 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 13 (Para No. 7.16) 
 
2.23 " The Committee further note that with regard to capacity building, tra ining have 
been imparted to 54 artisans, 23 Assaying and Hallmarking Centres (AHC) personnel and 
7 BIS officers during the year 2020 -21. India being one of the top consumers of gold 
jewellery items in the world the Committee, therefore, recommend that all possible efforts 
should be made to enable early recognition of more AHCs in the larger interest of the 
consumers. Since awareness of the rights is extremely important in the matter of 
hallmarking of gold jewellery, the Committee further recommend that all jewellers should 
be made to display the addresses and contact numbers of nearby test laboratories/AHCs 
in their bills/vouchers in respect of hallmarked gold jewellery sold by them for the 
convenience of consumers." 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.24 "With regard to capacity building, training have been imparted to 267 artisans, 80 
Assaying and Hallmarking Centres (AHC) personnel and 12 BIS officers during the year 
2020-21.” 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 14 (Para No. 7.17) 
 
2.25 "The Committee also note that out of a total number of 45 cases filed for violation 
of BIS Hallmarking Regulations, 2018,  21 cases are pending for disposal. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry/BIS should closely monitor the cases and also make 
concerted efforts to ensure that there is speedy settlement of cases. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of further progress made in this regard." 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.26 "Due to the COVID -19 pandemic, during the period from  01 April 2020  to 31 
March 2021, the number of cases decided by the Hon’ble Courts was low. The number 
of total criminal complaints filed in various courts all over India till 25 April 2021 is 47 for 
misuse of the Hallmark (violation of the provisions of the BIS Act, 2016). The number of 
pending criminal complaints in the Courts is 25 as on 25 April 2021. It is to mention that 
in case of complaints filed by the Bureau for misuse of hallmark, the conviction r ate is 
cent percent.” 
 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.28 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 15 (Para No. 8.13) 
 
2.27 "The Committee note with appreciation the fact that National Test House (NTH) 
has completed 108 years of dedicated service to the nation under the administrative 

37 
 
control of the Government of India. The Department has initiated procurement of  
Impulse Generator for NTH (SR), Chennai and is also in the process of installation of 
Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (GCMS) for NTH (SR) Chennai, Ion 
Chromatograph for NTH (SR) Chennai, NTH (NWR) Jaipur and NTH (NR) Ghaziabad. 
The Committee also not e that apart from the major and minor maintenance works 
already undertaken for NTH, the Government plans to complete major works for NTH 
(SR) Chennai. With an allocation of Rs. 23.50 crore for the year 2021 -22, the 
Government is planning  to procure  equip ments for NTH (WR) Mumbai, NTH 
(NWR), Jaipur, NTH (ER), Kolkata, NTH (NR) Ghaziabad, NTH (SR) Chennai and NTH 
(NER) Guwahati. The Department has stated that the fund allocated under the head 
Minor Works would be utilized for regular maintenance works of th e existing 
infrastructure at the regional centres and for AMC & Calibrations of the existing 
equipment. The Department has also stated that the fund for Information and 
Technology would be utilized for upgradation of existing MIS System, creating e-office, 
leased line, maintenance of the existing IT infrastructure  and also for creating Digital 
Signature Certificates (DSC) for test and calibrations certificates. The NTH being an 
important institution for testing and quality evaluation of different kinds of products, the 
Committee urge the Government to complete undertaking of major works, procurement 
of machineries and equipments, minor or maintenance works or upgradation of 
machinery and IT infrastructure in the various regions with efficiency and concrete 
planning at appropriate stage." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.28 " GCMS has been procured, installed and commissioned successfully at 
NTH(SR) Chennai. Three(3) Ion Chromatographs have been procured, installed 
and commissioned successfully at NTH(SR) Chennai,  NTH(NR) Ghaziabad and 
NTH(NWR) Jaipur respectively. During the year 2020 -21 a demand for 
authorization for Rs.0.82 Crore was sent to DoCA on 11.09.2020 as requested by 
CPWD(SZ) and probably due to paucity of fund the same may not have been 
authorised so f ar. With final authorization of above fund the project will be 
completed in all respect. Out of total allocation of Rs. 23.50 crore for the year 
2021-22, 7.6 crores have been allocated for procurement of Machinery and 
Equipments. 2 Nos AAS [for NTH(WR) and NTH(NWR)], FTIR [NTH(NR)], UTM & 
FTM, [for NTH(ER)], Shearing Bridge [ for NTH(NR)], Microwave Digester [for 
NTH(NWR)] & UTM [for NTH(NER)], Impulse Voltage Generator [for NTH(SR)] 
are proposed for procurement. Furthermore, many small equipments and 
machineries have been initiated for procurement to fill up the gap in testing, 
through the financial powers of regional centers of NTH. Rs. 2.5 Crore has been 

38 
 
utilized under head Minor Works(Scheme) for the f.y 2020 -21. For f.y 2021 -22 
Rs.4 Crores have been all ocated under head Minor Works. The fund will be 
utilized towards Regular Maintenance of all regional office buildings, AMC and 
Calibration of Equipments. Rs. 0.65 Crore has been utilized under head 
Information Technology for the f.y 2020 -21. All the old an d obsolete devices 
(Router, Firewall, Core/LAN Distribution Switches etc) declared by its OEM have 
been replaced with new active components which are at present under warranty 
coverage. The internet band width of all six Regions of NTH has been upgraded 
to 6 mbps during Oct -Nov 2020. Among of the five existing servers (Application, 
DB1, DB2, Webserver and Mail Server), the Webserver and Mail Server have 
already been shifted to NIC Meghraj cloud and deployment of MIS Application 
servers to cloud is in progre ss. Deployment of Application & Database servers to 
NIC Cloud will take place after development of New MIS Application with Digital 
Signature Certificate (DSC) feature for issuing test and calibration certificates. 
The process of implementation of e -office has been initiated through 
correspondence with NIC.” 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.31 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 17 (Para No. 10.14) 
 
2.29 "The Committee note that Price Stabilization Fund (PSF) was set up with an 
initial corpus of Rs. 500 crore to tackle inflationary trends of some agri -horticultural 
commodities. The Committee also note that pric e stabilization operations are 
determined by the Central Price Stabilization Fund Management Committee 
(CPSFMC), headed by Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs, which has held 49 
meetings so far. They further note that during the year 2020 -21 an amoun t of Rs. 
7798.00 crore has been utilized comprising, inter alia, of Rs. 7610.60 crore on 
transfer/procurement and differential claim on pulses and Rs. 151.4539 crore on 
Onions buffer. A quantity of 3,99,888.96 MT of tur and 99,820.10 MT of moong have 
been transferred from PSS to PSF. The Committee also note that as on 08.02.2021, a 
quantity of 3,92,539.50 MT of pulses and 1281.85 MT of Onion is available in PSF 
buffer. For the year 2021-22 the Department plans to procure/transfer 9 LMT of pulses 
and 1.5 LMT  of Onion. The Committee are of the opinion that price fluctuation is a 
serious issue for consumers, especially to those belonging to irregular and low income 
groups. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should carry out 

39 
 
market intervent ion operations with due diligence and sensitivity to the needs of 
consumers in various parts of the country." 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.30 " The primary objective of pulses and onion buffer are to utilise the stocks to 
moderate volatility in prices of the se commodities and make them available to the 
consumer at affordable price. During 2020 -21, 2 LMT Tur from the buffer was released 
in the market through open market sale (OMS) to moderate the rising prices. 
Mechanism for retail intervention in pulses was i ntroduced by which States/UTs were 
offered Moong, Urad and Tur for supply through retail outlets such as Fair Price Shops, 
Consumer Cooperative outlets, Horticulture outlets etc. The objective was to directly 
tackle and contain the rising retail prices of these pulses and ensure availability to the 
common people at affordable prices. Order for over 2 LMT of these pulses had been 
received from the States for retail intervention. Pulses from the buffer have also been 
supplied to States/UTs for welfare/ nutrit ion schemes such as Midday Meal, ICDS and 
PDS, and also to meet the requirement of Army and Central Para -Military Forces. 
During 2020 -21, a total of 15.79 LMT of processed pulses from the buffer were 
allocated for distribution under the PMGKAY and ANB pack ages. Supplies of pulses 
under these routes have also contributed towards moderating prices as quantities were 
directly supplied from the buffer without affecting the availability in the market. Onion 
buffer under PSF has been built by procuring Rabi onion from farmers and FPOs at the 
time of harvest and releasing the stocks during the lean season i.e., September to 
December. 1 LMT onion buffer created in 2020-21 was released from September 2020 
in markets located in major consumption centres to signal avai lability and moderate 
prices, and also supplied to State Governments and Government agencies such as 
Safal and KendriyaBhandar for supply through retail outlets. The strategic disposal of 
the PSF onion buffer together with other measures such as ban on export, imposition of 
stock limit under EC Act and import of onion had succeeded in containing the spike in 
onion prices during 2020-21.”  
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
Recommendation No. 19 (Para No. 10.16) 
 
2.31 "The Committee also note that State -level corpus funds are created with 
Centre-State sharing on 50:50 basis, which is 75:25 ratio in case of NE States. They 
also note that between the years 2015 -16 to 2019 -20 a t otal of Centre’s share of Rs. 
164.15 crore had been released for setting up of State Level Price Stabilisation Fund 

40 
 
with Centre’s share of Rs. 50.00 crore out of total fund requirement of Rs. 100.00 crore 
of Andhra Pradesh; Rs. 9.15 crore out of requiremen t of Rs. 18.31 crore of Telangana; 
Rs. 2.50 crore out of requirement of Rs 10.00 crore of West Bengal; Rs. 25 crore out of 
requirement of Rs. 100.00 crore of Odisha; Rs. 2.50 crore out of requirement of Rs. 
10.00 crore of Tamil Nadu; and Rs. 75.00 crore ou t of requirement of Rs. 200 crore of 
Assam. The funds are meant to be used to tackle inflationary trends in commodities like 
onion, potatoes and pulses. At the same time the rest of the States have been urged by 
the Department of Consumer Affairs to set -up State/UT level PSF. The Committee 
recommend that the States/UT may be vigorously pursued to set up the Fund to tackle 
situations of scarcity in pulses, onions and other essential commodities. The Committee 
also desire that the Department of Consumer Affairs favourably respond to any requests 
or demands for such commodities received from the States/UTs." 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.32 "Department of Consumer Affairs has requested States/UTs to set up State Level 
Price Stabilization Fund (PSF). This has been followed up with letters, emails and taken 
up during official visits, Zonal Conferences on price monitoring, Video Conferences and 
annual National Consultation Meetings (no NCM in 2020 -21 due to the COVID 
pandemic). Till date six States namely Andhra Prade sh, Telangana, West Bengal, 
Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Assam have been provided funds for creation of State Level 
PSF for pulses and onion. In-principal approval has been given to the proposal of Uttar 
Pradesh for setting up State Level PSF as per the scheme g uidelines. Further, 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Jharkhand have been requested to revise their 
proposals in accordance with the scheme guidelines, and Sikkim and Delhi have 
informed that they would be submitting proposals for setting up State -level PSF in due 
course.” 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 21 (Para No. 11.10) 
 
2.33 "The Committee also note that so far 16 States/UTs have set up State level  
Consumer Welfare (Corpus) Fund, with contribution of 75% from the Union Government 
and that States/UT Administrations like Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, 
Maharashtra and Puducherry intimated their interest in setting up the Fund. The 
Committee are of the view that while the steps taken by the Government to convince the 
States/UTs to set up the Fund have yielded some results, the Committee are 

41 
 
constrained to note that the growth pattern in the scenario is not satisfactory. 
Considering the urgent n eed to create consumer awareness and strengthening the 
consumer movement in the country, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
Department of Consumer Affairs should vigorously pursue and impress upon the 
remaining States/UTs to send proposals at the earliest. The Committee also desire that 
proposals, once received, should be processed favourably to ensure setting up of the 
Consumer State Corpus Welfare Fund on priority." 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.34 " The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.  It is 
pertinent to state here that this Department requests the  remaining States/UTs to send 
the proposals to set up the Consumer Welfare (Corpus) Fund in their States from time to 
time on various occasions. Proposals, once received proc essed favourably to ensure 
setting up of the Consumer Welfare (Corpus) Fund. A  letter dt. 23.10.2020 was sent to 
the Secretaries/Principal Secretaries of the States/In -Charge of Department of 
Consumer Affairs of the States/UTs, where Consumer Welfare (Corp us) Fund has not 
been established.A D.O. letter dt. 29.01.2021 from the Additional Secretary (Consumer 
Affairs) was also sent to the Chief Secretaries of the States/UTs where Consumer 
Welfare (Corpus) Fund has not been established.   A meeting was held unde r the 
Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Consumer Affairs), with the Principal 
Secretaries/Secretaries of State Governments and UTs through Video Conferencing on 
07.12.2020 to convince the States/UTs to set up State Corpus Fund which is now known 
as Consumer Welfare (Corpus) Fund in the States. An E-mail has also been sent in this 
regard to  Secretaries/Principal Secretaries of the States/In -Charge of Department of 
Consumer Affairs of the State Governments and UTs.” 
  
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S 
 REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No. 16 (Para No. 9.15) 
 
3.1 "The Committee observe that out of the BE of Rs. 2.00 crore and RE of Rs. 1.00 
crore for 2020 -21, an expenditure of Rs. 0.27 crore has been incurred and the 
Department of Consumer Affairs has assured that entire Revised Estimated amount 
would be fully utilized. For the year 2021-22 and an amount of Rs. 2.00 crore has been 
allocated for Strengthening Price Monitoring Structure, both at the Centre and State 
levels. The Committee also note that regular monitoring is done by way of organising 
workshop (regional, zone wise and State workshop), inter -alia, to review the prices, its 
authenticity and ensuring regularity of price reporting from the 122 centres. Field visits 
are also being undertaken by officers of the Ministry from time to time, whenever 
necessary. T he Committee are, however, concerned to note that while States have 
come forward to increase the number of Price Reporting Centres, it is sometimes seen 
that all centres do not report prices regularly and considerable follow up is required. The 
Committee are of the opinion that regular review and supervision of the price collection at 
these centres by State Government officials will go a long way in improving the quality of 
this information, which is vital for timely intervention decisions. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Government should utilize the allocated funds of Rs. 2.00 crore 
for the year 2021 -22, in a most prudent manner and ensure that the States/UTs report 
prices regularly, accurately and from the widest range of centres. The Committee also 
recommend that the States/UTs may be reminded to exercise powers available as per 
relevant provisions of the law in the interests of the consumers. The Government should 
ensure that uniform price of essential commodities prevail across all the States in the 
country." 
Reply of the Government 
3.2 " To ensure that maximum number of price reporting centres reports the daily 
retail and wholesale prices and that the data reported are accurate, meetings chaired by 
Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs had  been held with the Principal 
Secretaries/ Secretaries of State Food & Civil Supply and Consumer Affairs 
Departments. Apart from these meetings, training sessions were organised for price 
reporting centres through Videoconferencing on the use of Mobile App for price reporting 
and also sensitize them to ensure accurate and regular daily reporting of prices. Further, 
officers of the Department are interacting with the price reporting centres on daily basis 
to sort out issues such as late reporting, non-reporting, data verification, technical issues 
etc. To improve the accuracy of price data and ease of reporting, the Department has 

43 
 
operationalised Mobile App w.e.f. 1st January, 2021 and all the reporting centres have 
shifted from web -based reporting to Mobile App reporting w.e.f. 1st April 2021. Data 
reported through the Mobile App are geotagged to ensure actual reporting from the 
market and inbuilt features to facilitate reporting of prices for same type/variety of a 
commodity and to calculate average of the r etail prices collected from three markets. 
The budget allocation of Rs.1.0 crore in 2020 -21 (RE) under Strengthening of Price 
Monitoring Cell has been fully utilised. The allocation of Rs.2.0 crore in 2021-22 (BE) will 
be utilised as the  35 price reporting centres have been added in recent months, thereby 
taking the total price reporting centres to 157 (upto 20th May, 2021)." 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
Recommendation No. 18 (Para No. 10.15) 
 
3.3 "The Committee note that damage of Rabi Onions has occurred and that 
Government has accorded approval for storage of 30,000 MT of Onions in Controlled 
Atmosphere (CA).  The Committee also desire that as far as possible Govern ment 
should give emphasis on storage of Onions in Controlled Atmosphere especially in view 
of the nature of the commodity and prevailing weather condition." 
Reply of the Government 
3.4 "The Government approved creation of 2 Lakh MT of onion buffer under Pr ice 
Stabilisation Fund with Rabi onions 2021 and planned 30,000 MT for Controlled 
Atmosphere (CA) storage in major producing and deficient States. Procurement for Rabi 
2021 has started since last week of April, 2021 and DOCA through Inter Ministerial 
Committee (IMC) is closely monitoring the procurement situation. Cold storage capacity 
of about 27,425 MT located in Maharashtra, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Delhi and 
Haryana has been arranged. All possible steps are being taken to minimize damage and 
storage losses." 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

44 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 16 (Para No. 4.29) 
 
4.1 "The Committee also note that an amount of Rs.121.36 lakh has been released 
for the State Consumer Helpline to 5 States/UTs of Rajasthan, Chandigarh, Uttar 
Pradesh, Puducherry and Madhya Pradesh during the years 2018-19 to 2020-21. Out of 
that amount, Utilization Certificates for Rs. 23.56 lakh has been received by the 
Department of Consumer Affairs from Chandigarh and Puducherry. Rajasthan, Uttar 
Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh have not furnished the utilisation certificates. The 
helplines in Bihar, Nagaland and Puducherry are not functioning and Delhi, Goa and 
Ladakh have not sought funds under SCH Scheme. The Committee believe that 
settlement of cases through the Helpline has a good potential to bring about just ice to 
consumer. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to vigorously pursue 
with the 3 States to furnish Utilization Certificates in respect of grants under Consumer 
Helpline Scheme and apprise them the outcome thereof at the earliest. States/ UTs 
should be pursued to make the Helplines functional and Delhi, Goa and Ladakh should 
be persuaded utilise the facility of Grant-in-aid under the SCH Scheme." 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 "Uttar Pradesh have furnished Utilizations Certificates(UC) for full amount against 
the funds released during the year 2018-19 and 2019-20. As regards Govt. of Rajasthan, 
out of ₹27.24 lakhs released during 2018-19, UC for amount of ₹19.58 lakhs have been 
received and UC for only ₹7.66 lakhs is pending. Govt. of Madhya P radesh has been 
sanctioned an amount of Rs. 37.78 lakhs in 2020 -21, therefore it has time to submit 
utilization certificate upto 31.03.2022. Recently the letters were sent on 30.03.2021 to 
concerned State/UT Govts. for furnishing of Utlization Certificates  under State 
Consumer Helpline Scheme. As regards proposal for grants under SCH scheme to the 
States which have not availed this grant so far such as Delhi, Goa and Ladakh, it is 
submitted that already six Zonal Consumer Helplines have been made functional which 
caters to various geographical regions and in regional languages of these regions, apart 
from NCH, which responds in English and Hindi." 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 

45 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation No. 20 (Para No. 11.9) 
 
5.1 " The Committee note that for t he year 2020-21, an amount of Rs. 261.00 crore 
had been earmarked for Consumer Welfare Fund (CWF) where the money which is not 
refundable to the manufacturers, etc. is credited. The actual utilization of the allocated 
fund i s, however, Rs. 0.37 crore which was given to 4 organisation/institutions. The 
Committee hope and expect that the financial allocation of Rs. 263.50 crore for the 
financial year 2021-22 would be utilized productively and opt imally. The Committee 
desire that the Department should ensure that such institutions make utilization of the 
funds in a most productive manner, by insisting on Utilization Certificates (UCs) from 
them." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 " The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.  It is 
also pertinent to state here that in year 2020 -21, out of BE/RE of 261.00 Crore, Rs. 
226.00 Crore was earmarked for CBIC (Ministry of Finance) for  Publicity/Consumer 
awareness on GST, which could not released to CBIC as  the details of account in which 
the said amount is to be transferred was not provided." 
 
[Department of Consumer Affairs (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) O.M. No. N-19/5/2021-P&C] 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
01 December, 2021 
10 Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Food, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution  
 
 
 
 
 

46 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
CONFIDENTIAL 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUB LIC DISTRIBUTION (2021 -2022) 
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 01 DECEMBER, 2021 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1645 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat 
4. Ms. Debasree Chaudhuri 
5. Shri Anil Firojiya 
6. Shri Khagen Murmu 
7. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai (Bakabhai) Patel 
8. Smt. Kavita Singh 
9. Shri Ganesan Selvam  
10. Shri Saptagiri Ulaka 
11. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
12. Shri Ve. Vaithilingam 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
14. Smt. Roopa Ganguly 
15. Shri Ramji 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Pawan Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   - Director 
 
XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX 

47 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the draft Reports on Action Taken by 
the Government on recommendations/observations contained in (i) 10 th Report 
(17th LS) on Demands for Grants (2021 -22) pertaining to Department of 
Consumer Affairs; XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the Draft Report. After due 
deliberations, the Committee unanimously adopted the said Action Taken Report 
without any amendment/modification and authorized the Chairperson to carry out 
verbal and consequential changes, if any, therein. 
XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX 
 
3. XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX 
4. XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX  
 
5. XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX 
The Committee then adjourned. 
XXXXX  XXXXX  Matter does not relate to the Report. 
 
********* 

48 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS  OF THE  ACTION  TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TENTH REPORT  OF  
THE  STANDING  COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION (2020-2021) 
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA)  
   
(i) Total number of Recommendations:       21 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government : 
 
 Para Nos.:-  2.9, 3.4, 4.26, 4.27, 4.28, 4.30, 5.7, 6.13, 6.14, 
7.14, 7.15, 7.16, 7.17, 8.13, 10.14, 10.16, 11.10. 
    
         (Chapter – II, Total - 17) 
Percentage : 80.95% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the  replies received from the 
Government 
 
Para Nos. 9.15 and 10.15 
                 (Chapter – III, Total - 2) 
Percentage : 9.52% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration: 
 
Para Nos. 4.29 
 
         (Chapter – IV, Total -1)   
Percentage : 4.76 
   (v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the interim 
replies of the Government have been received. 
    
   Para Nos.:- 11.9  
    (Chapter – V, Total - 1) 
Percentage : 4.76%  