i 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2022-2023) 
 
 
       
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) – Hallmarking & Jewellery 
 
 
TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
27 


ii 
 
TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2022-2023) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) – Hallmarking & Jewellery 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on _________ 
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ___________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
Composition of the Committee 
Introduction 
REPORT 
Chapter I  Introductory: Hallmarking & Jewellery     1 
     
(i) The Legal Framework and Regulations    1 
(ii) The Guidelines         4 
(iii) Indian Standards       5 
(iv) International Standards      5 
 
Chapter II Hallmarking of Jewellery Scheme      6 
       (i) Hallmarking        6 
  (ii) HALLMARKING UNIQUE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (HUID) 9 
    
Chapter III Mandatory Hallmarking       14  
(i) Mandatory Hallmarking        14 
(ii) Achievements of the Hallmarking Scheme    15 
  (ii) Exemption from Mandatory Hallmarking    16 
  (iii) Articles with Weight Less than 2 Grams    17 
  (iv) Special Category of Jewellery - Kundan,     18 
Polki and Jadaau    
  (v) Jewellers with Turnover of upto Rs. 40 Lakhs.   19 
 
Chapter IV Enforcement         21 
  (i) Assessment of Purity       21 
  (ii) Enforcement : Responsibility and Penalty    23 
  (iii) Competence of Technical Personnel     25 
  (iv) Periodicity of Audit       25 
  (v) Publicity, Complaints and Redressal     26 
  (vi) Manak Online App and Privacy Issue    29 
        
Chapter V Assaying and Hallmarking Centres      31 
(i) Assaying and Hallmarking Centres     31 
  (ii) AHCs in Remote/ Backward Areas     33 
(iii) Financial Assistance       30 
APPENDICES 
  (i) Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 8 January, 2021  
 (ii) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 12 November, 2021 
(iii) Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 9 November, 2022 

iv 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (2022-23) 
 
Smt. Locket Chatterjee  -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
5. Shri Gangasandra Siddappa Basavaraj 
6. Km. Debasree Chaudhuri 
7. Shri Anil Firojiya 
8. Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit 
9. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi 
10. Shri Khagen Murmu 
11. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
12. Shri Subrat Pathak 
13. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
14. Dr. Amar Singh 
15. Smt. Himadri Singh 
16. Smt. Kavita Singh 
17. Shri Nandigam Suresh 
18. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
19. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
20. Shri Vaithilingam Ve. 
21. Vacant * 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
23. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
24. Shri Baburam Nishad 
25. Shri Rajmani Patel 
26. Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
27. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
28. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam 
29. Shri Harbhajan Singh 
30. Ms. Dola Sen 
31. Dr. Ashok Bajpai  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda         -  Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi       -  Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan          - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Dong Lianthang Tonsing  - Deputy Secretary 
 
* Vacant  
Table Office (B) Notification No. 21/4/(5)/2023/TO(B) dated 03.04.2023, Shri Girish Bhalchandra Bapat, an 
elected Member of Lok Sabha had passed away on 29.03.2023. 
 
 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee  on Food, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution (2022-2023) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Twenty Seventh Report on the subject ‘Bureau of 
Indian Standards (BIS) - Hallmarking & Jewellery’  pertaining to the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
 
2.  The subject Report was selected by the Committee for examination and report.  
The Committee was briefed on the subject by the representatives of  the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) on 8 
January, 2021. Oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of Consumer 
Affairs was held on 12 November, 2021. Besides non -official evidence of 
representatives of Stakeholders was also held on 9.11.2022. 
 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Officers of the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) and 
the Stakeholders on the subjec t of BIS – Hallmarking & Jewellery for placing before 
them the necessary information in connection with the examination of the subject. 
 
4.  A Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
1st August, 2023. 
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Comments of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the text of the Report. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                     LOCKET CHATTERJEE 
01 August, 2023                             Chairperson, 
10 Sravana, 1945 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee Consumer  
        Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
HALLMARKING OF JEWELLERY 
Hallmarking is the accurate determination and official recording of the 
proportionate content of precious metal in the jewellery/artefacts or bullion/ coins. 
 
(i) THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK AND REGULATIONS 
1.2 The Department of Consumer Affairs  (DoCA) in their background  note have  
stated  as under:  
“ Gold is too soft to with stand wear, therefore, for jewellery making, gold is always 
alloyed with some other metal. The need for alloying of gold also makes public 
extremely vulnerable to excessive adulteration. Detection of adulteration in gold is 
difficult without performing technical tests.  The complex nature of Indian jewellery 
mostly made of high caratage gold and containing numerous soldered joints of 
much lower caratage makes the job of determination of purity even more difficult. 
In addition, 24 carat plating of articles of low caratage is also common. The 
common consumer though well aware of such malpractices still has no option but 
to submit himself to repeated cheating by unscrupulous traders. 
 
1.3  With regard to the action taken to address the  malpractices and difficulties  in 
jewellery making mentioned at para 1.2   the DoCA submitted as  follows:  
“…. Government of India took cognizance of the need for protecting consumers. A 
mandate was, therefore, given to Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Standing 
Committee on Gold and Precious Metals to look into the issues relating to 
Standardization of Gold products and introduction of Gold Hallmarking in the 
country. The Committee identified Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) in the year 
2000 as the sole agency to operate the Hallmarking Scheme in India, and 
entrusted BIS with the task of implementing hallmarking scheme to protect the 
consumer against cheating, de velop export competitiveness and make India a 
leading market for gold jewellery in the world. The Scheme for Hallmarking of 
Silver articles was launched later in 2005.” 
 
1.4 Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) Act , 2016  is an Act to provide for the 
establishment of a national Standards body for the harmonious development of the 

 
 
2 
 
activities of standardization, conformity assessment and quality assurance of goods, 
articles, processes ,systems and services and for matters connected  therewith or 
incidental there to. BIS Act, 2016  came into  force with effect from 12 October 2017.  
 
1.5  Section 14 of BIS Act, 2016 deals with certification of Standard Mark of jewellers 
and sellers of certain specified goods or services. Sub section (1) and (2) of Section 14 
of the Act reads as follows :  
“(1) The Central Government, after consulting the Bureau , may notify precious 
metal articles or other goods or articles as it may consider necessary , to be 
marked with a Hallmark or Standard mark , as the case may be ,in a  mann er as 
specified in sub- section (2).  
 
(2) The goods or articles notified in section (1) may be sold through retail outlets 
certified by the Bureau after such goods or articles have been assessed for 
conformity to the relevant standard by testing and marki ng Centre, recognized by 
the Bureau and marked with Hallmark or Standard mark , as the case may be , 
as specified by regulations.”   
 
1.6 Government of India has notified  ‘The Bureau of Indian Standards (Hallmarking) 
Regulations, 2018  to mark gold jewellery and gold artefacts and silver jewellery and 
silver artefacts with Hallmark. Subsequently, the Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery and 
Gold A rtefacts Order, 2020 {(S.O. 205 (E)}  tified on 15 January, 2020 , making 
hallmarking of gold jewellery mandatory and to be sold only by certified jewellers in the 
country from 15 January, 2021.The amendment to the Order dated 15 January was   
made vide Gazette notification no. 3513  dated 09  October,2020 to change the date of 
coming into force of the said Order w.e.f  01.06.2021.  This date was further extended  
to 16.06.2021 vide Gazette notification no. 2102 dated 01.06.2021.   
 
1.7   The Hallmarking of Gold jewellery and Gold artefacts (Second amendment 
Order) ,2021 published vide Gazette notification S.O. 2481(E) dated 23.06.2021. has 
inserted  the following  amendment after clause 1 of the Order dated 15.01.2020.  
  
“1A Application of Order - This order shall apply only to the districts mentioned in 
the Annexure and to 14,18 and 22 caratage of gold jewellery and gold artefacts’’  
 

 
 
3 
 
1.8  The Government vide Gazette notification S.O. 1594 dated 04.04.2022 has 
omitted the words and figures  ‘and to 14,18 and  22 caratage of gold jewellery’ inserted 
vide the gazette notification referred in para 1.7 above.  
 
1.9  Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery and Gold Artefacts (Second Amendment) Order, 
2021 dated 23 June, 2021 contained quality control order for mandatory Hall marking of 
gold jewellery/ artefacts which made Hallmarking mandatory in 256 districts of the 
country where there is at least one Assaying and Hallmarking Centre (AHCs). An 
amendment to this order had been issued by Government of India on 04 April, 2022 
making Hallmarking mandatory in 288 districts of the country. 
 
1.10  Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery and Gold Artefacts (Amendment) Order, 2023 
dated 3 March, 2023 makes the selling of Hallmarked Gold Jewellery mandatory and 
reads as under :- 
“No person shall,  after 31st March, 2023, sell or display or offer to sell any gold 
jewellery or gold artefacts unless it is hallmarked in accordance with the 
standards specified in IS 1417:2016 as amended by notification number Ref: 
HQ-PUB014/1/2020-PUB-BIS (191), dated the 7 th July, 2021, published in the 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part III, Section 4, dated the 15th July, 2021.”  
 
(ii) THE GUIDELINES  
1.11 The Guidelines formulated for implementation of various provisions of the Act 
are as follows : 
a) The Guidelines for Reco gnition & Operation of Assaying & Hallmarking 
Centres ( issued by BIS in September, 2018 
b) Guidelines for Grant, Operation, Surveillance and cancellation of 
certificate of registration of jewelers in Nov, 2021 
c) Guidelines for grant, operation, renewal a nd cancellation of License for 
refinery or mint in Sep., 2018.    
 
1.12 The Guidelines for Recognition & Operation of AHCs, issued by BIS in 
September, 2018, states that recognition shall be granted as per IS (Indian Standards) 
15820:2009 with scope defined for-  
  
(a) Gold Jewellery / artefacts (as per IS 1417) -  for yellow gold jewellery / 

 
 
4 
 
artefacts only; (b) for white gold jewellery / artefacts only (Nickel based); (c) 
for white gold jewellery / artefacts only ( Palladium based); (d) for 
combination of all above; and  
(b) For Silver Jewellery / artefacts (as per IS 2112). 
 
(iii) INDIAN STANDARDS 
1.13  Sub-section (2) of Section 10 of BIS Act, 2016 states as under: 
 “The Bureau may – 
(a) Establish, publish, review and promote the Indian Standard, in relation 
to any goods, article, process, system or service in such manner as 
may be prescribed; 
(b)  Adopt as Indian Standard, any standard, established by any other 
Institution in India or elsewhere, in relation to any goods, article, 
process, system or service in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(c) Recognize or accredit any institution in India or outsid e which is 
engaged in standardization; 
(d) Undertake, support and promote such research as may be necessary 
for formulation of Indian Standards.” 
 
(iv) INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS 
 
1.14 In response to a query as to whether any international standards on jewellery 
and precious metal exist, the DoCA in a  written reply submitted as below: 
“The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) has published 
the standard ‘ISO 9202:2019 - Jewellery and precious metals — Fineness 
of Precious Metal Alloys’ which specif ies a range of fineness of precious 
metal alloys (excluding solders) recommended for use in the field of 
jewellery.  
 
  The grades of precious metal alloys specified in this standard are Gold, 
Silver, Platinum and Palladium. The grades of Gold and Silver j ewellery 
that are specified in the respective Indian standards are also available in 
the above ISO standard.” 
 
1.15 When enquired whether the hallmarking obligation apply to jewellery goods for 
export, the Department, in a written reply, submitted as follows: 
“As per the Mandatory hallmarking order any article meant for export, which 
conforms to any specification required by the foreign buyer and any article meant 
for export and re -import as per trade policy of the Government of India is 
exempted from mandatory hallmarking.” 

 
 
5 
 
1.16 The Committee note that BIS is entrusted with the task of implementing 
hallmarking scheme and making India a leading market for gold jewellery in the 
world.  They also note that  (i) as per sub -section (2) of Section 10 of BIS Act, 
2016, the Bureau may adopt as Indian Standard, any standard in such manner as 
may be prescribed; (ii)  the grades of gold and silver jewellery that are specified 
in the respective Indian standards are also available in ‘ISO 9202:2019 – Jewellery 
and Precio us Metals – Fineness of precious metal alloys’ published by the 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) which specifies a range of 
fineness of precious metal alloys; and (iii) articles meant for export which 
conforms to any specification requi red by the foreign buyers is exempted from 
mandatory hallmarking.  While appreciating the path breaking initiative of the 
Govt of India  for  (a)  formulating and prescribing Indian Standards for precious 
metals such as gold and silver; and,  (ii)   introducing mandatory hallmarking of 
Jewellery which  ensures purity, quality and fineness and go a long way in 
protecting the interest of the consumers of the precious metals and jewellery, the 
Committee desire the Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) e xplore the 
possibility of aligning the BIS Standards prescribed for precious metals and  
jewellery  with  those of International Standards prescribed by International 
Organisation of Standards to promote exports of precious metal jewellery.   
                                                     

 
 
6 
 
CHAPTER II 
HALLMARKING OF JEWELLERY SCHEME 
(i) HALLMARKING   
    Section 14 of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 inter alia, provides as under: 
“The Central Government, after consulting the Bureau, may notify  precious 
metal articles or other goods or articles as it may consider necessary, to be 
marked with a Hallmark or Standard Mark, as the case may be and that the 
goods or articles may be sold through retail outlets certified by the Bureau after 
such goods o r articles have been assessed for conformity to the relevant 
standard by testing and marking centre, recognised by the Bureau and marked 
with Hallmark or Standard Mark, as the case may be, as specified by 
regulations.”  
 
2.2 With regard  to the objectives of Hallmarking Scheme, the Department of 
Consumer Affairs  (DoCA) , in a written reply submitted as  under: 
“…The objectives of introducing Hallmarking Scheme in the country was to 
protect consumer against victimization due to irregular gold or silver quality, 
develop India as a leading gold market centre in the World and develop export 
competitiveness. 
 
2.3 The advantages to the jewellers  due to introduction of hallmarking as furnished 
by DoCA is as follows :  
 “The scheme  of hallmarking of jewellery will  provide jewellers clear 
indication of capability, strong evidence of commitment to quality and assurance 
of consistency in purity and quality of gold or silver jewellery.’’ 
 
2.4 Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery provides third party assurance to consumers  on 
the purity of gold jewellery or its fineness.  Under the Hallmarking Scheme, (i) the 
jewelers are granted certificate of registration to sell Hallmarked jewellery; and, (ii) 
Assaying and Hallmarking (A&H) Centres, to assay the purity of the jewellery s ubmitted 
by registered jeweler along with declaration of purity and apply Hallmark on such 
jewellery which is found conforming to relevant Indian Standard including declared 
fineness, are recognized 
 
 
 

 
 
7 
 
Registration of jewellers  
2.5  With regard to the process of obtaining registration by the jewellers for selling 
hallmarked jewellery, DoCA in their background note, submitted as under:  
“ For hallmarking of jewellery, a jeweler who wants to sell hallmarked jewellery 
has to obtain a reg istration from BIS.  The  registration of jeweler’s process  has 
been made online. The jeweler fills the application form online, and the 
registration is granted instantly and can be downloaded by the jeweler.  The 
registration of jewelers is free and valid for life time. 
 
 The registered jeweller submits the jewellery for hallmarking to BIS recognized 
AHC. The AHC applies hallmark on the jewellery which is found meeting the 
requirement of the standard.’’  
 
Recognition of Assaying and Hallmarking (A&H)  Centres 
2.6  On the process of obtaining  recognition of A&H centres,  DoCA in their  
background note ,  submitted as follows :  
“A&H centre can apply for recognition to BIS online. The recognition is granted to 
A&H centres for Hallmarking of jewellery/art efacts after verifying the 
infrastructure requirements, capacity, and competency of personnel to carry out 
assaying and hallmarking. Entire process of recognition, which involves audit of 
the centres, submission of audit report and grant of recognition or renewal, has 
been  automated.” 
 
2.7 Asked about the manner in which purity or caratage in gold jewellery is 
determined, the Department of Consumer Affairs, in a written reply, has stated as 
under: 
“The purity or caratage in gold is determined by fire assay  method as given in 
Indian Standard IS 1418:2009 ‘Determination of gold in gold bullion, gold alloys 
and gold jewellery/artefacts – Cuppelation (Fire Assay) method”  
 
Digital solution for  A&H of Jewellery  
 
2.8  Referring to automation of workflow  involved in Assaying and Hallmarking 
(A&H), DoCA in their background note stated as follows :   
“BIS has developed digital solution wherein the entire workflow in assaying and 
hallmarking centre is automated and made o nline. The jewellers submit the 
request for hallmarking online and the data for all the processes undertaken in 
the centre from inward receipt and weighment, XRF, Sampling, Fire assay and 
laser marking is maintained online and can be monitored on real time  basis.  At 
the end of the testing, a unique six digit alpha numerical code is generated from 
the BIS server for each jewellery article and is laser marked by the assaying and 
hallmarking centre on the jewellery along with BIS logo and purity mark.” 

 
 
8 
 
 
2.9 The representatives of the Department, during oral evidence held on 12.11.2021, 
explained the workflow process  involved in obtaining A&H certificate by the registered 
jewellers as follows :    
 
“BIS Registered Jeweller     (Jewellery)  BIS Recognised AHC 
 
         X-Ray Florescent Spectroscopy 
 
               XRF 
Return to jeweller  Reject  (Fail)                                        (Pass) 
           Sampling  
 
          Assaying Return to jeweller
  Reject    (Fail)      (Pass) 
         Hallmarking 
  
(Hallmarked Jewellery) 
        BIS Registered Jeweller” 
 
HALLMARK UNIQUE IDENTIFICATION (HUID) 
2.10 Before 1 July, 2021   hallmarked jewellery consisted  of  the following four marks: 
BIS Mark Purity in carat and fineness 
for gold (e.g. 22K916, 
18K750, 14K585) 
In case of silver only fineness 
of 990, 970, 925, 900, 835, 
800. 
Assay centre’s 
identification 
mark/ number 
Jeweller’s 
identification 
mark/ 
number 
 
2.11 With the introduction of six digit alphanumeric code from 1 July, 2021, Hallma rk 
which was earlier consisted of four symbols/ marks have now been replaced by three 
symbols/ marks for gold jewellery/ artefacts as given below: 

 
 
9 
 
BIS Mark Purity in carat and fineness for 
gold (e.g. 22K916, 18K750, 
14K585) 
Six digit alphanumeric 
code   AAAAAA 
 
The first symbol is BIS logo, the second symbol indicates purity and fineness and the 
third symbol is the HUID. 
 
2.12 Hallmark Unique Identification (HUID) number is a six digit alphanumeric code 
consisting of numbers and letters. HUID is given to  every piece of jewellery at the time 
of Hallmarking at A&H Centre and it is unique for every piece of jewellery.  
 
2.13 Responding to a  clarification sought  as to the stage in the value chain and 
entity – manufacturer, stockiest, distributer, retailer, etc is responsible for ensuring 
hallmarking of gold and Jewellery, DoCA in a post evidence written submitted as 
follows : 
“….In the chain of Manufacturer, Wholesaler, Distributor and Retailer, the 
responsibility to get the article Hallmarked is on the one who makes the first 
point of sale. Thus hallmarking has to be done only once in the entire chain at 
the first point of sale which may be Manufacturer or Wholesaler or Distributor 
or Retailer…..”.  
 
2.14 Referring to the circulation of jewellery with fake HUID, the stakeholders 
represented to the Committee that BIS should come out with some mechanism 
whereby the marking scheme is unique and cannot be duplicated or forged – a 
mechanism similar to one we have in currency notes. DoCA has submitted their views 
as under: 
“The entire work -flow in an AHC, right from the receipt of the jewellery to 
hallmarking, has become automated where by it is possible to verify that every 
piece of jewellery has gone through all the specified process of hallmarking. 
Further the i ntegration of Laser machine, XRF and microbalance with the BIS 
software is also in advance stages of implementation where by a unique HUID 
number is marked on each jewellery article.” 
 
2.15 Quality Council of India (QCI) in their written representation, fu rnishing the 
feedback received from jewellers / AHCs,  submitted as follows:  

 
 
10 
 
“(i) The HUID Portal developed by C -DAC has significantly improved however there 
are occasional lags by AHC users. 
(ii) The portal lacks the features of saving the information offline which has increased 
the workload of AHC users in times of technical lag or network disconnection.  
(iii) The process has multiple manual interventions, for instance, the AHCs have to 
record each and every activity (steps involved in the preparation of the sample) in the 
application which takes approximately 4-5 hours. 
(iv) The web application has a significant load time based on network connectivity 
which slows down the work of the AHCs. 
(v) The process needs to become more intuitive for small players. 
(vi) Time taken for the process of hallmarking for bulk order is almost 3 days.” 
 
2.16   QCI has suggested the following measures to address the problems mentioned  
in para 2.16  :  
(i) Blockchain Enabled Process: The entire system must be built on blockchain 
for increased data security, traceability, the integrity of the hallmark issued. 
Encrypted blockchain will ensure that the process data of each job is 
unalterable. HUID backed by blo ckchain will ensure that when the asset is 
transferred to another user, the chain of transactions is recorded for 
traceability. 
 
(ii) Eliminating Manual Touch Points: The number of data points that AHC 
inputs in the portal may be reduced to decrease the wo rkload of the AHC user 
and The HUID portal needs to be completely automated; manual touch points 
should be completely removed. 
 
(iii) Integration of Offline Functionality: Generation of temporary HUID IDs 
when in offline mode shall ensure that the AHC job is not hindered due to 
application outage. 
 
(iv) Mandatory Inclusion of Remarks by AHC at the Time of Evaluation: Every 
request rejected by the AHC must include remarks explaining the need to 
cancel the request by the jeweller. All the remarks may be analy sed to keep a 
check on the AHCs. 
 
(v) Increasing the Rate of User Adoption: User adoption can be increased by 
constantly updating the user manuals, availability of user manuals in local 
languages, and videos/GIFs to demonstrate the use of the portal for fa ster 
adoption. 
 
2.17 DoCA in their written replies to the QCI’s suggestions to improve the HUID 
processes submitted as follows :  
“HUID system works in online mode currently and it has incorporated standard 
measures like Timestamp and audit log of each transaction along with role-based 

 
 
11 
 
user access is maintained for security, traceability and integrity of Hallmarking 
process data. Also system does not allow manipulation or editing of data by user 
once a particular step is completed in Hallmarking process or entire Hallmarking 
process is completed.  
Current system has tried to enforce complete removal of manual touch points as 
it has pr ovision for auto capturing of weights, XRF machine data and Laser 
marking  machines can also fetch data automatically from HUID system for 
marking through APIs. The feasibility of HUID application migration to Blockchain 
technology would be explored upon s tabilization and improvement of current 
system.” 
 
2.18   With regard to offline functionality ,  DoCA in a written reply  submitted as under:  
“As the current system works in online mode and it is being optimized on regular 
basis for handling increased workload.  
 
…. Offline functionality would be explored upon stabilization and improvement of 
current system.” 
 
2.19  The QCI also in its Memorandu m, suggested that user adoption can be 
increased by constantly updating the user manuals, availability of user manuals in local 
languages, and videos/GIFs to demonstrate the use of portal for faster adoption.  
 
2.20   Responding to the suggestion given QCI  as mentioned at para 2.19, DoCA in a  
written reply submitted as follows :  
             “ Updated Users manuals in English are provided for each new functionality 
enabled in HUID system. The translation in other languages and manuals in 
audio video formats would be explored”  
 
2.21 The Committee are happy to note that with the introduction of HUID portal, all 
the process of hallmarking have  been made  online with minimum human 
intervention. The Committee observe that the HUID portal in its present form does 
not have the features of saving the information offline and this may have increased 
the workload of Assaying & hallmarking Centres (AHCs)  users in times of technical lag, 
network disconnection, malfunction of the online system  and at the time of 
application outage.  DoCA has acknowledged the issue and submitted  that the option 
would be explored upon stabilisation and improvement of the current system. The 

 
 
12 
 
Committee appreciate the same and urge DoCA to  explore the offline option  and  it 
may be put in place after thorough examination of various aspects at the earliest.     
 
2.22 The Committee are of the opinion that user manuals should be updated at 
regular intervals to enable enhanced user adoption. They are further of the view 
that user manuals in local languages will be of immense help to the substantial 
number of common people across the country who buys gold . The Committee 
accordingly recommend that this may be given utmost importance and 
implemented at the earliest.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
13 
 
CHAPTER III 
MANDATORY HALLMARKING 
 The Scheme of mandatory certification of jewellery could not be introduced for 
want of an enabling legislative framework for its implementation under the Bureau of 
Indian Standards Act, 1986. But with the coming into force of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 2016 on 22.3.2016, provisions for making the hallmarking of jewellery 
mandatory, were incorporated. Accordingly, based on Section 14 of the Act, the Bureau 
of Indian Standards (Hallmarking) Regulations, 2018 were notified by the Government 
to mark gold and silver jewellery/ artefacts with Hallmark. Subsequently the 
Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery and Gold Artefacts Order, 2020 was notified on 15 
January, 2020 and subsequent amendments were issued. 
(i) MANDATORY HALLMARKING 
3.2 The decision to make hallm arking mandatory was taken in 2019. Quality 
Control Order (QCO) for mandatory hallmarking of gold jewellery and gold 
artefacts was notified by the Government of India on 15 January 2020 making 
hallmarking of gold jewellery and gold artefacts mandatory across the country with 
effect from 15 January 2021.  
3.3 Several rounds of discussions , thereafter ,   were held by the Government of 
India with the  stakeholders concerned  and in view of the concerns raised by the 
stakeholders in offloading the ir existing stock, the Government decided to further 
extend the date of implementation of mandatory hallmarking to 01 June 2021 vide 
a notification dated 09 October 2020.  
3.4 Hallmarking was finally made mandatory in 256 districts of the country with 
effect from 23 June, 2021 for 14,18 and 22 carats of gold jewellery and gold 
artefacts vide the Quality Control Order dated 23 June 2021 issued by DoCA. The 
reason for the coverage of only 256 districts in the 1st phase was that each of 
these districts had at least one AHC. Taking into consideration the availability of 
infrastructure for hallmarking and to facilitate the access of jewellers to BIS 
Recognised AHCs, mandatory hallmarking was implemented phase wise. Further, 

 
 
14 
 
vide hallmarking of gold jewellery and gold artefacts order dated 04 April 2022, 
effective from 01 June 2022, the scope of mandatory hallmarking was extended to 
32 new districts and to three additional caratages of gold jewellery thus making 
hallmarking mandatory across 288 districts of the cou ntry and for six caratages of 
gold jewellery viz. 14, 18,20, 22,23 and 24 carats.   
 
(ii) ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE HALLMARKING SCHEME 
 
3.5 DoCA, with regard to the progress achieved so far in implementation of 
Hallmarking scheme , in a written reply submitted as follows: 
“Since the launch of the hallmarking scheme in year 2000 there has been 
continuous increase in the number of registered jewelers, recognized A&H 
Centres and the articles hallmarked. Further, BIS is regularly drawing samples of 
Hallmarked jewellery and test them against the marked purity for protecting the 
consumer interest. The achievements of Hallmarking Scheme during last 5 years 
are given in the table below: 
 
“ 
 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
 
2020-21 
 
2021-22  2022-23 
No. of Operative 
Jeweller 
Licenses/ 
Registered 
23342 26688 30626 34647 137315 158439 
No. of 
 Operative 
AHCs 
608 797 915 945 1079 1409 
Surveillance 
Audits of AHC 
336 420 436 111 2641 941 
Market Samples 
Drawn report 
issued 
3447 5017 4983 2615 3796 29753 
No. of Articles 
Hallmarked 
( in crores)  
4.17 4.49 3.89 2.47 8.68 11.73 
” 
3.6 In response to a query about the timeframe for making hallmarking mandatory in  
the entire country, the Ministry vide OM No. 14/1/2022-BIS Dated 10.7.2023 replied,  
inter alia, as under:  
  
 “AHCs have now been set up in 53 additional Districts and process of making  
hallmarking mandatory of gold jewellery and artifacts in these districts is under 

 
 
15 
 
progress. Setting up of AHCs in some more districts are also being considered in 
this Department.” 
 
3.7  The data on the achievements of the hallmarking scheme since 2017 -18 
shows that number of operative Jeweller/ licenses / registered which stood at 
23,342 in 2017 -18 has increased to 1,58,439 in 2022 -23, an increase of more than 
6.5 times. The number of operative AHCs at 608 in 2017-18 has gone up to 1409 in 
2022-23, an increase of 2.3 times. Surveillance audits of AHCs conducted at 336 
in 2017 -18 has increased to 941 (2.8 times) in 2022 -23. Similarly, number of 
articles hallmarked has witnessed quantu m jump – from 4.17 crore pieces in 
2017-18 to 11.73 crore pieces in 2022 -23, an increase of 2.8 times. The above 
mentioned performance indicators amply make it clear that the scheme has 
received positive response from the consumers. With hallmarking of pre cious 
metals – gold and silver jewellery / artefacts made compulsory, the Committee 
have no doubt that hallmarking will witness explosive growth in the coming 
years. The Committee are glad to note that within two years of launch of the 
Scheme, AHCs have be en set up in 341 districts and the process of making 
hallmarking mandatory was completed in 288 districts and is in the process  of 
implementation in  additional 53 districts .  Thus, so far, 45% of the districts are 
covered under the hallmarking Scheme.  The Committee recommend that suitable 
plans may be formulated to cover the remaining districts for compulsory 
hallmarking in a defined timeframe.  
 
(iii) EXEMPTION FROM MANDATORY HALLMARKING 
3.8 The Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery and Gold Artefacts Order, 2020 of DoCA 
Order dated 15 January, 2020, inter alia, states that nothing in the order shall apply to 
precious metal articles, like Gold jewellery and gold artefacts in the following cases, 
namely:- 
“(a) any article meant for export, which conforms to any specification required by 
the foreign buyer;  
(b) an article with weight less than two grams;  
(c) an article which is in course of consignment from outside India to an assaying 
and hallmarking centre in India recognised as per the Bureau of Indian Standards 
(Hallmarking) Regulations, 2018, for hallmarking;  
(d) any article which is intended to be used for medical, dental, veterinary, 
scientific or industrial purposes;  
(e) any article of gold thread;  

 
 
16 
 
(f) any manufactured article which is not substantially complete, and which is  
intended for further manufacture;  
(g) gold bullion in any shape of bar, plate, sheet, foil, rod, wire, strip, tube or coin.” 
 
3.9 DoCA vide Hallmarking of Gold jewellery  and Gold artefacts (Second 
Amendment Order), 2021 published in Gazette S.O. 2481 (E) dated 23 June, 2021 , 
amending the Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery and Gold Artefacts Order, 2020 dated 15 
january, 2020, in clause 2(3)after item (g) inserted on 23 June, 2021 in the same order:- 
“(h) any article meant for export and re -import as per trade policy of the 
Government of India;  
(i) any article meant for international exhibitions;  
(j) any article meant for domestic business -to-business exhibitions, approved by 
the Government;  
(k) special categories of jewellery, namely Kundan, Polki and Jadaau;  
(l) watch and fountain pen; and  
(m) jewellers with the annual turnover of upto rupees fourty lakh per annum.” 
 
 
(A)  ARTICLES WITH WEIGHT LESS THAN 2 GRAMS 
3.10 With regard to  Clause 3(b) of the  Order dated 15 January, 2020 Akhil Bharatiya 
Grahak Panchayat (ABGP), a consumer association, has stated in its Memorandum 
dated 26.10.2022  submitted to the Committee as follows:- 
“The Government earlier has given exemption from mandatory hallmarking of 
article with weight less than two grams vide “the said Order”. In this connection, 
we have to submit that so many items of gold jewellery are made of weight less 
than 2 grams and vide the said Order these items have been placed out of the 
purview of mandatory hallmarking leaving a huge scope for cheating of 
consumers. Also, poor people usually purchase items of small weight. They are 
illiterate and uneducated and are easily prone to cheating. Therefore, we strongly 
recommend to withdraw this exemption.” 
 
3.11 Furnishing comments on the concerns expressed by ABGP , DoCA submitted as 
follows: 
 “In India most of the jewellery is hand made and in view of the intricacies 
involved in designing of jewellery there may not be enough space in small 
jewellery for laser marking the four points. In view of the same the jewellery less 
than 2g has been exempted from mandatory hallmarking order. However, 
wherever possible the jewellery below 2g may also be hallmarked if required. In a 
jewellery each detachable part has a separate entity and needs to be hallmarked 
separately with HUID on each detachable part.” 
 
 

 
 
17 
 
3.12 The Committee note that The Hallmarking of Go ld Jewellery and Gold 
Artefacts Order, 2020 dated 15 January, 2020  of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) Order dated 15 
January, 2020, inter alia , has exempted an gold jewellery article with weight of 
less than two grams from Mandatory Hallmarking. The Committee are of the 
opinion  that substantial number of people buy  gold jewellery items weighing 1 -2 
grams on the occasion of festivals, functions  or at regular intervals. In the 
absence of any quality assurance, these people  are prone to cheating.  The 
Committee therefore opine that buyer of gold  should be assured of quality and 
fineness of the gold jewellery. They, therefore suggest to reconsider / relook into 
the exemption granted to  gold jewellery items weighing less than 2 grams  from 
Hallmarking requirements and explore the feasibility of prescribing smaller HUID 
Id consisting merely a symbol or  sign.    
 
(B) SPECIAL CATEGORY OF JEWELLERY - KUNDAN, POLKI AND JADAAU 
3.13 Some stakeholders suggested that the exemption extended to Kundan, Polki and 
Jadaau should be continued as it is a work of art and has a unique age -old 
manufacturing process is involved.  In a diametrically opposite view, All I ndia Grahak 
panchayat has submitted that it is opposed to exemption of such jewellery from 
hallmarking requirements as it feels that huge scope for manipulations in such type of 
jewellery.  
 
3.14 DoCA in written reply to the apprehensions of All India Grahak Panchayat 
mentioned at para 3.12 submitted as follows :  
“Govt. of India had constituted an Advisory Committee with the specific terms of 
reference to examine and recommend measures to ensure s mooth 
implementation of the mandatory hallmarking across the country and address the 
concerns of the gold jewellery industry in regard to various provisions of the BIS 
Act, 2016, Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The members of the 
committee include r epresentatives from the jewellery trade, Assaying & 
Hallmarking Centre, Gems & Jewellery export Promotion, consumer 
organization, Quality Council of India and other Govt. Organisations. The issue 
for revocation of the exemption granted to Kundan, Polki and  Jadaau from the 
scope of mandatory hallmarking was discussed in the committee meeting held on 

 
 
18 
 
22.06.2022 wherein  the member from jewellery trade were not in agreement that 
the exemption granted to Kundan, Polki and Jadaau from the scope of 
mandatory hallmarking may be revoked.” 
 
3.15 The Committee observe that the Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery and Gold 
Artefacts  ( second amendment ) Order, 2020 of DoCA   dated  23 June, 2021 has 
exempted the special category of jewellery, namely Kundan, Polki and Jadaau 
from the list of mandatory hallmarking.  The Committee are of the opinion   that  
such exemption makes studding one small stone in a jewellery item to bring the 
jewellery in the category of Kundan, Polki and Jadaau and not getting it 
hallmarked. They note t hat the exemption has not been revoked after 
deliberations with representatives from the jewellery trade, Assaying & 
Hallmarking Centres, Gems & Jewellery export Promotion Councils , consumer 
organizations, Quality Council of India. The Committee feel that a suitable method 
may be worked out wherein the interests of consumers may be protected while 
accommodating the concerns of the jewellery trade . They, therefore, suggest that 
even if Kundan, Polki and Jadaau remain exempted from mandatory hallmarking, 
a system of marking the weight and /or caratage of gold before studding with 
stones may be explored  for the convenience of consumers. 
 
(C) JEWELLERS WITH ANNUAL TURNOVER UPTO RS. 40 LAKHS 
3.16 Jewellers with the annual turnover of upto rupees forty lakh per  annum are 
exempted from the applicability of The Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery and Gold Artefacts 
Order, 2020  as amended time to time under Clause 3(m). 
 
3.17 Akhil Bhartiya Grahak Panchayat, referring to the practice of  not issuing the 
proper invoices to avoid GST and forming new entities in the name of their relatives , 
employees, etc  ensuring the turnover below Rs. 40 lakh per annum, suggested to 
withdraw such exemption as mentioned below:  
“Jewellery being a very high value item, but the retail jeweller’s are not issuing 
invoices to the consumers on the pretext of extra levy of GST. Therefore, their 
turnover always remains below Rs. 40 lacs per annum and mo st of the retail 
jewellers will be out of purview of necessary registrations for selling hallmarking 
jewellery. Jewellers can form new entities in the name of their employee / 

 
 
19 
 
relatives keeping full control with themselves to avoid requirement of mandatory  
registrations and to facilitate selling of low caratage jewellery to consumers. It is 
surprising that most of the retail jewellers are having inventory of 4 to 5 kg of 
Gold Jewellery value of which is about Rs. 2 Crores, but their turnover is below 
Rs. 40 lacs per annum. The retail jewellers are thus creating black money and 
also causing loss of the revenue in the form of GST and also cheating 
consumers. Therefore, we strongly suggest that exemptions given to Jewellers 
with Annual Turnover up to Rs. 40 lacs per annum should be withdrawn.” 
 
3.18 The representatives of the Department of Consumer Affairs also elaborated 
during oral evidence held on 12 November, 2021 as follows : 
“इसलिए हमने यह सोचा था लि  लिलिलमनरी स्टेज में उनिो  हम एग्जेम्पट िर  देते हैं और बाद में 
जब स्कीम सक्सेसफ ु ल्ली  रोि-आउट  हो जाएगी, तब उनिो  भी इसमें शालमि िर  िेंगे |  अब 
हम ऐसा िर  सिते  हैं  | “ 
 
3.19 The Committee note that mandatory hallmarking order of the Government 
has certain exemptions which, inter alia , includes jewelers with an annual 
turnover of upto Rs. 40 lakh.  While noting the apprehensions of the consumer 
associations about the unscrupulours traders resorting to selling jewellery with 
out proper invoices and opening of  sales entities in the name  of employees, 
relatives , etc to keep the turnover less than Rs 40 lakh per annum to remain 
exempted from mandatory  hallmarking, the Committee  hope that relevant  
enforcement authorities may address  suitably the issues raised by the consumer 
association.  

 
 
20 
 
CHAPTER IV 
ENFORCEMENT 
         With regard to enforcement of the provisions of the Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery 
and Gold Artefacts Order, 2020, DoCA, in their background note, submitted as follows: 
    
 “BIS periodically visits the sales outlet(s) and randomly draws sample of 
Hallmarked article as on sale and gets it tested according to the relevant 
Indian Standard at its own referral assay labs at Chennai, Sahibabad and 
Kolkata to ascertain the purity o f the precious metal content in the sample. In 
case of failure of sample, action is taken on both the jeweller and the Assaying 
and Hallmarking Centre. BIS also carries out periodic surveillance audit of the 
AHC to ascertain its continuation with the specified requirements.”    
 
4.2 Section 9 of The Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 defines the powers and 
function of the Bureau. This includes power to enter into and search places, premises 
or vehicles, and inspect and seize goods or articles and document s to enforce the 
provisions of this Act. Further, Sub-section (2) of Section 9 of the Act reads as under: 
 “The Bureau shall take all necessary steps for promotion, monitoring and 
management of the quality of goods, articles, processes, systems and service s, 
as may be necessary, to protect the interests of consumers and various other 
stake holders which may include the following namely: — 
(a) carrying out market surveillance or survey of any goods, article, process,  
system or service to monitor their quality  and publish findings of such 
surveillance or surveys;……”   
 
(i) ASSESSMENT OF PURITY  
4.3  In a written reply to a  query regarding  assessments undertaken/done on the 
extent of adulteration of the various grades/carats of gold jewellery in the country, the 
Department of Consumer Affairs in written reply, has submitted as below:  
“BIS had condu cted two market surveys in the year 2001 & 2006 of non -
hallmarked jewellery being sold by the jewellers across the country as under:  
 
Particulars 2001 
(120 samples in 8 cities) 
2006 
(162 samples in 16 cities) 
Sample failing 89% 90% 
Average 
shortage in 
purity 
11% 13.5% 

 
 
21 
 
Highest purity 
shortage 
 38.6% 44.6% 
 
The Department has further stated that BIS is regularly drawing samples from 
registered jewellers and test it against the marked purity at its own Labs.  In 
2020-21, 2615 test reports of hallmarked jewellery were received out of which 
2318 samples were found of equal to or higher purity than the declared purity.  
297 samples were found of marginally lower purity with 0.5% average shortage of 
purity.  In all, the above mentioned 297 cases, actions wer e taken against the 
concerned jewelers/ assaying & hallmarking centres in accordance with the 
Hallmarking Scheme of BIS.” 
 
4.4 As a result of tests of non hallmarked samples conducted in the country , 13.5% 
average shortage in the purity of gold was found in the year 2006. The tests of 
hallmarked jewellery conducted in the year 2020 -21 found 0.5% average shortage of 
purity. In written reply to a query on the reasons for decline in the average shortage of 
purity of gold , DoCA  submitted as under :  
 
“BIS organized a number of training programmes for the personnel of Assaying 
and Hallmarking Centres (AHCs), artisans making jewellery, awareness 
programmes for jewellers and enhanced surveillance of Jewellers and AHCs for 
effective monitoring of the scheme.” 
 
4.5 The Committee note that the mandate of Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) 
is to promote and monitor quality of goods and services.  They also note that 
regular market surveys of gold jewellery carried out in the year 2006 found that 
the average shortage in purity was 13.5% which was higher than the  average 
shortage of purity  found   in the survey conducted in 2001 i.e. 11%. On the 
contrary, test reports of hallmarked jewellery in the year 2020 -21 reveals an 
average shortage of purity of 0.5%. The Commit tee are of the view that 
introduction and implementation of  the Bureau of Indian Standards (Hallmarking) 
Regulations, 2018, the average shortage in purity of jewellery has considerably 
come down.  The Committee are glad  to note that the BIS has organized  a 
number of training programmes for the personnel of AHCs, artisans and 
undertaken awareness among jewellers and strengthened surveillance over 
jewellers and AHCs so as to keep effective monitoring over the scheme.  The 

 
 
22 
 
Committee desire the Department to conduct market surveys at frequent intervals  
and further intensify their monitoring mechanism. 
 
(ii) PUBLICITY, COMPLAINTS AND REDRESSAL 
4.6 In a written reply, apprising the Committee of the concerted awareness 
programmes about  HUID c arried out for generating awareness amongst the 
consumers, jewellers and other stakeholders, DoCA submitted the  following 
publicity/outreach initiatives  taken by BIS :   
“a) A 30 day Pan India campaign through AIR was executed on 29 FM Stations, 
42 Vividh Bharati National stations and Mann ki Baat, in which Hallmarking HUID 
was also highlighted.  
 
b) Hallmarking Publicity Campaign through "DD Conclave” to mark the 
completion of eight year of Union Government was executed. The telecast of this 
conclave was on DD News daily from 6pm to 8pm from 03.06.2022 to 
11.06.2022.  
 
c) Hallmarking publicity campaign was executed through Cycle Stand Outdoor 
Display media, located in front of BIS Main Building at ITO, New Delhi, for a 
duration of 1 month.  
 
d) Along with the Headquarter, the publicity activities are being executed through 
Regional and Branch offices of BIS to ensure eloquently reaching each and 
every corner of the country. In Regional/Branch Offices of BIS, Publicity on 
Hallmarking-HUID has been undertaken through –  
 
- A Hallmarking Print Advertisement on the eve of Akshay Tritiya was released 
on 3 May 2022.  
- A print campaign on second phase of mandatory hallmarking scheme on 14 
May 2022 and 27 May 2022.  
- Hoardings in Post Offices & LED displays inside Post Offices in Rural Areas  
- Hoardings in Mofussil Bus Terminus  
- Branding inside Metro Trains  
- LED Screens in Cinema Malls  
- Select Metro Train Stations  
- Display Screens at Railway Stations.  
- Standards Clubs in Educational institutions, Door-to-Door Campaigns etc.,  
 
Hallmarking HUID is also regularly publicized through static/Gif/Reel Posts 
through BIS social media platforms.  
 

 
 
23 
 
All the 41 Branch Offices of BIS are regularly organising consum er awareness 
programme wherein consumers are apprised about the schemes of BIS including 
hallmarking scheme.  
 
BIS also organized Quality Connect programme wherein more than 1 Lakh 
households were visited by approx. 4,000 youth volunteers on World Standard s 
Day 2022. Further, about 3,800 Standards Clubs have been formed in schools 
and colleges involving more than 85,000 students for consumer awareness and 
outreach activities” 
 
4.7 Responding to a  query regarding the procedure for redressal to aggrieved buyer, if 
any deficiency is found in the purity of gold, DoCA  in a written reply submitted as 
follows: 
“BIS has a well -established procedure for handling of complaints related to 
purity of hallmarked jewellery procured by customers. After formal registration of 
the complaint through Consumer Engagement Portal of BIS, the complaint is 
investigated at the end of complainant, wherein, the sample of jewellery is 
collected for testing in BIS lab.  In case the jewellery is found short of purity 
upon testing, act ion against registered jeweller is taken in accordance with BIS 
Rules/Regulations. Jeweller is also liable to compensate the complainant in 
accordance with BIS Rules 2018.” 
 
4.8 In written reply to a query on the  data on the number of complaints lodged with 
BIS with regard to the purity of hallmarked jewellery and other grievances during the 
last three years till date, DoCA submitted as follows :  
 
“ 
Nature of 
Complaints 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 Total 
Related to 
Purity 
07 00 09 10 19 45 
Related to 
Unauthorized 
Use of BIS 
Hallmark 
51 15 30 53 149 298 
” 
 
4.9 With regard to the steps taken to facilitate the customers to find out the fitness 
of jewellery, the DoCA  has, in a written submission, stated as follows: 
“Jewellers have been instructed by BIS that the bill or invoice of sale of 
hallmarked precious metal articles shall also mention that the consumer can get 
the purity of the hallmarked jewellery/artefacts verified from any of the BIS 
recognized A&H centre. The list of BIS recognized A&H centres along with 

 
 
24 
 
address and contact details is available on the website www.bis.gov.in. Further, 
during consumer awareness programmes it is informed to consumers that they 
can get their hallm arked jewellery tested at any of the BIS recognized centres 
for purity.” 
 
4.10 The Committee note that BIS has taken publicity/outreach initiatives 
through Print and electronic media radio, TV and social media.  As far as 
complaints related to purity of go ld is concerned, there are a total of 45 purity  
related complaints during the last 5 years. The Committee learned that BIS has a 
well-established procedure for handling of complaints related to purity of 
hallmarked jewellery procured by customers. The Dep artment informed that after 
formal registration of the complaint through Consumer Engagement Portal of BIS, 
the complaint is investigated and  during the investigation, the sample of 
jewellery is collected for testing in BIS lab.  Jewellers have been instructed by BIS 
that the bill or invoice of sale of hallmarked precious metal articles shall also 
mention that the consumer can get the purity of the hallmarked jewellery/artefacts 
verified from any of the BIS recognized A&H centre. In this regard, the Commit tee 
desire that information about such facilities may be in suitably included in the 
publicity/outreach initiatives of the BIS and that the information regarding 
Consumer Engagement Portal of BIS be distinctly displayed in the jewellery 
markets/ shops in order to improve the outreach of the portal. 
 
(iii) MANAK ONLINE APP AND PRIVACY ISSUE 
 
4.11  The Manak App/ BIS Care App shows the manufacturer’s  name and 
manufactured date once HUID number is entered in the  App. Some stakeholders 
expressed their concerns as this is leading to privacy issues and also denting the 
retailer’s business as the cus tomer can approach the manufacturer directly for the 
articles. Accordingly, the Industry body suggested that BIS should come out with a 
mechanism where by name of the manufacturer and hallmarking date is not visible on 
the manak online App, DoCA in written  reply  to the aforementioned suggestion 
submitted as follows :  
 

 
 
25 
 
“The provision in Mobile BIS care app wherein after entering the HUID the 
consumer can verify the details such as purity of jewellery, type of jewellery, 
details of AHC who has tested the jewellery, the name of jeweller who has 
hallmarked the jewellery, date of hallmarking etc. has only been made keeping 
in view consumer interest. This provision helps the consumer to check 
authenticity of the hallmark at the time of purchase. The name and a ddress of 
the jeweller should be visible to consumer as having knowledge of jeweller 
selling/manufacturing the article plays an important role in instilling confidence 
and assurance in consumers regarding purity of the hallmarked article and 
ensures transparency in the system. 
 
However, it may also be noted that this provision is similar to the other product 
certification scheme being operated by BIS.” 
 
                                                       
4.12 The Committee note that the Customer who uses  the BIS Care app can trace 
the source and date of manufacturing and Hallmarking as the Manak App/ BIS 
Care App shows the manufacturer’s name and manufactured date once HUID 
number is entered in the App. This has prompted some stakeholders to raise the 
issue of privacy.  While noting that    such transparency provision is similar to the 
other product certification schemes being operated by BIS, they suggest that no 
change may be made in this regard and  these  features – source and date of  
manufacturing , of the  Manak App may be retained as it will protect the interest 
of the consumers.  

 
 
26 
 
CHAPTER – V 
ASSAYING & HALLMARKING CENTRES 
(i) ASSAYING AND HALLMARKING CENTRES 
5.1 BIS Act, 2016 defines Assaying and Hallmarking Centre as under :- 
“Assaying and Hallmarking Centre means a testing and marking centre 
recognized by the Bureau to determine the purity of precious articles and to apply 
hallmark on the precious metal articles in a manner as may be determined by 
regulations” 
5.2 The criteria for recogniti on of Assaying and Hallmarking Centres,  as submitted 
by DoCA in a written reply is as follows :   
“The criteria for recognition of Assaying and Hallmarking Centers is specified in 
the Indian Standard IS 15820:2009 -‘General Requirements for Establishment 
and Operation of Assaying and Hallmarking Centres'. The Standard specifies 
Management as well as Technical requirements for Assaying and Hallmarking 
Centers.” 
 
5.3 The guidelines for recognition as as submitted by DoCA are as follows: 
“Any assaying centre set up in accordance with requirements specified in IS 
15820:2009 for assaying and hallmarking of gold and /or silver jewellery / 
artefacts, shall apply to the Regional office of BIS with self -certified copies 
of following documents. 
 
a) Proof of establish ment of the firm or company (Any one of the document 
given below), such as (i) Certificate of Registration issued by Registrar of 
companies along with memorandum of articles or (ii) Registered Partnership 
Deed in case applicant is a Partnership Firm or (ii i) Certificate from a 
Chartered Accountant if applicant is a Proprietorship Firm; 
 
b) Proof of address of firm's premises (Any one of the document given 
below) such as (i) Registration with State Government Authority/ Trade 
Licences or (ii) GST registratio n certificate or (iii) Income Tax Assessment 
Order or (iv) Property tax receipt or (v) Rent agreement with last rent receipt 
or (vi) Sale/ Lease Deed agreement; 
 
c) Proof of Identity of the signatory (i) Aadhar based verification/ e - 
signature and(ii) Self -certified copy of any one of following documents as 
identity proof of signatory on the Application: - Aadhar Card - Driving 
Licence - PAN card - Voter Identity card - Passport - Identity Certificate with 
photo issued by Gazetted Officer on official letterhead; 
 
d) Map indicating location of premises from nearest land mark Location map 

 
 
27 
 
of premises from some nearest prominent landmark for each outlet, as 
applicable (illustrative only); 
 
e) Quality manual of the A&H Centre prepared based on the Generic 
Quality Manual provided by BIS; and 
 
f) Affidavit cum undertaking as specified in regulations.” 
 
5.4 The guidelines prescribe that after recording the application, a Recognition 
Assessment of the AHC (of 4 man -days duration i.e. by a team of two officers f or two 
days either for gold or gold & silver) preferably within 15 days of recording the 
application to determine whether the AHC has created the necessary infrastructure for 
assaying and hallmarking according to IS 15820:2009 shall be carried out.  
  
5.5 DoCA,  furnishing the further processing of the assessment report  submitted as 
follows :   
“If the assessment report is found in order, Hallmarking Officer (HMO) shall 
prepare the proposal for grant of recognition and put up to the DDGR as per 
Hallmarking Regulations 2018. Recognition will be granted by the DDGR in 
respect of gold and/or silver hallmarking.”  
 
5.6  In response to a request to furnish the State/UT -wise names of AHCs granted 
recognition, DoCA  in their written replies have furnished a list of 1409 AHCs  granted 
recognition as per IS 15820: 2009 with scopes defined for Gold Jewellery/artefacts (as 
per IS 1417) as well as Silver Jewellery/artefacts (as per IS 2112) which includes 162 
Assaying and Hallmarking Centres granted recognition as per IS 15820:2009 with 
various scopes for Silver Jewellery / artefacts (as per IS 2112).   
 
5.7.  DoCA have also submitted to the Committee that during the last three years and 
the current year i.e.2022-23  a total of 796 recognitions have been granted and 727 got 
renewed. 
 
5.8 The Committee note that as per the Guidelines for Recognition & Operation 
of Assaying and Hallmarking Centres (AHCs), any Assaying and Hallmarking 
Centre (AHC)  may apply for recognition with self -certified copies of necessary 
documents and within 15 days, a Recognition Assessment of the AHC to 
determine whether the AHC has created the necessary infrastructure for assaying 

 
 
28 
 
and hallmarking according to IS 15820:2009, is  carried out. They also note that if 
the assessment report is found in order,  DDGR grants recognition in respect of 
gold and/or silver hallmarking. The Committee f urther note that till March, 2023, 
796 recognitions were granted and 727 were got renewed.   In this context , the 
Committee suggest that timelines for every step in the process for granting 
recognition should prescribed and  such timelines should adhered to .  
 
(ii) AHCs IN REMOTE/BACKWARD AREAS 
5.9 The status on setting up of AHCs in North East and remote/ backward areas,  
as submitted by DoCA  is as under :  
“setting up of AHC is a market driven activity where decision to open an AHC at 
a particular location is taken by the private entrepreneur based on the demand 
at that location. In view of the commercial viability the AHCs have been mostly 
setup in and around the city and that 12 AHCs were setup in the North -East 
region.   However , for increasing t he spread of AHCs in deficient areas, BIS is 
regularly inviting Expression of Interest for setting up the AHC in deficient 
locations with Central Assistance. Against the previous Expression of Interest 
invited in Sep. 2021, Applicants for 7 deficient locat ions in the North -East were 
given go-ahead for setting up the AHC with Central Assistance. “  
 
5.10 In this regard, a representative of BIS deposing before the Committee on 12  
November, 2021 submitted as under:  
“Opening of Assaying and Hallmarking Centre (AHC) is a private business and 
that BIS only recognizes them.” 
(iii) FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE 
5.11 BIS has been implementing the Plan scheme for setting up of gold Assaying and 
Hallmarking (A&H) centres in India with central assistance. 
 
The components of the scheme are indicated below: 
 
a)  Infrastructure building - Setting up of Assaying & Hallmarking (A&H) 
Centres 
b)  Capacity building 
i) Training of artisans 
ii) Training of Trainers (BIS auditors) 
iii) Training of personnel of assaying and hallmarking Centres. 
 

 
 
29 
 
5.12 The Committee sought details of the  financial assistance for setting up of Gold 
Assaying and Hallmarking Centres in those places in India  where no such centre exists 
along with  the plan, if any, to enhance the assistance.  DoCA in their w ritten reply, 
submitted as under: 
“Under the Plan scheme, setting up of AHCs is envisaged. This is through a one -
time financial assistance for ‘Setting up of Gold AHCs’ in India at locations where 
no AHC (assisted or otherwise) exists, the rates of financi al assistance given are 
as under: 
 
Area % of the total cost of machinery and equipment given 
to A&H Centre as assistance 
 To Private Entrepreneur To PSUs 
Normal 30% 50% 
NE/SCS/RA 50% 75% 
   NE – North East States; SCS - Special Category States; RA – Rural Areas 
  The Special Category states include the seven north east states, Sikkim, 
Jammu    and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, and Uttarakhand.” 
 
5.13 With regard to the reasons for giving less er financial assistance to private 
entrepreneurs compared to PSUs, DoCA, in a written reply that higher financial 
assistance to PSUs are given as they have proven credibility.  
 
5.14 About the proportion of AHCs  established with financial assistance of the Central 
Government to the total number of AHCs, the DoCA  stated in a reply furnished on 6 
December, 2022: 
“At present 1423 number of AHCs have been operating across the country. Out 
of these 1423 AHCs, 89 AHCs have been established with financial assistance of 
the Central Government of the Central Government as per the request received”.   
 
5.15  In written reply to a query whether  assessment of the Hallmarking Scheme  was 
carried out and the details there of,  DoCA submitted as follows : 
“After implementation of BIS(Hallmarking) Regulations, 2018, a study on 
Evaluation of the Schemes of the Depa rtment of Consumer Affairs, was 
entrusted to the National Productivity Council, New Delhi (NPC) by the 
Department of Consumer Affairs, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution, Government of India in year 2019.  Under this evaluation the study 
of gold hallmarking scheme was also carried out by NPC. NPC in its report has 
mentioned that the scheme of Hallmarking and Assaying of gold jewellery is 

 
 
30 
 
becoming popular among registered jewellers and consumers. The Hallmarking 
centers are becoming e conomically viable. Further, it was suggested that more 
and more hallmarking centres may be set up in different States.” 
 
5.16 With regard to the achievements made by BIS in protecting the consumers 
against cheating, developing export competitiveness and m aking India a leading market 
for gold jewellery in the world under the hallmarking of jewellery scheme, the 
Department, in a written reply, stated as under: 
 
“Since the launch of the hallmarking scheme in year 2000 there has been 
continuous increase in the  number of registered jewellers, recognized AHCs and 
the articles hallmarked. Further BIS is regularly drawing samples of Hallmarked 
jewellery and test them against the marked purity for protecting the consumer 
interest.” 
 
5.17 The Committee observe that the Government extends  financial assistance 
to private entrepreneurs and PSUs for ‘Setting up of Gold Assaying and 
Hallmarking Centres’ (AHC) in India, to the tune of 30% and 50% respectively.  
The assistance is 50% and 75% for private entrepreneurs and PS Us respectively 
in the case of North East/ Special Category States/ Rural Areas.  The Committee 
also note that higher financial assistance to PSUs is stated to have been given 
on the basis of proven credibility. They also note that BIS is regularly invitin g 
expression of interest for setting up of AHCs in deficient locations with Central 
assistance. Out of the 1423 AHCs, as on 30.5.2023, 89 AHCs have been 
established with financial assistance of the Central Government as per the 
request received. The Commit tee are of the view that  private entrepreneurs in 
NE and far flung areas needs t o be encouraged to set up AHCs and the 
possibility of change in the incentives may also be explored.   
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                     LOCKET CHATTERJEE 
01 August, 2023                         Chairperson 
10 Sravana, 1945 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee Consumer  
        Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 

 
 
31 
 
 
 
APPENDIX I 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2020 -2021) HELD ON 
FRIDAY, 08 JANUARY, 2021 
The Committee sat from 1200 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Ajay Misra Teni - Acting Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
3. Ms. Pratima Bhoumik 
4. Shri Bhagwant Mann 
5. Shri Khagen Murmu 
6. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai (Bakabhai) Patel 
7. Shri Subrat Pathak 
8. Smt. Himadri Singh 
9. Smt. Kavita Singh 
10. Shri Saptagiri Ulaka 
11. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Smt. Shanta Chhetri 
13. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
14. Smt. Roopa Ganguly 
15. Shri Rajmani Patel 
16. Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 

 
 
32 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Pawan Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Lovekesh Kumar Sharma - Director 
 
WITNESSES 
 
Sl No.          Name Designation 
1. Shri Vineet Mathur Joint Secretary, D/o Consumer Affairs 
2. Shri Sanjiv Chaturvedi DDG- Hallmarking (BIS) 
3. Shri Dharmesh Makwana Director, D/o Consumer Affairs 
4. Shri Sanjiv Maini Head-Hallmarking (BIS) 
 
2. At the outset, the Committee were informed that due to certain exigencies, the 
Hon’ble Chairperson was not in a position to preside over the sitting of the Committee 
and were requested to choose one amongst themselves to preside over the day’s 
sitting. Accordingly, in terms of Rule 258(3) of the Ru les of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha, the Committee chose Shri Ajay Misra Teni, MP (Lok Sabha) to 
preside over the sitting of the Committee for the day. Thereafter, the Acting Chairperson 
welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee convened to have briefing by the 
representatives of the Department of Consumer Affairs on the subject ‘BIS – 
Hallmarking & Jewellery’. 
 [The witnesses were then called in.] 
 
3. The Acting Chairperson then welcomed the representatives of Department of 
Consumer Affairs to the sitting and apprised them about Direction 55 (1) of the 
'Directions by the Speaker' regarding confidentiality of the proceedings. Thereafter, the 
witnesses in troduced themselves and then the representatives of the Department of 

 
 
33 
 
Consumer Affairs briefed the Committee on various aspects of the subject ‘BIS – 
Hallmarking & Jewellery’ with the help of power point presentation. The main issues 
covered, inter-alia, included Gold Consumption - Indian Scenario, Objectives of 
Hallmarking, Grades of Gold Jewellery/Artefacts covered under IS 1417:2016, 
Hallmarking Scheme Operation, New initiatives in Hallmarking Scheme, Monitoring of 
Hallmarking Scheme, Capacity Building -Promotional/Training Activities, Mandatory 
Hallmarking, etc. The queries raised by the Acting Chairperson and the Members on 
various issues during the course of briefing were responded to by the witnesses.  
4. The Hon'ble Acting Chairperson then thanked the representatives of Department 
of Consumer Affairs for briefing the Committee and directed them to furnish information 
to the Committee on the issues that remained unanswered/partially answered and also 
some further clarifications in connection with detailed examination of the subject. 
[The Witnesses then withdrew.] 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
********* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
34 
 
APPENDIX II 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2020 -2021) HELD ON 
FRIDAY, 12 NOVEMBER, 2021 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1245 hrs. in Committee Room ‘2’, First 
Floor, Block-‘A’, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Sudip Bandopadhyay - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
17. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
18. Ms. Pratima Bhoumik 
19. Shri Bhagwant Mann 
20. Shri Khagen Murmu 
21. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai (Bakabhai) Patel 
22. Shri Subrat Pathak 
23. Smt. Himadri Singh 
24. Smt. Kavita Singh 
25. Shri Saptagiri Ulaka 
26. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
27. Smt. Shanta Chhetri 
28. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
29. Smt. Roopa Ganguly 
30. Shri Rajmani Patel 
31. Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
SECRETARIAT 
 
3. Shri Pawan Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
4.  Shri Lovekesh Kumar Sharma - Director 

 
 
35 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
Sl No.          Name Designation 
1. Shri Vineet Mathur Joint Secretary, D/o Consumer Affairs 
2. Shri Sanjiv Chaturvedi DDG- Hallmarking (BIS) 
3. Shri Dharmesh Makwana Director, D/o Consumer Affairs 
4. Shri Sanjiv Maini Head-Hallmarking (BIS) 
 
2. At the outset, the Committee were informed that the sitting of the Committee was 
held to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of Consumer Affairs 
on the subject ‘BIS – Hallmarking & Jewellery’. 
 [The witnesses were then called in.] 
 
3. The Chairperson then welcomed the representatives of Department of Consumer 
Affairs to the sitting and apprised them about Direction 55 (1) of the 'Directions by the 
Speaker' regarding confidentiality of the proceedings. Thereafter, the witnesses 
introduced themselves and then the representatives of the Department of Consumer 
Affairs briefed the Committee on various aspects of the subject ‘BIS – Hallmarking & 
Jewellery’ with the help of power point presentation. The main issues covered, inter-alia, 
included Gold Consumption - Indian Scenario, Objectives of Hallmarking, Grades of 
Gold Jewellery/Artefacts covered under IS 1417:2016, Hallmarking Scheme Operation, 
New initiatives in Hallmarking Scheme, Monitoring of Hallmarking Scheme, Capacity 
Building-Promotional/Training Activities, Mandatory Hallmarking, etc. The queries raised 
by the Acting Chairperson and the Members on various issues during the course of 
briefing were responded to by the witnesses.  

 
 
36 
 
4. The Hon'ble Acting Chairperson then thanked the represe ntatives of Department 
of Consumer Affairs for briefing the Committee and directed them to furnish information 
to the Committee on the issues that remained unanswered/partially answered and also 
some further clarifications in connection with detailed examination of the subject. 
[The Witnesses then withdrew.] 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
********* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
37 
 
APPENDIX III 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2022 -2023) HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, 9th NOVEMBER,2022 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in Committee Room ‘2’, Block ‘A’, 
Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Smt. Locket Chatterjee - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
32. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
33. Shri Anil Firojiya 
34. Shri Khagen Murmu 
35. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai (Bakabhai)Patel 
36. Shri Subrat Pathak 
37. Dr. Amar Singh 
38. Smt. Kavita Singh 
39. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
40. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
 
Rajya Sabha 
41. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
42. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
43. Shri Baburam Nishad 
44. Shri Rajmani Patel 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
5. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda  - Joint Secretary 
6. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   - Director 
7. Shri Ram Lal Yadav                          - Additional Director 
8. Dr. Mohit Rajan    - Deputy Secretary 

 
 
38 
 
 
LIST OF NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES ON THE SUBJECT, ‘BUREAU OF INDIAN 
STANDARDS (BIS) - HALLMARKING & JEWELLERY’ 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Organization  
1 Shri Ashish R. 
Pethe 
Chairman, Gem and Jewellery Domestic Council 
(GJC) 
2. Shri Karthik 
Kuppuraj 
Advisor (Founder) Surabhi Bullion (Jewellery Trade) 
3.  Shri R.P. Singh Secretary General , Quality Council of India (QCI) 
4. Shri P.K. Bansal National Treasurer, Akhil Bharatiya Grahak 
Panchayat (ABGP) 
5. Shri Chetan 
Bhandari 
Managing Director, All India Hallmarking Centre 
(AIHC) 
6. Shri James Jose Promoter, Hallmarking Federation of India (HFI) 
 
XXXX     XXXX   XXXX  
2. At the outset, LAARDIS officials gave power point presentation about various 
facilities provided by the Research and Library Division. Thereafter, the  Ch airperson 
welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee convened to (i) consider and 
adopt the draft reports on Action Taken by the Government on 
observations/recommendations contained in the 18 th Report(17th LS) on Demands for 
Grants (2022-23) pertaining to Department of Food and Public Distribution; and the 19 th 
Report (17 th LS) on Demands for Grants (2022 -23) pertaining to Department of 
Consumer Affairs; (ii) Take oral evidence of experts/stakeholders on the subject ‘Bureau 
of Indian Standards (BI S)- Hallmarking & Jewellery’ and (iii) have briefing by the 
representatives of the Department of Food and Public Distribution on the subject ‘Sugar 
Industry in India - A Review’. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the 
Draft Reports. After due deliberations, the Committee unanimously adopted the said two 
Action Taken Reports without any amendment/modification and authorized the 
Chairperson to carry out verbal and consequential changes, if any, therein and present 
the same to the Parliament. 
 [The witnesses on the subject, ‘Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS)- Hallmarking & 
Jewellery were then called in.] 

 
 
39 
 
3.  The Chairperson welcomed the non -official witnesses/experts/stake holders on 
the subject ‘BIS -Hallmarking & Jewellery’ to the sitting and ap prised them about 
Direction 55(1) of ‘Directions by the Speaker’ regarding confidentiality of the 
proceedings. The witnesses after introduction briefed the Committee on various aspects 
of the subject ‘BIS - Hallmarking & Jewellery’. The main issues covered , inter-alia,  
include Homogeneity of Gold Jewellary Articles, Definitions of various terms in the BIS 
Act, 2016 and the Hallmarking of Gold Jewellary and Gold Artefacts Order, exemption 
from the Order, Awareness on Hallmark Unique Identification (HUID), etc. The Members 
raised clarificatory questions on the subject which were responded to by the witnesses.  
4. The Hon’ble Chairperson thanked the witnesses for their free and frank 
discussion and directed them to furnish information to the Committee on the i ssues that 
remained unanswered /were partially answered in connection with examination of the 
subject. 
[The Witnesses then withdrew] 
 
5.   XXXX     XXXX   XXXX 
6.   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
The Committee then adjourned. 
************* 
 
__________________________________________________ 
XXXX Matter is not related to the Report. 
 
  

 
 
40 
 
APPENDIX IV 
   
MINUTES OF THE  EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2022 -2023) HELD ON 
TUESDAY, 1st AUGUST, 2023 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1515 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’,  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt.Locket Chatterjee  - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Ms. Debasree Chaudhuri 
4. Shri Anil Firojiya 
5. Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit 
6. Shri Khagen Murmu 
7. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
8. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
9. Dr. Amar Singh 
10. Smt. Himadri Singh 
11. Smt. Kavita Singh 
12. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
13. Shri Ve. Vaithilingam 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 14. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
 15. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
 16. Shri Harbhajan Singh 
 17. Ms. Dola Sen 
 18. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   - Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Dong Lianthan Tonsing          -  Deputy Secretary  

 
 
41 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the following Draft Reports of 
the Committee: 
(i) Twenty Seventh Rep ort on the subject - “BIS-Hallmarking & Jewellery” of the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs);  
 
(ii) XXXXXX XXXXXXXXX XXXXXXX 
 
(iii) XXXXXX XXXXXXXXX XXXXXXX 
 
(iv) XXXXXX XXXXXXXXX XXXXXXX 
 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the above mentioned Draft 
Reports of the Committee.  
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft Reports 
without any amendments/modifications.  
5.  The Committee then authorize d Hon’ble Chairperson to finalize and present the 
aforesaid Reports. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
********* 
XXX Matter does not relate to the Report. 
 
 
 
  