i 
 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, 
FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2022-2023) 
 
 
     
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the recommendations /observations 
contained in the Twenty Fifth Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2023 -24) pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
              August, 2023/Sravana,1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
30 


ii 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2022-2023) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
{Action Taken  by  the   Government  on  the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Twenty Fifth Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2023 -24) pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 3.8.2023 
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 3.8.2023 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 August, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
            
Composition of the Committee ………………………………………                         
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………...           
Chapter I Report……………………………………………………           
 
Chapter II Recommendations/ Observations which have been 
accepted by Government……………………………             
  
Chapter III Recommendations/ Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
 Government’s replies………………………………...                            
 
Chapter IV Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee ………………………………………..                 
 
Chapter V Recommendations/ Observations in respect of 
which final replies of Government are  
still awaited………………………………………………    
  
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the 18th sitting of the Committee (2022-2023)          
 held on 01.08.2023            
   
 
(II) Analysis  of the  action  taken by the Government on                     
the observations/recommendations contained  
in the Twenty Fifth Report  of  the  Standing  Committee  
on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha)                                       
  

iv 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution 
 
(2022-23) 
Smt. Locket Chatterjee  -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
5. Shri Gangasandra Siddappa Basavaraj 
6. Km. Debasree Chaudhuri 
7. Shri Anil Firojiya 
8. Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit 
9. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi 
10. Shri Khagen Murmu 
11. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
12. Shri Subrat Pathak 
13. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
14. Dr. Amar Singh 
15. Smt. Himadri Singh 
16. Smt. Kavita Singh 
17. Shri Nandigam Suresh 
18. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
19. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
20. Shri Vaithilingam Ve. 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
23. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
24. Shri Baburam Nishad 
25. Shri Rajmani Patel 
26. Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
27. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
28. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam 
29. Shri Harbhajan Singh 
30. Ms. Dola Sen 
31. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda            -  Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi            -  Director 
3. Shri Dong Lianthang Tonsing       -  Deputy Secretary 

v 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs , Food  and 
Public Distribution (2022-2023) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Thirtieth Report on Action Taken by the Government 
on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twent y F ifth Report of the 
Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of the Ministry 
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
2.  The Twenty Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
21.03.2023. The Government has furnished its replies indicating Action Taken on the 
recommendations contained in the Report on 08.06.2023. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
1st August, 2023. 
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.  
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations/ Observations of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the text of the Report. 
  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                     LOCKET CHATTERJEE 
01 August, 2023                             Chairperson, 
10 Sravana, 1945 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee Consumer  
        Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -Fifth Report of the 
Committee (2022 -23), (17th Lok Sabha) on D emands for Grants (2023 -24), 
pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs).  
 
1.2  The Twenty-Fifth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the 
Rajya Sabha on 21 March, 2023. It cont ained 11 Observations/ 
Recommendations.  
 
1.3  Action taken replies in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received and categorized as follows:- 
  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Para Nos.: 2.6, 2.13, 3.15, 3.24, 4.14, 4.27, 5.8, 5.15, 6.7, 6.17 
Total: 10  
Chapter-II  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:   
Para No.: 4.5  
Total: 01  
Chapter-III  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:  
 Para No.: NIL  
Total:0  
Chapter-IV  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Para No. : NIL  
Total: 0  
Chapter-V  
 
1.4  The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendatio ns accepted by the 
Government. The Committee desire that final action taken notes to the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report 
should be furnished to them not later than three months of the presentation 
of this Report.  
 
1.5  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of the observations/recommendations.  
 
 

2 
 
 
 
Strengthening of Consumer Commissions  
 
Recommendation No 3 (Para no 3.15) 
  
1.6  The Committee in their Original Report observed/recommended as 
follows:- 
 
“The Committee note that in order to supplement the efforts of the 
State Governments to run quasi -judicial Consumer Commissions, 
the Department of Consumer Affairs, under Consumer Protection 
Act, 2019, is extending financial assistance to them to strengthen 
the infrastructure so that a minimum level of facilities are provided 
at each Consumer Commission required for their effective 
functioning. The Committee, therefore, hope that the Department 
will continuously pursue and take strong measu res to ensure 
utilization of the full amount and obtain UCs from such States/Uts 
at the earliest.”  
 
1.7  The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“The Department of Consumer Affairs has been persistently 
making regular requests to State Governments and UT 
Administrations to utilize the funds and also provide pending 
Utilization Certificates for the funds released und the 
“Strengthening of Consumer Co mmission” scheme through 
meetings, video conferencing and letters.”  
 
1.8 The Committee, in their report on Demands for Grants (2023 -24), 
expressed hope that Department will, in the matter of extending financial 
assistance to them to strengthen the infrast ructure, continuously pursue 
and take strong measures to ensure utilization of the full amount and 
obtain Utilization Certificates (UCs) from States/Uts at the earliest. In reply, 
the Department of Consumer Affairs informed that it has been persistently 
making regular requests to State Governments and UT Administrations to 
utilize the funds and also provide pending UCs for the funds released 
under the “Strengthening of Consumer Commission” scheme through 
meetings, video conferencing and letters. The Committ ee, while 
recognizing the efforts of the department, once again,  reiterate their earlier 
recommendation to ensure utilization of the full amount of funds released 
for strengthening infrastructure of the Consumer Commissions.  
  

3 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
  
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No. 2.6) 
 
2.1 The Committee note that allocation and utilization of funds by the 
Department of Consumer Affairs shows that the Actual Expenditure (AE) for the 
last 5 y ears has shown enormous surrenders. The Committee therefore, 
recommend that the Department should make better planning at the Revised 
Estimate Stage so as to spend as much as estimated and reduce the chances of 
surrender of funds. 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 There were enormous surrenders of saving during the FY 2019 -20, 2020- 
21 and 2021-22 w.r.t R.E allocations for which reasons was already replied to the 
Hon’ble Committee. However, during the FY 2022 -23, the actual expenditure as 
on 31.03.2023 was Rs. 24 9.46 crore against the. RE allocation of Rs. 256.55 
crore and there was surrender of savings of Rs.7.09 crore against the allocation 
of R.E during the F.Y 2022 -23 which was comparatively less than last five years. 
During the F.Y 2022 -23,every possible step s were taken to utilise the maximum 
budget allocation for which frequent meeting were held by senior officers with all 
the Divisional Heads. Daily monitoring of expenditure of each division was noted 
and accordingly discussed in the meetings.  
In addition to above, all the necessary efforts will be made to ensure that 
funds allocated for procurement of equipment, construction of laboratory 
buildings and capacity building of Legal Metrology officers of States/ UTs/ UoI will 
be judiciously utilized in time wi thout compromising on quality. It will be ensured 
that the funds estimated are spend to reduce the chances of surrender of funds.  
The observation of Hon’ble Committee in context of enormous surrenders 
of Actual Expenditure (AE) for the last 5 years is not ed by Department and the 
Department will closely monitor the progress implementation and necessary 
steps will be taken to maximize the expenditure against the R.E allocated in 
future. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. N-19/1/2023-P&C Dated the 8th June, 2023] 
 
  

4 
 
 
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No. 2.13) 
 
2.3 The Committee also note that The Department has created capital assets 
by constructing regional reference standards laboratories and upgrading and 
modernizing scientific testing equipment in National Test House. They also note 
that new building blocks have also been constructed in National Test House for 
impulse test laboratories in Chennai and Mumbai. They also note that funds 
allocated for the year 2023 -24 in capital head will be utilized for procurement of 
timing instruments for time dissemination project, standards weight and 
measures for testing and calibration of weighing and measuring instruments, and 
modernization and expansion o f the activities of National Test House. For while 
the Department has plans to take advance action to expedite procurement. The 
Committee desire that creation of capital assets should be executed with proper 
planning at appropriate stage in such away as to ensure timely completion. 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 Department will give topmost priority to efficient execution of the schemes 
under Legal Metrology and Quality Assurance. All the necessary efforts will be 
made to ensure that funds allocated will be ju diciously utilized in time without 
compromising on quality. The Department will closely monitor the progress of 
implementation and will make every sincere effort to get the funds utilised. The 
meetings with various stake holders will be held regularly to m onitor the progress 
of the Scheme.  
For Transformer testing project at Jaipur, Rajasthan, a plot of land 
measuring 10,000 sqm has been allotted by Rajasthan State Industrial 
Development and Investment Corporation (RIICO) at RIICO Industrial Area, 
Manda on Chomu Renwal Road (S.H. No. 19), Distt. Jaipur, Rajasthan.  
This allocation will facilitate the setting up of state -of-art “Integrated Test 
Facility for Power Transmission & Distribution Sectors including Short Circuit 
Test of Transformers upto 10 MVA” in the region. NTH has submitted a proposal 
for construction of boundary wall around the area at an estimated cost of Rs. 
73.28 lakhs as submitted by CPWD (NZ). The procurement of various equipment 
through Central & Regional purchase committee to create full test facility as per 
Indian Standard (IS) to fill up the gap and modernization of laboratories is under 
process and at different stages as per procurement plan. Implementation plan 
and monitoring on regular basis is also taken to ensure timely completion a nd as 
per availability of budgetary fund.  
The Department will closely monitor the progress implementation and will 
make every sincere effort to for timely completion of the project. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. N-19/1/2023-P&C Dated the 8th June, 2023] 

5 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 3 (Para No. 3.15) 
 
2.5 The Committee note that in order to supplement the efforts of the State 
Governments to run quasi -judicial Consumer Commissions, the Department of 
Consumer Affairs, under Consumer Protection Act, 2019, is extending financial 
assistance to them to strengthen the infrastructure so that a minimum level of 
facilities are provided at each Consumer Commission required for their effective 
functioning. The Committee, therefore, hope that the Department will 
continuously pursue and take strong measures to ensure utilization of the full 
amount and obtain UCs from such States/UTs at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 The Department of Consumer Affairs has been persistently making regular 
requests to State Governments and UT Administrations to utilize the funds and 
also provide pending Utilization Certificates for the funds released und the 
“Strengthening of Consumer Commission” scheme through  meetings, video 
conferencing and letters. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. N-19/1/2023-P&C Dated the 8th June, 2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 4 (Para No. 3.24) 
 
 
2.7 The Committee note that under the Scheme of Computerization and 
Computer Networking of Consumer Commissions in the country (CONFONET) 
all the three tiers of the Consumer Commissions were to be fully  computerized. 
The Committee are appreciative of the trend of spending of the funds viz -a –viz 
revised estimate since 2017 -18. They also appreciate the supply of hardware in 
35 State Commissions (SC), 15 Circuit Benches (CB) and 591 District 
Commissions (DC), deployment of manpower in 32 SCs, 10 CBs and 591 DCs 
and operationalization of the Commissions of that 35 SCs, 13 CBs and 588 DCs 
on Online Case Monitoring System (OCMS). The Committee express their 
satisfaction that E -Daakhil Portal has covered 34 Sta tes/UTs and providing 
facility for online registration of consumer complaints in different consumer 
commissions. The Committee hope that the Department will strive to continue the 
trend in future also. 
 

6 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 In this regard, it is conveyed that the observation of the committee has 
been duly noted. 
 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. N-19/1/2023-P&C Dated the 8th June, 2023] 
 
Recommendation No. 6 (Para No. 4.14) 
 
 2.9 The Committee note that synchronization of all networks and computers 
within the country with a national clock is a must, especially for the real time 
applications in strategic sector and national security. The Project of Time 
Dissemination was started in 2017 and originally slated for completion in the year 
2022. They were informed that now it is expected that the entire instrument for 
timing centres will be received by the end of 2023 and that the dissemination and 
time stamping is expected to be starte d during 2024 after integration/ testing of 
the timing instrument. In the mean time about Rs. 58 Crore has been spent under 
Minor Head 17.00.52 (Machinery & Equipments). They also note that for 
establishing timing centres, highly precise atomic clocks, hyd rogen masers etc. 
needs to procured from the International suppliers which are very few and takes 
upto one year delivery time; Tenders / orders for almost all the highly sensitive 
equipment have been placed by NPL and are expected to be supplied during 
2023; few of them have been supplied at ISRO for integration/ testing etc.; and 
permission for Global tender Enquiry has already been solicited from Cabinet 
Secretariat vide letter dated 10th December 2020. The Committee are of the 
opinion that as synchroniza tion of all networks and computers within the country 
with a national clock is a must, especially for the real time applications in 
strategic sector and national security. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Department of Consumer Affairs to take the p roject of Time Dissemination on 
highest priority for expediting its completion and rope in people with domain 
expertise, if needed so that the benefits accrued may reach to the to 59 various 
sectors of the economy and society at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10 Due care will be taken to most accurately synchronise all networks and 
computers in the country with a national clock while implementing the project for 

7 
 
ensuring absolute national security and enhanced cyber security with minimal 
scope of errors in time dissemination.  
Department of Consumer Affairs has taken the project of Time 
Dissemination is of National importance and is on highest priority for its 
completion. The very senior retired experts of National Physical Laboratory and 
Cyber Se curity Coordinator are also the part of meetings, held regularly to 
monitor the progress of the project. It will be ensured that the benefits of the 
project may reach to the various sectors of the economy and society at the 
earliest.  
On the request of Dep artment of Scientific and Industrial Research 
(DSIR), the Department of Consumer Affairs has decided to disseminate the 
Indian Standard Time through five Regional Reference Standards Laboratories of 
Legal Metrology located at Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Bhubanes war, Faridabad 
and Guwahati with the cooperation of National Physical Laboratory (NPL) and a 
budget provision of Rs. 100 crores was made. An MoU with CSIR - NPL for 
executing the project for setting up of atomic clocks for dissemination of Indian 
Standard Time was signed on 28.12.2018.  
Under the MoU, the hardware and software for setting up the time 
ensembles will be procured by NPL which shall also be responsible for 
installation and commissioning of the same including training on equipment 
operation to the LM personnel. NPL will handhold LM and shall provide requisite 
technical support. The MoU also envisages setting up of a Disaster Recovery 
Centre (DRC) at RRSL, Bengaluru. The operational laboratory space and 
technical manpower would be provided by the R RSLs and the project would be 
funded by this Department.  
With coordination of NPL and ISRO it will be ensured that the project is 
completed within timeline by 2024. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. N-19/1/2023-P&C Dated the 8th June, 2023] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 7 (Para No. 4.27) 
2.11 The Committee note that the National Test House works in the field of 
Testing, Evaluation and Quality Control of various engineering materials and 
finished products, Calibration of measuring equipment /instruments and devices. 
The Committee further observe that an additional budgetary allocation to the tune 
of Rs. 52.84 crore will be needed by NTH in FY 23 -24 to undertake new projects 
including EV Batteries Testing facilities at NTH, Kolkata and Mumbai, Drone 
Testing Facility at Ghaziabad, Transformer testi ng project at Jaipur, Rajasthan, 
testing of fertilizer samples under ‘One Nation, One Fertiliser’ scheme and testing 
of drainage water under Clean Ganga project, among others. The Committee 
think that NTH is one of its kind organization which provides auth entic testing 
facility which may be directly used by the Government Organisations as well as 

8 
 
private sector clients. The Committee, therefore, desire that suitable steps should 
be taken to ensure adequate funding is made available to NTH in order to 
modernize the NTH labs across the country. Further, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to popularize the work of NTH amongst the citizens and to collaborate 
with the colleges/universities and arrange the visits of students in order to make 
them acquainted with the work of NTH. 
Reply of the Government 
2.12 The proposals for the testing facility of EV batteries in NTH, Kolkata, and 
Mumbai have been finalized and submitted to DoCA. The procurement of the 
capital equipments and their specifications has also been finaliz ed and is 
currently in the bidding stage through GeM. The proposals for the Drone Testing 
Facility at Ghaziabad has been finalized and submitted to DoCA. The 
procurement of the capital equipments and their specification is under finalization 
stage for bidd ing through GeM portal. For Transformer testing project at Jaipur, 
Rajasthan, a plot of land measuring 10,000 sqm has been allotted by Rajasthan 
State Industrial Development and Investment Corporation (RIICO) at RIICO 
Industrial Area, Manda on Chomu Renwal  Road (S.H. No. 19), Distt. Jaipur, 
Rajasthan. This allocation will facilitate the setting up of the state -of-art testing 
facility in the region. NTH has submitted the proposal for construction of 
boundary wall around the area at an estimated cost of Rs. 7 3.28 lakhs as 
submitted by CPWD (NZ). Testing of Fertilizers under “One Nation One Fertilizer” 
Scheme has already been started and Testing of Drain Water under clean Ganga 
Project is under process of finalization. Other lab modernization and upgradation 
is also under progress for which additional fund requirement will be there. The 
budget of Rs. 52.84 crore will be required in order for all of the aforementioned 
projects to be carried out during the financial year 2023 –2024, and shall be 
completed subject to the availability of budget. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. N-19/1/2023-P&C Dated the 8th June, 2023] 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 8 (Para No. 5.8) 
 
2.13 The Committee note that the Price Monitoring Division (PMD)set up by the 
Department of Consumer Affairs in 1998 is keeping a close watch on the prices 
of selected food items as well as the structural and other constraints affecting the 
availability of 22commodities of five item groups i.e., C ereals (Rice & 
Wheat),Pulses (Gram, Tur, Urad, Moong, Masur), Edible Oils (Groundnut Oil, 
Mustard Oil, Vanaspati, Soya Oil, Sunflower Oil, Palm Oil ),Vegetables (Potato, 
Onion, Tomato), and other items (Atta, Sugar, Gur, Milk, Tea, and Salt). During 
the last 5 years, on an average, 90.5 % of the Revised Estimates (RE) figures 
got utilized and the BE for 2023 -24 is Rs. 600 Lakh. with which financial 

9 
 
assistance of approx. Rs. 2.99 lakh per annum is provided per annum for 
functioning of the centres. They also note that the number of Price Reporting 
Centres (PRCs) has increased from 178 in 2021 -22 to 461 in 2022 -23 and the 
Department has decided to cover all the districts in the country. The Department 
of Consumer Affairs to review their planning for covering al l the districts of the 
country. 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 The number of price reporting centres has increased from 178 in 2021 -22 
to 482 as on 31st March, 2023. The department is in the process of adding more 
centres. Additional 23 new centres have been  added in April, 2023, taking the 
total number of PRCs in the country to 505 presently. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. N-19/1/2023-P&C Dated the 8th June, 2023] 
 
Recommendation No.9 (Para No. 5.15) 
 
2.15 The Committee note that the Price Stabilization Fund (PSF)was set up 
with an initial corpus of ₹500 crore to tackle price volatility in some 
agrihorticultural commodities viz. onion, potato and pulses to protect the interests 
of consumers. As perthe Government’s decision, the PSF was transferred to the 
Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) w.e.f. 1st April, 2016.The buffer stock 
created out of the fund with the Government discourages hoarding and 
unscrupulous speculation by traders. As  on13th February, 2023 there is an 
amount of Rs.5,925 Crore in the PSF corpus. The Committee also note that with 
a view to bring the Price Support Scheme (PSS) presently operated by the 
Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare(DA&FW) & Price Stabiliza tion 
Fund (PSF) presently operated by Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) 
under one Ministry, inter -Ministerial consultation is going on among DoCA, 
DA&FW and Department of Food and Public Distribution (DFPD). In the mean 
time a token amount of Rs. 0.01 Crore has been allocated for PSF for the 
Financial Year 2023-24. Further, the inter ministerial consultation has decided to 
formulate a combined scheme for Price support and buffer management by 
combining PSS and PSF schemes to be implemented by a single M inistry i.e. 
DAFW, the modus operandi pertaining to buffer norms and management to 
remain under administrative control of DoCA, the combined scheme will be put 
up for EFC appraisal and Cabinet approval. The Inter -Ministerial consultation 
also decided that till the final approval is obtained from Cabinet, status quo may 
be maintained for implementing PSS and PSF and extension for Pradhan Mantri 
Annadata Aay Sanraks Han Abhiyan ( PM -AASHA) to be sought till 30.09.2023 
so that procurement of pulses and oilseed s is not hampered during the ensuing 
Rabi season. The Committee desire that a decision in the matter should be 
arrived at the earliest so that the Government is ready to tackle any possible 

10 
 
price volatility and Committee may be apprised about the progress made in the 
matter. 
Reply of the Government 
2.16 A Committee was constituted to examine the feasibility of combining Price 
Support  Scheme(PSS) & Price Stabilization Fund (PSF) to suggest modalities 
for implementing combined scheme. Accordingly, a new sche me in the 
nomenclature of Price Support & Stabilization Scheme (PS&SS) is envisaged by 
integrating PSS & PSF buffer and the EFC Note of the combined scheme which 
will be implement by Department of Agriculture & Farmer Welfare , is under 
process. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. N-19/1/2023-P&C Dated the 8th June, 2023] 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 10 (Para No. 6.7) 
 
2.17 The Committee note that under the scheme of Consumer Awareness, 
awareness campaigns are undertaken in the form of print, electronic, outdoor 
and social media through Central Bureau of Communication (CBC) / National 
Film Development Corporation (NFDC), All India Radio (AIR), Doordarshan (DD), 
and other organizations like Indian Railway Catering & Tourism Corporation 
(IRCTC), Common Service Centres(CSCs) etc. The Committee also note that the 
Department is actively using various social media platforms for gene rating 
consumer awareness and also has made use of Common Service Centres 
(CSCs) across the country by displaying posters on consumer awareness. 
Sponsored Radio Programmes (SRPs) in North -Eastern region and Ad libs 
(messages by RJs) are being broadcast on All India Radio (AIR) to generate 
awareness. The Department has launched “Jagriti”, a mascot for empowering 
consumers and making them aware of their rights. By bringing the Jagriti mascot, 
DoCA aims to strengthen its consumer awareness campaign presence in  digital 
and multimedia and reinforce a young empowered and informed consumer as a 
top- of-mind consumer rights awareness recall brand. The Committee think that 
despite publicity by various means, there is need for better penetration of the 
awareness programme specially in rural, tribal and NE areas. The Committee are 
happy to note that department is giving attention to the North Eastern areas of 
the country which have been sidelined for long. The Committee applaud the 
efforts of the Department in spreading  awareness programmes in North Eastern 
States and further desire that the awareness campaign should specifically 
mention the various schemes of the Department such as Consumer Protection, 
Weights and Measures, Hallmarking of Jewellery, Testing and Calibrat ion, Price 
Monitoring and Stabilization, etc. especially for consumers residing in rural, tribal 

11 
 
and the North Eastern Region by involving local Voluntary Organisations/ 
NonGovernment Organisations/ Self -Help Groups and Farmer Groups and 
Anganwadi Centres. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.18 The observations of the Commitee has been noted. As observed by the 
Committee, it may be informed that the Department has been carrying out 
various campaigns in Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe dominant areas and 
north eastern region through Doordarshan  and All India Radio. Moreover, given 
the increased digitalization throughout the nooks and corners of the country, the 
Department has been focusing on use of social media platforms. Further, the 
Department has undertaken consumer awareness initiatives for  dissemination of 
videos by involving Voluntary Consumer Organizations(VCOs).  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. N-19/1/2023-P&C Dated the 8th June, 2023] 
 
Recommendation No.11 (Para No. 6.17) 
2.19 The Committee note that money that is not refundable to the 
manufacturers etc. is credited to the Consumer Welfare Fund, the Rules of which 
were framed and notified in the Gazette of India in 1992, under the Central 
Excise and Salt Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) pursuant to its amendment in 1991. On 
enactment of the CGST Act, 2017, the Consumer Welfare Fund has been setup 
under section 57 thereof. Rule 97 of the CGST Rules, 2017 deals with the 
Consumer Welfare Fund. Financial assistance from CWF is given inter-alia to 
Government bodies and States to promote and protect the welfare of the 
consumer, engaged in consumer awareness/protection activities, for consumer 
awareness/protection and strengthen consumer movement in the country. Grants 
from Consumer Welfare Fund is also given to States/UTs for creating a State/UT 
level Consumer Welfare (Corpus) Fund upto a seed money upto Rs. 20.00 Crore 
with contribution of Centre and State/UT in the ratio of 75:25 (90:10 in the case of 
Special Category States/UTs), in t he corpus. The concerned State/UT 
government has to furnish to the Central Government, details of interest accrued, 
activities undertaken out of the above interest, Audited statement of accounts, 
details of the account, proof of the State share deposited e tc. as required by the 
Central Government. So far 21 states have opted for this scheme, covering 
around 80% of India's population. A total of Rs. 21367.77 Lakh Grants under the 
Schemes has been released from CWF Corpus Fund and an amount of Rs. 37 
Crore (with Rs. 32 Crore under the relevant head for Consumer Welfare (Corpus) 
Fund) for setting up / enhancement of Consumer Welfare (Corpus) Fund in 
States/UTshas been allocated in the BE 2023 -24. In this regard, the Committee 

12 
 
desire that the scheme should encou rage the remaining States to create the 
Consumer Welfare (Corpus) Fund so that the activities relating to consumer 
awareness/ protection could be strengthened in these States. 
Reply of the Government 
2.20 As per Consumer Welfare Fund Guidelines, 2019, fund s may be given to 
State/UT Government as seed money as one time grant on 75:25 basis (90:10 in 
the case of Special Category States/ UTs). The State/UT Government to become 
eligible to receive the one -time grant should deposit their share in a non -plan, 
non- lapsable public account. At present, Consumer Welfare (Corpus) Fund of ₹ 
20 crores has been fully set up in 8 states and partially set -up in 13 states. It is 
pertinent to state here that this Department has been vigorously following up the 
matter with th e remaining 15 States/UTs to send the proposals to set up the 
Consumer Welfare (Corpus) Fund in their states. Out of these 15States/UTs, 
proposal for setting up of the Consumer Welfare (Corpus) Fund have recently 
been received from 3 states, which are unde r examination stage in the 
Department. D.O. letters from Additional Secretary and Joint Secretary, 
Department of Consumer Affairs are regularly issued to States/UTs for seeking 
proposals for setting up of Consumer Welfare (Corpus) Fund. A D.O. letter from 
Joint Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs, dated 02.02.2022 and 
subsequent reminder dated 20.04.2022 were sent to Principal Secretaries of 
Food &Civil Supplies Department of the States/UTs where Consumer Welfare 
(Corpus) Fund has not been established . Another D.O. letter dated06.03.2023 
from Joint Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs was also sent to the 
Secretaries / Principal Secretaries of Food & Civil Supplies Department of the 
States/UTs where Consumer Welfare (Corpus) Fund has not been esta blished. 
This Department has also been telephonically and through VCs requesting all the 
remaining States/UTs to set up the Corpus Fund/enhancement of the fund at the 
earliest. Matter is also taken up during the visit of Secretary and other Senior 
Officers of the Department to the States/UTs. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. N-19/1/2023-P&C Dated the 8th June, 2023] 
 
  

13 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 4.5) 
 
3.1 The Committee note that for Machinery and Equipment for development of 
NE region under Minor Head 01.00.52, the Department spent amounts Rs. 50 
Lakh each during the years 2018-19 and 2019-20 and Rs. 19.13 Lakh in the year 
2022-23 through re -appropriation. Further, no allocation has been made for the 
year 2023-24. The Department informed that this Head is a non -functional Head 
and funds are re -appropriated in the f unctional Head before utilising. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons for resorting to re -
appropriation for utilizing the funds. 
Reply of the Government 
3.2 The Minor Head 01.00.52 is a non -functional head and therefore, funds 
are re-appropriated in the functional head before utilizing.  
As per practice, the funds for North -Eastern Regions are earmarked in the 
Heads mean for these regions. However, these Heads are nonfunctional and 
funds need to be re -appropriated in the functional head be fore release. These 
heads for NE regions are kept for better monitoring of utilization of funds in these 
regions.  
Further, keeping pace with the latest technology and ever changing 
international standards, the up -dated equipment are being procured for RRS Ls, 
which are the apex level laboratories for weights & measures and fulfills the 
demand of the States/ Industries in the region.  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
O.M. No. N-19/1/2023-P&C Dated the 8th June, 2023] 
  

14 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS  IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
-   NIL  -  

15 
 
 
CHAPTER - V 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
-   NIL  - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       LOCKET CHATTERJEE, 
01 August, 2023                            Chairperson, 
10 Sravana,1945 (Saka)                           Standing Committee on Consumer  
                                                                 Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 

16 
 
APPENDIX I  
MINUTES OF THE  EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2022 -2023) HELD ON 
TUESDAY, 1st AUGUST, 2023 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1515 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’,  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt.Locket Chatterjee  - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Ms. Debasree Chaudhuri 
4. Shri Anil Firojiya 
5. Shri Rajendra Dhedya Gavit 
6. Shri Khagen Murmu 
7. Shri Mitesh Rameshbhai Patel 
8. Shri Ganesan Selvam 
9. Dr. Amar Singh 
10. Smt. Himadri Singh 
11. Smt. Kavita Singh 
12. Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka 
13. Shri Ve. Vaithilingam 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 14. Shri Satish Chandra Dubey 
 15. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
 16. Shri Harbhajan Singh 
 17. Ms. Dola Sen 
 18. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   - Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Dong Lianthan Tonsing          -  Deputy Secretary  

17 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee co nvened for consideration and adoption of the following Draft Reports of 
the Committee: 
(i) XXXXXX XXXXXXXXX XXXXXXX 
 
(ii) XXXXXX XXXXXXXXX XXXXXXX 
 
(iii) XXXXXX XXXXXXXXX XXXXXXX 
 
(iv) Thirtieth Report on Action Taken   by   the   Government   on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty Fifth Report of the 
Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants(2023 -24) of the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public  Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs)  
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the above mentioned Draft 
Reports of the Committee.  
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft Reports 
without any amendments/modifications.  
5.  The Committee then authorized Hon’ble Chairperson to finalize and present the 
aforesaid Reports. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
********* 
XXX Matter does not relate to the Report. 
 
  

18 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF THE  ACTION  TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY FIFTH 
REPORT  OF  THE  STANDING  COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2022-23) 
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
(i) Total number of Recommendations:        11 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government : 
 
Para Nos. :- 2.6, 2.13, 3.15, 3.24, 4.14, 4.27, 5.8, 5.15, 6.7, 6.17   
            (Chapter – II, Total 10) 
              Percentage :   90.9% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
Para Nos.:- 4.5 
                     (Chapter – III, Total - 01) 
             Percentage :  9.09% 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 
Para Nos.    NIL 
            (Chapter – IV, Total -0)   
                Percentage : 0% 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the interim replies of 
the Government have been received. 
 
Para No.:-  
    (Chapter – V, Total - 0) 
           Percentage : 0% 
 
 