 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2025-2026) 
           EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
MODERNISATION OF PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM: STRENGTHENING TECHNICAL 
DATA BASE 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2026/  Shravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 


 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2025-2026) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
MODERNISATION OF PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM: STRENGTHENING TECHNICAL 
DATA BASE 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.07.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 23.07.2026  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
July, 2026/ Shravana, 1948 (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Page 
Composition of the Committee (2024-2025)        ii 
Composition of the Committee (2025-2026)        iii 
Introduction             iv 
Chapter I Introductory   1 
 Evolution of Public Distribution System in India 
 
1 
Chapter II Modernisation and Strengthening of Public Distribution System 
(PDS)  
5 
 Major Reforms in Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS)  5 
 Strengthening TPDS 6 
 Upgradation to new technology  8 
 Strengthening the Technical Database and Modernizing Public 
Distribution System (PDS) 
8 
 Aadhar Seeding/e-KYC in PDS (Public Distribution System) 12 
 Digital accessibility of PDS Services  13 
 Anna Chakra – PDS Supply Chain Optimisation Tool 
 
14 
Chapter III Scheme for Modernisation And Reforms through Technology 
(SMART) – PDS 
18 
 Overview of SMART-PDS 18 
 Development status of SMART-PDS 21 
 Financial Outlay 
 
22 
Chapter IV Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation  24 
 Identification of Beneficiaries  24 
 Data Analysis: Rightful Targeting 25 
 Monitoring and Evaluation 27 
 Challenges in PDS System 
 
28 
Chapter V Fair Price Shops (FPSs) 33 
 Automation of Fair Price Shops 33 
 One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) 
 
36 
Chapter VI Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) 44 
 Direct Benefit Transfer – Cash Transfers of Food Subsidy  44 
 Central Bank Digital Currency – Digital Food Coupons 
 
48 
Chapter VII PDS in States: A Case Study 50 
 Appendices    
1 Minutes of the10th Sitting of the Standing Committee on Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (2024-25) held on 27.03.2025 
69 
2 Minutes of 13th Sitting of the Standing Committee on Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (2024-25) held on 02.07.2025 
72 
3 Minutes of 17 th and 18 th Sittings of the Standing Committee on 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (2024 -25) held on 
19.09.2025 
75 
4 Minutes of 8th Sitting of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (2025-26) held on 05.06.2026 
79 
 

 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (2024-25) 
 
               Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi   -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Anto Antony  
3.  Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay  
4.  Shri Jaswantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  
5.  Smt. Malvika Devi  
6.  Shri Manish Jaiswal  
7.  Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa#  
8.  Shri Manoj Kumar  
9.  Shri Sunil Kumar  
10. Shri Bharat Singh Kushwah  
11. Shri Ajendra Singh Lodhi  
12. Shri Neeraj Maurya  
13. Shri Bastipati Nagaraju  
14. Shri Haribhai Patel  
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat  
16. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu  
17. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh  
18. Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh  
19. Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane  
20. Dr. Indra Hang Subba  
21. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan  
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
24. Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
25. Shri Baburam Nishad 
26. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
27. Shri Arun Singh 
28. Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah* 
29. Shri Kamal Haasan@ 
30. Shri Kanad Purkayastha@ 
31. Smt. Rajathi@ 
 
 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 26.09.2024 vide Bulletin Part II, Para No. 838 dated 26.09.2024. 
* Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah, MP, RS nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 23.01.2025 Vide Bulletin Part -II, Para 
No.1655 dated 27.01.2025.  
# Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa, MP, LS nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 29.1.2025 Vide Bulletin Part-
II, Para No.1710 dated 30.1.2025 vice Shri Saumitra Khan, MP, LS. 
@ Shri Kamal Haasan, Shri Kanad Purkayastha and Smt. Rajathi, MP, RS nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 
08.08.2025 vide Bulletin Part-II, Para No. 3117 dated 13.08.2025. 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (2025 -26) 
 
               Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi  -   Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Anto Antony 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Jaswantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor 
5. Smt. Malvika Devi 
6. Shri Manish Jaiswal 
7. Shri Manoj Kumar 
8. Shri Sunil Kumar 
9. Shri Bharat Singh Kushwah 
10. Shri Ajendra Singh Lodhi 
11. Shri Neeraj Maurya 
12. Shri Bastipati Nagaraju 
13. Shri Haribhai Patel 
14. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
16. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu 
17. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh 
18. Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh 
19. Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane 
20. Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
21. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
 
                                                                  RAJYA SABHA 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
24. Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah 
25. Shri Baburam Nishad 
26. Shri Mokariya Rambhai  
27. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
28. Shri Arun Singh 
29. Shri Sat Paul Sharma@  
30. Shri Chowdry Mohammad Ramzan@ 
31. Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad # 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi      -          Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   -          Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan              -          Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ram Anand  -          Executive Officer  
__________________________________________________________________  
Committee constituted w.e.f. 26.09.2025 vide Bulletin Part II, Para No. 3287 dated 01.10.2025. 
 
@  Shri Sat Paul Sharma and Shri Chowdry Mohammad Ramzan, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 
05.12.2025 Vide Bulletin Part-II, Para No.3767 dated 08.12.2025. 
 
#  Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 15.12.2025 Vide Bulletin Part -II, Para No.3996 
dated 18.12.2025 vice Smt. Sudha Murthy, MP, Rajya Sabha. 
  
Shri Milind Murli Deora, ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 16.10.2025 vide Bulletin Part II Para No. 3329 dated 
17.10.2025. 
 
(iii) 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs , Food and Public 
Distribution (2025-2026) having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on 
their behalf, present this Sixteenth Report ( Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘Modernisation of Public Distribution System: Strengthening Technical Data Base’ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution). 
 
2.  The subject was selected by the Committee for examination and report. The Committee 
was briefed on the subject by the representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution) on 27 March 2025. The Oral 
evidence of the representatives of the Department of Food and Public Distribution was held on 
2 July 2025. Subsequently, further oral evidence was also taken on 19 September 2025  with 
the representatives of the State Governments of Bihar, Meghalaya, Telangana, Tamil Nadu and 
Kerala and the Department of Food and Public Distribution.  
 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Officers of the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution) and the 
representatives of the State Government s of Bihar, Meghalaya, Telangana, Tamil  Nadu and 
Kerala for appearing before them and furnishing the necessary information in connection with 
the examination of the subject.  
 
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 5 June 
2026. 
 
 
5.        For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold type in the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                        Kanimozhi Karunanidhi,  
 05 June, 2026                                                                    Chairperson, 
 Jyaishtha 15, 1948 (Saka)                            Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, 
                                                      Food and Public Distribution 
(iv) 

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
 
The primary policy objective of the Department of Food & Public Distribution, 
one of the two Departments of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution is to ensure food security for the country through timely and efficient 
procurement and distribution of Foodgrains. 
 
1.2 The Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
selected the subject - ‘Modernisation of Public Distribution System: Strengthening 
Technical Data base ’ for examination and Report  during 2024 -25, which further 
continued during the term 2025 -26. Accordingly, briefing and oral evidence on the 
subject were held on 27.03.2025, 02.07.2025 and 19.09.2025. 
 
1.3 The Committee’s examination of the subject,  ‘Modernisation of Public 
Distribution System: Strengthening Technical Data base ’, include Scheme for 
Modernisation And Reforms through Technology (SMART) – PDS, Modernisation 
and Strengthening of Public Distribution System (PDS), Implementation, Monitoring 
& Evaluation of the Scheme , Fair Price Shops, Direct Benefit Scheme (DBT) and 
PDS in States – Case Study  of Bihar, Kerala, Meghalaya, Tamil Nadu and 
Telangana. In view of the same, the PDS System  - its modernization, 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation has been discussed in detailed in the 
successive paras of the Report.  
 
Evolution of Public Distribution System (PDS)in India  
  
1.4 The Public Distribution System (PDS) evolved as a system of management of 
scarcity through distribution of foodgrains at affordable prices. Over the years, PDS 
has become an important part of Government’s policy for management of food 
economy in the country. PDS is supplemental in nature and is not intended to make 
available the entire requirement of any of the commodities distributed under it to a 
household or a section of the society. 
 
PDS is operated under the joint responsibility of the Central and the State/UT 
Governments. The Central Government, through Food Corporation of India (FCI), 
has assumed the responsibility for procurement, storage, transportation and bulk 
allocation of food grains to the State Governments. The operational responsibility 
including allocation within the State, identification of eligible families, issue of Ration 
Cards, supervision of the functioning of Fair Price Shops (FPSs) etc., rest with the 
State Governments. Under the PDS, presently the commodities namely wheat, rice, 
sugar and kerosene are being allocated to the States/UTs for distribution. Some 
States/UTs also distribute additional items of mass consumption through the PDS 
outlets such as pulses, edible oils, iodized salt, spices, etc. 
  
 
 
 

2 
 
History of Public Distribution 
  
Public Distribution System in 1960s 
 
1.5 The public distribution of essential commodities was in existence in the 
country during the inter -war period. However, PDS, with its focus on distribution of 
foodgrains in urban scarcity areas, had emanated from the critical food shortage of 
1960s. PDS had substantially contributed to the containment of rise in food grain 
prices and ensured access of food to urban consumers. As the national agricultural 
production had grown in the aftermath of Green Revolution, the outreach of PDS 
was extended to tribal blocks and areas of high incidence of poverty in the 1970s 
and 1980s. 
  
Revamped Public Distribution System (RPDS) 
 
1.6 The Revamped Public Distribution System (RPDS) was launched in June, 
1992 with a view to strengthen and streamline the PDS as well as to improve its 
reach in the far -flung, hilly, remote and inaccessible areas where a substantial 
section of the poor live. It covered 1775 blocks wherein area specific programmes 
such as the Drought Prone Area Programme  (DPAP), Integrated Tribal Development 
Projects (ITDP), Desert Development Programme (DDP) were being implemented 
and in certain Designated Hill Areas (DHA) which were identified in consultation with 
State Governments for special focus. Food grains for distribution in RPDS areas 
were issued to the States at 50 paise below the Central Issue Price. The scale of 
issue was up to 20 kg per card. 
 
The RPDS included area approach for ensuring effective reach of the PDS 
commodities, their delivery by State Governments at the doorstep of FPSs in the 
identified areas, additional ration cards to the left -out families, infrastructure 
requirements like additional Fair Price Shops, storage capacity etc. and additional 
commodities such as tea, salt, pulses, soap, etc. for distribution through PDS outlets. 
 
  
Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) 
 
1.7 In June, 1997, the Government of India launched the Targeted Public 
Distribution System (TPDS) with focus on the poor. Under the PDS, States were 
required to formulate and implement foolproof arrangements for identification of the 
poor for delivery of foodgrains and for its distribution in a transparent and 
accountable manner at the FPS level. 
 
The scheme, when introduced, was intended to benefit about 6 crore poor 
families for whom a quantity of about 72 lakh tonnes of food grains was earmarked 
annually. The identification of the poor under the scheme was done by the States as 
per State-wise poverty estimates of the Planning Commission for 1993 -94 based on 
the methodology of the "Expert Group on estimation of proportion and number of 
poor” chaired by Late Prof Lakdawala. The allocation of food grains to the 
States/UTs was made on the basis of average consumption in the past i.e. average 
annual off-take of food grains under the PDS during the past ten years at the time of 
introduction of TPDS. 

3 
 
  
The quantum of food grains in excess of the requirement of Below Poverty 
Line (BPL) families was provided to the State as ‘transitory allocation’ for which a 
quantum of 103 lakh tonnes of food grains was earmarked annually. Over and above 
the TPDS allocation, additional allocation to States was also given. The transitory 
allocation was intended for continuation of benefit of subsidized food grains to the 
population Above the Poverty Line (APL) as any sudden withdrawal of benefits 
existing under PDS from them was not considered desirable. The transitory 
allocation was issued at prices, which were subsidized but were higher than the 
prices for the BPL quota of food grains. 
  
Keeping in view the consensus on increasing the allocation of food grains to 
BPL families, and to better target the food subsidy, Government of India increased 
the allocation to BPL families from 10 kg to 20 kg of food grains per family per month 
at 50% of the economic cost and allocation to APL families at economic cost w.e.f. 
1.4.2000. The allocation of APL families was retained at the same level as at the time 
of introduction of TPDS but the Central Issue Prices (CIPs) for APL were fixed at 
100% of economic cost from that date so that the entire consumer subsidy could be 
directed to the benefit of the BPL population. However, the CIPs fixed in July and 
December, 2000 for BPL & AAY respectively and in July, 2002 for APL were not 
revised upwards since then even though procurement cost have gone up 
considerably. 
  
The number of BPL families was increased w.e.f. 1.12.2000 by shifting the 
base to the population projections of the Registrar General as on 1.3.2000 instead of 
the earlier population projection of 1995. With this increase, the total number of BPL 
families came to 652.03 lakh as against 596.23 lakh families originally estimated 
when TPDS was introduced in June 1997. 
  
Under the TPDS, the end retail price was fixed by the States/UTs after taking 
into account the margin for wholesalers/ retailers, transportation charges, lev y of 
local taxes etc. The States were earlier requested to issue food-grains at a difference 
of not more than 50 paise per kg over and above the CIP for BPL families. However, 
since 2001, flexibility was given to States/UTs in the matter of fixing the retail issue 
prices by removing the restriction of 50 paise per kg over and above the CIP for 
distribution of food grains under TPDS. 
  
 
Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) 
 
1.8 AAY was a step in the direction of making TPDS aim at reducing hunger 
among the poorest segments of the BPL population. A National Sample Survey 
Exercise pointed towards the fact that about 5% of the total population in the country 
sleeps without two square meals a day. This section of the population could be called 
as "hungry”. In order to make TPDS more focused and targeted towards this 
category of population, the "Antyodaya Anna Yojana” (AAY) was launched in 
December, 2000 for one crore poorest of the poor families. 
 
AAY involved identification of one crore poorest of the poor families from 
amongst the number of BPL families covered under TPDS within the States and 

4 
 
providing them food grains at a highly subsidized rate of Rs.2/ - per kg. for wheat and 
Rs.3/- per kg for rice. The States/UTs were required to bear the distribution cost, 
including margin to dealers and retailers as well as the transportation cost. Thus, the 
entire food subsidy was passed on to the consumers under the scheme. 
  
The scale of issue that was initially 25 kg per family per month was increased 
to 35 kg per family per month with effect from 1st April 2002. 
   
 
 
 
  

5 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
 
Modernisation and Strengthening of Public Distribution System (PDS)  
 
 
Major Reforms in Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS)  
 
The Department has introduced major reforms in the functioning of TPDS 
through its modernization. To bring transparency & efficiency in TPDS operations, 
the Department, in association with all States/ UTs has implemented a plan scheme 
on End-to-End Computerization of TPDS Operations upto March, 2020 and central 
sector scheme namely Integrated Management of PDS (IMPDS) in all States/UTs 
w.e.f. April, 2018 upto March, 2023. The Department is implementing a Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme (CSS) –“Scheme for Modernization and Reforms through 
technology in Public Distribution System (SMART -PDS)” in association with all 
States/UTs from April, 2023 to March, 2026. 
 
2.2 As part of activities under the computerization scheme, around 20.5 Crore 
ration cards covering around 80 Crore beneficiaries under the National Food 
Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) are completely digitized. The Supply Chain Management 
of food grains is computerized in 31 out of 33 States/  UTs (except the UTs of 
Chandigarh, Puducherry, and Lakshadweep). 
 
 Digitised ration cards databases of States/ U Ts are also being seeded with 
available Aadhaar numbers of beneficiaries, and so far, at the national level more 
than 99.8% of ration cards (at least one member) and more than 99.3% beneficiaries 
(persons) have been Aadhaar seeded. This has enabled the States/  UTs to identify 
and weed out ineligible ration cards and duplicate/ ineligible beneficiaries while 
continuously reducing the pilferage of highly subsidized foodgrains, thereby 
increasing the rightful targeting of beneficiaries and thus food subsidies. The 
Aadhaar seeding of beneficiaries with their Ration Cards is being done by the 
respective State/ UT. 
 
2.3 Leveraging the strong foundations of end to -end computerisation, FPS 
automation and Aadhaar seeding/ authentication, the Department has implemented 
the One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) feature for nationwide portability of ration 
cards under NFSA. The national portability of ration cards under the ONORC feature 
has been seamlessly enabled in all 36 States/ UTs covering around 80 Crore 
beneficiaries (100% of the total NFSA population of the country). 
 
Further, as an outcome of the use of technology in TPDS operations since 
2013, i.e., digitization of ration cards/beneficiary databases, Aadhaar seeding, de -
duplication process, ineligible records, deaths, permanent migration of beneficiaries, 
etc. all States/U Ts have been able to weed -out a total of about 6. 77 crore ration 
cards between 2013 to 2025 (till Dec 2025), and are being able to achieve rightful 
targeting of beneficiaries against the quota thus released. 
 
 
 

6 
 
Strengthening TPDS 
 
2.4 On the issue of measures undertaken to strengthen TPDS, the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution, in its Annual Report 2025–26, stated that: 
 
“To eliminate leakages and to ensure that all eligible households are 
continuously receiving their entitled quota of subsidized foodgrains under 
PMGKAY , through TPDS, the following measures have been taken by th is 
Department:  
 
(a) End-to-End Computerization of Targeted Public Distribution 
System (TPDS) 
 
The modernization of TPDS operations has been taken up by the 
Department with the implementation of a scheme on ‘End -to-End 
Computerization of TPDS Operations’ in collaboration with all the 
States/UTs under the XII Five Year Plan (2012 -17). The validity of the 
scheme was up to March, 2020 only. The following are the major 
achievements under the scheme:  
 
(i) Digitization of ration cards/ beneficiaries’ data completed in all 
States/UTs. The details of around 20.5 Crore ration Cards 
covering around 80 Crore beneficiaries are available on 
transparency portals of States/UTs. 
(ii) Aadhaar seeding of ration cards – Seeding of Aadhaar numbers 
is completed with more than 99.8% ration cards (at least one 
member), whereas nearly 99.3% beneficiaries are also Aadhaar 
seeded at the national level. 
(iii) Online allocation of foodgrains upto FPS level – Implemented in 
all States/UTs except two Union territories of Chandigarh and 
Puducherry which have adopted the Direct Benefit transfer (DBT 
Cash transfers) scheme of NFSA. 
(iv) Computerization of Supply Chain Management – Implemented 
in 31 out of 33 States/UTs except for two Union territories of 
Chandigarh and Puducherry under DBT Cash transfers, and 
other U T of Lakshadweep (small island). Its implementation in 
Arunachal Pradesh and Manipur is expected to be completed in 
the current year. 
(v) Grievance redressal facilities and transparency portals – Online 
grievance redressal systems and tollfree helplines/call centres 
(1967/1800- series) available in all States/UTs. 
(vi) Automation of Fair Price Shops – About 99.8% i.e. 5.50 Lakh of 
a total of 5.51 Lakh FPSs in the country have operational 
electronic Point of Sale (ePoS) devices for transparent 
distribution of subsidised foodgrains. 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
(b) Integrated Management of Public Distribution System (IM-PDS) 
 
With an objective to sustain the computerized TPDS operations and to 
introduce new reforms, the Department has implemented another 
central sector scheme, namely ‘Integrated Management of Public 
Distribution System’ (IM PDS) in all States/U Ts w.e.f. April 2018. The 
validity of the IM -PDS scheme was extended up to 31st March 2023. 
This scheme aimed to implement nationwide portability of ration card 
holders/beneficiaries covered under NFSA and to empower 
beneficiaries to lift their entitled foodgrains from any FPS of their choice 
in the country by using their same/existing ration card with 
biometric/Aadhaar authentication on ePoS device. The scheme also 
included setting up of central data repository of all ration card data in 
the country, national de -duplication, data analytics, cross learning and 
sharing of best practices between States/UTs, etc. Collectively this lead 
to the implementation of the One Nation One Ration Card feature for all 
NFSA/PMGKAY ration card holders. 
 
One Nation One Ration Card feature:  Initially the facility of One 
Nation One Ration Card was started  as inter -state portability w.e.f. 
August 2019 in 4 States of Andhra Pradesh & Telangana and Gujarat & 
Maharashtra by the then Hon’ble Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution; and in January 2020 the facility of national 
portability of ration cards was seamlessly started in 12 States. Since 
then, the One Nation One Ration Card feature has been seamlessly 
enabled in all 36 States/ U Ts. The migratory beneficiaries/ households 
are now able to lift their entitled foodgrains from any FPS of their 
choice, anywhere in the country using their existing/same ration cards. 
The ONORC feature also includes intra -state portability of ration cards. 
Since inception in August 2019, a total of more than 200 Crore 
portability transactions (including inter -state and intra -state 
transactions) for the distribution of NFSA/ PMGKAY foodgrains have 
been recorded in States/UTs under ONORC. 
 
(c) Scheme for Modernization and Reforms through Technology in 
Public Distribution System (SMART-PDS) 
 
The approved scheme was envisaged to be implemented from April, 
2023 to March 2026. The scheme aimed to not only introduce major 
technological reforms but also to strengthen the technology 
infrastructure in the Public Distribution System (PDS) by introducing a 
technology-driven transformative change in the entire PDS ecosystem 
covering NFSA and State schemes. The scheme will overcome State 
level technological  limitations of PDS operations with respect to I T 
Hardware, Software, and technical Manpower by intr oducing a unified 
system covering all aspects of PDS -related operations from logistics to 
distribution across all 36 States/UTs and will incorporate the latest 
technologies for system implementation and operations for fast and 
secure PDS transactions. The total outlay of the scheme is Rs. 349.9 
Crore on cost sharing basis with all States/UTs. Financial assistance is 

8 
 
provided to States/UTs for cloud services, I T support teams and 
command control centres. Currently, NIC is developing the 
application/solution Pan India and the 1st phase of the new System is 
being deployed across the country. The present module -wise status of 
implementation is as under: 
 
Procurement Module: Development completed; customizations done 
for Uttarakhand State.  
 
RCMS, FPS & Grievance Monitoring: RCMS deployed in 1 6 States; 
Grievance Module under development (Routing Gateway ready; testing 
with Anna Sahayata and integration with SMART PDS in progress) 
 
Supply Chain & Allocation:  Development completed and 
implemented in 22 States.  
 
Biometric-based Distribution System:  Development completed and 
implemented in 30 States.” 
 
Upgradation to new technology  
 
2.5 While explaining the issue of technological upgradation, the representative of 
the Department of Food and Public Distribution apprised the Committee that: 
 
“Traditional or Monolithic architecture has been used in PDS Applications 
developed so far by States/UTs which lack modularity and scalability. 
Considering continues changes in technology, it is essential to transform entire 
PDS IT ecosystem.  
 
Thus, there is a need:  
 
➢ To sustain & strengthen key technology elements for continuous online 
operations without interruptions or compromising their performance; 
➢ To consolidate & build Central Unified Application/ Software covering all 
PDS modules developed for NFSA and State schemes; and 
➢ Provisioning of dedicated servers or cloud for hosting Central Standard 
application.” 
 
Strengthening the Technical Database  and Modernizing Public Distribution 
System (PDS) 
 
2.6 The Department of Food and Public Distribution, in their written replies, 
explained the need to strengthen the technical database as under: 
 
“While TPDS reforms have enabled transparency and efficiency, the current 
pace of digital transformation is constrained by: 
 
• Ageing Server Infrastructure:  Existing IT hardware, set up under 
previous schemes, is becoming obsolete. 
 

9 
 
• Software Upgradation Needs:  Several applications require 
modernization to incorporate advanced functionalities. 
 
• Integration Challenges:  Limited interconnectivity with FCI, CWC, 
UIDAI and other ministries. 
 
• Data Utilization Gaps: Real-time TPDS data remains largely untapped 
for policy analysis, predictive modeling and decision-making. 
 
To address these concerns, a comprehensive, technology -driven 
solution is essential for ensuring a robust, scalable and future -ready TPDS 
ecosystem.” 
 
2.7 On being asked about the action taken by Government to modernize the 
Public Distribution System (PDS), the Department furnished the information as 
under: 
“To modernize the PDS, the Government of India launched SMART -PDS 
(Scheme for Modernization and Reforms through Technology in PDS) w.e.f. 
April 2023 to March 2026 with a budget outlay of Rs 349.9 Crore. The scheme 
builds upon the previous IM -PDS scheme framework which improved the 
Public Distribution System (PDS) by strengthening national portability under 
the One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC). Under SMART -PDS Scheme, 
development of a new system has been envisaged as below: 
 
• Develop a Unified System Architecture across 36 States/UTs for PDS. 
• Build complete solutions for entire logistics supply chain eco-systems 
• Upgraded hardware and incorporation of latest technologies as cloud 
services, micro architecture solutions etc to ensure scalable, flexible, safe 
and fast PDS operations.  
• Facilitate comprehensive data integration for real-time monitoring. 
• Empower State IT support systems including deployment of expert 
manpower resources 
  
The development of SMART PDS application was commenced by NIC in Oct 
2024 and rolled out in phases from April 2025.”  
 
2.8 On being asked how the Mera Ration App and Anna Mitra App are 
strengthening the Public Distribution System, the Department  of Food and Public 
Distribution in their written replies, furnished the information as follows: 
 
“The Department has developed two mobile applications — Mera Ration App 
and Anna Mitra — to enhance transparency, accessibility, and efficiency in the 
Public Distribution System for both beneficiaries and officials. 
 
Mera Ration App: The Mera Ration App is a citizen -centric tool that offers 
essential digital services to beneficiaries of the National Food Security Act 
(NFSA). Key Features include: 
 
 
 

10 
 
• Ration Card Services: 
Beneficiaries can add, update, delete, surrender, or transfer family 
members, as well as update their mobile number directly through the app. 
 
• Real-Time Information Access: 
View ration entitlement, monthly allocation, and FPS sale transactions for 
improved awareness and transparency. 
 
• Nearby FPS Locator: 
Locate the nearest Fair Price Shop (FPS) using GPS for convenient 
access to subsidized foodgrains. 
 
• Grievance Redressal: 
Lodge complaints regarding entitlements, FPS operations, dealer 
behavior, or technical issues for prompt redressal. 
 
• FPS Rating System: 
Beneficiaries can rate their FPS dealers based on service quality, thereby 
encouraging accountability and continuous improvement. 
  
Anna Mitra App: The Anna Mitra mobile app empowers PDS (Public 
Distribution System) field functionaries by providing the access to critical 
operational data through a secure platform. The app is designed to streamline 
field-level monitoring, stock management, and compliance reporting by Fair 
Price Shop (FPS) dealers, Food Inspectors and District Food Supply Officers 
(DFSOs). The Key Design Features of Anna Mitra: 
 
• Streamline field-level operations, stock tracking, and compliance reporting 
• Availability of t ransaction summary of ration cards, beneficiary 
management and other stakeholder information 
• Inspection modules, feedback and rating modules 
• Stock level management from District to FPS level 
 
These features enable the app to: 
• Reduce bottlenecks and eliminate manual paperwork 
• Enhance decision-making through data access 
  
Anna Mitra ultimately brings all key PDS stakeholders onto a single, secure 
digital platform, improving transparency, speed, and efficiency in service 
delivery. At present, the Anna Mitra app is operational in four pilot States i.e 
Uttarakhand, Tripura, Assam and Punjab and available in two languages 
(English & Hindi). It is getting implemented in other States/UT in a phased 
manner.”  
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
2.9 During the evidence held on 02.07.2025, the representative of the Department 
of Food and Public Distribution briefed the Committee on the strengthening and 
modernization of the PDS: 
 
“Strengthening PDS through Mera Ration 
 
Mera Ration mobile app allows beneficiaries to view family member details, 
raise requests to add new family members, check ration card entitlements, 
lodge grievances, rate Fair Price Shop) and search for nearby FPS locations. 
 
Mera Ration 2.0 was launched on 20th August 24 with two key modules: 
 
1. Beneficiary Food Passbook App 
2. Central & State Official App 
3. No. of Downloads: 1 Cr + Downloads 
 
Modernisation of PDS through Anna Mitra 
 
Anna Mitra aims to further strengthen the Public Distribution System (PDS). 
This mobile application focuses on providing comprehensive solutions for key 
stakeholders, including FPS dealers, District Food Supply Officers (DFSO) 
and Food Inspectors. 
 
• 4 States onboarded – Uttarakhand, Assam, Tripura & Punjab.   1000+ 
Downloads with 3.8 Ratings  
• Tutorial of App along with link shared with States & UTs  
• APIs have been shared with all States for their consumption by NIC  
• Timeline for Go-Live in all States: 15th July’25.” 
 
 
2.10 While furnishing details of the Department’s coordination with the National 
Informatics Centre (NIC) to expand mobile connectivity —through initiatives such as 
the Mera Ration App (v2.0 and v3.0) and Anna Mitra for PDS beneficiaries and food 
supply officials —the Department of Food and Public Distribution in their written 
replies, submitted that: 
 
“The Department, in close coordination with the National Informatics Centre 
(NIC), is working towards the enhancement and deployment of mobile -based 
applications like Mera Ration App (v2.0 and v3.0) and Anna Mitra. These apps 
are built for intuitive usage, similar to widely -used platforms such as UPI, 
GPay, Paytm, etc. Beneficiaries and officials can directly download these 
applications and avail themselves of services without the need for external 
assistance.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
Aadhar Seeding/e-KYC in PDS (Public Distribution System) 
 
2.11 On the query related to Aadhaar seeding, the Committee was apprised by the 
representative of the Department of Food and Public Distribution during the briefing 
meeting held on 27.03.2025 as follows: 
 
 
“….. with regard to the Aadhaar seeding. We are conscious of the fact that 
any technological advancement or any documentation requirement cannot be 
a precondition for delivery of ration. So, in all our circulars, guidelines, 
instructions, while we are saying that it is always desirable and preferable that 
the beneficiary should have Aadhaar card, Aadhaar card should be seeded 
with his ration card. The Aadhaar authentication must happen, but this is not a 
precondition as of today for receiving ration. As we mentioned, still there are 
one per cent beneficiaries which are not having Aadhaar card and it has not 
been seeded. There could be instances where even though the Aadhaar card 
is there, but still the Aadhaar authentication does not happen because as 
Madam mentioned that the fingerprint is not working for some old beneficiary 
or there are some other reasons. So, this is not a precondition. It has been 
told time and again that even if let us say there is some network issue, the 
EPOS device is not able to capture the network, the Aadhaar biometric is not 
working, nobody should be denied ration on account of any failure of 
technology or any failure of the biometric authentication.  
 
That is the first point I would like to mention that if impression is there,  I would 
like to dispel that that we have not made such biometric authentication as a 
mandatory requirement for distribution of ration. We are saying that 98 per 
cent of the distribution is happening through Aadhaar authentication. So, two 
per cent of distribution is still happening without Aadhaar authentication, while 
we tell the State that they must do it, but still the guidelines are very clear that 
no beneficiary should be denied ration on account of failure of biometric.” 
 
 
2.12 Regarding the need for e -KYC in the Public Distribution System, the 
representative of the Department of Food and Public Distribution, during the 
evidence held on 02.07.2025, apprised the Committee that: 
 
“e-KYC is Aadhaar-based process where a PDS beneficiary authorizes the 
UIDAI server via biometric authentication to share their demographic data 
(Name, Address, Date of Birth, Gender, Photograph etc.) with the State Food 
Civil Supply Department. Data gets validated against the PDS database by a 
nominated designated officer (DFSO, Food Inspector etc.) to confirm the 
beneficiary's identity. e-KYC in PDS helps make sure that ration reaches the 
right people by linking Aadhaar to ration cards. This reduces duplicate cards 
and stops misuse.” 
 
 
 
 
 

13 
 
2.13 The Department of Food and Public Distribution explained the process of e -
KYC during the evidence held on 02.07.2025. 
 
 
 
Digital accessibility of PDS Services  
 
2.14 On being asked about the digital accessibility of PDS services and the 
measures to ensure that marginalized communities without digital literacy or 
resources can access their entitlements, the Department, in its written replies, 
furnished the following information: 
 
“Under the technology driven Public Distribution System (PDS) reforms, 
foodgrain distribution is operationalized through 5. 50 lakh e -PoS devices, 
covering nearly all Fair Price Shops in the country.  The process of distributing 
foodgrains through ePoS devices is very simple and does not require any 
special digital literacy among beneficiaries to lift their entitled foodgrains 
through electronic transactions. Further, States/UTs are advised to ensure that 
ePoS printed transaction receipts are provided to all beneficiaries in local 
language, besides SMS are sent on their registered mobile numbers to 
ensure complete transparency in distribution process. 
  
Further, to increase transparency, efficiency, and ease of access, the 
Department has also launched the Mera Ration App. The mobile app enabled 
beneficiaries to access ration card information and entitlement details.  The 
Mera Ration App is available in 13 languages.” 
 
 
 
            
    
                 
          
                      
             
           
               
               
           
               
       
         
                  
                        
                      
             
              
    

14 
 
Anna Chakra - PDS Supply Chain Optimisation Tool 
 
2.15 Providing an overview of the ‘Anna Chakra’ – PDS Supply Chain Optimisation 
Tool, the Department of Food and Public Distribution submitted in their written 
replies: 
 
“Anna Chakra’, PDS Supply Chain Optimisation Tool, is a significant step 
towards modernising the Public Distribution System. The Public Distribution 
System has been optimised through the Anna Chakra initiative, executed with 
support of WFP and IIT Delhi. Anna Chakra enhances efficiency and saves 
costs by optimising delivery routes, reducing fuel consumption and logistics 
expenses. Aligned with global sustainability goals and our Hon’ble PM’s Gati 
Shakti initiative, Anna Chakra exemplifies technology to create a resilient food 
system with minimal transport emissions, thus lowering the carbon footprint.  
 
In the Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS), State Governments 
manage the movement of food grains through various supply chain nodes, 
including procurement centers, mills, intermediary storage, warehouses, FPS, 
and FCI.  Traditionally, supply chain network planning was done manually, 
focusing on proximity and administrative ease, which lead to inefficiencies, 
under-utilization of resources, increasing costs and lead times.  
 
 A route optimisation assessment was conducted for 30 states in the pilot 
project, and the results show tremendous promise, with estimated cost 
savings of about Rs. 250 crores per annum and a reduction in the distance 
from FCI godowns to ration shops by 15 -50%. Operations Research was 
applied to enhance the efficiency of the TPDS supply chain.  By optimally 
utilizing and tagging existing nodes like warehouses and FPS shops, the 
technical team (WFP, IIT-Delhi) developed optimization models to identify the 
network with the lowest overall costs.  This optimization does not require 
changes in infrastructure locations or capacit y but uses a state -specific 
algorithm based on actual data such as geo tagged locations of all network 
points, actual road distances, contracted transportation rates, warehouse 
capacities and FPS allocations. 
 
This exercise covered 4.37 lakh Fair Price Shops and approximately 6,700 
warehouses involved in the PDS supply chain. In the second phase, the 
optimisation of the supply chain will extend from mandis to FCI warehouses, 
state warehouses, and rice mills. The interstate route optimisation tool has 
been developed for optimising the PDS movement between the states and is 
integrated with the FOIS (Freight Operations Information System) portal of the 
Railways through the Unified Logistics Interface Platform (ULIP). A significant 
milestone in this effort is the integration of the optimisation tool with the PM 
Gati Shakti platform, which now houses geolocations of FPSs and 
warehouses across the states. 
 
Besides the optimisation, and savings in both time and monetary terms 
through streamlined delivery routes with reduced fuel consumption, it also 
provides environmental benefits of a lower carbon footprint due to transport -
related emissions.”  

15 
 
 
2.16 In the course of providing information on the route optimization assessment 
conducted across States/UTs and the achievements under the Anna Chakra PDS 
System, the Department of Food and Public Distribution furnished information: 
 
“Anna Chakra” PDS Supply Chain Optimization Tool:  
 
On 5th December 2024, the Department of Food & Public Distribution (DFPD) 
launched the “Anna Chakra” optimization tool to enhance the efficiency of the 
Public Distribution System (PDS) supply chain. Designed to strengthen one of 
the world’s largest food safety nets, serving over 81 crore vulnerable people, 
the tool aims to reduce carbon emissions, improve delivery efficiency, and 
generate significant cost savings. The PDS Supply Chain Optimization 
programme began in March 2023 and covers routes transporting 680 LMT of 
food grains annually. It is being implemented in collaboration with the 
Foundation for Innovation and Technology Transfer (FITT), IIT Delhi, and the 
United Nations World Food Programme (UNWFP).  
 
After one year of implementation, assessments across 30 states show 
promising results, with transportation cost savings estimated at Rs. 250 crore 
annually. As of August 2025, the results of 30 states have been shared. 
 
(i)       Enhanced Efficiency and Cost Savings 
The implementation of the system is expected to deliver substantial 
annual savings of approximately Rs. 250 crores for both Central and 
State Governments. By enabling a 15 –50% reduction in travel 
distances, the system not only cuts down operational costs but also 
achieves nearly a 30% reduction in carbon emissions. Furthermore, it 
optimizes the use of over 6,700 warehouses that collectively serve 
around 4.5 lakh Fair Price Shops across the country. These 
advancements contribute to shorter transit times and significantly 
improved delivery timeliness, ensuring the timely distribution of food 
grains. 
  
(ii) Advanced Route Optimization 
Using sophisticated algorithms rooted in Operations Research (OR) 
and Artificial Intelligence (AI), the system determines the most efficient 
transportation routes for food grain movement. This approach results in 
a 15 –50% reduction in transport distances, minimizing exposure to 
bottlenecks and logistical disruptions. Additionally, the technology 
supports dynamic re -routing, allowing for quick adjustments during 
emergencies or unforeseen logistical challenges, thereby enhancing 
overall responsiveness. 
  
(iii)     Transparency Enhancements 
The system introduces robust transparency mechanisms, including 
systematic tracking of warehouse utilization and real -time monitoring of 
stock movements. Geospatial mapping of warehouses and Fair Price 
Shops(FPS) further aids visibility across the supply chain. Integration 
with the Gati Shakti National Master Plan ensures the use of updated 

16 
 
road infrastructure, while the FOIS (Freight Operations Information 
System) platform provides live freight rate data, optimizing interstate 
rail movements and improving transparency in transportation cost 
estimation. 
  
(iv) Accountability Mechanisms 
A key feature of the system is its emphasis on data -driven decision -
making, replacing older, convenience -based routing methods. With 
performance tracking tools and defined operational metrics, authorities 
can continuously assess and improve efficiency. Monthly reports 
detailing savings and route acceptances are submitted to the central 
government, fostering a culture of accountability and continuous 
performance evaluation. 
  
(v) Data-Driven Decision Making 
The platform automates and standardizes many of the previously 
manual supply chain planning processes, thereby reducing human 
errors and procedural delays. It utilizes state -specific models and 
historical data for demand forecasting and capacity planning. This 
data-backed approach enables proactive decision -making and efficient 
resource allocation, ensuring smoother and more reliable supply chain 
operations. 
  
(vi) Environmental and Sustainability Impact 
By drastically reducing transportation distances and fuel consumption 
through optimized logistics, the system contributes to a meaningful 
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. This not only lessens the 
overall carbon footprint but also aligns with broader environmental and 
sustainability goals, making food distribution more eco -friendly and 
responsible. 
  
(vii) Resilience in Distribution 
The optimized supply chain is designed to ensure rapid recovery and 
continuity during disruptions. By minimizing operational costs, delivery 
times, and travel distances, the system enhances resilience, allowing 
supplies to be restored swiftly during disasters or emergencies. This 
ensures that vulnerable populations continue to receive essential food 
supplies even under adverse conditions. 
 
(viii) Seamless Inter-Ministerial Coordination 
The Anna Chakra system benefits significantly from the PM Gati Shakti 
ecosystem, gaining access to standardized, real -time infrastructure 
datasets from various ministries, including those overseeing railways, 
roads, and warehouses. This integration automates previously manual 
planning processes, enhancing coordination and efficiency. Moreover, 
the system is linked with the Railways’ FOIS through the Unified 
Logistics Interface Platform (ULIP), enabling smooth interstate and 
multimodal movement within the Public Distribution System (PDS).” 
 

17 
 
2.17 The Committee note  with appreciation that major reforms in TPDS have 
led to complete digitization of about 20.5 crore ration cards covering around 
80 crore beneficiaries, Aadhaar seeding of more than 99.8 per cent ration cards 
and 99.3 per cent beneficiaries, automation of about 5.50 lakh out of 5.51 lakh 
Fair Price Shops and nationwide portability under ONORC covering all 36 
States/UTs. The Committee further note that, as an outcome of technology -
driven reforms, about 6. 77 crore ration cards were weeded out between 2013 
and December 2025, thereby improving rightful targeting of food subsidy. The 
Committee are of the view that the Department should consolidate these gains 
by expeditiously addressing the remaining gaps in supply chain 
computerization and module deployment, while ensuring that de -duplication 
and database purification continue as ongoing processes. This would enable 
the released quota to be effectively redirected toward genuine and eligible 
households. 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
 
2.18 The Committee observe that modernization of PDS is now being carried 
forward through SMART -PDS, mobile applications such as Mera Ration and 
Anna Mitra and route optimisation under Anna Chakra. The Committee note 
that Mera Ration 2.0 had crossed 1 crore downloads, that Anna Mitra had been 
onboarded in four States with APIs shared with all States/UTs and that Anna 
Chakra assessments across 30 States indicated estimated annual 
transportation savings of about Rs. 250 crore along with 15  to 50 per cent 
reduction in distance and nearly 30 per cent reduction in carbon emissions. In 
this regard, t he Committee recommend the Department to promote broader 
and time-bound adoption of these technological interventions across all States 
and Union Territories, with a strong focus on multilingual accessibility, 
usability at the field level, real -time grievance redressal and institutional 
acceptance of route optimization. This would help ensure that modernization 
efforts result in measurable operational efficiencies and enhanced delivery of 
services to beneficiaries. 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 

18 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
 
Scheme for Modernisation And Reforms through Technology (SMART) -PDS 
 
 
Overview of SMART-PDS 
 
The Department of Food and Public Distribution  apprised the Committee of 
the SMART-PDS that: 
 
“The SMART-PDS scheme is a visionary initiative designed to sustain and 
build upon the technology -led reforms introduced under the End -to-End 
Computerization of TPDS Operations across all States and Union Territories. 
A key aspect of SMART -PDS is the integration of real -time data from all 36 
States/UTs, covering the entire spectrum of PMGKAY operations. This 
centralized data eco -system will empower authorities with a comprehensive 
visual representation of procurement to distribution activities, enabling data -
driven policymaking and prompt decision-making.” 
 
3.2 In a written reply, the Committee have been informed that the Department of 
Food & Public Distribution (DFPD) has been implementing several technology -driven 
initiatives over the past decade to reform and modernize the Targeted Public 
Distribution System (TPDS). With the launch of SMART -PDS (Scheme for 
Modernization And Reforms through Technology in Public Distribution System) in 
2023, the Government aims to further strengthen technology infrastructure and 
ensure seamless delivery of food grains to beneficiaries under the National Food 
Security Act (NFSA), 2013.  
 
3.3 While elucidating the intent behind the introduction of SMART -PDS, the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution, in their written replies, submitted that: 
 
“The new scheme intends to sustain the technology -led reforms brought in by 
the end -to-end computerization schemes in all States/UTs and further 
enhance reforms by the existing IMPDS scheme and to introduce future/new 
reforms in the functioning of the PDS and strengthening of national portability 
under One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) System. Therefore, to maintain 
the transparency, efficiency, and effectiveness of the PDS, governed under 
the provisions of the National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) in the country, 
it is necessary that all activities covered under the ‘End -to-End 
Computerization of TPDS Operations’ Schemes remain operational in all 
States/UTs and such tasks / activities shall be implemented by new 
initiatives/reforms which are scalable/upgradable to aid in the distribution of 
free foodgrains. 
 
Following are the key objectives of the new scheme: 
 
a) To integrate the silo systems of Centre/States into one unified platform 
to standardize the PDS operations across the country.  

19 
 
b) To mitigate the challenges faced by the States/UTs in the usage of 
IT/ICT or technology driven initiatives through more cohesive target -
oriented approach to achieve the desired outcomes. 
c) To make central IT system more scalable & dynamic to enable any 
future technology transformation and to make technology driven PDS 
plan/schemes easily configurable.  
d) Development of an integrated & unique National Level Dashboard for 
monitoring the public distribution system.  
e) To integrate proposed system with FCI, CWC, Women and Child 
Development, Ministry of Education, etc. for real time monitoring of 
supply chain management of NFSA, etc.    
f) Capacity building to bring in the acceptability to adopt the transforming 
challenges in respect of technology driven public distribution through 
capacity building. 
g) To build & ensure a better communication platform with all the 
stakeholders to cater to their needs on time in the benefit of targeted 
beneficiaries of NFSA. 
h) To create a robust & unified mechanism for entire PDS operations 
including ration card management, dynamic Central allocation/ State 
allocation, supply chain management, foodgrain distribution under 
Central/State schemes, grievance redressal, biometric authentication, 
payments, deletion of de-duplicity, etc.  
i) Employ latest technologies, best practices, etc. for enabling advanced 
and integrated management and monitoring of end-to-end Supply Chain 
operations under national portability in all States/UTs; including 
monitoring of FPS level operations, stock positions in each FPSs, 
dynamic allocation/adjustment of foodgrains, end -to-end GPS based 
movement tracking of foodgrains, etc. 
j) To implement data driven decision making system through the usage of 
Data analytics at the central level and further use or customize by 
States/UTs.  
k) Enablement of centralized SMS / WhatsApp alerts to the 
beneficiaries/FPS dealers and other stakeholders, central 
grievance/complaint-redressal monitoring system, integrated supply 
chain management and monitoring system, awareness etc. 
l) Continuation and augmentation of institutional support 
(technical/professional manpower) for the schemes on PDS reforms at 
the Central (Department, NIC, System Integrator, Cloud Service 
Provider) and States/UTs level. 
m) Setting up of technical helpdesk and monitoring centre in Central/State 
level for –  
o Providing necessary technical support to States’/UTs’ technical 
teams for configuration, faster resolution of their technical 
issues/requests w.r.t. software applications, implementation of the 
scheme components, etc.  
o Centralized data monitoring of PDS application modules including 
RCMS, Allocation/Central Allocation, integrated Supply Chain 
Management, FPS Automation, Grievance redressal, etc.    
o Development of new/additional web -based and mobile -based 
applications to support the ongoing and future PDS reforms.   

20 
 
o Support other new IT -based initiatives such as data analytics, 
Integration, Collaboration with departments/ministries/institutes, etc. 
at the central and State level.” 
 
 
3.4 Further, in their written replies, the Department of Food and Public Distribution 
provided details on the key components of SMART-PDS, as follows: 
 
“1. Cloud Infrastructure which includes -Servers, Storage, Database Servers etc. 
2. Setting up Central/State Project Implementing Team for Institutional Setup and 
Capacity Building for the project 
3. Development of Smart PDS application along with maintenance support and 
helpdesk for application.  
4. Building command and control centres at Centre and States 
5. Outreach programmes for beneficiaries and public messaging/communication 
with various stakeholders 
6. Third party evaluations, support for existing infrastructure till deployment of 
new application and contingency support.”  
 
3.5 On the issue of the computerization of TPDS operations, the Department, in 
their written replies, provided the following information: 
 
“The implementation of End -to-End Computerization of TPDS Operations 
(2012-2020) played a crucial role in achieving: 
 
➢ 100% digitization of ration card data 
➢ 99% Aadhaar seeding of ration cards 
➢ Implementation of ePoS devices at Fair Price Shops (FPSs) 
➢ Online food grain allocation modules & computerized supply chain 
management 
• The One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) initiative has successfully 
enabled nationwide portability for ration cardholders, facilitating food 
security across states. 
 
• ONORC was implemented under the Integrated Management of Public 
Distribution System (IM -PDS) scheme, with an initial outlay of Rs. 127.3 
Crore (2018-2020), later extended until March 2023. 
 
Despite these advancements, the growing dependency on outdated 
technology infrastructure in states/UTs posed a major challenge for 
sustaining and expanding these reforms.” 
 
 
3.6 During the briefing meeting held on 27 March 2025, the representative of the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution apprised the Committee of the status of 
end-to-end computerization of the PDS, as follows: 
 
“There is an end -to-end computerization from the stage of procurement, to 
movement, to storage, and to distribution. Every grain or foodgrain that is 
procured by the Department and Government authorities and agencies in the 

21 
 
States and the Centre, will be accounted for, from the stage of procurement to 
distribution.  
 
…..We have completely digitized 20.2 crore ration cards, which is the number 
of households. Under these households, we have got on an average around 
four members per ration card. We have got 80.5 crore beneficiaries. This 
entire distribution is being handled through a network of 5.43 lakh ration 
shops. The monthly allocation is to the tune of 44 lakh metric tonnes. 
Annually, it turns out to be 608 lakh metric tonnes.” 
 
3.7 Further, during the briefing meeting held on 27 March 2025, the 
representative of the Department of Food and Public Distribution apprised the 
Committee of the key features of SMART-PDS, as follows: 
 
• “Ensures continuous implementation of technology-led reforms in PDS. 
• Enhances national portability for beneficiaries through ONORC. 
• Maintains transparency and efficiency in the distribution of free 
foodgrains.  
• Introduces scalable and upgradable IT system to improve PDS 
operations. 
• Strengthens existing systems to ensure seamless foodgrain distribution 
across States/UTs.” 
 
3.8 The Committee observe that SMART-PDS has been designed to address 
ageing server infrastructure, software upgradation needs, integration 
challenges and poor utilisation of real -time data and that it seeks to build a 
robust and unified mechanism covering ration card management, allocation, 
supply chain management, foodgrain distribution, grievance redressal, 
biometric authentication, payments and deletion of de -duplicity. The 
Committee note that the scheme envisages a national -level dashboard, 
command and control centres, technical helpdesks, cloud infrastructure, 
institutional support teams and integration with FCI, CWC and other Ministries. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should ensure that 
these core components are made fully functional in a standardized manner 
across all States/UTs and that interoperability, cyber -security, helpdesk 
support and real -time monitoring are treated as non -negotiable pillars of 
SMART-PDS implementation. 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
Development status of SMART-PDS  
 
3.9 The representative of the Department of Food and Public Distribution briefed 
the Committee on the SMART-PDS modules during the briefing held on 27.03.2025: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
“SMART-PDS modules are categorised into four key components: 
 
 
 
➢ As per the proposed timelines, the wireframes for RCMS, FPS, Allocation & 
Distribution, and Supply Chain modules have been successfully completed. 
➢ Currently, the wireframe development for the Procurement module is in 
progress. 
➢ Additionally, the Proof of Concept (PoC) for the Distribution module is actively 
being tested in the states of Telangana (TL), Jharkhand (JH), Gujarat (GJ), 
Uttarakhand (UK), and Himachal Pradesh (HP).” 
 
Financial Outlay 
 
3.10 The Department of Food and Public Distribution in their written reply stated 
that  the scheme is a “Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS)” since the cost of the 
scheme shall be partially borne by the Central Government through the Department 
of Food & Public Distribution and the rest shall be borne by States/UTs in the ratio of 
90:10 for NE & Hill States/UTs, 100:0 for UTs, 60:40 for remaining States (as 
applicable) and it shall be implemented by the State/UT Governments. The total cost 
of the scheme i.e.  Rs. 349.9 crore shall be shared with States/UTs as below:  
 
Total estimated outlay of Central Government and States/UTs with 100%, 60% 
and 10% sharing: 
i. Central Govt. (DFPD) Share : Rs. 286.82 Cr.  
ii. Total States/UTs Share  : Rs. 63.07 Cr. 
 
For the implementation of the scheme, i.e. release of central assistance to 
States/UTs and to the Software Development Company/System Integrator (SI), 
Cloud Service providers through NIC/NICSI, funds shall be sought from the 
Government under BE/RE estimations in every financial year up to the validity of the 
scheme, as per the following year -wise indicative estimates (for amounts up to the 
central share indicated above): 
(in Rs. Cr.) 
Year-1  Year-2  Year-3  Total 
Central 
Cost 
108.25 102.94 75.63 286.82 
 


23 
 
The Committee h as been informed by the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution in their written reply that the scheme is proposed to be implemented 
during a period of 3  years from FY 2023-24 to FY 2025 -26. Due to non -participation 
of participants from the industry for system integrator of application in the first tender 
and single bidder situation in second tender, the development and deployment of 
SMART PDS application was taken up by NIC. The development of project started in 
October 2 024 and is expected to rollout in phases across 35 states/UT (MoU for 
Tamil Nadu is under process) starting April 2 025 and will be fully deployed by            
31st October 2025.  
 
 
3.11 The Committee note that SMART-PDS has been conceived as a centrally 
sponsored scheme with a total outlay of Rs. 349.9 crore including Central 
share of Rs. 286.82 crore and States/UTs’ share of Rs. 63.07 crore to create a 
unified and scalable platform for PDS operations across the country. The 
Committee further note that the development and deployment of the SMART -
PDS application got delayed on account of non -participation/single-bidder 
situation in tendering and was thereafter taken up by NIC; the project started 
in October 2024 and is proposed to be rolled out in phases across 35 
States/UTs from April 2025 and to be fully deployed by 31st October 2025, while 
MoU for Tamil Nadu was still under process. The Committee  feel that the 
Department should strictly adhere to a time -bound implementation schedule, 
with State/UT -wise milestones for signing of MoUs, customization, user 
acceptance testing, training and go -live, so that the intended benefits of 
SMART-PDS are not deferred further. 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
  

24 
 
Chapter - IV 
 
Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation   
 
 
Identification of Beneficiaries  
 
On being asked about the eligibility criteria for issuing ration cards to 
beneficiaries across States and Union Territories, the representative of the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution briefed the Committee as follows: 
 
“…..the entire NFSA or the PMGKY is under the joint responsibility of the 
State and the Centre. The Centre has responsibility to provide the food grains. 
The State has the responsibility to identify the beneficiaries. The food grains 
are given to the State to distribute to the beneficiaries, which are identified by 
the State Government. 
 
There are two categories of beneficiaries. One is the priority household. The 
priority households get five kilograms per person per month, whereas the 
Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) beneficiaries, who are the poorest of the poor, 
get 35 kilograms per household. It may be even one person but they will get 
35 kilograms per household. That is the entitlement.” 
 
4.2 During the briefing meeting held on 27.03.2025, the Committee was apprised 
by the Department of the reasons for the non -issuance of new ration cards over the 
past three to four years: 
 
“There is no ban on the issue of new ration cards. Even today, if we see as of 
now, the ceiling given under the Act is 81.35 crore beneficiaries. In the 
country, 81.35 crore beneficiaries can be covered. However, as of today, there 
is a shortfall of about 79 lakh beneficiaries. In case the States can identify 
eligible beneficiaries, then more cards can be given at the level of the State 
Government. We will be happy to supply them the foodgrains.” 
 
 
4.3 In response to queries regarding the identification of eligible households 
under the National Food Security Act (NFSA), which continues to rely on Census 
2011 data, the Committee was further briefed during the briefing meeting held on 
27.03.2025 as follows: 
 
“…..with regard to the Census and whether we are working to increase the 
number of beneficiaries. The NFSA Act mentioned that any change or revision 
in the number of beneficiaries can only happen in case there is a Census 
which is published. So, as we are all aware, the Census has not happened 
since 2011. As hon. Member from Hazaribagh mentioned that we must also 
now increase the number of beneficiaries under the NFSA because the 
population must have gone up 15 per cent to 20 per cent over the past 10 
years or 15 years, but the beneficiary identification under NFSA is not only 
dependent on the population. The other criteria are the poverty estimate. 
When we did the estimation of the beneficiaries in 2011 Census which was 

25 
 
done by the erstwhile Planning Commission in 2013 -14, they calculated the 
number which will be eligible in each State based on the poverty estimates 
which were determined by the Tendulkar Committee report. The Tendulkar 
Committee report on poverty was used by the erstwhile Planning Commission 
to work out the estimates of people who would be eligible for free ration or 
subsidized ration. While we can say that yes because of the increase in 
population the numbers should normally go up, but it is also a fact that there 
has been economic development in the country. People have come out of the 
poverty limits and there has been general prosperity in the country.” 
 
 
Data Analytics: Rightful Targeting 
 
4.4 While providing information on data analytics for rightful targeting under the 
PDS, the Department of Food and Public Distribution in their written replies 
submitted that: 
“Government of India is giving thrust to Digital India to become a Digital Society 
wherein the lifeblood is Data.  In modern world, data is the key for transforming 
public policies and bringing transparency in entire ecosystem. Public 
distribution services (PDS) are generating large volume of data in real -time 
which remains inaccessible while most of such data may be non -sensitive in 
nature and could be used either by Department/Other Ministry or States/UTs, 
civil societies or by the industry/start -ups for scientific, economic and 
development purposes in the benefit of citizens & country. Generation of 
computerized data, online reports etc, has helped the Department of Food and 
Public Distribution (DFPD) to do a careful and systematic analysis which 
resulted in valuable insights into the quality of the implementation of different 
components of the scheme and also helps in identifying the areas for 
improvement. 
 
• To mitigate challenges & to monitor and analyse the real -time data for 
enhanced and up -to-date policy decisions, the technology driven PDS reforms 
in the country are now an immediate and ever important need of the day. 
Therefore, the Department of Food & Public Distribution (DFPD) has 
implemented data driven decision making through the data analytics/BI 
platforms and other ICT tools & technologies.  
• Rightful targeting under NFSA remains a priority to ensure benefits reach the 
truly deserving households in the country. The Government is committed to 
ensuring food security for all deserving beneficiaries while maintaining 
transparency, efficiency, and rightful targeting in NFSA implementation. 
• Accommodating additional beneficiaries under NFSA requires weeding out 
ineligible beneficiaries first so that new additions can be done within the ceiling 
limits given to states. 
• To identify rightful targeting, the DFPD has initiated analysis of the PDS 
Beneficiaries data on different parameters such as Beneficiaries having Single 
Member AAY Ration cards, Members who are more than 100 years old, Single 
member RCs given to beneficiaries below 18 years old, Duplicate Beneficiaries 
and Beneficiaries in Silent Ration cards. 
• In addition to this, the DFPD has also initiated integration of PDS 
Beneficiaries data with different other Ministries to get their information such as 

26 
 
status of existence (Deceased/alive), vehicle ownership, Income status, land 
ownership, Directorship in firms, and whether they own any business. The 
identified ministries for data integration are in line with the different Exclusion 
Criteria outlined in the PDS Control Orders of states/UTs that provides 
conditions for excluding beneficiaries from PDS.  
• During the data analysis, it is identified that 2.91 Crore Beneficiaries are found 
to be possible exclusion. Such conditions termed as 'Red Flags' are given as 
under- 
 
Sr.No. Red Flags Suspect 
Beneficiaries  
1 Beneficiaries Above 100 Years of age  5,60,775 
2 Single Member RCs having Beneficiaries 
below 18 Years age 2,11,682 
3 Silent Ration Cards  2,20,00,768 
4 Duplicate Beneficiaries 30,06,911 
5 Deceased Beneficiaries as per Aadhaar 
Status 34,12,532 
 Total  2,91,92,668 
 
The DFPD is sharing this data with the respective states and UTs for 
verification through field investigations. Based on the findings, appropriate 
action may be taken against beneficiaries found to be ineligible. The 
responsibility lies with the states to identify and update eligible beneficiaries 
within the existing framework.” 
 
4.5 On being asked about the measures being taken to update the data to include 
beneficiaries left out since the 2011 Census under NFSA coverage, the Department 
of Food and Public Distribution furnished the following information: 
 
“The National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) provides for coverage of upto 
75% of the rural and 50% of the urban population, at the all -India level, for 
receiving free of cost foodgrains. The Coverage under the Act is substantially 
high to ensure that all the vulnerable and needy sections of the society get its 
benefit. 
 
Corresponding to this coverage, State/UT -wise percentage coverage was 
determined by the then Planning Commission (now NITI Aayog). This was 
worked out by the erstwhile Planning Commission using the 68th  round of 
NSSO Household Consumption Expenditure Survey (2011 -12), Tendulkar 
Poverty estimates (2011 -2012) and 2011 Population Census data 
and uniform methodology across states. 
Further, Section 9 of the NFSA provides that the percentage coverage under 
the Targeted Public Distribution System in rural and urban areas for each 
State shall be determined by the Central Government and the total number of 
persons to be covered in the State shall be calculated on the basis of the 
population estimates as per the census of which the relevant figures have 
been published. Therefore, any revision in the coverage under the NFSA shall 

27 
 
be possible only after the relevant data of next population Census is 
published. 
 
At present, against the intended coverage of 81.35 crore, 80.56 crore 
beneficiaries are receiving foodgrains free of cost. 
 
Under the joint responsibility of the Central and State Government, the 
responsibility for identification of beneficiaries and issuance of their ration 
cards rests with the concerned State Government. The Central Government 
issues advisories to all the States/Union Territories from time to time to 
identify all eligible and poor persons/ households including vulnerable 
Sections of the Society for inclusion under the NFSA. States are undertaking 
updation of their beneficiary database so that bogus ration cards get deleted 
and better targeting of rightful beneficiaries is ensured. Thus, deletion of 
ineligible beneficiaries and addition of eligible beneficiaries under the Act is a 
continuous process.” 
 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
4.6 PDS–Evaluation, Monitoring and Research Central Sector Standalone Project 
is a continuation of earlier evaluation exercises conducted during Phase 1 (2018 -20) 
and Phase 2 (2020 –23). It aims to strengthen the monitoring and implementation of 
the Pradhan Mantri Gareeb Kalyan Anna Yojana (PMGKAY)/ National Food Security 
Act (NFSA). To support this objective, the Department has extended the concurrent 
evaluation study for three years —2025–26, 2026 –27 and 2027 –28—covering all 
States and Union territories. The study will generate detailed and evidence -based 
insights through structured questionnaires across various themes, including 
Information, awareness and education (IEC) on One Nation One Ration Card and 
portability, reforms in the Public Distribution System and supply chain, effectiveness 
of grievance redressal mechanisms, functioning of vigilance committees, ease of 
access to entitlements, assessment of leakages or diversion etc. 
 
4.7 In connection with the monitoring and evaluation of SMART -PDS, the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution submitted to the Committee that: 
 
“Under the proposed scheme, following is envisaged to undertake monitoring 
and evaluation: 
 
Institutional Framework at the Central & States/UT Level:  
 Day-to-day central monitoring of the scheme implementation would be done 
by the Department through the NIC (NIC) and SI/NIC-HQ team. Further, at the 
States/UTs level, the proposed institutional framework comprising of the 
respective State Project Implementation Team (SPIT) shall support the 
respective State/UT F&CS Departments in continuous monitoring of the 
implementation of the scheme, achieving the desired outcomes, 
mainstreaming of data analytics, integrated supply chain management and 
other activities of technology driven PDS reforms in all States/UTs. Besides, 
the NIC/SPIT shall also support the States/UTs in regular capacity 
building/trainings of FPS dealers and other field level officials of the 

28 
 
States/UTs in collaboration with States’/UTs’ respective System Integrators, 
etc.  
 
Empowered Committee:  
Further, At the central level, the implementation of the scheme shall be 
regularly monitored through an “Empowered Committee (EC)”.  
 
State Apex Committee:  
The States/UTs level, “State Apex Committee (SAC)” shall regularly monitor 
the implementation of the schematic activities within the concerned State/UT. 
 
Evaluation of the scheme implementation 
Evaluation of the scheme shall be carried out by DFPD through reputed 3rd 
party independent agencies/ institutions. Necessary guidelines and framework 
for the above evaluations of scheme, in accordance to the measurable 
outputs and outcomes of the scheme shall be devised by DFPD in 
consultation with the Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO) 
of the NITI Aayog.  
 
A review committee on evaluations of the scheme shall also be constituted at 
the level of DFPD in consultation with DMEO of NITI Aayog.” 
 
Challenges in PDS System 
 
4.8 The Department of Food and Public Distribution in their Annual Report 2025 –
26 stated that TPDS is presently operated under the joint responsibility of the Central 
and the State Governments, where the Central Government has assumed the 
responsibility for procurement, storage, transportation and allocation of foodgrains to 
all States/U Ts. The operational responsibility of allocation of foodgrains within 
State/UT, identification of eligible families under NFSA, issuance of ration cards, 
distribution of foodgrains through Fair Price Shop (FPS) and licensing and 
monitoring of FPSs, etc. rests with the respective State/ UT Governments. Under 
PDS, foodgrains, namely, Rice, Wheat and Coarse -grains are being distributed to 
eligible households. Some States/U Ts also distribute additional items of mass 
consumption through the PDS outlets such as sugar, pulses, edible oil, iodized salt, 
spices, etc. 
 
4.9 The eligibility criteria for coverage under TPDS include vulnerable groups like 
beggars, female domestic workers, ragpickers, sanitation workers etc. The 
Department has issued instructions to States/UTs from time to time to make special 
efforts to ensure the identification and inclusion of the extremely poor and needy 
households under NFSA. Ration card deletion during annual verification drives, 
deletion of duplicate ration cards under TPDS by many States/UTs under PDS 
reforms including computerization, which provides scope for issuance of new ration 
cards to such left out genuine beneficiaries. All States/UTs were requested to ensure 
that all left -out and genuinely deserving people belonging to weaker sections are 
covered under NFSA from time to time. 
 
 

29 
 
4.10 To eliminate leakages and to ensure that all eligible households are 
continuously receiving their entitled quota of subsidized foodgrains under PMGKAY, 
through TPDS, the following measures have been taken by this Department:  
 
(a) End-to-End Computerization of Targeted Public Distribution 
System (TPDS) 
(b) Integrated Management of Public Distribution System (IM-PDS)  
(c) Scheme for Modernization and Reforms through Technology in 
Public Distribution System (SMART-PDS) 
 
4.11 While outlining the rationale for the introduction of technology -led reforms i.e. 
SMART-PDS, the Department of Food and Public Distribution, in their written replies 
submitted that: 
 
“The new scheme intends to sustain the technology -led reforms brought in by 
the end -to-end computerization schemes in all States/UTs and further 
enhance reforms by the existing IMPDS scheme and to introduce future/new 
reforms in the functioning of the PDS and strengthening of national portability 
under One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) System. Therefore, to maintain 
the transparency, efficiency, and effectiveness of the PDS, governed under 
the provisions of the National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) in the country, 
it is necessary that all activities covered under the ‘End -to-End 
Computerization of TPDS Operations’ Schemes remain operational in all 
States/UTs and such tasks / activities shall be implemented by new 
initiatives/reforms which are scalable/upgradable to aid in the distribution of 
subsidised foodgrains.” 
 
 
4.12 With regard to strengthening the Public Distribution System, the Department 
of Food and Public Distribution stated in their written submissions that: 
 
“The Department has developed two mobile applications — Mera Ration App 
and Anna Mitra — to enhance transparency, accessibility, and efficiency in the 
Public Distribution System for both beneficiaries and officials. 
 
Mera Ration App: The Mera Ration App is a citizen -centric tool that offers 
essential digital services to beneficiaries of the National Food Security Act 
(NFSA). Key Features include:  Ration Card Services , Real-Time Information 
Access, Nearby FPS Locator, Grievance Redressal, FPS Rating System. 
 
  Anna Mitra App: The Anna Mitra mobile app empowers PDS (Public 
Distribution System) field functionaries by providing the access to critical 
operational data through a secure platform. The app is designed to streamline 
field-level monitoring, stock management, and compliance reporting by Fair 
Price Shop (FPS) dealers, Food Inspectors and District Food Supply Officers 
(DFSOs). Key Design Features of Anna Mitra: 
 
• Streamline field-level operations, stock tracking, and compliance reporting 
• Availability of t ransaction summary of ration cards, beneficiary 
management and other stakeholder information 

30 
 
• Inspection modules, feedback and rating modules 
• Stock level management from District to FPS level” 
 
   
4.13 Aimed at improving awareness among beneficiaries regarding schemes 
intended to strengthen the Public Distribution System,  a nationwide campaign has 
been carried out to create awareness among the PMGKAY beneficiaries about 
ONORC in different modes viz. FM/Radio channels, displaying audio visual spots at 
railway stations, banners, posters at outdoors and Fair Price Shops (FPSs), bus 
wraps etc. Apart from this States/UTs have also employed their own means for these 
campaigns. 
 
4.14 With a view to addressing challenges related to the availability of technical 
infrastructure—such as network connectivity and servers —in remote and hilly areas, 
the Department of Food and Public Distribution furnished information  in their written 
replies that: 
 
“To address the challenge of limited availability of technical infrastructure such 
as network and servers in remote and hilly areas, the Department has 
implemented several measures. The ePoS system includes a provision for 
offline distribution, allowing transactions to be carried out even in areas with 
poor or no network connectivity. The ePOS devices must come periodically to 
network area to sync the offline ePoS data with PDS online system. 
  
Additionally, States and UTs have been instructed to identify and report Fair 
Price Shops (FPS) located in such difficult terrains. Based on the information 
received, the Department has coordinated with the Department of 
Telecommunications (DoT) to engage BSNL for necessary interventions, 
including the installation of network infrastructure to improve connectivity.” 
 
 
4.15 On being asked about the steps taken to address complaints of delivery of 
underweight ration by dealers, the Department of Food and Public Distribution during 
the evidence meeting held on 19.09.2025 , apprised the Committee  about the steps 
taken so far in this connection: 
 
“PDS Helpline & Remedial Measures 
 
❑ Anna Sahayata System: Leveraging WhatsApp (9868200445) and IVRS 
(14457) for quick resolution of grievances.  
 
❑ Helpline Numbers: 
▪ 1967 / 1800-series (State-specific) operational in all States/UTs. 
▪ For lodging any PDS-related complaints, including less weight of ration. 
 
❑ Complaint Handling: 
▪ Complaints forwarded to respective State/UT Governments for inquiry & 
action. 
 
❑ Key Remedial Measures for Less Weight Issues: 

31 
 
▪ Integration of ePoS devices with Weighing Scales at Fair Price Shops (FPS). 
▪ Printed receipts display distributed quantity for beneficiary. 
If weighed quantity is less than entitlement, transaction will not be completed.” 
 
4.16 Regarding issues of exclusion of beneficiaries and authentication -related 
difficulties, the Department of Food and Public Distribution during the evidence 
meeting held on 19.09.2025, apprised the Committee as under: 
 
“Ensuring Ration Access Despite Biometric Failures 
 
❑ Advisory (24/10/2017): 
 
❖ No genuine beneficiary/household to be denied subsidized foodgrains 
due to biometric/Aadhaar authentication failure caused by: 
✓ Network/connectivity issues 
✓ Technical glitches 
✓ Poor biometrics 
 
❑ Mechanisms for Resolution: 
 
❖ Multiple Authentication Modes: 
✓ Single Fingerprint 
✓ Fusion Fingerprint (multiple fingerprints combined) 
✓ Iris Scan 
✓ OTP sent to registered mobile number 
 
❖ Nominee Facility: 
✓ If all authentication methods fail, a pre -nominated person can 
authenticate and collect ration on beneficiary’s behalf, as per 
state policy.” 
 
 
4.17 The Committee observe that the National Food Security Act, 2013 
(NFSA) provides for coverage of upto 75% of the rural and 50% of the urban 
population, at the all-India level, for receiving free of cost foodgrains. Section 9 
of the NFSA provides that the percentage coverage under the Targeted Public 
Distribution System in rural and urban areas for each State shall be 
determined by the Central Government and the total number of persons to be 
covered in the State shall be calculated on the basis of the population 
estimates as per the ce nsus of which the relevant figures have been 
published. Under NFSA the ceiling for coverage remains 81.35 crore 
beneficiaries as per 2011 Census , whereas a shortfall of about 79 lakh 
beneficiaries still existed within the permitted ceiling. The Committee 
understand that the responsibility for identification of beneficiaries and 
issuance of ration cards rests with the States/UTs and that deletion of 
ineligible beneficiaries and addition of eligible beneficiaries is a continuous 
process. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should 
impress upon all States/UTs to undertake sustained verification drives and 
prompt inclusion of left -out eligible households within the available ceiling, 

32 
 
especially among vulnerable groups, so that the existing statutory coverage is 
fully utilized in favour of genuine beneficiaries. 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
 
4.18 The Committee are happy to note that the Department has initiated data 
analytics for rightful targeting and has identified 2.91 crore suspect 
beneficiaries under various red -flag categories, including 5,60,775 
beneficiaries above 100 years of age, 2,11,682 single-member ration cards with 
beneficiaries below 18 years, 2,20,00,768 silent ration cards, 30,06,911 
duplicate beneficiaries and 34,12,532 deceased beneficiaries as per Aadhaar 
status. The Committee further note that an institutional framework has been 
envisaged under SMART -PDS through NIC, State Project Implementation 
Teams, an Empowered Committee, State Apex Committees and third -party 
evaluation. In this regard, t he Committee recommend that the verification of 
red-flag beneficiaries should be completed in a time-bound mission mode with 
mandatory field investigation. At the same time, utmost care must be taken to 
prevent wrongful exclusion of eligible beneficiaries through robust safeguards 
and grievance redressal mechanisms. 
        (Recommendation No. 6) 
 
4.19 The Committee note that PDS –Evaluation, Monitoring and Research 
Central Sector Standalone Project is a continuation of earlier evaluation 
exercises conducted during Phase 1 (2018 -20) and Phase 2 (2020 –23) which 
aims to strengthen the monitoring and implementation of the Pradhan Mantri 
Gareeb Kalyan Anna Yojana (PMGKAY)/ National Food Security Act (NFSA). To 
support this objective, the Department has extended the concurrent evaluation 
study for three years—2025–26, 2026–27 and 2027–28—covering all States and 
Union territories. In regard to making monitoring more effective,  the 
Committee recommend that the monitoring and evaluation framework be 
strengthened to produce periodic, outcome -based reports capturing key 
indicators such as reduction in leakages, effectiveness of grievance redressal, 
awareness and utilization of ONORC, functioning of vigilance committees, and 
ease of beneficiary access. These reports should be used to drive continuous 
corrective action and ensure efficiency in PDS operations. 
 
In this connection, the Committee also reiterate their recommendation 
made in 17 th Report of the 17 th Lok Sabha with regard to convening of State 
Level Vigilance Committee meetings on regular basis at District, Block and 
FPS levels so that NFSA beneficiaries actually reap the benefits of the welfare 
schemes of the Government. For this purpose, Department should 
communicate respective States/UTs on regular basis and detailed report on 
such vigilance meetings may be asked from the States/UT Administrations for 
a more effective monitoring of the same.  
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
  

33 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
 
FAIR PRICE SHOPS (FPSs) 
 
As an integral part of the computerization scheme, States/UTs have installed 
electronic Point of Sale (ePoS) devices at all Fair Price Shops (FPSs) for transparent 
distribution of foodgrains through electronic transactions and also with 
biometric/Aadhaar authentication of beneficiaries. The installation of ePoS devices 
has been achieved in about 99.8% i.e. 5.50 lakh of a total of 5.51 lakh FPSs in the 
country and these devices are being used for the distribution of foodgrains to NFSA 
beneficiaries’ digital transactions. On average, more than 98.4% of foodgrains are 
being distributed through these ePoS devices, with biometric authentication of 
beneficiaries, on a monthly basis. All ePoS transaction records are available on the 
respective ePoS portals of States/UTs. The distribution details of States/UTs up to 
the district level are also available on the central portal (https://impds.nic.in). 
 
Automation of Fair Price Shops 
 
5.2 On being asked about the details on the number of Fair Price Shops currently 
onboarded into the Open Network Digital Commerce (ONDC) platform, the 
Department in their written replies furnished that: 
 
“The Department of Food and Public Distribution, Government of India had 
launched a pilot initiative to onboard Fair Price Shops (FPSs) with the Open 
Network for Digital Commerce (ONDC). As part of this initiative, 11 FPSs (5 
FPSs in Una and 6 FPSs in Hamirpur districts) in Himachal Pradesh were 
piloted on ONDC by the Department of Food & Public Distribution.” 
 
5.3 The Department of Food and Public Distribution, in their written replies, 
detailed the progress made so far in automating Fair Price Shops (FPS) and 
underscored the challenges presently being faced:  
 
“Installation of ePoS devices/ electronic devices has been completed at almost 
all Fair Price Shops (FPSs). Further, Central Government instructed all 
States/UTs to install electronic weighing scale and integration of these weighing 
scale with ePoS device for accurate distribution of foodgrains. States/UTs have 
also been instructed to install IRIS scanner to ensure Aadhaar authentication of 
beneficiaries in case of failure of finger print based authentication. Offline 
distribution of foodgrains through ePoS devices are also being done where 
mobile network connections are not available. Department of 
Telecommunication (DoT) was also approached multiple times to ensure 
network connectivity at FPSs.”  
 
 
5.4 In response to the query of whether the introduction of the ePoS system has 
improved transparency, efficiency and accountability in the Public Distribution 
System (PDS) across States and Union Territories, the Department of Food and 
Public Distribution in their written submission stated that: 
 

34 
 
“Under the technology driven PDS reforms, at present, 5.41 lakh (99.6%) out of 
total 5.43 lakh Fair Price Shops (FPSs) have been automated by installing ePoS 
devices for the distribution of foodgrains in a transparent manner (electronically) 
through biometric/Aadhaar authentication of beneficiaries under the PDS 
system. 
  
Through automation of FPS, it has not only improved the transparency, efficiency 
of distribution of free foodgrains but also accountability in Public Distribution 
System (PDS).” 
 
5.5 On the issue of the automation of Fair Price Shops for ePoS -based 
distribution of foodgrains and Intra-State movement of foodgrains, the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution in their Annual Report 2025–26 submitted that:  
 
“The automation of Fair Price Shops for ePoS -based distribution of 
foodgrains - Involves the installation of electronic Point of Sale (ePoS) 
devices at all FPSs by the respective States/UTs, for the issuance of 
subsidized foodgrains to all eligible beneficiaries and biometric/Aadhaar 
authentication of beneficiaries for transparent and rightful delivery of 
foodgrains/ food subsidy. In this regard, the Department has approved an 
additional dealer margin of Rs. 21 per quintal (For General Category 
States/UTs) and Rs. 26 per quintal (For Special Category States/ UTs) 
towards the cost of purchase, operation and maintenance of the point -of-sale 
device, its running expenses and incentive for its use and any savings if 
accrued could be utilized for purchase, operations and maintenance of 
electronic weighing scales and their integration with the Point -of-Sale device 
under the ‘Food Security (Assistance to State Governments) Rules 2015. The 
expenditure thus incurred is shared between Centre and State Governments 
on a 50:50 and 75:25 basis for General and Special Category States/UTs 
respectively and accordingly, central assistance under the said rules is 
released to States/UTs periodically.  
 
Intra-State movement of foodgrains - NFSA provides for Central assistance 
to States/Uts to meet the expenditure incurred on the intra -State movement of 
foodgrains and fair price shop dealers’ margins. For this purpose, an amount 
of 3914.57 crores has been released for intra -state movement, dealers’ 
margin and additional dealers’ margin during 2025 -26, (as of 31.12.2025) to 
State Governments.” 
 
 
5.6 On being asked about the least percentage seeding of ration card in various 
States, the representative of the Department of Food and Public Distribution during 
the evidence held on 19.09.2025 apprised the Committee that:  
 
“Meghalaya and Arunachal Pradesh have achieved 73% and 81% Percentage 
seeding of Aadhar Card with Ration Card respectively against national average 
Aadhaar–Ration Card seeding of 99.9%.”  
 
 
 

35 
 
5.7 In this context, the Department of Food and Public Distribution in their written 
replies furnished information that: 
 
“As far as the percentage seeding of Aadhaar Card with Ration Card is 
concerned, it is stated that the reason for this can be accorded to low Aadhaar 
Saturation status for Meghalaya and Arunachal Pradesh which stands at 81.3% 
and 78.09% respectively as on 30 th June 2025 according to the State/UT - wise 
Aadhaar saturation report released by the Unique Identification Authority of 
India. Now, ration card -level Aadhaar seeding is about 78.1% and 80.6% in 
Meghalaya and Arunachal Pradesh, respectively. 
Further, it has been informed by NIC that eKYC -based seeding and verification 
are in progress.” 
 
5.8 In response to queries regarding the functioning of the ePoS system, which 
facilitates beneficiaries in both urban and rural areas to access their entitled 
foodgrains and other subsidized commodities without difficulty, the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution provided the following information in their written 
replies: 
“The process of distributing foodgrains through ePoS devices is very simple 
and does not require any special digital literacy among beneficiaries to lift 
their entitled foodgrains through electronic transactions. Further, States/UTs 
are advised to ensure that ePoS printed transaction receipts are provided to 
all beneficiaries in local language, besides SMS are sent on their registered 
mobile numbers to ensure complete transparency in distribution process.   
  
Additionally, the ePoS devices have a functionality to work in offline mode with 
limited/ no internet connectivity. The ePOS devices must come periodically to 
network area to sync the offline ePoS data with PDS online system. Further, 
the beneficiaries are empowered under ONORC to lift their entitled foodgrains 
from any FPS having operational ePoS device without facing any 
internet/connectivity related challenges. Presently, more than 98% of monthly 
allocated food grains to States/UTs are being distributed through 
biometric/Aadhaar authenticated electronic transactions.” 
 
  
5.9 With regard to the challenges faced in implementing the ePoS  system at Fair 
Price Shops (FPSs) —including technical issues, connectivity constraints and limited 
digital literacy —the Department of Food and Public Distribution in their written 
replies, submitted that: 
 
  “…..States and UTs have been instructed to identify and report Fair Price 
Shops (FPS) located in such difficult terrains. Based on the information 
received, the Department has coordinated with the Department of 
Telecommunications (DoT) to engage BSNL for necessary interventions, 
including the installation of network infrastructure to improve connectivity. 
  
The beneficiaries are also empowered under ONORC to lift their entitled 
foodgrains from any FPS having operational ePoS device without facing any 
internet/connectivity related challenges.” 
 

36 
 
5.10 On the issue of monitoring the distribution of food grains through ePoS 
devices and under the ONORC plan, the Department in their written replies 
submitted that: 
  
“The Department is actively monitoring the distribution of food grains through 
ePoS devices at Fair Price Shops (FPS) to ensure transparency and real -time 
tracking of transactions under the One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) 
feature. 
 
A weekly report is prepared to track inter - and intra -state portability 
transactions. Based on these reports, low -performing States/UTs are advised 
to take necessary corrective measures and improve beneficiary outreach. 
 
To promote usage of the ONORC facility among migrant beneficiaries, the 
Department conducts regular awareness drives. These drives are carried out 
through multiple channels, includ ing social media platforms, radio broadcasts 
etc.” 
 
 
5.11 The Committee note that about 5.41 lakh out of 5.43 lakh Fair Price 
Shops, i.e. around 99.6 per cent, have been automated with ePoS devices and 
that more than 98 per cent of monthly allocated foodgrains are being 
distributed through biometric/Aadhaar authenticated electronic transactions. 
The Committee further note that ePoS devices also have offline functionality, 
yet connectivity constraints in difficult terrains continue to affect smooth 
operations and the Department has had to coordinate with the Department of 
Telecommunications and BSNL for network improvement. The Committee , 
therefore, recommend that the Department, in coordination with States/UTs, 
should prepare a focused action plan for all no -network and difficult -terrain 
FPSs so that uninterrupted distribution is ensured through reliable offline 
sync, alternate authentication modes and strengthened last -mile connectivity, 
while ensuring that no genuine beneficiary is denied ration on account of 
technology failure. 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
 
One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) 
 
5.12 To address various challenges such as leakages and diversion of food grains 
and create a Smart Public Distribution System, IM -PDS scheme was launched in 
2018. The Key components of the IMPDS scheme are National Portability, 
Deduplication, creation of Central Repository and Data Analytics. Starting with inter -
state portability in just 4 States in August 2019, the ONORC plan has been enabled 
in all 36 States/UTs (across the country) covering around 80 Crore NFSA 
beneficiaries, i.e., almost 100% NFSA population in the country. 
 
5.13 Regarding One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) initiative, the Department 
of Food and Public Distribution in their written replies submitted that: 
 

37 
 
“The One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) initiative has successfully enabled 
nationwide portability for ration cardholders, facilitating food security across 
states. ONORC was implemented under the Integrated Management of Public 
Distribution System (IM-PDS) scheme, with an initial outlay of Rs. 127.3 Crore 
(2018-2020), later extended until March 2023.” 
 
5.14 The Department of Food and Public Distribution in their Annual Report 2025 -
26 informed that: 
 
“Initially the facility of One Nation One Ration Card was started as inter -state 
portability w.e.f. August 2019 in 4 States of Andhra Pradesh & Telangana and 
Gujarat & Maharashtra by the then Hon’ble Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution; and in January 2020, the facility of national portability of 
ration cards was seamlessly started in 12 States. Since then, the One Nation 
One Ration Card feature has been seamlessly enabled in all 36 States/ UTs. 
The migratory beneficiaries/ households are now able to lift their entitled 
foodgrains from any FPS of their choice anywhere in the country using their 
existing/same ration cards. The ONORC feature also includes intra -state 
portability of ration cards. Since inception in August 2019, a total of more than 
200 Crore portability transactions (including inter -state and intra -state 
transactions) for the distribution of NFSA/ PMGKAY foodgrains have been 
recorded in States/UTs under ONORC.” 
 
 
5.15 Highlighting the features of the Mera Ration and Anna Mitra mobile 
applications in strengthening ONORC, the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution, in its Annual Report 2025–26, submitted that: 
 
“The Mera Ration mobile application, developed by the Department of Food 
and Public Distribution, is a citizen -centric tool under the One Nation One 
Ration Card (ONORC) initiative. It provides key digital services to beneficiaries 
of the National Food Security Act (NFSA). 
 
Anna Mitra is an official mobile application developed by the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution, Government of India, for enabling PDS officials 
and stakeholders to access Public Distribution System (PDS) information 
anywhere, anytime in India. The app is designed exclusively for FPS Dealers, 
District Food Supply Officers (DFSO), and Food Inspectors, providing them with 
a unified platform to view ration-related data and reports in real time.” 
 
 
5.16 While elaborating on the details of Intra and Inter State portability transactions 
under the One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) plan, particularly with regard to 
enabling migrant beneficiaries to access their NFSA -entitled foodgrains and benefits 
under ONORC in the absence of a physical ration card, the Department of Food and 
Public Distribution in their written replies submitted that:  
 
“Under the ONORC feature, beneficiaries can lift their NFSA food grains from 
any Fair Price Shop (FPS) using Aadhaar authentication, regardless of where 
their ration card is registered. 

38 
 
  
• Intra-State Portability:   Allows beneficiaries to collect ration from an FPS 
located within the same state but outside their home FPS area. Useful for 
intra-state migrants or those temporarily living elsewhere in the state. 
 
• Inter-State Portability:   Allows beneficiaries to access ration from any 
other state across the country. This supports migrant workers and families 
who move between states for livelihood. 
  
ONORC ensures food security for migrants, offers flexibility in FPS 
choice, and promotes transparency in the PDS system. So far 173.98 
crore portability transactions have been recorded since inception of 
ONORC feature.  
 
A migrant beneficiary doesn’t need to carry physical ration card, 
he/she can provide either ration card number or Aadhaar number to FPS 
dealer for availing  foodgrains after biometric authentication on ePoS 
device at FPS. “  
 
 
5.17 The Department of Food and Public Distribution has furnished a snapshot of 
the state-wise statement showing ONORC transactions, as given below: 
 
STATE-WISE ONORC TRANSACTIONS 
  S.No  States   Total Intra State 
Portability  
 Total Inter-
State 
Portability  
 Total Inter-Intra 
Portability  
1 
 ANDAMAN 
AND 
NICOBAR 
ISLANDS  
                            
67,213  
                         
1,085  
                            
68,298  
2  ANDHRA 
PRADESH  
                 
17,27,13,482  
                         
3,851  
               
17,27,17,333  
3  ARUNACHAL 
PRADESH  
                              
1,306  
                           
  245  
                             
 1,551  
4  ASSAM                         
22,89,619  
                           
  803  
                      
22,90,422  
5  BIHAR                   
55,77,56,157  
                   
1,92,016  
               
55,79,48,173  
6  CHANDIGAR
H  
                             
           -    
                         
1,213  
                              
1,213  
7  CHHATTISGA
RH   
                       
27,34,741  
                      
16,113  
                      
27,50,854  
8  DELHI                      
3,93,54,011  
            
1,46,96,909  
                  
5,40,50,920  
9  GOA                              
93,890  
                      
55,485  
                        
1,49,375  
10  GUJARAT                         
76,52,359  
                   
6,73,022  
                      
83,25,381  

39 
 
11  HARYANA                      
9,50,10,397  
                
24,01,715  
                  
9,74,12,112  
12  HIMACHAL 
PRADESH  
                              
1,557  
                   
3,97,805  
                        
3,99,362  
13  JAMMU AND 
KASHMIR  
                       
30,17,698  
                   
1,84,391  
                      
32,02,089  
14  JHARKHAND                         
87,03,292  
                      
63,784  
                      
87,67,076  
15  KARNATAKA                      
8,78,86,590  
                      
44,802  
                  
8,79,31,392  
16  KERALA                      
8,64,74,824  
                      
89,855  
                  
8,65,64,679  
17  LADAKH                                
3,548  
                           
  868  
                             
 4,416  
18  LAKSHADWE
EP  
                            
46,025  
                           
    55  
                            
46,080  
19  MADHYA 
PRADESH  
                    
6,82,41,204  
                   
1,53,916  
                  
6,83,95,120  
20  MAHARASHT
RA  
                    
8,02,03,349  
                
16,36,396  
                  
8,18,39,745  
21  MANIPUR                                
1,506  
                           
    21  
                              
1,527  
22  MEGHALAYA                               
    250  
                           
  466  
                             
    716  
23  MIZORAM                              
30,791  
                           
    85  
                            
30,876  
24  NAGALAND                              
99,370  
                           
  438  
                            
99,808  
25  ODISHA                         
15,65,797  
                         
1,232  
                      
15,67,029  
26  PUDUCHERR
Y  
                             
           -    
                         
1,385  
                              
1,385  
27  PUNJAB                      
2,69,64,148  
                      
60,128  
                  
2,70,24,276  
28  RAJASTHAN                   
17,05,18,119  
                   
4,15,007  
               
17,09,33,126  
29  SIKKIM                              
48,039  
                         
3,495  
                            
51,534  
30  TAMIL NADU                      
1,62,16,977  
                      
22,230  
                  
1,62,39,207  
31  TELANGANA                   
12,96,58,875  
                   
1,23,266  
               
12,97,82,141  
32 
 THE DADRA 
AND NAGAR 
HAVELI AND 
DAMAN AND 
DIU  
                         4,
25,243  
                   
2,98,595  
                        
7,23,838  
33  TRIPURA                                                                     

40 
 
20,02,558  25,718  20,28,276  
34  UTTAR 
PRADESH  
                 
13,78,13,860  
                   
1,46,397  
               
13,79,60,257  
35  UTTARAKHA
ND  
                       
53,10,661  
                   
3,64,431  
                      
56,75,092  
36  WEST 
BENGAL  
                    
1,47,11,819  
                      
85,142  
                  
1,47,96,961  
   Total             
1,71,76,19,275             2,21,62,365            
1,73,97,81,640  
 
 
5.18 On being asked about the steps taken to generate awareness about ONORC 
amongst beneficiaries, the Department of Food and Public Distribution in their written 
replies submitted:  
 
“A nationwide campaign has been carried out to create awareness among the 
PMGKAY beneficiaries about ONORC in different modes viz. FM/Radio 
channels, displaying audio visual spots at railway stations, banners, posters at 
outdoors and Fair Price Shops (FPSs), bus wraps etc. Apart from this 
States/UTs have also employed their own means for these campaigns.” 
 
5.19 Regarding the monitoring mechanism for the distribution of food grains 
through ePoS devices under the ONORC plan, the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution in their written replies furnished information: 
   
“The Department is actively monitoring the distribution of food grains through 
ePoS devices at Fair Price Shops (FPS) to ensure transparency and real -time 
tracking of transactions under the One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) 
feature. 
 
A weekly report is prepared to track inter - and intra -state portability 
transactions. Based on these reports, low -performing States/UTs are advised 
to take necessary corrective measures and improve beneficiary outreach. 
 
To promote usage of the ONORC facility among migrant beneficiaries, the 
Department conducts regular awareness drives. These drives are carried out 
through multiple channels, includes social media platforms, radio broadcasts 
etc.” 
 
5.20 In response to queries regarding the current status of linking ePoS devices 
with weighing machines across each State/UT, the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution in their written replies furnished information as under: 
 
“The current status of linking of e -PoS with weighing machines in each 
State/UT is as follows: 
 
 
 
 

41 
 
Status of e -PoS 
linking with the 
electronic weighing 
scale 
Number 
of States 
Name of States/UTs 
Fully integrated 8 Andhra Pradesh, Meghalaya, Odisha, 
Punjab, Rajasthan, Telangana, Uttar 
Pradesh, and West Bengal 
Partially integrated 3 Chhattisgarh (97.14%), Jharkhand 
(94.76%), Tamil Nadu (96.66%) 
Not Integrated 23 Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Delhi, Goa, 
Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, 
Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands, Ladakh, Assam, 
Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, 
Uttarakhand, DNH&DD, 
Lakshadweep, and Jammu and 
Kashmir 
Not Applicable 2 Chandigarh, Puducherry (The Act is 
being implemented in DBT Cash 
Mode) 
 
5.21 In their Annual Report for 2025 –26, the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution furnished information regarding the business model and viability of Fair 
Price Shops (FPSs): 
 
“Sale of Non-PDS items: To make operations of FPSs economically viable, 
Clause 9(9) of the TPDS (C) Order 2015 provides that State/U T Governments 
may allow FPS owners to enlarge basket of commodities by allowing the sale 
of non-PDS items for daily use as per local requirements at the fair price shop 
to improve the viability of FPS operations. 
 
Initiatives of DFPD on FPS transformation: FPS serves as a critical last -
mile delivery node for the PDS supply chain ecosystem ensuring delivery of 
food grains to beneficiaries. In order to motivate dealers, it has been the 
endeavor of the DFPD to improve the financial viability of Fair Price Shops 
(FPS) by providing additional business avenues to FPS dealers and 
enhancing beneficiary satisfaction through the provision of value -added 
services at FPS. Consequently, DFPD has requested all State/U T 
governments to implement the following additional services at the FPS: 
 
• Common Service Centre (CSC) services  
• Banking services through a tie-up with banks/ corporate BCs  
• Banking and citizen-centric services of India Post Payment Bank (IPPB)  
• Sale of other commodities/ general store items” 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
5.22 On being asked about grievance redressal mechanism s to address 
complaints related to PDS, the Department in their written replies furnished 
information as under:  
 
“Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) under National Food Security Act 
(NFSA), 2013 is operated under the joint responsibility of the Central and the 
State/Union Territory (UT) Governments. The operational responsibilities for 
allocation of foodgrains within the States/ UTs, identification of eligible 
beneficiaries, issuance of ration cards to them, distribution of foodgrains to 
eligible beneficiaries under TPDS, issuance of license to Fair Price Shop 
dealers, supervision over and monitoring of functioning of FPSs etc. rest with 
the concerned State/ UT Governments. 
  
Helpline number 1967/1800 -State series number is operational in all the 
States/ UTs for contacting and redressal of the complaints in Public 
Distribution System and filing any type of complaints/ grievances by the 
intended beneficiaries. As and when complaints/ grievances related to TPDS 
are received in this Department from any source, they are sent to State/ UT 
Governments concerned for inquiry and appropriate action.” 
  
 
5.23 The Annual Report 2025-26 of the Department of Food and Public Distribution 
states about the AI-enabled grievance redressal platform as under: 
 
“….the Department has developed Anna Sahayata, an AI -enabled grievance 
redressal platform designed to enhance transparency, accessibility and 
responsiveness in PDS grievance management. Beneficiaries can lodge 
complaints through WhatsApp chatbot (9868200445) in conversational mode or 
via IVRS (14457). The platform supports 12 regional languages, ensuring 
inclusive access and improved grievance resolution outcomes across the 
country.”  
 
5.24 On the issue of formation of Vigilance Committees at all levels and 
institutionalization of social audits in TPDS, the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution in their Annual Report 2025-26 furnished that:  
 
“(a) Vigilance committees: Vigilance committees have been in 
existence since the inception of the rationing system to ensure 
transparency and proper functioning of TPDS. Further, NFSA provides 
that Vigilance Committees shall supervise the implementation of all 
schemes under the Act. and inform the District Grievance Redressal 
Officer of any violation of the provisions of the Act as well as any 
malpractice or misappropriation of funds found by it. Every State 
Government is thus required to set Vigilance Committees at the State, 
District, Block and FPS levels consisting of such persons as may be 
prescribed by the State Government giving due representation to the 
local authorities, the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Women 
and Destitute Persons or Persons with Disability. 
 

43 
 
(i) The TPDS (Control) Order, 2015 stipulates that the meetings of the 
Committee shall be held at least once every quarter at all levels. The 
date and periodicity of the meeting would be notified by the State 
Governments. 
(ii) Clause 11(4) of the TPDS (C) Order, 2015 requires the State 
Governments to set up Vigilance Committees for the TPDS at the 
State, District, Block and fair price shop levels as per the provisions of 
the NFSA to perform functions as specified in the said Act. 
(iii) Clause 11(5) of the TPDS (C) Order, 2015 requires meetings of 
Vigilance Committees shall be held at least once in every quarter at all 
levels and the date and periodicity of the meeting shall be notified by 
the State Governments and given wide publicity. 
(iv) Clause 11(6) of the TPDS (C) Order, 2015 requires that the State 
Government shall send a report half yearly to the Central Government 
on the functioning of Vigilance Committees in the prescribed format. 
(v) Clause 11(7) of the TPDS (C) Order, 2015 requires that the number of 
meetings held by the Vigilance Committees shall be displayed on the 
State web portal and the action taken on issues discussed in meetings 
of vigilance committees shall be reviewed in the next meeting. 
 
(b) Social Audits: All States/UTs have been advised to consider 
adopting the guidelines on social audit of the Government of 
Chhattisgarh including eliciting views/grievances/suggestions from the 
public on certain important parameters related to the functioning of 
FPSs. States/UTs are also free to modify these guidelines or evolve 
their own mechanism to suit State specific requirements, for the 
conduct of social audits as per provisions under section 28 of NFSA 
and notify relevant Rules under Section 40(2)(i) of the Act.” 
 
5.25 The Committee observe that ONORC has been enabled in all 36 
States/UTs covering around 80 crore NFSA beneficiaries and that 173.98 crore 
portability transactions had already been recorded, while weekly monitoring, 
awareness campaigns, AI -enabled Anna Sahayata, vigilance committees and 
social audits are part of the accountability framework. The Committee note 
that the financial viability of FPSs is being supported through additional dealer 
margin of Rs. 21 per quintal for General Category States/UTs and Rs. 26 per 
quintal for Special Category States/UTs, along with permission to enlarge the 
basket of commodities and services. The Committee , therefore,  recommend 
that the Department should strengthen FPS viability and accountability 
simultaneously by expediting linkage of ePoS with weighing machines, 
improving grievance traceability, ensuring regular meetings of vigilance 
committees, public display of action taken reports and encouraging 
supplementary citizen-centric services at FPSs without diluting their core food 
security role. 
(Recommendation No. 9) 

44 
 
CHAPTER – VI 
 
 
DIRECT BENEFIT TRANSFER (DBT) 
 
 
Direct Benefit Transfer - Cash Transfers of Food Subsidy  
 
The National Food Security Act (2013) provides for reforms in the TPDS 
including schemes such as Cash transfers for the provisioning of food entitlements. 
In pursuance of enabling provisions under section 12 of NFSA for cash transfer, the 
Government notified ‘Cash transfer of Food Subsidy Rule, 2015’ in August 2015. 
Direct Cash transfer in food was started in UTs of Chandigarh and Puducherry from 
the month of September 2015 and part of Dadra & Nagar Haveli from March 2016. In 
these UTs, NFSA is being implemented in cash transfer mode under which the cash 
equivalent of subsidy is being transferred directly into the Bank accounts of eligible 
households to enable them to purchase food grains from the open market. 
  
 
6.2 To ensure that benefits reach genuinely deserving households across the 
country, the Department of Food and Public Distribution in their written replies stated 
that: 
“Government of India is giving thrust to Digital India to become a Digital Society 
wherein the lifeblood is Data.  In modern world, data is the key for transforming 
public policies and bringing transparency in entire ecosystem. Public 
distribution services (PDS) are generating large volume of data in real -time 
which remains inaccessible while most of such data may be non -sensitive in 
nature and could be used either by Department/Other Ministry or States/UTs, 
civil societies or by the industry/start -ups for scientific, economic and 
development purposes in the benefit of citizens & country. Generation of 
computerized data, online reports etc. has helped the Department of Food and 
Public Distribution (DFPD) to do a careful and systematic analysis which 
resulted in valuable insights into the quality of the implementation of different 
components of the scheme and also helps in identifying the areas for 
improvement. 
 
• To mitigate challenges & to monitor and analyse the real -time data for 
enhanced and up -to-date policy decisions, the technology driven PDS 
reforms in the country are now an immediate and ever important need of 
the day. Therefore, the Department of Food & Public Distribution (DFPD) 
has implemented data driven decision making through the data 
analytics/BI platforms and other ICT tools & technologies. 
• Rightful targeting under NFSA remains a priority to ensure benefits reach 
the truly deserving households in the country. The Government is 
committed to ensuring food security for all deserving beneficiaries while 
maintaining transparency, efficiency, and rightful targeting in NFSA 
implementation. 
• Accommodating additional beneficiaries under NFSA requires weeding out 
ineligible beneficiaries first so that new additions can be done within the 
ceiling limits given to states. 

45 
 
• To identify rightful targeting, the DFPD has initiated analysis of the PDS 
Beneficiaries data on different parameters such as Beneficiaries having 
Single Member AAY Ration cards, Members who are more than 100 years 
old, Single member RCs given to beneficiaries below 18 years old, 
Duplicate Beneficiaries and Beneficiaries in Silent Ration cards. 
• In addition to this, the DFPD has also initiated integration of PDS 
Beneficiaries data with different other Ministries to get their information 
such as status of existence (Deceased/alive), vehicle ownership, Income 
status, land ownership, Directorship in firms, and whether they own any 
business. The identified ministries for data integration are in line with the 
different Exclusion Criteria outlined in the PDS Control Orders of 
states/UTs that provides conditions for excluding beneficiaries from PDS.  
• During the data analysis, it is identified that 2.91 Crore Beneficiaries are 
found to be possibl y excluded. Such conditions termed as 'Red Flags' are 
given as under: 
 
Sr. No. Red Flags Suspect 
Beneficiaries  
1 Beneficiaries Above 100 Years of age  5,60,775 
2 Single Member RCs having Beneficiaries 
below 18 Years age 2,11,682 
3 Silent Ration Cards  2,20,00,768 
4 Duplicate Beneficiaries 30,06,911 
5 Deceased Beneficiaries as per Aadhaar 
Status 34,12,532 
 Total  2,91,92,668 
 
The DFPD is sharing this data with the respective states and UTs for 
verification through field investigations. Based on the findings, appropriate 
action may be taken against beneficiaries found to be ineligible. The 
responsibility lies with the states to identify and update eligible beneficiaries 
within the existing framework.”  
 
 
6.3 According to the Annual Report 2025 –26 of the Department of Food and 
Public Distribution, the statement indicating the subsidy released under the DBT 
scheme to the Union Territories of Chandigarh, Puducherry, and Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli is as follows:  
(Rs. in Crore) 
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
State 
2021-22 2022-23 2023-
24 
2024-
25 
2025-
26 
1. DBT* 186.87 187.24+0.66 267.6 222.278 220.52 
 
* Under DBT scheme, subsidy is released to UTs of Chandigarh, Puducherry 
and Dadra & Nagar Haveli w.e.f. 2015-16. 
 
 
 

46 
 
6.4 On being asked about the technology-driven reforms, the Department of Food 
and Public Distribution in their written replies furnished information as under:  
 
“The country’s Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) is governed by the 
provisions of National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) for the distribution of 
free/subsidized food grains to about 81 Crore population (as per Census 2011). 
Annually, more than 550 Lakh MT of food grains is being allocated by the 
Government of India for distribution to nearly 20 Crore ration card holders 
under NFSA through a network of around 5.43 Lakh Fair Price Shops (FPSs) 
supported by almost 9,000 Godowns/Depots/Intermediate godowns of 
States/UTs and FCI/CWC/SWCs spread all over the country. 
  
In the recent years, significant technology -driven reforms have been brought in 
the functioning of TPDS to bring transparency and efficiency in the end -to-end 
operations as summarized below: 
  
(a) All 20 crore ration cards covering more than 80 crore beneficiaries 
under NFSA have been completely digitized in all States/UTs; of these 
almost 99.8% ration cards and 98.9% beneficiaries are also Aadhaar 
seeded. 
(b) 5.41 Lakh (99.6%) of total 5.43 Lakh FPSs in the country are 
automated by installing electronic Point of Sale (e-PoS) devices. 
(c) Computerization of Supply Chain Management is implemented in 31 
out of 33 States/UTs except for two Union Territories of Chandigarh and 
Puducherry under DBT Cash transfers, and other UT of Lakshadweep. 
Its implementation in Arunachal Pradesh and Manipur is expected to be 
completed in the current year. 
(d) Online allocation of food grains up to FPS levels is implemented in all 
States/UTs except two Union Territories of Chandigarh and Puducherry 
which have adopted the Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT Cash transfers) 
scheme under NFSA. 
(e) Online grievance redressal mechanism/toll -free helplines and 
transparency portals are set up in all States/UTs. 
  
Presently, more than 98% of monthly allocated food grains to States/UTs are 
being distributed through biometric/Aadhaar authenticated electronic 
transactions and all the details pertaining to above PDS operations and 
distribution of food grains are available on Central and States/UTs web-portals.”  
 
 
6.5 On the issue of challenges/constraints faced by the Department such as 
ageing server infrastructure, software upgradation needs, integration challenges, the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution in their written replies submitted that:  
 
“The incumbent PDS system is serving its purpose well. However, there was an 
imminent need to modernize the PDS for the following reasons: 
 
• Technology architecture modernization:  However, with the advent of 
significant advancements in technology it was imperative to revisit the 
technology architecture of PDS 

47 
 
 
• Heterogeneous technology landscape:  Although end -to-end 
computerization of TPDS is completed and implemented across all 
States/UTs, the uneven and varied implementation of various applications 
developed under the Public Distribution System poses a significant 
challenge for the Centre and State Governments to further enhance and 
maintain these applications. Different versions of each module are 
developed at various levels in different technologies. State policies also 
differ, making component integration difficult. Replacing or modifying these 
applications is a challenging process, and collecting data from these 
unintegrated systems for central monitoring is a tedious task that needs 
immediate attention. This situation has also led to data duplication, defying 
the principle of data integrity 
 
• Hyper scaling and Capacity on demand:  Introducing hyper scaling 
capabilities, to achieve elasticity in infrastructure provisioning as per surge 
in usage 
 
• Cyber Security:  Increasing the cyber security resilience to meet the 
contemporary cyber threats. Cyber -attacks are becoming more 
sophisticated, with hackers targeting sensitive data such as personal, 
financial, and proprietary information. A strong cybersecurity framework 
helps protect citizen data from data breaches, financial theft, and identity 
fraud. Further, data breaches lead to significant reputation damage. 
Therefore, in order to uphold the trust of citizens, comply with prevalent 
regulations and protect sensitive information a strong Cyber security 
framework should be created. 
 
• Business Continuity:  Enhancing the business continuity through 
improved Backups and Disaster Recovery implementation and 
optimization in usage of infrastructure through data archival 
 
• Data analytics: With the growth in voluminous data, extensive analytical 
dashboards can be provided to aid decision making “ 
 
  
6.6 The Committee note that cash transfer of food subsidy under the NFSA 
framework has been in operation in the UTs of Chandigarh and Puducherry 
since September, 2015 and in part of Dadra & Nagar Haveli since March, 2016. 
The TPDS ecosystem presently covers about 81 crore population through 
around 20 crore ration cards, 5.43 lakh FPSs and more than 550 lakh MT 
annual foodgrain allocation and that the DBT component continues to coexist 
with extensive in -kind distribution reforms. The Committee recommend that 
the Department should undertake a structured and periodic comparative 
assessment of the DBT cash transfer model in these UTs vis -a-vis physical 
distribution on parameters such as beneficiary convenience, adequacy and 
timeliness of subsidy, grievance levels, transparency and exclusion risks, 
before contemplating any wider replication of the DBT model.  The Committee 
may also be apprised of the outcome of such study. 
(Recommendation No. 10) 

48 
 
 
6.7 The Committee observe that data -driven rightful targeting remains 
central to the efficient delivery of subsidy and that 2.91 crore beneficiaries 
have been flagged as possible exclusions on account of silent ration cards, 
duplicates, deceased persons and other anomalies. The Department ha ve 
initiated integration of PDS data with other Ministries relating to existence 
status, vehicle ownership, income, land ownership, directorship and business 
ownership for verification in line with State/UT exclusion criteria. The 
Committee, therefore,  desire that the Department should complete this 
exercise in close coordination with States/UTs and use verified deletions to 
accommodate eligible beneficiaries within the existing ceiling, while ensuring 
robust safeguards against arbitrary deletion and preserving continuity of 
benefits for all genuinely entitled households. 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
 
Central Bank Digital Currency – Digital Food Coupons 
 
6.8 Under the Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana (PMGKAY), free foodgrains 
are being provided to approximately 80 crore beneficiaries across the country, with an 
annual subsidy outlay of about ₹2.4 lakh crore. The Department of Food & Public 
Distribution (DFPD), as the nodal Ministry for implementation of PMGKAY , has examined 
the potential of Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) with a view to further enhancing 
transparency, strengthening beneficiary empowerment, and improving efficiency in 
foodgrain distribution under the Scheme. The use of programmable CBDC tokens offers 
significant promise as a transformative instrument for subsidy delivery by enabling 
precise targeting of beneficiaries, ensuring scheme-specific utilization, and minimizing 
the risks of diversion or misuse. The Section -12 of the NFSA talks about reforms of 
introducing schemes, such as, cash transfer, food coupons, or other schemes, to the 
targeted beneficiaries in order to ensure their foodgrain entitlements specified in Chapter 
II, in such area and manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
 
The Budget provided for the Food subsidy under PMGKAY will be utilized for the 
pilot of Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) in the Public Distribution System (PDS). 
 
The digital rupee or e -rupee is a tokenised digital version of the Indian rupee, 
issued by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) as a Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC). 
The introduction of Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC – Digital Rupee) offers an 
opportunity to enhance the DBT ecosystem by providing a secure, instant, traceable, and 
programmable digital cash mechanism for PMGKAY beneficiaries, thereby enabling 
smoother fund flow and reducing friction in availing entitlements. Use of CBDC in food 
subsidy delivery offers the following advantages: 
 
• Transparency/auditability: Beneficiaries will be able to access clear information 
regarding their monthly entitlement, the quantity of foodgrains allocated, the 
subsidy value extended by the Government, the quantity lifted, and the balance 
due. 
• Convenience boost: The system will minimize transaction delays and improving 
ease of access. 

49 
 
• Purpose-bound usage: Subsidy spendable only on foodgrains at authorized FPSs 
or empaneled grocery stores (DBT). 
• Beneficiary empowerment: By providing full visibility of entitlements and 
transactions, the initiative reinforces the rights of beneficiaries and enables them 
to claim their foodgrain entitlement with confidence and dignity. 
• Leakage reduction: FPS allocation next month based on redeemed CBDC 
tokens; ensures foodgrain-only redemption. 
• Token programmability: Conditions/restrictions on usage; set validity for monthly 
distribution. 
• Instant transfers: Direct subsidy crediting, bypassing NEFT/RTGS/IMPS. 
 
6.9 The Department shared information about the implementation of CBDC and 
future roadmaps as under: 
 
“The Food, Civil Supplies, and Consumer Affairs Department, Gujarat has 
implemented the CBDC pilot project from 15th February, 2026 in the Sabarmati 
zone of Ahmedabad city as well as in five fair price shops each in the urban areas 
of Surat, Anand, and Valsad districts. Direct Cash Transfer in food was started in 
UTs of Chandigarh and Puducherry from the month of September 2015 and 
urban part of Dadra & Nagar Haveli from March, 2016. This Department is 
planning to launch CBDC pilot project in Puducherry, DNH & DD and Chandigarh 
by providing subsidy amount in the form of CBDC token instead of transferring 
money into their bank account. 
 
After successful rollout of CBDC in foodgrain distribution and DBT , real time 
transaction data will be available for monitoring the CBDC implementation and 
performing the predictive analysis.” 
 
 
6.10 The Committee note that under the Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna 
Yojana (PMGKAY), foodgrains are being provided free of cost to nearly 80 
crore beneficiaries, involving a substantial annual subsidy outlay of about ₹2.4 
lakh crore. The Committee appreciate the initiative of the Department of Food 
& Public Distribution to pilot the use of Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC – 
Digital Rupee) as a mechanism for subsidy delivery in the Public Distribution 
System (PDS). The Committee observe that the programmable nature of CBDC 
tokens has significant potential to enhance transparency, improve targeting 
and reduce leakages in the distribution of food subsidies. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to expedite the phased expansion of the 
CBDC pilot, leveraging its features of instant transfers, auditability and 
restricted usage to improve efficiency in subsidy delivery. The Committee also 
emphasize the need to utilize real -time transaction data for monitoring and 
predictive analysis to ensure a more targeted, transparent and efficient 
foodgrain distribution system under PMGKAY. 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
 
 
 
 

50 
 
Chapter – VII 
 
PDS in States: A Case Study 
 
Opening Analysis 
 
The Department of Food and Public Distribution in their Annual Report 2025 –
26 stated that TPDS is presently operated under the joint responsibility of the Central 
and the State Governments, where the Central Government has assumed the 
responsibility for procurement, storage, transportation and allocation of foodgrains to 
all States/UTs. The operational responsibility of allocation of foodgrains within 
State/UT, identification of eligible families under NFSA, issuance of ration cards, 
distribution of foodgrains through Fair Price Shop (FPS) and licensing and 
monitoring of FPSs, etc. rests with the respective State/ UT Governments. Under 
PDS, foodgrains, namely, Rice, Wheat and Coarse -grains are being distributed to 
eligible households. Some States/UTs also distribute additional items of mass 
consumption through the PDS outlets such as sugar, pulses, edible oil, iodized salt, 
spices, etc. 
 
7.2 The eligibility criteria for coverage under TPDS are such that vulnerable 
groups like beggars, female domestic workers, ragpickers, sanitation workers etc. 
get covered. The Department has issued instructions to States/UTs from time to time 
to make special efforts to ensure the identification and inclusion of the extremely 
poor and needy households under NFSA. Ration card deletion during annual 
verification drives, deletion of duplicate ration cards under TPDS by many 
States/UTs under PDS reforms including computerization, which provides scope for 
issuance of new ration cards to such left out genuine beneficiaries. All States/UTs 
were requested to ensure that all left -out and genuinely deserving people belonging 
to weaker sections are covered under NFSA from time to time. 
 
7.3 The development and deployment of SMART -PDS application was taken up 
by the NIC. The development of project started in October, 2024 is expected to 
rollout in phases across States and UTs from April, 2025 and will be fully deployed by 
31st October, 2025.  
 
Bihar, Meghalaya, Telangana, Tamil Nadu and Kerala have made 
commendable progress in digitising beneficiary records, rolling out EPOS devices 
and integrating supply chain and grievance redressal systems. At the same time, 
issues such as biometric authentication failures, connectivity issues in rural areas 
and pending grievances continue to require attention. 
 
Bihar - A Case Study 
 
Achievements 
7.4 The Government of Bihar, in its written replies regarding the PDS system in 
the state, submitted as follows:  
“The Government of Bihar is actively working to modernize the Public Distribution 
System (PDS) with a strong focus on strengthening its technical database to 
ensure more transparent, efficient, and accountable service delivery. 
 

51 
 
Over the years, key digital reforms have been implemented such as: 
 
➢ 100% digitization of ration cards has been achieved  with over 98% of 
beneficiaries data being  Aadhaar-seeded and approximately 80% of 
beneficiaries have completed their e-KYC. 
➢ e-PoS devices along with iris scanner  has been installed in all Fair Price 
Shops (FPS) to enable real -time biometric authentication and distribution  
of ration. 
➢ Online monitoring systems such as Ration Card Management System 
(RCMS), FPS Dashboards  and stock details ar e currently operational  in 
the department with the help of NIC Patna and NIC Hyderabad thus 
enabling overall transparency in the system. 
➢ The One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) system is now fully functional 
across Bihar. Thanks to this initiative, nearly 3 lakh migrant labourers from 
Bihar living in other states are able to access their foodgrain entitlements 
without any disruption. Likewise, around 9,000 ration card holders from 
outside Bihar are successfully drawing their ration from Fair Price Shops 
within the state. 
 
In October 2024, NIC initiated the development of the SMART -PDS 
platform — a next -generation integrated system aimed at unifying Public 
Distribution System (PDS) operations across the country. Bihar is actively 
preparing for its phased rollout , with full implementation targeted by 31st 
October 2025. 
 
Currently, Bihar has successfully implemented and rolled out the SMART-PDS 
modules for the e -PoS/AePDS (Aadhaar Enabled Public Distribution System) 
Portal and the IAeSCM (Integrated Aadhaar -enabled Supply Chain 
Management) Portal. The state has already developed and implemented its 
own online systems for RCMS, FPSMS and the Procurement module since 
2015. The State is also working closely with NIC to align other key modules, 
including RCMS (Ration Card Management System), FPSMS (Fair Price 
Shop Management System), and the Procurement Module. 
 
A demonstration of these three modules was recently provided by NIC Delhi. 
Following this, the department suggested several major modifications and 
formally requested NIC Delhi and the Department of Food & Public 
Distribution (DOFPD) to share a web link to enable User Acceptance Testing 
(UAT) at the field level after the suggested changes are incorporated. 
 
Bihar remains committed to using technology to make PDS more transparent 
and accessible for all eligible families, while ensuring data security, real -time 
monitoring, and better targeting of beneficiaries.” 
 
7.5 On being asked about the current status of linking of ePoS system with 
weighing machines in the State of Bihar, the State furnished in their written replies as 
under: 
 
“In Bihar, pilot testing for the integration of the Electronic Weighing Scale 
(EWS) with ePoS devices  has been successfully conducted at 2 Fair Price 

52 
 
Shops (FPS) . For statewide implementation, a tender for EWS procurement 
has already been floated , and the vendor selection process is currently 
underway. It is expected that the selection of a suitable vendor will be finalized 
by September 2025.” 
 
7.6 During the evidence held on 19.09.2025, the representative of the Department 
of Food and Public Distribution briefed the Committee about route optimization under 
Anna Chakra: 
 
“The objective is to optimise PDS supply chain for cost -efficiency, sustainability 
and better service delivery. We would also like to reduce the inefficiencies in 
transportation, inventory management and resource use.  So, our final aim is to 
make sure that the grain has to travel the least from the point of procurement till 
distribution. The technology approach is that we use operational research and 
data science for route optimisation, as the Secretary Sir has already said, and 
advance module. We are aligning it to supply -demand points. We tag 
warehouse capacity with storage needs.  The achievement we have made so 
far is that we have saved approximately Rs. 250 crore annual transportation 
cost.  We have already realized Rs. 238 crore saving in only 18 States.  There 
is 15 to 50 per cent reduction in the travel distance.  There is 30 per cent 
reduction in carbon emission.  Th is is a zero capital expenditure model.  The 
impact is that now we are having a faster delivery and reduced delays to FPS.  
There is lower fuel consumption and reduced post -harvest losses and better 
grain rotation through optimized warehouse use.  We have done stakeholder 
capacity building for which we have provided training to all the State 
Government officials involved in it.  There are cloud -based decision support 
tools for sustainable operation.  
 
All the five States which are present today, this is the Statistics which relate 
to them.  This shows the total supply chain routes we are having and the 
suggested change in the routes that we have made using Anna Chakra.  You 
can see the acceptance of optimised routes.  It is almost 100 per cent in Bihar.  
In Meghalaya, it is 70.64 per cent.  In Telangana, it is 97 per cent.  In Tamil 
Nadu, it is 20 per cent.  In Kerala, it is not there.  Coming to the annual savings, 
you can see that the maximum savings out of the five States is in Bihar where 
we have saved Rs.136.64 crore.  The average distance of quantity moved 
before optimization was approximately 25.77 km. in Bihar which has come 
down to 16.88 km.  In case of Meghalaya, from 29 km. we have come down to 
26 km.  In Telangana, we have come down from 69.57 km. to 59 km.  In case of 
Tamil Nadu, it has gone down from 31.86 km. to 23.89 km.  So, we have almost 
34 per cent saving in terms of distance or the km. travelled in Bihar.” 
 
Problems and Constraints 
 
7.7 On being asked about the problems/challenges being faced by the State in 
functioning of ePoS machines, the Government of Bihar in their written replies 
submitted that: 
 
“Bihar has taken major strides in modernising the Public Distribution System 
(PDS) by implementing electronic Point of Sale (ePoS)  devices across all Fair 

53 
 
Price Shops (FPSs). These devices have helped bring greater transparency, 
reduce pilferage, and ensure rightful delivery of foodgrains. However, the field -
level implementation has highlighted several practical challenges, which the State 
is actively addressing through targeted interventions. 
 
➢ Biometric Authentication Failures: - A section of beneficiaries, particularly 
senior citizens and manual laborers, face issues with fingerprint 
authentication due to faded or damaged fingerprints. 
➢ Poor Network Connectivity: - Several FPSs in remote areas suffer from 
poor internet connectivity, which affects real -time Aadhaar authentication 
and transaction syncing. 
➢ Hardware Issues: - Due to dust and regular wear and tear, some ePoS 
machines experience technical failures. 
➢ Inadequate Digital Literacy of FPS Dealers: - Some FPS dealers, 
especially older individuals and those in remote areas, struggle to operate 
digital devices or handle transaction errors. 
 
While the implementation of ePoS machines has significantly strengthened 
transparency in Bihar’s PDS, the ground realities demand constant innovation 
and field-level feedback. The State is proactively engaging with stakeholders, 
adopting flexible models and ensuring that no genuine beneficiary is denied 
access due to technical or infrastructural limitations.” 
 
7.8 The Government of Bihar, in its written submission provided information 
regarding the internal grievance redressal mechanism to address complaints related 
to the PDS in the state: 
 
“The Department has established a 24×7Toll-Free Helpline (1967 / 1800 -3456-
194) at the BSFC Headquarters  to strengthen the grievance redressal 
mechanism under the PDS. Through this call center, beneficiaries can lodge 
complaints anytime , which are then registered and updated on the Grievance 
Portal in real time. 
 
Upon registration, the complaint is automatically forwarded to the concerned 
officials via their login on the Grievance Portal. After necessary action is taken, 
the status of the complaint is updated by the concerned official  on the same 
portal, ensuring timely resolution and transparent closure of grievances. 
 
CPGRAMS (Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System) 
 
➢ Complaints received through CPGRAMS are forwarded to the 
respective district and resolved within defined timelines, under the 
supervision of senior officials. 
 
This system ensures continuous monitoring, accountability, and improved citizen 
satisfaction in PDS service delivery. 
 
In the state of Bihar, a total of 9,323 grievances related to the Public Distribution 
System (PDS) were registered over the last three financial years. Out of these, 
7,889 grievances have been resolved , while 1,434 grievances remain pending . 

54 
 
Specifically, during the financial year 2022, 689 grievances  were registered, of 
which 394 were resolved . In 2023, 3,741 grievances were registered with 3170 
resolved and in 2024, 4893 grievances were registered, with 4325 resolved. The 
department is continuously working to strengthen the grievance redressal 
mechanism to ensure faster and more effective resolution of complaints.” 
 
 
Meghalaya - A Case Study 
 
Achievements 
 
7.9 The Government of Meghalaya, in its written replies regarding the PDS 
system in the state, submitted as follows:  
 
“The Government of Meghalaya signed a Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) with the Department of Food and Public Distribution, Government of 
India, on 16 September 2023 for the implementation of the Scheme for 
Modernization and Reform through Technology in the Public Distribution 
System (SMART -PDS) for the period 2023 to 2026. Pursuant to this 
agreement, the State has transitioned from the earlier ration card 
management system to the SMART -PDS platform developed by the National 
Informatics Centre (NIC). 
 
The SMART -PDS initiative marks a significant technological reform in the 
Public Distribution System, aiming to enhance transparency, efficiency, and 
beneficiary convenience. While the platform has been introduced in the State, 
it is presently functioning in a transitional phase, with several critical modules 
and features required for seamless operation still under development or 
pending customization as per the State’s requirements. These requirements 
have already been conveyed to NIC, and continuous follow -ups are being 
undertaken to expedite the process. 
 
It is submitted that full-scale implementation of the SMART-PDS platform, with 
all required features and modules, is targeted for completion by 31 st October 
2025. The State Government remains committed to achieving this timeline 
and ensuring that the transition to SMART -PDS leads to improved 
transparency, accountability, and beneficiary satisfaction across the Public 
Distribution System in Meghalaya.” 
 
 
7.10 While sharing experience on introduction of new technological intervention in 
Public Distribution System in the State, the Government of Meghalaya in their written 
submission furnished that: 
 
“Meghalaya, owing to its unique topography as a small hilly state with extensive 
international borders and diverse terrains, faces specific logistical and 
operational challenges in implementing new technological interventions within 
the Public Distribution System (PDS). Nevertheless, the Government of 

55 
 
Meghalaya remains committed to leveraging technology to enhance 
transparency, efficiency, and service delivery in the PDS. 
 
Recognising these challenges, the State has progressively adopted several 
technological initiatives, such as the deployment of electronic Point of Sale 
(ePOS) devices, installation of electronic weighing scales across Fair Price 
Shops, and the organisation of Information, Education and Communication 
(IEC) programmes for mass awareness. In addition, consultative meetings, 
workshops and hands -on training sessions have been conducted at both 
ministerial and administrative levels, particularly with PDS wholesalers and Fair 
Price Shop dealers, to ensure clarity and the smooth implementation of these 
measures. 
 
A notable example includes the Route Optimisation exercise, which was 
diligently introduced through collaborative discussions and capacity building, 
addressing initial concerns and fostering a greater understanding amongst 
stakeholders. Similarly, comprehensive training has accompanied the rollout of 
ePOS devices and electronic weighing scales in every Fair Price Shop across 
the State. 
 
To further strengthen accountability and logistics monitoring, the Vehicle 
Location Tracking System (VLTS) has been piloted successfully in the West 
Garo Hills and West Jaintia Hills districts. Buoyed by the positive feedback, the 
Government has resolved to extend the VLTS and Route Optimisation 
programme to all districts within the coming two to three months. It is also 
pertinent to mention the valuable technical assistance received from the United 
Nations World Food Programme, which has partnered with the State 
Government in supporting these crucial interventions. 
 
The Government of Meghalaya remains resolute in its commitment to 
strengthen the PDS for all citizens through such technological advancements, 
whilst being sensitive to the ground realities and addressing operational 
challenges in a consultative and inclusive manner. Ongoing stakeholder 
engagement and capacity building shall continue to be the cornerstones of our 
approach as we progress in this direction.” 
 
 
7.11 On being asked about the current status of linking of e -PoS system with 
weighing machines in the State, the Government of Meghalaya furnished information 
as under: 
 
 “All Fair Price Shops in Meghalaya have successfully integrated the electronic 
Point of Sale (ePoS) system with electronic weighing scales with effect from 
June 2024. This seamless linkage across the state has been enabled through 
funding from the State Government. This step marks a further advancement in 
promoting accuracy, transparency and accountability within the Public 
Distribution System, whilst reinforcing the State’s commitment to sustainable 
technological improvements benefiting all citizens. 

56 
 
The State has a total of 4743 Fair Price Shop installed with ePOS devices, out 
of which 4742 shops are linked with weighing machines and 1 Fair Price Shop 
is linked to the Annapurti Grain ATM.” 
 
7.12 During the evidence held on 19.09.2025, the representative of the Department 
of Food and Public Distribution briefed the Committee about acceptance of optimised 
routes under Anna Chakra and reduction in average route distance as under:  
 
“……  You can see the acceptance of optimised routes.  It is almost 100 per 
cent in Bihar.  In Meghalaya, it is 70.64 per cent.  …………….  Coming to the 
annual savings, you can see that the maximum savings out of the five States is 
in Bihar where we have saved Rs.136.64 crore.  The average distance of 
quantity moved before optimization was approximately 25.77 km. in Bihar which 
has come down to 16.88 km.  In case of Meghalaya, from 29 km. we have 
come down to 26 km.”   
 
Problems and Constraints 
 
7.13 In their written replies, the Government of Meghalaya furnished information 
about the problem faced in connection with implementation of PDS as under: 
 
“At present, the State faces certain operational challenges which include the 
absence of comprehensive reporting and monitoring tools, difficulties in 
updating and managing ration cardholder details, incomplete modules relating 
to Fair Price Shop management, and duplication or inaccuracy in certain data 
entries such as village names. In addition, there are issues relating to 
premature availability of ration card downloads before proper approval, limited 
verification features for field officers, and non -functional face -based eKYC 
verification for new applicants. These gaps have affected the efficiency of 
service delivery and monitoring at the ground level. 
 
The Government of Meghalaya has taken several steps to address these 
challenges. Close coordination with NIC is being maintained through regular 
review meetings, both at the State and Central levels, to prioritize pending 
customizations and resolve field -level issues. The State is also undertaking 
systematic data verification and cleanup to remove duplicate or incorrect 
entries and to ensure accuracy of beneficiary records. Further, capacity 
building initiatives are planned for Fair Price Shop dealers and field 
functionaries to familiarize them with the new system and improve operational 
efficiency.” 
 
7.14 On being asked about the status of Aadhaar Seeding of Ration Card, the 
Government of Meghalaya in their written replies furnished as under: 
 
“It is respectfully submitted that Aadhaar seeding of Ration Cards has achieved 
99% coverage across all States and Union Territories as of 2025. However, in 
the case of Meghalaya, Aadhaar seeding stood at 73% as on 30th April 2025. 
 

57 
 
In pursuance of the Government of India’s directive vide DO letter No. 9 -
2/2016-PD.II (364004) dated 20th March 2025, which clearly states that no 
further extension beyond 30th June 2025 will be granted for the completion of 
Aadhaar seeding and e -KYC formalities , the State Government has taken 
urgent steps to ensure compliance. 
 
To meet the deadline, the Government of Meghalaya launched a Mission Mode 
Project (MMP), under which weekly reviews are being held at District, Sub -
Divisional, and Block levels. This initiative ensures strong coordination among 
key stakeholders, including: 
 
District and Sub-Divisional Supply Officers 
Block Development Officers (BDOs) 
Aadhaar Enrollment Operators 
UIDAI Representatives 
Local Administration and Fair Price Shop (FPS) Owners 
 
The project is being implemented through a structured field -level action plan, 
supported by comprehensive Information, Education, and Communication (IEC) 
campaigns aimed at increasing public participation and awareness. 
 
Extensive awareness drives have been conducted by Supply Department 
officials at the district and block levels, primarily targeting FPS dealers and 
wholesalers. These sessions focused on key elements such as eKYC 
procedures, Aadhaar authentication, and the use of electronic Point of Sale 
(ePoS) devices.” 
  
 
7.15 Further on the issue of problems/challenges being faced by the State in 
functioning of e -PoS machines, the Government of Meghalaya furnished information 
as under: 
 
“The State faces significant challenges in the optimal functioning of its ePOS 
machines, primarily stemming from three key areas: 
 
• Unstable Network Connectivity:  Persistent and fluctuating network 
issues present a major hurdle, particularly during the crucial 
authentication phase. This instability frequently leads to "Error 300 - 
Biometric Mismatch" complaints from Fair Price Shop dealers, 
disrupting service and frustrating beneficiaries. 
• Irregular Power Supply:  Electricity scarcity remains a substantial 
obstacle, especially in remote and border areas. Many shops in these 
regions experience little to no power, making consistent operation of 
the ePOS devices exceedingly difficult and impacting service delivery. 
• Biometric Authentication Difficulties:  The reliance on fingerprint 
scanners for biometric authentication poses a significant challenge for 
certain beneficiary groups. Individuals engaged in manual labour or 
farming often have worn or obscured fingerprints, leading to frequent 
authentication failures and preventing them from accessing their 
entitlements efficiently. 

58 
 
 
It is also to be noted that the Districts have been instructed to submit a 
report on the Shadow Area of all the areas under their district with network 
issue.” 
 
Telangana - A Case Study 
 
Achievements 
 
7.16 About the PDS System in the State, the Government of Telangana in their 
written replies furnished information as under:  
 
“SMART-PDS is an initiative by the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution (DoFPD), Government of India to move towards a modern, 
intelligent, and data -driven PDS system. It is an advanced version of earlier 
reforms like End -to-End Computerization and IM -PDS, designed to integrate 
technology, transparency, and efficiency at every level of the food distribution 
network. 
 
Component Description 
Unified National PDS 
Interface 
Open APIs and interoperable systems allowing 
integration with state -specific platforms, IM-PDS, 
and ONORC. 
Cloud-based Data 
Architecture 
Centralized data storage for transaction data, 
beneficiary records, and analytics using NIC 
Cloud/MeghRaj. 
Real-Time Dashboards 
& Analytics 
Use of data analytics and dashboards for real -
time monitoring of transactions, allocations and 
performance. 
Automated Supply 
Chain Management 
End-to-end tracking of food grain movement by 
using GPS. 
Data Security & 
Privacy 
End-to-end encryption, access control, and 
compliance with data privacy guidelines (e.g., 
Aadhaar masking). 
Grievance Redressal 
Integration 
Seamless grievance logging and resolution 
through portals, apps and call centers —linked to 
Aadhaar/ration card. 
AI/ML-based 
Beneficiary Targeting 
AI tools for identifying duplicate / ineligible 
beneficiaries, predicting demand and improving 
targeting accuracy. 
“ 
 
7.17 While sharing experience on introduction of new technological intervention in 
Public Distribution System in the State, the Government of Telangana submitted as 
under: 
 
“The introduction of new technological interventions in the Public Distribution 
System (PDS) has marked a significant shift towards improved transparency, 

59 
 
accountability, and efficiency in food grain distribution across the country. The 
experience with this transformation, particularly through the implementation of 
end-to-end computerization and Aadhaar -enabled Public Distribution System 
(AePDS), has been both insightful and transformative. 
 
Key Interventions Introduced: 
 
Digitization of Ration Cards (ePDS): 
All ration cards were digitized and seeded with Aadhaar to eliminate bogus or 
duplicate beneficiaries. 
 
Electronic Point of Sale (ePoS) Devices: 
These were installed at Fair Price Shops (FPS) to ensure biometric/Iris/OTP 
authentication of beneficiaries and real-time data capture of transactions. 
 
Online Allocation and Supply Cain Management: 
Stock movement from godowns to MLS Points and from MLS Points to FPS 
was tracked online, improving transparency and reducing leakages. 
 
Grievance Redressal Mechanisms: 
 Integrated with online portals and mobile apps to enable citizens to report 
issues and receive timely responses.” 
 
 
7.18 On the status of implementation of SMART -PDS in the state to introduce the 
major technological reforms and strengthen the technology infrastructure in PDS, the 
Government of Telangana in their written replies furnished information as under: 
 
“The Ministry of Food and Public Distribution (DoF&PD), Government of India, 
launched the Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) – SMART-PDS for the period 
from April 2023 to March 2026, with a 60:40 cost -sharing model between the 
Centre and the States/UTs. 
 
Key Technological Interventions and Implementation Milestones include: 
 
1. ePoS System Rollout 
 
• Pilot Phase: Implemented in Narayanpet district from February 2025. 
• Full Rollout: State-wide implementation began from June 2025. 
 
2. Supply Chain Management (SCM) 
 
• SCM application rollout is planned from October 2025. 
 
3. RCMS, FPS Automation, and Procurement Modules 
 
• These modules are currently in the User Acceptance Testing (UAT) phase. 
• Once operational, these will support comprehensive digitization of ration 
card management, FPS operations, and procurement processes. 
 

60 
 
4. Integration with Central Portals 
 
• Anna Sahayata, Mera Ration, and Anna Mitra portals have been successfully 
integrated with data being consumed on a regular basis. 
• These integrations allow for better portability, real -time grievance redressal, 
and enhanced service delivery to beneficiaries. 
 
Rightful Targeting of Beneficiaries 
 
As a part of the efforts under SMART-PDS, Telangana has actively pursued 
data-driven strategies for rightful targeting of PDS beneficiaries: 
 
Phase I: 
• 1,62,773 suspect beneficiaries were reviewed. 
• 81,604 were confirmed ineligible. 
• 78,162 units were already removed from the RCMS database. 
 
Phase II (Incremental): 
• 3,26,203 beneficiaries have been flagged as suspect. 
• Field verification is currently in progress to validate eligibility. 
These initiatives are critical for removing ineligible or duplicate beneficiaries 
and ensuring that subsidies reach the truly deserving population.” 
 
 
7.19 During the evidence held on 19.09.2025, the representative of the Department 
of Food and Public Distribution briefed the Committee about acceptance of optimised 
routes under Anna Chakra and reduction in average route distance as under:  
 
“The objective is to optimise PDS supply chain for cost -efficiency, sustainability 
and better service delivery. We would also like to reduce the inefficiencies in 
transportation, inventory management and resource use.  So, our final aim is to 
make sure that the grain has to travel the least from the point of procurement till 
distribution.  The technology approach is that we use operational research and 
data science for route optimization ……….. There is 30 per cent reduction in 
carbon emission.  There is zero capital expenditure model.  The impact is that 
now we are having a faster delivery and reduced delays to FPS.  There is lower 
fuel consumption and reduced post -harvest losses and better grain rotation 
through optimized warehouse use.   
 
……..  You can see the acceptance of optimised routes.  It is almost 100 per 
cent in Bihar.  In Meghalaya, it is 70.64 per cent.  In Telangana, it is 97 per cent.  
……  The average distance of quantity moved before optimization was 
approximately 25.77 km. in Bihar which has come down to 16.88 km.  In case 
of Meghalaya, from 29 km. we have come down to 26 km.  In Telangana, we 
have come down from 69.57 km. to 59 km.”   
 
 
 
 

61 
 
Problems and Constraints 
 
7.20 On the issue of problems/challenges being faced by the State in functioning of 
e-PoS machines, the Government of Telangana furnished information as under: 
 
“Poor and Unreliable Internet Connectivity 
 
• A minimum number of Fair Price Shops (FPSs) face connectivity issues due 
to poor or unreliable internet access, particularly in remote or rural areas. 
 
• As a result, 80 FPSs in the State are currently operating in offline mode. In 
these shops, distribution of commodities is being carried out without biometric 
authentication. However, these FP Shops transaction are being captured and 
uploaded at nearby Internet available places. 
 
Biometric Authentication Failures 
 
• Biometric authentication failures remain a persistent challenge, especially 
among elderly beneficiaries, manual labourers, or those with wrong fingerprints. 
 
• To address this, the list of authentication failures is regularly received from 
UIDAI and is being shared with the respective districts to initiate corrective 
actions, including updating and re -collection of biometric data from affected 
beneficiaries.” 
 
 
Tamil Nadu - A Case Study 
 
Achievements 
 
7.21 About the PDS System in the State, the Government of Tamil Nadu in their 
written replies furnished information as under:  
 
“Scheme for Modernization And Reforms through Technology in Public 
Distribution System (SMART - PDS) 
 
➢ Scheme Type –Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
➢ Implementation Period – April 2023 to March 2026 (3 years) 
➢ Cost Sharing Pattern – 60:40 – Centre: State share 
➢ Status of Developed Modules: 
• RCMS & FPS Module 
• Supply chain & Allocation Module 
• Distribution Module 
 
➢ SMART PDS MoU signed on 24th April 2025 by Government of Tamil 
Nadu for the implementation of SMART -PDS in Tamil Nadu for the NFSA 
Beneficiaries. 
➢ MoU for Aadhaar authentication to be signed between the Government of 
Tamil Nadu & NIC is in-process. 

62 
 
➢ MoU for Advanced Grievance Redressal System (Anna Sahayata  app – 
IVRS & WhatsApp) to be signed between the Government of Tamil Nadu & 
Government of India. 
➢ Shared data of 2 districts (Karur & Kanchipuram) for Pilot implementation. 
The Pilot rollout of the 2 districts is awaited.” 
 
 
7.22 While sharing experience on introduction of new technological intervention in 
Public Distribution System in the State, the Government of Tamil Nadu submitted as 
under: 
• “Multilanguage support 
• Real-time notifications 
• OTP based login 
• Real-time grievance lodging & tracking 
• Ration card modification options 
• Official inspections, feedback, and rating modules 
• Streamlined field operations, stock tracking 
• Reduce bottlenecks & manual paper works 
• Improved & guided decision-making with real-time data 
• Brings all stakeholders onto one secure platform 
• Data purification and overcome of duplicates 
• Data analytics  
• Identification of eligible beneficiaries” 
 
 
7.23 On being asked about the current status of linking of e -PoS system with 
weighing machines in the State, the Government of Tamil Nadu in their written replies 
furnished information as under: 
 
“There are a total of 34,807 FPS running with ePoS  in Tamil Nadu (as on Sep’ 
2025) in which 34,612e -PoS devices has been integrated with weighing 
machines, which is 99.4%. Necessary steps are being taken to integrate the 
remaining 195 e-PoS devices with weighing machines.” 
 
 
7.24 During the evidence held on 19.09.2025, the representative of the Department 
of Food and Public Distribution briefed the Committee about acceptance of optimised 
routes under Anna Chakra and reduction in average route distance as under:  
 
“The objective is to optimise PDS supply chain for cost -efficiency, sustainability 
and better service delivery. We would also like to reduce the inefficiencies in 
transportation, inventory management and resource use.  So, our final aim is to 
make sure that the grain has to travel the least from the point of procurement till 
distribution.  The technology approach is that we use operational research and 
data science for route optimization ……….. There is 30 per cent reduction in 
carbon emission.  There is zero capital expenditure model.  The impact is that 
now we are having a faster delivery and reduced delays to FPS.  There is lower 
fuel consumption and reduced post -harvest losses and better grain rotation 
through optimized warehouse use.   

63 
 
You can see the acceptance of optimised routes.  It is almost 100 per cent in 
Bihar.  ………… In Tamil Nadu, it is 20 per cent.  In Kerala, it is not there.  
Coming to the annual savings, you can see that the maximum savings out of 
the five States is in Bihar where we have saved Rs.136.64 crore.  The average 
distance of quantity moved before optimization was approximately 25.77 km. in 
Bihar which has come down to 16.88 km. …………….. In case of Tamil Nadu, it 
has gone down from 31.86 km. to 23.89 km. “  
 
Problems and Constraints 
 
7.25 On the issue of problems/challenges being faced by the State during 
implementation of PDS, the Government of Tamil Nadu furnished information as 
under: 
• “Regional language not incorporated in all the modules of SMART PDS 
portal / other apps. 
• In member deletion, “Death” as a reason is not included in "select 
reason" option. This may be included and necessary software changes 
to be made in the portal such that death member’s Aadhaar should be 
freezed and after deletion the same Aadhaar cannot be used anywhere 
in SMART PDS.  
• Query back option may be provisioned for Verifying / approval 
authorities wherever necessary. 
• Audit trial may be provided for all activities with time stamp. 
• The status of grievances not traceable. 
• The ration card format is not finalized.” 
 
7.26 Further, on the issue of problems/Challenges being faced by the State in 
functioning of ePoS machines, the State of Tamil Nadu in their written replies 
submitted as under: 
➢ “In Tamil Nadu a total of 34,807 Fair Price Shops is equipped with PoS 
devices. Essential commodities are being issued to cardholders without any 
hindrance.  
➢ However, difficulties are being faced in FPS which are located in No Network 
regions which counts to 403. Steps are being taken to provide network 
connectivity to those shops through TANFINET (Bharat Fibernet scheme). 
➢ The old age people/ manual workers whose fingerprint got deteriorated over a 
period of time, face difficulty in their authentication. During IRIS scanning 
which is provided as an alternate, the people who have vision/ cataract 
problem or undergone surgery faces difficulty.  
➢ The medically sick people and old age people who face difficulty in getting 
commodities are facilitated through the option of authorization. A new scheme 
have been launched in August 2025, in order to deliver PDS commodities at 
the doorstep of senior citizens (>70 years) and differently abled persons 
named as “Thayumanavar Scheme” 
➢ There are 7,15,137 PHH (including AAY) beneficiaries covered under this 
scheme all over the state.” 
 

64 
 
 
Kerala - A Case Study 
 
Achievements 
 
7.27 About the PDS System in the State, the Government of Kerala in their written 
replies furnished information as under:  
 
“Kerala has been a pioneer in the modernization of the Public Distribution 
System (PDS) by leveraging technology to enhance transparency and 
efficiency. The state's approach has focused on building a robust technical 
database and an integrated digital infrastructure. 
 
The Technical Database 
Kerala's PDS modernization began with the digitization of ration cards and 
beneficiary data. It is a key component of the state's e -governance initiatives, 
allowing for the generation of various reports, data sharing with other 
government departments, and secure citizen access to their data. 
 
The technical database is the foundation for several key applications: 
 
• Ration Card Management System (RCMS):  This is a client -server 
application that provides a workflow -based solution for all citizen services 
related to ration cards. This includes issuing new cards, adding or deleting 
members, and splitting cards. 
 
• Integrated Management of Public Distribution System (IMPDS):  Kerala 
has been at the forefront of modernizing its Public Distribution System 
(PDS) and has successfully integrated with the national iMPDS (Integrated 
Management of Public Distribution System) platform. The state's efforts are 
a crucial part of the "One Nation, One Ration Card" (ONORC) scheme, 
which aims to provide food security for all, including its non -native 
population. 
 
• Supply Chain Management System (SCMS):  Supply Chain Management 
System is a critical technological component that has been implemented to 
ensure the efficient, transparent, and end -to-end management of food 
grains from the time they are procured , to the moment they are distributed 
to beneficiaries. Kerala's SCMS is a digital backbone that ensures that the 
state's food security programs are not just efficient but also transparent and 
accountable. It is a vital tool that complements other technological 
initiatives like e -RCMS and AePDS, making Kerala a leader in PDS 
modernization. 
 
• Vehicle Tracking and Fleet Management System (VTFMS):  Vehicle 
Tracking and Fleet Management System is a crucial technological initiative 
implemented by the Kerala Civil Supplies Department and the Kerala State 
Civil Supplies Corporation (Supplyco) to enhance the transparency and 
efficiency of the Public Distribution System (PDS). This software is 

65 
 
developed by C -Dac. The primary goal of VTFMS is to prevent the 
diversion of food grains and other essential commodities meant for the 
Public Distribution System. Previously, there were concerns about vehicles 
transporting these items to ration shops diverting them to private godowns 
or other illegal markets. VTFMS addresses this problem head -on by 
providing real-time tracking of every vehicle in the PDS supply chain. 
 
• Public Grievance Portal (PG Portal):  The portal provides a user -friendly 
interface for citizens to register their complaints or grievances related to the 
PDS. This includes issues concerning ration shops, food grain quality, non -
availability of stock, or any other service -related problems. The portal acts 
as a centralized platform where all complaints are registered. It 
automatically routes the complaints to the concerned officials based on the 
category and location of the grievance. 
 
• Aadhaar-enabled Public Distribution System (AePDS):  This system 
uses Aadhaar-based biometric authentication and electronic Point of Sale 
(ePoS) devices at Fair Price Shops (FPSs). This ensures that beneficiaries 
are identified biometrically, preventing the use of bogus cards and the 
diversion of food grains. It also empowers citizens by allowing them to 
transact with any ePoS -enabled FPS in the country through the "One 
Nation, One Ration Card" (ONORC) scheme.” 
 
7.28 While sharing experience on introduction of new technological intervention in 
Public Distribution System in the State, the Government of Kerala submitted as 
under: 
“End to end computerization of PDS has brought in following positive changes 
in the working of the entire Public Distribution System of the state.  
 
• Improvement in transparency and accountability.  
• It reduced pilferage and diversion of PDS commodities.  
• It improved and their PDS administration.  
• Since 2018 till March 2025 around 2,16,035.402 MT of Rice & 55,439.775 
MT of wheat accumulated as closing balance and it saved revenue to 
GOI. 
• Improved the targeting of PDS. 
• People became more aware about their entitlement and it empowered 
them to demand their right full allocation from FPS.  
• This increased the quality and quantity of food grains being supplied 
through FPS  
• Inter-state and Intra -state portability has made the beneficiaries more 
powerful and it weeded out bad FPS from the system.” 
 
7.29 On the status of implementation of SMART -PDS in the State to introduce the 
major technological reforms and strengthen the technology infrastructure in Public 
Distribution System (PDS), the Government of Kerala furnished information as 
under: 
“The modernization of the PDS in Kerala has been instrumental in reducing 
leakage and improving the efficiency of the food distribution network. It has 
also enabled the state to participate in central initiatives like the SMART -PDS 

66 
 
(Scheme for Modernization and Reform through Technology in PDS), which 
aims to create a single national platform for food distribution. 
 
The SMART PDS initiative is a strategic extension of the technology -driven 
reforms implemented by the Government of India, aimed at introducing next -
generation enhancements with a strong focus on strengthening national 
portability through the One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) framework. 
 
A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the Government of India 
and the Government of Kerala was signed in May 2024 to facilitate the rollout 
of the SMART PDS project in Kerala. 
 
In line with the provisions of the MoU with the Central Government, and for 
the effective implementation of the centrally sponsored scheme “SMART 
PDS,” it has been proposed to constitute a State Project Implementation 
Team (SPIT) to coordinate and execute associated activities at the state level. 
 
Given the complexity of the SMART PDS framework, its successful 
implementation necessitates not only advanced technical competencies but 
also deep operational familiarity with PDS processes. The existing IT Cell has 
demonstrated excellence in deploying and maintaining core systems, 
including e -POS, AePDS, RCMS, SCMS, and others. Their domain 
knowledge, field experience, and continued engagement with NIC Kerala and 
NIC Hyderabad have ensured seamless operations, timely issue resolution, 
and effective feedback for system improvements. The same team has also 
facilitated demonstrations, transition management, and testing of newly 
developed SMART PDS modules, thereby contributing to a smooth on 
boarding process. 
 
Additionally, it has been decided to leverage the technical expertise and 
experience of the current contract/temporary staff working on RCMS, AePDS, 
SCMS, and PG Portal software systems in State NIC and NIC Hyderabad. 
 
In view of the above, the SPIT team is hereby constituted with the current 
members of the Department’s IT Cell, along with the contract/temporary staff 
working on RCMS, AePDS, and SCMS in NIC Kerala and NIC Hyderabad. An 
officer not below the rank of District Supply Officer, with expertise in IT and the 
current systems, is appointed for the overall coordination of the SMART PDS 
project. He will assume the roles and responsibilities of the Project Manager 
as envisaged in the MoU. 
 
The wages of the temporary employees under the SMART PDS scheme shall 
be disbursed from the SNA account in the name of the Commissioner of Civil 
Supplies and Consumer Affairs, for the duration of the scheme. 
 
Software such as IMPDS, AePDS, RCMS, SCMS, PG PORTAL, VTFMS, 
ANNA SAHAYATHA, and ANNA MITRA are being used to strengthen and 
effectively utilize the public distribution sector in Kerala.” 
 
 

67 
 
7.30 On being asked about the current status of linking of e -PoS system with 
weighing machines in the State, the Government of Kerala in their written replies 
furnished information as under: 
 
“Tender procedures have been initiated by the Commissionerate of Civil 
Supplies and Consumer Affairs, in connection with integrating electronic 
weighing scales with the ePoS system. Currently, the tender has been 
opened, and the pre-qualification evaluation has been completed. Companies 
that have qualified in the pre -qualification stage are being considered for 
participation in the technical evaluation. Those who succeed in the technical 
evaluation will be included in the financial evaluation, and the institution that 
emerges as L1 (lowest bidder) will be issued a work order with government 
approval.” 
 
Problems and Constraints 
 
7.31 On the issue of problems/challenges being faced by the State in functioning of 
ePoS machines, the Government of Kerala furnished information as under: 
 
“There may arise certain issues such as network connectivity problems, errors 
in the e -PoS system, or physical damage to the e -PoS machines. As per the 
provisions of the AMC, issues related to e-PoS devices will be attended to and 
resolved by the System Integrator upon receipt of the complaint. For effective 
maintenance, the System Integrator has deployed System Engineers at each 
Taluk to address the issues reported from the FPSs in a timely manner. In 
case of physical damage to the machine, a batch of spare machines has also 
been made available to ensure that the distribution process continues without 
disruption.” 
 
7.32 While expressing views on the aspect of ‘Modernisation of Public Distribution 
System: Strengthening Technical Data base' in the state, the Government of Kerala 
in their written replies furnished as under: 
 
“On the technology front, there is a need to simplify and unify the multiple 
software platforms currently used for PDS transactions. A single ERP -based 
solution under Smart PDS will help integrate procurement, storage, 
transportation and distribution, thereby improving efficiency and reducing 
duplication of effort. In addition, tools like the FPS Inspection App, developed 
in coordination with NIC, are already helping streamline monitoring and 
compliance at the shop level. 
 
Modernization of the Public Distribution System in Kerala requires a strong 
and integrated technical database that can enhance efficiency, transparency, 
and service quality. One of the key areas is the modernization of FPS. By 
introducing standards and developing a few model FPS across the state, the 
department is expected to showcase modern practices in storage, distribution, 
and customer service. Such initiatives will also help rebuild public trust, 
especially when allegations are often raised that PDS foodgrains are inferior 
to branded items available in the open market. This concern can be effectively 
addressed by supplying scientifically processed and polished foodgrains in 
standardized packs of 1 kg, 5 kg, and 10 kg, ensuring both quality and 
uniformity.” 

68 
 
 
7.33 The Committee note from the case studies of Bihar, Meghalaya, 
Telangana, Tamil Nadu and Kerala that substantial progress has been made by 
States in digitization, Aadhaar seeding, ePoS deployment, online monitoring 
and SMART -PDS adoption; however, the pace and depth of implementation 
remain uneven. The Committee further note that Bihar has achieved 100 per 
cent digitization with over 98 per cent Aadhaar seeding and about 80 per cent 
e-KYC, Meghalaya had only 73 per cent Aadhaar seeding as on 30th April 2025, 
Telangana had 80 FPSs operating in offline mode, Tamil Nadu had 403 FPSs in 
no-network regions and Kerala itself has emphasized the need for a single 
Enterprise Resource Planning ( ERP)-based solution. The Committee , 
therefore, recommend that the Department should institutionalize a structured 
cross-learning framework under SMART -PDS so that best practices, workable 
solutions and operational innovations emerging from better -performing States 
are quickly replicated in lagging States through technical support, training, 
standard operating procedures and focused follow-up. 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 
 
7.34 The Committee observe that State case studies reveal recurring 
operational constraints such as biometric authentication failures among 
elderly persons and manual labourers, poor network connectivity, incomplete 
module customization, pending grievance redressal and uneven acceptance of 
route optimisation under Anna Chakra. The y further note that acceptance of 
optimised routes was almost 100 per cent in Bihar, 70.64 per cent in 
Meghalaya, 97 per cent in Telangana, 20 per cent in Tamil Nadu and nil in 
Kerala, despite visible reductions in route distances and expected savings. 
The Committee are of the view that the Department should require each 
State/UT to prepare a time -bound reform agenda addressing authentication 
failures, connectivity gaps, module completion, grievance pendency and route 
optimisation, with quarterly review at the Central level so that the benefits of 
modernization are realized uniformly across the country rather than remaining 
confined to a few better-performing States. 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  NEW DELHI;                            Kanimozhi Karunanidhi,  
 05 June, 2026                                                              Chairperson, 
Jyaishtha 15, 1948 (Saka)                        Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, 
                                             Food and Public Distribution 
 
 
 

69 
 
APPENDIX I 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2024 -2025) HELD 
ON THURSDAY, 27TH MARCH, 2025 
The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1645 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’,  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
 Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Anto Antony 
3. Smt. Malvika Devi 
4. Shri Manish Jaiswal 
5. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
6.  Shri Manoj Kumar 
7. Shri Sunil Kumar 
8. Shri Ajendra Singh Lodhi 
9. Shri Neeraj Maurya 
10. Shri Bastipati Nagaraju 
11. Shri Haribhai Patel 
12. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu 
13. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh 
14. Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh 
15. Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane 
16. Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
17. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
 
Rajya Sabha 
18. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
19. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
20. Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
21. Shri Baburam Nishad 
22. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
23.  Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai             - Joint Secretary 
 

70 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES  
DEPARTMENT OF FOOD & PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation  
1.  Shri Sanjeev Chopra Secretary (F & PD) 
2.  Shri Ravi Shanakar Joint Secretary (BP , PD & NFSA) 
3.  Shri Jai Patil Joint Director (PD) 
     4.        Shri Alok Tiwari     Deputy Director General, NIC 
     5.       Ms. Meenu Arora    Sr. Technical Director, NIC 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened to have briefing by the representatives of the Department 
of Food and Public Distribution on the subject ‘Modernisation of Public Distribution 
System: Strengthening Technical Data base’.  
(The witnesses were called in) 
3. The Chairperson, then welcomed the representatives of the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution to the sitting and invited their attention to Direction 55 
(1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker’ regarding confidentiality of the proceedings.   
4. The Chairperson in the welcome remarks requested the witnesses to apprise 
the Committee about development of SMART -PDS, challenges/constraints faced by 
the Department such as ageing server infrastructure, software upgradation needs, 
integration challenges and steps taken by the Department to address those 
challenges, ONORC Plan, complaints of delivery of less weight of ration by the 
dealers, status of linking of ePoS with weighing machines in each State and steps 
taken to expedite the process and complete it in a time bound manner etc.  
5. The representatives of the Department of Food and Public Distribution made 
a power point presentation before the Committee on the various aspects of the 
subject ‘Modernisation of Public Distribution System: Strengthening Technical Data 
base’ such as status of PDS Reforms, overview of Fair Price Shops, Pictorial view of 
e-PoS devices installed at FPS, One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) Plan, 
implementation of supply chain automation (SCM), overview of SMART -PDS, 
Development status of SMART-PDS, supply chain optimization etc. 
6. The Committee then sought certain clarifications on the issues related to the 
subject such as leakages in PDS, steps taken/being taken by Government for 
installation of ePoS devices, automation of fair price shops, complaints of delivery of 
less weight of ration, complaints of beneficiaries regarding digitization of ration cards, 
problems in ONORC, supply chain optimization etc. The representatives of the 
Department replied to various queries raised/clarifications sought by the Members on 
the subject.  The Committee directed the Department to furnish the written replies to 
those queries/clarifications which could not be clarified/replied to.  

71 
 
7. The Hon’ble Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution for appearing before the Committee and furnishing 
valuable information on the subject. 
[The Witnesses then withdrew] 
 A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
************* 
 
  
 
 
  

72 
 
APPENDIX II 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2024 -2025) HELD 
ON WEDNESDAY, 2ND JULY, 2025 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘3’,  
Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
2. Smt. Malvika Devi 
3. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
4. Shri Manoj Kumar 
5. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
6. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh 
7. Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane 
8. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
9.   Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
10. Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
11. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
12. Shri Arun Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
   
1.    Smt. Maya Lingi             - Joint Secretary 
2.  Dr. Vatsala Joshi                        -           Director 
3.  Dr. Mohit Rajan             - Deputy Secretary 
 
  

73 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES  
DEPARTMENT OF FOOD & PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation  
1 Shri Sanjeev Chopra Secretary (F & PD) 
2 Shri Ravi Shanakar Joint Secretary (BP , PD & NFSA) 
3 Shri Jai Patil Joint Director (PD) 
4 Shri G Mayil Muthu Kumaran Deputy Director General, NIC -HQ 
               
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee. The Hon’ble Chairperson then expressed profound grief over the 
loss of lives in the Ahmedabad Plan crash and the Telangana chemical factory blast. 
Members observed two minutes silence to pay homage to the departed souls and 
expressed their heartfelt condolence to the bereaved families. Thereafter, before 
commencing the formal meeting with the representatives of the Department of Food 
and Public, the Committee Secretariat gave a brief power point presentation to give 
an overview and brief on the subject ‘Modernisation of Public Distribution System: 
Strengthening Technical Data base’ to the members of the Committee.  
 (The witnesses were called in) 
3. The Hon’ble Chairperson, then welcomed the representatives of the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution to the sitting and invited their attention to 
Direction 55 (1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker’ regarding confidentiality of the 
proceedings.   
4. The Chairperson in the welcome remarks requested the witnesses to apprise 
the Committee about development of SMART -PDS, challenges/constraints faced by 
the Department such as lack of relevant backend servers infrastructure, lack of 
reliable and scalable system for future upgradation, fragmented/isolated systems 
across States/UTs and mechanism to address those challenges, preparation of 
Department on next population census, implementation of Supply Chain 
Management (SCM) Automation, complaints of delivery of less weight of ration by 
the dealers, current status of linking of ePoS with weighing machines in each State, 
mechanism to resolve the issue of biometric authentication failures etc. 
5. The representatives of the Department of Food and Public Distribution made 
a power point presentation before the Committee on the various aspects of the 
subject ‘Modernisation of Public Distribution System: Strengthening Technical Data 
base’ such as status of PDS Reforms, progress of digitization and Aadhaar seeding, 
modernisation of PDS through Anna Mitra, Mera Ration App v2.0, Mera Ration App 
v3.0, overview of SMART-PDS, Supply Chain Automation etc. 
6. The Committee then sought certain clarifications on the issues related to the 
subject such as implementation status of SMART PDS, steps taken by Government 
linking of ePoS with weighing machines, automation of fair price shops, complaints 
of delivery of less weight of ration, complaints on biometric authentication failure, 
mera ration mobile app, details and achievement made on Anna Chakra PDS system 
etc. The representatives of the Department replied to various queries 
raised/clarifications sought by the Members on the subject.  The Committee directed 

74 
 
the Department to furnish the written replies to those queries/clarifications which 
could not be clarified/replied to.  
7. The Hon’ble Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution for appearing before the Committee and furnishing 
valuable information on the subject. 
[The Witnesses then withdrew] 
8.   xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx. 
 
 A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
************* 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________________ 
xxxx Matter does not relate to the Report 
  

75 
 
APPENDIX III 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH & EIGHTEENTH SITTINGS OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION  (2024-2025) HELD ON FRIDAY, 19TH SEPTEMBER, 2025 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘3’,  
Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.   Shri Manish Jaiswal 
3.   Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
4.   Shri Manoj Kumar 
5.  Shri Sunil Kumar 
6.   Shri Bharat Singh Kushwah 
7.   Shri Neeraj Maurya 
8.   Shri Bastipati Nagaraju 
9.   Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
10. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu 
11. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh 
12. Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh 
13. Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane 
14. Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
Rajya Sabha 
 
15.  Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
16.  Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
17.  Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
18.  Smt. Rajathi  
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1 Smt. Maya Lingi         - Joint Secretary 
2 Dr. Vatsala Joshi                        -   Director 
   3    Dr. Mohit Rajan         - Deputy Secretary 
 
  

76 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES  
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
1.  Shri Sanjeev Chopra Secretary, F&PD 
2.  Shri Ravi Shanakar JS (BP, PD & NFSA) 
3.  Shri G Mayil Muthu Kumaran Deputy Director General, NIC 
State Government of Bihar 
4.  Shri Pankaj Kumar Principal Secretary, Food and 
Consumer Protection Department 
5.  Shri Upendra Kumar Special Secretary, Food and 
Consumer Protection Department 
6.  Ms Shrishti Priya Officer on Special Duty, Food and 
Consumer Protection Department 
7.  Shri Kumar Nikhil Project Manager, SPIT, Food and 
Consumer Protection Department 
State Government of Meghalaya 
8.  Smt. Saloni Verma Director, Food Civil Supplies and 
Consumer Affairs 
9.  Shri Shai Kupar War Officer on Special Duty, Food Civil 
Supplies and Consumer Affairs 
State Government of Telangana  
10.  Shri Hanumant K. Zendage Director of Civil Supplies 
11.  Shri B Chandra Prakash Deputy Commissioner (IT), Civil 
Supplies Department  
12.  Shri B. Nagaraju Project Manager-IT Civil Supplies 
Department 
State Government of Tamil Nadu 
13.  Thiru Satyabrata Sahoo Principal Secretary to 
Government, Cooperation, Food 
and Consumer Protection 
Department 
14.  Thiru S. Sivarasu Director of Civil Supplies and 
Consumer Protection 
State Government of Kerala 
15.  Smt. Hima K. Commissioner, Civil Supplies & 
Consumer Affairs Department 
16.  Smt. Aswathy Srinivas Managing Director, Supplyco 
17.  Sri. Mathew A.J. Assistant Secretary, Civil Supplies 
& Consumer Affairs Department 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee. Thereafter, before commencing the formal meeting with the 
representatives of the Department of Food and Public Distribution, State 

77 
 
Governments of Bihar, Meghalaya, Telangana, Tamil Nadu & Kerala,  the Committee 
Secretariat gave  a  brief power point presentation to give an overview and brief on 
the subject ‘Modernisation of Public Distribution System: Strengthening Technical 
Data base’ to the members of the Committee. As per the pre scheduled agenda the 
Committee were to take evidence of the officials of State Government of Bihar, 
Meghalaya & Telangana and Department of Food and Public Distribution during pre -
Lunch Session (17 th sitting) and thereafter during the second session in the 
afternoon, the officials of State Governments of Tamil Nadu & Kerala and 
Department of Food and Public Distribution were to depose before the committee 
(18th sitting). 
3. However, the Hon’ble Chairperson, then directed that the representatives of 
the Department of Food & Public Distribution along with all the five state government 
officials viz.  State Governments of Bihar, Meghalaya, Telangana, Tamil Nadu & 
Kerala be present before the Committee together during the presentation/ 
submission of Dept of Food and Public Distribution on the above -mentioned subject.  
Thereafter, the Committee would listen to the submission of representatives of 
respective State Governments.  
 (Accordingly, the witnesses were called in) 
PART I 
    (1100 to 1300 hrs) 
 
4. The Hon’ble Chairperson, then welcomed the representatives of the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution and State Governments of Bihar, 
Meghalaya, Telangana, Tamil Nadu & Kerala and invited their attention to Direction 
55 (1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker’ regarding confidentiality of the proceedings.   
5. The Chairperson in the welcome remarks requested the witnesses to apprise 
the Committee about development of SMART-PDS, Aadhaar seeding of Ration Card 
& steps taken for the completion of Aadhaar seeding,  challenges/constraints faced 
by the Department &mechanism to address those challenges, connectivity issues in 
rural areas, pending grievances, current status of linking of ePoS with weighing 
machines in each State and steps taken to expedite the process and complete it in a 
time bound manner, mechanism to resolve the issue of biometric authentication 
failures, usability of Mera Ration App (v2.0 and v3.0) and Anna Mitra for PDS 
beneficiaries and Food Supply officials etc. relating to their respective states. 
6. The Hon’ble Chairperson then asked the representatives of the Department of 
Food & Public Distribution and State Governments of Bihar, Meghalaya, Telangana, 
Tamil Nadu & Kerala to introduce themselves before making their 
submission/presentation on the subject. Thereafter, t he representatives of the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution and State Governments of Bihar, 
Meghalaya, Telangana, Tamil Nadu & Kerala  made a power point presentation 
separately before the Committee on the various aspects of the subject which inter -
alia included status of SMART PDS , ONORC, Aadhaar Ration Card seeding status, 
complaints registered on TDPS, Grievance Redressal Mechanism, Anna Mitra, Mera 
Ration App v2.0, Mera Ration App v3.0, Current status of linking of ePoS with 
weighing machines, steps taken to tackle complaints of delivery of less weight of 
ration etc. 

78 
 
7.  After the power point presentation, Chairperson and Members of the 
Committee 
raised queries and sought clarifications relating to states of Bihar, Meghalaya, 
Telangana, Tamil Nadu & Kerala on the following issues:- 
 
(i) Implementation status of SMART PDS. 
(ii) Steps taken by Government linking of ePoS with weighing machines. 
(iii) Progress made in fair price shops (FPS) automation. 
(iv) Complaints of delivery of less weight of ration. 
(v) Complaints on biometric authentication failure & mechanism to resolve the 
issue. 
(vi) Mera Ration APP v2.0. 
(vii) Mera Ration App v3.0. 
(viii) Assessment of Anna Chakra - Supply Chain Optimisation Tool. 
(ix) Reasons for Leakages in PDS. 
(x) Complaints of beneficiaries regarding digitization of ration cards. 
(xi) Problems in ONORC. 
(xii) Supply chain optimization. 
(xiii) Challenges/constraints faced by the Department. 
 
8.  Thereafter, the Committee took a break for lunch. 
 
PART II 
(1400 hrs to 1630 hrs) 
 
9. During the post lunch session, the representatives of the Department of Food 
and Public Distribution replied to various queries raised/clarifications sought by the 
Members. The representatives of State Governments of Bihar, Meghalaya, 
Telangana, Tamil Nadu & Kerala also replied one by one to various queries 
raised/clarifications sought by MPs.  
 
10. The Hon’ble Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution, State Government of Bihar, Meghalaya, Telangana, 
Tamil Nadu & Kerala for appearing before the Committee and furnishing valuable 
information on the subject and directed the Department and State Governments to 
furnish the written replies to those queries/clarifications which could not be 
clarified/replied to.  
[The Witnesses then withdrew] 
 A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
************* 
 
 
  

79 
 
APPENDIX IV 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE  EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2025 -2026) HELD 
ON FRIDAY, 5 JUNE, 2026 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1130 hrs. in Committee Room No. 3, 
Extension to PHA, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 2. Shri Anto Antony 
 3. Smt. Malvika Devi 
 4.Shri Manish Jaiswal 
 5. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
6. Shri Manoj Kumar 
7. Shri Sunil Kumar 
8. Shri Bharat Singh Kushwah 
9. Shri Neeraj Maurya 
10. Shri Bastipati Nagaraju 
11. Shri Haribhai Patel 
12. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu 
13. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh 
14. Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh 
15. Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane 
 
  
Rajya Sabha 
 
16. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
17. Shri Mokariya Rambhai 
18. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
19. Shri Arun Singh 
20.  Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah 
21. Shri Sat Paul Sharma 
22. Shri Chowdry Mohammad Ramzan 
  
   
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi                 - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi                               - Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan                 - Deputy Secretary 

80 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the following Draft 
Reports of the Committee: 
(i) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx; and 
 
(ii) Draft Report on ‘Modernisation of Public Distribution System: Strengthening 
Technical Data base’ pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the above mentioned             
Draft Reports of the Committee.  
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft 
Reports without any amendments/modifications.  
5.  The Committee then authorized the Hon’ble Chairperson to finalize and 
present the aforesaid Reports during the upcoming Monsoon Session of Parliament. 
6 .  xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
************* 
 
 
 
xxxx Matter does not relate to the Report 