 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND 
 PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2025-26) 
 
     
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOODAND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
REGULATION OF PACKAGED COMMODITIES WITH SPECIFIC 
REFERENCE TO SUGAR CONTENT IN BABY PRODUCTS AND OTHER 
FOOD PRODUCTS 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
July,  2026/ Shravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
  
15 


 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
REGULATION OF PACKAGED COMMODITIES WITH SPECIFIC 
REFERENCE TO SUGAR CONTENT IN BABY PRODUCTS AND OTHER 
FOOD PRODUCTS 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.07.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha  on 23.07.2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
July,  2026/ Shravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 


 
 
CONTENTS 
 Page 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25)                                                                 (ii) 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26)                                                                 (iii) 
Introduction (iv) 
                 PART I 
                REPORT 
1 
I Introductory  1 
II Infant Food Products in India  2 
III Legal Framework  3 
IV Regulatory Landscape  5 
V Policy Prescribed in India  11 
VI Comparative Formulation: Global Context  15 
VII Nutritional Labelling on Packaging  20 
VIII Marketing on e- Commerce Platforms  28 
IX Monitoring   31 
X Enforcement Mechanisms  34 
XI Compliance and Penalties  42 
XII Inter-agency Co-ordination  48 
XIII Consumer Awareness  54 
 PART II 
Observations/ Recommendations 
 64 
 ANNEXURES   
 (i) The Cases scrutinized AMC (1.1.2023 to 31.3.2025)  78 
 (ii) The Cases scrutinized AMC (1.1.2023 to 15.3.2025)  79 
 (iii) Details of enforcement on Infant Milk Substitutes & Infant 
Food 
 80 
 (iv) Details of Enforcement of last 3 years (2022 -23, 2023-24 and 
2024-2025 
 81 
 (v) Details of enforcement samples (2024-25)  82 
 (vi) Details of enforcement samples (2023-24)  83 
 (vii) Details of samples (2022-23)  85 
 (viii) Details of PAN India Surveillance Drive  87 
 (ix) Details of enforcement (2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-25)  89 
 (x) Details of enforcement samples analyzed (2024-25)  90 
 (xi) Details of samples (2022-23)  93 
 (xii) Statewise Data  95 
 APPENDICES   
 i. Minutes of 6th  Sitting (2024-25) of the Committee held on 
12.12.2024 
 99 
 ii. Minutes of 11th Sitting (2024-25)of Committee held on 
06.05.2025 
 102 
 iii. Minutes of 2nd Sitting (2025-26) of the Committee held on 
18.11.2025 
 106 
 iv. Minutes of 8th Sitting (2025-26) of the Committee held on 
05.06.2026 
 110 

 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(2024-25) 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi   -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Anto Antony  3.  Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay  4.  Shri JaswantsinhSumanbhai Bhabhor  5.  Smt. Malvika Devi  6.  Shri Manish Jaiswal  7.  Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa#  8.  Shri Manoj Kumar  9.  Shri Sunil Kumar  10. Shri Bharat Singh Kushwah  11. Shri Ajendra Singh Lodhi  12. Shri Neeraj Maurya  13. Shri Bastipati Nagaraju  14. Shri Haribhai Patel  15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat  16. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu  17. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh  18. Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh  19. Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane  20. Dr. Indra Hang Subba  21. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan  RAJYA SABHA 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
24. Shri RambhaiHarjibhaiMokariya 
25. Shri Baburam Nishad 
26. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
27. Shri Arun Singh 
28. Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah* 
29. Shri Kamal Haasan@ 
30. Shri Kanad Purkayastha@ 
31. Smt. Rajathi@ 
 
 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 26.09.2024 vide Bulletin Part II, Para No. 838 dated 26.09.2024. 
* Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah, MP, RS nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 23.01.2025 Vide Bulletin Part-II, 
Para No.1655 dated 27.01.2025.  
# Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa, MP, LS nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 29.1.2025 Vide 
Bulletin Part-II, Para No.1710 dated 30.1.2025 vice Shri Saumitra Khan, MP, LS. 
@ Shri Kamal Haasan, Shri Kanad Purkayastha and Smt. Rajathi, MP, RS nominated to the 
Committee w.e.f. 08.08.2025 vide Bulletin Part-II, Para No. 3117 dated 13.08.2025. 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (2025-26) 
 
               Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi  -Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Anto Antony 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri JaswantsinhSumanbhai Bhabhor 
5. Smt. Malvika Devi 
6. Shri Manish Jaiswal 
7. Shri Manoj Kumar 
8. Shri Sunil Kumar 
9. Shri Bharat Singh Kushwah 
10. Shri Ajendra Singh Lodhi 
11. Shri Neeraj Maurya 
12. Shri Bastipati Nagaraju 
13. Shri Haribhai Patel 
14. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
16. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu 
17. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh 
18. Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh 
19. Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane 
20. Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
21. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
 
                                                                  RAJYA SABHA 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
24. Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah 
25. Shri Baburam Nishad 
26. Shri MokariyaRambhai 
27. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
28. Shri Arun Singh 
29. Shri Sat Paul Sharma@  
30. Shri Chowdry Mohammad Ramzan@ 
31. Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad # 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi  -          Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   -          Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan              -          Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Abdul Khan  -          Assistant Executive Officer  
_______________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 26.09.2025 vide Bulletin Part II, Para No. 3287 dated 01.10.2025.  
 
@Shri Sat Paul Sharma and Shri Chowdry Mohammad Ramzan, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 
05.12.2025 Vide Bulletin Part-II, Para No.3767 dated 08.12.2025.  
 
#Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 15.12.2025 Vide Bulletin Part -II, Para No.3996 
dated 18.12.2025 vice Smt. Sudha Murthy, MP, Rajya Sabha.  
 
Shri Milind Murli Deora, MP Rajya Sabha, ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 16.10.2025 vide Bulletin Part II 
Para No. 3329 dated 17.10.2025. 
 
(iii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
1. I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (2025 –2026), having been authorised by the Committee to present the 
Report on their behalf, present this Fifteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
subject ‘Regulation of Packaged Commodities with Specific Reference to Sugar Content 
in Baby Products and Other Food Products’  pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs). 
2. The subject was selected by the Committee for examination and report. The 
Committee held a briefing meeting wit h the representatives of the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) and the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare on 12 December, 2024. Subsequently, other meetings for 
oral evidence were also held with the representatives of the Department of Consumer 
Affairs and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on 06 May, 2025 and 18 
November, 2025. 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Officers of the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public D istribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) and 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for appearing before them and placing the 
necessary information before them in connection with the examination of the subject. 
They would also like to place on recor d their appreciation for the assistance rendered to 
them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
05 June, 2026. 
5. For facility of reference and c onvenience, the Observations/Recommendations of  
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part - II of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                    Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
5 June_,2026                           Chairperson, 
15 Jyeshtha, 1948 (Saka)                                           Standing Committee on  
    Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
 
 
(iv) 
  

 
 
List of Abbreviations 
Abbreviation Full Form 
µg Microgram 
AMC Advertisement Monitoring Committee 
CAC Central Advisory Committee 
CODEX Codex Alimentarius (International food standards set by FAO/WHO) 
DoCA Department of Consumer Affairs 
EFSA European Food Safety Authority 
EU European Union 
FBO Food Business Operator 
FOPNL Front-of-Pack Nutrition Labelling 
FSS Food Safety and Standards 
FSSAI Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
FSSR Food Safety and Standards Regulations 
g Gram 
HSR Health Star Rating 
ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research 
IIMR Indian Institute of Millets Research 
IU International Unit (used for Vitamin D etc.) 
Kcal Kilocalorie 
mg Milligram 
MoHFW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
NIN National Institute of Nutrition 
RDA Recommended Dietary Allowance 
SC Scientific Committee 
SP Scientific Panel 
WHO World Health Organization 
 

1 
 
REPORT  
PART - I 
 
I. INTRODUCTORY 
1.1 The public health impact of high sugar content in packaged baby foods is a 
growing concern worldwide. While several studies have already highlighted the risks, 
ongoing research in India and globally aims to further evaluate these effects and 
support policy  changes. Addressing this issue through regulatory measures, food 
industry reforms, and public health initiatives is crucial to curbing childhood obesity 
and other sugar related diseases.  
 
1.2 Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has also expressed its c oncern 
over the health impact of high sugar content in packaged baby foods and has issued 
dietary guidelines in this regard.  
 
1.3 Health Risks Associated with High Sugar Content in Infant Foods: As per 
the ICMR, high sugar intake from packaged baby foods duri ng early childhood is 
associated with several adverse long -term health outcomes as indicated by 
published research globally. The Research suggests increased risks of dental caries, 
obesity, metabolic dysfunction, altered gut microbiome composition, and chr onic 
diseases (Leermakers et al., 2015; Cohen et al., 2018; Huneault et al., 2023).  
Key Findings: 
 
Caries: Reducing sugar intake below 10% of daily energy intake 
significantly lowers the risk of dental caries, and further restriction 
below 5% may offer ad ditional protection. These findings support 
WHO recommendations for limiting free sugars in infant and toddler 
diets to prevent long-term dental and metabolic health issues.  
 
Obesity: Studies indicate that early sugar -sweetened beverage 
(SSB) consumption i nfluences body composition and increases the 
prevalence of overweight and obesity in later childhood (Leermakers 
et al., 2015).  
 
Metabolic Dysfunction: Infant sugar consumption has been 
associated with poor glucose tolerance, insulin resistance, and a 
higher risk of metabolic disorders in later life (Nettleton et al., 2020).  
 
Gut Microbiome Alterations: Animal studies show that high sugar 
intake significantly alters gut microbial diversity, with potential long -

2 
 
term metabolic consequences (Nettleton et al.,  2020). Changes in gut 
bacteria due to early sugar exposure may influence obesity risk and 
chronic disease development.  
 
Chronic Diseases: Early-life sugar exposure has been linked to an 
increased risk of type 2 diabetes and hypertension in adulthood, 
emphasizing the long-term impact of early dietary choices (Park et al., 
2015).” 
1.4 As per WHO, a healthy diet is a foundation for health, well -being, optimal 
growth and development. It protects against all forms of malnutrition.  
 WHO recommends a reduced intake of free sugars throughout the life course 
(strong recommendation).  
 In both adults and children, WHO recommends reducing the intake of free 
sugars to less than 10% of total energy intake (strong recommendation).  
 WHO suggests a further reduction of the intake of free sugars tro below 5% of 
total energy intake (conditional recommendation).  
 As per ICMR Dietary Guidelines, 2024, limiting sugar to 25g/day is better for 
health. If possible, added sugar may be completely eliminated  from one’s diet 
as it adds no nutritive value other than calories.  
 
1.5 In view of the serious health concerns emerging from high sugar intake, 
particularly among vulnerable groups such as infants, children, pregnant and 
lactating women, the Committee took up  the subject “Regulation of Packaged 
Commodities with Specific Reference to Sugar Content in Baby Products and Other 
Food Products” for detailed examination.  
 
II. INFANT FOOD PRODUCTS IN INDIA  
2.1 Infant food is defined under section 2(f) and (g) of “The I nfant Milk Substitutes, 
Feeding Bottles and Infant Foods (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) 
Act, 1992” as under: 
“(f) “infant food” means any food (by whatever name called) being marketed 
or otherwise represented as a complement to mother’s milk to meet the 
growing nutritional needs of the infant 4 [after the age of six months and up to 
the age of two years];  
(g) “in fant milk substitute” means any food being marketed or otherwise 
represented as a partial or total replacement for mother’s milk 5 [for infant up 
to the age of two years];” 

3 
 
2.2 The FSSAI informed the Committee that regarding the various categories of 
Infant food in India as under: 
Different Categories of Infant Food as per Food Safety and Standards 
Regulations(FSSR)  
a. Infant Formula: It is a br east milk substitute product based on milk of cow 
or buffalo or other milch animals as specified under the Food Safety and 
Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011 
or mixture thereof and other ingredients which have been pro ven to be 
suitable for infant feeding, to meet the nutritional requirements of infant during 
the first six months. 
b. Milk Cereal Based Complementary Foods: Food for infants after 6 
months up to 24 months of age, which is based on milk, cereals and /or 
legumes (pulses), millets, nuts and protein concentrates or protein isolates 
and/or defatted edible oilseed extracts and so prepared as to permit dilution 
with water or milk or other suitable medium.  
c. Processed Cereal Based Complementary Foods: Food for infants after 6 
months up to 24 months of age, which is based on cereals and legumes 
(pulses), millets, nuts and protein isolates or protein concentrates or de -fatted 
edible oil seed extracts and so prepared as to permit dilution with water or 
milk or other suitable medium  
d. Follow -Up Formula: Means a food for infants after six months up to 
twenty-four months of age, which is intended for use as a liquid part of the 
complementary diet for infants when prepared in accordance with instructions 
for use.  
e. Food for Infants based on Traditional Food Ingredients: Are products 
known to be prepared traditionally at home for feeding infants, but processed 
and provided in packaged forms, after six months up to twenty -four months of 
age. 
 
 
III. LEGAL FRAMEWORK 
 
3.1 In India, the infant food is regulated by the following ministries:  
a. Ministry of Women and Child Development : Through Infant Milk 
Substitutes, Feeding Bottles and Infant Foods (Regulation of Production, 
Supply and Distribution) (IMS) Act, 2003 – Regulates labelling, claims and 
advertisement.  
b. Ministry of Health and Family welfare : Through Food Safety and 
Standards Act, 2006.  

4 
 
c. Ministry of Consumer Affairs Food and Public Distribution : Through 
various Acts. 
3.2 During their deposition before the Committee on 12.12.2024, representatives 
of the Department of Consumer Affairs apprised the Committee as under:  
 “there are two laws which govern food products, packaged commodities 
including baby foods, one is the Food Safety and Standards Act of 2006. The other is 
the Legal Metrology Act of 2009. Under the Food Safety and Standards Act of 2006, 
we have two rules. One  is the Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and Display) 
Regulation of 2020, which provides for certain mandatory declarations. The other is 
Food Safety and Standards (Food for Infant Nutrition) Regulations 2020. When we 
come to the Legal Metrology Act, t his provides for a Legal Metrology (Packaged 
Commodities) Rules 2011, where there are mandatory provisions for all packaged 
commodities including baby foods .” 
3.3 Furnishing the legislative framework governing the Infant Food in India, the 
FSSAI/Dept. of Consumer Affairs apprised the Committee as under:  
1. Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006  
– The Food Safety and Standards (Foods for Infant Nutrition) Regulations, 
2020  
a) prescribes the standards for different categories of Infant food and 
formulae.  
b) The General Requirements Chapter- I, Regulation 3(6) of the said  
  regulation clearly specifies the preferred source of carbohydrates in 
food for Infant Nutrition.  
c) This provision is on par with Codex standards and other recognized 
global regulatory standards.   
The provision 3(6) of the said Regulations provides that:  
 “(6) Lactose and glucose polymers shall be the preferred 
 carbohydrates for food for infant nutrition. Sucrose and/or fructose 
 shall not be added, unless needed as a carbohydrate source, and 
 provided the sum of these does not exceed 20 per cent of total 
 carbohydrate.” 
2. Infant Milk Substitutes, Feeding Bottles and Infant Foods (IMS) Act, 1992  
– Administered by Ministry of Women and Child Development  
As per Section 11 of IMS Act, Act, 1992 (Amended in 2003) infant milk 
substitute or infant food shall conform to the standards of Food Safety and 
Standards Act, 2006(inserted in 2010) 
 

5 
 
3. Legal Metrology Act, 2009 
 The Legal Metrology Act, 2009 is enacted under Entry 50 of List -I 
(Union List) ‘Establish ment of standards of weight and measure’ and under 
Entry 33 -A of List -III (Concurrence List) ‘Weights and measures except 
establishment of standards’ in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. The 
objective of the Act is to ensure public guarantee from t he point of view of 
security and accuracy of the weighments and measurements and was 
enacted to establish and enforce standards of weights and measures, 
regulate trade and commerce in weights, measures and other goods which 
are sold or distributed by weigh t, measure or number. The Central 
Government and the State Governments are empowered to make Rules 
under section 52 and section 53 of the Act respectively. 1.3 The Legal 
Metrology Act is the primary instrument which establishes and enforces the 
standards o f weights and measures and regulates trade in weights and 
measures in the country and is the foundation of most business activities in 
the country.  
4. Consumer Protection Act, 2019 
– Consumer Protection (E-Commerce) Rules, 2020 provides remedies 
against unfair trade practices and misleading advertisements relating to food 
products, including misleading sugar -related claims. 
To safeguard consumers from unfair trade practices in e -commerce, the 
Department of Consumer Affairs has notified the Consumer Protection  (E-
commerce) Rules, 2020 under the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 
2019. 
 Rule 5 (2) of the ibid rules provides that every marketplace e -commerce entity 
shall require sellers through an undertaking to ensure that descriptions, 
images, and other  content pertaining to goods or services on their platform is 
accurate and corresponds directly with the appearance, nature, quality, 
purpose and other general features of such good or service.  
 Rule 6 (2) of the ibid rules lays down that no seller shall f alsely represent itself 
as a consumer and post reviews about goods or services or misrepresent the 
quality or the features of any goods or services.  
 
IV. REGULATORY LANDSCAPE 
4.1 In regard to the regulatory framework for regulating Infant Food in India, th e 
FSSAI submitted that following regulations have been in place:  
1. Food Safety and Standards (Foods for Infant Nutrition) Regulations, 
2020 
– Different Categories specified under the regulation are:  

6 
 
 Infant Formula 
 Milk Cereal Based Complementary Foods  
 Processed Cereal Based Complementary Foods  
 Follow-Up Formula 
 Food for Infants based on Traditional Food Ingredients  
 Food for Special Medical Purpose intended for Infants  
(a) Clause 3.6 states: “ Lactose and glucose polymers shall be the 
preferred carbohydrates for food for infant nutrition. Sucrose and/or 
fructose shall not be added, unless needed as a carbohydrate 
source, and provided the sum of these does not exceed 20 percent 
of total carbohydrate”. These regulations specify composition 
standards for infant foods. 
 
2. Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and Display) Regulations, 2020  
– These regulations prescribe the labelling requirements of pre -packaged 
foods and display of essential information on premises where food is 
manufactured, processed, served and sto red.  
 The Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and Display) Regulations, 2020, 
mandate the clear declaration of ingredients including total and added sugar on 
food product labels. Moreover, FSSAI has approved a proposal requiring the 
display of nutritiona l information about added sugar, sodium, and saturated fat in 
bold letters and with a relatively larger font size on packaged food labels. This 
amendment seeks to empower consumers by providing clearer information about 
the nutritional value of products, e nabling them to make more informed and 
healthier choices.  
 All food business operators are to comply with these statutory requirements 
including Ecommerce. Further sub -regulation no. 2.2 of FSS (Licensing & 
Registration of Food Business) regulation 2011 o utlines the responsibilities of e -
commerce FBOs in this regard.  
– The Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and Display) Regulations, 
2020 mandates for : 
 The Name of Food 
 List of Ingredients 
 Nutritional information 
 Declaration regarding Veg or Non veg 
 Declaration regarding Food Additives 

7 
 
 Declaration of name and complete address  
 FSSAI logo and license number  
 Net quantity, Retail Sale Price and Consumer Care details (As 
per LM PC Rules) 
 Lot/Code/Batch identification 
 Date Marking 
 Labelling of Imported Foods 
 Country of Origin for Imported Foods  
 Instructions for use 
 Declaration regarding Food allergen  
 
3. Food Safety and Standards (Advertising and Claims) Regulations, 2018  
– The sub-regulation 6(1) of the Food Safety and Standards (Advertising and 
Claims) Regulati ons, 2018 prescribes the conditions for ‘Non -addition claims’ 
wherein clause (a) prescribes the conditions for the claim as Non -addition of 
sugars.  
 Further, clause (b) prescribes that ‘where sugars are naturally present in the 
food in such case the label shall indicate’: ‘CONTAINS NATURALLY 
OCCURRING SUGARS’. 
 In Addition, the Schedule – I of the said regulation prescribes the ‘Nutrient 
Content Claim’ wherein clause 10 specifies the conditions for the claim as 
Low and Free for sugar used on the label as lis ted below: 
 ‘Low Sugar’ where the product contains not more than – 5 g of sugars per 100 
g for solids, or 2.5 g of sugars per 100 ml for liquids  
 ‘Sugar Free’ where the product contains not more than 0.5 g of sugars per 
100 g for solids or 100 ml for liquids. 
 
4. Food Safety and Standards (Safe Food and Balanced Diets for Children 
in School) Regulations, 2020  
o Food Safety and Standards (Safe food and balanced diets for children 
in school) Regulations, 2020 prescribes the responsibilities of School 
Authority to e nsure safe food and balanced diets on school Premises 
and Promotion of safe food and balanced diet in and around school 
campus 
o Promotion of Safe Food & Balanced Diet Around School Campus:  
o Encouragement of Safe & Balanced Diets: The Food 
Authority/State Food Authority encourages schools to adopt 
programs promoting safe food, balanced diets, and local, 
seasonal foods, aiming to achieve ‘Eat Right Campus’ status.  

8 
 
o Guidance for School Canteens: Schools should promote balanced 
diets in canteens/kitchens based on “Dietary Guidelines for 
Indians” issued by ICMR-NIN and other expert institutions.  
o FBO Selection: Schools must ensure that FBOs providing meals 
comply with guidelines on safe and suitable foods for children.  
o Monitoring and Surveillance: The school autho rity shall have a system 
of regular inspection of premises to ensure that safe, balanced and 
hygienic food is served to the students.  
5. Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011  
– Provides to mandatory declaration on every package of food products u nder 
LM Rules: 
 Country of origin in case of imported packages  
 Common or generic name of the Commodity contained in the package  
 Net quantity, in terms of standard unit of weight or measure or in 
number; Retail sale price (MRP) in Indian currency (inclusive of all 
taxes); Unit sale price; Sizes/ dimensions of  the commodity, if relevant, 
consumer care details  
 
4.2 Furnishing the legislative framework governing food products and packaged 
commodities in India, the Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA), in a wr itten reply, 
submitted as under: 
 “Department of Consumer Affairs enforces the labelling requirements under 
the Legal Metrology Act, 2009, and the Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) 
Rules, 2011, to protect consumers from misleading practices and ensure  
transparency in all packaged commodities including packaged food products/ baby 
food. Under the Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011, all packaged 
food products must display clear and accurate information on labels, including net 
quantity, MRP inclusive of all taxes, country of origin etc. This is particularly crucial 
for food products including the baby food. Noncompliance with mandatory labelling 
requirements can lead to penalties and legal action under the Act, ensuring that 
manufacturers or importers do not mislead consumers about mandatory 
declarations. These mandatory declarations are required to be made on all pre -
packaged commodities in the interest of consumers like name and address of the 
manufacturer/ packer/ importer, country of or igin, name of the commodity, net 
quantity, month and year of manufacturing, ‘best before or use by the date, month 
and year’ of a commodity which may become unfit for human consumption after a 
period of time, retail sale price in the form of Maximum Retail  Price (MRP) Rs….. 
(inclusive of all taxes) and consumer care details etc. The Legal Metrology 
(Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011 also require to declare information on e -
commerce websites. Under the Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 
2011 Addit ionally, the Consumer Protection (E -Commerce) Rules, 2020, require 

9 
 
online marketplaces and sellers to provide clear, accurate, and standardized 
labelling of food products and other packaged items. Any misleading claims are 
subject to action under the Consu mer Protection Act, 2019, which empowers the 
Central Consumer Protection Authority (CCPA) to issue fines, product recalls, or 
bans on deceptive advertisements. The Food Safety and Standards Authority of 
India (FSSAI) ensure compliance with Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and 
Display) Regulations, 2020. Enforcement mechanisms include market surveillance, 
random inspections, and strict penalties for non -compliance with labelling norms. 
Legal Metrology Officers conduct periodic checks to verify the accura cy of 
declarations and violations can lead to heavy fines, product seizures, and 
prosecution. The combined framework of the Legal Metrology Act and Consumer 
Protection Act, along with FSSAI regulations, ensures that consumers receive 
accurate, transparent,  and health -conscious information in packaged products, 
protecting their right to make informed purchasing decisions.  
4.3 Furnishing the legislative framework governing food products and packaged 
commodities in India, the Food Safety and Standards Authorit y of India (FSSAI), in a 
written reply, submitted as under: 
“Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) is mandated to lay down 
science-based standards for articles of food and to regulate their manufacture, 
storage, distribution, sale and import  to ensure availability of safe and wholesome 
food for human consumption.  
 
 
FSSAI formulates the country specific standards of food articles on the basis of risk 
assessment and scientific advice provided by 21 Scientific Panels and Scientific 
Committee co nstituted under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. These 
standards are harmonized with internationally accepted Codex standards.  
FSSAI engages in a consultative process while establishing these standards, 
engaging experts from scientific fields, rele vant ministries, industry representatives, 
and other stakeholders.  
 
FSSAI has laid down Food Safety & Standards regulations namely the Food Safety 
and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulation, 2011, 
Food Safety and Standards (Food s for Infant Nutrition) Regulations, 2020, Food 
Safety and Standards (Labelling and Display) Regulations, 2020 and Food Safety 
and Standards (Advertising and Claims) Regulation, 2018. These regulations 
stipulate the general and specific requirement w.r.t. to the quality & safety standards 
and the labelling/claim/advertisement requirement to regulate the quality & safety of 
food product, keeping in consideration the exposure & target population.  
 
The Food Safety and Standards (Foods for Infant Nutrition) Regulations, 2020 
specifies different categories of infant foods namely:  
a) Infant Formula 
b) Milk Cereal Based Complementary Foods  
c) Processed Cereal Based Complementary Foods  
d) Follow-Up Formula 

10 
 
e) Food for Infants based on Traditional Food Ingredients  
f) Food for Special Medical Purposes intended for Infants.   
 
As per clause 3.6 of the said regulation “Lactose and glucose polymers shall be the 
preferred carbohydrates for food for infant nutrition. Sucrose and/or fructose shall 
not be added , unless needed as a carbohydrate source, and provided the sum 
of these does not exceed 20 percent of total carbohydrate ”.  
 
FSS (Labelling & Display Regulation) 2020 stipulates that mandatory nutritional 
information is to be declared on every packaged food products including Infant food, 
in the manner prescribed at sub regulation no. 5(3) of the FSS (Labelling & Display 
Regulation) 2020. The regulation aims to ensure adequate information is provided on 
the food label to ensure consumer have access to information while purchasi ng or 
consuming food. Sub -regulation 5(4)(3) of these regulations mandates the 
declaration per 100g or 100ml or per single consumption pack of the product and per 
serve percentage (%) contribution to Recommended Dietary Allowance calculated on 
the basis of  2000kcal energy, 67 g total fat, 22 g saturated fat, 2 g trans -fat, 50 g 
added sugar and 2000 mg of sodium (5 g salt) requirement for average adult per day 
shall be given on the label containing the following: —  
(i) energy value (kcal);  
(ii) the amounts of (A) Protein (g); (B) Carbohydrate (g) and Total Sugars (g), added 
sugars (g); (C) Total fat (g), saturated fat (g), trans fat (other than naturally occurring 
trans-fat) (g)and cholesterol (mg).  
 
FSS (Advertising and Claims) Regulations, 2018 aims to cu rb false and misleading 
advertisements wherein regulation 4(1) prohibits advertisements that contain false or 
misleading information and requires that all claims made in advertisements be 
substantiated with scientific evidence. These regulations have under  laid clear 
specifications for making claims on food businesses. It is the responsibility of the 
food business to adhere with these requirements.  
In reference with sugar, the aforementioned regulations clearly specify the 
requirements for advertising prod ucts free or low in sugar. For instance, sub 
regulation 6 specifies requirements for making claims regarding the non -addition of 
sugars. The regulations have set limits for claims regarding food being low/very low 
or free of certain ingredients or nutrient s. In case of sugar:  
Non addition claims for sugars can be made only if no sugars of any type, 
such as sucrose, glucose, honey, molasses, or corn syrup, have been added 
to the food, and the food contains no ingredients that include sugars, such as 
jams, j ellies, sweetened chocolate, or sweetened fruit pieces. These 
regulations also specify the limits for claiming food low in sugar should contain 
no more than 5g of sugars per 100g for solids or 2.5g per 100ml for liquids, 
while sugar -free foods must have no  more than 0.5g of sugars per 100g or 
100ml.  
Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and Display) Regulations, 2020 also 
mandates the mention of nutritional information on the labels w.r.t. salt, sugar 
and fat. Further, FSSAI has notified the draft Food Safety and Standards 
(Labelling and Display) Amend ment Regulations, 2025 that mandates the 

11 
 
mention of nutritional information on the labels w.r.t. salt, sugar and fat in bold 
letters and relatively increased font size on labels.”   
4.4 During their deposition before the Committee on 12.12.2024, representat ives 
of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) [FSSAI] apprised the 
Committee as under: 
“The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India is a statutory body which 
regulates the manufacturing, storage, distribution, sale, and import of food 
articles, and also, establishes scientific standards to ensure food safety. “  
 
 
 
V. POLICY PRESCRIBED IN INDIA 
5.1 In regard to the sugar content prescribed in infant food, FSSAI informed that 
Committee that they have notified the Food Safety and Standard s (Foods for Infant 
Nutrition) Regulations, 2020 in the Gazette and enforced the same with effect from 
1st October, 2022. 
As per clause 3.6 of the Food Safety and Standards (Foods for Infant Nutrition) 
Regulations, 2020 “ Lactose and glucose polymers shall be the preferred 
carbohydrates for food for infant nutrition. Sucrose and/or fructose shall not 
be added, unless needed as a carbohydrate source, and provided the sum of 
these does not exceed 20 percent of total carbohydrate ”.  
The limits specified for sug ars in infant food products in the FSS (Foods for Infant 
Nutrition) Regulations, 2020 is on par with the global standards (Codex, EU) and 
have no safety concerns. 
5.2 In response to a query regarding the existence of standard definitions and 
regulatory cla rity in respect of terms such as ‘added sugar’, ‘zero sugar’ and ‘no 


12 
 
added sugar’, the Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) furnished the following 
information:  
“ FSSAI has informed that sub-regulation 5(3) (a) of the Food Safety and 
Standards (Labelling and Display) Regulations, 2020 specifies the definitions 
of certain nutrients, such as: 
(i)‘sugars’ means all monosaccharides (glucose, fructose, etc.) and 
disaccharides (maltose, sucrose, lactose, etc.).  
(ii) ‘added sugars’ means monosaccharides and disa ccharides added to foods 
and beverages.  
The sub -regulation 6 (1) of Food Safety and Standards (Advertising and 
Claims) Regulations, 2018 specifies the conditions for the claim ‘Non -addition 
of sugars’ mentioning that: 
(a) Claims regarding the non -addition of sugars to a food may be made if the 
following conditions are met, namely: - 
(i) no sugars of any type have been added to the food (Examples: sucrose, 
glucose, honey, molasses, corn syrup, etc.);  
(ii) the food contains no ingredients that contain sugars  as an ingredient 
(Examples: jams, jellies, sweetened chocolate, sweetened fruit pieces, etc.);  
(iii) the food contains no ingredients containing sugars that substitute for 
added sugars (Examples: non -reconstituted concentrated fruit juice, dried fruit 
paste, etc.); and 
(iv) the sugars content of the food itself has not been increased above the 
amount contributed by the ingredients by some other means (Example: the 
use of enzymes to hydrolyse starches to release sugars).  
(b) Claims regarding the non-addition of sugars to a food may also be made, 
where sugars are naturally present in the food, and in such case the following 
indication shall also appear on the label.  
‘CONTAINS NATURALLY OCCURRING SUGARS’.  
Further, the sub -regulation 10 of the Schedu le – I of the above mentioned 
regulations specifies the conditions for the ‘Sugar Free’ claim and the 
conditions for the same are provided below:  
The product contains not more than 0.5 g of sugars per 100 g for solids or 100 
ml for liquids 
The Schedule – II of the said regulations specifies the Synonyms which may 
be used for claims defined in these regulations wherein Zero, No, Without, 

13 
 
Negligible Source can be used in the place of the term Free, hence the term 
‘Zero sugar’ can also be used on the label.”  
5.3 On being asked whether packaged food products in the country are required 
to declare total sugar and added sugar content separately on their labels, and the 
steps, if any, taken in this regard, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
(FSSAI), in its reply, submitted as under: 
“The sub-regulation 5(3)(b) of the Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and 
Display) Regulations, 2020 mandates to provide the nutritional information on 
the label wherein the content of total sugars and added sugars shall be 
provided on the label.  
In addition, FSSAI has notified the draft notification mentioning that “the 
information regarding per serve percentage (%) contribution to 
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) be given in bold letters with 
relatively increased font size for added sugar, saturated fat  and sodium 
content.” 
5.4 When asked whether any proposal is under consideration to prescribe specific 
limits for added sugar content in packaged foods, the Food Safety and Standards 
Authority of India (FSSAI), in its response, submitted as under:  
 “FSS (Labelling & Display Regulation) 2020 stipulates that mandatory 
nutritional information is to be declared on every packaged food product in the 
manner prescribed at sub regulation no. 5(3) of the FSS (Labelling & Display 
Regulation) 2020.  
 The regulat ion aims to ensure adequate information is provided on the food 
label to ensure consumer have access to information while purchasing or consuming 
food. Sub-regulation 5(4)(3) of these regulations mandates the declaration per 100g 
or 100ml or per single con sumption pack of the product and per serve percentage 
(%) contribution to Recommended Dietary Allowance calculated on the basis of 
2000kcal energy, 67 g total fat, 22 g saturated fat, 2 g trans -fat, 50 g added sugar 
and 2000 mg of sodium (5 g salt) require ment for average adult per day shall be 
given on the label containing the following: —  
(i)  energy value (kcal);  
 (ii) the amounts of (A) Protein (g); (B) Carbohydrate (g) and Total Sugars (g), 
added sugars (g); (C) Total fat (g), saturated fat (g), tran s fat (other than 
naturally occurring trans-fat) (g)and  cholesterol (mg). 
 Based on recipes, the sugar content varies from product to product and 
FSSAI prescribes mandatory disclosure of total sugar and added sugar 
content / %RDA by the FBOs on principal display panel for informed choice of 
the Consumer.  To further empower consumers,  FSSAI has notified the draft 
notification mentioning that “the information regarding per serve percentage 

14 
 
(%) contribution to Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) be given in b old 
letters with relatively increased font size for added sugar, saturated fat and 
sodium content.”  This measure aims to enhance transparency and help 
consumers make informed dietary choices .” 
5.5 During the sitting of the Committee, FSSAI informed the Com mittee regarding 
the comparison of nutritional composition of human milk and infant formula as under:  
 
 
5.6 On being asked w hether FSSAI has proposed/notified category -wise sugar 
thresholds different cagetories e.g., beverages, snacks, cereals the scienti fic criteria 
used to determine such threshold limits. The FSSAI in its reply submitted the 
following reply: 
 
 “The sugar is a source of carbohydrate in the food for which 
thresholds are defined  in terms of recommended daily allowances of 
carbohydrate by Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) –National 
Institute of Nutrition(NIN) . Further, the dietary allowances of sugar are 
defined in the ICMR-NIN Dietary Guidelines for Indians.  
 
In alignment to the above, the FSS (Labelling & Display) Regulation, 202 0 
clause 5(3)(b) prescribes Nutritional Information per 100g or 100ml or per 
single consumption pack of the product and per serve percentage (%) 
contribution to Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) calculated on the 
basis of 2000kcal energy, 67 g total fat,  22 g saturated fat, 2 g trans -fat, 50 g 
added sugar and 2000 mg of sodium (5 g salt) requirement for average adult 
per day, to be given on the label.  
 
Through the Eat Right Initiatives, FSSAI advocates, educates Consumers to 
eat healthy food as per the i ndividual nutritional requirements and encourages 


15 
 
Food Business Operators(FBOs) to offer safe and wholesome food to the 
consumers. Based on recipes, the sugar content varies from product to 
product andFSSAI prescribes mandatory disclosure of total sugar an d 
added sugar content / %RDA by the FBOs on principal display panel for 
informed choice of the Consumer.” 
 
 
5.7 Further, when asked if FSSAI has adopted a policy to define and limit the use 
of misleading terms like “health drink,” “energy -boosting,” and “n atural” on labels of 
sugar-heavy products and the punitive measures laid down. The FSSAI in its written 
reply submitted the following reply:  
“Claims such as, the "energy -boosting" or "health drink" are misleading 
claims.  These terms cannot be used on food labels unless specific conditions 
are met as specified in the regulations.  
Food Safety and Standards (Advertising and Claims) Regulations, 2018 is the 
notified instrument of FSSAI to regulate such claims and advertisements. The 
regulation aims to promote fairness, accountability and protect consumer 
interests by ensuring truthful and non-misleading claims.” 
 
VI. COMPARATIVE FORMULATION: GLOBAL CONTEXT 
6.1 Regarding international guidelines for sugar intake, the FSSAI in their written 
replies informed the Committee as under:  
WHO 
WHO guidelines, 2015 for Sugars intake for adults & children recommends a 
reduced intake of free sugars throughout th e life course. In both adults and children, 
WHO recommends reducing the intake of free sugars to less than 10% of total 
energy intake (strong recommendation).  
Further, it is stated that, FSSAI regulation is in alignment with provisions of Codex 
(Intergovernmental Organization of FAO/WHO) and European Food Safety Authority:  
EC Regulation 
 
 As per the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) Sucrose shall not to be 
added in Infant formula made from milk protein but can be added to Infant 
formula made f rom protein hydrolysate (≤ 20 % of total carbohydrates). Further 
sum of sucrose, fructose, sugar from honey ≤ 20 % of total carbohydrates can be 
added in follow up formula. 
 Commission delegated regulation (EU) stated that Sucrose may only be added 
to infant formulae manufactured from protein hydrolysates. If added, the sucrose 
content shall not exceed 20 % of the total carbohydrate content.  
 
 

16 
 
Codex 
As per the Codex Standard for Follow -Up Formula for Older Infants and Product 
for Young Children “Sucrose and/ or fructose should not be added, unless 
needed as a carbohydrate source, and provided the sum of these does not 
exceed 20 percent of available carbohydrates”.  
Examination of emerging scientific evidence is a continuous process and 
accordingly FSSAI engages  stakeholders in the process of amendments in the 
regulations.” 
  
6.2  In response to a query on the measures undertaken by the Department to 
align its regulatory framework with international best practices in consumer 
protection, particularly concerning the Packaged Commodities Rules, the 
Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) furnished the following information:  
“The Department of Consumer Affairs has taken several proactive steps to 
align the Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011 with 
international best practices in consumer protection:  
(i) Standardized Labelling Requirements : The Rules mandate clear 
and standardized declarations such as net quantity, maximum retail price 
(MRP) and consumer care details, etc. in line with global practices followed 
by advanced jurisdictions like the EU, USA and ASEAN nations.  
(ii) QR Code and Digital Labelling : The use of QR codes for providing 
few information aligning with emerging international trends that promote 
transparency and digital access to product  data has been allowed for 
electronic products. 
(iii) Simplification and Ease of Doing Business : Recent amendments 
have rationalized compliance requirements, allowing greater flexibility in 
declarations such as enabling e -commerce provisions for bringing I ndia’s 
regulatory environment closer to global e -commerce packaging norms.  
(iv) International Engagement : The Department actively participates in 
OIML (International Organization of Legal Metrology) meetings and aligns its 
technical regulations, model appr ovals, etc. with international standards, 
enhancing global acceptance and harmonization.  
(v) Stakeholder Consultations : Regular consultations are held with 
industry bodies, consumer organizations and other stakeholders to review 
and upgrade rules, ensuring  the Packaged Commodities Rules remain 
dynamic and globally relevant. 
 These initiatives collectively strengthen consumer protection while facilitating 
fair trade and enabling regulatory coherence with international benchmarks.”  
6.3 When asked whether the World Health Organization (WHO) recommends 
limiting free sugar intake to less than 10% of total energy (with an ideal target of 5%) 

17 
 
and whether the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has 
incorporated these guidelines into its regulatory f ramework or plans to do so in the 
future, the FSSAI, in its written reply, submitted as under:  
                 “Yes, WHO guidelines: sugars intake for adults and children – 2015, 
recommends reducing the intake of free sugar to less than 10% of total energ y 
intake. These guidelines are applicable for both adult and children. Food Safety and 
Standards (Foods for Infant Nutrition) Regulations, 2020 are specific to infants upto 2 
years of age only. Examination of emerging scientific evidence is a continuous 
process and the scientific panels in FSSAI examine these and take necessary action 
from time to time.  FSSAI will continue to take measures to promote Eat Right 
practices accordingly.” 
  
6.4 Regarding global comparison of standards for carbohydrate for infan t formula 
(0-6 M) and follow up formula (6-12 M), FSSAI furnished the following information:  
 


18 
 
 
6.5 With regard to the steps and measures undertaken to align the Food Safety 
and Standards Authority of India’s (FSSAI) sugar standards for packaged baby foods 
with international benchmarks such as WHO guidelines and Codex Alimentarius, the 
FSSAI, in its written reply, submitted as under:  
“As per the Food Safety and Standards (Foods for Infant Nutrition) Regulations, 
2020, “Lactose and glucose polymers shal l be the preferred carbohydrates for 
food for infant nutrition. Sucrose and/or fructose shall not be added, unless 
needed as a carbohydrate source, and provided the sum of these does not 
exceed 20 percent of total carbohydrate”.  
It is clarified that, the 20% (13.25gm ~ 53 Kcal) of the total carbohydrate (50 to 
55% ~ 265Kcal) as per Food Safety and Standards (Foods for Infant Nutrition) 
Regulations, 2020 is equivalent to 10% (13.25gm ~ 53 Kcal) of the total energy 
requirement (530Kcal) of an infant (0 -06 mo nths) as per ICMR -NIN 
Recommended Dietary Allowance. In similar lines, the standards for Follow up 
Formula and complementary foods defined for 06 to 24 months is also on par 
with ICMR-NIN and WHO recommendations as follows:   
6.6 When asked whether any ong oing collaborations exist with international 
agencies or research institutions to explore innovative regulatory approaches for 
reducing sugar and salt in processed foods, akin to India’s achievements in 
eliminating trans fats, the Food Safety and Standards  Authority of India (FSSAI), in 
its reply, submitted as under: 
“FSSAI ensures Indian food safety regulations, align with international 
standards by referring to international guidelines and best practices, using evidence -
based decision - and global research, periodically reviewing and amending the 
regulations. 


19 
 
Further, FSSAI organises Global Food Regulator’s Summit, which provides a 
unique platform to food regulators of various nations for exchanging information on 
food product regulatory and safety requirements, with an emphasis on fostering 
cooperation between nations in the realm of food safety standards. The Global Food 
Regulator’s Summit will deliberate on these suggested collaborations.”  
 
6.7 On being asked whether the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
(FSSAI) has examined Nutri -Grade type rating systems implemented in developed 
countries, such as Singapore, and whether it proposes to pilot or adopt a similar 
system in India, the FSSAI, in its response, submitted as under:  
  “FSSAI has  notified the draft notification mentioning that “the 
information regarding per serve  percentage (%) contribution to Recommended 
Dietary Allowance (RDA) be given in bold letters with relatively increased font size 
for added sugar, saturated fat and sodium  content.” 
6.8 When asked whether, in view of emerging scientific evidence and international 
best practices, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) is 
contemplating a revision of the existing standards for sugar content in infant nutritio n, 
the FSSAI, in its reply, furnished the following information:  
“Examination of emerging scientific evidence is a continuous process and the   
scientific panels in FSSAI examine these and take necessary action from time 
to time.  FSSAI will continue to ta ke measures to promote Eat Right practices 
accordingly.” 
6.9 When asked whether regulatory authorities have aligned India’s sugar 
consumption limits in food products with WHO guidelines (5%) and global standards 
(10%), and, if not, the reasons for maintaining the higher 20% threshold in the 
country, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), in its reply, 
submitted as under: 
 
“WHO guidelines on sugars intake for adults and children – 2015, recommend 
a reduced intake of free sugars thr oughout the life course (strong 
recommendation). In both adults and children, WHO recommends reducing 
the intake of free sugars to less than 10% of total energy intake (strong 
recommendation). 
 
WHO also suggests a further reduction of the intake of free su gars to below 
5% of total energy intake (conditional recommendation).  
 
Food Safety and Standards (Foods for Infant Nutrition) Regulations, 2020 are 
specific to infants up to 2 years of age only. As per the Food Safety and 
Standards (Foods for Infant Nutrit ion) Regulations, 2020, “Lactose and 
glucose polymers shall be the preferred carbohydrates for food for infant 

20 
 
nutrition. Sucrose and/or fructose shall not be added, unless needed as a 
carbohydrate source, and provided the sum of these does not exceed 20 
percent of total carbohydrate”.  
 
It is clarified that, the 20% (13.25gm ~ 53 Kcal) of the total carbohydrate (50 
to 55% ~ 265Kcal) as per Food Safety and Standards (Foods for Infant 
Nutrition) Regulations, 2020 is equivalent to 10% (13.25gm ~ 53 Kcal) of t he 
total energy requirement (530Kcal) of an infant (0 -06 months) as per ICMR -
NIN Recommended Dietary Allowance. In similar lines, the standards for 
Follow up Formula and complementary foods defined for 06 to 24 months is 
also on par with ICMR-NIN and WHO recommendations  
 
Examination of emerging scientific evidence is a continuous process and the 
scientific panels in FSSAI examine these and take necessary action from time 
to time.  FSSAI will continue to take measures to promote Eat Right practices 
accordingly.” 
 
VII. NUTRITIONAL LABELLING ON PACKAGING  
 
7.1 Regarding lebelling provisions prevailing in India, during the deliberation, 
FSSAI apprised the Committee as under:  
 
7.2 In regard to consumer -friendly and easily readable nutritional disclosures —
such as  added sugar content through grading or colour coding —to enhance 
consumer awareness and enable informed decision -making under the Legal 
Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011 the Department of Consumer 
Affairs (DoCA), in its written reply, clarified as under: 


21 
 
“The responsibility for nutritional labelling, including sugar content, lies 
with the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) under the 
Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and Display) Regulations, 2020.  
For infant food, the Food S afety and Standards (Foods for Infant 
Nutrition) Regulations, 2020, particularly Regulation 3(6), stipulates that:  
“Lactose and glucose polymers shall be the preferred carbohydrates for 
food for infant nutrition. Sucrose and/or fructose shall not be added 
unless needed as a carbohydrate source and provided the sum of these 
does not exceed 20% of total carbohydrate .” 
 The Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011 do not 
require grading or colour coding for sugar or nutritional content. The 
Legal Met rology framework ensures that standard declarations like net 
quantity and MRP, etc. are clear and legible but does not extend to 
interpretative labelling such as warning labels, etc.”  
7.3 When asked to explain the mechanism adopted to ensure harmonization of 
packaging and labelling requirements under the Legal Metrology framework with the 
nutritional labelling norms prescribed by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of 
India (FSSAI), the Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA), in its reply, stated as 
under: 
“The packaging and labelling norms under the Legal Metrology (Packaged 
Commodities) Rules, 2011 and the Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and 
Display) Regulations, 2020 have been harmonized to ensure regulatory 
clarity, ease of compliance and consumer protection. 
 The nutritional labelling norms, including declarations related to sugar, 
fat, energy and other nutrient values, are exclusively prescribed by the Food 
Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI). The Legal Metrology does 
not regulate nutritional content or quality parameters.  The harmonized 
framework is as follows: 
(i) Declarations related to the name and address of the 
manufacturer/packer/importer, the month and year of manufacture, pre -
packing or import and the best before/use by da te are governed by FSSAI 
regulations. 
(ii) Declarations such as the country of origin (for imported products), common 
or generic name of the commodity, net quantity, retail sale price (MRP) 
(inclusive of all taxes), unit sale price and consumer care detail s fall under the 
Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules.  
(iii) Regarding the size of letters and numerals, for declarations like net 
quantity, MRP, expiry/ best before date (where applicable) and consumer care 
details, the provisions of Legal Metrology Rules apply. For all other 
declarations, including nutritional information, the FSSAI regulations apply.  

22 
 
 This delineation ensures that quantity assurance is addressed under 
the Legal Metrology, while quality and nutritional assurance is under th e 
domain of FSSAI. This coordination fosters greater transparency, enhances 
consumer confidence and aligns with best practices in packaged commodities 
regulation.” 
7.4 When asked to provide details of the various regulatory changes proposed by 
the Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) relating to sugar content, labelling, and 
advertising norms, along with their current implementation status, the DoCA, in its 
written response, submitted as under:  
“The Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA), through its Legal Metrology 
Division, is responsible for regulating quantitative declarations on all pre -
packaged commodities, including food products, under the Legal Metrology 
(Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011. These declarations include net quantity, 
maximum retail pric e (MRP), unit sale price, country of origin and consumer 
care details. 
          However, the regulation of sugar content, nutritional labelling and 
advertising norms, including health or sugar -related claims, falls outside the 
purview of DoCA and is exclu sively regulated by the Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 
2006. 
          While DoCA does not propose or implement regulations on sugar 
content, it has taken several initiatives to strengthen tran sparency, visibility and 
accuracy of packaging declarations, which support broader consumer 
protection objectives: 
(i) Enhanced Font Size & Legibility Requirements:  
o Regulatory changes have been made to ensure that key declarations such as 
net quantity, MRP , and best before/use by date are prominently displayed in a 
consumer-friendly manner, improving label visibility.  
(ii)      Digital Labelling Initiatives: 
o Introduction of QR code -based declarations for electronic products (with 
scope for future expansion)  reflects DoCA’s commitment to innovative labelling 
mechanisms aligned with digital access and global practices.  
(iii)     Harmonization with FSSAI Labelling Norms:  
o DoCA and FSSAI have harmonized the requirements for packaging and 
labelling. For instance:  
▪ “Best Before”/“Use by” dates follow FSSAI regulations.  
▪ Net quantity, MRP, unit price and consumer care details are governed by 
Legal Metrology rules. 

23 
 
o This ensures regulatory consistency and minimizes consumer confusion.  
(iv)     Consumer Awareness and Monitoring: 
o Through campaigns like “Jago Grahak Jago”, DoCA promotes awareness 
about accurate labelling and prevention of misleading packaging.  
o The Central Consumer Protection Authority (CCPA), under the Consumer 
Protection Act, 2019, addresses complaints related to misleading 
advertisements, including those involving nutritional or health claims.”  
7.5 On the matter of Front of Pack Nutrition Labeling (FoPNL), FSSAI informed in 
their written replies that FSSAI has draft notified Food Safety and Standards 
(Labelling and Display) Amendment Regulations, 2020 related to Front of Pack 
Nutrition Labelling (FOPNL) on 13 th September 2022 for public comments.  
Current status: FSSAI has received more than 14000 comments from the 
stakeholders on the aforementioned draft  regulations, which are currently under the 
examination by the experts and in the process of wider stakeholder consultations. 
Further, industry specific stakeholder consultations may be required.  
 
7.6 When asked whether the Department of Consumer Affairs i s undertaking any 
initiatives to ensure compliance with mandatory labeling and declaration 
requirements for packaged commodities sold through e -commerce platforms, the 
DoCA, in its written reply, submitted as under:  
 
 “FSSAI has informed that the Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and 
Display)  Regulations, 2020, mandate the clear declaration of ingredients 
including total and added  sugar on food product labels. Moreover, FSSAI 
has approved a proposal requiring the  display of  nutritional information 
about added sugar, sodium, and saturated fat in bold  letters and with  a 
relatively larger font size on packaged food labels. This amendment 
 seeks to empower  consumers by providing clearer information about the 
nutritional value  of products, enabling  them to make more informed 
and healthier choices. All food  business operators are to comply 
 with these statutory requirements including  ECommerce. Further sub -
regulation no. 2.2 of FSS  (Licensing & Registration of Fo od Business) 
regulation 2011 outlines the responsibilities of e -commerce FBOs in this 
regard.” 
 
7.7 On being asked whether the Legal Metrology Act, 2009, specifically 
addresses the accurate labeling and disclosure of sugar content in packaged food 
products, including infant foods, and whether the Department of Consumer Affairs 
(DoCA) has any plans to update the labeling provisions to make sugar -related 
disclosures more transparent and consumer -friendly, the DoCA, in its written reply, 
submitted as under: 

24 
 
 
“The Legal Metrology Act, 2009, primarily focuses on ensuring 
standardized weights, measures, and labelling requirements for 
packaged commodities, including food products. Under the Legal 
Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011, manufacturers must 
provide mandatory declarations on packaged food, such as net quantity, 
MRP inclusive of all taxes, etc. The Food Safety and Standards Authority 
of India (FSSAI) primarily regulates detailed nutritional labelling, while 
Legal Metrology ensures compliance with packaging and labelling norms. 
Under the Legal Metrology Act it is ensured that the quantity delivered to 
the consumer is correct. Given growing consumer concerns the 
Department of Consumer Affairs reviews existing labelling provisions to 
enhance transpare ncy and consumer awareness. To safeguard the 
interest of consumers the Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) 
Rules are amended time to time to ensure the interest of consumers. The 
provisions under the Legal Metrology Packaged Commodities Rules have 
already been harmonized with Food Safety & Standards Regulations. 
Department is open to future amend the Packaged Commodities Rules 
as per best global practices. These updates aim to ensure that 
consumers, can make informed choices when purchasing packaged food  
and other high sensitivity products”  
 
7.8 Regarding the label analysis of infant formula (0 -6 Months) of various brands, 
during the deliberation, FSSAI apprised the Committee as under:  
 
 


25 
 
 
 


26 
 
7.9 Further, on the matter of label analysis of infant follow -up formula (6 -12 
months) of various brands, FSSAI apprised the Committee as under:  
 
 


27 
 
7.10 Regarding labelling of milk cereal based complementary food (6 -24 months) 
of various brands, FSSAI informed the Committee as follows:  
 
 
7.11 In response to a quer y regarding the development of mobile applications, QR 
code–enabled scanners, or other digital tools to assist consumers in quickly 
evaluating sugar content at the point of purchase, along with the present status of 
such initiatives, FSSAI submitted as fol lows: — 
 
“The sub -regulation 5(3)(f) of FSS (Labelling & Display) Regulations, 2020 
specifies that Nutritional information may additionally be provided in the form 
of Barcode/Global Trade Identification Number (GTIN).  
 


28 
 
Further the sub -regulation 8(5) of th e said regulation specifies that some 
labelling requirements are exempted if they are provided in a Barcode/Global 
Trade Identification Number (GTIN). 
 
In addition, it is mentioned in the FAQ no. 43 of FSS (Labelling & Display) 
Regulations, 2020 that ‘Addi tionally, the term “Barcode” in this regulation is a 
comprehensive term that includes all types of barcodes, including QR Codes. 
Therefore, Food Business Operators (FBOs) have the flexibility to use QR 
Codes or any other form of barcode to provide nutritio nal information on their 
food products in accordance with the regulation’.”  
 
VIII. MARKETING ON E-COMMERCE PLATFORMS 
8.1 Regarding mandatory declarations on packaged commodity, Department of 
Consumer Affairs apprised the Committee that every e -commerce entity to ensure 
the following mandatory declarations:  
 
8.2 Regarding establishing a dedicated task force to take enforcement action 
against mislabeled packaged food products sold online, and regarding the penal 
measures initiated against erring Food Busi ness Operators, the Department of 
Consumer Affairs (DoCA), in its written reply, submitted as under:  
 
“The regulation of mislabelled packaged food products sold online falls 
exclusively under the jurisdiction of the Food Safety and Standards Authority 
of India (FSSAI). The mislabelled packaged food products is not regulated 
under the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 & Rules made thereunderand the 
Consumer Protection (E -Commerce) Rules, 2020, as it is outside the scope 
of the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 and the Legal  Metrology (Packaged 
Commodities) Rules, 2011 and the Consumer Protection (E -Commerce) 
Rules, 2020 as per the Allocation of Business Rules.  


29 
 
 The Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) has not established a 
dedicated task force exclusively for enforcement ac tions against mislabelled 
packaged food products sold online. However, robust enforcement 
mechanisms are in place under the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 and the Legal 
Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011 to regulate/ ensure 
declarations on pre -packaged commodities including for products sold 
through e-commerce platforms. 
 Legal Metrology Officers appointed in States/ UT s carry out inspections of 
both physical retail outlets and e -commerce platforms.  Following mandatory 
declarations are ensured regular ly, which are to be made on all e -commerce 
platforms/ websites: 
(i)  Name and address of the manufacturer/ packer/ importer,  
(ii) The name of the country of origin or manufacture or assembly for 
imported products, 
(iii) The common or generic name of the co mmodity, 
(iv) The net quantity, 
(v) The ‘best before or use by the date, month and year’ if a package 
contains a commodity which may become unfit for human consumption 
after a period of time, 
(vi) The retail sale price of the package.  
 While there is no dedicated task force exclusively for online food 
mislabelling, the existing regulatory and enforcement ecosystem comprising 
Legal Metrology Departments and FSSAI effectively monitors and acts 
against labelling violations. The Department remains committed f or 
enhancing consumer protection in the evolving digital marketplace and for 
strengthening institutional mechanisms based on emerging challenges.”  
8.3 When asked how the Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) ensures that 
products sold on e -commerce platforms comply with Legal Metrology and food 
labeling standards, and whether systems exist for real -time monitoring and removal 
of misleading listings, the DoCA, in its written reply, submitted as under:  
“The Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) ensures  compliance of products sold 
on e -commerce platforms through enforcement of the Legal Metrology (Packaged 
Commodities) Rules, 2011, which mandate that all necessary declarations such as 
net quantity, MRP, country of origin etc. are prominently displayed on line. The 
nutritional labelling and sugar -related claims are regulated by FSSAI, through the 
State’s Food Safety Authorities.” 
8.4 On being asked about the details of various regulatory changes related to 
sugar content, labelling and advertising norms prop osed by DoCA, in their written 
replies, DOCA informed the Committee as under:  
“The Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) , through its Legal 
Metrology Division, is responsible for regulating quantitative declarations 
on all pre -packaged commodities, including food products, under the 

30 
 
Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011 . These 
declarations includenet quantity, maximum retail price (MRP), unit sale 
price, country of originand consumer care details . 
          However, the regulation of sugar content, nutritional labelling  
and advertising norms , including health or sugar -related claims, falls 
outside the purview of DoCA  and is exclusively regulated by t he Food 
Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI)  under the Food 
Safety and Standards Act, 2006. 
          While DoCA does not propose or implement regulations on 
sugar content , it has taken several initiatives to strengthen 
transparency, visibility and accuracy of packaging declarations , 
which support broader consumer protection objectives:  
(i)      Enhanced Font Size & Legibility Requirements:  
o Regulatory changes have been made to ensure that key declarations 
such as net quantity, MRP , and best before/use by date are 
prominently displayed in a consumer -friendly manner, improving label 
visibility. 
(ii)      Digital Labelling Initiatives:  
o Introduction of QR code-based declarations for electronic products 
(with scope for future expansion) reflects DoCA's  commitment to 
innovative labelling mechanisms  aligned with digital access and 
global practices. 
 (iii)     Harmonization with FSSAI Labelling Norms:  
o DoCA and FSSAI have harmonized the requirements for packaging 
and labelling. For instance: 
 “Best Before”/“Use by” dates follow FSSAI regulations. 
 Net quantity, MRP , unit price and consumer care details are 
governed by Legal Metrology rules.  
o This ensures regulatory consistency and minimizes consumer 
confusion. 
(iv)     Consumer Awareness and Monitoring : 
o Through campaigns like “Jago Grahak Jago”, DoCA promotes 
awareness about accurate labelling and prevention of 
misleading packaging. 
The Central Consumer Protection Authority (CCPA) , under the Consumer 
Protection Act, 2019, addresses complaints related to  misleading advertisements , 
including those involving nutritional or health claims. 
 

31 
 
IX. MONITORING 
9.1 In response to a query regarding the procedures and safeguards in place to 
verify that nutritional claims on baby food products are truthful and do not mislead 
consumers, the Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) provided the following 
details: 
 “FSSAI has informed that  they have set up a dedicated Advertisement 
Monitoring Committee (AMC) which periodically scrutinizes the 
advertisements and food labellin g claims being made on the food 
products on various channels including social media and e -commerce 
platforms. The said committee monitors the advertisements/claims 
regularly of different food products including high -sugar products, in 
Indian Market and in case of any violation, the same is referred to the 
concerned Licensing Authorities for further enforcement actions against 
the FBOs such as issuance of Improvement Notices under Section -32 of 
FSS Act, 2006, for withdrawing of misleading claims or seeking 
scientifically substantiate for the same etc.  
          The detail of the action taken in last 02 years is given at Annexure I.” 
 
9.2 Regarding the measures adopted to monitor advertisements and labeling 
claims of high-sugar food products, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
(FSSAI) furnished the following information:  
 “FSSAI has set up a dedicated Advertisement Monitoring Committee (AMC) 
which  periodically scrutinizes the advertisements and food labelling claims made 
through various channels including social media and e -commerce platforms. 
The said committee  monitors the advertisements/claims regularly of different 
food products including high- sugar  products, in Indian Market and in case of 
any violation, the same is referr ed to the concerned Licensing Authorities for further 
enforcement actions against the FBOs such  as issuance of Improvement Notices 
under Section-32 of FSS Act, 2006, for withdrawing  of misleading claims or 
seeking scientifically substantiated data for th e same etc.   The detail of the action 
taken in last 02 years is given at Annexure II. Additionally, Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs refers issues pertaining to food safety to FSSAI on regular basis. ” 
9.3 Further, on the matter of existence of mechanisms to m onitor compliance and 
impose penalties for violations of sugar content regulations in pre -packaged baby 
foods nationwide, the Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA), in its written reply, 
submitted as under: 
 
“FSSAI has informed that, FSSAI through the Stat e/UT Food Safety 
Departments and its Regional Offices, carries out regular surveillance, 
monitoring, inspections label Scrutiny and random sampling of food products to 
ensure compliance with the standards established under the FSS Act, 2006 and 
the Rules a nd Regulations made thereunder. In cases where food samples fail 

32 
 
to meet the required standards and FBOs are found in contravention of the 
provisions of the FSS Act, 2006, penal actions are taken against the defaulting 
FBOs. The details of enforcement samp les of infant food and infant milk 
substitutes for last 03 years is placed at Annexure III.” 
 
9.4 In response to a query regarding the specific mechanisms adopted by the 
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) to verify and monitor that 
sugar content declarations on food labels are clearly visible, accurate, and not 
misleading, the FSSAI, in its written reply, submitted as under:  
“The Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and Display) Regulations, 2020, 
mandate the clear declaration of ingredien ts including total and added sugar on 
food product labels.  
Following methods for testing of Total carbohydrate in Infant Food are used.  
 
(i) FSSAI Method No. FSSAI 01.067:2022: Determine the Total 
Carbohydrates in Milk Cereal Based Complementary Food and 
Processed Cereal Based Complementary Food available in Manual of 
Methods of Analysis of Foods: Dairy and Dairy Products  
(ii) IS 1656 (2007): Milk -Cereal Based Complementary foods [FAD 19: 
Dairy Products and Equipment]: Determination of Total Carbohydrates  
It may be noted that added sugars and inherent sugars are both simple 
carbohydrates composed of molecules of carbon, hydrogen, and 
oxygen. So added sugars cannot be differentiated from naturally 
occurring sugar in food by any chemical or and analytical tes t methods. 
Current test protocols can determine total sugar content or 
carbohydrate content in food products by employing chromatography, 
volumetric or gravimetric methods.  
 
It may further be noted that as per FSS (Labelling and Display) 
Regulation, 2020, labelling of added sugar in the product is 
compulsory. This enables consumers to make informed choice. It is 
required that manufacturers to create and keep certain records 
necessary to verify the amount of sugars added in the food, that could 
be requested for review by the regulatory body during inspection.”  
 
9.5 In response to a query regarding the regular monitoring mechanisms 
established by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) to ensure 
the accuracy of nutritional information on label s, with particular reference to added 
sugar in infant and other food products, the FSSAI, in its written reply, submitted as 
under: 

33 
 
“Mechanism involves regular inspection, label Scrutiny & sample testing 
through enforcement authorities viz., Regional offic es of FSSAI and 
Commissioner of Food Safety, States/UTs’ Food Safety Departments.” 
9.6 When asked whether regulatory authorities verify the nutritional claims made 
by manufacturers of baby food, health drinks, and food supplements, and the 
measures being t aken to curb misleading claims, the Department of Consumer 
Affairs (DoCA), in its written reply, submitted as under:  
“FSSAI has informed that  the sub -regulation 4(1) of Food Safety and 
Standards (Advertising and Claims) Regulations, 2018 specifies that:  
Claims must be truthful, unambiguous, meaningful, not misleading and help 
consumers to comprehend the information provided.  
• FSSAI has laid down Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and Display) 
Regulations, 2020 and Food Safety and Standards (Advertising  and Claims) 
Regulation, 2018.  
• FSS (Advertising and Claims) Regulations, 2018 aims to curb false and 
misleading advertisements. These regulations have under laid clear 
specifications for making claims on food products. It is the responsibility of the 
food business operators to adhere with these requirements. The relevant 
provisions in the said regulations are provided below:  
a)         regulation 4(1): Claims must be truthful, unambiguous, meaningful, not 
misleading and help consumers to comprehend the i nformation provided. 
b)         regulation 4(12): Claims in advertisements shall be consistent with 
information on the label of the food or beverage  
c)         regulation 4(13): No advertisement shall be made for food products 
which is deceptive to the consumers 
• FSSAI through the State/UT Food Safety Departments and its Regional 
Offices, carry out regular surveillance, monitoring, inspections, label scrutiny 
and product verification and random sampling of food products to ensure 
compliance with the standa rds established under the FSS Act, 2006 and the 
Rules and Regulations made thereunder.  
In cases where food samples fail to meet the required standards and FBOs are 
found in contravention of the provisions of the FSS Act, 2006, regulatory 
actions are taken  against the defaulting FBOs as rules, viz., issuance of 
improvement notice and punitive measures (judicial) are taken under sections 
52 & 53 of FSS Act 2006 for Misbranded Food & Misleading advertisement w.r.t 
Nutritional information, respectively. Penalt y for misbranded food may extend to 
three lakh rupees and the penalty for misleading advertisements may extend to 
ten lakh rupees. The details of non -conforming samples including Labelling 
defects/ Misleading claims/ advertisement etc. and penalties raised  in last 3 
years are attached at Annexure – IV and state wise data attached at 
Annexure V to VII.” 

34 
 
9.7 When asked whether third -party scientific substantiation is currently required 
for any health -related claims made on food product packaging, the Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), in its reply, submitted as under:  
 
“As per the section 7 (2) of Food Safety and Standards (Advertising and 
Claims) Regulations, 2018, Nutrient function claims and other function claims 
maybe made based on cu rrent relevant scientific substantiation and to provide 
sufficient evidence on the type of claimed effect and the relationship to health 
as recognized by generally accepted scientific review of the data and the 
scientific substantiation shall be reviewed b y food business operator as new 
knowledge becomes available and claims updated accordingly.  
 
Further, where a claimed health benefit is attributed directly to the product, it 
shall be based on statistically significant results from well -designed human 
intervention  studies, conducted by or under guidance of established 
research institutions, in line with the  principles of GCP (Good Clinical 
Practices) and peer reviewed or published in a peer reviewed reputed scientific 
journal.   
 
The food business operator or marketer shall seek prior approval from the Food 
Authority for reduction of disease risk claims other than those that are defined 
and for which criteria are laid out under these regulations or any other 
regulations made under the Food Safety and Stand ards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006).  
 
The health claims, nutrition claims, nutrient function claim” can be made as per 
the provisions stipulated in the Food Safety and Standards (Advertising and 
Claims) Regulations, 2018.  
 
X. ENFORCEMENT MECHANISMS  
10.1 Regarding enforcement of the regulations, during the deliberation, the 
Committee was apprised as under:  
 


35 
 
10.2 When asked whether the Department/FSSAI has developed a comprehensive 
enforcement strategy for monitoring packaged food commodities, including infant 
foods, and to provide details of the major components of such a strategy, the 
Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA), in its written reply, submitted as under:  
“The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) is mandated to lay 
down science based standards for articles of food and to regulate their 
manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and import to ensure availability of safe 
and wholesome food for h uman consumption. FSSAI is fully committed to 
ensure the availability of safe food products including infant foods to the 
consumers across the country.  
Enforcement and the implementation of the Act is primarily carried out by state 
food safety authorities . Towards this, Regular surveillance drives, monitoring, 
regulatory inspection and random sampling of various food products are 
conducted throughout the year by the officials of Food Safety Departments of 
the respective States/ UTs and Regional offices of FSSAI to check compliance 
with the quality and safety parameters including testing for infant food products 
as laid down under Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, and Regulations 
made thereunder.  
 Any Food Business Operators (FBOs) found in contravention  of the provisions 
of the FSS Act, 2006, and the rules and regulations made thereunder will face 
penal actions as per the provisions outlined in Chapter IX (Offences and 
Penalties) of the Act, specifically Sections 48 -67. 
 Furthermore, FSSAI has implemente d Risk Based Inspections System (RBIS) 
wherein inspection plan has been framed, based on the risk associated with the 
Food Businesses. This enables the Food Safety Officers to prioritize the 
inspections of the premises of the high risk Food Business Operat ors (FBOs). 
The inspections of high risk food businesses are mandatory to be done once in 
a year along with sampling. 
 FSSAI has established mechanisms for receiving and addressing complaints 
related to food adulteration. Consumers can lodge complaints thr ough the 
FSSAI helpline, or Food Safety Connect mobile app, which are promptly 
investigated and acted upon as per FSS Act, Rules and Regulations.”  
10.3 When asked about the mechanisms currently in place within the Department 
of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) to periodically re-verify that approved labels and product 
formulations continue to comply with regulatory standards, and whether any random 
or risk-based revalidation processes are being implemented, the DoCA, in its written 
reply, submitted as under: 
 
“The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) is mandated to lay 
down science -based standards for articles of food and to regulate their 

36 
 
manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and import to ensure availability of safe 
and wholesome food for human c onsumption. Towards this, FSSAI sets 
science-based standards for the food products and conducts regular monitoring 
through States/UT and through 04 Regional Offices of FSSAI.  
While setting standards, the Food Authority plays the pivotal role in the 
formation of any regulations. Further, Food Authority also takes note of the 
status of the enforcement of the FSS Acts, Rules and Regulations made 
thereunder. As per the FSS Act, the Food Authority consists of a Chairperson 
and twenty -two other members which inc lude representative the Ministry or 
Department of Consumer Affairs not below the rank of Joint Secretary, thereby 
involving the relevant ministries/departments in Food Authorities vital activities.  
In order to ensure that the approved labels and formulati ons continue to meet 
regulatory standards, following regulatory provisions are in place.  
  
Section 23 of FSS Act : Packaging and labelling of foods - (1) No person shall 
manufacture, distribute, sell or expose for sale or despatch or deliver to any 
agent or broker for the purpose of sale, any packaged food products which are 
not marked and labelled in the manner as may be specified by regulations:  
Provided that the labels shall not contain any statement, claim, design or device 
which is false or misleading in any particular concerning the food products 
contained in the package or concerning the quantity or the nutritive value 
implying medicinal or therapeutic claims or in relation to the place of origin of 
the said food products. 
(2) Every food business oper ator shall ensure that the labelling and 
presentation of food, including their shape, appearance or packaging, the 
packaging materials used, the manner in which they are arranged and the 
setting in which they are displayed, and the information which is mad e available 
about them through whatever medium, does not mislead consumers.  
For this, FSSAI has notified Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and Display) 
Regulations, 2020. 
Section 24 of FSS Act: Restrictions of advertisement and prohibition as to unfair 
trade practices. 
No advertisement shall be made of any food which is misleading or deceiving 
or contravenes the provisions of this Act, the rules and regulations made 
thereunder. 
For this, FSSAI has notified Food Safety and Standards (Advertising and 
Claims) Regulation, 2018. FSS (Advertising and Claims) Regulations, 2018 
aims to curb false and misleading advertisements. These regulations have 
under laid clear specifications for making claims on food products. It is the 
responsibility of the food business o perators to adhere with these requirements. 
The relevant provisions in the said regulations are provided below:  

37 
 
a) regulation 4(1): Claims must be truthful, unambiguous, meaningful, 
not misleading and help consumers to comprehend the information 
provided. 
b) regulation 4(12): Claims in advertisements shall be consistent with 
information on the label of the food or beverage  
c) regulation 4(13): No advertisement shall be made for food products 
which is deceptive to the consumers  
  
Further, FSSAI through the State/UT Food Safety Departments and its 
Regional Offices, carry out regular surveillance, monitoring, inspections, label 
scrutiny and product verification and random sampling of food products to 
ensure compliance with the standards established under the FSS Act, 2006 and 
the Rules and Regulations made thereunder.  
In cases where food samples fail to meet the required standards and FBOs are 
found in contravention of the provisions of the FSS Act, 2006, the defaulting 
FBOs will fac e penal actions as per the provisions outlined in Chapter IX 
(Offences and Penalties) of the Act, specifically Sections 48 -67. 
10.4  On being asked to provide details of the mechanisms and guidelines instituted 
by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of  India (FSSAI) for conducting periodic 
inspections and surveillance of packaged food products across the country, the 
FSSAI, in its written reply, submitted as under:  
 
“Regular monitoring, inspections, and audits are conducted by all the state 
governments and 04 regional offices of FSSAI. Each Food Safety Officer is 
given the monthly target of minimum 10 inspections and 25 samples to be 
lifted.  
 
In order to carry out th e inspection, a detailed checklist is specified for Food 
Safety Officers in Food Safety Manual. Based on the score obtained, result is 
shown as compliant, partial compliant and non -compliant. In case of partial 
compliance or non -compliance, improvement not ice or suspension/cancellation 
of license/registration are done in accordance with the FSS act, 2006, Rules 
and regulations made thereunder. In the year 2024 -25 more than 04 lakhs 
inspections were conducted including approx. 1100 inspections on units 
involved in Foods for Infants. 
FSSAI through Risk Based Inspection System (RBIS) conducts special 
inspections on High Risk Food Businesses such as infant products, milk & milk 
products, meat & meat products, Egg & poultry, packaged drinking water & 
mineral water, prepare foods, Indian Sweets & foodstuffs intended for particular 
nutritional uses & FRK.  In addition, inspection is also mandated in cases of 
complaints/food safety emergency/expired licenses.  
Further, all the food business operators holding Central L icense undergo Third 
Party Audit from FSSAI empanelled agencies once in a year.  In case of report 

38 
 
of major non -conformity compliance during Third Party Audit, inspection by the 
Food Safety Officer has been made mandatory. Additionally, non -compliance is 
addressed through corrective actions, penalties, and guidance to ensure 
adherence to food safety standards. Total number of Third Party Audits 
conducted in FY 2024-25 is 8036.  
FSSAI regularly conducts PAN India surveillance of various commodities 
engaging national level institutes like Quality Council of India (QCI), National 
Dairy Development Board (NDDB) etc.  The details of surveillance conducted 
during last 10 years is placed at Annexure VIII.” 
 
10.5 In response to a query on whether the Food Safety and  Standards Authority of 
India (FSSAI) and the Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) have conducted joint 
inspections, market surveillance, or enforcement campaigns targeting high -sugar 
products and misleading labeling, the DoCA, in its written reply, submi tted as under: 
 
“The regulation of sugar content and related nutritional aspects of food 
products falls exclusively under the jurisdiction of the Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India (FSSAI). The Legal Metrology Division, 
Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA), does not regulate sugar content, as 
it is outside the scope of the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 and the Legal 
Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011, as per the Allocation of 
Business Rules. 
 Accordingly, no joint inspections, market sur veillance or enforcement 
campaigns have been carried out by DoCA in relation to high sugar products 
or nutritional labelling.  However, the Legal Metrology Division continues to 
coordinate with FSSAI and other relevant authorities on issues related to 
declarations and prevention of misleading packaging practices , strictly within 
the domain of legal metrology.” 
10.6 Regarding availability of adequate testing mechanisms, including accredited 
laboratories, exist for conducting regular and surprise quality chec ks on packaged 
foods, particularly in rural areas and smaller towns, and any proposal to establish an 
independent food testing agency to strengthen monitoring, the Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), in its written reply, informed that Co mmittee as 
under: 
“Sampling and testing are integral components of the food safety framework to 
ensure that the food available to consumers is safe and meets the prescribed 
standards.  
In line with the provisions laid down under Section 43 (1) and (2)  of the FSSAI 
has notified NABL-accredited laboratories  as Primary and Referral Food 
Laboratories which are accredited under ISO/IEC 17025: 2017 system.  

39 
 
 Primary Notified Food Laboratories  are mandated to carry out analysis of 
food samples by the Food Analy sts under Section 43(1) of the FSS Act, 2006. 
Currently, there are 243 such laboratories across the country. 
 Referral Food Laboratories  are entrusted with the analysis of appellate 
samples and additional responsibilities as specified under Section 43(2) of  the 
Act and its corresponding rules and regulations. Presently, 22 Referral 
Laboratories are functioning under this framework . 
 There is no proposal to establish new independent food testing agency.”  
 
10.7 On the matter of shortage of staff and delay in te st results, FSSAI i n their 
written replies, submitted as under::  
 “As per section 46 (3) of FSS act, 2006:  
The Food Analyst shall, within a period of fourteen days from the date of receipt 
of any sample for analysis, send analysis report.  
Provided that in case the sample cannot be analysed within fourteen days of its 
receipt, the Food Analyst shall inform the Designated Officer and the 
Commissioner of Food Safety giving reasons and specifying the time to be 
taken for analysis. 
FSSAI issues various orders fr om time to time and also apprises laboratories 
during meetings conducted by FSSAI to strictly adhere to the prescribed 
timelines for testing. 
Further, for strengthening of the food testing infrastructure in States & UTs & 
based on the requirements received  from the respective States/UT, FSSAI 
provides financial and technical assistance for setting & up -gradation of state 
food testing laboratories. Funds are provided to the States/UTs under the 
SoFTeL (Strengthening of Food Testing System in the Country Incl uding 
provision of Mobile Food Testing Labs) & through Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) between FSSAI & States/U Ts. 
The support includes the grant towards “High End Equipment with manpower 
support and renovation work for accommodating the equipment, basic  food 
testing equipment, setting up of microbiology laboratory, manpower, support 
towards obtaining NABL -Integrated Assessment, Capacity Building, mobile 
food testing laboratory with their operational costs, rapid testing kits etc.    
To address the deficie ncy of food testing infrastructure in remote areas and to 
improve consumer access to such services, FSSAI is providing financial 
assistance to States and Union Territories (U Ts) for the procurement of Mobile 
Food Testing Laboratories, known as Food Safety on Wheels (FSWs). 

40 
 
Currently, 305 FSWs are deployed across 35 States and U Ts.  These mobile 
labs are equipped to perform basic tests for common adulterants in food 
products. These multipurpose vehicles not only serve as mobile testing units 
but also play a vital role in spreading food safety awareness and provide 
training programmes. 
FSSAI has informed that the procedure of sampling is prescribed under Section 
38, 42 and 47 of the FSS Act read with FSS Rule 2.4.1 which is to be strictly 
adhered to, and the s ame provides adequate procedural safeguards to prevent 
any possibility of sample replacement or manipulation.  
As per prescribed procedure under the aforesaid provisions, samples are to be 
taken in four parts. Further, the sealed container of one part of th e sample for 
analysis shall be sent in a sealed packet, by the immediate succeeding working 
day, to the Food Analyst under appropriate condition to retain the integrity of the 
sample; and remaining second and third parts of the sample are deposited in 
the custody of the Designated officer. The fourth part of the sample shall be 
sent to an accredited laboratory along, if so requested by the Food Business 
Operator, under intimation to the Designated Officer. Provided that fourth part 
also shall be deposited with Designated Officer if Food Business Operator does 
not request to send the sample to an accredited lab.  
To ensure quick and timely reporting of samples collected, the FSSAI has 
launched a single online regulatory platform namely Food Safety Compliance 
System (FoSCoS), wherein real time punching of inspection, sampling, notices 
issued are to be done. 
Further, timelines have been prescribed for each steps of the sampling, 
analysis and further regulatory action. For instance, the sample shall reach food 
analyst by immediate succeeding working day and the lab shall generate report 
within 14 days of the receipt of the sample.  
 Regarding the interim action between sampling and receipt of lab report, in 
order to prevent any tempering and to safeguard the public health, provision of 
seizure of the suspected food articles and issuance of prohibition of sale is 
done in accordance with the provision of the FSS Act 2006.”  
10.8 When asked to provide information on the number of inspections conducted, 
samples tested, an d enforcement actions taken by FSSAI and DoCA, and whether 
the Department considers these measures sufficient to deter violations in the 
expansive and growing infant and packaged food sector, the Department of 
Consumer Affairs (DoCA), in its written reply, submitted as under: 
 

41 
 
“FSSAI has informed the details of inspections conducted by FSSAI for 
infant food products as given below:  
Fiscal Years Inspections Conducted 
2023-24 779 
2022-23 396 
2021-22 173 
 
10.9 Further, FSSAI was asked to provide details of  the measures implemented to 
ensure that imported baby food products comply with Indian regulations on sugar 
content and labeling requirements, along with information on the number of samples 
collected and cases of violations detected over the past three y ears. In response, the 
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), in its written reply, submitted 
as under: 
 “Food Import in the country is subject to Section 25 of the Food Safety and 
Standards Act, 2006 & Food Safety and Standards (Import) Regulations, 2017 
made thereunder. Regarding Infant Food, FSSAI has notified the specific 
regulation i.e. FSS (Foods for Infant Nutrition) Regulations, 2020 which has to 
be complied with. 
Risk Management System (RMS) is operational at Indian Customs Electr onic 
Data Interchange Gateway (ICEGATE) system which is based on the risk 
criteria shared by FSSAI. Accordingly the imported food consignments are 
referred to FSSAI for clearance. Any imported food articles once referred to 
the Food Import Clearance System  (FICS) of the FSSAI is subject to three 
tier verification system i.e. Document scrutiny, Visual Inspection, & Testing 
which includes the check on quality, safety and labelling requirement on 
imported food.  If the imported food article complies with the F SS Act, 2006 
and Regulations the No Objection Certificate (NOC) is issued else Non -
Conforming Certificate (NCC) is issued which means the consignment is not 
cleared for sale in domestic market.  
As per risk criteria shared with Customs for implementation of  RMS, Infant 
foods are classified as high-risk which has highly stringent RMS. Further, 
for efficient monitoring and traceability of high risk products, import of high 
risk products including Food for infant nutrition/ Infant foods is permitted 
through designated ports. 
 
 
 

42 
 
Details of Infant food product Bill of entries referred to FICS -FSSAI (last 3 
years): 
Year Bill of entry*  No of samples 
collected/Items 
NOC Issued NCC Generated 
2022 15 24 22 2 
2023 67 146 133 13 
2024 35 54 54 0 
* Single Bill of entry may contain multiple items  
 
XI. COMPLIANCE AND PENALTIES 
11.1 In regard to the steps undertaken by the Department of Consumer Affairs 
(DoCA) to protect the health of infants and children, including the measures enforced 
against food companies violati ng sugar-related labeling or formulation standards, the 
DoCA provided the following written reply:  
“The Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA), through its Legal Metrology 
Division, has implemented several regulatory measures to protect consumers, 
including infants and children, by ensuring transparency and accuracy in 
packaging and labelling of pre -packaged commodities. Under the Legal 
Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011, all packaged products —
including baby food —shall display mandatory informatio n such as net quantity, 
maximum retail price (MRP) inclusive of all taxes, country of origin (for imported 
products), and consumer care details. These measures are intended to 
safeguard consumers from misleading practices and ensure that essential 
quantitative information is accessible and legible on packaging, including those 
sold via e-commerce platforms.  
           However, it is important to note that the regulation of sugar content and 
nutritional labelling in food products, including baby food, does not fall under the 
jurisdiction of DoCA. Instead, such matters are regulated exclusively by the 
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), under the Food Safety 
and Standards Act, 2006. The FSSAI's Labelling and Display Regulations, 2020 
and the  Foods for Infant Nutrition Regulations, 2020 govern nutritional claims 
and formulation standards. For instance, the infant food regulation prohibits the 
addition of sucrose or fructose unless specifically needed and restricts their total 
to not exceed 20% of total carbohydrate content.  
           As sugar content and related nutritional aspects fall outside the scope of 
the Legal Metrology Act, 2009, DoCA has not taken enforcement action against 
food companies for flouting sugar -related labelling or formulation norms. These 
violations ar e dealt with by FSSAI, which has the authority to issue notices, 
impose penalties, recall products and ban deceptive advertisements. DoCA, 
however, maintains coordination with FSSAI to harmonize packaging and 
labelling standards —ensuring declarations like “Best Before” dates follow 
FSSAI guidelines, while quantity -related declarations remain under Legal 
Metrology.  

43 
 
           Although no dedicated task force has been formed by DoCA for sugar -
specific violations, its officers do inspect both retail and onlin e markets for 
compliance with quantitative labelling norms. Consumer complaints related to 
incorrect net quantity or price are handled by the Legal Metrology Officers of the 
State Governments who enforces the provisions of the Legal Metrology Act, 
2009 and Rules made thereunder. Thus, while DoCA’s efforts focus on ensuring 
packaging transparency and standardization, the responsibility for regulating 
sugar levels and nutritional quality in food products for infants and children rests 
entirely with FSSAI.” 
 
11.2 In response to a query seeking details of the mechanisms established to track 
and report violations of the nutritional labeling requirements under the Food Safety 
and Standards (Labelling and Display) Regulations, 2020, the Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), in its written reply, submitted as under:  
“FSSAI through its regional offices and States/U Ts conduct verification of the 
implementation of the statutory provisions notified under FSS Act and 
regulations made there under including FSS (Labelling & Display) Regulation 
2020, through random inspections and sampling. In case of any violation 
appropriate action is taken as per the provisions under the act. Further punitive 
measures (judicial) are taken under Sec. 52 & 53 of FSS Act 2006 for 
Misbranding & Misleading claims w.r.t Nutritional information, respectively. The 
details of total violations repo rted (including labelling) for last 4 years and 
subsequent action taken is summarized below:  
 
Details of Enforcement for last 4 Years. 
Yea
r 
No. of 
Sampl
es 
Analy
sed 
No. of 
Sample
s found 
non-
conform
ing 
Non-Conforming 
Samples Civil Cases Criminal Cases 
Unsa
fe 
Sub 
Stand
ard 
Labelling 
defects/ 
Misleadin
g/ 
Miscellan
eous 
No. of 
Convicti
ons 
Penalt
ies 
Raise
d  (Cr 
Rs.) 
No. of 
Convicti
ons 
Penalt
ies 
Raise
d  (Cr 
Rs.) 
202
3-
24 
17051
3 33808 6782 22603 4423 29586 74.12 1161 2.67 
202
2-
23 
1,77,51
1 44,626 6,57
9 21,917 16,130 28,464 33.23 1188 2.75 
202
1-
22 
1,44,3
45 32,934 4,89
0 16,582 11,462 19,437 53.39 671 1.38 
202 1,07,8 28,347 5,22 13,394 9,733 14,817 49.92 506 0.83 

44 
 
0-
21 
29 0 
201
9-
20 
1,18,7
75 29,589 4526 15671 8995 16881 57.77 821 1.61 
 
  
11.3 During the deliberation, representatives of FSSAI explained the comparison 
between various provisions under IMS Act, 1992 and FSS Act, 2006 with reference 
to penalty/punishment as under:  
 
 
11.4 When asked whether the penalties prescribed under the Legal Metrology Act 
and FSSAI regulations are effective in preventing violations, especially concerning 
sugar content in baby foods, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
(FSSAI), in its written reply, submitted as under:  


45 
 
“Condition for addition of carbohydrate  is specified in sub -regulation (6) of 
regulation 3 of Food Safety and Standards (Foods for Infant Nutrition) 
Regulations, 2020. 
Violation of this provision attract penalty specified for sub -standards food 
specified in section 51 of  FSS Act,2006  which st ipulate that:- 
 
“Any person who whether by himself or by any other person on his behalf 
manufactures for sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports any article of 
food for human consumption which is sub -standard, shall be liable to a penalty 
which may extend to five lakh rupees.”  
 
11.5  On being asked whether the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
(FSSAI) has imposed penalties on any Food Business Operators (FBOs) for 
misleading advertisements related to sugar content over the past three ye ars, the 
FSSAI, in its written reply, submitted as under:  
“The details of non -conforming samples including Labelling defects/ Misleading 
claims/ advertisement etc and penalties raised in last 3 years are attached at 
Annexure – IX and state wise data attached at Annexure X to XI.” 
 
11.6 Further,when asked whether the existing penalties of ₹25,000 or ₹1,00,000 
are adequate and effective when imposed on large corporates operating nationwide, 
and whether there are any proposals to revise or strengthen the penal ty framework, 
particularly for violations involving children’s food and health supplements, the 
Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA), in its written reply, submitted as under:  
“FSSAI has informed that the penalties and punishment under the Food Safety 
& Standards Act 2006 are imposed in a graded manner depending on the 
nature & gravity of offence and accordingly, civil penalties for minor offences 
and punishment for serious violations, as provided from section 50 -67 under 
the FSS Act 2006. These penalty &  punishment are levied post enquiry/trial 
through judicial proceedings i.e. adjudication & prosecution as provided under 
the FSS Act 2006 by the Adjudication Court (by Adjudicating officer - having 
power of a civil court under sec 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code) and by 
a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or by a Metropolitan Magistrate (at court 
of ordinary jurisdiction or special court under code of criminal procedure, 1973) 
respectively. 
Furthermore, Sections 48 and 49 of the Food Safety and Sta ndards Act, 2006 
lay down the guiding principles and provisions concerning offences and 
penalties. These sections assist the courts in evaluating the relevant factors of 
each case while determining the appropriate quantum of penalty and 
punishment.” 

46 
 
Central Database of Repeat Offenders in Food Safety Violations  
 
11.7    In response to the query regarding the existence of a centralized online 
portal or publicly accessible database maintained by the Government that lists 
brands found non -compliant or repeat offenders for food safety violations, the 
FSSAI provided the following information: 
“At present, FSSAI has an online platform – FoSCoS (Food Safety 
Compliance System), which maintains all the details including 
inspections, improvement notices issued, FBO history related to 
license/registration, the number of samples drawn , tested, non -
conforming samples, civil and criminal cases initiated, and penalties 
imposed.  
• Through FoSCoS, since 2020 FSSAI captures data on repeated 
offenses w.r.t. Food safety violations during inspections. 
• Since, 2024, the details related to adju dication cases are being 
captured. 
• Since April 2025, the details related to prosecution cases of central 
license holders are being captured.  
Soon this portal will be able to capture all the type of non -compliances/ 
repeated offenses related to food safety violations.” 
 
11.8   Regarding monitoring and publishing  data concerning the sugar 
content in packaged foods, instances of violations of prescribed limits, and the 
punitive actions taken against such violators, the Department of Consumer 
Affairs (DoCA) provided the following reply:  
 “The regulation of nutritional composition, including sugar levels and 
enforcement of limits on added sugars in food products is the statutory 
responsibility of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
(FSSAI) under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 . 
          Accordingly, DoCA does not collect or publish data related to sugar 
content, nutritional violations in prescribed limits in packaged foods.   
However, FSSAI is the designated authority that sets nutrient limits, 
monitors compliance through inspections and laboratory  testing and 
takes enforcement actions (including penalties, product recalls and 
prosecution) for violations of nutritional standards.  
          DoCA, through its Legal Metrology Division, enforces compliance 
with the Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities)  Rules, 2011, which 
pertain to: 
o Quantitative declarations such as net quantity, MRP and unit 
sale price, etc. 

47 
 
o Ensuring clarity and legibility of labelling on all pre -packaged 
goods, 
o Preventing misleading packaging in terms of quantity, not 
quality. 
          While DoCA plays a complementary role by ensuring that labels 
are clear and accurate, it does not have a mandate to assess or act 
upon sugar content or dietary formulations.  
          Therefore, DoCA does not monitor or publish data on sugar 
content or related violations, as this function is exclusively carried out by 
FSSAI. The Department remains committed to supporting consumer 
protection by ensuring accurate quantity declarations and coordinating 
with FSSAI to address misleading practices in pa ckaging and labelling 
where required.” 
11.9 Further, when asked whether the Department of Consumer Affairs 
publishes data on violations by food companies and the punitive actions taken 
against them in the public domain, and if so, the details thereof, or i f not, the 
reasons for the same, the Department provided the following reply:  
“The Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA), through its Legal 
Metrology Division, is responsible for enforcing the provisions of the 
Legal Metrology Act, 2009 and the Legal Metro logy (Packaged 
Commodities) Rules, 2011, which mandate accurate and legible 
quantitative declarations such as net quantity, Maximum Retail Price 
(MRP), unit sale price, country of origin and consumer care details on all 
pre-packaged commodities, including food products. 
         The violations specifically related to food safety, nutritional 
composition and misleading health claims fall under the jurisdiction of the 
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) under the Ministry 
of Health and Family  Welfare, the Department of Consumer Affairs 
monitors and enforces quantitative labelling compliance, for all pre -
packaged commodities. 
         Data on enforcement actions taken under the Legal Metrology Act, 
2009 such as the number of inspections, offenc es booked, compounding 
actions taken and penalties collected is comp iled by the respective 
States/UTs.” 
11.10   In regard to provide state-wise data on the number of raids conducted, 
violations detected, and prosecutions initiated against violators, the 
Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) submitted the following response:  
“FSSAI has informed that the enforcement data is maintained by FSSAI 
on online platform Food Safety Compliance System (FoSCoS) and 
Annual Report Portal. 
          Department of Consume r Affairs (DoCA) has actively contributed 
to protecting consumer interests under the Legal Metrology (Packaged 
Commodities) Rules, 2011. While the Food Safety and Standards 

48 
 
Authority of India (FSSAI) under the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare is respo nsible for food content and nutrition labelling (including 
sugar composition), DoCA ensures that declarations such as MRP, net 
quantity, consumer care contact, etc. are properly displayed. DoCA’s role 
also includes ensuring label visibility, accuracy and d eterrence against 
deceptive or misleading packaging practices.  
           DoCA also works closely with FSSAI and other stakeholders to 
enhance coordination, strengthen enforcement, and promote consumer 
education through platforms like Jago Grahak Jago. State Legal 
Metrology Departments conduct inspections to ensure co mpliance under 
the Legal Metrology Act, 2009.  
State-wise data of last 3 years related with enforcement of packaged 
commodities received from States/ UTs under the Legal Metrology Act, 
2009 
Sr. 
No. 
  
Year 
Section 36(1) Error in declaration  Section 36(2) Error in quantity 
Offences 
Booked 
Offence
s 
Compou
nded 
Compounding 
Fee Deposited 
(₹) 
Offenc
es 
Booke
d 
Offences 
Compounded 
Compoundi
ng Fee 
Deposited 
(₹) 
1 2022-23 23,976 19,402 4,69,489,022 2,060 1,778 22,613,600 
2 2023-24 24,101 19,364 3,48,92,03,991 2,030 1,819 4,48,12,590 
3. 2024-25 23,675 20,366 26,30,16,970 2,279 2,025 2,70,13,200 
 
 State-wise details are attached under Annexure XII 
 
XII. INTER-AGENCY COORDINATION 
 
12.1 As informed by FSSAI, in India, the infant food is regulated by the Ministry of 
Women and Child Development, Ministry of Health and Family welfare and   
c. Ministry of Consumer Affairs Food and Public Distribution through various Acts.  
12.2 In regard to any existing mechanism for inter -ministerial coordination 
between the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), the Department 
of Consumer Affairs (DoCA), and other relevant stakeholders on the regulation of 
sugar in packaged foods , the DoCA in their written replies furnished the following 
information:  
FSSAI has informed that the Food Authority consists of 22 members which includes 
representatives from 7 ministries or Departments of the Central Government dealing 
with - 

49 
 
(i) Agriculture, 
(ii) Commerce, 
(iii) Consumer Affairs, 
(iv) Food Processing, 
(v) Health, 
(vi) Legislative Affairs, 
(vii) Small Scale Industries. 
 
          Whenever FSSAI proposes a new draft notification, it is made 
available on the FSSAI website for stakeholders (including government 
bodies, FBO associations, and others) feedback/ comments.”  
 
12.3  Further, responding to the same query, FSSAI in their written replies 
submitted as under:  
“The Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 prescribes the information 
regarding the members of the Food Authority, stating that: 
The Food Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and the following twenty -
two members out of which one -third shall be women, Joint Secretary level 
officer from 7 relevant Ministries wherein Consumer Affairs is one of the 
members and plays a vital role in the formation of regulations.  
Additionally, whenever FSSAI proposes a new draft notification, it is made 
available on the FSSAI website where in various stakeholders (including 
government bodies, FBO associations, and others) can provide the 
feedback/comments within a duration of 60 days. Moreover, FSSAI operates 
21 scientific panels, consisting of scientists and researchers who are part of 
national-level government organizations.  
The composition of the Scientific Committee (SC) includes six independent 
food technologists or scientists who are not affiliated with any of the Scientific 
Panels (SPs), and are nominated by the Food Authority. Additionally, the 
Chairpersons of all the SPs are also members of the SC. This structure 
ensures a balanced representati on of expertise and independence in the 
decision-making process. 
The FSSAI's Central Advisory Committee (CAC) composition includes 
representatives from various sectors like food industry, agriculture, consumer 
organizations, and research bodies.  
Further, FSSAI is conducting stakeholder consultations and actively involving 
them in the regulation making process.  
Misleading advertisements and claims received from the Department of 
Consumer Affairs (DoCA), the Central Consumer Protection Authority 

50 
 
(CCPA), or th rough public complaints are being scrutinized by the 
Advertisement Monitoring Committee of FSSAI.  
This Committee evaluates the compliance of such claims and advertisements 
in accordance with the Food Safety and Standards (Advertising and Claims) 
Regulations, 2018. Based on the findings, appropriate actions are taken 
against FBOs to ensure that food businesses do not mislead consumers 
through inaccurate representations regarding sugar content or health -related 
benefits.” 
12.4 When asked about the specific s teps taken to harmonize the roles of the Food 
Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) and the Department of Consumer 
Affairs (DoCA) and to ensure coordinated enforcement, particularly in cases 
involving misleading health claims or dual formulations  in international and domestic 
markets, given that FSSAI oversees nutritional and safety standards while DoCA 
regulates packaging, declarations, and pricing norms, the DoCA furnished the 
following response:  
“As informed by the Food Safety and Standards Au thority of India (FSSAI), 
the provisions for labelling of pre -packaged foods are mentioned under FSS 
(Labelling and Display) Regulations, 2020 which specifies that all food 
products must comply with mandatory labelling and safety requirements to 
ensure consumer protection and informed choice. These include declaring the 
true name of the food, list of ingredients with allergens, nutritional information, 
net quantity, date marking (use by/expiry or best before), lot/batch 
identification, veg/non -veg symbol, a nd the name, address, FSSAI logo and 
license number of the manufacturer/packer/importer. Moreover, the Food 
Safety and Standards (Advertising and Claims) Regulations, 2018 provides a 
comprehensive framework to ensure that health and nutrition claims on foo ds 
are truthful, clear, non -misleading and scientifically substantiated. Claims 
must not encourage excessive consumption, undermine the importance of a 
balanced and varied diet or healthy lifestyles, and must be fully consistent 
with label information. 
Products must also carry appropriate warnings, advisories, and usage or 
storage instructions, along with category -specific declarations such as for 
fortified foods, sweeteners, caffeine, or special dietary products, wherever 
applicable. 
All information must b e truthful, clear, legible, non -misleading, and consistent 
with advertisements and claims, ensuring food safety, traceability, and 
transparency for consumers.” 
 
12.5  On being asked about the steps the Department has taken to delineate 
responsibilities, es tablish uniform enforcement protocols, and coordinate effectively 

51 
 
between the Union and State Governments in relation to food business regulation, 
the DoCA furnished the following response:  
“FSSAI has informed that the implementation and enforcement of th e Food 
Safety and Standards Act, 2006 is a shared responsibility between the Central 
and State Governments. While the Food Safety and Standards Authority of 
India (FSSAI), under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, is responsible 
for laying down scie nce-based standards and ensuring overall coordination, 
the State Food Safety Authorities are primarily responsible for enforcement at 
the field level.  
As per provisions of Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and  
Registration of Food Businesses) Regulatio ns, 2011, the FBOs have been 
bifurcated into Centrally Licensed FBOs (as per Schedule 1 of the regulation) 
and State Licensed FBOs (for commencing or carrying on food business, 
which are not covered under Schedule 1). The Centrally Licensed FBOs come 
under the jurisdictional control of the FSSAI and the state Licensed FBOs 
come under the jurisdictional control of the respective State/UTs.  
The enforcement authorities viz., Commissioner of Food Safety, Designated 
Officer & Food Safety Officers in the States/U Ts perform their duties under 
sec 29 of the FSS Act and perform regular inspection, monitoring, 
surveillance, and sampling at the food businesses to verify & ensure 
compliance to the statutory standards & requirements under the FSS Act 
2006, FSS Rules 2011  and Food Safety & Standards Regulations notified 
from 2011 till date. In case of any non -compliance, punitive measures by the 
States/UTs are taken against the defaulting food business operators following 
the procedures as per the provisions under the FSS Act 2006. 
Further, in order to ensure uniformity in the implementation of harmonized and 
effective food safety enforcement mechanisms across all states, the Food 
Authority coordinates with the State Food Safety Authority and has 
undertaken the following key measures: 
(i)  Clear procedures on inspection, sampling, testing, and to initiate the 
penalties & punishment under FSS Act 2006, FSS Rules 2011 and 
regulations, ensuring consistency in implementation across States/UTs by 
State Food Authorities through CAC meetings.   
(ii) Regular training programs by FSSAI are conducted for Food Safety 
Officers (FSOs), Designated Officers (DOs), and laboratory personnel to 
enhance their enforcement capabilities and ensure standardized practices.  

52 
 
(iii)  Digital platforms like the Food Safety Compliance System (FoSCoS) 
and the Indian Food Laboratory Network (INFoLNet) to facilitate real -time 
monitoring and data sharing among enforcement authorities.  
(iv)  Regular engagement with State Food Safety Commissioners through 
Central Advisory Committee meetings (held quarterly) for reviewing the status 
of enforcement machinery and proper implementation of food safety 
measures.  The Central Advisory Committee ensures close cooperation 
between the Food Authority and the enforcement ag encies and organisations 
operating in the field of food.  
To further streamline effective coordination between Central and State 
Authorities and avoid jurisdictional issues, FSSAI has laid down directions for 
clear jurisdictional control of Central and Stat e authorities over central and 
state licensed FBOs while taking into consideration the need for early and 
effective response in cases of the Food safety emergencies. Thus there is a 
clear demarcation of responsibilities and jurisdiction between State/UTs f ood 
Safety Authorities and FSSAI complemented with uniform enforcement 
protocols to ensure effective coordination between the Union and State 
Governments.” 
12.6  When asked whether a formal mechanism —such as a task force, 
memorandum of understanding (MoU),  or committee —exists between the Food 
Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) and the Department of Consumer 
Affairs (DoCA) to harmonize labeling, marketing, and enforcement norms, the DoCA 
submitted the following response:  
“FSSAI has informed that no such task force, MoU, committee exist between 
FSSAI and DoCA for such purpose. However, Misleading advertisements and 
claims received from the Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA), the Central 
Consumer Protection Authority (CCPA), or through public co mplaints are being 
scrutinized by the Advertisement Monitoring Committee.”  
12.7  On being asked whether the Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) and the 
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) share a common grievance 
redressal platform or da ta exchange protocol to monitor sugar -related consumer 
complaints, and if not, whether DoCA plans to establish one in the future, the DoCA 
in their written replies submitted as under:  
  
“The Consumer Protection Act, 2019 provides for a three tier quasi -judicial 
machinery at District, State and Central levels commonly known as “Consumer 
Commissions” for protection of the rights of consumers and to provide simple 
and speedy redressal of consumer disputes including those related with unfair 
trade practices. The Consumer Commissions are empowered to give relief of a 
specific nature and award compensation to consumers, wherever appropriate.  

53 
 
Under the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, the Central 
Consumer Protection Authority (CCPA), an executive a gency, came into 
existence on 24.07.2020. It is designed to intervene, to prevent consumer 
detriment arising from unfair trade practices and to initiate class action(s), 
including the enforcement of recalls, refunds and return of products. Its core 
mandate is to prevent and regulate false or misleading advertisements which 
are prejudicial to the public interest.  
FSSAI has informed that  there is no such common platform for grievance 
redressal platform or data exchange protocol to monitor sugar -related 
consumer complaints, between DoCA and FSSAI. However, Misleading 
advertisements and claims received from the Department of Consumer Affairs 
(DoCA), the Central Consumer Protection Authority (CCPA), or through public 
complaints are being scrutinized by the Advertisement Monitoring Committee.”  
 
12.8 With regard to the efforts being undertaken to coordinate with the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), the Ministry of Women and Child Development 
(MoWCD), and the Food Safety and Standards Authority of  India (FSSAI) for 
establishing a national task force or a concerted mechanism to reduce sugar 
consumption in the country, FSSAI, in its written submission, stated as follows: — 
 
“FSSAI, as the authority responsible for regulating food safety standards and  
nutritional labelling is involved in promoting healthier eating habits and reducing 
excessive sugar consumption. Some of the initiatives include:  
(i) Aaj Se Thoda Kam Campaign : FSSAI has launched public awareness 
campaigns, such as “Aaj Se Thoda Kam,” enc ouraging people to reduce their 
intake of sugar, salt, and fat. This campaign aims to raise awareness about the 
health risks associated with high sugar consumption and is part of FSSAI’s 
broader initiative to improve public health.  
(ii) Regulations on Food  Products: FSSAI regularly updates its regulations to 
control the levels of sugar, fat and salt in packaged food products. This includes 
establishing guidelines for food manufacturers and ensuring compliance with 
nutritional labelling, which helps consumer s make informed choices.  
 The Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) through the Legal Metrology 
Division does not directly regulate issues related to reducing sugar consumption, 
as it’s focus is on ensuring the quantity and other declarations required unde r the 
Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011. However, the efforts to 
reduce sugar consumption in the country typically fall within the domain of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) and the Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India (FSSAI). 
 Given that sugar consumption is a public health issue that requires multi -
sectoral coordination, FSSAI may play a leading role in establishing a national 
task force or a combined effort to tackle excessive sugar intake. This task force 
could bring together stakeholders from various ministries, including MoHFW, 

54 
 
MoWCD and DoCA to develop comprehensive strategies to reduce sugar 
consumption in India.  The task force may focus on regulating sugar content in 
foods, promoting public awareness and e ducation, collaborating with health 
organizations to develop guidelines and encouraging reforms in advertising and 
marketing of high-sugar foods, particularly those targeted at children.  
 While the Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) and Legal Metrology are 
not directly involved in efforts to reduce sugar consumption, FSSAI is 
responsible to take active steps through public awareness campaigns and 
regulatory measures. A national task force focused on reducing sugar intake may 
be led by FSSAI in collaborat ion with other stakeholders to coordinate efforts 
across sectors and address the public health implications of excessive sugar 
consumption.” 
XIII. CONSUMER AWARENESS  
 
13.1 On being asked about the initiation of the ‘Jago Grahak Jago’ consumer 
awareness ca mpaign and the steps taken under this programme to generate 
awareness among consumers at the grassroots level, including details of activities 
undertaken, outreach achieved, and measurable impact of the campaign, the DoCA 
furnished the following response:  
 
“The ‘Jago Grahak Jago’ (JGJ) consumer awareness campaign was initiated by the 
Government of India in 2005, and has since evolved into a flagship national 
programme of the Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) for promoting consumer 
awareness and empowerment.  
Concrete steps undertaken at the grassroots level include:  
Multi-media dissemination through Prasar Bharati mediums, outdoor media, and 
digital/social media platforms in multiple Indian languages.  
Development and dissemination of short awareness films, jingles, static creatives, 
and animated explainers on consumer awareness  
Promotion of the National Consumer Helpline (NCH – 1915) and the e -Jagriti 
platform for filing consumer complaints.  
Engagement with State Governments, Panchayati Raj Institutions, and Voluntary 
Consumer Organisations (VCOs) for local -level outreach.  
Regular use of social media platforms for thematic campaigns, success stories, and 
issue-based awareness (including food labelling and packaged commodities).  
Outreach and impact: 
The campaign has achiev ed nationwide coverage, with digital and social media 
content reaching millions of consumers annually.  

55 
 
There has been a significant increase in consumer grievance reporting, 
particularly through the NCH, indicating improved awareness of consumer 
rights. Increased consumer participation in digital grievance mechanisms”  
 
 
 
 
13.2 On being asked whether any legal provisions or official guidelines exist under 
which awareness programmes on food safety and nutritional risks can be mandated 
in schools, and the ex tent to which such provisions have been implemented, the 
DoCA furnished the following response:  
“As informed by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), the 
regulation namely Food Safety and Standards (Safe food and balanced diets 
for children in school) Regulations, 2020 has been issued under FSS Act. The 
aim of these regulations is to ensure safe and wholesome food for school 
children. These regulations prescribe certain responsibilities of School Authority 
to ensure safe food and balanc ed diets on school premises including 
mandatory registration or licensing of School Authority or contractor for 
operation of the mid-day meal scheme; prohibition on sale / advertising of foods 
high in fat, sugar and salt (HFSS) to school children in school  canteens/ mess 
premises/ hostel kitchens. The regulations also include provisions related to 
promotion of safe food and balanced diet in and around school campus; and 
monitoring / surveillance as part of developing an ecosystem of ensuring 
availability of safe and balanced diets for children in schools”  
 


56 
 
 
13.3  Regarding the concern that advertisements under the ‘Jago Grahak Jago’ 
campaign lack guidance on identifying healthy or safe food, the Committee sought 
information on whether the Department proposes to revise the communication 
strategy to include clarity on healthy food choices, simplified labelling, and consumer 
rights relating to food safety. The DoCA furnished the following response:  
“The Department acknowledges the importance of providing  clear, actionable, 
and consumer-friendly guidance on food-related issues. 
Accordingly, the Department proposes to revise and enrich the communication 
strategy under the ‘Jago Grahak Jago’ campaign to include:  
Simplified explanations of mandatory labelling  requirements under the Legal 
Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, such as sugar content disclosure, 
ingredient lists, and nutritional information.  
Awareness messages enabling consumers to make informed food choices, 
particularly for vulnerable groups s uch as children” 
 
13.4  When asked whether the department has rolled out any awareness initiatives 
under the “Jago Grahak Jago” campaign are specifically aimed at helping consumers 
identify and reduce excessive sugar intake. The DoCA in its written reply furnished: 
 
“(A) The Department of Consumer Affairs has been actively running 
comprehensive consumer awareness initiatives under the well -known "Jago 
Grahak Jago" campaign, focusing on empowerment of consumers across all 
sectors. This campaign utilizes a m ulti-platform approach, engaging electronic 
media, outdoor advertising, fairs -festivals and social media to reach diverse 
demographics. As digitalization continues to expand and penetrating remote & 


57 
 
rural locations, the department is making use of social m edia as an increasingly 
effective tool for spreading consumer awareness. The Department regularly 
posts engaging content, such as infographics, GIFs, and videos, designed to 
capture attention and educate consumers on various consumer centric issues in 
concise and attractive format 
 
(B) The issue of excessive sugar intake and the related aspects of nutritional 
awareness and dietary health risks fall entirely under the regulatory domain of 
the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), which is the  
competent authority under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. Matters 
such as nutritional labelling, including sugar content declarations, health claims, 
recommended daily intake and dietary advisories, are not governed under the 
Legal Metrology Act,  2009 and the Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) 
Rules, 2011. 
 The Legal Metrology Division, under the Department of Consumer Affairs, is 
mandated to regulate declarations on net quantity, maximum retail price (MRP), 
date of manufacture, country of ori gin (in case of imports) and consumer care 
details for food products. It does not regulate or prescribe standards relating to 
the quality, composition, or nutritional content of packaged commodities, 
including sugar levels. 
 Accordingly, the initiatives that are aimed solely at helping consumers 
identify or reduce excessive sugar intake, falls within the ambit of FSSAI, which 
regularly undertakes public outreach and health campaigns, such as "Eat Right 
India", focused on healthy eating practices, includin g reduction of sugar, salt, and 
fat intake. 
 Department of Consumer Affairs, through the “Jago Grahak Jago” campaign, 
continues to raise general awareness about accurate labelling, prevention of 
misleading packaging and consumer rights, which complements t he broader 
objective of informed consumer decision -making. Where complaints involving 
misleading quantity declarations or omission of mandatory quantitative 
information are received, they are addressed under the provisions of the Legal 
Metrology Act and rules made thereunder.” 
13.5 The Department of Consumer Affairs was asked to furnish the information on 
the proposals to develop a comprehensive, expanded action plan to take this 
campaign to the ground Level, including involvement of public representatives so 
that consumers may be better informed about benefits and risks associated with 
various food products. The DoCA in their written replies furnished the following:  
“The Department during last year conducted weekly virtual sessions with 
Panchayats across States/UTs to: 
Educate elected representatives on consumer rights,   
Build capacity for grievance redressal at the village level,   
Deliver messages in regional/local languages.  

58 
 
These sessions help reach the most remote and digitally unconnected 
Populations” 
 
13.6  When inquired regarding the initiatives undertaken by the Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) and the Department of Consumer Affairs, 
including awareness campaigns such as Jago Grahak Jago, to educate rural 
consumers on interpreting food labels, identifying products high in sugar and fat 
content, and availing grievance redressal mechanisms, the representative of the 
Department of Consumer Affairs submitted as follows:  
 
“….. labels are not understood in rural areas and I think it is a  very valid 
concern. I think from the Jago Grahak Jago, we will try to create 
awareness since both FSSAI and Department of Consumer Affairs actually 
work in a lot of coordination. I completely understand that it is not possible 
for the rural consumers to u nderstand what is good for them and what is 
not so good. We will try to take this suggestion and we will try to come up 
with some videos, audios, some creatives for people to understand what is 
the benchmark for high sugar or high fat or some such other th ings which 
are not so beneficial, so that they can mark out and they can also register 
their complaints either at 1915 which is our consumer helpline. We work 
very closely. Many complaints that we receive, we forward it to FSSAI for 
their detailed investigation.” 
 
13.7   When asked about the initiatives undertaken by the Department of Consumer 
Affairs (DoCA), through the “Jago Grahak Jago” campaign or other platforms, to 
educate consumers on understanding sugar -related information on food labels, the 
Department furnished the following response:  
“The Department of Consumer Affairs has been actively running 
comprehensive consumer awareness initiatives under the well -known 
"Jago Grahak Jago" campaign, focusing on empowerment of consumers 
across all sectors. This campaign utilizes a multi -platform approach, 
engaging electronic media, outdoor advertising, fairs -festivals and social 
media to reach diverse demographics. As digitalization continues to 
expand and penetrating remote & rural locations, the department  is 
making use of social media as an increasingly effective tool for 
spreading consumer awareness. The Department regularly posts 
engaging content, such as infographics, GIFs, and videos, designed to 
capture attention and educate consumers on various consu mer centric 
issues in concise and attractive format. The Department remains 
committed to empowering consumers by running awareness campaign 
specifically in rural & remote areas The Department has also been 
conducting weekly interaction programme with the P anchyats (State -
wise) of India to empower the rural consumers about their rights”  
 

59 
 
13.8   During the course of discussion, when asked about the steps taken by the 
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) to encourage reduction in 
sugar consumpt ion, including measures aimed at public awareness, the 
representative of FSSAI stated as under: — 
“We keep suggesting them with regard to minimizing sugar content for the 
infant baby powders. A few people have done that. We also generate a lot of 
awareness. “Aaj Se Thoda Kam” -- that is, sweet should be eaten less -- is a 
campaign. The FSSAI also recommends to reduce the intake of high fat, salt, 
and sugar. Whichever school is implementing our regulations, we certify that 
such and such school can be declared as ‘Eat Right Schools’.”  
13.9 When asked to elaborate on the existing outreach strategy under the “Har 
Label Kuch Kehta Hai” and “Eat Right India” campaigns for educating consumers 
about sugar content in food products, and to indicate whether sp ecific initiatives have 
been undertaken to promote sugar literacy and understanding of food labels among 
children and mothers through school -based programmes, FSSAI stated as under:  
“The ‘Eat Right India’ movement was introduced by FSSAI to bolster food 
safety across the nation. It is based on three key pillars of, ‘Eat Safe, Eat 
Healthy and Eat Sustainable’. Various awareness campaigns, programmes and 
initiatives under the Eat Right umbrella aim to excite, engage and enable 
citizens to consume safe, healthy and sustainable diets.  
FSSAI is carrying out a social media awareness campaign,  “#Har Label Kuch 
Kahta Hai” (Every Label Speaks), to empower citizens with label literacy for 
healthier eating and informed choices. Through engaging posts, infographics, 
and videos, the social media posts educate consumers on key elements like 
nutritional information (calories, fats, sugars, protein), ingredient lists, allergen 
warnings, and date markings. 
Label awareness campaign are being carried out in various Exhibitions  and 
Fairs. FSSAI conducts different awareness activities like – Eat Right Melas, Eat 
Right Walkathon, Street plays, etc. to educate people about Food Safety 
including Label awareness. 
To address the adverse effects of consuming foods high in fat, salt and  sugar, 
FSSAI has carried out a campaign called ‘Aaj se Thoda Kam’.  It encourages 
consumers to gradually reduce their intake of fat, salt and sugar through dietary 
modifications. In this regard, FSSAI has developed a series of short videos in 
different languages, accompanied by flyers, banners, and audio clips.  
 
    Sugar Reduction Strategies –  
    https://youtu.be/SSs7uPC_pUY?si=D5xNfZNSlJzhbNbG    
 
    A little less Sugar from today – 
    https://youtu.be/w3W2wb_NC5Y?si=XaY4 -5MjoWbxjmqA 
 
    Aaj Se Thoda Kum Cheeni –  
    https://youtu.be/jfs9wGEN_DM?si=EBueAYZBlNrvkScy 

60 
 
 
Eat Right certificates are awarded to ensure food safety and hygiene in places 
where food is prepared or served.  Eat Right certifications are given to 391 
Street Food Hubs, 442 Fruit and Vegetable Markets, 345 Stations, 1,825 Place 
of Worships, 4,965 Campuses and 2,313 Schools.  
 
Further, while regulatory implementation is under FSSAI’s domain, the ICMR -
National Institute of Nutrition (NIN) is actively developing sustainable nutrition 
and lifestyle risk surveillance models targeting organize and young adul ts in 
school and college setting. A key component of this initiative is raising 
awareness on sugar literacy and food label interpretation to promote healthier 
dietary behaviours and prevent nutrition -related non -communicable diseases.  
 
Eat Right Mela / Ea t Right Millet Mela & Walkathon / Cyclothon / Yoga 
Session 
FSSAI organized Eat Right Melas and Walkathons in different cities across the 
country to commemorate Azadi kaa Amrit Mahotsav (75 years of 
independence) with food safety and health.  
To celebrate the International Year of Millets 2023, 251 Eat Right Millets were 
conducted across the country to spread awareness about the health benefits of 
millets and its usage in daily diet.  
The new session of Eat Right Mela has been launched across the country in 
October 2024. States/U Ts have been directed to spread awareness about safe 
and healthy diet with a focus on Fight Obesity. 
So far More than 400 Eat Right Melas & Millets Melas have been organized 
with an estimated footfall of approximately 20 lakh.”  
 


61 
 
13.10 When asked about the measures taken by the Department to ensure that 
rural consumers, particularly those with low literacy levels or limited awareness, are 
able to understand food labels and make informed choices, especially in relation to 
sugar content in packaged foods, the Department of Consumer Affairs, in its written 
reply, furnished as under:  
“FSSAI has informed  that FSSAI has taken following steps to ensure food safety and 
create awareness among the rural consumers  
• Deployed Mobile Food Testing Lab, commonly known as Food Safety on 
Wheels to cater remotest part of the country for food testing spreading 
awareness and capacity building. 
• To create awareness, short videos have been developed and uploaded on 
FSSAI's YouTube Channel with an aim at reduction in Sugar uses in country. 
   Launched the "Har Label Kuch Kehta Hai" (Every Label Speaks)
 campaign to promote food safety consciousness and healthy eating habits
 across India. This national initiative focuses on empowering consumers to 
 make informed dietary choices by enhancing their understanding of food 
labels.” 
13.11  When asked to provide details of the specific measures being undertaken 
under the “Eat Right India” initiative to educate consumers about sugar content in 
processed foods, particularly products marketed for children, FSSAI, in its written 
reply, furnished the following:  
“To address the adverse effects of consuming foods high in fat, salt, and 
sugar, FSSAI has undertaken several awareness measures. One such 
initiative is the campaign called 'Aaj se Thoda Kam' promoting moderate 
consumption. It encourages co nsumers to gradually reduce their intake of 
fat, salt, and sugar through dietary modifications.  
 
FSSAI has developed a series of short videos in English, Hindi, and 12 
regional languages (Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam, Khasi, Kannada, Garo, 
Assamese, Mizo, Man ipuri, Oriya, Bangla and Nagamese), accompanied 
by flyers, banners, and audio clips.  
 
These resources, available on the Eat Right India website, provide useful 
guidance on gradually reducing the consumption of High Fat, Sugar, and 
Salt (HFSS) foods. 
 
Videos, Flyers, Banners are displayed in different exhibitions, like 
International Trade Fare, AAHAR, Eat Right Mela etc. Simultaneously, 
FSSAI actively utilizes social media platforms like Facebook, Instagram, X 
(Twitter), YouTube, LinkedIn, Public App etc to raise awareness about 
healthier food options. 
 

62 
 
Short videos regarding reduction in Sugar uses has been developed and 
uploaded on FSSAI’s YouTube Channel. These videos are displayed at 
different occasions also. 
 
Sugar Reduction Strategies 
https://youtu.be/SSs7uPC_pUY?si=D5xNfZNSlJzhbNbG   
 
A little less Sugar from today 
https://youtu.be/w3W2wb_NC5Y?si=XaY4 -5MJoWbxjmqA 
 
Aaj Se Thoda Kum Cheeni 
https://youtu.be/jfs9wGEN_DM?si=EBueAYZBlNrvkScy  
 
FSSAI conducted various online competitions and c hallenges, like - 
"Healthy Recipe Contest: Ghar Ki Rasoi - Tasty Bhi, Healthy Bhi," 
"Sugarless Desserts challenge," etc to aware people about Food with less 
sugar. 
 
Additionally, The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) 
has launched the "Har Label Kuch Kehta Hai" (Every Label Speaks) 
campaign to promote food safety consciousness and healthy eating habits 
across India. This national initiative focuses on empowering consumers to 
make informed dietary choices by enhancing their understanding of food 
labels. Food labels contain crucial information about a product's nutritional 
value, ingredients, and potential allergens. However, this information can 
often be complex and difficult for the average consumer to decipher. The 
"Har Label Kuch Kehta Hai " campaign addresses this gap by simplifying 
label information and educating consumers on its importance. By 
improving label literacy, the FSSAI aims to support rational decision -
making and improve public health outcomes.  
 
 The Food Safety on Wheels serve as comprehensive food safety hubs on 
wheels. They not only conduct food testing but also act as platforms for 
awareness. These mobile labs conduct educational sessions, workshops, 
and demonstrations to enhance the understanding of food safety practices 
among the general public as well as food business operators.  
 
Eat Right School programme aims at creating awareness about food 
safety, nutrition & hygiene among school children. Eat Right Campus 
initiative aims to promote safe, healthy and sustainable food in  campuses 
such as universities, colleges, workplaces, hospitals, tea estates etc. As 
on March, 2025,4075 Eat right Campus and 2101 Eat Right School have 
been certified by FSSAI.” 

63 
 
13.12  When asked to indicate the public awareness campaigns that have been 
launched or are proposed to be undertaken to enhance consumer literacy in reading 
food labels and understanding the health risks associated with excessive sugar 
consumption, FSSAI furnished the following: — 
 
 
“FSSAI is carrying out a social media awareness campaign, 
“#HarLabelKuchKahtaHai” (Every Label Speaks), to empower citizens with 
label literacy for healthier eating and informed choices. This initiative 
strategically utilizes digital platforms to reach a w ide audience, breaking down 
the intricacies of food labels into easily understandable information. Through 
engaging posts, infographics, and videos, the social media posts educate 
consumers on key elements like nutritional information (calories, fats, suga rs, 
protein), ingredient lists, allergen warnings, and date markings. By demystifying 
these components, “#Har Label Kuch Kahta Hai” enables individuals to make 
conscious decisions about the food they consume.   
 
FSSAI significantly amplified its digital ou treach and audience engagement. 
The presence of FSSAI enhanced across major social media platforms. 
Estimated outreach of different social media platforms of FSSAI in FY 2024 -25 
may be found below: 
S.No. Social Media Platform Reach 
1. X (Twitter) 12 M 
2. Instagram 48 M 
3. YouTube 1 M 
4. Facebook 8.3 M 
5. Public App 6 Lakh 
 
Eat Right Mela / Eat Right Millet Mela & Walkathon / Cyclothon / Yoga 
Session 
FSSAI organized Eat Right Melas and Walkathons in different cities across the 
country to commemorate Azadi kaa Amrit Mahotsav (75 years of 
independence) with food safety and health.  
To celebrate the International Year of Millets 2023, 251 Eat Right Millet s were 
conducted across the country to spread awareness about the health benefits of 
millets and its usage in daily diet.  
The new session of Eat Right Mela has been launched across the country in 
October 2024. States/U Ts have been directed to spread aware ness about safe 
and healthy diet with a focus on Fight Obesity. 
So far More than 400 Eat Right Melas & Millets Melas have been organised 
with an estimated footfall of approximately 20 lakh.”  
 

64 
 
PART – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.  The Committee note that in light of the indications presented by the 
Indian Council of Medical Research and dietary guidance issued by the World 
Health Organization, it is evident that excessive sugar intake from packaged 
infant foods poses significant lon g-term health risks, including dental caries, 
obesity, metabolic disorders, and other chronic diseases. The Committee 
strongly opine that as infant foods marketed in India are intended to 
complement breast milk for children between six months and two years  of age, 
ensuring their nutritional safety is critical and be paramount for the 
Government. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend  the Government  that, from an overall 
perspective, it is essential that the sugar content in various categories of 
infant food pr oducts—such as infant formula, cereal -based complementary 
foods, follow -up formula, and packaged traditional infant foods —be carefully 
regulated and aligned with recommended dietary limits. Further, strengthening 
monitoring mechanisms, ensuring adherence t o nutritional guidelines, and 
promoting formulations with minimal or no added sugars would help protect 
infant health and support healthy growth and development.  
 
Mandatory Sugar-Level Classification for Packaged Foods  
2.  The Committee note that the Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and 
Display) Regulations, 2020 mandate declaration of total sugar and added sugar 
content along with percentage contribution to Recommended Dietary 
Allowance (RDA), calculated on the basis of 2000 Kcal energy and 50 grams 
added sugar for an average adult per day.  
The Committee believe that while numerical disclosure of sugar and RDA 
percentages is scientifically accurate, many consumers may not easily 
interpret whether a product is high or low in sugar at the point of purchas e. 
Further, WHO’s recommended intake thresholds (10 per cent and 5 per cent of 

65 
 
total energy) differ from the 50 g adult RDA reference used for labelling 
purposes, which may lead to confusion.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend introduction of a m andatory 
sugar-level classification framework under the Front -of-Pack Nutrition 
Labelling regime, based on clearly defined and scientifically derived 
thresholds aligned with WHO and Indian Council of Medical Research ( ICMR)– 
National Institute of Nutrition  (NIN) guidance, to facilitate immediate 
recognition by consumer.. 
 
Uniform Application of Sugar Labelling Norms Across Food Categories  
3.   The Committee note that sugar content varies across products 
depending on formulation, and prescribed existing regulations.  While the 
existing provisions under the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India’s 
Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and Display) Regulations, 2020  mandate 
disclosure of total sugar and added sugar content on packaged food labels to 
facilitate informed consumer choice, the Committee feel that mere disclosure 
may not be sufficient to address the public health concerns arising from high 
sugar consumption. 
The Committee also observe that in the absence of uniform interpretive 
labelling nor ms across all food categories, consumers may receive 
inconsistent information, thereby limiting comparability and informed choice.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government that in addition to 
strengthened labelling requirements such as enhanced v isibility of added 
sugar and related nutritional information, the possibility of prescribing specific 
limits for added sugar content in packaged food products, particularly those 
intended for infants and young children, be examined  and recommend that 
sugar disclosure and interpretive labelling requirements be uniformly applied 
across all packaged food categories without exemption, so that consumers 
receive consistent and comparable information irrespective of product type.  
The Committee are of view that establishing such limits would complement the 
existing labelling framework and further safeguard consumer health while 

66 
 
ensuring that food business operators progressively reformulate products to 
reduce excessive sugar content  
 
Explicit Declaration of Added Sugar in Foods Intended for Children  
4.  The Committee note that under Clause 3.6 of the Food Safety and 
Standards (Foods for Infant Nutrition) Regulations, 2020, lactose and glucose 
polymers are the preferred carbohydrates for infant nutrition, and sucrose  
and/or fructose shall not exceed 20 per cent of total carbohydrate. FSSAI has 
clarified that this 20 per cent carbohydrate threshold corresponds to 
approximately 13.25 grams (≈53 Kcal), which is equivalent to 10 per cent of the 
530 Kcal total daily energy  requirement for infants aged 0 –6 months as per 
ICMR–NIN RDA. 
The Committee observe that although the regulatory limit aligns with Codex 
and EU standards and has been technically explained in terms of energy 
equivalence, such scientific equivalence is not evident to consumer/caregivers 
at the time of purchase and percentage of carbohydrate does not translate 
intuitively into the real sugar intake of infants.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend  the Government that all foods intended 
for or marketed to infants and children, wherever added sugar is present in 
any form, mandatorily carry a clear and prominent front -of-pack declaration 
stating the presence of added sugar in grams per serving, along with its 
percentage contribution to the daily energy requir ement of the target age 
group and if need be, the requisite amendments may be carried out in the 
respective acts/rule/regulations.  
 
Consumer Awareness on Health Impacts of High Sugar Intake  
5.  The Committee note that the World Health Organization recommen ds 
reducing the intake of free sugars to less than 10 per cent of total energy 
intake for both adults and children, and suggests that a further reduction 
below 5 per cent may provide additional health benefits. The Indian Council of 
Medical Research (ICMR) , in its Dietary Guidelines, 2024, recommends limiting 

67 
 
sugar intake to 25 grams per day and further states that added sugar provides 
no nutritive value other than calories. Also, global research link high sugar 
intake in early childhood to increased risks of dental caries, obesity, metabolic 
dysfunction, altered gut microbiome composition, type 2 diabetes and 
hypertension later in life. 
The Committee believe that while existing regulatory frameworks prescribe 
disclosure norms and compositional standards, lo ng-term behavioural change 
requires informed consumers. In particular, parents and caregivers of infants 
and young children may not always understand the cumulative health 
implications of early exposure to high -sugar diets. 
The Committee, therefore, recomm end that the Government should intensify 
and recalibrate nationwide consumer awareness campaigns, including the 
“Eat Right” initiatives, to specifically communicate WHO’s 10 per cent and 5 
per cent energy benchmarks and the 25 g/day ICMR recommendation in 
simplified and relatable formats. The Committee further recommend targeted 
outreach through schools, anganwadis, maternity clinics and digital platforms 
be initiated to ensure informed dietary choices for children.  The awareness 
about sugar content can fur ther be increased by enhancing the spread and 
frequency of engaging campaigns, collaborating with stake holders and 
sharing information on social media.  
 
Periodic Scientific Review of Sugar Thresholds in Infant Nutrition  
6.  The Committee note that FSSAI has stated that it regularly examines 
new scientific evidence through its Scientific Panels and Scientific Committee. 
It has clarified that the present limit of 20 per cent carbohydrate from 
sucrose/fructose in infant foods are aligned with Codex and Europ ean Union 
provisions. 
The Committee observe that although current limits are aligned with 
international standards, scientific knowledge on infant nutrition is 
continuously evolving  and firmly believe that  in view of the increasing public 
health concerns re garding sugar consumption in early childhood, it is 

68 
 
important that regulatory standards remain dynamic and responsive to 
emerging scientific evidence.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that permissible limits of 
sugar in infant formula, follow -up formula and complementary foods be 
periodically and systematically reviewed preferably at intervals of two to three 
years, by the concerned scientific bodies of the Food Safety and Standards 
Authority of India. Standard Operating Procedure to be frame fo r this and Inter 
departmental Training camps can be organised to successful implementation 
of the same.  The Committee further recommend that the outcome of such 
reviews, along with any proposed regulatory revisions, be  made public in a 
timely manner to en sure transparency , strengthen public trust in food safety 
regulation, and encourage progressive reformulation of infant food products in 
line with the latest scientific evidence.  
 
Expedited Notification of Front -of-Pack Nutrition Labelling (FOPNL) 
Regulations 
7.  The Committee are dismayed to note that the draft Front -of-Pack 
Nutrition Labelling (FOPNL) regulations were notified on 13 September 2022 
and that more than 14,000 stakeholder comments have been received, which 
are presently under examination and wider consultation.  
The Committee observe that over two years have lapsed since the draft 
notification, and the continued delay in finalising the regulations has resulted 
in the absence of simplified and interpretative front -of-pack information , 
particularly in relation to sugar content. In the context of increasing 
consumption of packaged and ultra -processed food, timely availability of clear 
and easily understandable nutritional information assumes significant 
importance for enabling informed diet ary choices. 
The Committee further observe that the present labelling framework relies 
primarily on numerical disclosures such as grams and percentage of 
Recommended Dietary Allowance, which may not be readily understood by all 
consumer at the point of pur chase.  The absence of simple interpretative tools 

69 
 
such as warning labels or colour -coded indicatory limits the effectiveness of 
such disclosures in guiding consumer behaviour.  
The Committee are of the view that clear, prominent and interpretative front -of-
pack warnings, especially for products high in sugar, can serve as an effective 
consumer information tool by providing immediate and easily understandable 
guidance at the point of purchase.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend the  FSSAI to finalise and not ify the 
Front-of-Pack Nutrition Labelling regulations within a defined and time -bound 
framework. The front -of-pack nutrition labelling should provide accessible, at -
a-glance information to help consumers quickly and easily identify the 
nutritional status of a product . The Committee further recommend  that the 
notified regulations  incorporate simple, , clearly visible and interpretative 
labelling mechanisms, including colour -coded indicators  for sugar levels in all 
products, using a three -colour format (red,  yellow, and green) to denote high, 
medium, and low sugar levels, or appropriate warning labels for products high 
in sugar. The Committee may also be apprised regarding the status of the 
same.  
 
Strengthening Oversight of E-Commerce Listings and Digital Ma rketing 
8.  The Committee note that the Department of Consumer Affairs has 
clarified that the regulation of mislabelled packaged food products, including 
those sold through e -commerce platforms, falls primarily within the 
jurisdiction of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India under the 
Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. The Committee further note that the 
Department enforces declaration -related provisions on pre -packaged 
commodities through the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 and the Legal Metrology  
(Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011, while misleading advertisements are 
addressed by the Central Consumer Protection Authority under the Consumer 
Protection Act, 2019. 
The Committee observe that with the rapid expansion of e -commerce, the sale 
of packaged food products through online platforms has increased 

70 
 
significantly, which may pose challenges in ensuring accurate labelling, 
truthful product claims and effective regu latory oversight. The absence of a 
dedicated institutional mechanism for monitoring mislabelling of food 
products sold online could lead to gaps in enforcement and delay in 
addressing misleading or non-compliant product listings. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Consumer 
Affairs, in coordination with the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, 
State Food Safety Authorities and the Central Consumer Protection Authority, 
explore the establishment of a coordinated monitoring mec hanism or joint 
task framework to specifically address issues relating to mislabelling and 
misleading claims in packaged food products sold on e -commerce platforms. 
The Committee further recommend that mechanisms for timely detection, real -
time monitoring and prompt removal of misleading product listings be 
strengthened in collaboration with e -commerce platforms so as to ensure 
effective enforcement of labelling norms and enhanced consumer protection 
in the digital marketplace. 
 
Strengthening Independent Th ird-Party Scientific Substantiation of Sugar -
Related and Health Claims  
9.  The Committee note that under Section 7(2) of the Food Safety and 
Standards (Advertising and Claims) Regulations, 2018, nutrient function 
claims and other function claims may be mad e only when they are supported 
by relevant and current scientific evidence  It has further been stated that 
where a claimed health benefit is directly attributed to a product, such claim 
must be based on statistically significant results from well -designed human 
intervention studies conducted by or under guidance of established research 
institutions and published in peer -reviewed journals. In certain cases, 
particularly those involving reduction of disease risk claims,  prior approval 
from the Food Authority is required  
The Committee also note that the primary responsibility for maintaining 
scientific evidence and substantiating such claims currently rests with the 

71 
 
Food Business Operators, while regulatory authorities may call for and 
examine this evidence during inspections or regulatory review  
The Committee observe that while the existing framework mandates scientific 
substantiation, reliance predominantly on documentation maintained by the 
Food Business Operator may give rise to concerns regarding objectivi ty, 
especially in relation to sugar -related claims such as “no added sugar,” 
“natural sweetener,” or implied health benefits in products marketed to 
children. In the absence of structured independent verification, consumers 
may not be fully assured of the robustness and neutrality of the scientific 
basis underlying such claims.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that FSSAI strengthen the framework 
for third -party scientific substantiation of sugar -related and health claims by 
prescribing mandatory independent validation, wherever such claims relate to 
health benefits, nutritional superiority, or sugar substitution. The Committee 
further recommend creation of an empanelled list of accredited independent 
scientific institutions authorised to review an d certify supporting evidence, 
and summary details of such certifications be made publicly accessible to 
enhance transparency and consumer confidence.  The Front of Label Pack can 
mention the accreditation to build consumer Confidence.  
 
Regulation and Enforcement of Sugar-Related Claims 
10.  The Committee note that the regulatory framework governing 
advertising, labelling and claims on food products is clearly laid down under 
the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, the Food Safety and Standards 
(Advertising and Claims) Regulations, 2018 and the Food Safety and 
Standards (Labelling and Display) Regulations, 2020. These regulations 
prescribe specific conditions for claims such as “Low Sugar” and “Sugar 
Free” and require that all claims be truthful, unambiguous , meaningful and 
supported by scientific evidence. The Committee further note that penalties for 
misbranded food and misleading advertisements may extend up to ₹3 lakh and 
₹10 lakh respectively under Sections 52 and 53 of the Act, and that an 
Advertisement Monitoring Committee has been constituted by the Food Safety 

72 
 
and Standards Authority of India to scrutinize advertisements across media 
platforms, including e-commerce. 
The Committee also take note of the recent initiative of the Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India to enable consumers to report misleading claims 
on packaged food products through digital platforms such as the Food Safety 
Connect application and the FoSCoS Portal. The Committee view this initiative 
as a positive step towards strengt hening participatory regulation by enabling 
consumers to directly submit evidence such as front -of-pack images, licence 
details and e -commerce links to facilitate enforcement action against non -
compliant Food Business Operators.  
 
The Committee view this as  an important extension of the existing 
enforcement architecture, as it introduces a participatory dimension to 
regulatory oversight by allowing consumers to submit front -of-pack images, 
licence details and e -commerce links to facilitate evidence -based act ion 
against non-compliant Food Business Operators.  
The Committee firmly believe that while the legal and institutional framework 
to curb misleading claims is already in place, the effectiveness of scrutiny 
mechanisms can be significantly enhanced when cons umers are enabled to 
act as active informants. This is particularly relevant in categories such as 
infant foods and products carrying sugar -related or health -related claims, 
where misleading representations can have serious public health 
consequences. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Food Safety and Standards 
Authority of India strengthen enforcement by introducing graded penalties for 
repeat violations, prescribing mandatory timelines for withdrawal or correction 
of non -compliant advertisements  and claims, and ensuring regular public 
disclosure of violations and enforcement actions related to misleading sugar -
related claims. The Committee further recommend that the consumer reporting 
mechanism through digital platforms be institutionalised withi n the broader 
regulatory monitoring framework, with provisions for time -bound examination 

73 
 
of complaints, integration of complaint data into risk -based inspections, and 
periodic publication of action taken reports.  
The Committee are of the view that such me asures would enhance deterrence, 
strengthen consumer participation, and improve transparency and 
accountability in the regulation of food labelling and advertising, particularly in 
sensitive product categories such as infant foods and products carrying 
sugar-related or health-related claims. 
 
Institutionalising Periodic Post -Approval Re -Verification of Product 
Formulations 
11.  The Committee note that verification of sugar content in food products 
is undertaken during inspections through evaluation of raw materials, 
ingredient composition, formulation records, label scrutiny and sample 
testing. It has further been stated that current analytical methods can 
determine total carbohydrate or total sugar content, but added sugars cannot 
be analytically distingui shed from naturally occurring sugars through 
chemical testing alone. Manufacturers are required to maintain records 
regarding added sugars, which may be examined by regulatory authorities 
during inspection. 
The Committee further note that routine surveilla nce, sampling and 
inspections are carried out across the country, and that enforcement action is 
initiated in cases of non -conformity. However, there is no structured 
framework mandating periodic re -verification of product formulations after 
initial approv al or licensing, particularly in cases where reformulation may 
occur over time. 
The Committee observe that in the absence of a formalised post -approval re -
verification mechanism, reformulation of products leading to incremental 
increases in sugar content o r changes in ingredient composition may not be 
detected in a timely manner, especially where such changes remain within 
declared label parameters but alter nutritional quality. This concern assumes 

74 
 
greater significance in the case of infant and child foods , where even marginal 
changes in sugar composition may have long -term health implications.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that FSSAI to institutionalise a 
structured periodic or risk -based post -approval re -verification mechanism for 
packaged food prod ucts, particularly those intended for infants and children. 
Such re -verification may include scrutiny of formulation records, ingredient 
sourcing documentation, and targeted market sampling at defined intervals. 
The Committee further recommend that reformu lated products be subject to 
mandatory re-declaration and, where applicable, prior regulatory intimation to 
ensure continued compliance with prescribed sugar standards.  
 
Enhanced Safeguards for Infant and Child Foods  
12.  The Committee note that during 2024–25, more than 4 lakh inspections 
were conducted across the country by State Governments and FSSAI Regional 
Offices, including approximately 1,100 inspections on units involved in foods 
for infants. Infant food businesses are categorised as high -risk under the Risk 
Based Inspection System (RBIS). Each Food Safety Officer has a monthly 
target of at least 10 inspections and 25 samples.  
The Committee observe that while inspection mechanisms are robust in 
aggregate terms, inspections specifically relating t o infant foods constitute a 
relatively small proportion of total inspections, despite infants representing 
the most vulnerable consumer group.  Further, they observe that infant and 
baby foods represent a uniquely sensitive category due to the vulnerability  of 
the target population. However, enforcement statistics relating specifically to 
infant food compliance are not presented in a distinct and consolidated annual 
format. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that infant and baby food products be 
accorded pr iority enforcement status, with a defined minimum percentage of 
annual inspections and sampling reserved for this segment. Compliance 
statistics relating specifically to infant and child foods should be reported 
separately in FSSAI’s Annual Report  detailing inspections conducted, samples 

75 
 
analysed, non -compliance rates, nature of violations (including sugar -related 
non-compliance), enforcement actions taken, and corrective steps 
implemented. This will ensure greater transparency and focused regulator y 
oversight in this critical segment.  
 
Strengthening Transparency and Inter-Agency Coordination 
13.  The Committee note that nutritional labelling and sugar regulation fall 
within FSSAI’s domain, while quantitative declarations such as net quantity 
and MRP fall under the Legal Metrology framework. It has been stated that no 
joint inspections on sugar content have been conducted due to allocation of 
business rules. 
The Committee observe that while statutory mandates are distinct, absence of 
structured coordi nation may lead to fragmented enforcement and regulatory 
gaps in cases involving misleading packaging.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend establishment of a structured 
coordination mechanism between FSSAI and the Department of Consumer 
Affairs for regular  information sharing, joint review meetings, and harmonised 
enforcement planning in matters involving nutritional disclosures and 
packaging practices. 
 
Strengthening Laboratory Infrastructure and Timely Testing  
14.  The Committee note that 243 NABL -accredited Primary Food 
Laboratories and 22 Referral Laboratories are notified under Section 43 of the 
FSS Act, 2006. Food Analysts are required under Section 46(3) to furnish 
reports within fourteen days. Additionally, 305 Mobile Food Testing 
Laboratories (Food Safety on Wheels) are deployed across 35 States/UTs.  
The Committee observe that keeping in view of the volume of inspections 
exceeding 4 lakh annually, laboratory capacity and turnaround time may face 
operational pressures, which could affect enforcement e fficiency. 

76 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that FSSAI undertake a comprehensive 
workload and capacity assessment of laboratories, publish State -wise average 
turnaround time statistics annually, and strengthen infrastructure and 
manpower in high -volume jurisdictions. They further suggest FSSAI to extend 
their horizon by including laboratory infrastructure of BIS and NTH.  
 
Disclosure of Average Laboratory Turnaround Time and Capacity Utilisation  
15.  The Committee note that. Under Section 46(3)of the FSS Act, 2006, Food 
Analysts are required to send analysis reports within fourteen days from the 
date of receipt of sample. Further, 305 Mobile Food Testing Laboratories (Food 
Safety on Wheels) are operational across 35 States/UTs.  
The Committee observe that w hile statutory timelines are clearly prescribed, 
concerns have been expressed regarding delays in receipt of laboratory 
reports in certain instances. In view of the number of inspections conducted 
annually, timely analysis of samples is critical for effect ive enforcement, 
especially in cases involving infant foods and high -sugar products. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that FSSAI publish State -wise data on 
average sample analysis turnaround time, laboratory capacity utilisation, and 
backlog status. Whe re the fourteen -day statutory timeline is not consistently 
adhered to, corrective measures including augmentation of manpower, 
equipment, or laboratory infrastructure should be undertaken on priority.  
 
Dedicated National Monitoring Programme on Sugar Compliance 
16.  The Committee note that the Department of Consumer Affairs, through 
the enforcement of the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 and the Legal Metrology 
(Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011, ensures transparency in packaging and 
labelling of pre -packaged commodities, in cluding baby food, by mandating 
declarations such as net quantity, maximum retail price, country of origin and 
consumer care details. The Committee further note that the regulation of sugar 
content, nutritional labelling and formulation standards in infant  food products 

77 
 
falls within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Food Safety and Standards 
Authority of India under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 and the 
relevant regulations governing infant nutrition and food labelling.  
While acknowledging the res pective mandates of the two authorities, the 
Committee are surprised to know that there is no dedicated task force has 
been formed for sugar -specific violations. They  are of the view that effective 
consumer protection —particularly in respect of food produc ts meant for 
infants and children —requires closer coordination between regulatory bodies 
responsible for packaging declarations and nutritional standards . The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Consumer Affairs 
and the Food Safety and S tandards Authority of India further strengthen their 
coordination and information -sharing mechanisms so that violations relating 
to packaging, labelling and nutritional standards, including sugar -related 
claims in infant food products, are identified and a cted upon in a timely and 
coordinated manner. The Committee believe that such an integrated regulatory 
approach would enhance transparency, improve enforcement effectiveness 
and better safeguard the health and interests of infants and children.  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                      Kanimozhi Karunanidhi  
5 June,  2026                           Chairperson, 
15 Jyeshtha, 1948 (Saka)                                            Standing Committee on  
    Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  
 
 
 
 
 
 
*** 
  

78 
 
Annexure-I 
The cases scrutinised by AMC over the last two years and status of same is illustrated 
in the table below 
 
Duration No. of meetings 
conducted 
No. of Cases 
scrutinized 
Cases 
Closed 
Transferred to 
State 
Under 
Process 
01.01.2023 to  
31.03.2025  
  
29 709 282 59 368 
 
 
 
 

79 
 
Annexure-II 
The cases scrutinised by Advertisement Monitoring Committee (AMC) over the last 
two years and status of same is illustrated in the table below:  
 
Duration No. of cases 
scrutinised 
Cases 
Closed 
Transferred to 
State 
Under 
process 
01.01.2023 to  
15.03.2025  709 282 59 368 
 

80 
 
Annexure-III  
Details of Enforcement on Infant Milk Substitutes & Infant Food (Weaning Food) 
Year 
No. of 
Samples 
Annlyse
d 
No. of 
Samples 
found 
non-
conformin
g 
Non-Conforming Samples Civil Cases Criminal Cases 
Unsaf
e  
Sub 
Standar
d 
Labelling 
Defects/ 
Misleading/ 
Miscellaneou
s 
No. of 
Conviction
s 
Penaltie
s 
Raised 
(Rs.) 
No. of 
Conviction
s 
Penaltie
s 
Raised 
(Rs.) 
2023
- 
24 
231 7 0 
 
1 
 
6 
 
3 
 2,70,000 0 0 
2022
-23 389 30 2 11 17 8 1,89,000 1 1,50,000 
2021
-22 297 26 2 15 9 5 3,20,000 1 50,000 
 

81 
 
Annexure-IV 
Details of Enforcement for last 3 years 
Year 
No. of 
Samples 
lifted/ 
Analyse
d 
No. of 
Samples 
found non-
conformin
g 
Non-Conforming Samples Civil Cases Criminal Cases 
Unsaf
e 
Sub 
Standar
d 
Labelling 
defects/ 
Misleading/ 
Miscellaneou
s 
No. of 
cases 
awarded 
penaltie
s 
Penaltie
s Raised 
(Cr. Rs.) 
NO. of 
Conviction
s 
Penaltie
s Raised 
(Cr. Rs.) 
2024
- 
25* 
6,46,892$ 34396 7953 
 
22505 
 
3897 
 
30142 
 35.74 1265 3.03 
2023
-24 4,47,939# 33,808 6782 22603 4423 29586 74.12 1161 2.67 
2022
-23 1,77,511 44,626 6,579 21,917 16,130 28,464 33.23 1188 2.75 
  
*Provisional data 
$ 4,52,731 are surveillance samples 
# 2,77,426 are surveillance samples 
  

82 
 
 
 


83 
 
 
 


84 
 
 
 


85 
 
 


86 
 
 
 
  


87 
 
Annexure VIII 
 


88 
 
 
 
 
 
 


89 
 
Annexure IX 
  


90 
 
Annexure X 
 
  


91 
 
 


92 
 
 
  


93 
 
Annexure XI 
 


94 
 
 
  


95 
 
Annexure XII 
Year 2022-23 
Sr. 
No. 
  
Name of State 
Section 36(1) Error in declaration  Section 36(2) Error in quantity  
Offences 
Booked 
Offence
s 
Compou
nded 
Compounding 
Fee Deposited 
Offenc
es 
Booke
d 
Offences 
Compounded 
Compoundi
ng Fee 
Deposited 
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar 
36 36 1,62,000    
2 Andhra Pradesh 7,620 7,130 4,03,20,400 635 588 67,25,000 
3 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
67 66 1,89,200 - - - 
4 Assam 22 16 1,10,000 - - - 
5 Chandigarh 3 - - - - - 
6 Chhattisgarh 49 49 8,13,500 9 9 40,000 
7 Delhi 648 131 30,84,600 - - - 
8 Goa 165 205 31,31,000 3 4 3,60,0000 
9 Gujarat 55 - 28,02,000 8 - 3,09,000 
10 Haryana 95 86 7,35,000 - - - 
11 Himachal 
Pradesh 
142 150 6,62,000 - - - 
12 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
665 74 7,74,000 76 - - 
13 Jharkhand - - - 2 - - 
14 Karnataka 2,433 2,307 32,56,16,222 16 12 16,39,100 
15 Kerala 224 224 18,89,000 67 67 7,05,000 
16 Ladakh 3 3 5,000 5 5 15,000 
17 Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0  
18 Madhya Pradesh 1,280 1,001 11,93,600 109 97 2,52,500 
19 Maharashtra 1,688 - - 41 - - 

96 
 
20 Meghalaya 12 3 5,000 - - - 
21 Mizoram - - - - - - 
22 Nagaland 9 9 17,500 - - - 
23 Odisha 35 35 2,30,000 10 10 47,500 
24 Punjab 197 188 35,06,000 4 4 10,000 
25 Rajasthan 22 22 - 4 2  
26 Tamil Nadu 1,683 1,683 84,15,000 299 299 14,95,000 
27 Telangana 3,741 3,741 2,72,32,500 509 509 41,46,500 
28 Tripura 71 75 1,87,500 - - - 
29 Uttar Pradesh 2,762 1,918 3,71,33,500 247 161 35,14,000 
30 Uttrakhand 249 250 1,10,75,500 16 11 1,15,000 
 
Year 2023-24 
  
Sr. 
No. 
  
Name of State 
Section 36(1) Error in declaration  Section 36(2) Error in quantity 
Offences 
Booked 
Offences 
Compound
ed 
Compoundi
ng Fee 
Deposited 
Offences 
Booked 
Offences 
Compound
ed 
Compoundi
ng Fee 
Deposited 
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar 
32 32 1,18,000 - - - 
2 Andhra Pradesh 8,314 7,822 4,29,01,300 1,023 972 3,02,08,200 
3 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
96 98 3,18,500 - - - 
4 Assam 23 14 85,000 - - - 
5 Chandigarh 8 8 95,000 - - - 
6 Chhattisgarh 63 63 7,46,500 - - - 
7 Delhi 446 184 13,48,000 40 6 1,12,000 
8 Gujarat 71 - 24,03,000 5 - 8,000 
9 Haryana 58 55 4,75,000 0 - - 

97 
 
10 Himachal Pradesh 296 273 13,65,000 1 - - 
11 Jammu & Kashmir 486 446 1,28,15,000 73 69 7,97,00 
12 Karnataka 1,529 1,402 16,51,18,69
1 
23 15 14,85,590 
13 Kerala 788 778 87,01,500 12 10 11,75,000 
14 Ladakh 1 1 1,000 - - - 
15 Lakshadweep 15 15 37,500 - - - 
16 Madhya Pradesh 1,146 794 91,44,800 78 64 4,91,300 
17 Maharashtra 2,607 - - 31  - 
18 Meghalaya 12 3 5,000 - - - 
19 Odisha 30 30 3,22,500 - - - 
20 Punjab 258 242 - 7 7 - 
21 Rajasthan 42 40 - 11 9 - 
22 Tamil Nadu 715 715 3,57,500 80 80 4,00,000 
23 Telangana 3,464 3,464 2,91,66,000 254 254 33,46,000 
24 Uttar Pradesh 3,339 2,634 7,04,32,700 379 328 86,65,500 
25 Uttrakhand 263 251 93,62,000 13 15 1,22,000 
  
 
Year 2024-25 
Sr. 
No. 
  
Name of 
State 
Section 36(1) Error in declaration  Section 36(2) Error in quantity 
Offences 
Booked 
Offences 
Compounde
d 
Compounding 
Fee Deposited 
Offences 
Booked 
Offences 
Compounde
d 
Compounding 
Fee Deposited 
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar 
34 34 92,000 0 0 0 
2 Andhra 
Pradesh 
7,352 6,499 5,55,04,220 1,486 1,358 1,56,84,300 

98 
 
3 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
23 8 47,000 0 0 0 
4 Dadara& 
Nagar Haveli  
and  Daman& 
Diu 
1 1 0 0 0 0 
5 Assam 410 260 20,50,000 1 0 0 
6 Chandigarh 14 14 70,000 0 0 0 
7 Chhattisgarh 12 12 1,73,000 1 1 5,000 
8 Delhi 641 103 40,71,000 3 2 10,000 
9 Goa 151 128 22,85,000 0 0 0 
10 Haryana 56 43 1,55,000 0 0 0 
11 Himachal 
Pradesh 
217 275 13,86,000 1 6 35,000 
12 Kerala 485 452 87,66,000 10 9 13,20,000 
13 Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0 0 
14 Madhya 
Pradesh 
1,209 957 1,46,71,200 33 31 4,59,400 
15 Maharashtra 2,998 2,999 4,26,84,950 81 81 4,05,000 
16 Meghalaya 14 0 0 0 0 0 
17 Mizoram 6 6 12,000 0 0 0 
18 Nagaland 0 0 0 0 0 0 
19 Odisha 18 18 2,42,000 0 0 0 
20 Punjab 401 351 54,52,400 3 2 1,55,000 
21 Tamil Nadu 797 794 34,54,000 58 46 3,20,000 
22 Tripura 27 26 65,000 0 0 0 
23 Telangana 2,831 2,699 1,83,65,700 198 186 11,78,000 
24 Uttar Pradesh 4,681 3,376 9,18,90,500 396 294 73,36,500 
25 Uttrakhand 297 311 1,12,60,000 7 9 1,05,000 
 

99 
 
APPENDIX - I 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2024 -2025) 
HELD ON THURSDAY, 12TH DECEMBER 2024. 
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs to 1700 hrs in Committee Room No. 3, 
extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi   - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Anto Antony 
3.  Shri Jaswantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  
4.  Smt. Malvika Devi 
5.  Shri Manish Jaiswal 
6.  Shri Manoj Kumar 
7.  Shri Sunil Kumar 
8.  Shri Bharat Singh Kushwah  
9.  Shri Ajendra Singh Lodhi 
10.Shri Neeraj Maurya 
11. Shri Bastipati Nagaraju  
12. Shri Haribhai Patel 
13. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu 
14. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh 
15. Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh 
16. Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
17. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan  
 
       Rajya Sabha 
 
18. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
19. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
20. Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya  
21. Shri Baburam Nishad 
22. Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai                 - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi                 - Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan                 - Deputy Secretary 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 

100 
 
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) and the Ministry of 
Health and Family W elfare were called in to brief the Committee on the subject 
‘Regulation of Packed Commodities with specific reference to sugar content in baby 
products and other food products.’ and drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker regarding confidentiality of the proceedings.  
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)  
  
 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  
 
3. After the introduction, the representatives of the Department of Consumer 
Affairs made a brief PowerPoint presentation before the Committee, apprising them 
of issues related to the subject under discussion and the relevant provisions under 
the Legal Metrology Act. Thereafter, the Food Regulation Division of the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare, in their p resentation, apprised the Committee of the 
provisions made by FSSAI to check and regulate high sugar content in food 
products. 
4. After the presentation, Hon'ble Members raised queries and sought further 
clarifications on various aspects of the subject under discussion, including  use of 
easy terminology, c oncerns regarding the use of compound ingredients in food 
products enforcement measures, mandatory labeling, difficulties in compliance 
monitoring, steps being taken to improve consumer awareness about sugar labeling 
on food products , country's alignment with international labeling standards , e fforts 
1.  
 
Smt. Nidhi Khare,  Secretary (CA) 
2.  Shri Bharat Khera , AS(CA) 
3.  Shri Anupam Mishra, JS(CA) 
4.  Shri Shashi Bhushan, Advisor (Cost) 
5.  Shri Ashutosh Agarwal, Director (LM) 
6.  Shri Aman Jain, Director (P&C) 
1. Ms. Punya Salila Srivastava , Secretary (Health), MoHFW  
2. Shri G.K.V. Rao, CEO, FSSAI 
3. Shri Rajiv Wadhawan, Advisor (Cost), MoHFW  
4. Ms. Alka Rao, Adviser (Science, Standards and Regulation, FSSAI)  
5. Ms. Inoshi Sharma, Executive Director (FSSAI)  

101 
 
being made by the government to introduce a simplified, standardized front -of-pack 
labeling system, especially in rural and tribal areas.  
5.  Representatives of both the Departments responded and assured the 
Committee that the y were  committed to addressing all concerns and providing 
necessary clarifications. 
6. Thereafter the Chairperson thanked the representatives and other officials for 
their detailed presentation. The Chairperson also requested the Departments to 
submit any additional information that could not be addressed during the sitting to 
the Lok Sabha Secretariat. 
7. The evidence was concluded and the representatives of the Ministri es then 
withdrew. 
8.  Subsequently, the Committee unanimously decided to undertake a study visit 
during the month of January, 2025 to gather first -hand information on the various 
subjects under examination. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kep t. 
The Committee then adjourned.  
___  
 
 
 
 
 
  

102 
 
APPENDIX - II 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2024 -2025) HELD ON 
TUESDAY, 6th MAY 2025. 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs to 1320 hrs in  Committee Room No. C, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi – Chairperson  
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Smt. Malvika Devi 
3. Shri Manish Jaiswal 
4. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa  
5. Shri Manoj Kumar 
6. Shri Bharat Singh Kushwah  
7. Shri Neeraj Maurya 
8. Shri Bastipati Nagaraju 
9. Shri Haribhai Patel 
10. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
11. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu 
12. Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh 
13. Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane 
14. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
RAJYA SABHA 
15. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
16. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
17. Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
18. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
19. Shri Arun Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Mohit Rajan – Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

103 
 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)  
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1. Smt. Nidhi Khare 
 
Secretary (CA) 
2. Shri Santosh Kumar Verma  
 
Joint Secretary (CA) 
3. Shri Aman Jain  
 
Director (Policy & Consumer Affairs)  
4. Shri Ashutosh Agarwal  
 
Director (Legal Metrology) 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare / FSSAI  
 
1.  Shri G.K.V. Rao  
 
CEO, FSSAI 
2.  Shri Rajiv Wadhawan  
 
Advisor (Cost), MoHFW 
3.  Ms. Alka Rao  
 
Advisor (Science, Standards and 
Regulation), FSSAI 
4.  Dr. Satyen Kumar Panda  Advisor (Quality Assurance), FSSAI  
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened to have oral evidence of Department of Consumer Affairs 
and Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI ) on the subject “Regulation 
of Packaged Commodi ties with Specific Reference to Sugar Content in Baby 
Products and Other Food Products.”  
(The witness were called in) 
3. The Chairperson, then welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Con sumer Affairs) 
and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to the sitting and invited their attention 
to Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding 
confidentiality of the proceedings.  
The Chairperson, informed that this  was the second sitting of the Committee on 
the subject, the first having been held on 12 th December 2024 and today’s 
proceedings were focused on examining regulatory, enforcement, and coordination 
aspects more deeply. 
The Chairperson, also acknowledged the steps taken so far by both Ministries 
including labelling reforms, infant food regulation reviews, awareness campaigns and 
consumer protection mechanisms, but expressed concern over:  

104 
 
 The continued non-compliance by major Food Business Operators (FBOs);  
 Disparity in product formulations between India and developed countries;  
 Limited inspection coverage in infant foods;  
 Need for stronger inter-agency coordination, particularly for FoPL, e -
commerce monitoring, and misleading ads.  
4. After the introduction,  the Food Regulation Division of the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare, in their presentation, apprised the Committee of the provisions 
made by FSSAI to check and regulate high sugar content in food products and 
thereafter the representatives of the De partment of Consumer Affairs made a brief 
PowerPoint presentation before the Committee, apprising them of issues related to 
the subject under discussion. An overview of the following was presented before the 
Committee: 
Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) 
 The Legal Metrology Act and Packaged Commodities Rules, 2011;  
 Inspection and grievance data;  
 Status of enforcement across states;  
 Actions against misleading labels.  
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare / FSSAI  
 Food Safety and Standards regulations concer ning sugar and infant nutrition;  
 Thresholds for “sugar-free” and “low-sugar” claims; 
 Progress on Front-of-Pack Labelling (FoPL); 
 Awareness initiatives including “Aaj Se Thoda Kam” and “Eat Right” 
campaigns; 
 Current testing methodologies and efforts to standardize sugar detection in 
baby foods. 
5.  After the presentation, the Hon’ble Chairperson left for an urgent meeting, and 
Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat, MP, convened rest of the meeting. Thereafter, the Hon’ble 
Members raised queries and sought further clari fications on various aspects of the 
subject under discussion. The Committee, inter alia, deliberated upon the following 
issues: 
 Non-alignment of Indian sugar thresholds with WHO/ICMR guidelines;  
 Need for Nutri-Grade-style warning labels; 
 Inadequacy of current testing infrastructure for detecting added sugar;  
 Sale of expired/mislabelled foods in rural markets;  
 Inconsistency in product standards across countries;  
 Weak consumer awareness in low-literacy regions; 
 Delayed regulatory implementation and the ab sence of a violators' database;  
 Suggestions for joint task forces and a unified public complaint platform.  

105 
 
 
6.  Representatives of both the Ministry/Department responded and assured the 
Committee that they were committed to addressing all concerns and prov iding 
necessary clarifications. 
7.  Thereafter, the Chairperson thanked the representatives and other officials for 
their detailed presentation. The Chairperson also requested the Ministry/Department 
to submit any additional information that could not be a ddressed during the sitting to 
the Lok Sabha Secretariat. 
8. The evidence was concluded and the representatives of the Ministries then 
withdrew. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
The Committee then adjourned.  
___ 
 
 
  

106 
 
APPENDIX - III 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2025 -2026) HELD 
ON TUESDAY, 18TH NOVEMBER, 2025 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1315 hrs. in Committee Room No. 2, Extension 
to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi – Chairperson  
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Smt. Malvika Devi 
3. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
4. Shri Manoj Kumar 
5. Shri Sunil Kumar 
6. Shri Bharat Singh Kushwah 
7. Shri Neeraj Maurya 
8. Shri Bastipati Nagaraju 
9. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
10. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu 
11. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh 
12. Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane 
13. Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
RAJYA SABHA 
14. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
15. Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
16. Shri Arun Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Dr. Vatsala Joshi – Director 
2. Smt. Veena Luthra – Committee Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

107 
 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  
(Department of Consumer Affairs)  
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1. Smt. Nidhi Khare 
 
Secretary (CA) 
2. Shri Bharat Khera 
 
AS (CA) 
3. Shri Anupam Mishra 
 
JS (CA) 
4.  Shri Shashi Bhushan,  Advisor (Cost) 
 
5. Shri Ashutosh Agarwal  
 
Director (Legal Metrology) 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare / FSSAI  
 
5.  Shri Rajit Punhani 
 
CEO, FSSAI 
6.  Shri Nikhil Gajraj 
 
Joint Secretary 
7.  Shri U.S. Dhyani ED, FSSAI 
8.  Dr. Alka Rao Advisor, FSSAI 
9.  Dr. Amit Sharma  Director, FSSAI 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened to have oral evidence of Department of Consumer Affairs 
and Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI ) on the subject “Regulation 
of Packaged Commodi ties with Specific Reference to Sugar Content in Baby 
Products and Other Food Products.”  
(The witness were called in) 
3. The Chairperson, then welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to the sitting and invited their attention 
to Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding 
confidentiality of the proceedings.  
The Chairperson informed that this sitting was a continuation of the previous 
meetings of the Committee on the subject, the first having been held on 12th 
December 2024 and the second on 6th May 2025  and today’s proceedings were 
focused on examining regulatory, enforcement, and coordin ation aspects in greater 
depth. 

108 
 
The Chairperson, also acknowledged the steps taken so far by both Ministries 
including labelling reforms, infant food regulation reviews, awareness campaigns and 
consumer protection mechanisms, but expressed concern over:  
(i)  the progress made in implementing FoPL and pack declaration reforms;  
(ii)  the adequacy of inspection and testing mechanisms;  
(iii)  the measures taken to address misleading advertisements and digital 
marketing practices; and 
(iv)  legal and institutional improvements to strengthen consumer protection.  
4. After the introduction, the representatives of the Department of Consumer 
Affairs made a brief PowerPoint presentation before the Committee, apprising them 
of issues related to the subject under discuss ion. An overview of the following was 
presented before the Committee:  
 The Legal Metrology Act and Packaged Commodities Rules, 2011;  
 Inspection and grievance data;  
 Status of enforcement across states;  
 Actions against misleading labels.  
Thereafter, the Food Regulation Division of the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, in their presentation, apprised the Committee of the provisions made by 
FSSAI to check and regulate high sugar content in food products and inter alia 
briefed the the Committee on the follow ing:  
 Food Safety and Standards regulations concerning sugar and infant nutrition;  
 Thresholds for “sugar-free” and “low-sugar” claims; 
 Progress on Front-of-Pack Labelling (FoPL); 
 Awareness initiatives including “Aaj Se Thoda Kam” and “Eat Right” 
campaigns; 
 Current testing methodologies and efforts to standardize sugar detection in 
baby foods. 
5.  After the presentation, the Hon’ble Members raised queries and sought further 
clarifications on various aspects of the subject under discussion. The Committee, 
inter alia, deliberated upon the following issues:  
 Causes Behind Weak Enforcement and Low Compliance  
 Sufficiency of Penalties for Misbranding and Misleading Labels  
 Expert Review of Regulatory Proposals  
 Engagement of Premier Academic Institutions in Samplin g and Testing 
 Consideration of a Stricter Sugar Threshold  
 Regulation of Marketing of High-Sugar Foods to Children 

109 
 
 Enforcement Strategy for Sugar-Related Regulations Across States  
 Safety Oversight in Infant Milk Substitutes  
 Authority Responsible for Prescri bing Sugar Limits 
 Availability of the Regulation Prescribing Sugar Limits  
 India Allowing Higher Sugar Levels Than WHO Norms  
 Proposed Ban on BPA and PFAS in Packaging  
 Submission of Draft Regulation on BPA/PFAS  
 Display of Complaint Information on Pack Labels  
 Failure of Surveillance in Cough Syrup Incidents  
 Data on First-Time, Repeat, and Habitual Offenders  
 Continued Compliance of Long-Term Licence Holders 
 
6.  Representatives of both the Ministry/Department responded  to thequeries and 
concerned raised by the Members and assured the Committee that they were 
committed to addressing all concerns and providing necessary clarifications.  
7.  Thereafter, the Chairperson thanked the representatives and other officials for 
their detailed presentation. The Chairperson also requested the Ministry/Department 
to submit any additional information that could not be addressed during the sitting to 
the Lok Sabha Secretariat. 
8. The evidence was concluded and the representatives of the Ministries then 
withdrew. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
The Committee then adjourned.  
___ 
 
 
  

110 
 
APPENDIX - IV 
MINUTES OF THE  EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2025 -2026) HELD 
ON FRIDAY, 5 JUNE, 2026 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1130 hrs. in Committee Room No. 3,  
Extension to PHA, New Delhi.  
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 2. Shri Anto Antony 
 3. Smt. Malvika Devi 
 4.Shri Manish Jaiswal 
 5. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa  
6. Shri Manoj Kumar 
7. Shri Sunil Kumar 
8. Shri Bharat Singh Kushwah  
9. Shri Neeraj Maurya 
10. Shri Bastipati Nagaraju 
11. Shri Haribhai Patel 
12. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu 
13. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh 
14. Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh 
15. Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane  
 
  
Rajya Sabha 
 
16. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
17. Shri MokariyaRambhai 
18. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
19. Shri Arun Singh 
20.  Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah 
21. Shri Sat Paul Sharma 
22. Shri Chowdry Mohammad Ramzan  
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi                 - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi                          - Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan                 - Deputy Secretary 

111 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Commit tee convened for consideration and adoption of the following Draft 
Reports of the Committee: 
(i) Draft Report on ‘Regulation of Packed Commodities with specific Reference 
to Sugar Content in Baby products and other Food Products’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs); and 
 
(ii) XXXX           XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the abovementionedDraft 
Reports of the Committee.  
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft 
Reports without any amendments/modifications.  
5.  The Committee then authorized the Hon’ble Chairperson to finalize and 
present the aforesaid Reports during the upcoming Monsoon Session of Parliament. 
6. XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
************* 
XXXX     Matter does not pertain to report  
 
 