 
 
       STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, 
FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2024-2025) 
 
 
     
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty Seventh Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
the subject ‘Initiatives in the North East in the Field of Consumer Rights Protection’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department 
of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
FIRST REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
      December, 2024/    Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
1 


 
 
FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2024-2025) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty Seventh Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
the subject ‘ Initiatives in the North East in the Field of Consumer Rights Protection’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department 
of Consumer Affairs)} 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 02.12.2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 02.12.2024 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
      December, 2024/    Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
 
  


 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Composition of the Committee 
 
iii 
Introduction 
 
iv 
Chapter I Report 
 
1 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by Government 
 
5 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government replies 
 
20 
Chapter IV Observation/Recommendation which have not been 
accepted by Government 
 
21 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of Government are still awaited 
 
22 
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the 4th sitting of the Committee (202 4-25) 
held on 28.11.2024 
 
23 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Thirty Seventh Report of the Standing Committee  on 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (2024-25) 
 
                   Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi   -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Anto Antony  3.  Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay  4.  Shri Jaswantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  5.  Smt. Malvika Devi  6.  Shri Manish Jaiswal  7.  Shri Saumitra Khan  8.  Shri Manoj Kumar  9.  Shri Sunil Kumar  10. Shri Bharat Singh Kushwah  11. Shri Ajendra Singh Lodhi  12. Shri Neeraj Maurya  13. Shri Bastipati Nagaraju  14. Shri Haribhai Patel  15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat  16. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu  17. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh  18. Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh  19. Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane  20. Dr. Indra Hang Subba  21. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan   
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
24. Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
25. Shri Baburam Nishad 
26. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
27. Shri Arun Singh 
28. Vacant 
29. Vacant  
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai                      -           Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi            -  Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan                     -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Abdul Khan   - Assistant Committee Officer  
(iii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs , Food  and 
Public Distribution (2024-2025) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this First Report on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty Seventh Report of the 
Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Initiatives in the North East in the 
Field of Consumer Rights Protection’ pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)}. 
 
2.   The Thirty Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
19.12.2023. The Government has furnished its replies indicating Action Taken on the 
recommendations contained in the Report on 15.04.2024 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
28.11.2024. 
 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report is given in Appendix II.  
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the text of the Report. 
  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                     Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
28 November, 2024                    Chairperson, 
07 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                           Standing Committee on  
    Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER - I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty Seventh Report of the Committee 
(2023-2024), (17 th Lok Sabha) on the subject, ‘Initiatives in the North East in the Field of 
Consumer Rights Protection’ pertaining to the Department of Consumer Affairs.  
1.2 The Thirty Seventh Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya 
Sabha on 19.12.2023. It contained 13 Observations/ Recommendations.  
1.3 Action taken replies in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report have been received and categorized as follows:- 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Para Nos.:  1.9, 2.2, 2.23, 2.24, 2.25, 3.5, 3.13, 4.7, 4.8, 5.4, 5.9, 6.5, 7.5 
Total: 13 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies: 
 Para Nos.:  NIL                                                                                          Total: 00 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies   of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
Para No.:      NIL                                                                                                   
                                                              Total:00 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in  respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
   Para No. : NIL 
                                                                                                                              Total: 00 
  Chapter-V 

2 
 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the implementation 
of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government.  The Committee 
desire that final action taken notes  to the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in Chapter I of this Report should be furnished to them not later than three months of 
the presentation of this Report.    
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action -taken by the Government on some of their 
Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No.2.25) 
  
1.6 The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee also note that a Consumer Commission online application portal 
named “edaakhil.nic.in” has been developed to facilitate the consumers/advocates to 
file the consumer complaint online through the e - Daakhil portal from home or 
anywhere at their own comfort. This E -daakhil software, that provides facility to pay 
the complaint fees online as well as havi ng option to pay the fees offline with 
uploading the proof of payment of fee, can be accessed in NCDRC and in 35 State 
Commissions along with all District Commissions of states of North -East. The facility 
of E-Daakhil has been extended for filing both Appe al as well as Revision also. The 
pecuniary jurisdiction is decided on the consideration paid on the goods or services 
procured. No fee is required to be paid for registering a complaint regarding a product 
or service below Rs.5,00,000/ - . The Committee are  impressed to note that the 
Department is conducting awareness campaigns through hoardings, various media 
channels, including television, radio, newspapers, and social media platforms, to 
inform the public about the existence and benefits of the e -Daakhil scheme apart from 
organizing online tutorials and regional workshops. The Committee further 
recommend that the awareness campaigns of the Department and concerned State 
Governments should be more intensified and penetrating got intensified so that 
awareness about their consumer rights and the e -Daakhil portal will be amplified. The 
Department should also organize more tutorials and regional workshops to equip the 
officials to take up the cases more efficiently.” 
1.7 In its action-taken reply, the Ministry has stated as under: 
“To make the stakeholders familiar with the features of the new platform, the 
Department has started a capacity building program for the application users. In this 
regard, a training workshop was held on 13th Feb 2024 at New Delhi. “ 
 
1.8 The Committee, while recognizing the Department's efforts in promoting the e -
Daakhil portal by various online and offline modes, recommended for more intensified 
awareness programmes and regional workshops for better penetration.  In their action 
taken reply, the Department has informed that they had started a capacity building 
programme for application users and a training worksho p was held on 13 February, 

3 
 
2024 at New Delhi.   While reiterating their earlier recommendation, the Committee are 
not satisfied with just one workshop organized for the awareness of stakeholders and 
desire that more targeted efforts in all regions, particularly in rural and less developed 
areas, where awareness is often lower should be intensified to make it more impactful 
in all the parts of the country .  The Committee may also be apprised of the same  
accordingly. 
Recommendation No. 6 (Para No. 3.5) 
 1.9    The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that Section 6 (3) of Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (the Act) 
stipulates that State Consumer Protection Council (SCPCs) shall meet as and when 
necessary but not less than two meetings per y ear. They also note that Section 8 of 
the Act prescribes that District Consumer Protection Councils (DCPCs) should be 
established in each and every district. The Committee note that the State of 
Arunachal Pradesh has constituted the State Consumer Protecti on Council (SCPC) 
but held no meeting while 18 District Consumer Protection Councils have, however, 
been constituted in that state. Formation of the Commission at State and District 
levels are Nil in Tripura, Mizoram and Sikkim. Manipur and Nagaland have o ne and 
eleven District Commissions each without having constituted the SCPC. As regards 
the State of Assam, it has constituted the SCPC but not held any meeting yet. It is 
only the State of Meghalaya that has constituted the SCPC and held meeting at 
all.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Central Government should see that 
the mandates of Section 6(3) and 8 of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 is fulfilled in 
each of the States of the North East so that the consumers in the region feel assured 
of their rights and have a sense of belonging with the rest of the country.”   
  
1.10 In its action-taken, reply the Ministry has stated as under:   
“The recommendations of the Committee have been duly noted.” 
1.11 While observing the fact that several North -Eastern States were not complying 
with the provisions of Consumer Protection Act, 2019 , particularly the establishment 
of District Consumer Protection Councils (DCPCs) in every district  and regular 
meetings of State Consumer Protection C ouncils (SCPCs) at least twice a year .  The 
Committee had desired that the Central Government should see  the mandates of 
Section 6(3) and 8 of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 is fulfilled in each North -
Eastern State.   
In their action-taken reply, the Department has only stated that they have noted 
the observations and recommendations of the Committee. The Committee , therefore, 
reiterate their recommendation and urge the Central Government to ensure the full 
implementation of the Consumer Protection Act , 2019 in all North -Eastern States 

4 
 
particularly the basis mandates of regular meetings of SCPCs and the establishment 
of DCPCs to safeguard consumer rights of this region. 
  

5 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation Serial No. 1 (Para No. 1.9) 
 The Committee note that under the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, a three -tier 
quasi-judicial mechanism, called Consumer Commission, has been established at the 
District, State and National levels to provide speedy, simple and inexpensive resolution of 
consumer disputes. The rules/guidelines and regulations have been accordingly notified by 
the Government. They also note that it is the responsibility of the State Governments to 
establish and effectivel y run the District Commissions and State Commissions in their 
respective States/UTs. Moreover, the Government of India has also been expending 
financial assistance under the Scheme of Strengthening the Infrastructure of Consumer 
Commissions. The Committee,  therefore, desire that the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 
may be got implemented in letter and spirit so that the rules, guidelines and regulations are 
strictly complied with in the execution of the Act. The Central Government should ensure that 
strengthening of infrastructure of the consumer commissions in the North East States so that 
the resolution of consumer disputes is speedy, simple and inexpensive in the North Eastern 
States of the country. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.2 The Government of India conti nues to provide financial assistance under the Scheme 
of Strengthening the Infrastructure of Consumer Commissions. Special attention is being 
given to the North Eastern States to ensure that the infrastructure is robust and capable of 
delivering speedy, simple, and inexpensive resolution of consumer disputes which is evident 
from the fact that during last 3 years, a total of ₹ 999.40 lakh have been released under the 
Scheme of Strengthening of Consumer Commissions, out of which ₹ 382.08 lakh have been 
released for States in North Eastern region, which implies that around 38% of the total funds 
released under the SCC scheme during the last 3 years have been released to the North -
Eastern states. 

6 
 
The Department of Consumer Affairs (DoCA) is committed to ensure speedy disposal 
of consumer cases in the country. In recent years, the DoCA has taken a number of 
initiatives to expedite the resolution of consumer disputes, including organizing regional 
workshops, conferences, and roundtable discussions with stakeholder s, disposal by Lok  
Adalats etc. One such regional workshop was held in Guwahati  on 2 nd December, 2022 
which was intended specifically towards deliberating key issues revolving around consumer 
protection in the north -eastern states. The workshop was attended by the Presidents and 
Members of the State Commissions and District Commissions situ ated within the North -
eastern states along with the Principal Secretaries/Secretaries of the Consumer Affairs 
departments in these states. During the course of workshop, various panel discussions on 
issues such as reducing the pendency in Consumer Commissi ons, strengthening the 
infrastructure of Consumer Commissions, using mediation for speedier resolution of 
consumer cases etc. were held and deliberated upon.  These efforts have resulted in a 
significant increase in the number of cases disposed of by Consum er Commissions across 
the country including the North eastern region. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/2/2024-P&C dated 15.04.2024] 
Recommendation Serial No. 2   (Para no 2.2) 
2.3 The Committee observe that there are two ongoing schemes to strengthen the 
Consumer Commissions in North Eastern Regions.However, they find that under 
these schemes during the F.Y 2022-23, an amount of ₹ 18.62 Lakh was released to the 
state of Assam one pr oposal each of the Government of Sikkim and Arunachal 
Pradesh seeking financial assistance for the State Commission are under 
consideration and one proposal from Nagaland has been sent back for clarification. 
The rest of the North Eastern States either did  not seek financial assistance or failed 
to submit proposals seeking assistance under these schemes. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that in view of the poor record of seeking financial assistance 
by the north Eastern States, the Ministry may assess th e exact status of consumer 
Commissions of all the North Eastern States in terms of functioning and availability of 
infrastructure and persuade the state Governments to strengthen them and provide all 
necessary Central assistance under the ongoing schemes, so that all the consumer 

7 
 
Commissions of North Eastern states are also sufficiently strengthened. The 
Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard.   
 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 As per the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, the responsibility of 
establishing consumer commissions at the District and State level as well as filling up posts 
of Presidents and Members in these consumer commissions lie with the respective 
States/UTs. 
However, the Central Government  is committed to provide necessary support 
and assistance to the North Eastern States for strengthening their Consumer 
Commissions.To supplement the efforts of the State Governments, the Central Government 
has been providing financial assistance to the State Governments un der the scheme, 
‘Strengthening Consumer Commission’ for strengthening the infrastructure of Consumer 
Commissions so that minimum level of facilities to settle  consumer disputes redressal  are 
made available  at each Consumer Commission. 
As per the latest information received from North Eastern States, the present status of 
Consumer Commissions in the North Eastern region is as under: 
 S. 
No. 
States/UTs Whether State 
Commission 
District Commission  
Functional Non-
Functional 
Number of 
District 
Commissions 
Functional Non-
functional 
  Arunachal 
Pradesh 
1 0 25 18 7 
  Assam 1 0 23 23 0 
  Manipur 1 0 3 3 0 
  Meghalaya 1 0 7 7 0 
  Mizoram 1 0 11 11 0 
  Nagaland 1 0 16 11 5 

8 
 
  Sikkim  1 0 6 6 0 
  Tripura 1 0 4 4 0 
Total 8 0 95 83 12 
  
2.5 The status of proposals received from the North -Eastern States in the last two years 
under the “Strengthening Consumer Commissions (SCC)” scheme is as follows: 
1. Assam: The Department has released total funds amounting to ₹ 22.08 lakh to the 
state of Assam in the F.Y 2022-23. 
2. Arunachal Pradesh: An amount of ₹ 1.50 crore was released to Government of 
Arunachal Pradesh for non -building assistance for the State Commission and 16 
District Commissions located in the state. 
3. Sikkim: The Department released funds amounting to ₹ 65 lakh to the state of 
Sikkim for non -building assistance for the State Commission and 4 District 
Commissions located within the state of Sikkim. 
4. Nagaland: Government of Nagaland is yet to furnish the clarifications sought by this 
department in reference to the proposal submitted by them in the F.Y 2022 -23. 
Besides, a total of ₹ 979.25 lakh have been released to the Govt. of Nagaland for 
upgrading the infrastructure of Consumer Commissions since inception by the 
Department of Consumer Aff airs. However, there is still pending UCs of ₹ 80 lakh on 
part of Nagaland in respect of funds released to them in the year 2013-14. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/2/2024-P&C dated 15.04.2024] 
 
Recommendation No. 3  (Para No. 2.23) 
  
2.6 The Committee note that the Government is implementing the C omputerization 
and Computer Networking of Consumer Fora in the country (CONFONET)  through the 
National Informatics Centre in the North Eastern  States also . The Committee desire 
that the Government should adopt an integrated approach in the implementation of 
the schemes CONFONET in each North Eastern State, so that the consumer 
commissions are strengthened and empowered with the necessary equipme nt like 
computers and devise a mechanism for regular documenting lacunae in the system 
for eventual rectification of the same. 
  

9 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
2.7 The recommendation of the committee has been duly noted. It is submitted that all the 
Districts of North Eastern States have been equipped with computer hardware. Besides 
CONFONET, the Department also administers a scheme called Strengthening of Consumer 
Commissions (SCC) through which hardware accessories are provided to the consumer 
commissions to strengthen the technical infrastructure.The Department has also launched 
the revamped portal of CONFONET i.e. "e-jagriti.gov.in" on 24th Dec 2023. This platform is a 
new integrated platform for CONFONET software. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/2/2024-P&C dated 15.04.2024] 
 
Recommendation No. 4 (Para No. 2.24) 
2.8 The Committee note that the scheme of ‘Computerization and Computer 
Networking of Consumer Fora (Commissions) in the cou ntry, (CONFONET)’ was 
launched during the 10th Plan period in March, 2005. Under the scheme, the Consumer 
Commissions at all the three tiers throughout the country are to be fully computerized 
to enable digital access of information and quicker disposal of cases. They also note 
that under the CONFONER an Online Case Monitoring System (OCMS) has been 
developed and implemented to facilitate entry of consumer cases online in the 
consumer commissions. There is a quick search facility using case number, 
complainant name, respondent name etc. and free text search for judgme nts are also 
available. Auto SMS & E -mail alerts on next date of hearing to all concerned is also 
available in the Online CMS application software. CONFONET Dashboard for 
Administrator & for General Public along with Pull SMS facility has also been 
introduced in the application that one can send SMS to request and get the date of 
next hearing of his case on his mobile through SMS. Hardware supports are provided 
to all State Commissions, 23 District Commissions (DC) in Assam, 10 DC in Arunachal 
Pradesh, 3 DCs in Manipur, 8 DCs in Mizoram, 7 DC each in Meghalaya and Nagaland 
and 4 DC each in Tripura and Sikkim. The Committee desire that the Central 
Government should ensure that all the Districts of the each North Eastern States are 

10 
 
equipped with computer hardw are to facilitate faster entry of cases and quicker 
disposal.  
Reply of the Government 
2.9 The recommendation of the committee has been duly noted. The Division provides 
the hardware to the consumer commissions across the country and the same is replaced o n 
need basis. It is further submitted that all the Districts of North Eastern States are fully 
equipped with computer hardware.To make the stakeholders familiar with the features of the 
new platform (e -Jagriti), the Department has started a capacity buildi ng program for the 
application users. in this regard, a training workshop was held on 13th Feb 2024 at   New 
Delhi.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/2/2024-P&C dated 15.04.2024] 
 
(Recommendation No. 5)  Para No. 2.25 
2.10  The Committee also note that a Consumer Commission online application 
portal named “edaakhil.nic.in” has been developed to facilitate the 
consumers/advocates to file the consumer complaint online through the e - Daakhil 
portal from home or anywhere at their own comfort. This E -daakhil software, that 
provides facility to pay the complaint fees online as well as having option to pay the 
fees offline with uploading the proof of payment of fee, can be accessed in NCDRC  
and in 35 State Commissions along with all District Commissions of states of North -
East. The facility of E -Daakhil has been extended for filing both Appeal as well as 
Revision also. The pecuniary jurisdiction is decided on the consideration paid on the 
goods or services procured. No fee is required to be paid for registering a complaint 
regarding a product or service below Rs.5,00,000/ - . The Committee are impressed to 
note that the Department is conducting awareness campaigns through hoardings, 
various me dia channels, including television, radio, newspapers, and social media 
platforms, to inform the public about the existence and benefits of the e -Daakhil 
scheme apart from organizing online tutorials and regional workshops. The 
Committee further recommend that the awareness campaigns of the Department and 

11 
 
concerned State Governments should be more intensified and penetrating got 
intensified so that awareness about their consumer rights and the e-Daakhil portal will 
be amplified. The Department should also o rganize more tutorials and regional 
workshops to equip the officials to take up the cases more efficiently. 
Reply of the Government 
2.11 To make the stakeholders familiar with the features of the new platform, the 
Department has started a capacity building program for the application users. in this regard, 
a training workshop was held on 13th Feb 2024 at  New Delhi.  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/2/2024-P&C dated 15.04.2024] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.8 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation Serial No. 6 (Para No. 3.5) 
  
2.12 The Committee note that Section 6 (3) of Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (the 
Act) stipulates that State Consumer Protection Council (SCPCs) shall meet as and 
when necessary but not less than two meetings per year. They also note that Section 
8 of the Act prescribes that District Consumer Protection Councils (DCPCs) should be 
established in each and every district. The Committee note that the State of Arunachal 
Pradesh has constituted the State Consumer Protection Council (SCPC) but held no 
meeting while 18 D istrict Consumer Protection Councils have, however, been 
constituted in that state. Formation of the Commission at State and District levels are 
Nil in Tripura, Mizoram and Sikkim. Manipur and Nagaland have one and eleven 
District Commissions each without having constituted the SCPC. As regards the State 
of Assam, it has constituted the SCPC but not held any meeting yet. It is only the 
State of Meghalaya that has constituted the SCPC and held meeting at all.   The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Centra l Government should see that the 
mandates of Section 6(3) and 8 of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 is fulfilled in 
each of the States of the North East so that the consumers in the region feel assured 
of their rights and have a sense of belonging with the rest of the country.   

12 
 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.13 The recommendations of the Committee have been duly noted. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/2/2024-P&C dated 15.04.2024] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.11 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation Serial No. 7   (Para No. 3.13) 
  
2.14 The Committee note that Section 28(1) of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 
provides for the establishment of District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission 
in each district of the State . They also note with appreciation the conformance of 
States to the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 with regard to setting 
up of District Commissions in each district of the States.  With some District 
Commissions that hear and decide cases in other locations due to various reasons, 
the Committee are hopeful of the complete compliance of the mandate of the Act. The 
Committee desire the Department to delve deeper into the issue and mak e all 
arrangements to ensure that consumer disputes cases are heard and decided in the 
District Commissions located in the District Headquarters of old or new districts of 
North Eastern States itself for the convenience of the aggrieved consumers. It may 
also be ensured that the authorities decide cases as per the pecuniary jurisdictions 
uptoRs. 50 Lakh so that they may not burden themselves with disputes of higher 
value.  
Reply of the Government 
2.15 As per the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, the responsibility of 
establishing consumer commissions at the District and State level lie with the respective 
State/UT. Consequently, it is also the responsibility of the State Governments to ensure t hat 
these Consumer Commissions are provided with the requisite infrastructure so that they 

13 
 
function effectively. The Central Government doesn’t have any say in deciding the location of 
the consumer commission as the land is provided by the concerned State Government. 
However, to supplement the efforts of the State Governments, the Central 
Government has been providing financial assistance to the State Governments under the 
scheme, ‘Strengthening Consumer Commission’ for strengthening the infrastructure of 
Consumer Comm issions so that minimum level of facilities to settle  consumer disputes 
redressal are made available  at each Consumer Commission.  
  
As regards pecuniary jurisdiction of Consumer Commissions is concerned, the same 
has been revised vide notification dated 30.12.2021 and is presently as under: 
  
Consumer Commission Amount (in Rupees) 
District Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commission 
Upto 50 Lakhs 
State Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commission 
Beyond Rs 50 lakhs up to Rs 2 crore 
National  Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commission 
Beyond Rs 2 crore 
  
 
Consumer cases are admitted in the Consumer Commissions based on both the pecuniary 
and the territorial jurisdiction. 
  
Further, the Government has established the E-Daakhil Portal to streamline the online 
submission of consumer complaints. This portal offers a convenient, rapid, and cost -effective 
platform, allowing consumers to easily engage with the appropriate consumer forum without 
the necessity of traveling or being physically present to register their grievances. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/2/2024-P&C dated 15.04.2024] 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
Recommendation No.8  (Para No. 4.7) 
  
2.16 The Committee note that Legal Metrology infrastructure scheme aims to fulfill 
the legislative mandate,  protect consumers from being short changed by wrong 
measurement, provide impetus to the governance priorities of transparency and ease 
of doing business and provide for Indian Standards and enhance accuracy of 
measurement of time. They also note that strengthening Legal Metrology 
infrastructure in the States is carried on by means of construction of Secondary 
Standard and Working Standard Laboratories, by providing equipment to ensure 
enhanced activity and higher reliability of verifications and by capacity building of 
officers. In the North East, the Regional Reference Standards Laboratory (RRSL) is 
situated at Guwahati, Assam.  This is apart from the othe r RRSLs located at 
Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Bhubaneswar and Faridabad. Two more laboratories at 
Varanasi, (Uttar Pradesh) and Nagpur, (Maharashtra) are being established. These 
RRSLs serve as a vital link in dissemination of the values of national standards o f 
Legal Metrology down to the commercial level. During last three years out of total 
Grant in aid in this scheme of Rs 25 crore around Rs 1.5 crore have been given to 
RRSL Guwahati. The Committee desire that apart from Guwahati (Assam), given the 
geographical size of the North Eastern Region, the Government should select suitable 
locations in the North Eastern Region for setting up of more RRSLs which will go a 
long way in promoting the policy of Act East Policy of for eventual integration of the 
region with the rest of the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
2.17 Department will give topmost priority for  promoting the policy of Act for eventual 
integration of the region with the rest of the country and to efficient execution of the schemes 
under Legal Metrology for Quantity Assurance.   All the necessary efforts will be made for 
setting up of  camp offices/ RRSLs at  suitable locations in the North Eastern Region in 
association with Controllers of Legal Metrology of NE States. 
  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/2/2024-P&C dated 15.04.2024] 

15 
 
Recommendation No. 9 (Para 4.8) 
2.18 The Committee note that Legal Metrology scheme aims to fulfill the legislative 
mandate, protect consumers fro m being short changed by wrong 
measurement, provide impetus to the governance priorities of transparency and ease 
of doing business and provide for Indian Standards. Objectives of the scheme include 
Strengthening Legal Metrology infrastructure in the State s. The Committee also note 
that during the last 10 years an amount of Rs. 27.19 Crore Grant in Aid for Legal 
Metrology was released in the region out of which Utilisation Certificate of Rs. 12.49 
Crore is still pending. Except the State of Arunachal Prades h, most of the States don’t 
furnish UC for major part of the Grant received by them. Against the States of Assam, 
Manipur and Sikkim 100% of the grant released are still pending. The Committee 
therefore desire that the Department should ensure the strength ening of Legal 
Metrology infrastructure in each state of North East with proper and full utilization of 
the funds provided for that purpose.  
  
Reply of the Government 
2.19 During 2012 -13 to 2023 -24 an amount of Rs. 27.19 crore was released to NE 
States, of which Rs. 20.18 crore has been utilised and an amount of Rs. 7.01 crore is 
pending. 
 However, all the necessary efforts will be made to ensure  the strengthening of Legal 
Metrology infrastructure in each state of North East with proper and full utilizat ion of the 
funds provided for that purpose.   Department will give topmost priority to efficient execution 
of the schemes under Legal Metrology.   It will be  ensured that funds allocated will be 
judiciously utilized in time without compromising on quality. T he Department will closely 
monitor the progress of implementation and will make every sincere effort to get the funds 
utilised.  The meetings with various stake holders will be held regularly to monitor the 
progress of the Scheme. 
The Department will closely monitor the progress implementation and will make every 
sincere effort to get the funds utilised. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/2/2024-P&C dated 15.04.2024] 

16 
 
 
Recommendation No. 10 (Para No. 5.4) 
 
2.20   The Committee note that the Price Monitoring Division of the Department of 
Consumer Affairs monitors prices prevailing in the country from 184 centres which 
includes 86 centres from the North -Eastern States. While expressing their  
appreciation for the Department of Consumer Affairs for monitoring prices prevailing 
in the Northeast from 86 centres, the Committee desire that such centres in the 
Northeast may be made functional and their uses, optimized. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.21 At present there are 550 price reporting centres across 34 states/UTs   including 86 
centres in North Eastern States. All the price reporting centres in North -eastern States are 
functional and are reporting daily prices, except the centres in the State of Manipur. The 
price reporting centres in Manipur have not been reporting daily prices since May 2023 due 
to the prevailing law and order situation in the State. 
  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/2/2024-P&C dated 15.04.2024] 
Recommendation No. 11  (Para No. 5.9) 
  
2.22    The Committee note that prices of commodities are normally higher in 
consuming States such as the North East area as compared to producing States due 
to transportation and other logistics costs. In this connection, the information upto 14 
June, 2022 as given by the Department, has given a clear picture of the situation. The 
Committee also note that normal life of consumers in the Northeastern region is often, 
marred by recurrent bandhs and strikes.   However, there is no impact study on such 
bands and strike s. As a result, prices of essential commodities see an abnormal 
increase in the region. Besides slight disruptions in supply chain or damage due to 
heavy rains leads to spike in prices of agri -horticultural commodities. The Committee 
desire the Central Gov ernment to take up the matter with a view to bring about 
positive change, in the interest of the consumers living in the North East areas of the 

17 
 
country who have to pay higher prices for commodities of daily consumption due to 
various factors.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
2.23 Prices of agri-horticultural commodities are volatile and tend to get affected by several 
factors, such as mismatch in demand and supply, seasonality, supply chain constraints, 
artificial shortage created by hoarding and black marketin g, rise in international prices, 
geopolitical tensions etc. Sometimes slight disruptions in supply chain or damage due to 
heavy rains leads to spike in prices of agri -horticultural commodities. Conversely, bulk arrival 
and logistics problems have the poten tial of creating a situation of glut in the market and 
resultant dip in retail prices. 
Government takes various measures from time to time to augment domestic 
availability and stabilize the prices of essential food commodities. These steps, inter -alia, 
include releases from the buffer to cool down prices, imposition of stock limits, monitoring of 
stocks declared by entities to prevent hoarding as also requisite changes in trade policy 
instruments like rationalization of import duty, changes in import quota,  restrictions on 
exports of the commodity etc. 
State Governments, including NE States, have been requested to implement State -
level Price Stabilisation Fund (SLPSF) for intervention to control price volatility by availing 
funds for the PSF scheme. Funds fr om the PSF schemes are provided to States for setting 
up State -level PSF Corpus on a 50:50 sharing between Centre and State (the sharing 
pattern is 75:25 for NE States). Till date, 2 State, viz., Assam and Nagaland have been 
sanctioned State-level PSF corpus fund of Rs. 200 crore and Rs. 100 crore respectively. 
Status of Bharat Chana Dal 
  
To make dals available to consumers at affordable prices, Bharat Dal has been 
launched in July, 2023 by converting Chana stock in the PSF into Chana dal for retail 
disposal. The Bharat Chana Dal is made available to the consumers at subsidized rates of 
Rs.60 per kg for 1 kg pack and Rs.55 per kg for 30 kg pack. Over 5.50 LMT of Bharat Chana 
Dal has been sold to retail consumers till date. 

18 
 
Status of Bharat Chana Dal - North East States 
Bharat Chana Dal is distributed in the North Ea stern States by NCCF and NAFED as 
per demand of the consumers and States Governments. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/2/2024-P&C dated 15.04.2024] 
Recommendation No. 12   (Para No. 6.5) 
 
2.24 The Committee are happy to note that grants is given from Consumer Welfare 
Fund given to States/UTs for creating a State/UT level Consumer Welfare (Corpus) 
Fund up to a seed money up  to Rs. 20.00 Crore and the contribution of Centre and 
State/UT is in the ratio of 90:10 in for states of the North Eastern Region in the corpus. 
The money is to be deposited in a dedicated interest bearing bank account in any 
Nationalized Bank to be opene d and operated by the concerned State/UT States can 
frame their own guidelines which should be consistent with guidelines framed by GoI. 
The interest generated out of the Corpus Fund is to be used by the State/UT for 
consumer welfare activities as per the extant CWF guidelines and directions of the 
Central Government. 24 States / UTs that have set up Consumer   welfare (Corpus 
Fund) amounting to Rs. 32806 Lakhs out of which the share of financial assistance of 
DoCA is Rs. 24568 Lakhs. Out of the Rs. 24568 La khs, the share of 7 States of the 
North East namely, Nagaland, Sikkim, Mizoram, Meghalaya, Tripura, Arunachal 
Pradesh and Assam is 21.84% of the amount which is Rs. 5366 Lakhs. The Committee 
desire the Department to continue to follow up with States not ye t setting up the fund 
and also desire that the Central Government should monitor the manner of utilization 
of the fund so that a clear picture of the worth of the fund may be visible. 
Reply of the Government 
2.25 The recommendation of the Committee has been duly noted. As per the guidelines 
and terms & condition of Consumer Welfare Fund (CWF), all the concerned states have to 
furnish the Utilization Certificate by the end of financial year. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/2/2024-P&C dated 15.04.2024] 

19 
 
Recommendation No. 13  (Para No. 7.5) 
 
2.26 The Committee note that 2012 cases and 9963 cases are filed in the State 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissions (SCs) and the District Consumer 
Disputes Redressal Commissions (DCs) respectively in the NE States. They are of the 
opinion that even if the projects of Strengthening of Consumer Commissions, 
CONFONET, Legal Metrology Infrastructure, Price Monitoring, etc. are in place, unless 
sufficient level of awareness exists, the consumers in the Northeast will not get full 
benefit from the Schemes of the Central Government.   It may be noted that as per 
information furnished by the Department, a total of 397 cases were filed, 369 disposed 
and 28 are pending in State Commissions of the Northeast.   Similarly, out of the total 
of 1723 cases filed, 1530 cases were disposed and 193 are pending in District 
Commissions of the Northeast.   The Committee, therefore, recommend that while 
making use of s ocial media in creating awareness in rural and urban areas, the 
Government should ensure that impact of awareness campaigns is reflected in the 
data on cases in the Consumer Commissions.   They also desire that the consumer 
rights awareness messages are accompanied with a call to action for exercising one’s 
responsibility in passing on awareness about the right as a consumer. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.27 Besides providing Grants in aid  to North -Eastern States for creating consumer 
awareness through various  activities, the Department has also participated in the  Hornbill 
festival. Further, the Department has also extensively used social media platforms like 
Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, LinkedIn, Koo and Public for generating awareness. Regular 
posts in the form of infographics, gifs and videos have been uploaded to educate and 
empower consumers. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) 
OM NO- N-19/2/2024-P&C dated 15.04.2024] 
 
 

20 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
-   NIL  - 
 
 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
 
 
  
 
 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER - V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
- NIL - 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;          (KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI) 
28 NOVEMBER, 2024               Chairperson, 
07 AGRAHAYANA, 1946 (Saka)          Standing Committee on Consumer  
Affairs and Public Distribution

23  
APPENDIX I 
 
MINUTES OF THE  FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (202 4-2025) HELD ON THURSDAY,  28TH 
NOVEMBER, 2024 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘D’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi - Chairperson  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Malvika Devi  
3. Shri Manish Jaiswal  
4. Shri Manoj Kumar  
5. Shri Sunil Kumar  
6. Shri Ajendra Singh Lodhi  
7. Shri Haribhai Patel  
8. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu  
9. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh 
10. Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh 
11.Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane 
12. Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
13.Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
  
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
      14.Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
      15. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
      16. Shri Baburam Nishad 
      17. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
      18. Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai                 - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi                 - Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan                 - Deputy Secretary 

24  
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the following Draft Reports of the 
Committee: 
(i) First Report on Action Taken   by   the   Government   on the Observations/  
Recommendations contained in the Thirty Seventh Report of the Committee 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Initiatives in the North - East in the 
field of Consumer Rights Protection’ of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs); 
 
(ii) XXXX XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 
(iii) XXXX XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
(iv) XXXX XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the above mentioned Draft 
Reports of the Committee.  
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft Reports 
without any amendments/modifications.  
5.  The Committee then authorize d Hon’ble Chairperson to finalize and present the 
aforesaid Reports. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
XXXX Matter does not pertain to report 
 
 
  

25  
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Para No. 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY SEVENTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FOOD, CONSUMER AFFAIRS AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2023-2024) 
                                       (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
(i) Total number of Recommendations:         13  
(ii)   Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted  by the Government :  
  Para Nos.:- 1.9, 2.2, 2.23, 2.24, 2.25, 3.5, 3.13, 4.7, 4.8, 5.4, 5.9, 6.5, 7.5 
(Chapter – II, Total 13)          
Percentage : 100% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which  the Committee do not  desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
Para Nos. Nil 
(Chapter – III, Total - NIL)  
Percentage : 0% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of  the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
Para Nos. : Nil 
          (Chapter – IV, Total NIL 
Percentage : 0% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the interim replies of the 
Government have been received. 
Para Nos.:-  NIL 
                 (Chapter – V, Total NIL)  
                       Percentage : 0% 
 