 
 
            STANDING COMMITTEE O N CONSUMER AFFAIRS, 
FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (202 5-2026) 
 
 
     
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF CONSUM ER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
   AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Committee ( Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
Demands for Grants (202 6-2027) pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs )} 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
       July, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 


 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE O N CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD 
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (202 5-2026) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DI STRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS ) 
 
 
{Action Taken   by   the   Government   on   the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Committee ( Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
Demands for Grants (202 6-2027) pertaining to the  Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs )} 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28.07.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28.07.2026 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 July, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
 


 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Composition of the Committee 
 
(i) 
Introduction 
 
(ii) 
Chapter I Report 
 
1 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been  
accepted by Government 
 
8 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government replies  
 
22 
Chapter IV Observation/Recommendation which have not been 
accepted by Government and require reiteration 
 
23 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of Government are still awaited  
 
24 
APPENDICES 
(I) Minutes of the 11th sitting of the Committee (202 5-26) 
held on 23.07.2026 
 
25 
(II) Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Thirteenth Report of the Standing Committee  on 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
                     Composition of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (2025-26) 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi  -   Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Anto Antony 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Jaswantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor 
5. Smt. Malvika Devi 
6. Shri Manish Jaiswal 
7. Shri Manoj Kumar 
8. Shri Sunil Kumar 
9. Shri Bharat Singh Kushwah 
10. Shri Ajendra Singh Lodhi 
11. Shri Neeraj Maurya 
12. Shri Bastipati Nagaraju 
13. Shri Haribhai Patel 
14. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
16. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu 
17. Shri Rao Rajendra Singh 
18. Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh 
19. Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane 
20. Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
21. Shri Rajmohan Unnithan 
 
                                                                  RAJYA SABHA 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah 
24. Shri Baburam Nishad 
25 Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
26. Shri Arun Singh 
27. Shri Sat Paul Sharma@  
28. Shri Chowdry Mohammad Ramzan@ 
29. Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad # 
30. * 
31. Vacant^ 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi   -          Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi  -          Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan -          Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Abdul Khan -          Assistant Executive Officer  
__________________________________________________________________ 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 26.09.2025 vide Bulletin Part II, Para No. 3287 dated 01.10.2025. 
 
@  Shri Sat Paul Sharma and Shri Chowdry Mohammad Ramzan, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 
05.12.2025 Vide Bulletin Part-II, Para No.3767 dated 08.12.2025. 
 
#  Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 15.12.2025 Vide Bulletin Part-II, Para No.3996 dated 
18.12.2025 vice Smt. Sudha Murty, MP, Rajya Sabha. 
 
*  Shri Mansingh Meraman Parmar, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 23.07.2026 Vide Bulletin Part-II, Para 
No.5724 dated 24.07.2026.  
 
 
^Shri MokariyaRambhai, MP, Rajya Sabha ceased to be a Member of the Committee due to retirement on 21.06.2026 vide 
Committee Branch Note dated 19.02.2026. 
 
Shri Prakash Chik Baraik, MP, Rajya Sabha ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation from the 
membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 11.06.2026 vide Committee Branch Note dated 15.06.2026. 
 
 
Shri Milind Murli Deora, MP, Rajya Sabha ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 16.10.2025 vide Bulletin Part II Para 
No. 3329 dated 17.10.2025. 
 
 
 (i) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution (2025 -2026) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Seventeenth Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report 
of the Committee (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2026 -2027) of the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs). 
2.  The Thirteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
16.03.2026. The Government has furnished its replies indicating Action Taken on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report on 25.06.2026. 
 
3. The Report was considered an d adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on               
23.07.2026. The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have been given at Appendix -I 
to the Report. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the 
Report. 
 
5.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on Observations/  
Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Committee is given at  
Appendix II.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                 Kanimozhi Karunanidhi , 
23 July,  2026                  Chairperson, 
Sravana 01, 1948 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on  
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  
 
(ii) 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
 
  This Report of the Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution deals with action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Committee 
(2025–2026), (18th Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants (2026 –27) of the Department of 
Consumer Affairs. 
1.2 The Thirteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha 
on 16.03.2026. The Report contained 12 Observations/Recommendations. 
1.3 Action Taken replies in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Report have been received from the Government. These have been categorised as 
follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government – 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 
        
Total 12 
Chapter – II 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government's replies – 
Recommendation Nos. Nil 
Total Nil 
Chapter – III 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration– 
 
Recommendation Nos. Nil 
Total Nil 
Chapter- IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies are still awaited – 
 
Recommendation Nos. Nil 
 
Total Nil 
Chapter – V 

2 
 
 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the implementation 
ofthe Observations / Recommendations accepted by the Government. The Committee 
desirethat Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/Recommendations 
contained inChapter -I of this Report should be furnished to them at the earliest but 
not later than threemonths of the presentation of this Report. 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with some of t heir earlier 
Observations/Recommendationswhich either require reiteration or merit furthercomments. 
 
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No. 2.27) 
A. Scheme-wise Prioritisation of Resources in Demands for Grants 
1.6 The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the Budget Estimate of the Department of Consumer 
Affairs for 2026–27 is ₹4,497.37 crore. Out of this, ₹4,100 crore, which is about 91 
percent of the total allocation, has been provided for the Price Stabilisation Fund 
(PSF). The Depart ment has informed that although the PSF accounts for the 
largest share of the budget, the allocation for other schemes in 2026 –27 is higher 
than the previous year by about 5.22 percent and is considered adequate for 
consumer grievance redressal, enforcemen t activities and awareness 
programmes. 
The Committee recognise the importance of the PSF in stabilising prices of 
essential commodities. At the same time, they observe that such a large 
concentration of resources under a single scheme leaves relatively lim ited fiscal 
space for strengthening the institutional framework for consumer protection, 
including grievance redressal mechanisms, enforcement of standards and 
consumer awareness. 
The Committee recommend that the Department present a clearer scheme -wise 
prioritisation of resources in future Demands for Grants so that price stabilisation 
measures and institutional consumer protection systems develop in a balanced 
manner.” 
1.7 In its action-taken reply, the Ministry has stated as under: 
“Adequate provision ha s been kept keeping in view the anticipated requirements and 
estimated expenditure. In so far as the “SCC” Scheme is concerned, financial 
assistance is released to States/UTs based on eligible proposals received in 
accordance with the scheme guidelines and , therefore, the Budget Estimates (BE) 
and Revised Estimates (RE) are calibrated in view of the anticipated proposals and 
implementation requirements during a given financial year. Since inception, the SCC 
Scheme has enabled provision of financial assistan ce across States/UTs for 
strengthening the infrastructure of Consumer Commissions, thereby supplementing 

3 
 
the responsibility of State Governments in ensuring minimum infrastructural facilities 
for effective functioning of Consumer Commissions. During recent  years also, 
financial assistance has continued to be extended for physical and non -physical 
infrastructure subject to receipt of eligible proposals from States/UTs. 
        Further, “Consumer Protection Activities” focus on strengthening stakeholder 
engagement, awareness and institutional coordination for effective implementation of 
the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 through organisation of workshops/conferences, 
consultations, observance of National Consumer Day and World Consumer Rights 
Day and other rela ted activities. The expenditure under this component is also 
planned keeping in view the approved activities and estimated requirement during the 
financial year. 
 The CONFONET scheme is implemented through NIC, which raises fund 
demands for software upgrad ation, hardware support, cloud services, contractual 
manpower. Key activities include e -Jagriti platform, technical support to consumer 
commissions at National, State and District levels.  
 The Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) receives funding from Govt of  India for 
the implementation of specific scheme, namely 'Setting up of Assaying and 
Hallmarking Centres'. Additionally, Quality Control Orders are issued by the 
concerned line Ministries/Departments, while the enforcement of standards is carried 
out by BIS using its own internal funds. 
 The Department has been generating consumer awareness through various 
media including electronic, digital and outdoor media, the focus for publicizing the 
consumer awareness initiatives has been through social media at zero  cost 
dissemination. There has been exponential growth in the number of followers of social 
media handles with increased engagement and reach. We have been able to garner 
attention as well as generate public engagement using social media platforms like X, 
Instagram, Facebook, Linked In, Telegram, Arattai, and Whatsapp in which we are 
having direct communication also with consumers. Other than social media, the 
Department has been interacting with Panchayats of States/UTs through virtual 
interactions to reac h the grassroot levels. Videos are being forwarded to States/ 
UTs/VCOs so that they may utilize those videos for generating awareness. The 
Department has been participating in fairs and festivals where large number of people 
from rural and backwards areas may congregate.   In Publicity division, funds are also 
allocated to NER, SC, ST regions in which Department in past has done has done 
various campaigns and in future proposes community engagement with women 
SHGs, Anganwadi workers, PDS beneficiaries out o f allocated funds. However, as 
and when the need arises for any major awareness campaigns for which provision of 
funds is not there, proposal will be put up for seeking funds.” 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. N-12/1/2026-P&C Section dated 25th June, 2026] 
 
 

4 
 
 
1.8 The Committee in their original report had observed that a large concentration of 
resources under a single scheme leaves relatively limited fiscal space for strengthening the 
institutional framework for consumer protection, and had accordingly recommended that the 
Department present a clearer scheme -wise prioritisation of resources in future Demands for 
Grants. 
 The Committee note the Department's reply does not amount to the c learer scheme-
wise prioritisation of resources in future Demands for Grants. However, it defends the 
existing 91-per-cent concentration under the PSF rather than indicating how a more balanced 
prioritisation between price stabilisation and institutional co nsumer protection would be 
reflected going forward. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that the 
Department present, in future Demands for Grants, a clearer scheme -wise prioritisation of 
resources so that price stabilisation measures and institutional consumer protection systems 
develop in a balanced manner. 
 
Recommendation No. 8 (Para No. 3.96) 
B. Vacancies in Consumer Commissions 
1.9 The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that as on 31 January 2026 there are 18 va cancies of 
Presidents and 79 vacancies of Members in State Commissions and 179 
vacancies of Presidents and 397 vacancies of Members in District Commissions. 
The Department has stated that appointments to these positions fall under the 
jurisdiction of the respective State Governments. 
The Committee observe that such a large number of vacancies can affect the 
efficiency of consumer dispute resolution and may contribute to delays in disposal 
of cases. 
The Committee recommend that the Department continue engagi ng with State 
Governments and Union Territory administrations to ensure that vacancies in 
consumer commissions are filled at the earliest so that timely redressal of 
consumer grievances, enhance awareness about consumer rights, and promote 
fair business practices.” 
1.10 In its action-taken reply, the Ministry has stated as under: 
“Under the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, the responsibility for 
appointment of Presidents and Members in the State and District Consumer 
Commissions rests with the respective State Governments. The Act also mandates 
that the process of appointments be initiated at least six months prior to occurrence of 
vacancies and provides enabling provisions for alternate arrangements to ensure 
continuity of functioning in ca se of vacancies. The Department of Consumer Affairs 
continuously engages with State Governments to expedite the filling up of vacancies 
and improve the overall functioning of Consumer Commissions. In addition, the e -

5 
 
Jagriti platform, with features such as e-filing, virtual hearings etc. is expected to 
mitigate capacity constraints, improve efficiency and reduce pendency. Moreover, 
several Consumer Commissions have achieved disposal rates exceeding 100% in 
recent periods, indicating improved operational effectiveness.” 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. N-12/1/2026-P&C Section dated 25th June, 2026] 
1.11 The Committee note that as on 31 January 2026 there were 18 vacancies of 
Presidents and 79 v acancies of Members in State Commissions, and as many as 179 
vacancies of Presidents and 397 vacancies of Members in District Commissions. The 
Committee, while noting that such a large number of vacancies can affect the 
efficiency of consumer dispute resol ution and contribute to delays in disposal of 
cases, had recommended that the Department continue engaging with State 
Governments and Union Territory administrations to ensure that these vacancies are 
filled at the earliest. In response, the Department had  informed the Committee that 
appointments to these positions fall within the jurisdiction of the respective State 
Governments, and they are continuously engaging with State Governments to 
expedite the filling up of vacancies and improve the overall functio ning of Consumer 
Commissions.   
 The Committee note that the Department in its reply has reiterated the statutory  
position under the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 that the Act mandates initiation of 
the appointment process at least six months prior to occu rrence of vacancies, and 
that enabling provisions exist for alternate arrangements pending such appointments. 
The Committee, however, observe that the reply does not indicate any specific, time -
bound steps, targets, or a mechanism for periodic review at an  appropriate level to fill 
the large number of vacancies. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation and urge the Department to pursue focused, time -bound 
engagement with State Governments and Union Territory administrations to expedite 
the filling of vacancies in State and District Consumer Commissions. 
Recommendation No. 11 (Para No.  3.99) 
C. Internationally Recognised Accreditation for the National Test House 
 1.12 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 “The Committee note that against the projected demand of ₹88.80 crore for the 
National Test House (NTH) during 2026–27, an allocation of ₹67.00 crore has been provided 
in the Budget Estimate. The Department has stated that the allocation, though lower than the 
projected demand, has been a ssessed as adequate to meet priority requirements and that 
ongoing projects, implementation capacity, statutory functions, infrastructure works, 
procurement of equipment and capacity-building activities will continue without disruption. 
 The Committee beli eve that the National Test House plays a critical role in 
strengthening the country’s quality infrastructure by providing testing and certification 
facilities across a wide range of industrial sectors. In view of the growing demand for reliable 

6 
 
testing fac ilities in emerging areas such as electric mobility, renewable energy equipment, 
electronics and advanced manufacturing, the need for strengthening and expanding testing 
infrastructure is expected to increase significantly. 
 The Committee, therefore, recom mend the Department to closely monitor the 
implementation of infrastructure expansion and laboratory modernisation projects under the 
National Test House to ensure that planned capacity augmentation is not delayed due to 
resource constraints. The Committee  also urge the Department to explore avenues for 
phased expansion of NTH facilities in emerging sectors and industrial clusters in each State 
so as to further strengthen the national quality infrastructure and effectively support industry 
in meeting evolving quality and safety standards. The Committee further recommend that the 
National Test House should pursue internationally recognised accreditations and strengthen 
alignment with global testing and certification frameworks so as to enhance international 
acceptance of its test results and support Indian industry in accessing global markets.” 
1.13 In its action-taken reply, the Ministry has stated as under: 
 “The recommendations of the Hon'ble Committee have been noted and are being 
addressed through ongoing infrastructure expansion, laboratory modernization, and capacity 
augmentation initiatives of NTH. 
NTH has established a robust monitoring mechanism for infrastructure expansion and 
laboratory modernization projects. A dedicated dashboard is being utilized  to monitor project 
progress, and regular review meetings are conducted to assess implementation status, 
identify bottlenecks, and ensure timely completion of activities. This mechanism facilitates 
effective monitoring of project execution, timely utilizat ion of resources, and implementation 
of planned capacity augmentation initiatives. 
            Budget utilization is being monitored on a continuous basis to ensure that priority 
activities, including infrastructure development, laboratory modernization, p rocurement of 
testing equipment, and capacity -building initiatives, are undertaken in a timely manner. In 
case additional requirements arise on account of project expansion, capacity augmentation, 
or emerging sectoral needs, suitable proposals will be cons idered at the Revised Estimates 
stage, subject to availability of resources and approval of the competent authority. 
    NTH recognizes the growing demand for testing and certification services in emerging 
sectors such as electric mobility, renewable energ y, electronics, and advanced 
manufacturing. In this regard, NTH is undertaking capacity augmentation through the 
establishment of new testing facilities and modernization of existing laboratories. The 
ongoing initiatives include the establishment of a Sola r PV Module Testing Facility at 
Ghaziabad, a Solar Water Heater Testing Facility at Chennai, an Integrated Test Facility for 
the Power Transmission and Distribution Sector at Jaipur, EV Battery Testing Facilities at 
Mumbai, Kolkata and Bengaluru, and a Drone Testing Facility at Ghaziabad. 
 Existing laboratories are also being upgraded with advanced testing infrastructure to meet 
emerging industrial and technological requirements. Through its network of laboratories, 
including NABL -accredited laboratories, N TH provides testing and quality assurance 

7 
 
services to industry, government departments, regulatory authorities, public sector 
undertakings, and other stakeholders across the country. The impact of these initiatives is 
reflected in improved operational perf ormance. During FY 2025 –26, the number of samples 
tested increased by 10.57%, from 45,959 to 50,815, while revenue generation increased by 
20.09%, from ₹44.45 crore to ₹53.38 crore, as compared to FY 2024 –25. NTH has also 
reduced the turnaround time for te sting of samples through process optimization and 
improved utilization of testing infrastructure, enabling faster delivery of testing and quality 
assurance services and strengthening domestic testing capabilities. 
        NTH continues to maintain and expa nd nationally recognized accreditations and align 
its testing and certification practices with internationally accepted standards and conformity 
assessment frameworks. Efforts are being made to strengthen quality systems, enhance 
technical competence, and expand the scope of accredited services so as to improve 
international acceptance of NTH test reports and facilitate access of Indian industry to global 
markets. 
            NTH will continue to take necessary measures to strengthen its infrastructure, tes ting 
capabilities, and service delivery in line with evolving industry requirements and national 
priorities.” 
 
1.14 The Committee note the detailed submission of the Department regarding the 
ongoing capacity augmentation and modernisation of the National Test House, 
including the establishment of a Solar PV Module Testing Facility at Ghaziabad, a 
Solar Water Heater Testing Facility at Chennai, an Integrated Test Facility for Power 
Transmission and Distribution at Jaipur, EV Battery Testing Facilities at Mu mbai, 
Kolkata and Bengaluru, and a Drone Testing Facility at Ghaziabad. The Committee are 
satisfied to note the resultant improvement in operational performance, with the 
number of samples tested increasing by 10.57 per cent and revenue generation 
increasing by 20.09 per cent during 2025-26 over the previous year. 
 The Committee, however, observe that the Department's reply, insofar as it 
relates to international acceptance of NTH's test results, refers only to NABL 
accreditation, which is a domestic accred itation framework, and offers only a general 
assurance of efforts to "strengthen international acceptance" without indicating 
specific internationally recognised mutual recognition arrangements, nor any target 
timeline in this regard. Since the recommendat ion had specifically urged NTH to 
pursue internationally recognised accreditations to enhance global acceptance of its 
test results, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation to pursue 
internationally recognised accreditations and strengthen alignment in global testing & 
certification framework with a time-frame for achieving the same. 
 

8 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 1 (Para No.  2.27) 
  
 The Committee note that the Budget Estimate of the Department of Consumer Affairs 
for 2026–27 is ₹4,497.37 crore. Out of this, ₹4,100 crore, which is about 91 percent of the 
total allocation, has been provided for the Price Stabilisation Fund (PSF). The Department 
has informed th at although the PSF accounts for the largest share of the budget, the 
allocation for other schemes in 2026 –27 is higher than the previous year by about 5.22 
percent and is considered adequate for consumer grievance redressal, enforcement 
activities and awareness programmes. 
 The Committee recognise the importance of the PSF in stabilising prices of essential 
commodities. At the same time, they observe that such a large concentration of resources 
under a single scheme leaves relatively limited fiscal space f or strengthening the institutional 
framework for consumer protection, including grievance redressal mechanisms, enforcement 
of standards and consumer awareness. 
 The Committee recommend that the Department to present a clearer scheme -wise 
prioritisation of resources in future Demands for Grants so that price stabilisation measures 
and institutional consumer protection systems develop in a balanced manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Adequate provision has been kept keeping in view the anticipated requirements  and 
estimated expenditure. In so far as the “SCC” Scheme is concerned, financial assistance is 
released to States/UTs based on eligible proposals received in accordance with the scheme 
guidelines and, therefore, the Budget Estimates (BE) and Revised Estim ates (RE) are 
calibrated in view of the anticipated proposals and implementation requirements during a 
given financial year. Since inception, the SCC Scheme has enabled provision of financial 
assistance across States/UTs for strengthening the infrastructur e of Consumer 
Commissions, thereby supplementing the responsibility of State Governments in ensuring 
minimum infrastructural facilities for effective functioning of Consumer Commissions. During 
recent years also, financial assistance has continued to be ex tended for physical and non -
physical infrastructure subject to receipt of eligible proposals from States/UTs. 
           Further, “Consumer Protection Activities” focus on strengthening stakeholder 
engagement, awareness and institutional coordination for e ffective implementation of the 
Consumer Protection Act, 2019 through organisation of workshops/conferences, 
consultations, observance of National Consumer Day and World Consumer Rights Day and 
other related activities. The expenditure under this component is also planned keeping in 
view the approved activities and estimated requirement during the financial year. 

9 
 
The CONFONET scheme is implemented through NIC, which raises fund demands 
for software upgradation, hardware support, cloud services, contractual m anpower. Key 
activities include e -Jagriti platform, technical support to consumer commissions at National, 
State and District levels.  
The Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) receives funding from Govt of India for the 
implementation of specific scheme, namel y 'Setting up of Assaying and Hallmarking 
Centres'. Additionally, Quality Control Orders are issued by the concerned line 
Ministries/Departments, while the enforcement of standards is carried out by BIS using its 
own internal funds. 
 The Department has bee n generating consumer awareness through various media 
including electronic, digital and outdoor media, the focus for publicizing the consumer 
awareness initiatives has been through social media at zero cost dissemination. There has 
been exponential growth in the number of followers of social media handles with increased 
engagement and reach. We have been able to garner attention as well as generate public 
engagement using social media platforms like X, Instagram, Facebook, Linked In, Telegram, 
Arattai, and Whatsapp in which we are having direct communication also with consumers. 
Other than social media, the Department has been interacting with Panchayats of 
States/UTs through virtual interactions to reach the grassroot levels. Videos are being 
forwarded to S tates/ UTs/VCOs so that they may utilize those videos for generating 
awareness. The Department has been participating in fairs and festivals where large number 
of people from rural and backwards areas may congregate.   In Publicity division, funds are 
also allocated to NER, SC, ST regions in which Department in past has done has done 
various campaigns and in future proposes community engagement with women SHGs, 
Anganwadi workers, PDS beneficiaries out of allocated funds. However, as and when the 
need arises for any major awareness campaigns for which provision of funds is not there, 
proposal will be put up for seeking funds. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. N-12/1/2026-P&C Section dated 25th June, 2026] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No.  2.28) 
  
 The Committee note that the Department has introduced certain reforms to improve 
the realism of PSF budgeting. These include integration of PSF with the Price Support 
Scheme under the PM -AASHA framework, planning of buffer procurement based on stock 
levels and production outlook, estimation of sale proceeds using historical trends and 
introduction of concurrent audit of implementing agencies. 
  The Committee further note that PSF operations depend significantly on the sale 
proceeds realised from buffer stocks and that in case these proceeds fall short of 
projections, additional funds may be sought from the Ministry of Finance. While the steps 

10 
 
taken by the Department are noted, the Committee are of the view that reliance on variable 
sale proceeds introduces an element of uncertainty in financial planning. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to develop a structured 
medium-term planni ng framework for PSF operations, clearly setting out procurement 
targets, buffer stock norms, expected sale proceeds and potential fiscal risks. Such a 
framework should also provide for multi -structured interventions, including targeted market 
interventions, strategic buffer stock management and strengthened coordination with State 
Governments for effective implementation. The Committee further recommend that the 
Department leverage technology by adopting data analytics and market intelligence systems 
to be tter monitor market conditions, predict price trends and improve the effectiveness of 
PSF operations. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 The PSF market interventions are broadly based on buffer stocking for subsequent 
release to stabilize volatility in prices. Vol atility in prices occurs due to seasonality in 
production, annual variations in production, trade disruptions etc. Calibrated release of 
pulses through open market sale to infuse stocks in the market and retail interventions by 
selling Dals at subsidized prices to consumers. 
  
 The Department is guided by the buffer target for pulses prescribed by the Committee 
of Minister (CoM) from time to time. The actual procurement, however, depends upon the 
production and market conditions, and that procurement itself  does lead to increased 
volatility in the market prices. Onion buffer targets for the year are fixed after thorough 
deliberations in the Inter -Ministerial Committee meeting regarding the estimated production 
and price situation. 
 
 Integration of PSF with P rice Support Scheme (PSS) of Department of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare under the PM -AASHA kept all procurement, including procurement for 
buffer, at MSP under the PSS and procurement for buffer at other than MSP (market price 
linked procurement price) PSF.   
   
 The Department has expanded the number of commodities covered under price 
monitoring from 22 to 40 by adding 18 additional commodities. In order to make the daily 
price monitoring stronger, Department of Consumer Affairs developed the Price Monito ring 
System (PMS) Mobile App for reporting the daily price data by the price reporting centres. 
Data reported through PMS Mobile App are geo -tagged to ensure reporting from the market 
locations and has inbuilt feature to calculate and report the average pr ice from three 
collection centres thereby avoiding human errors in calculation. An analytical dashboard has 
been developed for analysis of prices data through graphical visualisation, heat map, 
comparison between commodities and geographies, price forecasting etc. The daily report of 
prices and indicative price trends are duly analysed for taking appropriate decisions such as 
release of stocks from the buffer, stock disclosure by stockholding entities, imposition of 
stock limits, changes in trade policy instruments like rationalization of import duty, changes in 
import quota, restrictions on exports of the commodity etc. Further, the number of price 

11 
 
reporting centres has been increased to 578 centres across the country. This enhancement 
helped in timely and focused interventions to stabilize food prices. Moving forward, the 
government will continue to collaborate with state governments to expand the network of 
price monitoring centres, ensuring comprehensive coverage across the country. 
  
 Additionally, to streamline the PSF Operations, a DigiGov digital System is being 
finalized with the collaboration with SBI/TCS Team.    DigiGov aims to    digitize the entire 
PSF process. It enables real -time tracking of fund utilization,  and automatic reset of 
unutilized f unds at fiscal year -end to ensure compliance.  The portal aims to effectively 
addresses critical challenges in the existing manual system —delayed sale proceeds 
deposits, lack of linkage between operations and deposits, reconciled transactions between 
Implementing Agencies and the fund manager (SFAC), and difficulties in account 
settlement—through automated enforcement of timely deposits, one -to-one operation -to-
proceeds linkage, and seamless transaction reconciliation. Integration with E -Pay and CWC 
allows s ame-day fund settlements, operation -wise monitoring, and warehouse -wise stock 
tracking. Automated alerts highlight discrepancies, and data archival to ensure transparency, 
accountability, and ease of auditing. 
  
 Furthermore, price forecasting technology, market intelligence reports is also 
being used to  better monitor market conditions, predict price trends and improve the 
effectiveness of PSF operations. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. N-12/1/2026-P&C Section dated 25th June, 2026] 
 
Recommendation No. 3 (Para No.  3.91) 
  
 The Committee note that the Department relies on crop production estimates from the 
Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, market intelligence inputs from agenci es 
such as Agriwatch, and analytical dashboards tracking mandi and retail prices to assess 
price trends and plan interventions under the PSF. Weekly interactions are also held with 
agencies such as IMD, NAFED and NCCF to assess crop and market conditions. 
 The Committee appreciate the efforts made to improve the information base for policy 
decisions. However, they observe that price volatility in agricultural commodities has become 
increasingly complex and requires more robust predictive capabilities. 
 The Committee recommend that the Department continue to strengthen digital 
monitoring systems, predictive models and market intelligence mechanisms so that price 
forecasts and intervention decisions become timelier and more accurate. 
   
Reply of the Government 
 The Department has already strengthened price monitoring by expanding coverage 
from 22 to 40 commodities and increasing reporting centres to 578 nationwide with a target 

12 
 
to cover each district, a geo -tagged PMS Mobile App ensures accurate daily price reporting, 
while an analytical dashboard provides visual analysis, comparisons, and forecasting. These 
tools support timely decisions on buffer stock release, stock limits, and trade policy 
adjustments. To further streamline PSF operations, the DigiGov sys tem is being finalized 
with SBI/TCS, enabling real -time fund tracking,  warehouse stock monitoring  and automatic 
reset of unutilized funds at fiscal year -end to ensure compliance, etc. Additionally, 
forecasting technologies and market intelligence reports a re being used to improve market 
monitoring and stabilize food prices. 
  
 Also, as recommended, the Department will continue to strengthen the digital 
monitoring systems, predictive models and market intelligence mechanisms to make price 
forecasts and intervention decisions more timely and accurate. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. N-12/1/2026-P&C Section dated 25th June, 2026] 
 
Recommendation No. 4 (Para No.  3.92) 
  
 The Committee note tha t according to a study cited by the Department, post -harvest 
losses in onions are estimated at 5.31 percent at the farm level and 1.96 percent at the 
market level. In tomatoes, the losses are estimated at 8.37 percent and 3.25 percent 
respectively. The Department has reported that initiatives such as innovation challenges and 
improved storage infrastructure have helped increase the recovery rate of stored onions from 
about 63 percent in 2024–25 to around 72 percent in 2025–26. 
 While acknowledging these imp rovements, the Committee observe that post -harvest 
losses continue to be a major concern, particularly in commodities such as onion and tomato 
where supply disruptions can quickly translate into price spikes. 
 The Committee recommend that the Department ma y initiate corrective steps in this 
regard to develop modern storage facilities, expand cold chain infrastructure and adoption of 
technological solutions that improve storage conditions and monitoring of perishable 
commodities. 
Reply of the Government 
 In an effort to encourage the development of improved storage technologies and 
reduce post -harvest losses in onion and tomato, the Department of Consumer Affairs, in 
collaboration with Innovation Cell, Ministry of Education had conducted hackathons titled 
Onion Grand Challenge in 2022 -23 by inviting innovative ideas at various levels of the value 
chain. The selected innovative ideas were supported for development of protype and further 
to make the ideas commercially viable. Some of innovators have set up their  startup firms in 
storage, shelf -life preservation and IoT -based stock health and quality monitoring system . 
The effort had been carried further with Smart India Hackathon (SIH), 2025 organised by 
AICTE in which innovative ideas for improved onion storage technology for enhancing shelf 

13 
 
life of onions was included as a problem statement. The winners of SIH -2025 developed a 
robust, low-cost smart storage solution that combines a strong physical structure with IoT -
based monitoring and automation. In PSF Onion Operation 2025 -26, the Department 
prescribed permanent storage godowns with 5,000 MT capacity in Nashik and 2,000 MT in 
other districts with the objective of reducing storage loss and encouraging the development 
of modern storage infrastructure for onion. Through the initiative, the recovery rate for Grade 
A onions after 4 months or more storage duration had increased to 72% in 2025 -26 over 
63% in 2024-25. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. N-12/1/2026-P&C Section dated 25th June, 2026] 
 
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No.  3.93) 
  
 The Committee note that the Department monitors daily prices of 40 essential 
commodities through 577 price monitoring centres across the country. The data is analysed 
to guide decisions on release of buffer stocks, retail interventions and other policy 
responses. 
 The Committee recognise the value of such a nationwide monitoring system. 
However, they observe that the effectiveness of price stabilisation measures depends o n 
how quickly the Department is able to respond to emerging price pressures. 
 The Committee therefore recommend that the Department continue to streamline its 
monitoring and decision -making systems to ensure that timely and proactive interventions 
under th e Price Stabilisation Fund are undertaken to effectively curb abnormal price 
fluctuations and protect consumer interests. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Department has already strengthened price monitoring by expanding coverage 
from 22 to 40 commodities and increased reporting centres to 578 nationwide, a geo -tagged 
PMS Mobile App ensures accurate daily price reporting, while an analytical dashboard 
provides visual analysis, comparisons, and forecasting. These tools support timely decisions 
on buffer stock release, stock limits, and trade policy adjustments. To further streamline PSF 
operations, the DigiGov system is being finalized with SBI/TCS, enabling real -time fund 
tracking, warehouse stock monitoring  and automatic reset of unutilized funds at fiscal year -
end to ensure compliance.  Additionally, forecasting technologies and market intelligence 
reports are being used to improve market monitoring and stabilize food prices. 
  
 Also, the daily report of prices and indicative price trends are duly analyzed for taking 
appropriate decisions such as release of stocks from the buffer, stock disclosure by stock 
holding entities, imposition of stock limits, changes in trade policy instr uments like 
rationalization of import duty, changes in import quota, restrictions on exports of the 

14 
 
commodity etc. Government keeps a close watch on the production and availability of 
essential commodities through regular reviews by the Inter -Ministerial Committee (IMC). The 
Committee reviews, on regular basis, the scenario and the indicative trends in prices of 
essential agri -horticultural commodities and suggests measures to enhance availability 
through increased domestic production and rationalization in export-import policies. 
  
 All these efforts may help in streamlining the monitoring and decision-making systems 
to ensure that timely and proactive interventions under the Price Stabilization Fund  to 
effectively curb abnormal price fluctuations and protect consumer interests. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. N-12/1/2026-P&C Section dated 25th June, 2026] 
 
Recommendation No. 6 (Para No.  3.94) 
  
 The Committee note that retail intervention s under the PSF, including the sale of 
Bharat-branded pulses, have been carried out through government outlets, cooperative 
societies, authorised retailers and mobile vans to ensure wider availability of essential 
commodities. 
 The Committee appreciate the  Department’s efforts to reach consumers through 
multiple distribution channels. At the same time, they observe that the benefits of such 
interventions must reach consumers in smaller towns and rural areas where market 
fluctuations often have a stronger impact on household budgets. 
 The Committee recommend that the Department continue to strengthen the 
distribution network for PSF -supported commodities and ensure that retail interventions are 
implemented across a wider geographical area. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Bharat Dal was launched in July 2023 to provide affordable pulses by converting PSF 
Chana stock into Chana Dal, sold at subsidized rates of ₹60/kg (1 kg pack) and ₹55/kg (30 
kg pack). In Phase I, 12.36 lakh MT was sold, followed by Phase II all ocation of 3 LMT till 
December 2024, with sales split 80:20 between dal and whole chana. Bharat Dal was later 
expanded to include Moong and Masur Dal, sold at subsidized prices, with 7,142 MT Moong 
and 929 MT Masur sold by March 2025. As pulse prices stabi lized, Bharat Dal retail sales 
were discontinued in April 2025. 
  To ensure maximum traceability in the distribution of Bharat Dal, agencies were 
regularly directed to maintain real time distribution photos of bharat dal and share the sale 
progress with the department on daily basis. Regular meetings with NCCF, NAFED, an d 

15 
 
Kendriya Bhandar are conducted to monitor stock movement, sales progress, and address 
operational challenges. 
  
 Bharat Brand of food items are distributed by three central cooperative organizations: 
National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation  of India Ltd. (NAFED), Kendriya 
Bhandar, and National Cooperative Consumers' Federation of India Limited (NCCF) through 
their Own Outlets, Vans, e -commerce platforms and big Chain Retailers all over the 
country.   
 The distribution network for Price Stabi lization Fund (PSF) -supported commodities 
has been expanded to ensure retail interventions to reach a wider geographical area and 
stabilize prices, specifically targeting agricultural and horticultural commodities. This strategy 
involves widening the network to increase availability and mitigate price volatility for essential 
goods. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. N-12/1/2026-P&C Section dated 25th June, 2026] 
 
Recommendation No. 7(Para No.  3.95) 
  
 The Committee note that the e -Jagriti platform has facilitated more than 1.62 lakh 
case filings and around 1.5 lakh disposals during year 2025. The platform provides online 
filing, digital fee payment, real-time case tracking and hybrid hearing facilities. 
 The Committee welcome the digital transformation of consumer grievance redressal 
systems. They observe that such platforms can significantly improve transparency and 
accessibility if supported by adequate institutional capacity. 
 The Committee  recommend the Department to continue strengthening digital 
grievance redressal platforms while also ensuring that consumer commissions have the 
necessary staffing and infrastructure to handle increasing digital case flows. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The De partment fully agrees that digital platforms enhance transparency and 
accessibility when supported by adequate institutional capacity. 
In line with the Committee’s recommendations, the Department will continue to 
strengthen the e -Jagriti platform while ensuring that Consumer Commissions are provided 
with necessary staffing and infrastructure to handle the rising digital case load. The 
Department remains committed to further improving the digital consumer grievance redressal 
ecosystem. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. N-12/1/2026-P&C Section dated 25th June, 2026] 

16 
 
 
Recommendation No. 8 (Para No.  3.96) 
  
 The Committee note that as on 31 January 2026 there are 18 vacancies of Presidents 
and 79 vacancies of Members in State Commissions and 179 vacancies of Presidents and 
397 vacancies of Members in District Commissions. The Department has stated that 
appointments to these positions fall under the jurisdiction of the respective State 
Governments. 
 The Committee observe that such a large number of vacancies can affect the 
efficiency of consumer dispute resolution and may contribute to delays in disposal of cases. 
 The Committee recommend that the Department continue engaging with State 
Governments and Union Territory administrations to ensure that vacancies in consumer 
commissions are filled at the earliest so that timely redressal of consumer grievances, 
enhance awareness about consumer rights, and promote fair business practices. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 Under the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, the responsibility for 
appointment of Presidents and Members in the State and District Consumer Commissions 
rests with the respective State Governments. The Act also mandates that the process of 
appointments be initiated at least six months prior to occurrence of vacancies and provides 
enabling provisions for alternate arrangements to ensure continuity of functioning in case of 
vacancies. The Department of Consumer Affairs continuously engages with State 
Governments to expedite the filling up of vacancies and improve the overall functioning of 
Consumer Commissions. In addition, the e -Jagriti platform, with features such as e -filing, 
virtual hearings etc. is expected to mitigate capacity constraints, improve efficiency and 
reduce pendency. Moreover, several Consumer Commissions have achieved disposal rates 
exceeding 100% in recent periods, indicating improved operational effectiveness. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. N-12/1/2026-P&C Section dated 25th June, 2026] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 9 (Para No.  3.97) 
  
 The Committee note that the allocation under consumer protection schemes, 
excluding PSF, is about ₹89 crore and keeping in view of the expanded mandate under the 
Consumer Protection Act, 2019 is quite minimal. The Department in its reply has stated that 
infrastructure for State and District Consumer Commissions is primarily the responsibility of 
State Governments and that the Central Government provides supplementary financial 

17 
 
support through the Strengthening of Consumer Commissions scheme and Funds have 
been released to 13 State Commissions and 307 District Commissions since 2021–22. 
 The Committee recognise that consumer protection is a shared responsibility between 
the Centre and the States. However, they observe that effective consumer dispute resolutio n 
depends on the availability of adequate infrastructure and resources in consumer 
commissions. 
 The Committee recommend that the Department continue to work closely with State 
Governments so that proposals for infrastructure development are submitted in t ime and 
funds released under the scheme are utilised effectively. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 In terms of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, the responsibility for establishment 
and maintenance of State and District Consumer Commissions, including provision of 
infrastructure for their effective functioning, primarily rests with the respective State 
Governments/UT Administrations. However, to supplement the efforts of the States/UTs and 
bridge infrastructure gaps, the Central Government has been extending fina ncial assistance 
under the Strengthening of Consumer Commissions (SCC) Scheme since 1995 for 
creation/upgradation of basic infrastructure, including building and non -building assets 
required for effective functioning of Consumer Commissions. Notably, at le ast one tranche of 
financial assistance under the SCC Scheme has been extended to all States/UTs since 
inception and an amount of about ₹282.87 crore has been released covering all States/UTs 
for strengthening Consumer Commissions. 
The Department has been continuously engaging with States/UTs through regional 
workshops/conferences, VC meetings and regular correspondence for timely submission of 
proposals and effective utilisation of funds released under the scheme. During such 
interactions, States/UTs are r egularly advised to strengthen infrastructure in Consumer 
Commissions and ensure expeditious utilisation of financial assistance in accordance with 
scheme guidelines so as to improve the overall efficiency of consumer dispute redressal 
mechanisms. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. N-12/1/2026-P&C Section dated 25th June, 2026] 
 
Recommendation No. 10 (Para No.  3.98) 
  
 The Committee note that high precision time dissemination equipment has been 
installed at four Regional Reference Standard Laboratories and that the remaining centre is 
nearing completion. The project envisages dissemination of Indian Standard Time through 
five centres along with a disaster recovery facility. 

18 
 
 The Committee recognise the importance of this initiative for digital governance, 
financial transaction traceability and cyber security. 
 operationalisation of all planned IST dissemination centres and coordinate with 
sectoral regulators to facilitate nationwide synchronisation with Indian Standard Time.) 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Department is fully committed to ensuring the nationwide adoption of Indian 
Standards Time (IST) as a foundational element for strengthening India’s digital and 
strategic infra structure, including secure communications, cyber resilience, financial 
transaction integrity and forensic traceability.  
 The Time Dissemination Project is being implemented in a focused and mission -
oriented manner, in closed coordination with CSIR - National Physical Laboratory (NPL), 
ISRO and other partner agencies. High -precision time dissemination system have already 
been successfully installed at four Regional Reference Standard Laboratories (RRSLs), 
while the remaining centre is in the final stages of  completion. A Disaster Recovery Centre 
(DRC) is also being established to ensure uninterrupted and resilient availability of IST 
services.  
 The project is being supported through adequate budgetary provisions for upgradation 
of infrastructure, renovation of RRSL facilities and procurement of highly sophisticated time 
synchronisation equipment. All activities are being undertaken in a phased an d time bound 
manner with a clear focus on achieving full operational readiness across all centres.  
 At the same time, the Department is proactively engaging with key stakeholders and 
sectoral regulators, including Telecom Service Providers (TSPs), Interne t Service Providers 
(ISPs), financial institutions and other critical infrastructure operators, to promote seamless 
and standardised synchronization with IST in line with the proposed regulatory framework.  
            The Department remains fully committe d to the timely completion and effective 
operationalisation of all IST dissemination centres and to ensuring to robust, secure and 
universally accepted national time framework through sustained inter -agency coordination 
and close monitoring.    
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. N-12/1/2026-P&C Section dated 25th June, 2026] 
 
Recommendation No. 11(Para No.  3.99) 
  
 The Committee note that against the projected demand of ₹88.80 crore for the 
National Test House (NTH) during 2026–27, an allocation of ₹67.00 crore has been provided 

19 
 
in the Budget Estimate. The Department has stated that the allocation, though lower than the 
projected demand, has been assessed as adequate to meet priority requireme nts and that 
ongoing projects, implementation capacity, statutory functions, infrastructure works, 
procurement of equipment and capacity-building activities will continue without disruption. 
 The Committee believe that the National Test House plays a criti cal role in 
strengthening the country’s quality infrastructure by providing testing and certification 
facilities across a wide range of industrial sectors. In view of the growing demand for reliable 
testing facilities in emerging areas such as electric mob ility, renewable energy equipment, 
electronics and advanced manufacturing, the need for strengthening and expanding testing 
infrastructure is expected to increase significantly. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to closely monitor the 
implementation of infrastructure expansion and laboratory modernisation projects under the 
National Test House to ensure that planned capacity augmentation is not delayed due to 
resource constraints. The Committee also urge the Department to explore avenues f or 
phased expansion of NTH facilities in emerging sectors and industrial clusters in each State 
so as to further strengthen the national quality infrastructure and effectively support industry 
in meeting evolving quality and safety standards. The Committee further recommend that the 
National Test House should pursue internationally recognised accreditations and strengthen 
alignment with global testing and certification frameworks so as to enhance international 
acceptance of its test results and support Indian industry in accessing global markets. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendations of the Hon'ble Committee have been noted and are being 
addressed through ongoing infrastructure expansion, laboratory modernization, and capacity 
augmentation initiatives of NTH. 
NTH has established a robust monitoring mechanism for infrastructure expansion and 
laboratory modernization projects. A dedicated dashboard is being utilized to monitor project 
progress, and regular review meetings are conducted to assess impleme ntation status, 
identify bottlenecks, and ensure timely completion of activities. This mechanism facilitates 
effective monitoring of project execution, timely utilization of resources, and implementation 
of planned capacity augmentation initiatives. 
            Budget utilization is being monitored on a continuous basis to ensure that priority 
activities, including infrastructure development, laboratory modernization, procurement of 
testing equipment, and capacity -building initiatives, are undertaken in a timely manner. In 
case additional requirements arise on account of project expansion, capacity augmentation, 
or emerging sectoral needs, suitable proposals will be considered at the Revised Estimates 
stage, subject to availability of resources and approval of the competent authority. 
     NTH recognizes the growing demand for testing and certification services in emerging 
sectors such as electric mobility, renewable energy, electronics, and advanced 
manufacturing. In this regard, NTH is undertaking cap acity augmentation through the 

20 
 
establishment of new testing facilities and modernization of existing laboratories. The 
ongoing initiatives include the establishment of a Solar PV Module Testing Facility at 
Ghaziabad, a Solar Water Heater Testing Facility a t Chennai, an Integrated Test Facility for 
the Power Transmission and Distribution Sector at Jaipur, EV Battery Testing Facilities at 
Mumbai, Kolkata and Bengaluru, and a Drone Testing Facility at Ghaziabad. 
  Existing laboratories are also being upgraded with advanced testing infrastructure to 
meet emerging industrial and technological requirements. Through its network of 
laboratories, including NABL -accredited laboratories, NTH provides testing and quality 
assurance services to industry, government depart ments, regulatory authorities, public 
sector undertakings, and other stakeholders across the country. The impact of these 
initiatives is reflected in improved operational performance. During FY 2025 –26, the number 
of samples tested increased by 10.57%, fro m 45,959 to 50,815, while revenue generation 
increased by 20.09%, from ₹44.45 crore to ₹53.38 crore, as compared to FY 2024 –25. NTH 
has also reduced the turnaround time for testing of samples through process optimization 
and improved utilization of testing  infrastructure, enabling faster delivery of testing and 
quality assurance services and strengthening domestic testing capabilities. 
        NTH continues to maintain and expand nationally recognized accreditations and align 
its testing and certification p ractices with internationally accepted standards and conformity 
assessment frameworks. Efforts are being made to strengthen quality systems, enhance 
technical competence, and expand the scope of accredited services so as to improve 
international acceptance of NTH test reports and facilitate access of Indian industry to global 
markets. 
            NTH will continue to take necessary measures to strengthen its infrastructure, testing 
capabilities, and service delivery in line with evolving industry requiremen ts and national 
priorities. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. N-12/1/2026-P&C Section dated 25th June, 2026] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 12 (Para No.  3.100) 
 
 The Committee note that the Budget Estimates under the Consumer Awareness 
Scheme have remained almost stagnant at around ₹19 crore since 2023 –24, despite higher 
Revised Estimates and actual expenditure in certain y ears. While the Committee appreciate 
the Department’s efforts to utilise social media and other low -cost digital platforms for wider 
dissemination of consumer awareness messages, they are of the view that digital outreach 
alone may not be sufficient, particularly in rural and backward areas. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to review the adequacy of the 
present allocation and consider enhancing it in future, while adopting a balanced approach 

21 
 
combining digital campaigns with on -ground awareness activities through States/UTs, local 
institutions and public representatives to ensure wider and more effective outreach. The 
Committee also desire the Department to emphasise on the potential of social media 
outreach which needs to be further expan ded and strategically utilised to reach a wider and 
younger audience. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 Given the increased digitalization in the country, the Department has been utilizing 
social media at zero dissemination cost to generate awareness. There has been exponential 
growth in the number of followers of social media handles with increased engagement and 
reach. Other than social media, the Department has been interacting with Panchayats of 
States/UTs through virtual interactions to reach the grassroot l evels. Videos are being 
forwarded to States/ UTs/VCOs so that they may utilize those videos for generating 
awareness. The Department has been participating in fairs and festivals where large number 
of people from rural and backwards areas may congregate. F urther, traditional media like 
SMS, IVRS are being used for rural and backward areas.  In Publicity division, funds are also 
allocated to NER, SC, ST regions in which Department in past has done various campaigns 
 and in future proposes community engagemen t with women SHGs, Anganwadi workers, 
PDS beneficiaries out of allocated funds. However, as and when the need arises for any 
major awareness campaigns for which provision of funds is not there, proposal will be put up 
for seeking funds. The level of awaren ess can be judged from the fact that the number of 
complaints registered at NCH has increased through the succeeding years. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs) O.M. No. N-12/1/2026-P&C Section dated 25th June, 2026] 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
-   NIL  - 
 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
-NIL- 
  

24 
 
 
CHAPTER - V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;          (KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI) 
23 July, 2026                                   Chairperson 
Sravana 01 , 1948 (Saka)                               Standing Committee on Consumer  
Affairs and Public Distribution 

25 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE  ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (2025 -2026) HELD ON 
THURSDAY, 23 JULY, 2026 
 
The Committee sat from 1000 hrs. to 1030 hrs . in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Rao Rajendra Singh- In the Chair  
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Anto Antony 
3. Shri JaswantsinhSumanbhai Bhabhor 
4. Smt. Malvika Devi 
5.  Shri Manish Jaiswal 
6. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
7. Shri Manoj Kumar 
8. Shri Sunil Kumar 
9. Shri Neeraj Maurya 
10.Shri Bastipati Nagaraju 
11.Shri Haribhai Patel 
12. Shri Bunty Vivek Sahu 
13.Shri Ujjwal Raman Singh 
14. Shri Bajrang Manohar Sonwane 
15. Dr. Indra Hang Subba 
   
Rajya Sabha 
 
16. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
17. Shri Arun Singh 
18. Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah 
19. Shri Sat Paul Sharma 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi                 - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi                 - Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan                 - Deputy Secretary 
 

26 
 
2. In the absence of Chairperson, members of the Committee who were present chose 
amongst themselves Shri Rao Rajendra Singh , MP to act as Chairperson for the sitting in 
terms of Rule 258(3) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
 
3. The Committee then considered the following draft Reports:- 
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken   by   the   Government   on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Committee (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs); and 
 
(ii) xxxx     xxxx    xxxx    xxxx 
 
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft Reports 
without any amendments/modifications.  
 
5. The Committee then authorized the Hon’ble Chairperson to finalize and present the 
aforesaid Reports during the ongoing Session of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
************* 
 
 
____________________________________________________________________ 
 
xxxx Matter does not pertain to Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

27 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para No.4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTEENTH REPORT 
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION (2025-2026) (18th LOK SABHA) 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
Total Number of Recommendations/Observations – 12 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government – 
Recommendation Nos. 1,2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 
 
(Chapter – II, Total 12) 
Percentage of Total:100% 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government's replies – 
Recommendation Nos. Nil 
(Chapter – III, Total Nil) 
Percentage of Total:0% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration – 
Recommendation Nos. Nil 
(Chapter- IV, Total Nil) 
Percentage of Total:0% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies are still awaited – 
Recommendation Nos. Nil 
 
(Chapter – V, Total Nil) 
Percentage of Total:0% 
 
 