i 
 
 
 
    STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
           MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 2024-25’ of the Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
AUGUST, 2025/ SHRAVAN, 1947 (SAKA) 
 
 
10 


ii 
 
CC&F NO. 190 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2024-25) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in the Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants 2024-25’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20 August, 2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20 August, 2025 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2025/ SHRAVAN, 1947 (SAKA) 


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25) (iv)  
Introduction (v) 
Chapter-I Report 1 
Chapter-II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies  
 
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
 
Chapter-V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 
APPENDICES  
I Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2024-25) held on 18th August, 2025. 
 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report  
(18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers on ‘Demands for Grants 2024 -25’ of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Departme nt of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals). 
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS 
AND FERTILIZERS 
(2024-2025) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Shri Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
21. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Subhash Barala 
23. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
24. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
25. Shri Sanjay Raut 
26. Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy 
27. Dr. Kalpana Saini 
28. Shri Arun Singh 
29. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
30. Shri Tejveer Singh 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Smt. Maya Lingi   - Joint Secretary 
2.  Ms. Miranda Ingudam  - Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2024-25) having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this  
Tenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fourth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 2024-25’ pertaining to the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
2.  The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 16th December, 2024. The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers furnished their replies on 13 July, 2024 indicating Action 
Taken on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report. The 
Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 18th August, 
2025. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
18 August, 2025 CHAIRPERSON, 
27 Shravan, 1947 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
    CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
            CHAPTER–I 
This Report deals with action taken by the Government on 
observations/recommendations of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers contained in their Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2024- 25)’ pertaining to the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 
1.2 The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 16 th December, 2024. It contained 15 Observations/Recommendations. The 
Replies of the Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been 
received and are categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Rec.Para No. 1,2, 6, 7,8, 10,11,12 , 13  and 14  
 
Chapter-II Total-10 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
                     Rec. NIL                                                         
Chapter–III Total–‘NIL’ 
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee which require 
reiteration: 
                      Rec. 3,4,5,9 and15 
Chapter-IV Total– 05 
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited: 
                      Rec. NIL 
 
Chapter–V Total- ‘NIL’ 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I be furnished to them within three months 
of the presentation of this Report. 
 
1.4      The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 

2 
 
their Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
(Recommendation No. 3)  
Setting Up of Plastic Parks 
 
1.5 The Committee note that the scheme of Plastic Parks was formulated way 
back in the year 2011 and so far 10 Plastic Parks have been approved and are stated 
to be at different levels of Implementation. The Committee are, however, pained to 
note that the laudable objectives of the Plastic Parks viz. to consolidate and synergise 
the capacities of downstream Plastic industry to help increase investment production, 
exports and employment generation stood defeated as none of the Plastic Park is 
fully functional. In the case of Plastic Parks at Tamot, Madhya Pradesh, only 26 Plots 
out of 172 could be allotted; in the case of Plastic Parks at Tinsukia, Assam, only 66 
Plots out of 104 could be allotted, in the case of Plastic Parks at Bilaua, Madhya 
Pradesh, only 02 plots out of 107 could be allotted; and in cases of Plastic Parks at 
Deoghar, Jharkhand; Thirmuallan, Tamil Nadu;  Sarora, Chhattisgarh; and Ganjimutt, 
Karnataka having 102, 65, 48 and 53 number of plots respectively, no plots could be 
allotted. The Com mittee are even more concerned to observe the monumental 
challenge faced by the Department in populating the Plastic Parks.  The Committee 
are of the considered view that the optimal delivery of the Plastic Parks as envisaged 
would happen only by incentivizing industrial entities to set up their units in the Plastic 
Parks. The Committee are, therefore, perturbed to note inordinate delays in the 
delivery mechanism for making all the Plastic Parks fully functional. The Department 
has submitted that the implem entation of the Plastic Parks is largely dependent on 
the Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) set up by the State Governments or their 
agencies and progress of the Plastic Parks is dependent on the State Governments. 
The Committee are of the view that the Depa rtment cannot shy away from their 
bounden duty to coordinate with the respective State Governments for expeditiously 
making the Plastic Parks fully functional as envisaged in the ‘New Schemes of 
Petrochemicals’ of the Department. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department should draw up a timeline for effective coordination with the respective 
State Governments to iron out the constraints and challenges faced. The Committee 
may be apprised of the action taken in the matter.     
 
1.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The Scheme for Setting up of Plastic Parks promotes setting up of need -
based Plastic Parks with requisite infrastructure and enabling common 
facilities. The creation of infrastructure was impacted by various local factors. 
Besides, the work during 2020-22 was also impacted to varying degrees due 
to the pandemic. 
 

3 
 
The Department has been regularly monitoring the implementation of 
the various projects, including through site visits, review meetings as well as 
regular progress reports submitted by the SPVs. Best efforts are being made 
to ensure timely completion of th e projects and to populate the Parks at the 
earliest. Based on the efforts made, significant progress in terms of 
infrastructure development has been made in these Plastic Park projects. 
 
In Jharkhand, the compound wall, road network, storm water drainage, 
internal sewerage system, street lighting, warehouse, administrative complex 
have all been completed between 2022 to 2024. In Assam, the work on site 
office has been completed and signifi cant work in the common facilities has 
been completed in the past 2 years. There has also been improvement in 
terms of allotment of plots in the Plastic Parks. The allotment in Assam has 
increased from 46 plots in August, 2023 to 66 plots in December, 2024 . 
Similarly, the allotment in Tamot has increased from 18 plots in August, 2023 
to 26 plots in December, 2024. In Gorakhpur, 58 of the 92 plots have been 
allotted. 
 
The Government (including State Governments) has tried to provide all 
possible incentives to the industry for locating in these Parks. 
 
• The Chhattisgarh Government provides several incentives including fixed 
capital investment subsidy, electricity duty exemption, stamp duty exemption, 
training cost reimbursement, employment subsidy, project report subsidy, 
quality certification subsidy etc . for industrial units. The SPV has received 
intent from more than 50 plastic based units for land allocation. 
• In the Karnataka Plastic Park, more than 50% of the infrastructure work is 
completed, and the remaining is likely to be completed by June, 2025. About 
30 manufacturers have expressed interest in investing in the Plastic Park. 
• The process of land allotment in the Jharkhand Plastic Park Limited has been 
initiated, under which they have so far received 36 applications for allotment 
of land. They are also participating in various events to populate the Plastic 
Park at Deoghar, including road shows etc. 
• The Bilaua Plastic Park is making efforts to populate the Park at the earliest 
including marketing and awareness campaigns, industry promotion campaign, 
industry-specific trade shows and events. Several financial incentives are also 
being offered for industrial units. 
• The Tamot Plastic Park has completed the process of infrastructure creation 
and is implementing an aggressive marketing strategy and participating in 
major plastic exhibitions to reach out to potential investors. Industrial 
Conclaves and road shows are being organised by the State Government. A 
proposal to reduce land premium and develop ment charges for the Plastic 
Park is under consideration by the State Government. 

4 
 
• The basic infrastructure in the Assam Plastic Park has been completed. The 
AIDC has provided land at a discounted rate and has constructed 15 industrial 
sheds which provide ready -to-use factory spaces to attract smaller players. 
The State Government has provided subsidies on land and capital investment 
as per the Industrial Investment Policy of Assam, 2023. It has also provided 
tax holidays, GST exemptions, or deferred tax payments for a fixed period. It 
has conducted various roadshows, seminars, and worksh ops targeting both 
domestic and international investors. 
 
The Department has been making constant efforts to ensure timely 
implementation of the project including review meetings, site visits and written 
communications. D.O. letters have been written to the Chief Secretaries of the 
respective States requesting fo r expeditious implementation of the projects. 
The projects are being duly monitored by the Department officials, including 
through site visits. In the past one year, 5 of the 10 Plastic Parks have been 
visited by senior officials of the Department. Based o n the efforts made, the 
pace of allotment in many of the Parks has picked up and the implementing 
agencies are confident of making the requisite allotments in the near future. It 
is expected that the process of infrastructure creation would be completed by 
June, 2025 and thereafter, the Plastic Parks would get populated at the 
earliest.” 
 
 
1.7 The Committee had emphasized the need for expeditious setting up of 
Plastic Parks as all ten Plastic Park s approved so far were  only at different 
stages of implementation with none completed so far. The Committee observed 
that the scheme of setting  up of Plastic Parks was formulated way back in the 
year 2011 and there has been very slow progress statedly, the creation of 
infrastructure was impacted by various local factors and also due to the 
pandemic  The Committee recommended that the Department should draw up 
a timeline for effective coordination with the respective State Governments  to 
iron out the constraints and challenges faced by the Department.  In the Action 
Taken Notes, the Department has inter-alia submitted that constant efforts 
were being made to ensure timely implementation of the Plastic P arks which 
includes review meetings, site visits, written communication etc.  and target 
set for completion of the process of infrastructure creation was June, 2025 
after which the Plastic Parks were expected to get populated.  The Committee 
recommend that as assured by the Department, the target for all ten Plastic 
Parks completion by June, 2025 should be met in letter and spirit so that the 

5 
 
Plastic Parks are populated within the same year 2025.  The Committee would 
like to be informed of the steps taken in this matter. 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
Centres of Excellence (CoEs) 
 
1.8 The Committee note that the Scheme of CoEs seeks to provide grant-in-aid to 
educational and research Institutes to improve existing technology and promote 
development of new applications. Further, the CoEs are set up with an aim to help in 
development of new products, new applications, innovation and improvement of 
technology, process innovation, quality and environmentally sustainable 
development. The Scheme of CoEs was earlier restricted to Petrochemicals but now 
the Scheme has been expanded to include the Chemical sector too. The Committee 
have been apprised that as on date, 18 CoEs have been approved. The Department 
reviews the requirements of the Sector and accords approval for new CoEs based 
on the needs of the industry and the quality of research proposals received. Keeping 
in view the laudable objectives of the CoEs, the Committee opine that only 18 CoEs 
for the entire Country seems to be inadequate and the number needs further 
augmentation. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department may come forth 
with a roadmap on CoEs for the ent ire nation to bring the R&D and technology in 
Chemical and Petrochemical Sector on par with other developed nations. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this 
regard. 
 
1.9 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as follows: 
“The Department implements a Scheme for setting up Centres of Excellence 
(CoEs) under the New Scheme of Petrochemicals. This Scheme is being 
implemented since 2011 and 11 CoEs had been approved upto September, 
2021. The Standing Finance Committee (SFC), in its meeting held on 
25th October, 2021, recommended continuation of the New Scheme of 
Petrochemicals upto FY 2025-26, with a total proposed financial outlay of Rs. 
270.75 crore, to complete all pending Plastic Parks including pending CoEs 
and 11 new CoEs. Subsequent to this decision, 2 more CoEs were approved 
by the Department in February, 2022. Thereafter, a comprehensive review of 
the CoEs was undertaken to make the scheme more effective. Based on the 
feedback and learnings, the Scheme Guidelines were revised in May, 2024 
and 5 new CoEs were approved in September, 2024, taking the total number 
of approved CoEs to 18. 
 
The CoEs are undertaking pioneering research in their chosen fields. These 
centres have so far filed 44 patents, published 173 research papers and have 

6 
 
developed 22 new products/ technologies. They have also served to resolve 
some of the research challenges being faced in the sector and have 
successfully transferred some of their technologies/ products for application in 
the industry.” 
 
1.10 As regards the CoEs, the Committee had desired that the Department 
should come forth with a roadmap on CoEs for the entire nation to bring the 
R&D & technology in Chemical and Petrochemical Sectoron par with the other 
developed nations.  However, in the Action Taken Notes the Department has 
inter-alia submitted that a comprehensive review of the CoEs was undertaken 
to make the Scheme more effective and based on the feedback and learnings, 
the Scheme guideline s were revised in May, 2024 and 05 new CoEs were 
approved in September, 2024 taking the total member of approved CoEs to 18.  
Though a comprehensive review has been statedly done, the Committee’s 
recommendation for a roadmap on CoEs for the entire nation to bring the R&D 
and technology in Chemical and Petrochemical Sector on par with other 
developed nations, apparently still a miss.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their recommendation for a more holistic and futuristic roadmap on CoEs so 
that the larger need of the nation are met in letter and spirit.  
(Recommendation No. 5)                                                   
New Schemes Of Petrochemicals (NSPs) 
 
1.11 The Committee note with concern that the actual expenditure under the New 
Schemes of Petrochemicals has reduced to Rs. 18.00 Crore in the year 2023-24 from 
Rs. 51.12 crore in the year 2021-22. The RE of New Schemes of Petrochemicals has 
also declined to Rs. 25.00 Crore in the year 2024-25 from Rs. 51.13 crore in the year 
2021-22. The BE too has declined to Rs. 22.00 crore in the year 2023 -24 from Rs. 
53.73 crore in the year 2021 -22. The Department cited the same reason that it has 
adopted the single Central  Nodal Agency (CNA) system for release of funds, 
according to which funds are to be released to the implementing agencies on a just-
in-time basis. As regards the Physical targets under NSP, the Committee are 
perturbed to note that targets set for the years  2023-24 and 2024-25 was ‘NIL.’ The 
Committee was apprised that when the Standing Finance Committee (SFC)’s 
recommendation for setting up of 05 Plastic Parks was sent to the Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, it was suggested that the proposal  be brought 
before them after completion of the ongoing projects and also when their output as 
well as outcomes become clear. The Committee are dismayed to observe that the 
non-completion of ongoing Plastic Parks Projects and delays in their output/outcomes 

7 
 
have affected the approval and disbursal of funds for new targets set. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should streamline its existing 
machinery with an overall objective to obviate scope for such negative eventualities. 
 
1.12 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as follows: 
“The Department implements the New Scheme of Petrochemicals under which 
funds are released to the implementing agencies i.e. Plastic Parks and 
Centres of Excellence (CoEs), based on achievement of specified milestones. 
 
In March, 2022, the D/o Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, Government of India 
issued guidelines prescribing the revised procedure for flow of funds under 
Central Sector Schemes. Given the various steps required in implementation 
of this procedure, due funds could n ot be release during 2022 -23 and the 
utilization was Rs. 24.22 crore against the RE of Rs. 29 crore. In 2023 -24, 
efforts were made for efficient implementation of the revised procedure for flow 
of funds, and the single Central Nodal Agency (CNA) system was  adopted. 
Full efforts were made to ensure utilization of funds based on which the entire 
RE of Rs. 18 crore was released. 
 
Based on the recommendations of the Committee, the Department is regularly 
monitoring the implementation of the projects and the utilization of the funds 
released, including through site visits, review meetings as well as through 
regular progress reports s ubmitted by the implementing agencies. Based on 
the same, an amount of Rs. 18.55 crore has been released upto till date. 
Further, the allocated budget for the Scheme has been increased from Rs. 25 
in BE to Rs. 33.50 crore in RE. Best efforts are being made  to ensure timely 
completion of the projects and optimal utilization of funds. 
With regard to the completion of the Plastic Park projects, it is submitted that 
the creation of infrastructure was impacted by various local factors. Besides, 
the work during 2020 -22 was also impacted to varying degrees due to the 
pandemic. However, the D epartment has been regularly monitoring the 
implementation of the various projects, including through site visits, review 
meetings as well as regular progress reports submitted by the SPVs. Best 
efforts are being made to ensure timely completion of the pro jects and to 
populate the Parks at the earliest. Based on the efforts made, significant 
progress in terms of infrastructure development has been made in these 
Plastic Park projects. 
 
The Department has been making constant efforts to ensure timely 
implementation of the project including review meetings, site visits and written 
communications. D.O. letters have been written to the Chief Secretaries of the 
respective States requesting fo r expeditious implementation of the projects. 
The projects are being duly monitored by the Department officials, including 
through site visits. In the past one year, 5 of the 10 Plastic Parks have been 
visited by senior officials of the Department. Based o n the efforts made, the 
pace of allotment in many of the Parks has picked up and the implementing 
agencies are confident of making the requisite allotments in the near future. It 
is expected that the process of infrastructure creation would be completed by 

8 
 
June, 2025 and thereafter, the Plastic Parks would get populated at the 
earliest.” 
 
1.13 The Committee were concerned with the reduction in the expenditure 
under the New Schemes of Petrochemicals and ‘NIL’ targets set under the New 
Schemes of Petrochemicals for the year s 2023-24 and 2024 -25.  The 
Department’s explanation was that it had adopted th e single Central Nodal 
Agency (CNAs) system for release of funds, according to which the funds are 
to be released to the implementing agencies on a just in time basis.  In their 
Action Taken Notes  too the Department submitted that the Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, Government of India issued Guidelines 
prescribing the revised procedure for flow of funds under Central Sector 
Schemes and due to which the funds could not be released during the Year 
2022-23.  The Department has neither furnished any clarification as to how the 
CNA system is acting as a hindrance in smooth flow of funds nor has furnished 
any information as to how the CNA system can be made supportive for optimal 
utilization of allotted funds.  The Committee , therefore reiterates that the CNA 
system should not be allowed to act as a hindrance in the release and 
utilization of funds.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken 
by the Department in this regard.   The Committee further note that the 
Department has submit ted that it has been regularly monitoring the 
implementation of the various projects, including through site visits, review 
meetings as well as regular progress reports submitted by the Special Purpose 
Vehicles yet the Department got reduced allocation of funds and ‘NIL’ targets 
were set under the New Schemes of Petrochemicals for the year 2023 -24 and 
2024-25.  
(RecommendationNo.9) 
 
Institute of Pesticides Formulation Technology (IPFT) 
 
1.14 The Committee note that the fund utilization of IPFT is appreciable and it has 
been able to utilize the whole amount allocated to it viz. RE for the year 2021 -22, 
2022-23 and 2023 -24 which was Rs, 11.50 Crore, Rs. 11.04 Crore and Rs. 14.12 
crore were fully utilized. The Committee expect that IPFT should keep its good track 
of fund utilization in the year 2024 -25 too and also in the ensuing financial years. 
Admittedly, IPFT, is dedicated to work in the area of pesticide formulation and 

9 
 
development of bio-botanical pesticides and their formulations. The Committee were 
apprised that to augment the working strength of IPFT, recruitment of 05 post is 
stated to be in progress. The Committee desire that good work of the IPFT should 
not be allowed to suffer because of vacancies at any level. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the vacancies should be filled up expeditiously. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the steps taken by the IPFT and the Department in this regard.  
 
1.15 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as follows: 
“All efforts will be made by IPFT for effective utilization of fund s. With regard to 
the working strength it is informed that the recruitment process of 05 posts of 
various category in IPFT is initiated as per the Rules. All the posts were notified 
to be filled up on Contractual -Consolidated Salary /Deputation basis in August, 
2024. The recruitment process for the post of Dy. Chief (Bioscience) and 
Establishment Officer has been completed. No candidate was found suitable for 
the post of Dy. Chief (Bioscienc e). For the post of Establishment Officer, a 
candidate has been finalized on Deputation basis. The selection process for the 
remaining three (3) posts is being completed on priority basis.” 
 
1.16 The Committee desired that the good work of the IPFT should not be 
allowed to suffer because of vacancies at any level.  The Department in their 
Action Taken Notes has submitted that as regards the working strength the 
recruitment process of 05 posts of various categories in IPFT was initiated as 
per the Rules. All the posts were notified to be filled up on Contractual -
Consolidated Salary /Deputation basis in August, 2024. The recruitment 
process for the post of Dy. Chief (Bioscience) and Establishment Officer has 
been completed. No candidate was found suitable for the post of Dy. Chief 
(Bioscience). For the post of Establishment Officer, a candidate has been 
finalized on Deputation basis. The sel ection process for the remaining three 
(03) posts was being completed on priority basis.  The Committee desire that  
more earnest efforts be taken by way of adequate publication of vacancies so 
that the selection process for the remaining posts be completed in a time 
bound manner. 
(RecommendationNo.15) 
 
1.17 The Committee note that a detailed note on the contamination caused to the 
River Lukha  located in Jaintia Hills District of Meghalaya State due to cement 
factories located in the area was sought from the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals (DCPC). The Committee are, however, dismayed that the 
Department in their reply have merely sta ted that the inputs have been sought and 

10 
 
will be furnished on receipt of the same.  The Committee desire that the matter may 
be taken up with due seriousness considering the gravity of the issue and the health 
hazards that it poses to inhabitants as well as to the eco system.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that a detailed note on the contamination of the River ‘Lukha’ 
may be furnished to the Committee, after an Independent Enquiry into Reports of 
deadly contamination by chemical waste from Cement Factories which resulted i n 
death of Fishes and the River turning blue, is conducted in consultation/association 
with the local Members of Parliament and the State Pollution Control Board.  The 
Committee also desire that in future, representatives of the affected people in the 
region, more specifically the local Member of Parliament may be kept in the loop on 
all matters concerning this grave and serious issue of contamination and its 
deleterious effects of River Lukha in the Jaintia Hills of Meghalaya State.  The 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the matter within a period of three 
months of presentation of this Report to the House. 
 
1.18 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as follows: 
 
“Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals took up the matter with the 
Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change (MEF&CC) for seeking a 
detailed note on the contamination caused to the River Lukha located in Jaintia 
Hills District of Meghalaya State due to cement factories located in the area. 
 
In this regard, Meghalaya State Pollution Borad has furnished a report on the 
Water Quality Status of river flowing across the cement factories. The report 
has concluded the following: 
 
“Based on the data reported, it was observed that the pH is 7.2 at Lukha River, 
Sonapur and 8.0 at Ummutha stream, CMCL, Lumshnong in the normal range. 
The concentration of other parameters was observed to be comparatively low. 
The water quality at both th e water bodies was satisfactory with reference to 
the Water Quality criteria for Bathing (ph 6.5 -8.5, BOD 3.0 mg/l or less, DO 
5.0 mg/l or more, FC-2500MPN/100ml).” 
A copy of the report is enclosed at Annexure-II. 
 
Further, Meghalaya State Pollution Control Board has informed the following: 
In East Jaintia Hills District, Cement factories were started since 2004. It maybe 
informed that there are 10 (ten) cement industries operating in East Jaintia Hills 
District. The Consent for establish/operate were granted by the Meghalaya 
State Pollution Control Board under the Water (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1974 and the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 
upon submission and proper scrutiny of all requisite documents, NOC's etc. 
 
(a) Control of Air Pollution 
It may be mentioned that for control of air pollution, cement units have installed the 
following devices: 

11 
 
(i) Bag Filters 
(ii) Reverse Air Bag House 
(iii) Electro Static Precipitators 
 
(b) Waste Water Treatment 
For the waste water generated from the unit, following devices are installed 
(i) For Trade Effluent (emerging from Industries) - Effluent Treatment 
Plant. 
(ii) For Sewage-Sewage Treatment Plant 
 
(c) Solid Waste Management: 
For Solid waste management, the units are taking the following measures: 
(i) Adequate facility is created for collection, storage, transportation, 
treatment & disposal of Municipal Solid Waste generated from the 
Residential Colony and Industry (non-hazardous industrial solid waste). 
(ii) Adequate system is being adopted for reduction of waste generation 
and enhancement of re-utilization & recycling of waste materials. 
 
(d) Hazardous Waste Management Treatment 
For hazardous waste management, the units are taking the following measures: 
Appropriate facility is created and maintained for handling, storage, treatment & 
disposal of Hazardous waste generate from the industry in accordance to the 
provisions of the Hazardous & Other Wastes (Management & Transboundary 
Movement) Rules, 2016 including Notifications, Guidelines issued there under. 
 
(e) Pollution Monitoring: 
Meghalaya State Pollution Control Board has also entrusted Knowledge Lens 
Pvt. Ltd. with the job of providing Real Time Continuous Emission Monitoring 
System from all the cement and thermal power plants units in Meghalaya. Keeping 
up with the current Government norms and applying the latest technologies, all the 
industries data pertaining to Emission Monitoring and Air Quality Monitoring using 
various instruments available in the market, is being captured and transmitted to the 
Meghalaya State Pollution Control Board and Central Pollution Control Board. 
 
The pollution data pertaining to Emission and Air Quality is directly captured 
from different type of instruments installed at the industries and the data is transmitted 
to the Meghalaya State Pollution Control Board and Central Pollution Control Board 
using dedicated internet connection. The Meghalaya State Pollution Control Board 
can view the data of all the industries present in Meghalaya State connected to the 
single server platform. 
 
Alarms are generated and sent to the Board as well as industries in case there 
is a breach of prescribed level of pollutants being discharged into the environment. 
Data validation is being regularly carried by the Board to prevent any manipulations. 
Apart from the single server platform, the Board has provided a separate URL for 

12 
 
public viewing of the real time data as per the Hon'ble Supreme Court’s order which 
can be viewed on Meghalaya Pollution Control Board website. If any violation by any 
cement industry is found, action is taken against them as per relevant Acts and 
Rules.” 
 
1.19 On the contamination caused to the river Lukha located in Jaintia Hills 
District of Meghalaya, the Committee drew the attention of the Department and 
had sought a detailed reply.  The Department in their Action Taken Note has 
furnished a Report on the Water Quality Status of Lukha river flowing across 
cement factories which reveals steps taken to stop Air Pollution , treatment of 
waste water, solid waste management, hazardous waste management 
treatment etc.  thereby proving beyond doubt that the water of the ‘Lukha River’ 
had indeed been contaminated and efforts are now being taken to stop further 
contamination of wate r. Apparently action has been taken solely by the 
Meghalaya State Pollution Control Board .  The Department has submitted in 
their Action Taken Notes that for control of air Pollution, the Cement units have 
installed Bag filters, Reverse Air Bag House and Electrostatic Precipitator. 
Similarly for treatment of Waste Water generated from the Cement unit, the 
Cement Units have installed Effluent Tre atment Water and Sewage Treatment 
plant.  However, the number of Devices/Plants installed for controlling the Air 
and Water Pollution have not been furnished.  The Committee desire that  the 
requisite data/figures along with specific analysis statement as t o the 
adequacy of the number of devices installed  vis-a-vis quantum of pollutants 
may be furnished for an objective assessment.  The Committee also note that 
the reply is silent on the action taken by the Department and by the Ministry of 
Environment Forest and Climate Change.  To save Lukha River, coordinated 
efforts should be made by the Department, Ministry of Environment Forest and 
Climate Change and Meghalaya State Pollution Control Board.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire a detailed reply alongwith ti melines for cleansing the Lukha 
River pollution.    
  
 
 
 
 
 

13 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
 Proposed and Approved Allocation For The Year 2024-25  
 
2.1 The Committee note that the Department has been allocated an amount of 
Rs.209.00 crore for the financial year 2022 -23 which was subsequently increased to 
Rs. 259.11 crore for the year 2024 -25 at the RE stage.  This was purportedly due to 
the loan given to HIL (India) Ltd. for closure of two of its units and payment of the 
statutory payments to be made to employees at Head Office, Rasayani Unit and also 
five sales offices of HIL (India) Ltd.  The Committee further note that though overall 
allocation has increased, the scheme-wise allocation appears to have declined.  For 
instance, for other new schemes of petrochemicals, the Department projected a BE of 
Rs. 42.3 crore but were allocated an amount of Rs.25.00 crore only.  Similarly, the 
Department projected BE  of Rs.62.58 crore for CIPET but were allocated just Rs. 
36.37 crore and IPFT too got reduced allocation of funds as compared to the projected 
amount.  The Committee are, however, happy to note utilization of more than 70% of 
the BE by October 2024. The Co mmittee desire that the Department should gear up 
its machinery for maximum performance with the allocation it has received for its 
schemes/ programmes.     
 
2.2 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as follows: 
 
Full efforts are being made to ensure  maximum utilization of funds. The entire 
RE of Rs. 18.00 crore for New Scheme of Petrochemicals (NSP) was utilized in 2023-
24. There is regular monitoring by the Department regarding the implementation of the 
projects and the utilization of the funds released . An amount of Rs. 18.55 crore has 
been released in NSP till date. Further, the allocated budget for the Scheme has been 
increased from Rs. 25.00 crore in BE 2024-25  to Rs.33.50 crore in RE 2024-25. 
 
The Department provides grants -in-aid to CIPET for creation of capital assets. 
The BE for 2024-25 was Rs. 36.37 crore. The Treasury Single Account (TSA) system 
has been implemented in CIPET from 2024-25 to ensure efficiency in the release and 
utilization of funds and  best efforts are being made to ensure full utilization of the  
allocated budget.  
 
 
 

14 
 
An amount of Rs.33.28 crore has already been released to CIPET   till date and 
the budget allocated to CIPET has been increased to Rs. 44.20 crore in the RE 2024-
25. As advised by the Committee, CIPET is making concentrated efforts for effective 
utilization of the allocated funds and expeditious completion of the ongoing projects. 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 2)  
 
Allocation And Utilization of Funds During The Last Three Years. 
 
2.3 The Committee note that BE (2021-2022) which stood at Rs.233.14 Crore was 
reduced to Rs. 209.00 Crore in the year 2022 -23 and saw a further reduction to Rs. 
173.45 Crore in the year 2023-24 which was then raised in BE 2024-25 to Rs. 259.11 
Crore. The Depar tment inter-alia submitted that the reason was adoption of single 
Central Nodal Agency (CNA) system for release of funds, according to which the funds 
are to be released to the implementing agencies on a just -in-time basis. The pooling 
of funds with the im plementing agencies is not possible in this system and all the 
Centres of Excellence (CoEs) and Plastic Parks have adopted this system where the 
funds are released as per the actual requirement based on the actual expenditure. 
The Committee observe that th e reason cited do not appear to be a satisfactory 
explanation for the downward trend in BE of the Department. Similarly, on the declining 
RE for the years 2021 -22 and 2022-23, the Department submitted that the reduction 
is mainly due to reduced allocation for New Scheme of Petrochemicals and unspent 
amount with CIPET due to implementation of revised procedure of flow of funds under 
the Central Sector Scheme from the financial year 2022-23. The Committee are of the 
considered view that the Department should look into the matter holistically for optimal 
utilization of allocated funds so as to be admissible to seek higher BE in terms of the 
requirements of the new single CNA System. The Committee feel that any new system 
of flow of funds should make the process  more robust and cannot be allowed to act 
as hindrance in optimal utilization of funds. The Committee would like to be apprised 
about the steps taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
2.4 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as follows: 
  
The Department implements the New Scheme of Petrochemicals under which 
funds are released to the implementing agencies i.e. Plastic Parks and Centres of 
Excellence (CoEs), based on achievement of specified milestones. 
 
In March, 2022, the D/o Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, Government of India 
issued guidelines prescribing the revised procedure for flow of funds under Central 
Sector Schemes. Given the various steps required in implementation of this 
procedure, due funds could not be release during 2022-23 and the utilisation was Rs. 
24.22 crore against the RE of Rs. 29 crore. In 2023-24, efforts were made for efficient 

15 
 
implementation of the revised procedure for flow of funds, and the single Central Nodal 
Agency (CNA) system was adopted. Full efforts were made to ensure utilisation of 
funds based on which the entire RE of Rs. 18 crore was released. 
 
Based on the recommendations of the Committee, the Department is regularly 
monitoring the implementation of the projects and the utilization of the funds released, 
including through site visits, review meetings as well as through regular progress 
reports submitted by the implementing agencies. Based on the same, an amount of 
Rs. 18.55 crore has been released in NSP till date. Further, the allocated budget for 
the Scheme has been increased from Rs. 25 crore in BE 2024 -25 to Rs. 33.50 crore 
in RE 2024-25. Best efforts are being made to ensure timely completion of the projects 
and optimal utilization of funds. 
 
There was full utilization of the RE of Rs.102.34 crore  during 2021-22 and RE 
of Rs. 63.81 crore during 2022-23. No funds were released to CIPET during 2023-24 
and efforts were made to utilise the  funds available with CIPET from releases of 
previous years. Accordingly, an amount of Rs. 74.15 crore was utilized and Rs. 34.65 
crore was deposited into the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 
The Treasury Single Account (TSA) system has been implemented in CIPET 
from 2024- 25 to ensure efficiency in  the release and  utilization of funds and  best 
efforts are being made to ensure full utilization of the allocated budget. An amount of 
Rs. 33.28 crore has already been released to CIPET till date. 
 
(Recommendation No. 6)  
 
Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering And Technology (CIPET) 
 
2.5 The Committee note that for construction of residential hostels of CIPET, an 
amount of Rs. 260.98 crore has been released out of Rs. 292.77 crore approved since 
the year 2012-13. The Committee are, however, pained to note that the construction 
of residential hostels is still pending at CIPET, Mysore, Imphal and Baddi. Similarly out 
of 11 CIPET Centres approved in the year 2015 -2016, while 07 CIPET Centres have 
since been set up but four (04) CIPET Centres viz, Bhagalpur, Nasik, Maharashtra 
and Jammu and Kas hmir are still pending. The Committee desire that the work of 
setting up of CIPET Hostels as well as CIPET Centres may be expedited and 
completed in a time bound manner. 
 
2.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as follows: 
 
With regard to creation of residential hostels, the construction of the G+2 Boys 
Hostel at Imphal is  being undertaken. About 28%  of the  work is  complete and  the 

16 
 
project is likely to be completed by September, 2025. The construction of 32 bedded 
Boys Hostel at Baddi  has been awarded to CPWD in July, 2024, and it is likely to be 
completed by July, 2025. 
 
Under the scheme for Establishment of 11 new Centres, 7 Centres have been 
set up. CIPET: CSTS, Bhagalpur has been inaugurated on 19th January, 2025 while 
the CIPET Centre at Bihta is likely to be completed soon. In the case of Nasik and 
Jammu & Kashmir, the matter of land allotment has been taken up with the respective 
State Governments. 
 
CIPET is regularly monitoring the progress of these projects with the 
objective of expeditious completion of the same. 
 
A thorough review of the funds released to CIPET and their utilization was 
undertaken and it was observed that there were significant unspent funds with CIPET 
from releases of previous years. Accordingly, no funds were released to CIPET during 
2023-24 and efforts were made to utilise the funds available with CIPET from releases 
of previous years. Based on the same, an amount of Rs. 74.15 crore was utilized and 
Rs. 34.65 crore was deposited into the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 
 
The Treasury Single Account (TSA) system has been implemented in CIPET 
from 2024- 25 to ensure efficiency in the release and utilization of funds and best efforts 
are being made to ensure full utilization of the allocated budget. An amount of Rs. 33.28 
crore has already been released to CIPET till date. As recommended by the 
Committee, best efforts are being made to ensure timely and efficient utilization of the 
allocated funds. 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering and Technology (CIPET) 
 
2.7 The Committee are dismayed to note that CIPET had to deposit the unspent 
balance amount out of Rs. 74.15 crore lying with it and due to unspent funds lying with 
CIPET, further funds were not released in the year 2023 -24. The Committee note a 
slight improve ment in the year 2024 -25 wherein an amount of Rs. 36.37 crore 
allocated at BE stage an amount of Rs. 18.18 crore have already been utilized. The 
Committee recommend that the CIPET should make all out efforts towards utilization 
of allocated funds.  
 
2.8 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as follows: 
  

17 
 
A thorough review of the funds released to CIPET and their utilization was 
undertaken and it was observed that there were significant unspent funds with CIPET 
from releases of previous years. Accordingly, no funds were released to CIPET during 
2023-24 and efforts were made to utilise the funds available with CIPET from releases 
of previous years. Based on the same, an amount of Rs. 74.15 crore was utilized and 
Rs. 34.65 crore was deposited into the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 
The Treasury Single Account (TSA) system has been implemented in CIPET 
from 2024- 25 to ensure efficiency in the release and utilization of funds and best efforts 
are being made to ensure full utilization of the allocated budget. An amount of Rs. 33.28 
crore has already been released to CIPET tlll date. As recommended by the 
Committee, best efforts are being made to ensure timely and efficient utilization of the 
allocated funds. 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
Plastic Waste Management Centres (PWMCs) 
 
2.9 The Committee note that the process of setting up of PWMCs which was 
delayed for years together due to problems in acquisition of land etc. got an upstart 
with the decision of the Department to establish PWMCs within the premises of 
existing CIPET Centres. The Committee are happy to note that PWMC, Varanasi has 
been completed and inaugurated on 20.10.2024 while the work pertaining to 
construction as well as the machines and equipments has been completed in case of 
PWMC, Bhagalpur. Admittedly, PWMC, Sanad an d PWMC, Bengaluru are in 
progress. While appreciating the decision taken by the Department to establish the 
PWMCs in the existing CIPET centres, the Committee hope and trust that the 
Department would be able to set up these two PWMCs also without further l oss of 
time.  
 
2.10 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as follows: 
 
Of the four approved PWMCs, the PWMC at Varanasi was inaugurated on 20th 
October, 2024 while the PWMC at Bhagalpur was inaugurated on 19th January, 2025. 
PWMC, Bengaluru is ready while PWMC, Sanand is likely to be completed in FY 2024-
25. 
(Recommendation No.10) 
 
Petroleum Chemicals And Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs) 
 
2.11 The Committee note that the Department notified the PCPIR policy way back in 
the year 2007 to attract investment and also for generation of employment in the 

18 
 
Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment Regions. PCPIRs were 
conceived to promote the Chemicals and Petrochemicals sector in an integrated and 
environmentally friendly manner on a large scale. At present three PCPIRs at 
Vishakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, Dahej, Gujarat and Paradeep, Odisha are being 
implemented by the Department under the PCPIR policy 2007. As regards 
achievement of their objective of attracting investment and generation of employment 
the Committee note that these three PCPIRs have attracted an investment of Rs. 2.6 
Lakh Crore and have generated employment to 3,71,263 persons and have resulted 
in establishment of 824 units. The Committee are, however, of the view that these 
PCPIRs have much more potential provided their capacity is a ugmented to the 
optimum level. In this regard, the Committee note that at PCPIR, Visakhapatnam, the 
Department is still struggling for setting up a Anchor unit which is hampering the 
progress of making the PCPIR, Visakhapatnam fully functional. The Committ ee 
recommend that the Department should look into the matter and initiate measures for 
speedy corrective action with a view to make these three PCPIRs fully functional at 
the earliest.  The Committee also desire that the outcome of a series of stake holder  
consultations with various industry associations at the Central level as well as with 
the associations in different States to improve the PCPIR infrastructure purportedly 
being organized by the Department, may also be furnished to the Committee. 
 
2.12 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals conducted a number of 
Stakeholder consultations with industry associations and respective State 
Governments.  
From the stakeholders consultation with the State Governments, it has been 
noticed that these PCPIRs have attracted an investment of Rs. 2.6 Lakh Crores and 
has generated employment opportunities to 3.71 lakh persons. As per the information 
furnished by th e States, 824 Chemical Units have already been set up in these 
PCPIRs.  
 
Various projects have been executed in the PCPIRs and certain projects are in 
pipeline. The details of these projects are indicated at Annexure-I.  
  
Status of Anchor Unit at Andhra Pradesh: 
A consortium consisting of Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL) and Hindustan 
Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) was requested to examine the feasibility of 
setting up of a cracker and petroleum complex at Kakinada in Andhra Pradesh. A 
detailed feasibil ity report for setting up of a petrol chemical complex was also 
prepared by Engineers India Limited (EIL) in the year 2017. However, since the 
project was found to be financially, un -viable, the project could not materialize. 
Thereafter, renewed efforts we re made and in July 2021, Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas constituted a joint working group consisting of representatives from M/o 
Petroleum and Natural Gas, Govt of Andhra Pradesh, GAIL, HPCL and EIL to revisit 
the project. However, the project costs had further escalated as estimated by EIL and 

19 
 
Viability Gap Funding was required from the Government of Andhra Pradesh to 
ensure feasibility of the project. The issue is currently under deliberation.” 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
Quality Control Order 
 
2.13 The Committee have been informed that the Chemical sector is de -licensed 
and de-regulated except for few hazardous chemicals. Further, standards of majority 
of chemicals issued by Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), are voluntary in nature. In 
this regard th e Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals is stated to have taken 
measures to make BIS Standards mandatory for major chemicals and petrochemicals, 
so that both domestic manufacturers and overseas suppliers meet the BIS parameters 
so as to protect human, animal or plant health, safety of the environment, prevention 
of unfair trade practices and national security in terms of the provisions, under Section 
16 of BIS Act, 2016. Accordingly, the Standards of Chemicals and Petrochemicals are 
being made mandatory and Quality Control Orders (QCOs) are being notified in the 
Gazette of India. In this regard, the Committee note that as on date 26 Quality Control 
Orders for Chemicals and Petrochemicals have been made mandatory during the 
years 2022 -23, 2023 -24 and 2024 -25. Keeping in view the need of the hour for a 
stricter Quality Control regime, the Committee desire that the Department review the 
extant Quality Control Orders for Chemicals and Petrochemicals with a view to find 
out whether they are sufficient to curb t he growing menace of contamination and 
pollution that the present Society is facing in multifaceted ways.  The Committee may 
be apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
 
2.14 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as follows: 
 
 It is important to improve the quality of Chemicals/Petrochemicals produced in 
the country as well as to ensure that only quality chemicals are being placed in Indian 
Market. With this objective, the Department has already initiated a review to make the 
BIS Standards for Chemicals and Petrochemicals mandatory. This includes ensuring 
that both importers and domestic manufacturers adhere to the quality parameters set 
by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS). By requiring these products to bear the 
Standard Mark, which can only be obtained through a BIS license, this Department is 
creating a mechanism that enforces stringent quality control. This approach also 
prevents the entry of substandard and potentially harmful Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals into the country , particularly from sources that may not meet the 
existing BIS standards. To date, 75 Chemicals and Petrochemicals have been notified 
for making BIS Standards mandatory.  
 
 

20 
 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
Petrochemical Research and Innovation Commendation (PRIC) 
 
2.15 The Committee note that the Department is implementing an Award Scheme 
since the year 2010-11 to provide incentive for meritorious innovations and inventions 
in various fields of Petrochemical and downstream plastic processing industry. The 
Committee further note that the Department is popularizing the scheme to make the 
general public aware through advertisement in leading national newspapers both 
English and Hindi as well as in regional newspapers, websites of the Department as 
well as that of CIPET for vide popularity of the scheme besides development of the 
portal by CIPET for inviting nominations for the commendation.  The Committee were 
apprised that on the directions of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), only commendation 
certificates are being give n and cash awards have since been discontinued.  
Admittedly, the Department maintain a database of innovation based on which the 
awards are given and due recognition are generated by these awards on the 
innovations which provides awareness in the industry regarding these new 
technologies, facilitating collaboration and adoption of these innovations.  The 
Committee desire that more and more industrial applications may be made out of 
these innovations so that the actual benefits of these innovations are accru ed by the 
Sector. 
 
2.16 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as follows: 
 
These Awards have been given in various emerging areas such as innovations 
in machinery and equipment, emerging packaging technologies, innovation in 
processes and technology, innovation in technology management, polymer waste 
management and recycling tech nology, green polymeric materials, polymers in 
agriculture and water conservation etc. All these are areas of crucial importance to the 
industry and there is increasing demand for these technologies in the petrochemical 
and allied sector. 
 
The Department maintains the database of innovations based on which the 
awards are given each year. Receiving of these awards serves to provide due 
recognition to these innovations and provides awareness in the industry regarding 
these new technologies, fa cilitating possible collaboration and adoption of these 
innovations. Besides, many of these awards were given for innovations made in the 
industry itself and are already in practice. 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
Domestic Production of Petrochemicals 
 
2.17 On the question whether forecasted demand for the major petrochemicals will 

21 
 
be met for the year 2025, the Department apprised the Committee that the production 
capacity of major petrochemicals has witnessed sluggish growth over the past seven 
years, resulting in a projected reliance on imports to meet the demand for 2025. 
Keeping in view the fact that petrochemicals such as Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) and 
Acetic Acid recorded low domestic production rates of 28.4% and 12.57% respectively, 
the Committee seeks urgent attention of the Department to address this woeful 
situation. The Committee desire that necessary measures be undertaken to augment 
requisite capacity building in the Sector and also attract investment so as to bolster 
the domestic production of these key petrochemicals to reduce dependency on 
imports. The Committee also des ire that appropriate measures should also be taken 
to bridge the production gap in Polypropylene (25.4%), PE (31.3%), MEG (11.89%), 
Butyl Rubber/SBR (19.2%) and Butyl Acrylate (29.8%).  The Committee may be 
apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
 
2.18 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as follows: 
 
Petrochemical sector is delicensed & deregulated sector, driven by the market 
demand. The industry invests as per the market condition. Major Petrochemical’s players 
in India are Indian Oil, RIL, HMEL, HPL, GAIL, MCPI, and MRPL & BCPL and more than 
2600 KT of additional capacity was added in the major petrochemicals over the past 5 
years. The details are as under: 
 
Companies Capacity in KT 
HMEL Total:1700 KT (PP-500 KT, PE-1200 KT) 
Nayara PP-450KT 
Indorama PET-230 KT 
IOCL PP-200 KT 
 
Further for the 11 major Petrochemicals having capacity of 32.12 million tonnes 
(MMT); it is expected that their capacity will reach 48.63 MMT by 2030. The details 
are as follows: 
 
S. 
No. 
Product Present Capacity in 
KT (2025) 
Expected Capacity in 
KT (2030) 
1 LLDPE+HDPE+LDPE(PE) 7170 10870 
2 Polypropylene (PP) 7050 11120 
3 Purified Terephthalic acid (PTA) 6440 8962 
4 Polyester Staple Fibre (PSF) 2857 5872 
5 Ethylene Glycol (MEG) 2705 2705 
6 Poly Ethylene Terephthalate (PET) 2541 2541 
7 Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) 1672 4872 
8 SBR/Butyl Rubber 649 649 

22 
 
9 Phthalic Anhydride 530 530 
10 Butyl Acrylate 340 340 
11 Acetic Acid 166 166 
 Total 32120 48627 
 
In this regard, the details of some upcoming investments already announced 
are as under: 
 
Product Upcoming capacities 
PVC Total: 3200 KT capacity expansion by Reliance (1200KT), 
Adani (1000KT), IOCL (700KT) and Chemplast & Sanmer(300 
KT) in 2026 
PP Total Expansion in Capacity: 4070 KT by petrochemical 
companies. • IOCL (1630 KT), 
• BPCL (900 KT)  
• GAIL (560 KT),  
• HRRL 980 KT 
PE Total Expansion in Capacity: 3700 KT (IOCL 1450 KT, BPCL 
1250 KT and HRRL 1000 KT) 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
Hazardous Effects of Chemical Industry 
 
2.19 The Committee observe that as regards the outcomes of the FSSAI project on 
Micro- and Nano-Plastics as Emerging Food Contaminants sought by the Committee, 
the Department has merely stated that comments from FSSAI has been sought that 
the response is still pending. Keeping in view the growing concerns over microplastic 
contamination in food caused by food packaging, the Committee desire that the 
Department of Petrochemicals and FSSAI come out with stringent regulations 
requiring packaged drinking water/food manufacturers to display the safety limits of 
exposure of the food in terms of minimum as well as maximum tolerance temperature 
limits besides the usual shelf life of the food product.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress and findings on the matter. 
 
2.20 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as follows: 
 
The issue has been forwarded to the FSSAI for further necessary action. 
 
FSSAI has launched an innovative project to combat the critical issue of 
microplastic contamination in food. Recognizing  the growing threat posed by 

23 
 
microplastic pollution, the project, titled “Micro- and Nano-Plastics as Emerging Food 
Contaminants: Establishing Validated Methodologies and Understanding the 
Prevalence in Different Food Matrices,” has been launched in March 2024. It focuses 
on developing and validating advanced analytical techniques for detecting micro- and 
nano-plastics in various food products. Moreover, it aims to evaluate the prevalence 
and exposure levels of these contaminants across India, paving the way for 
evidence-based strategies to mitigate risks and safeguard public health. 
 
i. Institutions Involved in the project: 
• CSIR – Indian Institute of Toxicology Research (IITR), Lucknow 
• ICAR – Central Institute of Fisheries Technology (CIFT), Kerala 
• Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani, Rajasthan 
ii. Specific Objectives of the Project: 
• Development and validation of analytical methods for identification and 
quantification of micro/nano plastics in foods matrices  
• Inter- and intra -laboratory comparison of developed methods in identified in 
foods matrices  
• Survey study to determine the levels of micro/nano plastics in identified foods 
matrices  
iii. Project Timeline: The project is scheduled to be completed within two years. 
Status of the Project: The methods have been optimized and developed, and 
are currently undergoing method validation at both inter -laboratory and intra -
laboratory levels 
  

24 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
  
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation No. 3)  
Setting Up of Plastic Parks 
 
4.1 The Committee note that the scheme of Plastic Parks was formulated way back 
in the year 2011 and so far 10 Plastic Parks have been approved and are stated to be 
at different levels of Implementation. The Committee are, however, pained to note that 
the laud able objectives of the Plastic Parks viz. to consolidate and synergise the 
capacities of downstream Plastic industry to help increase investment production, 
exports and employment generation stood defeated as none of the Plastic Park is fully 
functional. In the case of Plastic Parks at Tamot, Madhya Pradesh, only 26 Plots out 
of 172 could be allotted; in the case of Plastic Parks at Tinsukia, Assam, only 66 Plots 
out of 104 could be allotted, in the case of Plastic Parks at Bilaua, Madhya Pradsh, 
only 02 plots out of 107 could be allotted; and in cases of Plastic Parks at Deoghar, 
Jharkhand; Thirmuallan, Tamil Nadu;  Sarora, Chhattisgarh; and Ganjimutt, Karnataka 
having 102, 65, 48 and 53 number of plots respectively, no plots could be allotted. The 
Committee are even more concerned to observe the monumental challenge faced by 
the Department in populating the Plastic Parks.  The Committee are of the considered 
view that the optimal delivery of the Plastic Parks as envisaged would happen only by 
incentivizing industrial entities to set up their units in the Plastic Parks. The Committee 
are, therefore, perturbed to note inordinate delays in the delivery mechanism for 
making all the Plastic Parks fully functional. The Department has submitted that the 
implementation of the Plastic Parks is largely dependent on the Special Purpose 
Vehicles (SPVs) set up by the State Governments or their agencies and progress of 
the Plastic Parks is dependent on the State Governments. The Committee are of the 
view that the Department cannot shy away from their bounden duty to coordinate with 
the respective State Governments for expeditiously making the Plastic Parks fully 
functional as envisaged in the ‘New Schemes of Petrochemicals’ of the Department. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should draw up a timeline 
for effective coordination with the respective State Governments to iron out the 
constraints and challenges faced. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken 
in the matter.     
 
4.2 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as follows: 
 
The Scheme for Setting up of Plastic Parks promotes setting up of need-based 

26 
 
Plastic Parks with requisite infrastructure and enabling common facilities. The creation 
of infrastructure was impacted by various local factors. Besides, the work during 2020-
22 was also impacted to varying degrees due to the pandemic. 
 
The Department has been regularly monitoring the implementation of the 
various projects, including through site visits, review meetings as well as regular 
progress reports submitted by the SPVs. Best efforts are being made to ensure timely 
completion of th e projects and to populate the Parks at the earliest. Based on the 
efforts made, significant progress in terms of infrastructure development has been 
made in these Plastic Park projects. 
 
In Jharkhand, the compound wall, road network, storm water drainage, 
internal sewerage system, street lighting, warehouse, administrative complex have all 
been completed between 2022 to 2024. In Assam, the work on site office has been 
completed and signifi cant work in the common facilities has been completed in the 
past 2 years. There has also been improvement in terms of allotment of plots in the 
Plastic Parks. The allotment in Assam has increased from 46 plots in August, 2023 to 
66 plots in December, 2024 . Similarly, the allotment in Tamot has increased from 18 
plots in August, 2023 to 26 plots in December, 2024. In Gorakhpur, 58 of the 92 plots 
have been allotted. 
 
The Government (including State Governments) has tried to provide all 
possible incentives to the industry for locating in these Parks. 
 
• The Chhattisgarh Government provides several incentives including fixed 
capital investment subsidy, electricity duty exemption, stamp duty exemption, 
training cost reimbursement, employment subsidy, project report subsidy, 
quality certification subsidy etc. for industrial units. The SPV has received intent 
from more than 50 plastic based units for land allocation. 
• In the Karnataka Plastic Park, more than 50% of the infrastructure work is 
completed, and the remaining is likely to be completed by June, 2025. About 
30 manufacturers have expressed interest in investing in the Plastic Park. 
• The process of land allotment in the Jharkhand Plastic Park Limited has been 
initiated, under which they have so far received 36 applications for allotment of 
land. They are also participating in various events to populate the Plastic Park 
at Deoghar, including road shows etc. 
• The Bilaua Plastic Park is making efforts to populate the Park at the earliest 
including marketing and awareness campaigns, industry promotion campaign, 
industry-specific trade shows and events. Several financial incentives are also 
being offered for industrial units. 
• The Tamot Plastic Park has completed the process of infrastructure creation 
and is implementing an aggressive marketing strategy and participating in 
major plastic exhibitions to reach out to potential investors. Industrial Conclaves 
and road shows are being organised by the State Government. A proposal to 

27 
 
reduce land premium and development charges for the Plastic Park is under 
consideration by the State Government. 
• The basic infrastructure in the Assam Plastic Park has been completed. The 
AIDC has provided land at a discounted rate and has constructed 15 industrial 
sheds which provide ready-to-use factory spaces to attract smaller players. The 
State Government has pr ovided subsidies on land and capital investment as 
per the Industrial Investment Policy of Assam, 2023. It has also provided tax 
holidays, GST exemptions, or deferred tax payments for a fixed period. It has 
conducted various roadshows, seminars, and worksh ops targeting both 
domestic and international investors. 
 
The Department has been making constant efforts to ensure timely 
implementation of the project including review meetings, site visits and written 
communications. D.O. letters have been written to the Chief Secretaries of the 
respective States requesting fo r expeditious implementation of the projects. The 
projects are being duly monitored by the Department officials, including through site 
visits. In the past one year, 5 of the 10 Plastic Parks have been visited by senior 
officials of the Department. Based on the efforts made, the pace of allotment in many 
of the Parks has picked up and the implementing agencies are confident of making 
the requisite allotments in the near future. It is expected that the process of 
infrastructure creation would be completed by  June, 2025 and thereafter, the Plastic 
Parks would get populated at the earliest. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
Centres of Excellence (CoEs) 
 
4.3 The Committee note that the Scheme of CoEs seeks to provide grant-in-aid to 
educational and research Institutes to improve existing technology and promote 
development of new applications. Further, the CoEs are set up with an aim to help in 
development of new products, new applications, innovation and improvement of 
technology, process innovation, quality and environmentally sustainable development. 
The Scheme of CoEs was earlier restricted to Petrochemicals but now the Scheme 
has been expanded to include the Chemical sector too. The Committee have been 
apprised that as on date, 18 CoEs have been approved. The Department reviews the 
requirements of the Sector and accords approval for new CoEs based on the needs 
of the industry and the quality of research proposals received. Keeping in view the 
laudable objectives of the CoEs, the Committee opine that only 18 CoEs for the entire 
Country seems to be inadequate and the number needs further augmentation. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Department may come forth with a roadmap on 
CoEs for the ent ire nation to bring the R&D and technology in Chemical and 

28 
 
Petrochemical Sector on par with other developed nations. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
4.4 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as follows: 
 
The Department implements a Scheme for setting up Centres of Excellence 
(CoEs) under the New Scheme of Petrochemicals. This Scheme is being implemented 
since 2011 and 11 CoEs had been approved up to September, 2021. The Standing 
Finance Committee (SFC), in its meeting held on 25 th October, 2021, recommended 
continuation of the New Scheme of Petrochemicals upto FY 2025 -26, with a total 
proposed financial outlay of Rs. 270.75 crore, to complete all pending Plastic Parks 
including pending CoEs and 11 new CoEs. Subsequent to this decision, 2 more CoEs 
were approved by the Department in February, 2022. Thereafter, a comprehensive 
review of the CoEs was undertaken to make the scheme more effective. Based on the 
feedback and learnings, the Scheme Guidelines were revised in May, 2024 and 5 new 
CoEs were approved in September, 2024, taking th e total number of approved CoEs 
to 18. 
 
The CoEs are undertaking pioneering research in their chosen fields. These 
centres have so far filed 44 patents, published 173 research papers and have 
developed 22 new products/ technologies. They have also served to resolve some of 
the research challenges being faced in the sector and have successfully transferred 
some of their technologies/ products for application in the industry. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
New Schemes of Petrochemicals (NSPs) 
 
4.5 The Committee note with concern that the actual expenditure under the New 
Schemes of Petrochemicals has reduced to Rs. 18.00 Crore in the year 2023-24 from 
Rs. 51.12 crore in the year 2021-22. The RE of New Schemes of Petrochemicals has 
also declined to Rs. 25.00 Crore in the year 2024-25 from Rs. 51.13 crore in the year 
2021-22. The BE too has declined to Rs. 22.00 crore in the year 2023 -24 from Rs. 
53.73 crore in the year 2021 -22. The Department cited the same reason that it has 
adopted the single Central Nodal Agency (CNA) system for release of funds, according 
to which funds are to be released to the implementing agencies on a just-in-time basis. 
As regards the Physical targets under NSP, the Committee are perturbed to note that 
targets set for the years 2023-24 and 2024-25 was ‘NIL.’ The Committee was apprised 
that when the Standing Finance Committee (SFC)’s recommendation for setting up of 
05 Plastic Parks was sent to the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, it 

29 
 
was suggested that the proposal be brought before them after completion of the 
ongoing projects and also when their output as well as outcomes become clear. The 
Committee are dismayed to observe that the non-completion of ongoing Plastic Parks 
Projects and delays in their output/outcomes have affected the approval and disbursal 
of funds for new targets set. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department should streamline its existing machinery with an overall objective to 
obviate scope for such negative eventualities.   
 
4.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as follows: 
 
 The Department implements the New Scheme of Petrochemicals under which 
funds are released to the implementing agencies i.e. Plastic Parks and Centres of 
Excellence (CoEs), based on achievement of specified milestones. 
 
In March, 2022, the D/o Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, Government of India 
issued guidelines prescribing the revised procedure for flow of funds under Central 
Sector Schemes. Given the various steps required in implementation of this 
procedure, due funds could not be release during 2022-23 and the utilization was Rs. 
24.22 crore against the RE of Rs. 29 crore. In 2023-24, efforts were made for efficient 
implementation of the revised procedure for flow of funds, and the single Central Nodal 
Agency (CNA) s ystem was adopted. Full efforts were made to ensure utilization of 
funds based on which the entire RE of Rs. 18 crore was released. 
 
Based on the recommendations of the Committee, the Department is regularly 
monitoring the implementation of the projects and the utilization of the funds released, 
including through site visits, review meetings as well as through regular progress 
reports submitted by the implementing agencies. Based on the same, an amount of 
Rs. 18.55 crore has been released upto till date. Further, the allocated budget for the 
Scheme has been increased from Rs. 25 in BE to Rs. 33.50 crore in RE. Best efforts 
are being made to ensure timely completion of the projects and optimal utilization of 
funds. 
With regard to the completion of the Plastic Park projects, it is submitted that 
the creation of infrastructure was impacted by various local factors. Besides, the work 
during 2020-22 was also impacted to varying degrees due to the pandemic. However, 
the D epartment has been regularly monitoring the implementation of the various 
projects, including through site visits, review meetings as well as regular progress 
reports submitted by the SPVs. Best efforts are being made to ensure timely 
completion of the pro jects and to populate the Parks at the earliest. Based on the 
efforts made, significant progress in terms of infrastructure development has been 
made in these Plastic Park projects. 
 
The Department has been making constant efforts to ensure timely 
implementation of the project including review meetings, site visits and written 

30 
 
communications. D.O. letters have been written to the Chief Secretaries of the 
respective States requesting for expeditious implementation of the projects. The 
projects are being duly monitored by the Department officials, including through site 
visits. In  the past one year, 5 of the 10 Plastic Parks have been visited by senior 
officials of the Department. Based on the efforts made, the pace of allotment in many 
of the Parks has picked up and the implementing agencies are confident of making 
the requisite a llotments in the near future. It is expected that the process of 
infrastructure creation would be completed by June, 2025 and thereafter, the Plastic 
Parks would get populated at the earliest. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
Institute of Pesticides Formulation Technology (IPFT) 
 
4.7 The Committee note that the fund utilization of IPFT is appreciable  and it has 
been able to utilize the whole amount allocated to it viz. RE for the year 2021-22, 2022-
23 and 2023-24 which was Rs, 11.50 Crore, Rs. 11.04 Crore and Rs. 14.12 crore were 
fully utilized. The Committee expect that IPFT should keep its good track of fund 
utilization in the year 2024-25 too and also in the ensuing financial years. Admittedly, 
IPFT, is dedicated to work in the area of pesticide formulation and development of bio-
botanical pesticides and their formulations. The Committee were appris ed that to 
augment the working strength of IPFT, recruitment of 05 post is stated to be in 
progress. The Committee desire that good work of the IPFT should not be allowed to 
suffer because of vacancies at any level. The Committee, therefore, desire that th e 
vacancies should be filled up expeditiously. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the steps taken by the IPFT and the Department in this regard.  
 
4.8 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as follows: 
 
All efforts will be made by IPFT for effective utilization of fund s. With regard to 
the working strength it is informed that the recruitment process of 05 posts of various 
category in IPFT is initiated as per the Rules. All the posts were notified to be filled up 
on Contractual -Consolidated Salary /Deputation basis in August, 2024 . The 
recruitment process for the post of Dy. Chief (Bioscience) and Establishment Officer 
has been completed. No candidate was found suitable for the post of Dy. Chief 
(Bioscience). For the post of Establishment Officer a candidate has been finalised on 
Deputation basis. The select ion process for the remaining three (3) posts is being 
completed on priority basis 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 

31 
 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
Hazardous Effects of Chemical Industry 
 
4.9 The Committee note that a detailed note on the contamination caused to the 
River Lukha located in Jaintia Hills District of Meghalaya State due to cement factories 
located in the area was sought from the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
(DCPC). The Committee are, however, dismayed that the Department in their reply 
have merely stated that the inputs have been sought and will be furnished on receipt 
of the same.  The Committee desire that the matter may be taken up with due 
seriousness considering the gravity of the issue and the health hazards that it poses 
to inhabitants as well as to the ecosystem.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that a detailed note on the contamination of the River ‘Lukha’ may be furnished to the 
Committee, after an Indepe ndent Enquiry into Reports of deadly contamination by 
chemical waste from Cement Factories which resulted in death of Fishes and the River 
turning blue, is conducted in consultation/association with the local Members of 
Parliament and the State Pollution Control Board.  The Committee also desire that in 
future, representatives of the affected people in the region, more specifically the local 
Member of Parliament may be kept in the loop on all matters concerning this grave 
and serious issue of contamination and its deleterious effects of River Lukha in the 
Jaintia Hills of Meghalaya State.  The Committee may be apprised of the action taken 
in the matter within a period of three months of presentation of this Report to the 
House. 
 
4.10 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as follows: 
 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals took up the matter with the 
Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change (MEF&CC) for seeking a detailed 
note on the contamination caused to the River Lukha located in Jaintia Hills District of 
Meghalaya State due to cement factories located in the area. 
 
In this regard, Meghalaya State Pollution Borad  has furnished a report on the 
Water Quality Status of river flowing across the cement factories. The report has 
concluded the following: 
 
“Based on the data reported, it was observed that the pH is 7.2 at Lukha River, 
Sonapur and 8.0 at Ummutha stream, CMCL, Lumshnong in the normal range. The 
concentration of other parameters was observed to be comparatively low. The water 
quality at both th e water bodies was satisfactory with reference to the Water Quality 
criteria for Bathing (ph 6.5 -8.5, BOD 3.0 mg/l or less, DO 5.0 mg/l or more, FC -
2500MPN/100ml).” 
A copy of the report is enclosed at Annexure-II.  
 
Further, Meghalaya State Pollution Control Board has informed the following: 
In East Jaintia Hills District, Cement factories were started since 2004. It may be 
informed that there are 10 (ten) cement industries operating in East Jaintia Hills 

32 
 
District. The Consent for establish/operate were granted by the Meghalaya State 
Pollution Control Board under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 
1974 and the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 upon submission and 
proper scrutiny of all requisite documents, NOC's etc. 
 
(f) Control of Air Pollution 
It may be mentioned that for control of air pollution, cement units have installed the 
following devices: 
(iv) Bag Filters 
(v) Reverse Air Bag House 
(vi) Electro Static Precipitators 
 
(g) Waste Water Treatment 
For the waste water generated from the unit, following devices are installed 
(iii) For Trade Effluent (emerging from Industries)- Effluent Treatment Plant. 
(iv) For Sewage-Sewage Treatment Plant 
 
(h) Solid Waste Management: 
For Solid waste management, the units are taking the following measures: 
(iii) Adequate facility is created for collection, storage, transportation, 
treatment & disposal of Municipal Solid Waste generated from the 
Residential Colony and Industry (non-hazardous industrial solid waste). 
(iv) Adequate system is being adopted for reduction of waste generation and 
enhancement of re-utilization & recycling of waste materials. 
 
(i) Hazardous Waste Management Treatment 
For hazardous waste management, the units are taking the following measures: 
Appropriate facility is created and maintained for handling, storage, treatment & 
disposal of Hazardous waste generate from the industry in accordance to the 
provisions of the Hazardous & Other Wastes (Management & Transboundary 
Movement) Rules, 2016 including Notifications, Guidelines issued there under. 
 
(j) Pollution Monitoring: 
Meghalaya State Pollution Control Board has also entrusted Knowledge Lens 
Pvt. Ltd. with the job of providing Real Time Continuous Emission Monitoring System 
from all the cement and thermal power plants units in Meghalaya. Keeping up with the 
current Government norms and applying the latest technologies, all the industries data 
pertaining to Emission Monitoring and Air Quality Monitoring using various instruments 
available in the market, is being captured and transmitted to the Meghalaya State 
Pollution Control Board and Central Pollution Control Board. 
 
The pollution data pertaining to Emission and Air Quality is directly captured from 
different type of instruments installed at the industries and the data is transmitted to 
the Meghalaya State Pollution Control Board and Central Pollution Control Board 

33 
 
using dedicated internet connection. The Meghalaya State Pollution Control Board can 
view the data of all the industries present in Meghalaya State connected to the single 
server platform. 
 
Alarms are generated and sent to the Board as well as industries in case there 
is a breach of prescribed level of pollutants being discharged into the environment. 
Data validation is being regularly carried by the Board to prevent any manipulations. 
Apart from the single server platform, the Board has provided a separate URL for 
public viewing of the real time data as per the Hon'ble Supreme Court’s order which 
can be viewed on Meghalaya Pollution Control Board website. If any violation by any 
cement industry is found, action is taken against them as per relevant Acts and Rules. 
    
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.19 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
  

34 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
- Nil – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
18 AUGUST, 2025 CHAIRPERSON, 
27 SHRAVAN, 1946 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
  

35 
 
APPENDIX I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2024-25) 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SIXTH SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 18th August, 202 5 from 1 500 hrs.  
to 1700 hrs. in the Committee Room ‘2’, EPHA, New Delhi. 
  
PRESENT 
 
     SHRI AZAD KIRTI JHA -    CHAIRPERSON 
 
     MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
6. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
7. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
8. Shri Praveen Patel  
9. Dr. Sambit Patra  
10. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
11. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
12. Shri Eatala Rajender 
13. Shri Nalin Soren 
14. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
15. Shri Subhash Barala 
16. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
17. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
18. Shri Naresh Bansal 
19. Shri Sanjay Raut 

36 
 
20. Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy 
21. Shri Arun Singh 
22. Shri Tejveer Singh 
  
SECRETARIAT  
4. Smt. Maya Lingi   - Joint Secretary 
5. Ms. Miranda Ingudam            - Director 
6. Shri Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
7. Shri Nagendra Suman  - Deputy Secretary 
8. Shri Panna Lal   - Deputy Secretary 
9. Shri Abhishek Kumar  -  Deputy Director 
10. Ms. Neelam Bhave   - Under Secretary 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the  
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration, the following Draft  
Reports:  
(i)    XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  
(ii) Tenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024 -25)’ 
pertaining to the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
(iii) XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  
(iv) XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  
(v) XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  
(vi) XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  
(vii) XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  
(viii) XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  
 
 
3. Giving an overview of the important Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the draft Reports, the Chairperson solicited the views/suggestions of the Members. 
 
4.      After some deliberations the Committee decided to Adopt five (05) Draft Reports 
viz, 03 ATRs and 02 subject Reports i.e, the Ninth, Tenth, Eleventh, Twelfth and 
Thirteenth draft Reports. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize 
the Reports and present/lay the Reports in the ongoing Session in both the Houses of 
Parliament.  
 
5.  The Committee decided to consider Draft Report No. Fifteenth and Sixteenth 
for adoption in the next Sitting of the Committee to be held on 19.08.2025 at 1600 hrs. 
onwards. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

37 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION  TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED  IN THE FOURTH REPORT 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING  COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (202 4-25) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2024-25)’ PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS ANDPETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
Total No. of Recommendations 15 
I. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
1. (Sl. Nos. 1,2,6,7,8,10,11,12,13 and 14)  
 
10 
Percentage of Total: 66.67% 
II. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not like to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
NIL 
 
00 
Percentage of Total:  0% 
III. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies given by 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:  
(Sl. Nos. 3,4,5,9 and 15)  
 
 
05 
Percentage of Total: 33.33%  
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final replies of 
the Government are still awaited:  
NIL 
 
00 
Percentage of Total:  0%  
 
 
 