i 
 
 
 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2024-25)  
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
      MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
      (DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 2024-25’ of the Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
AUGUST, 2025/ SHRAVAN, 1947 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
11 

ii 
 
CC&F NO. 191 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2024-25) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 2024-25’ of the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20 August, 2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20 August, 2025 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
AUGUST, 2025/ SHRAVAN, 1947 (SAKA) 
 


iii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25) (iv)  
Introduction (v) 
Chapter-I Report 1 
Chapter-II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies  
 
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
 
Chapter-V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 
APPENDICES  
I Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2024-25) held on 18th August, 2025. 
 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report  
(18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers on ‘Demands for Grants 2024 -25’ of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals). 
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2024-25) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Dr. Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
21. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Subhash Barala 
23. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
24. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
25. Shri Naresh Bansal 
26. Shri Sanjay Raut 
27. Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy 
28. Dr. Kalpana Saini 
29. Shri Arun Singh 
30. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
31. Shri Tejveer Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Smt. Maya Lingi   - Joint Secretary 
2.   Ms. Miranda Ingudam  - Director 
3.  Shri Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
4.  Smt. Neelam Bhave  - Under Secretary 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2024-25) having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this  
Eleventh Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 2024 -25’ pertaining to the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals). 
2.  The Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya Sabha on 
16th December, 2024. The Department of Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers furnished their replies on 16 th March, 2025 indicating Action Taken on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report . The Committee 
considered and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on 18th August, 2025. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
18 August, 2025 CHAIRPERSON, 
27 Shravan, 1947 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
REPORT 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with 
action-taken by the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) on observations/recommendations contained in the ir Fifth Report 
(18th Lok Sab ha) on ' Demands for Grants (2024 -25)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals). 
1.2 The F ifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on              
16th December, 2024. It contained 33 Observations/Recommendations. The Action 
Taken Replies of Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been 
received and categorized as follows: 
 (i)  Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
 Government: 
  Rec.Para  Sl. No. 2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,22,23,24,25,26 
           27,28,29,30,31,32,33     
    
            (Total=28) 
  These are included in Chapter II of the Report.            
(ii)  Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire   
 to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
 Rec. Para No.    -NIL-          (Total=0) 
 These are included in Chapter III of the Report.             
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of w hich replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committe e which  require 
reiteration: 
  Rec. Para No.  1,10,11,20,21                               (Total =5)          
  These are included in Chapter IV of the Report.  
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
  Rec. Para No.  -NIL-      (Total = 0)  
  These are included in Chapter V of the Report.  

2 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that  the Action Taken Statement  on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report may be 
furnished to them at the earliest. 
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with action -taken by the Government on  some of 
their Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
PROPOSED AND APPROVED ALLOCATION FOR THE YEAR 2024-25 
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA  NO. 1) 
  
1.5 “The Committee note that the Department sought an amount of Rs.4089.95 crore 
for the financial year 2024 -25. The Committee find consistent decline in funds allocated 
for various schemes/programmes run by the Department viz. For promotion of Bulk 
Drug Parks, Rs. 1,000.00 crore out of Rs. 1,352.00 crore sought; For Promotion of 
Medical Devices Parks, Rs. 150.00 crore out of Rs. 156.89 crore sought; For Human 
Resource Development in Medical Devices Sector  (HRD) Rs.50.00 crore out of 
Rs.98.00 crore sought; For Assistance to Medical Device Cluster for Common Facilities 
(AMD-CF),Rs.40.00crore out of Rs.191.00 crore sought; and Consumer Awareness 
Publicity and Price Monitoring Rs. 4.00 crore out of Rs.6.00 crore sought. The 
Committee are perturbed to note that for Promotion of Research and Innovation in 
Pharma Med-Tech (PRIP), the allocation sought by the Department has been reduced 
by 50 percent. In this case, the allocation has been reduced to Rs.75.00 crore from 
Rs.150.00 crore sought by the Department. The Committee desire to be apprised of the 
reasons for reduced allocation of funds in each of the schemes/programmes being run 
by the Department and impact on their implementation. The Committee recommend that 
the Department should analyse the reasons for reduced allocation of funds in these 
Schemes and initiate corrective measures therein.” 
 
1.6 The Department in their Action Taken Replies has submitted as follows: 
“The expected release under some schemes could not be made primarily due to 
lesser demand in infrastructure schemes on account of difficulties faced in successful 
completion of procurement processes, obtaining environmental and other 

3 
 
clearances/approvals, non -fulfilment of targeted achievements by beneficiary 
companies to be eligible to claim incentives. 
The financial targets under the Scheme for Promotion of Medical Device Parks 
were not achieved due to non -submission of utilisation certificates by the selected 
States, despite follow - up. As a result, funds could not be released in past years. 
However, all approved State implementing agencies have now awarded tenders for civil 
construction of Common Infrastructure Facility buildings and work has started. Tenders 
for equipment to be installed in these buildings are at various stages of procurement. 
The second instalment is expected to be released within March 2025, upon due 
verification of requisite documents and submission of utilisation certificate for the first 
instalment. 
Under the Capacity building and Skill development in Medical Device Sector 
scheme (formerly known as the Human Resource Development in Medical Devices 
Sector schemes), in - principle approval has been granted to 13 applicants for two -year 
degree or one -year postgraduate diploma courses and to five applicants for short -term 
certificate courses. These courses are expected to commence from the academic year 
2025-2026, and release of funds will be on reimbursement basis, i.e., the fund will be 
released once claim is submitted by the approved applicant. An amount of ₹ 0.90 crore 
has so far been utilised for payment towards professional fee of the project 
management agency. 
Under the Scheme for Common Facilities for Medical Device Clusters, Budget 
Estimate (BE) for the financial year (FY) 2024 -25 was ₹40 crore, which was reduced to 
₹ 25 crore. This scheme was earlier known as the Assistance to Medical Device Cluster 
for Common Facilities scheme, and had provision for establishment of facilities for 
testing of medical devices and common facilities for manufacturing of medical devices. 
So far, six applicants have been selected to establish six testing facilities and four 
applicants have been selected to establish four common facilities for manufacturing of 
medical devices in the country. In-principle approval have been conveyed to all selected 
applicants between December 2024 to January 2025, and steps have been taken for 
opening of requisite Central Nodal Agency account to enable release of funds. 

4 
 
Further, under the new umbrella scheme of Strengthening of Medical Device 
Industry, launched on 8.11.2024, in -principle approval has been granted for proposals 
received under two sub-schemes, namely, the Capacity Building and Skill Development 
in the Medical Device Sector sub -scheme and the Common Facilities for Medical 
Device Clusters sub -scheme. For the selected applicants for the Common Facilities for 
Medical Device Clusters sub -scheme, the first instalment is expected to be released 
within March 2025, after due verification of requisite documents as per criteria specified 
in the scheme guidelines.”  
 
1.7. The Committee  had noted that  the Department  had sought  an amount of 
Rs. 4089.95 crore for the financial year 2024 -25. The Committee also  noted that  
there has been a significant reduction in the funds allocated for various schemes 
and programs run by the Department, including the Promotion of Bulk Drug 
Parks, Promotion of Medical Devices Parks, Human Resource Development in the 
Medical Devices Sector, Assistance to Medical Device Clusters for Common 
Facilities, and Consumer Awareness Publicity and Price Monitoring. The 
Department   in their Action Taken Notes has submitted that  the expected  
release under some schemes could not be made primarily due to lesser demand 
in infrastructure schemes on account of difficulties faced in successful 
completion of procurement processes, obtaining environmental and other 
clearances/approvals, non -fulfilment of targeted achievements by beneficiary 
companies to be eligible to claim incentives.  Further  the financial targets under 
the Scheme for Promotion of Medical Device Parks were not achieved due to non -
submission of utilisation certificates by the selected States, despite  follow up.  
The Committee are of the view that the se issues were well under the  
administrative control of the Department  and should be resolved  expeditiously 
by the Department in consultation  with the concerned  
organizations/agencies/State Governments.  The Committee ,  therefore, 
recommend  that necessary steps  be initiated  by the Department  in this regard  
and the  Committe e  be apprised  accordingly to address the issues of reduced 
allocations to several challenges, including lower demand for infrastructure due 
to procurement difficulties, delays in obtaining necessary environmental 
clearances and non -fulfillment of targeted achievements by beneficiary 

5 
 
companies that are pre -requisites for claiming incentives . The Committee 
recommend that the Department ought to  conduct a thorough analysis of the 
factors leading to decreased fund allocation and implement corrective measures, 
viz. streamlining the procurement process, improving communication with State 
implementing agencies to ensure timely submiss ion of utilization certificates and 
timely completion of projects.  The Committee may be apprised of the reasons for 
reduction in allocation of funds  and the steps taken by the Department to ensure 
optimum utilization of resources. 
1.7 A  The Committee  are also  concerned to observe that BE for Financial 
Year 2024-25 which stood at Rs.40 crore  was reduced  to Rs.25 crore in respect 
of the ‘Scheme for Common Facilities for Medical Devices Clusters’ which was 
hitherto known as ‘Assistance to Medical Devices cluster for common facilities  
Scheme.’ Keeping in view the important target of the scheme viz. establishment 
of facilities  for testing of medical devices and common facilities  for 
manufacturing  of medical devices, the Committee are of the considered  view 
that reduction in the R.E. stage was apparently  due to the inherent  inefficiencies  
of the Department which would have definitely  impacted the implementation of 
the Scheme.  The Department’s reply that steps have since been taken  for 
opening of requisite Central Nodal Agency Account to enable release of funds 
also indicate the unpreparedness of the Department where action appears  to 
have been initiated  only at the fag end of the financial year a nd at the last 
quarter.  The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
SHOW CAUSE NOTICES ISSUED TO JAKS 
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA No. 10) 
 
1.8 “The Committee are happy to note that about 42 Marketing Officers of PMBI are 
stated to have been deputed in different States / UTs to handle complaints of 
malpractice. Admittedly, Show Cause Notices are also issued for violating Pradhan 
Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) norms resulting in a warning or 
cancellation in case of any confirmed malpractices. The Committee, however, desire 

6 
 
that the number of complaints received and resolved by the 42 Marketing Officers of 
PMBI during the last three years and also the number of Show Cause Notices issued 
under the Scheme including the number of warnings issued or cancellation for 
confirmed cases of malpractices found in JAKs may be furnished alongwith the analysis 
of the effectiveness of the extant monitoring system of JAKs. 
. 
1.9 The Department in their Action Taken Replies has submitted as follows: 
 
“During the financial year2022 -23 and 2024 -25, over 1,200, 1,500 and 1,800 show 
cause notices were respectively issued, with directions to remove violations and comply 
with conditions of the agreement. In case of repeated violations, PMBI takes steps to 
cancel the allotment of the Jan Aushadhi Kendra (JAK) concerned or to withhold its 
incentives for a specific period until the violation is resolved. There is effective 
monitoring of JAKs, and complaints are given priority for resolution.  
 Financial year wise details of show cause notices issued and JAKs closed are 
as under:  
S.No. FY No. of Show Cause notice 
issued to JAKs 
JAKs Closed 
1 2021-22 1349 191 
2 2022-23 1284 252 
3 2023-24 1539 611 
4 2024-25 1839 267 
Total 6011 1321 
 
 
1.10. The Committee had noted in their recommendation that  42 Marketing 
Officers of PMBI are stated to have been deputed in different States / UTs to 
handle complaints of malpractice form . The Committee observe  that the 
issuance of Show Cause Notices to Jan Aushadhi Kendras (JAKs) has shown an 
alarming upward trend over the past few years, with a total of 6,011 notices 

7 
 
issued from the year 2021-22 to  the year  2024-25. This escalation in notices 
correlates with the significant number of JAK closures, which  too has risen to 
267 from 191 in the year 2021 -2022. The Committee are  concerned about the 
increasing number  of both Show Cause Notices and JAK s closures which 
indicates persistent malpractices and a need for stringent check of  Pradhan 
Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) norms. The Committee 
therefore, recommend that  a more robust and effective monitoring system  for 
JAKs network be put in place so as to obviate scope for such malpractices. 
  
INCLUSION OF ESSENTIAL MEDICINES FOR TB AND MENTAL ILLNESSES 
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 11) 
 
 
1.11 “The Committee note that important medicines/injections like Benzylpenicillin, 
Atropine, Streptomycin, used for treatment of tuberculosis, mental ailments, are not 
available at JAKs and only Atropine Sulphate injection is procured as per demand and 
supplied to selected JAKs. The Committee were apprised that Benzylpenicillin and 
Streptomycin injection are not part of PMBJP product basket and are not at all procured. 
Further, tuberculosis medicines are also not part of PMBJP product basket as there is a 
separate TB Programme of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to provide free 
medicines for TB patients under TB Eradication Plan. The Committee observe that the 
capacity of JAKs need further augmentation and feasibility studies for bringing these life 
saving drugs for TB or Mental illnesses into the PMBJP Product Basket may be carried 
out. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department make efforts towards 
requisite augmentation of JAKs so that they become a one stop place for all kinds of 
medicines for the common people.”  
 
1.12. The Department in their Action Taken Replies has submitted as follows: 
“The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been taken note of. 
PMBI, as part of its continuous process of augmenting the product basket under Jan 

8 
 
Aushadhi, would review whether any more additions may be done. Insofar as Benzyl 
Penicillin is concerned, it is informed that it was earlier available in the PMBI basket, but 
due to low demand and no sales, its procurement was discontinued. For anti -
tuberculosis (TB) medicines, TB Mukt Bharat Abhiyan was launched in the year 2021 
and registration of all TB patients was done under a separate campaign by the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare with the aim of providing free medicines. PMBI surveyed 
more than 100 JAKs and decided not to include anti -TB medicines due to low demand 
and the free availability under the aforementioned campaign. It is further informed that 
more than 278 medicines for mental ailments/illness are available in the PMBI product 
basket and more medicines  may be added based on suggestions or demand from  
stakeholders. The medicine Atropine is already available in the PMBI basket according 
to the demand pattern.” 
 
1.13 The Committee had desired that the Department Should make efforts 
towards requisite augmentation of JAKs so that they become a one stop place for 
all kinds of medicines for the common people  by  bringing  the life saving  drugs  
for TB or Mental illness .  T he Department has submitted in their Action Taken 
Notes that the recommendation of the Committee  have been  taken note of. The 
Committee hope that the se li ve saving TB or Mental illness drugs would be 
included  in the PMBJP Product Basket.    However, as regards Benzylpenicillin, it 
has been  informed  that the injection was available  in the PMBI Basket  but due 
to low demand  and no sales its procurement has since been  discontinued . 
Keeping in view the importance of the medicines the Committee desire that the 
decision to discontinue procurement due to low demand may be reviewed from 
time to time. 
 
COURSE/CASTE-WISE STUDENTS  IN TAKE AT NIPER FOR THE YEARS 2022-24 
 
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 20) 
 
1.14. “The Committee note that NIPER has provisions for reservation for SC/ST/OBC 
students for admission in its different courses as per Government of India rules and are 
also giving concession in fees to SC/ST/OBC students. The Committee desire that the 

9 
 
number of SC/ST/OBC students admitted vis -à-vis total in-take of students course -wise 
in all the seven Centres of NIPERs during the last three years may be furnished to 
them.” 
 
1.15. The Department in their Action Taken Replies has submitted as follows: 
Details of number of students belonging to the Scheduled Castes (SC), 
Scheduled Tribes (ST) and Other Backward Class  (OBC) admitted and the total intake 
of students, course-wise, in the seven NIPERs during the last three years are as under: 
NIPER  Course 2022 
    
Total Student 
Intake SC ST OBC 
Mohali 
Masters 285 38 20 100 
PhD 61 14 1 16 
Ahmedabad 
Masters 166 24 12 44 
PhD 35 4 2 12 
Hyderabad 
Masters 180 26 9 47 
PhD 49 6 3 14 
Guwahati 
Masters 144 22 11 50 
PhD 35 4 3 14 
Raebareli 
Masters 109 20 5 49 
PhD 30 3 2 11 
Kolkata 
Masters 88 18 6 41 
PhD 28 0 0 1 
Hajipur 
Masters 91 13 6 29 
PhD 19 3 0 5 
      
      
NIPER  Course 2023 

10 
 
    
Total Student 
Intake SC ST OBC 
Mohali 
Masters 305 38 20 99 
PhD 79 12 0 23 
Ahmedabad 
Masters 178 27 12 51 
PhD 35 4 1 16 
Hyderabad 
Masters 193 25 14 44 
PhD 59 9 1 18 
Guwahati 
Masters 189 26 11 80 
PhD 49 10 3 22 
Raebareli 
Masters 110 15 7 42 
PhD 27 4 0 14 
Kolkata 
Masters 112 16 8 40 
PhD 28 1 0 0 
Hajipur 
Masters 109 12 5 27 
PhD 24 3 1 7 
   
 
   
      
NIPER  Course 2024 
    
Total Student 
Intake SC ST OBC 
Mohali 
Masters 257 34 10 102 
PhD 12 0 0 3 
Ahmedabad 
Masters 150 20 10 37 
PhD 4 0 0 1 

11 
 
Hyderabad 
Masters 214 27 15 50 
PhD 5 - - - 
Guwahati 
Masters 164 30 15 82 
PhD 21 4 2 8 
Raebareli 
Masters 99 13 4 36 
PhD 14 3 2 6 
Kolkata 
Masters 96 10 5 31 
PhD 5 0 0 5 
Hajipur 
Masters 55 7 4 13 
PhD 10 1 0 3 
 
 
1.16. The Committee observe that despite the provisions for reservation and fee 
concession for SC, ST and OBC students at NIPERs, there remains a consistently 
low rate of intake for these students in the Ph.D. Courses across all seven 
NIPERs during the years 2022 -2024. The data reveals that the number of SC, ST 
and OBC students admitted to Ph.D. courses is significantly lower compared to 
their intake in Masters ’ Courses with some Centres showing particularly dismal 
figures, such as NIPER Mohali in 2024, which admitted only 3 OBC students to 
the Ph.D. programme.  The Committee recommend  that NIPERs should initiate 
corrective measures to address this disparity including targeted outreach and 
support programs to encourage more SC, ST and OBC students to apply for Ph.D. 
courses, as well as provid e a more additional academic support, conducive  
environment for these students to pursue  and succeed in research based 
courses.   
 
EXPANSION PLANS FOR POSTGRADUATE PROGRAMMES AT NIPER HAJIPUR 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 21) 
 
1.17. “The Committee are dismayed to find that for NIPER, Hajipur, only 572 students 

12 
 
have passed out since the inception of the Institute (2007) till the academic year 2023 -
24 which inter-alia include every low data of students of Masters (Two years course) 
from the year2019 till date where student in take capacities is 435, out of 426 admitted 
are, 261 students graduated so far upto the 2022 -24 Session. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that special focus be given to NIPER, Hajipur Centre by the 
Department to increase the student intake and also improve the number of successful 
students.” 
 
1.18. The Department in their Action Taken Replies has submitted as follows: 
 “As per the record of the institute, data regarding the total number of students 
admitted and passed out since inception till now are as under: 
(a) Masters programme (two years) 
(b) Ph D programme 
 
 In the academic/admission year  2024, the total student in take in the 
postgraduate programme was 65. In the forthcoming academic/admission year 2025, 
the institute has proposed an intake of 78 in the postgraduate programme, keeping in 
view the existing faculty -student ratio and facilities available. Expansion of facilities and 
construction of new building for NIPER Hajipur is in progress. As the construction of 
new academic/administration building gets finished, student intake and new 
specialisations will be introduced in phased manner. 
1.19. The Committee had recommended that special focus be given the  NIPER, 
Hajipur Centre by the Department for increasing the student intake and also to 
improve the number of successful students.  The Department  has apprised the 
Committee that  expansion  of facilities  and construction of new building  for 
NIPER Hajipur was in progress and once the new academic/administrati ve 
building  gets functional, student intake  and new specialization would be  
introduced  in planned manner.  The Committee hope and trust that as assured 
the intake capacity of Hajipur  NIPER would be enhanced and new specialization 
coursed would be introdu ced  without  any loss of time.  The Committee may be 
apprised of the action taken in the  matter. 
  

13 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 and 3 
 
2.1. The Committee note that the increasing Budget Estimates (BE) of the 
Department viz. BE (2021 -22) stood at Rs.470.41 crore, BE (2022 -23) enhanced to 
Rs.2,244.15 crore, BE (2023 -24) enhanced to Rs.3,160.06 crore; and BE (2024 -25) 
enhanced to Rs.4,089.95 crore. The Department has submitted that the reasons for 
consistently enhanced allocation was introduction of the three new Production Linked 
Incentives (PLI) Schemes in the year 2021 -22 for a period of 5/6 years with a combined 
outlay of Rs. 25,360 crore. The Budgetary provisions were started from 2022 -23 
onwards, which increased the BE figures of the Department. Similarly, some new 
schemes of Development of Pharmaceuticals & Medical Device Industries were also 
approved during this period causing enhancement of BE (2022 -23) onwards in 
comparison to BE (2021 -22). The Committee are of the view that while the BE of the 
Department has been increased considerably for running new PLI Schemes introduced 
in the previous years, the consistently reducing RE figures as cited in Recommendation 
No.1 apparently reveals gaps in the implementation process. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Department should utilize the allocated funds in a time bound manner for 
successful and timely implementation of the schemes. 
  The Committee also note that the BE for the year 2023 -24 which was Rs. 
3,160.06 crore was drastically reduced to Rs.2,697.96 crore. The Department has 
submitted that the RE was reduced due to the reason that expected release under 
some Schemes could not be made due to lesser demand in infrastructure schemes 
because of inherent issues in tendering process, environmental clearances etc, non -
fulfillment of targeted achievements to claim incentives etc. The Committee 
recommended that the issues and constraints cited may be worked out in a time bound 
manner so that the intended benefits of the Schemes reach the beneficiaries in time. 
 

14 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.2 The Hon’ble Committee’s observations/recommendations have been taken note of. 
 
 The BE and Revised Estimate (RE) figures under the three PLI schemes for the 
last three years and the current status of their implementation and fund utilisation are as 
under: 
(i) Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Promotion of Domestic 
Manufacturing of Critical KSMs/Drug Intermediates and APIs: Under this 
scheme, FY 2022-23 and FY 2023-24 were the first years of performance for 
chemical-synthesis-based products and fermentation -based products 
respectively, under Greenfield projects. Establishment of the projects was 
initially impacted due to the COVID pandemic. Many projects under the 
scheme also faced challenges in acquisition of land, obtaining environmental 
clearance, drug -licensing approvals, etc., impacting their progress.  As of 
December2024,a total of 34projects have been established for 25bulk drugs. 
It is expected that BE will be utilised fully in FY 2024-25. 
(ii) PLI Scheme for Pharmaceuticals: Under the scheme, FY 2022 -23 was the first 
year of performance. During the initial years, several selected applicants were 
unable to achieve their threshold investment criteria under the scheme 
guidelines, due to which they were found to be ineligible for claim of incentive 
amount. Implementation has since gathered pace. As of December 2024, the 
55 selected applicants had made total actual investment to the tune of ₹ 34,771 
crore against investment commitment of ₹ 17,275 crore. It is expected that RE 
allocated will be utilized fully in FY2024-25. 
(iii) PLI Scheme for Promoting Domestic Manufacturing for Medical Device: Under 
the scheme, FY 2022 -23 was the first year of performance, through Greenfield 
projects. Progress of the projects was impacted initially due to the COVID 
pandemic. Many projects under the scheme also faced challenges related to 
environmental clearance, manufacturing -licensing approvals, etc., impacting 
their progress. As of December 2024, a total of 19 projects have been 
established for 46 medical devices.  It is expected that RE will be utilized fully in 
FY2024-25. 

15 
 
(iv) Other schemes : The fund utilisation  position in respect of other key schemes 
has been submitted in the reply to point no. 1. 
 
2.3 The Committee acknowledges the significant increases in the Budget 
Estimates (BE) for the Department, primarily driven by the introduction of three 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) schemes aimed at bolstering domestic 
manufacturing, but expresses concern over the corresponding reductions in 
Revised Estimates (RE), indicating implementation challenges. The Committee  
urge the Department to address issues such as tendering processes, 
environmental clearances, and investment criteria compliance in a timely manner 
to ensure effective fund utilization and achievement of targeted outcomes. The 
Committee emphasizes the necessity for the Department to enhance its 
implementation strategies to guarantee that the benefits of these schemes reach 
the intended beneficiaries without delay, thereby supporting the overarching goal 
of promoting domestic production in the pharmaceuticals and medical device 
sectors. 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 4 
 
 
2.4  The Committee are dismayed to note that the actual expenditure of the 
Department for the years 2021 -22, 2022 -23, 2023-24 also remained far less than the 
allocated funds. The Department has submitted that in the infrastructure’s Schemes 
(Bulk Drug Parks, Medical Device Parks, Cluster Development Schemes) the release of 
funds depends upon the actual expenditure on the capital projects by the State 
agencies. This further depends upon the tendering processes and mandatory 
clearances from regulatory bodies and adding their shares of funds. Similarly, in the PLI 
Schemes, the actual release of incentives depends upon the fulfilment of Scheme 
guidelines and sanction provisions. The Committee were apprised that the Department 
has reviewed the functioning of the Schemes of Medical Devices and has formulated a 
new Umbrella Scheme in 2024 -25 for Strengthening of Medical Device Industry for 
more focused approach and efficient utilization of funds. The Committee finds 
consolation to note that the Department has reviewed the functioning of the Schemes of 

16 
 
Medical Devices and has formulated the new Umbrella Scheme in the current financial 
year 2024-25. The Committee, however, desire that the Department should take up the 
matter at the highest level with State agencies etc. for more robust coordination to 
ensure timely and optimal utilization of funds in future. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.5  The slow progress in the medical device sector can be attributed to several 
factors, including initial delays in obtaining regulatory approvals, such as environmental 
clearance, and the emerging nature of the sector, which required additional time for the 
necessary technical support to prepare tenders. 
 The financial targets under the Scheme for Promotion of Medical Device Parks 
were not achieved due to the non -submission of utilisation certificates by the selected 
states, despite repeated follow -ups. As a result, funds were not released in the past 
years. However, all the approved states have now awarded major tenders for the civil 
construction of CIF buildings, and work has already started. Tenders for equipment to 
be installed in the CIF buildings are at different stages of procurement. The second 
installment is likely to be released by March 2025, after the verification of all documents 
and the submission of the utilisation certificate for the first installment. So far, land has 
been allotted to 140 medical device manufacturers in the selected medical device parks. 
For effective implementation and optimal utilization of funds under the PLI 
schemes: Regular meetings are held with Project Management Agencies (PMAs) under 
the chairpersonship of Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals to monitor the 
progress and performance under PLI schemes. Through the Project Development Cell 
(PDC) mechanism, the Department also handholds applicants to facilitate resolution of 
issues related to commissioning of projects. Issues such as land allotment, Petroleum 
and Explosives Safety Organisation(PESO) licence, approval of the Central Drugs 
Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO), environmental clearance, etc. have been 
resolved. 
2.6 The Committee finds that the actual expenditure of the Department for the 
years 2021-22, 2022-23, and 2023 -24 was significantly lower than allocated funds 
due to delays in regulatory approvals, tendering processes, and state agencies’ 

17 
 
contribution. While the Department has formulated a new Umbrella Scheme for 
the medical device industry in 2024 -25 to improve fund utilization, the Committee 
recommends that the Department engage with state agencies and other relevant 
stakeholders at the highest level to ensure more robust coordination and timely, 
optimal utilization of funds in the future. This would help avoid underutilization 
and delays in project implementation. 
RECOMMENDATION No. 5 
 
 
2.7 . The Committee have noted that the fund utilized by the Department was94.14 
percent, 90.37 percent, 90.15 percent for the year 2021 -22, 2022 -23, and 2023 -24 
respectively. Further, the Department have stated that the expenditure upto October, 
2024 was Rs. 1,363.55 crores (33.34%) of BE and it will pick up in the subsequent 
months when the PLI beneficiary companies will be raising claims for incentives. 
Moreover, the releases under the Pharmaceuticals companies and Medical Devices 
Schemes will be made on the basis of demand from the concerned agencies and 
sanctioning of new proposals etc. The Committee hope and trust that the Department 
would be able to utilize the funds allocated in an efficient manner for the year 2024 -25 
too. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.8 The Department expects to utilize the funds allocated in RE 2024-25. 
 
2.9 The Committee note  that the Department utilized 94.14%, 90.37%, and 
90.15% of the allocated funds for the years 2021 -22, 2022 -23, and 2023 -24, 
respectively, and that as of October 2024, only 33.34% of the allocated funds for 
2024-25 have been utilized. The Department has stated that expenditure will 
increase as PLI beneficiary companies raise claims for incentives and as releases 
under the Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Schemes are made based on 
demand and new proposals. The Committee hopes and trusts that the  
Department will efficiently utilize the allocated funds for 2024 -25, ensuring timely 
and effective expenditure. 

18 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 6 
 
JAN AUSHADHI KENDRAS 
 
2.10. The Committee note that in order to open Jan Aushadhi Kendras  (JAKs) in rural 
and remote areas of the Country, the Department have apprised that the Pradhan 
Mantri Bhartiya Pariyojana (PMBJP) has partnered with the Cooperative Sector to 
maximize benefits of PMBJP Kendras in interior parts of the Country. Further, 
Pharmaceuticals & Medical Devices Bureau of India (PMBI), the implementing agency 
of PMBJP has also entered in to an agreement for setting up of Jan Aushadhi Kendras 
in Primary Agricultural Cooperative Credit Society (PACs). In this regard, till 31st 
October 2024, 4,400+ PACS from 647 districts have applied & 2,695 Primary 
Agricultural Cooperative Credit Society (PACS) have also been given initial approval 
letter, of which 676 Jan Aushadhi Kendras have been opened in PACS. Besides, more 
than 1,000 applicants of PACS have been given online training. The Committee are 
happy that concerted efforts have been taken at the right time by the PMBJP and desire 
that the Department ensure that these JAKs opened in rural and remote areas are 
made functional at the earliest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.11 The Department of Pharmaceuticals, in coordination with the Ministry of 
Cooperation, is facilitating the opening of Jan Aushadhi Kendras (JAKs) in Primary 
Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS) and other cooperative societies to enable the 
benefits of quality Jan Aushadhi medicines reach rural and remote are as of the 
country.Asof31.1.2025, the number of JAKs opened by PACs and other cooperative 
societies stood at 719. Review meetings are held from time to time with officials from 
the Ministry of Cooperation and State Governments, including Registrars of Cooperative 
Societies, to facilitate the opening of JAKS in PACS and other cooperative societies. 
 
2.12 The Committee are not satisfied with the Action Taken Notes furnished by 
the Ministry which are not only evasive but also lack clarity on critical issues 
such as issues relating to reduction in the double regulatory burden to comply 

19 
 
with labelling and packaging requirements; exemption of accessories 
/components pertaining to medical devices from compulsory registration.  The 
Committee are not satisfied with the casual and routine reply of the Ministry on 
these issues.  The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendations 
urge the Ministry to intensify the measures to address the issues which are still 
under the deliberation of NMDPC with utmost sincerity as they are associated 
with medical products which may have implications on quality and safety of 
medical device products.   
RECOMMENDATION No.7 
 
2.13 The Committee have been apprised with regard to the quality of generic 
medicines and their review by the Department that PMBI procures medicines only from 
World Health Organization – Good Manufacturing Practices (WHO -GMP) certified 
suppliers for ensuring the quality of the products. Apart from this, each batch of drug is 
tested at laboratories accredited by ‘National Accreditation Board for Testing and 
Calibration Laboratories’ (NABL) and only after passing the quality tests, the medicines 
are dispatched to PMBJP Kendras. PMBI also does routine quality audit of the facilities 
of vendors and carries out public outreach & campaigns throughout India to do away the 
false perception about poor quality of generic medicines and emphasize that the quality 
of Jan Aushadhi generic medicines areas good as branded ones. The Committee are 
happy to observe that PMBI has initiated sufficient measures to ensure the quality of the 
medicines made available at JAKs. The Committee, however, recommend that PMBI as 
well as the Department should make surprise visits at JAKs and undertake requisite 
tests on samples of medicines etc., from JAKs to keep them on their toes with the 
overall aim to ensure the quality of medicines sold by JAKs. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.14 The Hon’ble  Committee's recommendation to collect samples of medicines from 
Jan Aushadhi  Kendras (JAKs) is taken note of for necessary action. 
 
2.15  The Committee feels that the Action Taken Note submitted by the 
Ministry is not only ambiguous but is also devoid of facts.  The soft peddling 

20 
 
being done by the Ministry to ask the existing medical device testing 
laboratories to submit without any follow up action clearly indicates the casual 
approach of the Ministry in dealing with the critical issue of such magnitude.  
The Committee are of the view that the Ministry should make genuine efforts to 
take cognizance of the recommendation given by the Standing Forum on 
Medical Device Association in order to streamline logistics and also to optimize 
the transition towards licensing of all types of medical devices and requirement 
of testing equipments and testing infrastructure for Class A,B,C and D type of 
medical devices.  The Committee further desires that the Ministry of 
H&FW/CDSCO ought to monitor implementation of the recommendations of 
the standing forum and device a framework to establish right kind of 
environment and infrastructure to ensure smooth transition. The Committee 
may be apprised of the progress /status from time to time. 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 8 
 
 
2.16 The Committee note that, as on date, about 3188 number of applications for 
opening of Jan Aushadhi Kendras was pending with PMBI at different stages out of 
which 2,692 applications are stated to have been given in principle approval and 496 
applications are stated to be under review. As regards the complaints filed by 
customers/general people regarding availability and quality of medicines, the Committee 
have been apprised that Pharmaceuticals & Medical Devices Bureau of India (PMBI) 
has a Store Complaint & Facilitation cell (e -mail ID-complaints@janaushadhi.gov.in) to 
analyze and resolve the queries of the customers as well as entrepreneurs. Further, a 
toll – free     helpline number  18001808080is also being operated with 06 (Six) 
telecallers to address the queries of the customers, Jan Aushadhi Kendra owners and 
applicants etc. Besides, the complaints/ grievances received through other portals like 
RTI, CPGRA Mare also addressed by PMBI regularly in a timely manner and strict 
quality control mechanisms are in place to ensure compliance of standards and no 
major quality issue has arisen so far. The Committee observe that though the complaint 
redressal system of PMBI appears to be satisfactory, the Committee, however desire 
that all the complaints received as well as the 496 number of applications lying pending 
with the PMBI may be disposed off at the earliest. 

21 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.17 Most queries regarding the opening of new Jan Aushadhi Kendras (JAKs) pertain 
to procedure and are not in the nature of complaints from citizens. All complaints 
received via email are attended to by the divisions concerned in PMBI and reviewed at 
senior management level. With regard to the number of pending applications, it is 
informed that all such applications are reviewed and disposed of in due course. PMBI 
receives applications for opening new JAKs online every month, making it a continuous 
process. Therefore, there will always be some applications under review due to 
deficiencies in documentation or failure to meet eligibility criteria. Such applicants are 
informed and advised to complete the necessary documentation to facilitate the opening 
of a new JAK.  Further, the details of the 496 applications are under:   
 Initial approval given— 297 
Documents awaited 176 
Applications rejected 23 
Total 496 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 9 
2.18 The Committee are dismayed to note that as regards the mechanism to inspect 
the JAK retail outlets and malpractices in JAKs, the Department has not furnished any 
specific reply. However, the Department has submitted that there are more than 14,000 
Jan Aushadhi Kendras (JAKs) located in 773 Districts which are operated and run by 
private entrepreneurs with their own funds and establishment. The Committee are of the 
view that since the JAKs are owned and run by private entrepreneurs, it becomes 
imperative on the part of PMBI to check the quality and quantity of medicines being sold 
at JAKs and also to curb malpractices of the JAKs owners that the benefits of the 
Scheme reaches the common man in a seamless manner. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.19 The monitoring mechanism to ensure best quality is already in place, and there 
have been no specific concerns regarding the quality of medicines in the last two years. 
As regards the quantity of medicines sold, the entire process of supplies to Jan 
Aushadhi Kendras (JAKs) are captured in the Point of Sale (PoS) system run under 
Systems, Applications and Products (SAP).Through SAP, complete supply of a 

22 
 
particular JAK is recorded and based on these records, JAK is eligible for both 
purchase-based and stock-based incentives with maximum limit of ₹ 10,000 each. 
 
2.20 The Committee note with satisfaction that the applications for grant of 
manufacturing license for all class of medical devices will be reviewed and 
processed subject to fulfillment of eligibility criteria. While the Ministry has 
spelt out the course of action for the grant of license in respect of Class C&D 
medical device with effect from 01.10.2023, the Action Taken Notes do not 
mention insofar as grant of license in respect of Class A&B medical devices are 
concerned.  The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and impress 
upon the Ministry to ensure that all the necessary arrangements will be made to 
complete the process of issuance of license to the manufacturers of all kind of 
device in a time bound manner. 
 The Committee also recommends that since Class A&B categories are 
regulated by the State License Authorities (SLA), the Ministry should sensitize 
the States that on their part that arrangements are required to be made so that 
best practices are implemented without unnecessary skewed delays as is 
commonly believed. 
RECOMMENDATION No. 12 
 
2.21 The Committee note that in order to ensure that the medicines being sold under 
PMBJP scheme are not duplicate or ‘expired’ and to obviate scope for such 
irregularities in Jan Aushadhi  Kendras, the Department has come out with a 
“Janaushadhi Sugam" mobile application which serves as a vital resource for the 
general public, offering a user - friendly digital platform that provides a range of 
convenient services at their fingertips. Through this App, users can easily locate nearby 
Janaushadhi Kendras (JAKs) wi th directions powered by Google Maps, search for 
Janaushadhi medicines, and compare the prices of generic versus branded medicines, 
highlighting potential savings in MRP. The Committee were apprised that there has 
been no instance of any duplicate medicines ever reported; JAKs have to ensure that 
‘expired medicines’ are not sold to customers; and PMBI does not supply those 
medicines which have short life of 03 months or less. The Committee appreciate the 
launch of “Janaushadhi Sugam” mobile application. The  Committee, however, feel that 

23 
 
it is the duty of the PMBI and the Department to ensure stoppage of expired or 
duplicate/substandard medicines at JAKs and it should not be left in the hands of only 
the JAKs. The Committee, therefore, recommend that more stringent steps may be 
taken to obviate scope for this malpractice. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the steps taken by the Department/PMBI in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.22 As per PMBI’s policy, PMBI does not sell medicines that have a remaining shelf 
life of three months or less. Further, legal provisions require that expired medicines not 
be sold by any retailer at any JAK as they are bound by the drug license conditions 
issued to them by the respective State Governments / Union Territory Administrations. 
The entire supply chain of Jan Aushadhi medicines is in a closed loop and medicines 
are supplied to distributors and retailers only after centralised procurement and quality 
testing. No complaint has been received regarding duplication of Jan Aushadhi 
medicines. Campaigns by way of newspapers and social media advertisements are also 
run to sensitise customers/beneficiaries, with a view to enable them to identify the Jan 
Aushadhi logo while making purchases and encouraging them to take advantage of Jan 
Aushadhi products. In view of the recommendations of the Hon’ble committee, PMBI 
field officers have been instructed to monitor compliance of instructions. 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 13) 
 
2.23 The Committee note that under the PMBJP, sanitary pads at Rs. 1/ - per pad are 
sold through its network of more than 14,000 JAKs functioning across the Country. The 
Committee further note that in an appreciable noteworthy initiative, the Government of 
Telangana have made available sanitary napkins in Schools for girls students by 
installing booths/vending machines. The Committee are of the opinion that the 
Telengana model need to be replicated across the Country. The Department submitted 
that the matter does not pertain to Jan Aushadhi and they have referred it to the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee are not happy with the contention of the 
Department as sanitary napkins are already being sold at the rate of Rs. 1/ - per pad in 
JAKs and it was just the step of making it easily accessible for the convenience of the 
girl students across the Country by installation of dispensing machines/booths. The 

24 
 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department may consider the feasibility in 
consultation with the Ministry of Women and Child Development or Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare, if required. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps 
taken by the Department/PMBI in this regard. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.24 As on 31.1.2025, a total of 15,000 Jan Aushadhi Kendras (JAKs) had been 
opened across the country. Sanitary napkins are available in all JAKs, and their 
consumption has increased significantly. Till 31.3.2025, approximately 72.63 crore pads 
have been sold across the country at ₹ 1.00 per sanitary pad through these 15,000 
JAKs. 
Recommendation of the Hon’ble committee for considering feasibility of 
dispensing machine/booths in consultation with the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development or the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have been taken note of for 
necessary action. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 14 
 
National  Institute of Pharmaceuticals Education and Research (NIPERs) 
 
2.25  The Committee note that since the inception of NIPER, a total number of 10,810 
students (10,159 – M Pharma/MBA; 651- PhD) have passed out who are working in the 
industry as well as R&D and Academic Institutions. Further, NIPERs have signed about 
303 MOUs with industries and other academic institutions till September 30, 2024 more 
than 425 patents have been filed till September 30, 2024 and about 8,048 research 
papers have been published in various reputed journals by the seven working NIPERs 
till September 30, 2024. The committee find that during the last three years, 3,608 
students were enrolled in different courses offered by NIPERs out of which 2,937 
students successfully. The Committee, however, find that since inception of NIPER, out 
of 14,890 students enrolled in seven centres of NIEPRs at Mohali, Guwahati, 
Ahmedabad, Hyderabad, Hajipur, Kolkata and Raebareli, only 10,960 students passed 
out successfully indicating a large number of students who were declared unsuccessful 
i.e 3,930. The Committee recomm end that the Department in consultation with NIPER 
undertake a serious study to analyse the gap between the number of students enrolled 

25 
 
and number of students declared successful each year with a view of take concrete 
steps to improve the scenario. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.26 The difference between the number of students enrolled and number of students 
declared successful from NIPER may be attributed to the ongoing postgraduate and 
PhD programmes. At the postgraduate level, which is a two-year course, there would be 
two batches of students who are enrolled but currently pursuing their studies and hence 
have not passed out. Similarly, there are students at PhD level who are enrolled and 
pursuing their studies. Additionally, factors such as health issues, selection for 
government jobs, offers for a better course at other institutions in India and abroad may 
also contribute to difference in the number of students enrolled and passed out from 
NIPERs. 
RECOMMENDATION No. 15 
 
2.27 The Committee further find that the placement percentage in NIPERs is stated to 
be 79.54% for Mohali Centre, 82.08% for Hajipur and 86.44% for Kolkata Centre and 
100% for Guwahati and Hyderabad centres. The Committee hope that the placement 
percentage of NIPER Centres at Mohali, Hajipur, Kolkata and other Centres may also 
follow the laudable achievements of 100% placement of Guwahati and Hyderabad 
Centres. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.28 Graduating PhD students have either been absorbed by pharmaceutical 
companies or found post -doctoral positions in academia in India or abroad. NIPER 
Mohali is taking proactive steps to enhance placement every year. In the last year batch 
(2022-2024), out of 262 interested students, 235students were placed(placement 
89.69%)and80companies visited NIPER Mohali for recruitment. 
Actions taken by NIPER Ahmedabad for improving placement footprint include the 
following: 

26 
 
(a) The visibility of NIPER Ahmedabad to local industries has been increased 
 through various events, including industry -academia interactions, alumni meet, 
 etc. 
(b) Individual departmental faculty coordinators for each department have been 
 identified for making connections with alumni working in industry. 
(c) Training in soft skills has been imparted to students. 
(d) NIPER Ahmedabad has been working on feed back received from industry and 
has implemented a policy for securing better employability of students. 
(e) NIPER Ahmedabad has enhanced infrastructure relevant to industry needs, 
which  has helped in making students industry-ready. 
 
The placement record of NIPER Raebareli for the academic session 2023 -2024 has 
been exceptional, with 97% of students securing positions in leading pharmaceutical 
industries and the remaining 3% pursuing higher studies at reputed institutions, 
achieving a 100% absorption in either jobs or higher studies. 
NIPER Kolkata is imparting soft skill development training to students. Five 
companies have participated in placements. The institute has invited more companies 
for placement, with a view to enhance placement. Number of steps have been taken by 
the institute for this, which include the following: 
(a) The institute is providing its students exposure to industry through industrial 
training and hands -on work experience, thereby ensuring that students are well -
prepared for the industry with practical knowledge and real -world problem -
solving experience. 
(b) It is imparting training to develop soft skills of its students. 
(c) It is doing extensive outreach to bring companies to participate in on -campus 
placement activities, resulting in more than 50 companies participating in the 
current round of placements. 
 NIPER Hajipur  has established a Placement and Training cell in the year  
2021.Thereafter, placement in industry and percentage of Masters students enrolled for 
higher studies has improved significantly. The placement rate was 86.44% immediately 

27 
 
after three months of graduation for the batch that graduated in the year2024. 
Placement percentage for the graduating batch has touched about 95%. 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 16 
 
 
2.29 The Committee note that seven Centers of Excellence (CoEs ) are being 
established at the respective National Institutes of Pharmaceutical Education and 
Research (NIPERs) under Promotion of Research and Innovation in Pharma Med -Tech 
Sector (PRIP) Scheme with the overall budget outlay of Rs. 700 crore over a period of 5 
years. The Committee look forward to the establishment of the CoEs in a time bound 
manner as envisaged by the Department. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.30 Seven Centres of Excellence (CoEs) have been established, one at each NIPER. 
As of 3.2.2025, these CoEs have approved a total of 67 projects, filed two patent 
applications, and published three research papers. Procurement of capital equipment, 
consumables, engagement of requisite manpower and construction activities are in 
progress. 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 17 and 18 
 
2.31 The Committee note with concern that the BE (2021 -22) of was enhanced to Rs. 
372.00 crore at RE stage and BE (2022 -23) of Rs. 395.00 crore was also enhanced to 
Rs. 451.13 crore whereas the BE (2023-24) of Rs. 550.00 crore was reduced drastically 
to Rs. 228.80 crore. The Committee find that BE (2023 -24) of Rs.550 crore which was 
in accordance with EFC ceiling including Capital grant for construction of the NIPERs 
were revised t o Rs.228.80 crore at RE stage due to slow pace of expenditure. The 
Committee desire that the reasons for slow pace of expenditure by the 
Department/NIPERs along with steps taken to accelerate the pace may be furnished to 
them. 
 The Committee further note with concern that the BE(2024 -25) of NIPERs has 
been  proposed at Rs.242.00crore which is almost 50% less than BE (2023 -24) which 

28 
 
was Rs.550.00 crore. The Committee were apprised by the Department that based on 
the reduced expenditure pattern of previous year and in accordance with the EFC 
ceiling, the BE 2024 -25 has been kept at Rs. 242 crore. The Committee desire that the 
Department should take ameliorative steps for timely utilization of the allotted funds. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.32. EFC approved ₹ 1,500 crore for the seven existing NIPERs, including for 
construction in six NIPERs. Out of this,₹823.13crore was released till FY2022 -
2023(₹372crorein FY2021- 22 and ₹ 451.13 crore in FY 2022 -23). BE 2023-24 of ₹ 550 
crore was in accordance with the EFC ceiling, including the capital grant for the 
construction in six NIPERs. However, due to slow pace of expenditure, the estimates 
were revised to ₹ 228.80 crore at RE stage, which was utilised fully. In accordance with 
the overall EFC ceiling, BE 2024 -25 has been kept at ₹ 242 crore and it has been 
revised to ₹ 248 at the RE stage as per the requirement of NIPER. 
 Due to technical formalities in on boarding the Treasury Single Account (TSA) 
model, expenditure till September 2024 was slow. However, out of ₹ 248 crore, ₹ 
246.20 crore now stands released. The balance is also expected to be released during 
the remaining period of FY 2024-25. 
 
2.33 The Committee observed that though much has been done to boost 
domestic manufacturing of medical devices, however, the Committee desires 
that the Ministry may device a mechanism to see to it that attractive duty 
concessions and reasonable reduction in the GST rates are effectuated in 
consultation with other stake holders so that the momentum is not lost and the 
benefits of PMP are able to reach beyond the realms of a few medical devices.  
The Committee may be apprised of the status in this regard. 
RECOMMENDATION No. 19 
 
2.34 The Committee note that construction of regular campuses in four NIPERs 
centres at Hajipur, Hyderabad, Kolkata and Raebareli is in progress. At Hajipur  Centre, 
38 percent of work is stated to have been completed; Centres at Hyderabad and 
Kolkata record 25 percent and 43 percent work completion respectively; Raebareli 
Centre, 70 percent of work has been completed. The estimated dates of completion of 
these construction work is stated to be01.04.2025, 01.07.2025, 30.06.2025 and 
31.03.2025respectively. The Committee recommend that the estimated dates of 

29 
 
completion of these campuses must be adhered to strictly through a robust monitoring 
mechanism. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.35 The construction progress of NIPER campuses is being closely monitored to 
ensure timely completion. NIPER Hajipur has achieved 57% progress as of December 
2024. The progress of construction is reviewed with the Central Public Works 
Department (CPWD), Patna every fortnight. At NIPER Hyderabad,35% of the 
construction has been completed. To facilitate smooth execution, NIPER Hyderabad 
has been conducting weekly reviews with the project management consultant and the 
third-party quality assurance consultant. At NIPER Kolkata,61% of the construction is 
completed, and CPWD, Kolkata has committed to handing over the fully equipped 
campus by July 2025. NIPER Raebareli has completed 75% of its permanent campus, 
with the construction agency working efficiently to meet the deadline. 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 22 
 
2.36 The Committee note that 07 applications were short listed under the 
Development of Pharmaceutical Industry Scheme out of which 06 projects were given 
final approval and 01 project has been given ‘in principle’ approval by the Scheme 
Steering Committee. The Committee recommend that the 06 projects may be given 
concrete shape at the earliest for the development of pharmaceutical industry 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.37 The six projects approved under the scheme are at various stages of 
implementation and are expected to be completed, as envisaged, by the end of FY 
2025-26. 
RECOMMENDATION No.23 
Bulk Drug Parks Scheme 
 
2.38  The Committee note that the Department proposes to establish Bulk Drug Parks 

30 
 
with the total financial outlay of Rs. 3,000 crore during a 05 -year tenure from the year 
2020-21 to 2024-25. Though the current financial year i.e.2024-25 is the last year of the 
Scheme, on the request of the State Governments of Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh and 
Andhra Pradesh, the Scheme tenure has since been extended till 2025 -26.The 
Committee further note that out of the total of Rs. 1,054.90 crore, Rs. 750.00 crore from 
Central Grant and Rs. 304.94 crore from State Fund, a meagre sum of Rs. 198.81 crore 
is stated to have been utilized by the States. The Committee have been informed that 
the 03 Bulk Drug Parks have submitted revised timelines upto March, 2026 keeping in 
view the laudable objectives of the Bulk Drug Parks to provide easy access to Common 
Infrastructure Facilities (CIF) to bulk drug units located in the park, so as to significantly 
reduce the manufacturing cost of bulk drugs. The Committee observe the delay in 
setting up of these parks may defeat the very purpose for which they have been setup. 
Moreover, keeping in view that these parks with the CIF and with subsidized power, 
water, land etc. are expected to optimize the cost of manufacturing bulk drugs in India. 
The Committee recommend that the targets set for the 03 Bulk Drug Parks due to come 
up by March, 2026 in the States Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh may 
be achieved in a time bound manner. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
steps taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.39 The recommendation of Hon’ble committee has been taken note of. To expedite 
project implementation, the Department of Pharmaceuticals has been engaging 
continuously with the state implementing agencies (SIAs) of the three bulk drug parks to 
support the development of these parks. The Department has also been periodically 
taking stock of the progress through monthly review reports obtained from the 
implementing states. It is conducted reviews on an ongoing basis, wherein the 
representatives of SIAs have been advised to expedite fund utilisation. The Department 
had also addressed DO letters on 1.5.2024 and 12.6.2024 to the Additional Chief 
Secretary / Principal Secretary concerned in the State Governments, apprising them of 
the slow progress in completion of the bulk drug parks and requesting them to speed up 
the physical progress and fund utilisation. 

31 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 24 
 
Schemes for Promotion of Medial Device Park 
2.40  The Committee note that the Scheme for Promotion of Medical Device Park 
being implemented by the Department received proposals from 16 States Governments 
for creation of CIF. However, after evaluation, proposals of 4 (four) States viz. Uttar 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh were finally approved. 
The BE for the year 2021 -22 was Rs.60 crore which was enhanced to Rs.137 crore but 
reduced to Rs.32.93 crore in the year 2022-23 and again goes to Rs.200.00 crore in the 
year 2023-24 and reduced toRs.150.00 crore in the year 2024 -25. The Committee are 
perturbed to note that a meagre amount of Rs.0.90 crore was the actual expenditure 
during the year 2022 -23 and2023-24. What is more perturbing to the Committee is the 
fact that Himachal Pradesh has withdrawn from the Scheme of Promotion of Medical 
Device Parks. The Department will have to obtain proposal from another State, evaluate 
the same and release grant, which is a very time consuming process and would cause 
considerable delay in the implementation of the Scheme. The Committee desire that the 
Department may initiate concrete steps in this regard to expeditiously set up the Medical 
Devices Parks in the remaining two States. 
. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.41 Recently, the Government of Himachal Pradesh has withdrawn from the scheme 
and informed that it will fund the project using its own resources. Currently, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals is focused on the establishment of the remaining three 
approved medical device parks and is not in the process of inviting proposals from other 
States. 
Regular review meetings are being held with the stakeholders concerned of the 
medical device schemes at the levels of the Secretary, Joint Secretary, Empowered 
Committee and Empowered Group of Secretaries (EGoS), to monitor progress, ensure 
optimal utilisation of funds and expedite the setting up of the medical device parks. 
 

32 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 25 
 
Consumer Awareness Publicity and Price Monitoring (CAPPM). 
 
2.42  The Committee find that the Consumer Awareness Publicity and Price Monitoring 
(CAPPM) has two components (i) Assistance to Price Monitoring and Resource Units 
(PMRUs) in States and UTs; and (ii) Advertisement and Publicity for CAPPM. The 
Committee were apprised that as on date, PMRUs are stated to have been set up in 31 
States/UTs and are stately performing their functions satisfactorily. However, in the 
States of Andaman and  Nicobar Island, Tamil Nadu, Delhi, Sikkim and Manipur, the 
PMRUs are yet to be set up. Notably, letters have been issued by the Department to the 
States/UT Authorities for regular follow ups and Officers from NPPA have also been 
deputed to some of the States to expedite the process. The Committee desire that the 
PMRUs be set up in these five remaining States at the earliest so that the benefits of 
the Scheme reaches these States too. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.43 PMRUs are set -up in a State or Union Territory (UT) with the consent and 
approval of the State/UT Government/Administration concerned. As on date, out of 36 
States/UTs, PMRUs have been set up in all, except Andaman and Nicobar Islands, 
Tamil Nadu, Delhi, Sikkim and Manipur. NPPA is making efforts for the setting up of 
PMRUs in the said remaining States/UTs as well. DO letters have been written from the 
level of Chairman, NPPA to the State/UT Departments concerned in all the said five 
States/UTs and the matter is being followed up regularly. 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 26 
 
PLI Scheme for Domestic Manufacturing of Critical KSMs/Drug Intermediates and 
APIs. 
 
2.44 The Committee note that the Department is implementing Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Domestic Manufacturing of Critical KSMs/Drug 
Intermediates and APIs for a ten (10) year tenure from the year 2020-21 to 2029-30 with 
a total financial outlay of Rs. 6,940 crore. The Committee were apprised that while a 

33 
 
total number of 249 applications were received, 48 green field projects for 33 bulk drugs 
have been approved with a total committed investment of Rs. 3,938 crore. Selected 
applicants have already made an actual investment worth Rs 4,155 crore and 
generated employment for 4,241 individuals, as per the September 2024 Quarterly 
Review Report. As of October 2024, the selected applicants have commissioned a total 
of 34 projects for 25 bulk drugs, resulting in cumulative capacity creation of 56,800 MT 
per annum. The Committee are happy to note the development under the scheme and 
desires that the scheme may be brought to its logical conclusion at the earliest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.45 The recommendation of Hon’ble committee has been taken note of. Under the 
said PLI scheme, selected applicants have so far made actual investment worth ₹ 4,254 
crore and generated employment for 4,473 individuals (as per the December 2024 
Quarterly Review Report). As of December 2024, a total of 34 projects for 25 bulk drugs 
stood completed. Further, six more projects are expected to be completed and 
commence production in FY 2025-26. 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 27 
 
2.46  The Committee note that the Department is implementing Production Link 
Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Promoting Domestic Manufacturing and Production Link 
Incentives Scheme for Pharmaceuticals and considerable progress in terms of 
utilization of allocated funds etc., has been made. The Committee recommended that 
these PLI schemes may be implemented in letter and spirit and brought to their logical 
conclusion. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.47 The observations/recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been taken 
note of. The Department is taking earnest steps to implement the PLI schemes as 
envisaged.  
 
 
 

34 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 28 
 
2.48 As regard Promotion of Research and Innovation in Pharma Med -Tech Sector 
(PRIP), the committee note that for the year 2023 -24, the Department sought ‘NIL’ 
funds at BE stage but at RE stage (2023 -24) and amount of Rs. 1.00 crore was 
allocated but the actual expenditure is Rs. 0.00 crore. In this regard the Department 
have submitted that the scheme was approved by Cabinet in July, 2023 as such funds 
under the Promotion of Research and Innovation in Pharma Med Tech (PRIP) Scheme 
in the fiscal year prior to that were not sought and in the year 2023 -24, engaging a PMA 
as per scheme guidelines was planned and finally a tender in this regard was floated 
but due to non -receipt of any valid response, the tender could not be utilized. Under 
these circumstances the Committee recommended that all the issues involved in the 
Scheme may be fixed at the earliest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.49 Under Component A of the under the Promotion of Research and Innovation in 
Pharma- MedTech sector (PRIP) Scheme, the Department has set up a Centre of 
Excellence (CoE) at each of the seven NIPERs, with total budget outlay of ₹700 crore 
over the period from FY 2023 -24 to FY2027 -28. ₹ 88 crore have been released to 
NIPERs in FY 2024 -25 for establishment of CoEs. Under Component B of the scheme, 
the Department has appointed a Project Management Agency (PMA) for strategy 
development and implementation of the scheme after following due procedure. 
Expressions of Interest (EoI) from interested companies for projects to be funded under 
the scheme have been interested. 
RECOMMENDATION No. 29 
Spurious/Adulterated Drugs 
2.50 The Committee find that during the years 2015 -16 to 2018 -19, 2.3 lakh samples 
of drugs/spurious were test out of which 593 were declared as ‘spurious’ and 9,266 
were declared as ‘Not of Standard Quality (NSQ)’Drugs/medicines. Apparently, only 35 
convictions were made in all these cases amounting to a meager 5.9%. The Committee, 

35 
 
however, observes that as on date only 5.9% of the total 593 cases relating to 
spurious/adulterated drugs have been resolved, with the remaining cases at various 
stages in respective Courts. The Committee are surprised to find that the conviction rate 
data is not maintained centrally for penal action for spurious/adulterated drugs. 
Admittedly, the figureof5.9% does not represent the conviction rate but percentage of 
cases decided as per the data obtained for States/UTs. The Committee are concerned 
about the delays in disposal of cases as also the maintenance of centralized data 
pertaining to enforcement of penalties for spurious/adulterated drugs. The Committee, 
therefore recommend stringent action to be taken in a time bound manner for exemplary 
punishments for spurious/adulterated drugs. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.51 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has informed that the 
recommendation of the Hon’ble committee has been taken note of, and that various 
measures are being taken for monitoring such cases and ensuring stringent action. 
Drugs inspectors are being trained from time to time for updating knowledge on legal 
provisions on spurious, adulterated, misbranded and Not of Standard Quality drugs and 
the procedure to be adopted for launch of prosecution and court proceedings. Further, 
SUGAM lab portal has been developed, which has provision for updating of status of 
prosecution cases of CDSCO, etc. Also, a digital regulatory system is proposed to be 
developed to build trust and confidence on quality of drugs in the domestic and global 
market, transparency and accountability in the regulation of quality of drugs, effective 
enforcement of quality, safety and efficacy at the field level and ensuring compliance 
with Indian pharmacopeia and standards. The proposed digital regulatory system will 
also take care of, amongst other aspects, maintenance of database of Not of Standard 
Quality, spurious, adulterated and misbranded products in the public domain. 
RECOMMENDATION No. 30 
 
2.52 The Committee note with serious concern that National Survey of Drugs (2014 -
16) revealed that 10% of samples from Government sources were substandard, 
compared to only 3% from Private sources indicating 3.17 times more prevalence in 
Government channels than in the retail market, undoubtedly pointing to loopholes in the 

36 
 
procurement processes. Admittedly, various measures are taken by the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare to ensure that better quality and more effective, and safe 
drugs are made available to consumers. The Committee, however find the 
Department’s reply on the higher prevalence of Not of Standard Quality (NSQ) drugs 
from Government sources did not address the core reasons for the flaws, and enabling 
factors contributing to the higher prevalence of NSQ drugs from Government sources. 
Furthermore, the Committee find the Department’s response does not outline the 
measures in place of ensure the quality and integrity of pharmaceutical products 
throughout all stages of the distribution process, including procurement, purchasing, 
storage, distribution, transportation, documentation, and record -keeping. The 
Committee desire that the Government come out with more clarity on the previous legal 
authority and enforceability of rules governing these distribution guidelines so that 
accountability be fixed accordingly. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.53 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has informed that a series of 
measures have been taken to ensure that the quality, safety and efficacy of medicines 
are not compromised from source to end -consumer including strengthening of legal 
provisions, workshops and training programmes for manufacturers and regulatory 
officials and measures such as risk based inspections. These aspects include 
procurement, storage, distribution, transportation, documentation and record -keeping 
practices. Sales, stock and distribution of drugs in the country are regulated under the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 by State Licensing Authorities (SLAs) 
appointed by the States/UT Governments concerned. SLAs are legally empowered to 
take stringent action in case of any non -compliance. Further, the Central Drugs 
Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
have taken various measures to ensure quality, efficacy and safety of medicines 
manufactured in the country. 
CDSCO and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have taken several measures 
to ensure the quality, safety and efficacy of medicines, as described below: 
a) In order to assess the regulatory compliance of drug manufacturing premises in 

37 
 
the country, CDSCO, in collaboration with State regulators, initiated risk -based 
inspections of drug manufacturing and testing firms in December 2022. 905 units 
have been inspected, resulting in 694 actions being taken. Depending on the 
severity of non- compliance, the actions taken include orders to stop production, 
orders to stop testing, suspension or cancellation of licence and issuance of 
warning or notice to show cause. Risk -based inspections have provided valuable 
insights into manufacturing practices being followed, led to corrective actions and 
resulted in discernable improvements in the regulatory framework. 
b) The Central Government, vide its notification dated 28.12.2023, amended the 
Drugs Rules,1945to revise Schedule M to the said rules related to Good 
Manufacturing Practices and requirements of premises, plant and equipment for 
pharmaceutical products. From 29.6.2024, the revised schedule has become 
effective for drug manufacturers with turnover of over ₹ 250 crore. For 
manufacturers having a turnover of up to ₹ 250 crore, vide notification dated 
11.2.2025, time for implementation has been granted till 31.12.2025. 
c) To require manufacturers to print or affix on packaging labels of top 300 brands 
of drug formulation products bar code or Quick Response (QR) code that stores 
data or information legible with software application to facilitate authentication, 
the Drugs Rules, 1945 were amended through notification dated 17.11.2022, 
which came into force from 1.8.2023, to provide for such printing or affixation in 
respect of the drug formulation products specified in Schedule H2 to the said 
rules. 
d) On 18.1.2022, the Drugs Rules, 1945 were amended to provide that every active 
pharmaceutical ingredient (bulk drug) manufactured or imported in India shall 
bear QR code on its label at each level of packaging, that stores data or 
information readable with software application to facilitate tracking and tracing. 
Such stored data or information shall include the minimum particulars, including 
unique product identification code, batch number, manufacturing date, expiry 
date, etc. 
e) On11.2.2020, the Drugs Rules,1945wereamendedto provide with effect 
from1.3.2021 that, along with the manufacturer, any marketer who sells or 
distributes any drug shall be responsible for the quality of that drug as well as 
other regulatory compliances under these rules. 

38 
 
f) The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 was amended through an amending Act of 
2008 to provide for stringent penalties for manufacture of spurious and 
adulterated drugs. Certain offences were also made cognizable and non -
bailable. 
g) For speedy disposal of cases relating to offences under the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940, State and Union Territory Governments have set up 
special courts. 
h) To ensure efficacy of drugs, the Drugs Rules, 1945 have been amended to 
provide that applicants for grant of manufacturing license shall submit along with 
their application the result of bioequivalence study of oral dosage form of some 
drugs. 
i) The Drugs Rules, 1945 have been am ended to make it mandatory that 
applicants submit to the State Licensing Authority evidence of stability, safety of 
excipients, etc. before manufacturing license is granted by such authority. 
j) The number of sanctioned posts in CDSCO has been increased significantly over 
 the last 10 years. 
k) For uniformity in the administration of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, the 
 Central regulator coordinates activities of State Drug Control Organisations and 
 provides expert advice through the Drugs Consultative Committee meetings held 
 with the State Drugs Controllers. 
l) The Central Government is providing regular residential and regional training and 
 workshops to officials of CDSCO and State Drug Regulatory Authorities on Good 
 Manufacturing Practices. Since April 2023, CDSCO has trained over 35,000 
 persons. 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 31 
India’s Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API) 
 
2.54  the Committee note that India's Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API) 
manufacturing industry has demonstrated growth, particularly in exports, but remains 
heavily reliant on imports, predominantly from China, for many APIs and Key Starting 
Materials (KSMs).The Committee further note that China’s dominance in this sector was 
attributed to its State -supported robust industrial infrastructure and large -scale 

39 
 
manufacturing capabilities for production APIs and KSMs at significantly lower costs, 
driven by economies of scale and subsidized utilities such as water, steam, and power. 
Consequently, Indian manufacturers face challenges in competing, which have led to 
the closure of several local fermentation -based production plants for antibiotics and 
vitamins. In response to the query of the Committee regarding measures to create a 
level playing field for domestic manufacturers, the Department outlined the Ministry's 
initiatives to reduce dependency on imported APIs. While appreciating these efforts, the 
Committee find that particularly the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme, provides 
20% incentives for fermentation -based products and 10% 9+for chemically synthesized 
products. The Committee, however, note with concern that, to date, only nine 
fermentation-based production plants have been approved under the Scheme, with just 
three operational at present. Keeping in view the importance of achieving self - 
sufficiency in API production the Committee recommends efforts for enhancing the 
existing incentives for fermentation - based plants and leveraging Government 
infrastructure to establish additional plants. To this end, the Committee desire that these 
facilities should be also provided with highly subsidized utilities such as power, water, 
and steam to support domestic manufacturers and ensure competitiveness in the global 
market. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.55 Out of nine approved fermentation -based projects, three are already operational 
and four more are expected to commence production in FY 2025 -26. The 
technologically challenging fermentation -based projects are eligible for higher incentive 
of 20% on sales, compared to 10% of incentive on sales of chemical synthesis -based 
projects. Further, under the Bulk Drug Parks scheme, three bulk drug parks are under 
construction in Bharuch (Gujarat), in Nakkapalli (Andhra Pradesh) and in Una 
(Himachal Pradesh) districts. These parks will support projects that use fermentation, as 
well as those that use chemical synthesis. 
 In the three bulk drug parks, state governments, with support from the central 
government, are developing common facilities for effluent treatment, steam generation, 
solvent storage, recovery and distillation, testing, warehousing, etc. Further, the state 
governments are providing utilities such as power, water, steam, effluent treatment, 
solid waste management, etc. on highly subsidised rates and industrial land on long 

40 
 
lease rentals, to investors for setting up green field projects in the bulk drug parks. Also, 
State subsidies, such as capital subsidy, GST subvention, interest rate subvention, 
exemption of stamp duty and registration charges etc., are being extended to 
prospective investors for setting up projects in the approved bulk drug parks. 
 It is expected that the operationalisation of bulk drug parks will lead to 
competitively-priced bulk drugs produced from these facilities. 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 32 
Vacancies in Drug Inspector Posts in Central Drug Standard Control Organisation 
(CDSCO) 
2.56  The Committee find that as on December, 2023, 60 percent of the sanctioned 
strength of drug inspectors, 303 out of 504 were vacant despite the fact that the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare may back in the year 
2012 had recommended hiring people on short-term contractual bases till the vacancies 
are filled. The Committee were apprised that recruitment delays were caused by the 
court on matters related to Recruitment Rules and following its orders from the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of India, in this regard steps have now been initiated to expedite the 
recruitment process. While urging the Department to prioritize filling these vacancies 
without further delay, the Committee expresses concern that the existing sanctioned 
strength of 504 posts are insufficient to meet the Country’s regulatory requirements for 
the medicines/drugs regime more specifically considering the fact that the country has 
more that 750 districts. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the responsible 
authorities conduct a comprehensive assessment of the actual staffing needs with a 
holistic vision of increasing the number of sanctioned posts to ensure effective 
regulation and oversight owe the multifaceted issues grappling the spurious/NSQ 
Drugs. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.57 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has informed that the 
recommendation of the Hon’ble committee has been note of, and that as per records 
available with CDSCO (HQ), in the year 2008, CDSCO had 62 posts of Drugs 
Inspectors. Further, to combat counterfeit medicines and as per requirement of CDSCO 

41 
 
for other regulatory work, various inspector posts were sanctioned by the Department of 
Expenditure (DoE) from time to time, depending on the increasing work load of the 
CDSCO. Accordingly, budgetary resources are enhanced time to time as per 
requirement of CDSCO. Over time, the number of posts of Drugs Inspectors have been 
increased and currently the number of posts of Drugs Inspectors in CDSCO is 504 
(Regulatory and Medical Devices Vertical). Apart from CDSCO, each State regulatory 
authority has drugs inspectors for licensing, enforcement activities, etc. in their 
respective jurisdiction. 
Filling up of vacancies is an ongoing process and the matter is being pursued. 
The Ministry has further informed that it is working at full pace in accordance with 
Mission Recruitment and that recruitment rules for the Medical Devices Vertical of 
CDSCO have been notified in November 2024, and advertisement for the said posts 
has been published in the Employment News for filling up the posts on deputation basis. 
In addition, indents for the recruitment of Drugs Inspector (Medical Devices) and 
Assistant Drugs Controller (Medical Devices) are being sent to the Union Public Service 
Commission (UPSC) through Single Window System as per UPSC calendar. In respect 
of the regulatory cadre of CDSCO, as per directions of the Hon'ble Central 
Administrative Tribunal, High Court and Supreme Court, criteria  for recruitment are to 
be revised and draft recruitment rules have been sent to the Department of Personnel 
and Training. Once the recruitment rules are finalised and notified, the recruitment 
process may be initiated. 
RECOMMENDATION No. 33 
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) 
 
2.58 The Committee find that the NPPA notified ceiling price for area 920 essential 
medicines including oxygen, general anaesthetics and opoids. The Committee further 
find that while sending prices of essential medicines are raise on the basis of changes 
in the Wholesale Price Index (WPI), the NPPA also monitor the pricing of non -essential 
devices to ensure that manufactures do not hike the MRP of the medicines by more 
than10 percent of the MRP in the last one year. The Committee find that NPPA issued 
on order d ated 15th October, 2024 increasing the prices of 11 drug formulation by 50 

42 
 
percent. Admittedly, this was done in response to several applications requesting on 
price rise to accommodate rising production cost over the years. The Committee 
observe with serious concern that in the face of apparent increasing prices of medicines 
affecting the whole nation, particularly hard hiring the poorest of the poor, the NPPA 
which has the ambit of monitoring and enforcement of pricing of medicine, have allowed 
this situation to prevail. The Committee, therefore, desires a detailed note be furnished 
on the price hike. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.59 The National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) received applications in 
respect of 77 formulations for increase in their price. The price increase has been 
sought by various manufacturing/ marketing companies for reasons like increase in cost 
of production, increase in cost of active pharmaceuticals ingredients, changes in 
exchange rate, etc. 
As per its mandate, NPPA, while regulating prices of essential medicines under 
DPCO, 2013, has to also keep in view the objectives of availability of essential 
medicines in the market. NPPA receives withdrawal notices and requests for upward 
revision of prices of critical drugs from manufacturers for reasons mentioned above that 
made the production and marketing of these drugs unviable. To deliberate on such 
representations, a consultative mechanism in the form of an Inter -Ministerial Committee 
(IMC) of technical experts consisting of representatives from CDSCO, Director General 
of Health Services and NPPA exists in NPPA. IMC examines the requests keeping in 
view parameters like essentiality of these medicines, period since when they have been 
under price control, trend of API prices over the last three years, concerns regarding 
possible shortages, if any, and requests received for discontinuation of essential 
medicines from the manufacturing companies. 
The mechanism for one -time price increase of 50% under paragraph 19of 
DPCO,2013 is as per the guidance given by the Committee on Affordable Medicines 
and Health Products (CAMPH) of NITI Aayog. This mechanism has been invoked from 
time to time since 2019 with a view to ensure continued availability of essential drugs to 
the general public. Earlier, such measures were taken in the years 2019 and 2021, 
when prices of 21scheduled formulations of 12 medicines and 9 scheduled formulations 

43 
 
of 3 drugs respectively were increased by 50% under paragraph 19 of DPCO, 2013, in 
public interest, on similar grounds. 
 
  


44 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE  COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
   
  
 
-   NIL  -  
 
 
 
 
  

45 
 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
OBSERVATION S/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION  
  
(RECOMMENDATION No.  1) 
 
 
4.1 The Committee note that the Department sought an amount of Rs.4089.95 crore 
for the financial year 2024-25. The Committee find consistent decline in funds allocated 
for various schemes/programmes run by the Department viz. For promotion of Bulk 
Drug Parks, Rs. 1,000.00 crore out of Rs. 1,352.00 crore sought; For Promotion of 
Medical Devices Parks, Rs. 150.00 crore out of Rs. 156.89 crore sought; For Human 
Resource Development in Medical Devices Sector  (HRD) Rs.50.00  crore out of 
Rs.98.00 crores ought; For Assistance to Medical Device Cluster for Common Facilities 
(AMD-CF),Rs.40.00crore out of Rs.191.00 crore sought; and Consumer Awareness 
Publicity and Price Monitoring Rs. 4.00 crore out of Rs.6.00 crore sought. The 
Committee are perturbed to note that for Promotion of Research and Innovation in 
Pharma Med-Tech (PRIP), the allocation sought by the Department has been reduced 
by 50 percent. In this case, the allocation has been reduced to Rs.75.00 crore from 
Rs.150.00 crore sought by the Department. The Committee desire to be apprised of the 
reasons for reduced allocation of funds in each of the schemes/programmes being run 
by the Department and impact on their implementation. The Committee recommend that 
the Department should analyse the reasons for reduced allocation of funds in these 
Schemes and initiate corrective measures therein. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.2 The expected release under some schemes could not be made primarily due to 
lesser demand in infrastructure schemes on account of difficulties faced in successful 
completion of procurement processes, obtaining environmental and other 

46 
 
clearances/approvals, non -fulfilment of targeted achievements by beneficiary 
companies to be eligible to claim incentives. 
The financial targets under the Scheme for Promotion of Medical Device Parks 
were not achieved due to non -submission of utilisation certificates by the selected 
States, despite follow - up. As a result, funds could not be released in past years. 
However, all approved State implementing agencies have now awarded tenders for civil 
construction of Common Infrastructure Facility buildings and work has started. Tenders 
for equipment to be installed in the these buildings are at various stages of 
procurement. The second instalment is expected to be released within March 2025, 
upon due verification of requisite documents and submission of utilisation certificate for 
the first instalment. 
Under the Capacity building and Skill development in Medical Device Sector 
scheme (formerly known as the Human Resource Development in Medical Devices 
Sector schemes), in - principle approval has been granted to 13 applicants for two -year 
degree or one -year postgraduate diploma courses and to five applicants for short -term 
certificate courses. These courses are expected to commence from the academic year 
2025-2026, and release of funds will be on reimbursement basis, i.e., the fund will be 
released once claim is submitted by the approved applicant. An amount of ₹ 0.90 crore 
has so far been utilised for payment towards professional fee of the project 
management agency. 
Under the Scheme for Common Facilities for Medical Device Clusters, Budget 
Estimate (BE) for the financial year (FY) 2024 -25 was ₹40 crore, which was reduced to 
₹ 25 crore. This scheme was earlier known as the Assistance to Medical Device Cluster 
for Common Facilities scheme, and had provision for establishment of facilities for 
testing of medical devices and common facilities for manufacturing of medical devices. 
So far, six applicants have been selected to establish six testing facilities and four 
applicants have been selected to establish four common facilities for manufacturing of 
medical devices in the country. In-principle approval have been conveyed to all selected 
applicants between December 2024 to January 2025, and steps have been taken for 
opening of requisite Central Nodal Agency account to enable release of funds. 

47 
 
Further, under the new umbrella scheme of Strengthening of Medical Device 
Industry, launched on 8.11.2024, in -principle approval has been granted for proposals 
received under two sub-schemes, namely, the Capacity Building and Skill Development 
in the Medical Device Sector sub -scheme and the Common Facilities for Medical 
Device Clusters sub -scheme. For the selected applicants for the Common Facilities for 
Medical Device Clusters sub -scheme, the first instalment is expected to be released 
within March 2025, after due verification of requisite documents as per criteria specified 
in the scheme guidelines. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter-1 of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 10 
 
4.3  The Committee are happy to note that about 42 Marketing Officers of PMBI are 
stated to have been deputed in different States / UTs to handle complaints of 
malpractice. Admittedly, Show Cause Notices are also issued for violating Pradhan 
Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) norms resulting in a warning or 
cancellation in case of any confirmed malpractices. The Committee, however, desire 
that the number of complaints received and resolved by the 42 Marketing Officers of 
PMBI during the last three years and also the number of Show Cause Notices issued 
under the Scheme including the number of warnings issued or cancellation for 
confirmed cases of malpractices found in JAKs may be furnished alongwith the analysis 
of the effectiveness of the extant monitoring system of JAKs. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.4 During the financial year2022 -23 and 2024 -25, over 1,200, 1,500 and 1,800 
show cause notices were respectively issued, with directions to remove violations and 
comply with conditions of the agreement. In case of repeated violations, PMBI takes 
steps to cancel the allotment of the Jan Aushadhi Kendra (JAK) concerned or to 
withhold its incentives for a specific period until the violation is resolved. There is 
effective monitoring of JAKs, and complaints are given priority for resolution.   

48 
 
Financial year wise details of show cause notices issued and JAKs closed are as 
under:  
S.No. FY No. of Show Cause notice 
issued to JAKs 
JAKs Closed 
1 2021-22 1349 191 
2 2022-23 1284 252 
3 2023-24 1539 611 
4 2024-25 1839 267 
Total 6011 1321 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter -1 of the Report) 
 
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 11) 
 
4.5 The Committee note that important medicines/injections like Benzylpenicillin, 
Atropine, Streptomycin, used for treatment of tuberculosis, mental ailments, are not 
available at JAKs and only Atropine Sulphate injection is procured as per demand and 
supplied to selected JAKs. The Committee were apprised that Benzylpenicillin and 
Streptomycin injection are not part of PMBJP product basket and are not at all procured. 
Further, tuberculosis medicines are also not part of PMBJP product basket as there is a 
separate TB Programme of Ministry of Health& Family Welfare to provide free 
medicines for TB patients under TB Eradication Plan. The Committee observe that the 
capacity of JAKs need further augmentation and feasibility studies for bringing these life 
saving drugs for TB or Mental illnesses into the PMBJP Product Basket may be carried 
out. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department make efforts towards 
requisite augmentation of JAKs so that they become a one stop place for all kinds of 
medicines for the common people 
 
 
 

49 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
4.6 The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been taken note of. PMBI, 
as part of its continuous process of augmenting the product basket under Jan Aushadhi, 
would review whether any more additions may be done. Insofar as Benzyl Penicillin is 
concerned, it is informed that it was earlier available in the PMBI basket, but due to low 
demand and no sales, its procurement was discontinued. For anti -tuberculosis (TB) 
medicines, TB Mukt Bharat Abhiyan was launched in the year 2021 and registration of 
all TB patients was done under a separate campaign by the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare with the aim of providing free medicines. PMBI surveyed more than 100 
JAKs and decided not to include anti -TB medicines due to low demand and the free 
availability under the aforementioned campaign. It is further informed that more than 
278 medicines for mental ailments/illness are available in the PMBI product basket, and 
more medicines may be added based on suggestions or demand from stakeholders. 
The medicine Atropine is already available in the PMBI basket according to the demand 
pattern. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter – 1 of the Report) 
 
 
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 20) 
 
4.7  The Committee note that NIPER has provisions for reservation for 
SC/ST/OBC students for admission in its different courses as per Government of 
India rules and are also giving concession in fees to SC/ST/OBC students. The 
Committee desire that the number of SC/ST/OBC students admitted vis -à-vis total 
in-take of students course -wise in all the seven Centres of NIPERs during the last 
three years may be furnished to them. 
 
 
 
 

50 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.8 Details of number of students belonging to the Scheduled Castes (SC), 
Scheduled Tribes (ST) and Other Backward Class( OBC) admitted and the total intake 
of students, course-wise, in the seven NIPERs during the last three years are as under:  
NIPER  Course 2022 
    
Total Student 
Intake SC ST OBC 
Mohali 
Masters 285 38 20 100 
PhD 61 14 1 16 
Ahmedabad 
Masters 166 24 12 44 
PhD 35 4 2 12 
Hyderabad 
Masters 180 26 9 47 
PhD 49 6 3 14 
Guwahati 
Masters 144 22 11 50 
PhD 35 4 3 14 
Raebareli 
Masters 109 20 5 49 
PhD 30 3 2 11 
Kolkata 
Masters 88 18 6 41 
PhD 28 0 0 1 
Hajipur 
Masters 91 13 6 29 
PhD 19 3 0 5 
      
      
NIPER  Course 2023 
    
Total Student 
Intake SC ST OBC 

51 
 
Mohali 
Masters 305 38 20 99 
PhD 79 12 0 23 
Ahmedabad 
Masters 178 27 12 51 
PhD 35 4 1 16 
Hyderabad 
Masters 193 25 14 44 
PhD 59 9 1 18 
Guwahati 
Masters 189 26 11 80 
PhD 49 10 3 22 
Raebareli 
Masters 110 15 7 42 
PhD 27 4 0 14 
Kolkata 
Masters 112 16 8 40 
PhD 28 1 0 0 
Hajipur 
Masters 109 12 5 27 
PhD 24 3 1 7 
      
      
NIPER  Course 2024 
    
Total Student 
Intake SC ST OBC 
Mohali 
Masters 257 34 10 102 
PhD 12 0 0 3 
Ahmedabad 
Masters 150 20 10 37 
PhD 4 0 0 1 
Hyderabad 
Masters 214 27 15 50 
PhD 5 - - - 

52 
 
Guwahati 
Masters 164 30 15 82 
PhD 21 4 2 8 
Raebareli 
Masters 99 13 4 36 
PhD 14 3 2 6 
Kolkata 
Masters 96 10 5 31 
PhD 5 0 0 5 
Hajipur 
Masters 55 7 4 13 
PhD 10 1 0 3 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter – 1 of the Report) 
 
 
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 21) 
 
4.9. The Committee are dismayed to find that for NIPER, Hajipur, only 572 students 
have passed out since the inception of the Institute (2007) till the academic year 2023 -
24 which inter-alia include every low data of students of Masters (Two years course) 
from the year2019 till date where student in take capacities is 435, out of 426 admitted 
are, 261 students graduated so far upto the 2022 -24 Session. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that special focus be given to NIPER, Hajipur Centre by the 
Department to increase the student intake and also improve the number of successful 
students 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.10 As per the record of the institute, data regarding the total number of students 
admitted and passed out since inception till now are as under: 
(a) Masters programme (two years) 
(b) Ph D programme 
In the academic/admission year  2024, the total student in take in the postgraduate 
programme was 65. In the forthcoming academic/admission year 2025, the institute has 

53 
 
proposed an intake of 78 in the postgraduate programme, keeping in view the existing 
faculty-student ratio and facilities available. Expansion of facilities and construction of 
new building for NIPER Hajipur is in progress. As the construction of new 
academic/administration building gets finished, student intake and new specialisations 
will be introduced in phased manner. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.19 of Chapter – 1 of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
……….. 
  

54 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
- NIL – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                          AZAD KIRTI JHA 
18 AUGUST, 2025                          CHAIRPERSON, 
27 SHRAVAN, 1947 (Saka)     STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
    CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
 
  

55 
 
APPENDIX I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2024-25) MINUTES 
OF THE TWENTY SIXTH SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 18th August, 202 5 from 1 500 hrs.  
to 1700 hrs. in the Committee Room ‘2’, EPHA, New Delhi. 
  
PRESENT 
 
     SHRI AZAD KIRTI JHA -    CHAIRPERSON 
 
     MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
6. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
7. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
8. Shri Praveen Patel  
9. Dr. Sambit Patra  
10. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
11. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
12. Shri Eatala Rajender 
13. Shri Nalin Soren 
14. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
15. Shri Subhash Barala 
16. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
17. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
18. Shri Naresh Bansal 
19. Shri Sanjay Raut 
20. Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy 
21. Shri Arun Singh 
22. Shri Tejveer Singh 
  
SECRETARIAT  
5. Smt. Maya Lingi   - Joint Secretary 
6. Ms. Miranda Ingudam            - Director 
7. Shri Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
8. Shri Nagendra Suman  - Deputy Secretary 

56 
 
9. Shri Panna Lal   - Deputy Secretary 
10. Shri Abhishek Kumar  -  Deputy Director 
11. Ms. Neelam Bhave   - Under Secretary 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the  
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration, the following Draft  
Reports:  
(i) XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  
(ii) XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  
(iii) Eleventh Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observation s/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Fifth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ pertaining 
to the Department of Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers. 
(iv) XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  
(v) XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  
(vi) XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  
(vii) XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  
(viii) XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  
 
 
3. Giving an overview of the important Observations/Recommendations contained  
in the draft Reports, the Chairperson solicited the views/suggestions of the Members. 
 
4.      After some deliberation s the Committee decided to Adopt five (05) Draft Reports 
viz, 03 ATRs and 02 subject Reports i.e, the Ninth, Tenth, Eleventh, Twelfth and 
Thirteenth draft Reports. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the 
Reports and present/lay the Reports  in the ongoing Session  in both the Houses of 
Parliament.  
 
5.  The Committee decided to consider Draft Report No. Fifteenth and Sixteenth for 
adoption in the next Sitting of the Committee to be held on 19.08.2025 at 1600 hrs. 
onwards. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
  

57 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2024-
25) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024 -25)’ PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS). 
 
Total No. of Recommendations 33 
I. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
(Sl. Nos. 2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,22,23,24,25,26 
           27,28,29,30,31,32,33)  
 
28 
Percentage of Total: 85 % 
II. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not like to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
NIL  
 
00 
Percentage of Total:  0% 
III. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
replies given by the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and which require reiteration:  
(Sl. Nos. 1,10,11, 20, 21)  
 
 
05 
Percentage of Total: 15%  
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
final replies of the Government are still awaited:  
NIL  
 
00 
Percentage of Total:  0%  
 