i 
 
                                                                                                              
14 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
    
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
PRICE RISE OF MEDICINES IN THE PHARMACEUTICAL SECTOR 
IMPACTING THE LIVES OF ORDINARY CITIZENS ADVERSELY- A REVIEW  
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2025/  AGRAHAYANA, 1947 (SAKA) 
 
   


ii 
 
CC&F.No. 194 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
PRICE RISE OF MEDICINES IN THE PHARMACEUTICAL SECTOR IMPACTING 
THE LIVES OF ORDINARY CITIZENS ADVERSELY- A REVIEW  
(2024-25) 
  
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 04th October, 2025 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 01st December, 2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21st August, 2025 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2025/ AGRAHAYANA, 1947 (SAKA) 


iii 
 
  
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25)  
INTRODUCTION  
Glossary of Abbreviations  
 
REPORT 
 
PART – I 
 
 
NARRATION   
PART- II OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS  
 ANNEXURES (1-10)  
 
APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2024-25) held on 7th January, 2025.  
 
II. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2024-25) held on 8th May, 2025.  
 
II. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2024-25) held on 19th August, 2025. 
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS 
(2025-2026) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Dr. Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
21. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Subhash Barala 
24. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
25. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
26. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
27. Shri Arun Singh 
28. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
29. Shri Tejveer Singh 
30. Shri G.K. Vasan 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi   : Joint Secretary  
2. Ms. Miranda Ingudam  :  Director  
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh  : Deputy Secretary 
 

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2024-25) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Dr. Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
21. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Subhash Barala 
23. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
24. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
25. Shri Sanjay Raut 
26. Shri Naresh Bansal 
27. Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy 
28. Dr. Kalpana Saini 
29. Shri Arun Singh 
30. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
31. Shri Tejveer Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi   : Joint Secretary  
2. Ms. Miranda Ingudam  :  Director  
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh  : Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Neelam Bhave   : Under Secretary  

vi 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (202 5-26) 
having been authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf, this Fourteenth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Price Rise of medicines in the Pharmaceutical 
Sector impacting the lives of ordinary citizens adversely - A Review’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals).  
2. The Committee had a briefing by the representatives of the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals on 7 th January, 2025 and took oral evidence of the representatives 
of the Department of Pharmaceuticals on the subject on 8th May, 2025. 
3.  The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on 
19th August, 2025.  
 
4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Department 
of Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers  for tendering evidence and 
placing before the Committee all the requisite information related to examination of 
the subject.  
 
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to 
the Committee.  
 
6. For ease of reference and convenience, the Observations/ Recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; AZAD KIRTI JHA 
19 AUGUST, 2025 CHAIRPERSON, 
28 SHRAVAN, 1947(SAKA) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 
 

Glossary of Abbreviations 
 
Abbreviation                          Full Form 
PTS 
MRP 
IPA 
TMR 
DPCO 
DoP 
NPPA 
PMBI 
WPI 
NLEM 
PTR 
JAKs 
AB-PMJAY 
PMJAY 
AMRIT 
BMS 
DES 
DCGI 
PPIs 
MoHFW 
BVS 
FDC 
 
Price to Stockist 
Maximum Retail Price 
Indian Pharmaceutical Alliance 
Trade Margin Rationalisation 
Drug (Prices Control) Order 
Department of Pharmaceuticals 
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
Pharmaceuticals & Medical Devices Bureau of India 
Wholesale Price Index 
National List of Essential Medicines 
Price to Retailer 
Jan Aushadhi  Kendras 
Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana 
Pradhan Manti Jan Aushadi Yojana 
Affordable Medicines and Reliable Implants for Treatment 
Bare Metal Stents  
Drug Eluting Stents 
Drugs Controller General of India  
Proton Pump Inhibitors  
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
Bioresorbable Vascular Scaffold 
Fixed Dose Combination 
 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
PART – I 
 
NARRATION 
 
 
 
 The Department of Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
informed that the Indian pharmaceutical industry ranks third globally in terms of volume 
and eleventh in terms of value. In terms of its size, the Indian Pharmaceutical 
Industries is currently valued at $ 50 Billion and is expected to reach $ 130 billion by 
2030. India produces more than 500 APIs and 60,000 generic drugs across 60 
therapeutic categories. 
 
I. Setting up of National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) 
  
2.    The New Drug Policy, 1994 envisaged the setting up of National Pharmaceutical 
Pricing Authority (NPPA). It was set-up in 1997 as an independent body of experts 
in the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP). 
NPPA was delegated the powers to implement and enforce the then extant Drugs 
(Prices Control) Order 1995. 
   
3.     NPPA is headed by Chairman in the rank of Additional Secretary to the 
Government of India. The organization also has a Member Secretary in the rank of 
Joint Secretary to the Government of India. The other Members of the Authority 
include the Drugs Control ler General of India (DCGI); Adviser (Cost), Office of the 
Chief Advisor (Cost); and Adviser, Department of Economic Affairs.  
The functions of NPPA, inter-alia, include: 
  
a.     To implement and enforce the provisions of the DPCO, 1979, 1987, 1995 
and 2013 in accordance with powers delegated to it. 
 b.    To monitor the availability of medicines & medical devices, identify 
shortages, if any, and to take remedial steps. 
 c.    To undertake and/or sponsor relevant studies in respect of pricing of 
drugs/formulations. 
 d.   To deal with all legal matters arising out of the decisions of the Authority. 
 e.    To render advice to the Central Government on changes/revisions in 
pharmaceutical policy. 
 f.    To render assistance to the Central Government in parliamentary matters 
relating to pharmaceutical pricing. 
 
4. The Committee desired to know as to why the prices of medicines are so high, 
and whether the Department is satisfied with the prices of medicines in the market and 
also whether the prices of medicines should not be brought down. The Department in 
a written note submitted as follows: 

2 
 
 
(a) India is among only 24 countries out of about two hundred countries who are 
net exporters of formulations and is globally ranked third (Annex 1). This shows 
that Indian medicine prices are on the average globally among the lowest, since 
exporters would not be competitive unless prices in India were lower.  
(b) The prices of essential medicines in India are lower in comparison to those in 
other middle and low income countries, as indicated by the study comparing 
the prices of top -selling formulations in the said top -selling therapeutic 
categories and dosage forms  with the prices in such other countries . 
(Annex 2.) 
(c) The rise in prices in essential/scheduled medicines is less than or in line with 
inflation, as indicated by the analysis of impact of ceiling prices post DPCO, 
2013 for top -selling formulations in the top -selling four therapeutic categories 
that account for 60% value of such medicines in the top -selling four dosage 
forms that account for 90% valu e shows that over the 11 -year period from 
March 2014 to March 2025.Similarly, the rise in prices in non -scheduled 
medicines has been 5.5% per annum, which is broadly in line with inflation over 
the corresponding period (Annex 3). Thus, prices of medicines on the average 
have been broadly in line with inflation. 
(d) Estimated annual savings of over ₹24,000 crore have accrued to patients under 
DPCO, 2013 in respect of essential/scheduled and non -scheduled medicines. 
(Annex 4). 
 
The above covers both branded and generic formulations. 
 
While the above brings out that medicine price levels in India are among the 
lowest in the world and considerable reduction in prices and price stability have been 
achieved under the existing price regulation framework, the framework is revisited 
from time to time in light of experience and feedback gathered.  As a part of this, a 
Trade Margin Rationalisation (TMR) approach of capping Trade Margin has been 
implemented as a pilot in respect of 42 high price anti -cancer medicines and during 
the pandemic, on si x COVID related devices. This was done by exercising 
extraordinary powers available under paragraph 19 of DPCO, 2013, under which such 
capping can be done only for a limited period.  In light of experience of TMR and 
feedback gathered, the Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) and NPPA have 
undertaken stakeholder consultations regarding incorporation of a suitable enabling 
provision for applying a TMR approach on DPCO, 2013. The feedback gathered from 
the consultations is under examination for formulating an appropriate policy view in 
the matter. 
 
5. During the course of Oral Evidence the Committee requested the 
representative to tell something about Trade Margin Rationalization (TMR). In reply 
the representative submitted as follows: 
“सर , जो हमारी  वर्तमान  देश की फामात पॉलिसी है, उसमें शेड्यूल्ड ड् र ग या एनएिईएम 
ड् र ग की जो लिस्ट है, उस पर  सीलििंग प्राइसलफक्सेशन होर्ा  है। हमार े  पास इसक े अिावा 

3 
 
इमरजेंसी क िं ड्ीशन में लिलमटेड् टाइम के लिए इमरजेंसी पावसत हैं। इसमें ओवरटाइम  क ु छ-क ु छ 
मामिोिं में क ु छ महिंगी क ैं सर ड् र ग्स, हाटतड् र ग्स, कोलवड् से ररिेलटड्  क ु छ इलिपमेंट्स वगैरह , हाटत 
स्टैंट इन सब चीजोिं के लिए इसका उपयोग ड्ीपीसीओ के पैरा -9 के र्हर्  लकया गया। इन पर  
प्राइमरी  चीज यह की गई लक प्राइसलफक्स नहीिं लकए गए। इसमें यह कहा गया लक ट रेड् के मालजतन 
को लफक्स कर  देर्े  हैं, लजससे ट रेलड्िंग मालजतन बहुर्  ज्यादा न हो। इसमें मोटे र्ौर  पर  अिग-अिग 
चीजोिं के लिए अिग-अिग ट रेड् मालजतन्स इिंड्स्ट र ी के कर ें ट लड्स्ट र ीब्यूशन कॉस्ट स्ट र क्चर को देखर्े  
हुए लफक्स लकए गए।“ 
 
 
6. The Committee then desired to know as to how the standard of fixations 
decided: 
“सर , इिंड्स्ट र ी को ही देखना पड़र्ा  है। हम यह मानकर  चिर्े  हैं लक आज बाजार  में अगर  
लड् र स्ट र ीब्यूशन मालजतन यह चि रहा  है र्ो  इसका कोई बेस होगा………..हमारा  जो कर ें ट 
ड्ीपीसीओ है और  उसमें जो दाम है, वह हमने लड्स्ट र ीब्यूटर िेवि पर  लफक्स लकए हैं। 
लड्स्ट र ीब्यूटर िेवि पर  हमारा  जो लफक्सेशन है, उसकी प्राइस को हम लफक्स करर्े  
हैं।………सर , टीएमआर  में हमारी  सीमा यह है लक टीएमआर  जहािं हमने िगाया, वहािं ठीक-
ठीक अनुभव रहा  और  बचर्  भी हुई, िेलकन हमारी  वर्तमान  नीलर्  में जैसा मैंने बर्ाया  लक यह 
क े वि हमने इमरजेंसी और  टाइम लिलमटेड् यूज के लिए है और  आज की र्ारीख  मेंवर्तमान नीलर्  
अिाउ करर्ी  है।  
इस में हमार े  इिंड्स्ट र ी से क ु छ क िं सल्टेशिंस भी हुए लक क्या इसको और  व्यापक करना  
चालहए। एक सहमलर्  हुई है, िेलकन क ु छ लबिंदुओिं पर  िोगोिं का मर्ािंर्र भी है और  लड्फर ें टग्रुप्स 
ऑफ इिंड्स्ट र ी के लड्फर ें ट ओलपलनयिंस हैं। हम इस टीएमआर  के इश्यू को कर ें टिी एग्जालमन कर  
रहे  हैं। It has been under active examination of the Department. हम उस पर  क ु छ 
व्यू िेकर  आगे नीलर्गर्  फ ै सिा िेने की कोलशश कर ें गे।” 
 
7. During evidence, w hen the Committee shared Price List of few renowned 
pharma companies which exhibited exorbitant and unjustified trade margin of ten 
ranging between 500% to 1800%  and asked as to why these medicines can not be 
made available to the citizens at about similar prices as available through the 
Government initiative like Pradhan Mantri Janaushadi Kendra. The representative of 
Department of Pharmaceuticals deposed as under: 
“Sir, the Jan Aushadhi medicines, as I said, does not go through the normal 
distribution channel or its costs.  The Jan Aushadhi medicine is centrally 
procured for the whole of the country. So, the scale of economies is very 
different. Also, there is no market development cost.We also give an incentive 
and a one-time initial cost to the pharmacies and so on. So those are the things 
because of which the cost structure becomes different. Till the distributor point, 
the entire system is run by the PMBI.  So, again, it is not like an independent 
distributor with their cost margins, etc. So it is not directly comparable. That is 

4 
 
the point. So, we cannot pick up a price point from Jan Aushadhi and say the 
same price point will apply here because it is not an Apple -to-Apple 
comparison. But, as regards the other point which you are saying, as the CEO, 
NPPA also said, the viable optio ns seem to be trade margin rationalization. 
And, we do need to take a policy decision on that.  That seems to be the way 
ahead. The discussions on this originally started not with a drug context. The 
NITI Aayog floated paper of medical devices. But then, it was felt that maybe it 
is relevant for this also. A small trial was done for high-value cancer drugs. And, 
we were also constrained by the fact that the present policy does not permit it.  
We could only introduce it for emergency use in certain cases for a limited time. 
But then if you have to make a regular policy, we have done consultations over 
the last one to two years. And as I said, we are now approaching the stage of 
concluding the deliberations and the examinations so that we can, lay a specific 
proposal for the Government's consideration.  So, we are approaching that 
stage now”. 
 
8. The representative further apprised the Committee regarding TMR as follows: 
 
“Sir, as I said, TMR is the approach that we are considering and we have 
done the consultations also. There are one or two outstanding issues on 
which we are trying to resolve the different points of view, and thereafter 
we propose to take it for a policy decision.” 
 
9. When the Committee pointed out that the issue of TMR is being debated upon 
from long time and the prices of medicines are sky rocketing and after the multinational 
pharma companies can be asked to give medicines at the same price which is given 
under the Pradhan Mantri Jan Aushadhi Yojana. In reply the representative hence 
submitted as follows: 
 
“Sir, the Jan Aushadhi medicines, as I said, does not go through the 
normal distribution channel or its costs. The Jan Aushadhi medicine is centrally 
procured for the whole of the country. So, the scale of economies is very 
different. Also, there is no market development cost. We also give an incentive 
and a one-time initial cost to the pharmacies and so on. So those are the things 
because of which the cost structure becomes different. Till the distributor point, 
the entire system is run by the PMBI.  So, again, it is not like an independent 
distributor with their cost margins, etc. So it is not directly c omparable. That is 
the point. So, we cannot pick up a price point from Jan Aushadhi and say the 
same price point will apply here because it is not an Apple -to-Apple 
comparison. But, as regards the other point which you are saying, as the CEO, 
NPPA also sai d, the viable options seem to be trade margin rationalization. 
And, we do need to take a policy decision on that.  That seems to be the way 
ahead.  
 

5 
 
10. The Committee enquired, whether the Department has put any mechanism to 
fix a limit on the benefit accruing to the manufacturer of the medicines. In reply t he 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated that the objective of NPPP, 2012 is to put 
in place a regulatory framework for pricing of drugs with a view to ensure the 
availability of required medicines – “essential medicines” – at reasonable prices while 
providing sufficient opportunity for innovation and competition to support the growth of 
industry, thereby meeting the goals of employment and shared economic well -being 
for all. The ceiling prices of scheduled medicines and retail prices of new drugs are 
fixed by NPPA and not by companies. To ensure the availability of essential medicine 
at reasonable prices, NPPA, fixes the ceiling price of essential medicines, retail price 
of new drugs defined as per paragraph 2(1)(u) of DPCO, 2013 and monitors the prices 
of non-scheduled drugs in accordance with provisions of DPCO, 2013.  Further, it was 
the considered decision of the Government to move away from the earlier regime that 
provided for the control of the profits/benefits accruing to the companies so as to 
provide sufficient opportunity for innovation and growth in the sector. 
 
11. On being asked whether MRP on PTS of medicine Ciprofloxacin 500 mg and 
Tinidazole 600 mg is ₹450/ - but their MRP is ₹3500/ -. The Department in a written 
reply submitted thatNPPA has informed that Ciprofloxacin 500 mg and Tinidazole 600 
mg is not a scheduled formulation. As per Pharmarack database, a major database of 
market prices of medicines in the domestic market, the highest per tablet prices for the 
said formulation in the month of April 2025 were ₹20.76 for MRP (including taxes) and 
₹14.83 for PTS (excluding taxes). 
 
12. When asked whether PTS of Ibuprofen is ₹831/ - and its MRP is ₹4560/ -. The 
Department replied as under: 
 
NPPA has fixed ceiling prices of Ibuprofen formulation as below: 
S.No. Dosage and strength Unit Ceiling price  
(in ₹, excluding taxes) 
1 Tablet 200 mg 1 tablet 0.72 
2 Tablet 200 mg 1 tablet 1.22 
3 Oral liquid 
100 mg /5ml(p) 
1 ml 0.22 
4 Capsule 400 mg 1 capsule 1.33 
5 Capsule 200 mg 1 soft gelatin capsule 3.39 
All manufacturers are required to sell the formulations (generic or branded) 
within the notified ceiling prices (plus applicable taxes).  
 
13. When asked that PTS of Labocof is ₹316/- and MRP is ₹2850/-The Department 
submitted that  NPPA has informed that Labocof is not a scheduled formulation. 
Further, the formulation is not captured in Pharmarack, the principal source database 
use for monitoring market information in respect of over 14,000 formulations. 
 
14. A detailed price list of medicines of Five (5) common and very popular  
brands was shared with the representatives of the Department of Pharmaceuticals 

6 
 
(placed at Annexure 5-9) The Price List shows huge profit margins available to 
retailers as evident from the margin available to them.  For eliciting the comments of 
the Department the price list was also sent as an Annexure to Supplementary List of 
Points shared with the Depart ment. Wherein the Department was asked why such 
exorbitantly high trade margins; ranging from over 600% to more than 1100%, are 
permitted in several commonly prescribed medications used for routine and chronic 
health conditions. Thes e include widely used anti -allergy drugs and proton pump 
inhibitors (PPIs), which form part of standard treatment protocols across the country. 
Some of the specific formulations and their margins are as mentioned in the table 
below: 
Brand (Company) Composition  MRP 
(₹) 
PTS 
(₹) 
Margin 
% 
Common Anti-allergy medication  
Cetrest (Aristo)  Cetrizine 10 mg 21.06 1.85 +1038% 
Alexcet (Glenmark) Cetrizine hydrochloride 10 mg 21.06 2.00 +953% 
Aldryl+ (Alkem) Ammonium Chloride, Diphenhydramine, 
Menthol, and Sodium Citrate 114 11.25 +911% 
Common Acidity, Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) medication 
Nexom 40 (Aristo) Esomeprazole 40 mg 170 13.95 +1119% 
Pantoglen 40 
(Glenmark) Pantoprazole 40 mg 102 10 +920% 
Esomer 40 
(Glenmark) Esomeprazole 40 mg 180.50 25 +622% 
Common Essential Supplements 
Aristocal CT 
(Aristo) 
Calcium carbonate 500 mg + calcitriol 0.25 
mg + zinc 7.5 mg 327.30 16.95 +1831% 
Calbonex 500 tab 
(Glenmark) Calcium carbonate 1250 mg + vitamin D3  101.50 7.40 +1272% 
Cipcal CT (Cipla) Calcium carbonate 1250 mg + vitamin D3 305.00 28.55 +968% 
Common Cough Syrup 
Alkof LS (Alkem) Ambroxol, Guaifenesin, Levosalbutamol 118 24 +392% 
Aristokof DX 
(Aristo) 
Chlorpheniramine Maleate and 
Dextromethorphan Hydrobromide 129 18.40 +601% 
Cheston Cold DS 
(Cipla) 
Cetirizine, Paracetamol and 
Phenylephrine 79.50 23.35 +240% 
Medications for chronic lifestyle conditions like hypertension and diabetes 
Amlip-AT (Cipla) Amlodipine + Atenolol 72.60 9.60 +656% 
Cosart-AM (Cipla) Losartan + Amlodipine 75 20.60 +264% 
 

7 
 
The Department in their written reply submitted that  presently, prices of drugs are 
regulated as per the provisions of the Drugs (Prices Control) Order 2013 (DPCO, 
2013) based on the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy, 2012, with the objective 
of ensuring the availability of essential medicines at reasonable prices while providing 
sufficient opportunity for innovation and competition to support the growth of industry. 
It follows the principles of essentiality and market -based pricing of formulations only. 
As per extant provisions of DPCO, 2013, the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
(NPPA) under the Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) controls prices of medicines 
by fixing ceiling prices of formulations specified in Schedule-I to DPCO, 2013 which is 
based on the National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM) and retail prices of new 
drugs as defined in paragraph 2(u) of DPCO, 2013. Ceiling prices and retail prices are 
fixed by adding 16% margin to the average of Price to Retailer (PTR) of all brands 
having market share of equal to or more than 1% appearing in market database. 
Further, supply chain / marketing channel may vary across different drugs and as per 
the current policy framework the margin at various levels in the supply chain is not 
regulated and are part of business practices, and are guided by commercial 
considerations.  
 
Further, for the non -scheduled formulations, NPPA regulates prices as per the 
provisions of DPCO, 2013 and manufacturers are not allowed to increase the 
maximum retail price (MRP) of such formulations by more than 10% of MRP during 
preceding 12 months, alt hough the average annual price increase by such 
manufacturers of non -scheduled drugs over the five -year period from April 2020 to 
March 2025 at 5.6%, which is broadly in line with the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) rise 
of 5.4% over the same period and is sig nificantly lower than the permissible 10% 
increase.  
In this connection, it is submitted that in a study done through IQVIA, a leading global 
life sciences consulting firm, Indian prices were compared with those of three other 
low and middle income countries, viz., Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Brazil for top-selling 
dosage forms (tablets, liquids, capsules and injections) of top -selling therapeutic 
categories (anti-infective, anti-cancer, cardiovascular and hormonal drugs). The study 
revealed that the prices of both sch eduled and non -scheduled formulations in In dia 
were comparatively lower. (Annex -10) 
 
Further, access to drugs at affordable prices is being ensured not only through ceiling 
price fixation of essential medicines and capping price rise of other medicines but also 
through Jan Aushadhi Kendras that provide quality generic medicines at rates typically 
50% to 80% cheaper than branded medicines, cashless provision of medicines under 
Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana in case of hospitalisation, free 
provision of essential drugs in public health facilities under Government’s Free Drugs 
Service Initiative, through AMRIT Pharmacy stores, and financial assistance to poor 
patients under Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi and the Health Minister’s Discretionary Grant. 
 
Insofar as the company-specific formulations mentioned in the Point are concerned, it 
is submitted that assessing the trade margin in respect of a specific formulation 
requires analysis of various cost components specific to the business operations for 

8 
 
the distribution of that formulation. Under the extant legal dispensation, such cost 
information is not available to the Department or NPPA. Therefore, inputs in the matter 
were sought from the Indian Pharmaceutical Alliance (IPA), which is the industry 
association of major domestic manufacturers. 
 
IPA has informed that supply and distribution of branded generic formulations is done 
through two types of marketing channels: the “branded generics” channel that typically 
caters to major demand centres and the “trade generics” channel that typically caters 
to remote and rural areas that have low -volume sales and account for about 8 -9% of 
the market. The distribution costs for the two channels are structurally different, which 
translate into high difference in their per unit distribution costs in percentage terms.  
The following factors are pertinent in this connection: 
(a) Low-volume sales result in apportionment of fixed costs of distribution over a 
relatively smaller number of formulation units sold, which would translate into 
trade margins that may be high in percentage terms. 
(b) In the case of formulations sold through the “branded generics” channel, the 
manufacturer maintains inventory for uninterrupted supply, along with 
associated significant inventory carrying costs, and also bears the costs of 
awareness activities related to these products, while the distribution channel 
only incurs logistics and distribution point costs. In contrast, in the case of 
formulations sold through the “trade generics” channel, the distribution channel 
incurs additionally the cost of carrying inventory and awareness.  
(c) Apart from the above additional cost constituents, in the “trade generics” 
channel, the distribution channel costs are themselves typically higher than the 
corresponding costs incurred on formulations that are typically marketed 
through the “branded generi cs” channel, since the costs of logistics, staffing, 
expired inventory, cold chain, etc. in the “trade generics” channel are higher as 
sale volumes are smaller and offtake slower and uncertain and the distribution 
chain is longer due to this channel being typically adopted for supplies to remote 
and rural areas. In this connection, it is pertinent that the inventory carrying 
costs are higher for smaller retailers located away from main towns as they 
need to carry at least two months of stock to ensure avail ability, whereas 
retailers in larger towns who are supplied on daily basis carry only two to three 
weeks of inventory. Further, the costs of finance for the two sets of retailers 
may be significantly different as smaller retailers may have smaller balance -
sheets and lower credit rating assessment. 
(d) Further, unlike in the case of the “branded generics” channel, where the 
manufacturer may maintain centralised inventory offering cost advantages 
accruing from economies of scale, in the case of the “trade generics” channel, 
there may typically be multiple  smaller distributors who would not have the 
same scale and whose cost of distribution would, therefore, be higher. 
(e) The above cost related factors significantly impact the percentages for trade 
margin for formulations marketed through the “trade generics” channel in two 
ways. First, the Price to Stockist (PTS) at which the manufacturer sells 
becomes lower, reducing the denominator on which the percentage is 

9 
 
calculated and, secondly, the absolute trade margin becomes higher, raising 
the numerator in the percentage calculation.  
 
Thus, the trade margins for the two channels may differ considerably in percentage 
terms and may serve to offset higher distribution costs, which enable uninterrupted 
supply of essential medicines despite inherently high costs and logistical challenges. 
Notwithstanding the fact that price rise has remained broadly in line with the rise in 
WPI, that drug prices in India for both scheduled and non-scheduled formulations are 
among the lowest in the world and that affordable medicines are being made available 
to the common man through multiple country-wide initiatives as aforesaid, NPPA and 
DoP are engaged in appropriately addressing emerging issues on an ongoing basis. 
As part of this, NPPA invoked an exceptional clause under DPCO, 2013 that allows 
for fixing  of ceiling price of drugs in case of extraordinary circumstances in public 
interest, to cap the trade margin for 42 high -priced anti-cancer medicines as a pilot 
under a Trade Margin Rationalisation (TMR) approach. Further, in light of experience, 
DoP and NPPA have undertaken stakeholder consultations regarding incorporation of 
a suitable enabling provision for TMR in DPCO, 2013, and the feedback gathered from 
the consultations is under examination for formulating an appropriate policy in the 
matter. 
 
 
15. On being asked about mechanism been put in place by the Department to 
control the MRP of medicines. The Department submitted the measures taken to keep 
the prices of essential medicines under control are summarised below:  
(a) NPPA fixes the ceiling prices of scheduled medicines, that is, the medicines 
specified in the said Schedule. The prices fixed by NPPA are applicable to 
all Manufacturers and marketers selling the specified formulations, whether 
generic or branded. Manufacturers and marketers of scheduled medicines 
(branded or generic) are required to sell the same within the ceiling price 
fixed by the NPPA and applicable GST and annual revision based on WPI. 
NPPA also refixes the ceiling price after five years. The average price 
reduction due to refixation of prices under NLEM, 2022 is about 17%, 
leading to annual savings of approximately ₹3,788 crore to patients.  
(b) NPPA also fixes the retail prices of new drugs as defined in DPCO, 2013 
for existing manufacturers of scheduled formulations. Till 13.2.2025, retail 
price of over 3,100 new drugs under DPCO, 2013 have been fixed. 
(c) For non-scheduled formulations (both branded and generic), manufacturers 
are required to not increase the maximum retail price by more than 10% 
per annum. 
(d) In addition, NPPA has fixed the prices of number of drugs, in public interest, 
as follows: 
(i) In 2014, NPPA capped the MRP of 106 non-scheduled anti-diabetic 
and cardiovascular treatment drugs, resulting in estimated annual 
savings of about ₹350 crore to patients. 
(ii) Trade margin of non-scheduled formulations of 42 select anti-cancer 
medicines were capped under a trade margin rationalisation 

10 
 
approach, wherein price of about 500 brands of medicines were 
reduced by an average of about 50%, resulting into estimated annual 
saving of about ₹ 984 crore to patients.  
(iii) In February 2017, ceiling prices of coronary stents were fixed, 
resulting in estimated annual savings of about ₹11,600 crore to 
patients. 
(iv) In August 2017, ceiling prices of orthopaedic knee implants were 
fixed, resulting in estimated annual savings of about ₹1,500 crore to 
patients. 
(v) In June/July 2021, trade margin of oxygen concentrators, pulse 
oximeter, blood pressure monitoring machine, nebuliser, digital 
thermometer and glucometer were also capped, resulting in 
estimated annual savings of about ₹1,000 crore to consumers. 
 
 
16. When the Committee desire d to know regarding scheduled drugs and non-
scheduled drugs and how this classification of the drugs will be helpful in providing 
medicines to the common man at cheaper prices. The Department submitted that as 
per paragraph 2(1)(zb) of DPCO, 2013, “scheduled formulation” means any 
formulation, included in the First Schedule whether referred to by generic versions or 
brand name. MoHFW notifies the National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM) which 
is a list of medicines that are considered essential for addressing the priority 
healthcare needs of a population.  The NLEM is included in the Schedule-I of DPCO, 
2013. NPPA fixes the ceiling prices of these essential medicines specified in 
Schedule-I of the DPCO, 2013, in accordance with the provisions of the DPCO, 2014 
on the basis of market-based data. All manufacturers of scheduled medicines have to 
sell their products within the ceiling price (plus appl icable Goods and Service Tax) 
fixed by the NPPA. Further, prices fixed by NPPA are applicable to all  the 
manufacturers/marketers selling the said formulation whether generic or branded. 
NPPA has fixed ceiling prices of 928 formulations under NLEM, 2022 and previous 
NLEMs. 
 
 
17. Further, as per paragraph 2(1)(v) of DPCO, 2013, “non-schedule” formulation 
means a formulation which is not included in Schedule -I. As per the provisions of 
DPCO, 2013 the manufacturers of non -scheduled formulations are not allowed to 
increase the maximum retail price of such formulations by more than 10% per 
annum. 
 
 
18. During oral evidence the representative further elaborated the issue of 
scheduled and non-scheduled medicines as under: 
“Sir, in the present policy framework, as the Secretary mentioned, so far 
as the scheduled medicines are concerned, the prices are controlled. The 
ceiling price is fixed by the NPPA across the industry; so, nobody can sell that 
medicine more than the ceilin g price fixed. They can sell it at a lower price.  

11 
 
What we fix is PTR plus 16 per cent margin is allowed.  And over and above 
that, they can add the local taxes which essentially is a GST and that should be 
the MRP and nobody can sell it above the price. So far as the non-scheduled 
medicines are concerned, the companies are free to fix their prices. That is the 
existing policy framework.  Now, the regulation that comes from the NPPA is 
that once they fix the price at the initial stages, they cannot increase it more 
than 10 per cent during a 12-month period. That is the control we exercise over 
them. But as regards the initial fixation, we d o not have any regulatory 
framework for that at the moment.  Your point is well taken and it is something 
of a concern for us also. It is regarding the variation in the prices of the same 
formulation, same molecules going into but different brands, different 
companies. There is a huge variation. So  one of the things that has been 
coming up for consideration is that how do we control this. TMR is being looked 
at as a viable option to control these price variations so that the margin is fixed 
by the Government. Beyond that, they cannot charge. As I sa id, there have 
been discussions on this and there is broad agreement on a major part of the 
proposal but there are some issues from different industry groups. So those are 
being debated and maybe soon we will have some kind of a framework for that.” 
     
 
19. The Committee then desired to know the opinion of the Department to reduce 
the cost of medicines in view of  Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadi  Pariyojana 
scheme and steps can be taken in  this regard.  In  a written reply the Department 
submitted as follows : 
(a) The Government has launched the Pradhan Mantri  Bhartiya Janaushadhi 
Pariyojana scheme with the objective of making quality generic medicines 
available at affordable prices to all. Under the scheme, dedicated outlets known 
as Jan Aushadhi Kendras (JAKs) have been opened to provide quality generic 
medicines at rates that are typically 50% to 80% cheaper than branded 
medicines. Over 16,000 JAKs have been opened across the country till  date. 
2,100 types of medicines and 310 surgicals and devices are covered under the 
product basket of the scheme, covering all major therapeutic groups, such as 
cardiovascular, anti -cancers, anti -diabetics, anti -infectives, anti -allergic and 
gastro-intestinal medicines and nutraceuticals. Over the last 10 years, 
medicines sold through JAKs have resulted in  estimated savings of about 
₹38,000 crore to citizens in comparison to the maximum retail prices of 
corresponding leading branded medicines in the market. 
(b) Under Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya  Yojana (AB-PMJAY) of 
the Department of Health and Family Welfare, health assurance/insurance 
cover of ₹5 lakh per family per year is provided for secondary or tertiary care 
hospitalisation, including for medicines. Over 41 crore persons have been 
issued PMJAY cards. 
(c) Under the Free Drugs Service Initiative of the National Health Mission, essential 
drugs are provided free of cost in public health facilities.  
(d) Under the Amrit (Affordable Medicines and Reliable Implants for 
Treatment)initiative of the Department of Health and Family Welfare, affordable 

12 
 
medicines are provided for the treatment of cancer, cardiovascular and other 
diseases, implants, surgical disposables and other consumables etc., at a 
significant discount of up to 50% on market rates through AMRIT Pharmacy 
stores set up in number of hospitals and healthcare institutions. 
(e) Financial assistance is provided to poor patients belonging to families living 
below the poverty line, who suffer from major life-threatening diseases including 
cancer, under the umbrella scheme of Rashtriya  Arogya Nidhi and the Health 
Minister’s Discretionary Grant. 
(f) NPPA fixes the ceiling prices of scheduled medicines. The prices fixed by NPPA 
are applicable to all Manufacturers and marketers selling the specified 
formulations, whether generic or branded. Manufacturers and marketers of 
scheduled medicines (branded or generic) are required to sell the same within 
the ceiling price fixed by the NPPA and applicable GST and annual revision 
based on WPI. It also refixes prices after five years. The average price reduction 
due to refixation of prices under NLEM, 2022 is abou t 17%, leading to annual 
savings of approximately ₹3,788 crore to patients.  
(g) NPPA also fixes the retail prices of new drugs as defined in DPCO, 2013 for 
existing manufacturers of scheduled formulations. Retail price of over 3,200 
new drugs under DPCO, 2013 have been fixed till date. 
(h) In case of non -scheduled formulations (both branded and generic), 
manufacturers are required to not increase the maximum retail price by more 
than 10% per annum.  
(i) In addition, NPPA has fixed the prices of number of drugs, in public interest, as 
follows: 
(i) In 2014, NPPA capped the MRP of 106 non-scheduled anti-diabetic and 
cardiovascular treatment drugs, resulting in estimated annual savings of 
about ₹350 crore to patients. 
(ii) Trade margin of non -scheduled formulations of 42 select anti -cancer 
medicines were capped under a trade margin rationalisation approach, 
wherein price of about 500 brands of medicines were reduced by an 
average of about 50%, resulting into estimated annual saving of about ₹ 
984 crore to patients.  
(iii) In February 2017, ceiling prices of coronary stents were fixed, resulting 
in estimated annual savings of about ₹11,600 crore to patients. 
(iv) In August 2017, ceiling prices of orthopaedic knee implants were fixed, 
resulting in estimated annual savings of about ₹1,500 crore to patients. 
(v) In June/July 2021, trade margin of oxygen concentrators, pulse oximeter, 
blood pressure monitoring machine, nebuliser, digital thermometer and 
glucometer were also capped, resulting in estimated annual savings of 
about ₹1,000 crore to consumers. 
 
20. The Committee then desired to know whether the Department has undertaken 
any study regarding  difference in the PTS and MRP printed on the medicines . The 
Department submitted that no such study has been undertaken by the Department. 
However, the Indian Pharmaceutical Alliance (IPA), which is the industry association 
of major domestic manufacturers, has informed that t he pharmaceutical industry 

13 
 
operates under various models: patented drugs, branded generics, trade generics and 
pure generics.  
 
21. Asked about the present status of the pharmaceutical policy stated to be under 
consideration of the Department and timeline of the policy is  likely to be finalized , it 
was submitted that  the Department of Pharmaceuticals  has held stakeholder 
consultations regarding various provisions of DPCO, 2013. Various stakeholder 
groups and associations were invited to make presentations and submissions and give 
their recommendations during the course of interactive deliberations. The matter is 
under examination in the  Department, keeping in view the suggestions and 
recommendations gathered from stakeholders. 
         
 
22. When asked to state that whether it is a fact that as soon as a drug is put under 
DPCO, its production is stopped.  The Department submitted thatNPPA has informed 
that no such instance has come to its notice.  
 
23. When specifically pointed out that w hether Glimepiride with Metformin 
combination was capped under DPCO but the companies replaced it with Glimepiride 
plus and Metformin plus Vognilibose and then charged higher price and  came out of 
the purview of the DPCO the Department submitted that  Ceiling prices are fixed for 
scheduled formulations. Both Glimepride with Metformin combination and Glimepiride 
plus and Metformin plus Vognilibose are not scheduled formulations. 
 
 
24. When asked whether the prices of medicines are controlled at PTS and not on 
the MRP.  The Department stated that  Price of a scheduled formulation is controlled 
by NPPA by fixing its ceiling price. Ceiling price plus applicable local taxes gives the 
MRP. Thus, for a given level of taxation, MRP of medicines is controlled for scheduled 
formulations. 
 
 
25. The Committee desired to know the reasons for the huge difference in the 
prices of stents available in the market and control of the Department in regard to the 
rising prices of stents used by heart patients. The Department in their reply stated that 
The Department of Health and Family Welfare incorporated coronary stents [Bare 
Metal Stents (BMS) and Drug Eluting Stents (DES)], which include metallic DES and 
Bioresorbable Vascular Scaffold (BVS) / Biodegradable stents, into NLEM, 2015 on 
19.7.2016. Following this, coronary stents were included in Schedule I to DPCO, 2013 
on 21.12.2016. NPPA initially fixed and notified ceiling prices for coronary stents on 
13.2.2017 at ₹7,260 for BMS and ₹29,600 for DES, including metallic DES and 
BVS/Biodegradable stents. 
 
On12.2.2018, NPPA revised the ceiling prices of coronary stents to ₹7,660 for 
BMS and ₹27,890 for DES, including metallic DES and BVS/Biodegradable stents. 
Subsequently, the ceiling prices were revised every year based on the annual WPI. 

14 
 
 
The ceiling prices of coronary stents fixed from time to time over the period from 
2017onwards are as below: 
 
Particulars 
Drug Eluting 
Stent 
(in₹) 
BareMetal 
Stent 
(in₹) 
Ceilingpricesfixedon13.2.2017 29,600 7,260 
Ceilingpricesw.e.f.1.4.2017 30,180 7,400 
Ceilingpricesre-fixedon12.2.2018 27,890 7,660 
Ceilingpricesw.e.f.1.4.2018 28,849 7,923 
Ceilingpricesw.e.f.1.4.2019 30,080 8,261 
Ceilingpricesw.e.f.1.4.2020 30,647 8,417 
Ceilingpricesw.e.f.1.4.2021 30,811 8,462 
Ceilingpricesw.e.f.1.4.2022 34,128 9,373 
Ceilingpricesw.e.f.1.4.2023 38265.07 10509.20 
Ceilingpricesw.e.f.1.4.2024 38,267.18 10,509.79 
 
All manufacturers are  required to sell coronary  stents within the ceiling  price (plus 
applicable Goods and Service Tax) fixed by NPPA. 
 
26. The Committee enquired negotiating the medicines accumulate in the stores at 
half price in market are being sold in exorbitant prices in the Hospital and steps taken 
in this regard. The Department in their written reply submitted that NPPA fixes the 
ceiling prices and retail prices of scheduled formulations and new drugs respectively, 
in accordance with the provisions of DPCO, 2013. However, manufacturers/marketers 
are at liberty to sell at a price below the ceiling price too and may do so based on their 
respective business considerations. 
 
27. On being asked about the Cardiac stents ranging from 30 thousand to two lakh 
rupees and even more are available in the market and there are no guidelines for the 
patients to choose which stents to be implanted and it is very difficult for the patient to 
decide, if any guidelines issued by the Department in public interest for selection of 
stents. The Department submitted that NPPA fixed and notified ceiling prices for 
coronary stents. Presently, the ceiling prices for coronary stents are ₹10,509.79 for 
Bare Metal Stents (BMS) and ₹38,267.18 for Drug Eluting Stents (DES) including 
metallic DES and Bioresorbable Vascular Scaffold (BVS) / Biodegradable Stents. All 
manufactures/marketers are required to sell coro nary stents within the ceiling price 
fixed by NPPA. 
 
28. It came to the notice of the Committee that a life saving cancer drug like Peg 
L-Asparaginase (3750 IU) being listed with an MRP of Rs.38.215.50 and is being s 
sold at Rs.9,200 – a staggering 76% is being offered on OncoHealthMart.com 
indicting that the actual trade price may be far lower than the MRP, with excessive 
margins built in for retail markups. When Committee desire to know as to why there 
is no regulation or margin cap on such high-value, essential medicines under the 
DPCO framework.  The Department in written reply submitted that in respect of the  

15 
 
sale of the specific formulations mentioned in the Point, it is submitted that assessing 
the trade margin in respect of a specific formulation requires analysis of various cost 
components specific to the business operations for the distribution of that 
formulation. Under the extant legal dispensation, such cost information is not 
available to the Department or NPPA. Therefore, inputs in the matter were sought 
from the Indian Pharmaceutical Alliance (IPA), which is the industry association of 
major domestic manufacturers. 
 
IPA has informed as follows: 
(a) There has been a rise in cancer incidence in recent years, prompting hospitals 
to invest in infrastructure for early diagnosis, treatment monitoring and 
comprehensive patient care, and keeping this in view, pharmaceutical 
companies may offer higher trade margins to hospitals and clinics. The overall 
cost of oncology treatment in hospitals and clinics is often influenced by 
essential components such as patient support programs, ongoing monitoring 
by specialist s and management of side effects, all of which are vital to 
ensuring safe and effective care. 
(b) Distributors and online retailers in any product segment at times offer deep 
discounts as costs incurred for customer acquisition to achieve the scale 
necessary for business viability and may subsequently raise prices.  
(c) Insofar as the specific formulations mentioned in the Point are concerned, it 
is informed that most leading companies do not supply their products to 
OncoHealthMart.com, as it is not one of their authorised stockists, distributors 
or channel partners. As such, the Association is not in position to comment on 
the authenticity or quality of products being sold on this platform at deep 
discounts compared to the printed MRP.  
 
29. The Committee have been informed that an anti-cancer medicine like Brcaone 
150 mg (used in breast and ovarian cancer) is listed at an MRP of Rs. 45,000 and 
sold at Rs.8,800/- is being given by OncoHealthMart.com and indicate a manipulative 
inflation of MRPs to enable retail profiteering.  The Committee desire to know what 
measures has the Department taken to audit and regulate MRPs of non -scheduled 
anti-cancer drugs, especially when they are being sold at a fraction of their listed 
price in the open market. The Department in their written reply stated that in respect 
of the sale of the specific formulations mentioned here in the reply given in the 
preceding p ara may be referred to .the Department further submitted that  with 
regardto audit of MRPs of drugs, it is submitted that the extant legal dispensation 
does not provide for audit of drug costs. 
 
Under DPCO, 2013, manufacturers are not permitted to increase MRP of such 
formulations by more than 10% of MRP during preceding 12 months. 
 
With regard to regulation of anti-cancer drugs, it is submitted that the following price 
regulatory actions have been taken: 
 
(a) NPPA has revised the ceiling prices of 131 anti -cancer scheduled 
formulations, resulting in reduction of around 21% in the ceiling prices from 
the ceiling prices fixed under NLEM, 2015 and annual savings of around 
₹294.34 crore to patients.  

16 
 
 
(b) NPPA has also fixed retail price of 29 non-scheduled anti-cancer formulations 
as new drugs.  
(c) NPPA has invoked an exceptional clause under DPCO, 2013 that allows for 
fixing of ceiling price of drugs in case of extraordinary circumstances in public 
interest, to cap the trade margin for 42 high -priced anti -cancer medicines 
under a Trade Margin Rationalisation (TMR) approach, reducing MRP of 526 
brands of these medicines by an average of about 50% and resulting in annual 
savings of around ₹984 crore to patients.  
 
Further, DoP and NPPA have undertaken stakeholder consultations regarding 
incorporation of a suitable enabling provision for TMR in DPCO, 2013, and the 
feedback gathered from the consultations is under examination for formulating an 
appropriate policy in the matter. 
 
  

17 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
NEED FOR REVIEW IN THE PRICE REGULATION FRAMEWORK OF MEDICINES  
1. The Committee note that a wide range of frequently prescribed medicines, 
used for common ailments and chronic conditions are being sold at a high 
prices with unjustified trade margin. When asked about the huge differential in 
price to supplier viz-a-viz MRPs of the medicines , t he Department has cited 
reasons such as distribution cost, etc which was not found convincing. When 
asked about the Departments inaction to curb the trade margins to the tune of 
600% to 1100% in common medications, the Department’s reply appears 
unsatisfactory  as it relied heavily on a general explanation of the Drugs (Prices 
Control) Order, 2013 (DPCO, 2013). The apparent lack of any control over trade 
margins, especially in the case of non -scheduled drugs, leaves the door open 
for widespread profiteering at the cost of patients.  The Committee desire that 
the Department undertake a comprehensive review of the extant price regulation 
framework to plug the existing loopholes in the pricing mechanism effecting the 
ordinary citizen.  
REGULATORY BLIND SPOTS IN DPCO, 2013: THE URGENT NEED TO 
EMPOWER NPPA  
2. The Committee note  that the existing Drugs (Prices Control) Order 2013 
(DPCO) is structurally inadequate to curb  pricing malpractices in India’s 
pharmaceutical sector. W hereas the DPCO empowers the National 
Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) to fix ceiling prices for drugs listed 
under the National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM), but it fails to extend this 
regulatory authority to the  unscheduled drugs. As such the NPPA is not  
empowered to regulate trade margins  for non NLEM drugs  in cases  where 
excessive markups are evident on widely used and lifesaving medicines. This  
regulatory gap allows  manufacturers  to launch non-scheduled formulations, 
both branded and generic, at arbitrary points. Although they are technically 
restricted from increasing the maximum retail price (MRP) by more than 10 
percent annually, the absence of initial price fixation renders this control largely 
meaningless.  This loophole  requires to be corrected . The Price to Stockist 
(PTS) data also remains undiscl osed to the public, as platforms like Pharma 

18 
 
Sahi Daam and Sugam App shows  only MRPs and failed to reveal the true extent 
of profiteering. Fixed dose combination (FDC) drugs, which account for a 
substantial share of prescriptions in India, also remain outside the ambit of price 
regulation despite their widespread use and potential for irrational 
combinations.  The Committee therefore, recommend   that the Department 
should look into the matter  and initiate ameliorative steps in this regard.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised by the steps taken by the department. 
TRADE MARGIN RATIONALIZATION 
 
3. The Committee note that, a Trade Margin Rationalization (TMR) approach 
of capping Trade Margin was implemented as a pilot in respect of 42 high price 
anti-cancer medicines and during the pandemic, on six COVI D related devices 
by exercising extraordinary powers available under paragraph 19 of DPCO, 
2013, under which such capping can be done only for a limited period.  In the 
light of experience of TMR and feedback gathered, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals (DoP) and NPPA have undertaken stakeholder consulta tions 
regarding incorporation of a suitable enabling provision for applying a TMR 
approach on DPCO, 2013. The feedback gathered from the consultations is 
under examination for formulating an appropriate policy view in the matter.  A 
perusal of these events reveals that TMR approach was implemented during the 
pandemic i.e. way back in the year 2019-2020 and a considerable time period of 
about five years have elapsed and in order to control the prices of medicines in 
the country the Department and NPPA is trying to incorporate suitable enabling 
provision for applying a TMR approach on DPCO , 2013 such delays 
unnecessarily impending on the provision for applying a TMR approach in 
DPCO, 2013.  The Committee  therefore,  desire  that the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals  in consultation with NPPA should come forward  for a  policy 
review in the matter at the earliest so  that medicines are available to the 
ordinary citizens at affordable prices.  
 
 
UNDUE PROFITS/BENEFITS ACCRUING TO DRUGS MANUFACTURING 
COMPANIES 

19 
 
4. The Committee note that the objective of National Pharmaceutical Pricing 
Policy (NPPP), 2012 is to put in place a regulatory framework for pricing of drugs 
with a view to ensure the availability of required medicines at affordable prices 
while providing sufficient opportunity for innovation and competition to support 
the growth of industry, thereby meeting the goals of employment and shared 
economic well-being for all. To ensure the availability of essential medicines at 
affordable prices, NPPA, fixes the ceilin g price of essential medicines and 
monitors the prices of non -scheduled drugs in accordance with provisions of 
DPCO, 2013.  The Committee note  that the PTS of Ciprofloxin 500  mg and 
Tinidazole 600 mg which came to notice of the Committee , is Rs. 450/ - but its 
MRP is Rs. 3500/ - hence a whopping difference of  Rs. 3050. S imilarly PTS of 
Ibrufin and Labocof is Rs. 831/ - and Rs.316/ - but their MRP is Rs.4560/ - and 
Rs.2850/- respectively hence again a big difference of Rs .3729/- and Rs.2534/-. 
Against this backdrop the Committee desire that the Department should review 
the matter, so that medicines  to the common man should be made available  at 
justifiable rate.  The Committee  may  be  apprised of the decision taken in the 
matter. 
 
FIXATION OF PRICES OF SCHEDULED/NON-SCHEDULED FORMULATIONS BY 
NPPA  
5. The Committee note that National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
(NPPA) fixes the ceiling prices of scheduled medicines and the prices so fixed 
by NPPA are applicable to all manufacturer and marketers selling the specified 
formulation, whether generic or branded . At the initial stage , non-scheduled 
drugs are not subject to price regulations/fixations. However, as regard non -
scheduled formulation (both branded and generi c) manufacturer are required 
not to increase the maximum retail price by more than 10% per annum. However, 
the Committee fails to understand the distinction made by NPPA regarding 
scheduled and non-scheduled formulations.   It seems evident that  NPPA  needs  
to put  more control on  prices of non-scheduled formulation to  obviate scope 
for  abuse by   manufacturers and marketers. The Committee therefore, desire 
that NPPA should consider  some appropriate control over prices of non -
scheduled formulations which are more in use  as has been done in the case of 
scheduled formulations . Where prices  are under check with more effective 

20 
 
control. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the 
Department as well as NPPA in this regard.    
 
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE PRICE TO STOCKIST (PTS) AND MAXIMUM 
RETAILS PRICE (MRP) 
6. The Committee note that as regard undertaking any study regarding 
difference between the Price to Stockist (PTS) and Maximum Retails Price (MRP) 
printed on the medicine,  the Department has submitted that it has not 
undertaken any such study. The Committee are of the view that by undertaking 
such a study the difference between the PTS and MRP would be highlighted and 
reasons for the difference would also emerge besides other benefits to the end 
consumer by way of reduction in the prices of medicines. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should initiate a ‘study’ in this regard 
at the earliest and they be apprised of the findings of the study.  
 
PHARMACEUTICAL POLICY 
7. As regard pharmaceutical policy under consideration of the Department , 
the Committee has been apprised that it has held stakeholder consultations 
regarding various provisions of DPCO, 2013. Further, va rious stakeholder 
groups and associations were also invited to make presentations and 
submissions and give their recommendations in the course of interactive 
deliberations. Presently, t he matter was statedly  under examination in the 
Department, where the suggestions and recommendations from stakeholders 
were being scrutinised. The Committee are of view  that  immediate steps should 
be taken to  come forth  with a  pharmaceutical policy where the thrust should 
be  to provide  both scheduled as well as non -scheduled formulations to the 
people at affordable prices. 
 
SUPPLY OF MEDICINES BY MULTINATIONAL PHARMA COMPANIES AT THE 
SAME PRICE AS GIVEN UNDER PMJAY 
8. The Committee note that the issue of Trade Margin Rationalisation (TMR) 
was under consideration of the Department f or a long time  with no final  
decision taken by the Department  so far . In the meanwhile , the prices of 
essential medicines/formulations have been rising and have become out of the 
reach of the common man. Against this backdrop, the Committee are of the view 

21 
 
that the multinational pharma companies need more control and  a  mechanism  
be evolved to provide medicines to the people at the prevailing Price to Stockist 
(PTS) under the Pradhan Mantri Jan Aushadhi Yojana (PMJAY). The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.  
 
HIGH PRICES OF BARE METAL STENT AND DRUG ELUTING STENT 
9. As regard the prices of stents available in the market, the Committee note 
that the NPPA initially fixed and notified ceiling prices for coronary stents on 13 
February, 2017 at Rs. 7,260/- for Bare Metal Stent (BMS) and Rs.29,600/- for Drug 
Eluting Stents (DES).  Subsequently, the prices of Bare Metal Stents  and Drug 
Eluting  Stents were revised from time to time. The ceiling price of Bare Metal 
Stent as fixed on 1 April, 2024 is Rs. 10,509.79 and the price of Drug Eluting 
Stent is fixed Rs.39,267.18.  It may be seen that the prices of  Bare Metal Stent 
and Dr ug Eluting Stent has increased by  Rs.3,249.79 and Rs.9,667.18 
respectively.  In addition to this, the patients  have to pay the applicable Goods 
and Service Tax as fixed by NPPA and charges of Hospital etc.  The Committee 
note the increase in the prices of Bare Metal Stent and Drug Eluting Stent which 
comes to around 44 percent and around 29 percent r espectively.  The 
Committee therefore, recommend that the NPPA as well as the Department 
should look into the matter  to bring down the prices of stents in our  Country. 
The Committee also recommend that the NPPA should strictly monitor and 
ensure that the stents  are not made available to the patients over and above the 
prices fixed by it and cases over charging, if any,  may be dealt with  strictly.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.  
TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN ONCOLOGY DRUG PRICING 
10. The Committee find gaps in clarity and consistency in so far as pricing 
mechanism of cancer drugs are concern ed. While the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals and NPPA acknowledges the need for detailed analysis to 
assess trade margins on specific formulations, they also conceded that such 
data was   not available with the Department or NPPA. The Committee feels that 
this raises serious questions about how policy oversight is exercised in the 
absence of critical  information.  The Committee are of the considered view that 
the reliance on inputs from the Indian Pharmaceutical Alliance (IPA), an industry 
body with inherent commercial interests, is bound to affect objectivity.  

22 
 
Admittedly, the IPA justifies higher trade margins for oncology products citing 
increased hospital infrastructure costs and comprehensive care requirements.  
The Committee, however, find this explanation lacks quantitative backing and 
does not directly add ress concerns of pricing transparency or affordability. 
Additionally, the Committee find that IPA’s claim that most leading companies 
do not supply to OncoHealthMart.com and therefore cannot comment on the 
authenticity of products being sold at deep discou nts appears to skirt the core 
issue of regulatory oversight over online drug sales. The Committee note that 
the Department's response, appears to dilute accountability in so far as a 
concrete mechanism for ensuring pricing fairness or product authenticity in the 
market is still lacking in the present system. The Committee therefore 
recommend that the Department take immediate and concrete steps to put in a 
robust mechanism to ensure full transparency in trade margins and pricing of 
cancer drugs.   To this e xtent, the Committee desire that the Department and 
NPPA to come up with a robust mechanism to collect real time data on pricing 
information directly from manufacturers, hospitals, and distributors and 
establish a regulatory framework for online drug sales, i ncluding strict 
monitoring of platforms like OncoHealthMart.com, to ensure that only authentic 
and approved products are sold in the market. The Committee are of the 
considered opinion that without these steps, patient safety and affordability 
remain at serious risk, and regulatory oversight will remain weak and ineffective. 
The Committee therefore recommend that requisite action plan with strict 
timelines be put in place at the earliest.  The Committee may be apprised of the 
action taken of the matter.  
 
STRENGTHENING OF PRICE REGULATION OF ANTI-CANCER DRUGS 
11. The Committee observe that the absence of a legal provision to audit drug 
costs under the existing law limits the ability to check whether MRPs of cancer 
medicines are truly justified. The Committee find that  although NPPA is 
endowed with exceptional powe rs to cap prices and margins, the lack of a 
permanent, legal mechanism for trade margin control remains to weaken long -
term price regulation and transparency and needs to be addressed with top 
priority and urgency. The Committee therefore, strongly recomme nd that the 
Department urgently introduce a clear legal provision in the Drug Price Control 
Orders ( DPCO), 2013, by way of appropriate amendments for effective 

23 
 
implementation of Trade Margin Rationalisation (TMR). The Committee feel that 
relying only on exceptional power clauses may not be sufficient to protect 
public interest in the long term and a permanent, transparent system must be 
put in place at the earliest to regularly monitor MRPs and  trade margins for life-
saving drugs like anti-cancer medicines. The Committee therefore desire that in 
order to ensure fair pricing, prevent unjustified markups, and make essential 
treatments more affordable for patients, the policy formulation process must be 
expedited to be followed by earnest implementation proc ess. The Committee 
may be apprised of the action taken in the matter.  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
19 August, 2025 CHAIRPERSON, 
28 Shravan, 1947 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
 

1 
 
Annex - 1 
 
  


2 
 
Annex - 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


4 
 
 
  


5 
 
Annex 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


7 
 
 
 
 
 
  


8 
 
Annex 4 
 
• The average price reduction due to refixation of prices is about 16.89%, resulting in 
total savings of around ₹ 3,788 crore. 
 
 
 
Savings to consumers under DPCO, 2013 


9 
 
 Particulars Savings to consumers  
(in crore ₹) 
Under NLEM, 2011 2,423 
Under NLEM, 2015 2,643 
Under NLEM, 2022 (till 20.12.2024) 3,788 
Coronary stents (CY2023) 11,633 
Under paragraph 19 of DPCO, 2013 350 
Orthopedic knee implants 1,500 
Anti-cancer drugs 984 
Trade-margin rationalisation of six 
medical devices during COVID 
1,000 
Total 24,321 
Note: The total savings calculated are in the nature of additional savings, since prices of 
many scheduled drugs are historically under price control. Additionally, consumers are also 
benefited due to the 10% cap on annual increase in MRP applicable to non-scheduled drugs. 
Hence, absolute savings on account of price regulation under DPCO, 2013 are likely to be 
much more than the above estimate. 
 

   
 
 
  
PRICE LIST 
NOVEMBER 2024 
HEALTHCARE AND LIFESCIENCE DIVISION 

   
 
 
 
HEALTHCARE DIVISION 
S.No. HSN CODE PRODUCT NAME COMPOSITION GROUP 
NAME  PACK MRP PTS SHIPPER PACK 
1 30049011 A9634 ACI FREE (LEMON) 
Svarjiksara (Shudh) 2.904G 
Nimbukamlam (Citrus Medica) 
2.015G Sodium Saccharin 12 
Mg/5G Contains Permitted 
Sweetener Excipients Q.S 
Pouch 5 gm. 10.00 4.45 30 x 40 x 5 
gm. 
2 30049011 A9637 ACI FREE (JEERA) 
Svarjiksara ( Shudh ) 2.7764 G 
Nimbukamlam ( Shushkam ) 
2.0286 G Jeera ( Cuminum 
Cyminum ) 0.01 G Excipients Q.S, 
Contains Permitted Sweetener 
Sodium Saccharin 20 Mg/5G 
Pouch 5 gm. 10.00 4.45 30 x 40 x 5 
gm. 
3 30049032 A3230 ACIGENE GEL 170ML 
MINT 
Magnesium Hydroxide Ip 200 Mg, 
Simethicone Ip 50 Mg, Dried Al. 
Hydroxide Ip 250 Mg / 10Ml, Mint 
Flavour 
Suspn. 170ml 
Bottle 73.00 22.75 60 X 1 X 170 
ml. 
4 30049074 A0026 AMLIP 10 TAB Amlodipine  Besilate Ip. Equivalent 
To Amlidipine ….10 Mg Tablets Tablets 10s 61.04 9.65 84 x 20 x 10s 
5 30049074 A0934 AMLIP 2.5 TAB Amlodipine  Besilate Ip. Equivalent 
To Amlidipine ….2.5 Mg Tablets Tablets 10s 17.80 5.00 42 x 50 x 10s 
6 30049074 A0025 AMLIP 5 TAB Amlodipine  Besilate Ip. Equivalent 
To Amlidipine ….5 Mg Tablets Tablets 10s 24.97 6.95 42x 50 x 10s 
7 30049074 A2435 AMLIP AT TAB 
Amlodipine Besilate Ip Equivalent 
To Amlodipine…..5 Mg + Atenolol Ip 
50 Mg 
Tablets 10s 72.60 9.60 60 x 20 x 10s 
8 30049079 A2432 AMLIP TL TABS 
Each uncoated bilayered tablet 
contains Telmisartan IP…..40 mg. 
Amlodipine Besilate IP equivalent 
to Amlodipine…..5 mg. Excipients 
q.s. 
Tablets 10s 73.92 16.40 54 x 10 x 10s 
9 30042064 A4112 AZICIP 250MG TAB 
6'S 
Azithromycin (Andhydrous)250 Mg 
(As Azithromycin Dihydrate Ip) Tablets 6s 78.28 44.15 36 x 20 x 6s 
10 30042064 A4113 AZICIP 500MG TAB 
3'S 
Azithromycin (Andhydrous)500 Mg 
(As Azithromycin Dihydrate Ip) Tablets 3s 79.19 44.15 72 x 20 x 3s 
11 30042064 A4117 AZICIP 100 ORAL 
SUSPN. 
Each 5 ml. contains Azithromycin 
IP (as dihydrate) equvalent to 
Azithromycin anhydrous….100 mg. 
Flavoured syrupy base…..q.s. 
Suspn. 15 ml. 41.71 21.50 8 x 20 x 15 ml. 
12 30042064 A4116 AZICIP 200 ORAL 
SUSPN. 
Each 5 ml. contains Azithromycin 
IP (as dihydrate) equvalent to 
Azithromycin anhydrous…..200 mg. 
Flavoured syrupy base…..q.s. 
Suspn. 15 ml. 57.28 29.25 8 x 20 x 15 ml. 
NOVEMBER’24 PRICE LIST 

   
 
13 30042019 C1026 CEFASYN 250 TABS 
10s 
Each film coated tablet contains 
Cefuroxime Axetil IP…equivalent to 
Cefuroxime….250 mg. 
Excipients…..q.s. 
Tablets 10s 275.00 93.35 80 x 10 x 10s 
14 30042019 C1027 CEFASYN 500 TABS 
10s 
Each film coated tablet contains 
Cefuroxime Axetil IP…equivalent to 
Cefuroxime…..500 mg. 
Excipients…..q.s. 
Tablets 10s 570.00 166.55 80 x 10 x 10s 
15 30042019 C4068 CEFIX 200 TAB (O) 
Cefixime I.P.(Trihydrate Equivalent 
To Anyhydrous Cefixime 200 Mg)  
200 Mg Tablet 
Tablets 10s 109.53 58.15 48 x 20 x10s 
16 30049031 C4864 CHESTON COLD 
TAB-AMBER 
Cetirizine Dihydrochloride Ip  ..5Mg 
Phenylephrine Hydrocloride Ip   
.10Mg Paracetamold Ip     325 Mg 
Tablets 10s 42.90 16.90 36 x 25 x 10s 
17 30049031 C8316 CHESTON COLD DS 
60ML 
Paracetamol Ip…250 Mg. 
Phenylephrine Hydrochloride Ip…5 
Mg. Cetirizine Dihydrochloride Ip…2 
Mg. In A Flavoured Syrupy Base 
Syrup 60 ml. 79.50 23.35 200  x 1 x 60 
ml. 
18 30049093 C4872 CHESTON AF 
SYRUP 60 ml. 
Each 5 ml. contains Phenylephrine 
Hydrochloride IP…..5 mg. 
Chlorpheniramine Maleate IP…..2 
mg. Flavoured syrupy base…..q.s. 
Syrup 60 ml. 75.00 17.05 8 x 25 x 60 ml. 
19 30045090 C2202 CIPCAL 250 TAB Elemental Calcium 250 Mg + Vit 
D3 125 Iu Capsule Tablets 30s 73.00 17.75 36 x 10 x 30s 
20 30045090 C2201 CIPCAL 500 TAB Elemental Calcium 500 Mg + Vit 
D3 250 Iu Capsule Tablets 15s 86.50 17.35 24 X 20 X 15s 
21 30045090 C2206 CIPCAL CT TABS 
Each film coated tablet contains 
1250 mg Calcium Carbonate from 
an  organic source ( Oyster Shell ) 
Equivalent to Elemental 
Calcium….500 mg, Calcitriol 
IP…0.25 mcg 
Tablets 15s 305.00 28.55 60 x 10 x 15s 
22 30045036 C5590 CIPCAL D3 
SACHETS 
Cholecalciferol [Vitamin D3] Ip 60, 
000 Iu Excipients……………….Q.S. Sachet 1 gm. 43.92 9.45 30 x 100 x 1 
gm. 
23 30049099 C5591 CIPCAL D3 
SOFTGELS CAP 
Cholecalciferol [Vitamin D3] Ip 60, 
000 Iu Excipients……………….Q.S. Capsules 4s 137.89 20.65 60 x 10 x 4s 
24 30045090 C2207 CIPCAL HD 12 TABS 
Calcium Carbonate IP…..1250 mg. 
from an Organic source (Oyster 
Shell) equivalent to Elemental 
Calcium…..500 mg.Vitamin D3 
IP…...500 IU Vitamin B12 IP…..15 mcg. 
Tablets 15s 144.14 26.50 40 x 10  x 15s 
25 30045090 C2203 CIPCAL SYRUP Elemental Calcium 250Ml + Vit D3,  
125 Iu  Syrup Syrup 150 
ml. 82.50 31.70 45 x 1 x 150 ml. 
26 30049039 C4613 CIPLACTIN SYRUP 
200 ml. 
Ceproheptadine Hydrochloride 
Anhydrous IP 2 mg. In a flavoured 
syrupy base 
Syrup 200 
ml. 159.57 35.00 36 x 1 x 200 
ml. 
27 30041030 C2701 CIPMOX 250 Y/G 
15'S In a flavoured syrupy base Capsules 15s 36.62 28.55 54 X 20 X 15s 
28 30041030 C2693 CIPMOX 500 - O 
15'S 
Amoxycillin Trihydrate I.P. 
Equivalent To Amoxycillin 500 Mg 
(Orange) 
Capsules 15s 123.64 53.20 36 x 20 x 15s 
29 30049069 C1603 CIP-ZOX TAB 6'S 
Diclofenac Sodium Ip…. 50 Mg + 
Paracetamol Ip… 325 Mg + 
Chlorozoxazone Usp…. 500 Mg, 
Excipient….. Qs 
Tablets 6s 81.07 13.60 20 X 50 X 6s 
30 30049099 C5501 CIPVILDIN-M TABS 
50/1000 
Each film coated tablet contains 
Vildagliptin IP…..50 mg. Metformin 
Hydrochloride IP…..1000 mg. 
Tablets 15s 165.00 40.15 28 x 6 x 15s 

   
 
31 30049099 C5502 CIPVILDIN-M TABS 
50/500 
Each film coated tablet contains 
Vildagliptin IP…..50 mg. Metformin 
Hydrochloride IP…..500 mg. 
Tablets 15s 156.75 35.00 42 x 6 x 15s 
32 30049099 C5500 CIPVILDIN 50 TABS Each uncoated tablet contains: 
vildagliptin IP…..50 mg. Tablets 15s 148.50 32.95 120 x 6 x 15s 
33 30049099 C1420 CLEARWAX EAR 
DROPS 10ML 
Para Dichlorobenzene 2% + 
Benzocaine 2.7% + Chlorbutol 5% + 
Turpentine Oil 15%. 
Drops 10 ml. 73.15 24.55 8 X 25 X 10 ml. 
34 30049031 C4915 COF - Q DX TAB 
Dextromehorphan Hydrobromide 
10Mg Chlorpheniramine Maleate 
2Mg Phenylephrine Hydrochloride 
5Mg Excipients Q.S. 
Tablets 10s 46.20 9.40 72 x 10  x 10s 
35 30049039 C8203 COF-RYL SYRUP 
100ML 
Diphenhydramine Hcl Ip ..14.08Mg, 
Amonium Cloride Ip.. 138Mg, 
Sodium Citret 57.03Mg 
Syrup 100 
ml. 82.50 15.80 100 x 1 x 100 
ml. 
36 30049099 C4802 COF-VYN TABS 
Bromhexine Hydrochloride Ip       
.8.00 Mg Phenylephrine 
Hydrochloride Ip     ....5.00 Mg 
Tablets 15s 36.00 8.80 54 x 20 x 15s 
37 30049079 C1712 COSART-H Llosartan Potassium Ip …. 50 Mg + 
Hydrochlorothaize  I.P. 12.5 Mg Tablets 10s 96.80 22.20 64 X 20 X 10s 
38 30049073 C1710 COSART-25 Losartan Potassium Ip …. 25 Mg Tablets 10s 33.55 9.50 96 X 20 X 10s 
39 30049073 C1711 COSART-50 Losartan Potassium Ip …. 50 Mg Tablets 10s 53.30 15.10 96 X 20 X 10s 
40 30049079 C1715 COSART-AM 
Each film coated contains 
Losartan Potassium IP…..50 mg. 
Amlodipine Besilate IP…..equivalent 
to Amlodipine…..5 mg. Excipients 
Q.S. 
Tablets 10s 75.00 20.60 24 x 10 x 10s 
41 30049099 D1111 DERICIP 150 
RETARD TAB 
Etofhyline Ip 115 Mg + Theophylline 
Ip Anhydrous Equivalent To 
Theophylive Ip Hydrate 35 Mg 
Tablets 10s 8.64 5.80 120 x 20 x 10s 
42 30049099 D1112 DERICIP 300 
RETARD TAB 
Etophylline  231 Mg + Theophylline  
Ip Anhydrous Equivatent To 
Theoplyline Ip Hydrate 69 Mg 
Tablets 10s 13.04 8.65 60 x 20 x 10s 
43 30049099 D1110 DERICIP 
TAB(10X5X10) 
Theophylline Ip Anhydrous 
Equivalent To Theoplyine Ip 
Hydrate 23 Mg. + Etophylline 77 Mg 
Tablets 10s 5.23 3.40 48 x 50 x 10s 
44 30049031 D0039 DILVAS 10MG Enalapril Maleate Ip… 10 Mg Tablets Tablets 10s 69.00 8.70 80 x 20 x 10s 
45 30049069 D0041 DILVAS 2.5MG Enalapril Maleate  Ip… 2.5 Mg 
Tablets Tablets 10s 24.52 4.90 120 x 20 x 10s 
46 30049069 D0040 DILVAS 5MG Enalapril Maleate  Ip… 5 Mg Tablet Tablets 10s 36.96 6.45 80 x 20 x 10s 
47 30049069 D1091 DOMCET TAB 
Paracetamol 325 Mg 
Domperidone Maleate Ip 
Equivalent To Domperidone 10 Mg 
Tablets 10s 52.80 8.60 120 x 10 x 10s 
48 30041020 D1092 DOXOCIP TAB Doxofylline 400 Mg Excipients Q.S. Tablets 10s 75.00 20.20 90 x 10 x 10s 
49 30049099 E2932 EASI BREATHE 
SOFTGEL CAP 
Camphor Ip 66Mg Chlorothymol 
5Mg Eucalyptol Usp 125Mg Menthol 
Ip 55Mg Terpineol Bp 120Mg 
Capsules 10s 67.50 20.10 30 x 20 x 10s 
50 30049032 E2803 EASYLAX ORAL 
EMULSION 170 ML 
Liquid Paraffin 3.75 Ml Milk Of 
Magnesia 11.25 Ml Bottle 170 
ml. 140.50 34.85 4 x 16 x 170 ml.  
51 30049032 E2804 
EASYLAX PLUS 
ORAL EMULSION 
170 ML 
Liquid Paraffin 3.75 Ml Milk Of 
Magnesia 1.25 Ml Sodium 
Picosulfate 3.33 Mg 
Bottle 170 
ml.  157.30 36.15 4 x 16 x 170 ml.  
52 30049099 E2805 EASYLAX L 
SOLUTION 200 ml. 
Each 15 ml. contains Lactulose 
Concentrate USP equivalent to 
Lactulose 66 % …..10 gm. Flavoured 
Syrupy……q.s. 
Bottle 200 
ml. 231.00 151.00 48 X 1 X 200 
ml. 

   
 
53 30049099 E2806 EASYLAX L 
SOLUTION 100 ml. 
Each 15 ml. contains Lactulose 
Concentrate USP equivalent to 
Lactulose 66 % …..10 gm. Flavoured 
Syrupy……q.s. 
Bottle 100 
ml. 115.50 79.10 120 x 1 x 100 
ml. 
54 21069099 E1002 EMRICH CAPS Multi Vitamins Capsules 10s 121.00 16.25 16 x 30 x 10s 
55 30049069 E1009 ETHAMCIP 500 Ethamsylate B.P. 500 Mg Tab Tablets 10s 163.50 27.60 24 x 20 x 10s 
56 30049069 E1008 ETHAMCIP 250 TAB Ethamsulate B.P. 250 Mg Tab Tablets 10s 99.00 18.50 63 x 20 x 10s 
57 30049029 F2761 FOURDERM CREAM 
10GM 
Clobetasol Propionate Bp…0.05% 
W/W, Neomycin Sulphate Ip 
…0.50% W/W.Miconazole Nitrate 
Ip….2.00% W/W,  Chlorhexidine 
Gluconate Solution Ip…..0.20% W.W, 
Chlorocresol Ip ( As Preservative) 
0.10% W/W, In A Cream Base…..Q.S. 
Cream 10 
gms. 97.50 22.95 32 x 20 x 10 
gm. 
58 30049029 F2762 FOURDERM CREAM 
5GM 
Clobetasol Propionate Bp…0.05% 
W/W, Neomycin Sulphate Ip 
…0.50% W/W.Miconazole Nitrate 
Ip….2.00% W/W,  Chlorhexidine 
Gluconate Solution Ip…..0.20%, 
Chlorocresol Ip ( As Preservative) 
0.10% W/W, In A Cream Base…..Q.S. 
Cream 5 
gms. 62.31 13.40 60 x 20 x 5 
gm. 
59 30049029 F2923 FOURDERM RF 
CREAM 5 GM 
Beclomethasone Dipropionate 
IP…..0.025% w/w, Clotrimazole 
IP…..1% w/w, Neomycin Sulphate 
IP…..equivalent to Neomycin 0.5% 
w/w, Chlorocresol IP…..0.1% w/w (as 
preservative) Cream base…..q.s. 
Cream 5 
gms. 36.30 13.50 36 x 30 x 5 
gm. 
60 30049029 F2921 FOURDERM RF 
CREAM 10 GM 
Beclomethasone Dipropionate 
IP…..0.025% w/w, Clotrimazole 
IP…..1% w/w, Neomycin Sulphate 
IP…..equivalent to Neomycin 0.5% 
w/w, Chlorocresol IP…..0.1% w/w (as 
preservative) Cream base…..q.s. 
Cream 10 
gm. 72.60 22.50 30 x 20 x 10 
gm. 
61 30049099 G1057 GLIMDA 1 TAB Each uncoated tablet contains 
Glimepiride IP….1 mg. Tablets 10s 41.44 11.20 96 X 25 X 10s 
62 30049099 G1060 GLIMDA 2 TAB Each uncoated tablet contains 
Glimepiride IP…..2 mg. Tablets 10s 64.96 19.30 96 X 25 X 10s 
63 30049099 G1058 GLIMDA 3 TAB Each uncoated tablet contains 
Glimepiride IP…..3 mg. Tablets 10s 133.10 18.90 100 x 10 x 10s 
64 30049099 G1059 GLIMDA 4 TAB Each uncoated tablet contains 
Glimepiride IP …..4 mg. Tablets 10s 145.20 20.40 140 x 10 x 10s 
65 30049099 G1052 GLIMDA-MV 1 
Metformin Hydrochloride 500 Mg 
(In Sustained Release Form) 
Glimepiride 1 Mg Voglibose 0.2 Mg 
Tablets 10s 125.00 30.45 90 x 10 x 10s 
66 30049099 G1053 GLIMDA-MV 2 
Metformin Hydrochloride 500 Mg 
(In Sustained Release 
Form)Glimepiride 2 Mg Voglibose 
0.2 Mg 
Tablets 10s 160.00 34.55 90 x 10 x 10s 
67 30049099 G1021 GLINIL M Glibenclamide Ip...5 Mg + 
Metformin Hcl 500 Mg Tablets 10s 31.35 10.40 24 X 50 x 10's 
68 30049074 H3005 HIPRES 25MG TAB 
14'S Atenolol Ip...25 Mg Tablets Tablets 14s 29.50 5.55 40 X 50 X 14s 
69 30049074 H3006 HIPRES 50MG TAB 
14'S Atenolol Ip...50 Mg Tablets Tablets 14s 31.04 10.40 48 X 50 X 14s 

   
 
70 30049099 I2021 INCREGLIP-M TABS 
50/1000 
Each film coated bilayered tablet 
contains Metformin Hydrochloride 
IP…..(As prolonged release) 1000 
mg. Sitagliptin Phosphate 
Monohydrate IP…...equivalent to 
Sitagliptin 50 mg.  Excipients Q.S. 
Tablets 15s 196.35 69.30 24 x 10 x 15s 
71 30049099 I2022 INCREGLIP-M TABS 
50/500 
Each film coated bilayered tablet 
contains Metformin Hydrochloride 
IP…..(As prolonged release) 500 
mg.  Sitagliptin Phosphate 
Monohydrate IP…..equivalent to 
Silagliptin 50 mg.  Excipients q.s. 
Tablets 15s 179.85 56.50 48 x 10 x 15s 
72 30049099 I2023 INCREGLIP-M TABS 
100/500 
Each film coated bilayered tablet 
contains Metformin Hydrochloride 
IP…..(As prolonged release) 500 
mg.  Sitagliptin Phosphate 
Monohydrate IP…..equivalent to 
Silagliptin 100 mg.  Excipients q.s. 
Tablets 15s 245.85 72.00 50 x 10 x 15s 
73 30049029 I2016 ITRANOX 100 BP 
CAPS 
Each hard gelatin capsule 
contains Itraconazole BP…..100 mg. 
(As pellets) 
Capsules 7s 106.57 44.85 30 x 10 x 7s 
74 30049029 I2013 ITRANOX 200 BP 
CAPS 
Eash hard gelatin capsule 
Cantains Itraconazole BP…..200Mg 
(As Pellets )  
Capsules 7s 173.42 68.55 30 x 10 x 7s 
75 30049029 I2019 ITRANOX 100 CAP  
Each Hard gelatin capsule 
contains Itraconazole IP…..100 mg. 
(As pellets) 
Capsules 10s 170.68 62.00 20 x 10 x 10s 
76 30049029 I2020 ITRANOX 200 CAP 
Each Hard gelatin capsule 
contains Itraconazole IP…..200 mg. 
(As pellets) 
Capsules 10s 247.74 94.15 20 x 10 x 10s 
77 30049029 K0217 KETOCIP 100ML - 
1% Ketoconazole Ip     1% W/V Shampoo 100 
ml. 240.35 64.00 70 x 1 x 100 ml 
78 30049069 K0206 KETOCIP TAB Ketoconazole Ip............200Mg Tablets 10s 200.20 52.40 96 x 10 x 10s 
79 34011190 K0208 KETOCIP CT SOAP 
Ketoconazole IP …..2.0 % w/w, 
Cetrimide IP…..0.5 %, Soap noodle 
base…..q.s. Perfume……q.s. 
Soap 75 
gms. 125.00 41.25 8 x 12 x 75 
gms. 
80 30049034 L1303 LANZOL - 30 CAP Lansoprazole Ip...30 Mg Capsules Capsules 10s 90.00 17.50 30 x 30 x 10s 
81 30042034 L0369 LEVOQUIN 250 TAB Levfloxacin 250 Mg Tablet Tablets 5s 23.80 12.35 100 X 20 X 5s 
82 30042034 L0370 LEVOQUIN 500 TAB 
Levofloxacin Hemihydrade Ip.. 
Equivalent To Levofloxacin 500 Mg 
Tablet 
Tablets 5s 43.96 20.20 100 X 20 X 5s 
83 30049099 L0203 LIPVAS 10MG TAB Atorvastatin Calcium 10 Mg Tablets 10s 49.05 16.35 48 x 30 x 10s 
84 30049062 L0204 LIPVAS-ASP 10 
CAPS 
Each hard gelatin capsule 
contains Atorvastatin Calcium IP 
equivalent to Atorvastatin…..10 mg. 
Aspirin IP…..75 mg. (as Gastro-
resistant tablet) 
Capsules 10s 33.27 17.00 45 x10 x 10s 
85 30049062 L0206 LIPVAS-ASP 20 
CAPS 
Each hard gelatin capsule 
contains Atorvastatin Calcium IP 
equivalent to Atorvastatin….20 mg. 
Aspirin IP…..75 mg. (as Gastro-
resistant tablet) 
Capsules 10S 36.59 21.20 45 x 10 x 10s 
86 30049099 L0205 LIPVAS F 10 TABS 
Each film coated tablet contains 
Atorvastatin Calcicum IP 
equivalent to Atorvastatin…..10 mg. 
Fenofibrate IP (Micronized) …..160 
mg. 
Tablets 10s 155.00 19.40 40 x 10 x 10s 

   
 
87 30049099 L0222 LIPVAS 20MG TAB Atorvastain Calcium Ip.. Equivalent 
To Atonvastatin 20 Mg Tablets 10s 140.67 30.10 48 x 30 x 10s 
88 30049099 L2258 LIPVAS 40MG TAB Atorvastatin Calcium Ip.. 
Equivalent To Atonvastatin 40 Mg Tablets 10s 216.16 50.15 24 X 30 X 10s 
89 30049029 L6016 LULITEC CREAM 
10GM 
Luliconazole 1.0% W/W 
Methylparaben 0.14% W/W Benzyl 
Alcohol 1.0% W/W In A Cream Base 
Q.S. (Each Gram Contains 
Luliconazole 10 Mg) 
Cream 10 
gms. 126.50 28.35 20 x20 x 10gm 
90 30049029 L6020 LULITEC CREAM 
50GM 
Luliconazole IP…..1.0 % w/w, 
Preservative: Benzyl Alcohol IP…..1.0 
% w/w. In a cream base 
Cream 50 
gm. 395.00 93.65 16 x 10 x 50 
gm. 
91 30049029 L6019 LULITEC SPRAY 30 
ml. Luliconazole 1 % w/v ,  Excipients Spray 30 ml. 300.00 75.20 216 x 1 x 30 ml. 
92 30049069 M2330 MEBEX TAB Mebendazole 100 Mg Tablets 6s 17.40 8.15 24 x 20 x 7 x 
6s 
93 30041020 M2060 MEGACLOX 
CAPSULES 
Ampicillin Trihydrate Equivalent To 
Ampicillin 250 Mg Dicloxacillin 
Sodium Equivalent To Dicloxacillin 
250 Mg 
Capsules 10s 105.05 39.55 30 x 20 x 10s 
94 30041020 M2410 MEGACLOX 
DT(NEW) 
One Ampicillin Trihydrate Ip 
Equivalent To Amicillin 125 Mg + 
Dicloxacillin Sodium Ip Equivalent 
To Dicloxacilline 125 Mg 
Tablets 10s 57.20 23.40 60 x10 x 10s 
95 30043200 M2504 MICOGEL-F-
OINTMENT 
Miconazole Nitrate Ip...2% 
Flucinolone Acetonide 0.01% Water 
Miscible Base . . . . Qs 
Ointment 15 
gms. 56.50 25.25 24 x 25 x 15 
gms. 
96 30049099 M2643 MUPICIP OINTMENT 
10GM 
Mupirocin 2.0% W/W Ointment 
Base Q.S. Ointment 10 
gms. 190.00 49.35 30 x 20 x 10 
gms. 
97 30049069 N1141 NICIP ASP TABS 
Each film coated tablet contains 
Aceclofenac IP…..100 mg. 
Paracetamol IP…..325 ng, 
Serratiopeptidase IP…..15 mg. (As 
enteric coated granules eq. to 
30000 enzyme activity units of 
Serratiopeptidase) 
tablets 10s 127.77 26.40 24 x 20 x 10s 
98 30049069 N1142 NICIP AP TABS 
Each film coated tablet contains 
Aceclofenac IP…..100 mg, 
Paracetamol IP…..325 mg. 
Excipients q.s. 
tablets 10s 82.70 10.15 60 x 20 x 10s 
99 30049069 N1045 NIMUPAIN TAB Nimesulide B.P 100 Mg Tablet Tablets 10s 44.00 5.80 24 X 60 X 10s 
100 30049061 N1879 NIMUPAIN PLUS 
(BROWN) 
Nimesulide Bp.......100 Mg , 
Paracetamol Ip....325 Mg Tablets 10s 62.00 11.35 16 x 50 x 10s 
101 30049099 N1540 NO DARAR CREAM 
Duraharidra, Kampilak, 
Pakhanbed, Majistha, Dodishak 
And Sarjaras, 35.4% W/W, 
Raktapraka 3.6^ W/W Base 
Cream 25 
gms. 63.00 17.70 20 x 20 x 25 
gms. 
102 30049031 N4628 NOCOLD DROPS 
Phenylephrine Hydrochloride Ip 
.5.00Mg Chlorpheniranmine 
Maleate Ip  2.00Mg 
Drops 15 ml. 67.50 16.90 8 x 25 x 15 ml. 
103 30049069 N4672 NOCOLD SYRUP 
60ML 
Phenylephrine Hydrochloride 
Ip...2.00Mg Chlorpheniramine 
Maleate Ip    2.00 Mg In A Flver 
Base. . .  .Qs 
Syrup 60 ml. 68.50 15.65 8 x 25 x 60 ml. 

   
 
104 30049061 N4632 NOCOLD TAB 
Paracetamol Ip         ..325 Mg 
Phenylephrine Hydrochloride Ip   
..5 Mg Caffeine  (Anhydrous) Ip      
25 Mg Chlorpheniramine Maleate 
Ip    2 Mg 
Tablets 10s 39.00 10.60 9 x 110 x 10s 
105 30049099 N0106 NORLUT-N Norethisterone Acetate Usp...5 Mg 
Tablet Tablets 10s 53.87 19.15 75 x 20 x 10s 
106 30041020 N3208 NOVACLOX NF 
CAPS 
Amoxycillin Trihydrate Ip 
Equivalent To Amoxycillin 250 Mg 
Cloxacillin Sodium Ip  Equivalent 
To Cloxacillin 250 Mg Excipient Q.S. 
Capsules 10s 85.80 42.40 24 x 10 x 10s 
107 30049031 O0176 OKACET 10MG TAB Cetrizine Hydrochloride Ip...10 Mg 
Tablts Tablets 10s 18.81 4.55 36 x 140 x 10s 
108 30049061 O1899 OKACET COLD TAB 
Cetirizine Dihydrochloride Ip     ..5 
Mg Phenylephrine Hydrochloride Ip    
..10 Mg Paracetamol Ip          325Mg 
Tablets 10s 46.75 16.85 36 x 25 x 10s 
109 30049069 O3903 OKACET COLD 
TOTAL 
Levocetirizine Hydrochloride 5 Mg 
Paracetamol 325 Mg 
Phenylephrine Hydrochloride 5 Mg 
Tablets 10s 77.00 14.60 54 x 20 x 10s 
110 30049031 O0186 OKACET SYRUP 
30ML Cetrizine Hcl Ip 5 Mg / 5 Ml Syrup 30 ml. 19.82 10.30 8 X 36 X 30 ml 
111 30049099 O1322 OKACET-L TAB 10'S Levocetirizine Hydrochloride Ip…. 
5Mg Tablets 10s 62.70 4.55 63 x 50 x 10s 
112 30049099 O1728 OKAMET 500 TAB Metformin Hydrochloride Tab Ip 
500Mg Tablets 20s 24.62 10.70 24 x 30 x 20s 
113 30049099 O1729 OKAMET 500 SR 
TAB 
Each Uncoated Prolonged- 
Release Tablet Contains 
Metformin Hydrochloride 500Mg 
Tablets 15s 33.25 12.15 24 x 10 x 15s 
114 30049099 O1730 OKAMET GM 501 
TABS 15'S 
Each Uncoated Bilayered Tablet 
Contains Metformin Hydrochloride 
500 Mg ( As Prolonged-Release 
Form ) Glimepiride 1 Mg Excipients 
Q.S. 
Tablets 15s 114.95 22.55 60 x 10 x 15s 
115 30049099 O1731 OKAMET GM 502 
TABS 15'S 
Each Uncoated Bilayered Tablet 
Contains Metformin Hydrochloride 
500 Mg ( As Prolonged-Release 
Form ) Glimepiride 2 Mg Excipients 
Q.S. 
Tablets 15s 158.40 27.85 60 x 10 x 15s 
116 30049099 O1735 OKAMET GM 503 
TABS 10'S 
Each Uncoated Bilayered Tablet 
Contains Metformin Hydrochloride 
500 Mg ( As Prolonged-Release 
Form ) Glimepiride 3 Mg Excipients 
Q.S. 
Tablets 10s 108.19 17.50 88 x 10 x 10s 
117 30049099 O1736 OKAMET GM 504 
TABS 10'S 
Each Uncoated Bilayered Tablet 
Contains Metformin Hydrochloride 
500 Mg ( As Prolonged-Release 
Form ) Glimepiride 4 Mg Excipients 
Q.S. 
Tablets 10s 116.03 18.50 88 x 10 x 10s 
118 30049099 O1737 OKAMET 1000 SR 
TABS 
Each uncoated sustained release 
tablet contains Metformin 
Hydrochloride IP…..1000 mg. 
Excipients q.s. 
Tablets 10s 45.36 16.00 80 x 10 x 10s 
119 30049099 O1738 OKAMET-GM 1001 
TABS 
Each uncoated Bilayered tablet 
contains Metformin Hydrochloride 
1000 mg.( As Prolonged Release 
Form) Glimepiride IP…..1 mg. 
Excipients…..q.s. 
Tablets 10s 96.80 19.50 63 x 10 x 10s 

   
 
120 30049099 O1739 OKAMET-GM 1003 
TABS 
Each uncoated Bilayered tablet 
contains Metformin Hydrochloride 
IP….. 1000 mg. (As Prolonged 
Release Form) Glimepiride IP…..3 
mg. Excipients q.s. 
Tablets 10s 114.01 20.50 63 x 10 x 10s 
121 30049099 O1740 OKAMET-GM 1004 
TABS 
Each uncoated Bilayered tablet 
contains Metformin Hydrochloride 
IP…..1000 mg. (As Prolonged 
Release Form) Glimepiride IP…..4 
mg. Excipients…..q.s 
Tablets 10s 121.74 22.00 63 x 10 x 10s 
122 30049099 O1732 OKAMET GMP 1 
TABS 
Each uncoated Bilayered Tablet 
contains Glimepiride IP…..1 mg.,  
Pioglitazone Hydrochloride 
IP…..equivalent to Pioglitazone 15 
mg., Metformin Hydrochloride 
IP…..500 mg., (In sustained release 
form) Excipients q.s. 
Tablets 10s 139.81 17.25 100 x 10 x 10s 
123 30049099 O1733 OKAMET GMP 2 
TABS 
Each uncoated Bilayered Tablet 
contains Glimepiride IP…. 2 mg.,  
Pioglitazone Hydrochloride 
IP…..equivalent to Pioglitazone 15 
mg., Metformin Hydrochloride 
IP…..500 mg., (In sustained release 
form) Excipients q.s. 
Tablets 10s 214.19 18.30 100 x 10 x 10s 
124 30049099 O1734 OKAMET-GM 1002 
TABS 
Each uncoated bilayered tablet 
contains Metformin Hydrochloride 
IP…..1000 mg. (As Prolonged-
Release form) Glimepiride IP…..2 
mg. Excipients…..q.s. 
Tablets 10s 131.28 23.70 60 x 10 x 10s 
125 30041030 O2177 OMNICLAV 375 
Amoxycillin Trihydrate Ip 
Equivalent To  Amoxycillin 
………………250 Mg Potassium 
Clavulanate Diluted Ip Equivalent 
To Clavulanic Acid………………125 Mg 
Tablets 6s 122.10 53.00 18 X 20 X 6s 
126 30041030 O2176 OMNICLAV 625 
Amoxycillin Trihydrate Ip 
Equivalent To Amoxycillin...500Mg 
Potassium Clavulanate Diluted Ip 
Equivalent To Clavulanic 
Acid...125Mg 
Tablets 6s 122.97 59.50 18 x 20 x 6s 
127 30049087 O1282 OMNICLAV DS 
30ML 
Amoxycillin 200Mg Clavulanic Acid 
28.5Mg Syrup 30 ml. 67.87 33.65 240 x 1 x 30 
ml. 
128 30049039 O2163 OXECAINE GEL 
170ML 
Dried Aluminium + Hydroxide Gel 
Ip 291 Mg + Magnesium Hydroxide 
Ip 98 Mg + Oxetacaine Bp 10 Mg In 
Flavoured Syrup Base Q.S. 
Gel 170ml 
Bottle 133.10 27.60 60 x 1 x 170 ml. 
129 30042019 P2691 PODOCIP 200 10'S 
Cefpodoxime Proxetil Ip  
Equivalent To 
Cefpodoxime    200 Mg 
Tablets 10s 299.20 91.35 42 x 10 x 10s 
130 30049099 P2764 POWERGYL SUSP 
30ML 
Each 5 Ml Contains Ofloxacin 50 
Mg Metronidozole Benzoate Ip Eq. 
To Metronidozole 100Mg Flavoured 
Syrupy Base Q.S 
Suspn. 30 ml. 72.50 21.00 120 x 1 x 30 ml. 
131 30049087 P2765 POWERGYL SUSP 
30ML 
Each 5 Ml Contains Ofloxacin 
IP…..50 Mg Metronidazole Benzoate 
IP Eq. To Metronidazole 100Mg 
Flavoured Syrupy Base Q.S 
Suspn. 30 ml. 79.75 21.85 120 x 1 x 30 ml. 
132 30049066 R0944 REACTIN 100 SR 15 Prolonged Release Diclofenac 
Sodium Ip…100Mg Tablets 15s 111.10 13.60 36 x 30 x 15s 

   
 
133 30049066 R1306 REACTIN 100 SR 10 Diclofenac Sodium Ip...100 Mg 
Sustained Release Tablets 10s 61.50 9.30 36 x 30 x 10s 
134 30049031 R1302 REACTIN 50 TAB Diclofenac Sodium Ip……….50 Mg Tablets 10s 20.49 6.50 36 x 100 x 10s 
135 30049061 R0196 REACTIN PLUS(G) Diclofenac Sodium Ip...50 Mg + 
Paracetamol Ip...325Mg Tablets 10s 26.00 8.05 32 X 50 X 10s 
136 30049061 R0197 REACTIN PLUS(R) Diclofenac Sodium Ip...50 Mg + 
Paracetamol Ip...325Mg Tablets 10s 26.00 8.05 32 x 50 x 10s 
137 30049061 R0004 REACTIN PLUS(W) Diclofenac Sodium Ip...50 Mg + 
Paracetamol Ip...325Mg Tablets 10s 26.00 8.05 32 X 50 X 10s 
138 30049093 R2220 REXCOF DX 100 ML 
Dextromethorphan Hydrobromine 
Ip………10 Mg Chlorpheniramine 
Maleate Ip…………….2 Mg Flavoured 
Syrupy Base………………….Q.S. 
Syrup 100 
ml. 128.20 29.00 120x 1 x 100 ml 
139 30049094 R2223 REXCOF BM PLUS 
100 ML 
Each 5 ml. contains Terbutaline 
Sulphate IP….1.25 mg.Bromhexine 
Hydrochloride IP…..2 
mg.Guaiphenesin IP…..50 
mg.Flavoured base…..q.s. 
Syrup 100 
ml. 110.00 26.00 120 x 1 x 100 
ml. 
140 30049099 C4871 REXCOF LS SYRUP 
100ML 
Each 5 Ml Contains: Ambroxol 
Hydrochloride Ip…….30 Mg 
Levosalbutamol Sulphate Ip 
Equivalent To Levosalbutamol………..1 
Mg Guaiphenesin Ip……,50 Mg 
Flavoured Base……….Q.S. 
Syrup 100 
ml. 95.16 28.30 50 x 1 x 100 ml. 
141 30041030 R0011 ROKO CAPS Lopramide Hcl Ip...Capsule 2 Mg Capsules 10s 22.73 9.35 36 x 30 x 10s 
142 30049061 S3821 SPASMONIL TAB Dicyclomine Hydrochloride Ip..20 
Mg + Paracetamol Ip…325  Mg Tablets 10s 29.04 10.25 28 x 50 x 10s 
143 30049039 S3812 SPASMONIL DROPS 
Dicyclomine Hydrochloride Ip..10 
Mg + Act. Dimethicone 40 Mg Per 
Ml 
Drops 10 ml. 39.50 14.50 6 X 25 X 10 ml. 
144 30049061 S3502 SPASMONIL PLUS 
TAB 
Dicyclomine Hydrochloride Ip..10 
Mg + Mefenamic  Acid  Ip...250 Mg Tablets 10s 27.00 10.10 48 x 30 x 10s 
145 30049099 S1008 SUHAGRA 100MG 
TAB 4'S 
Sildenafil Citrate Ip Equivalent To 
Sildenafil 100 Mg Tablets 4s 211.20 15.25 72 x 20 x 4s 
146 30049099 S0109 SUHAGRA 25MG 
TAB 4'S 
Sildenafil Citrate Ip Equivalent To 
Sildenafil 25 Mg Tablets 4s 106.00 8.00 36 X 20 X 4s 
147 30049099 S1005 SUHAGRA 50MG 
TAB 4'S 
Sildenafil Citrate Ip Equivalent To 
Sildenafil 50 Mg Tablets 4s 121.00 8.60 36 X 20 X 4s 
148 30049099 S2408 SUHAGRA FORCE 
50 
Dapoxetine Hcl Eq To Dapoxetine 
30Mg, Sildenafil Citrate Ip...Eq To 
Sildenafil 50Mg 
Tablets 4s 239.50 42.65 24 x 10 x 4s 
149 30049099 T2301 TADACIP 20 TAB 
4'S Tadalafil 20 Mg Tablet Tablets 4s 217.00 19.50 45 X20 x 4s 
150 30049035 V0125 VOMINORM TAB Metoclopramide Hydrochloride 10 
Mg Tablets 10s 12.31 5.60 40 x 50 x 10s 
151 30049021 X0003 X-WORM 400MG 
TAB Albendazole Ip...400 Mg Tablets Tablets 1s 7.88 2.80 40 X 100 X 1s 
152 30049099 Z0244 ZYRIK 100 Allopurinol Ip...100 Mg Tablet Tablets 10s 18.92 11.60 96 X 20 X 10s 
153 30049099 Z0243 ZYRIK 300 Allopurinol  Ip...300 Mg Tablet Tablets 10s 63.05 24.40 60 x 10 x 10s 
 
 
 

   
 
LIFESCIENCE DIVISION  
S.No. HSN CODE PRODUCT NAME COMPOSITION GROUP 
NAME  PACK MRP PTS SHIPPER PACK 
1 30049011 A9635 ACI FREE (PUDINA) 
Svarjiksara (Shudh) 2.913G 
Nimbukamlam (Citrus Medica) 
2.041G Sodium Saccharin 15 Mg/5G 
Contains Permitted Sweetener 
Excipients Q.S 
Pouch 5 gm. 10.00 4.45 30 x 40 x 5 
gm. 
2 30049039 A2903 ALKACIP SYRUP Disodium Hydrogen Citrate B.P. 1.53 
Gm/5 Ml Syrup 100 
ml. 77.00 23.45 120 x 1 x 100  
ml. 
3 30042064 A2285 AZIPRO 500MG TAB 
3'S 
Azithromycin ( Anhydrous) 500 Mg. 
( As Azithromycin Dihydrate Ip Tablets 3s 79.19 44.15 72 x 20 x 3s 
4 30042064 A2287 AZIPRO 250MG TAB 
6'S 
Azithromycin (Anhydrous) 250 mg. 
(As Azithromycin Dihydrate IP Tablets 6s 78.28 44.15 36 x 20 x 6s 
5 30049021 B1130 BENDEX - 400 TAB Albendazole Ip………….400 Mg Tablets 1s 7.88 3.50 30 x 100 x 1s 
6 30049021 B1126 BENDEX 
SUSPENSION 10ML 
Albendazole Ip………….200 Mg 
Flavoured Syrup Base….Q.S. Suspn. 10 ml. 19.82 11.40 6 x 30 x 10 ml. 
7 30049099 B1487 BURNHEAL CREAM 
15GM 
Silver Nitrate 0.20 % W/W, 
Chlorhexidine Gluconate Solution 
Ip 0.20%, Preservative: Chlorocresol 
0.12 % W/W, In A Cream Base Q.S. ) 
cream 15 
gms. 90.14 24.35 24 x 20 x 15 
gm. 
8 30049087 C4763 CEFIX O TAB 10'S 
Cefixime Ip As Trihydrate Eu To 
Anhydrous Cefixime 200Mg 
Ofloxacin Ip 200Mg 
Tablets 10s 242.00 84.25 72 x 10 x 10s 
9 30049087 C4117 CEFIX 100 
Cefixime Ip ( As Trihydrate) 
Equivalent To Anhydrous Cefixime 
100 Mg 
Tablets 10s 104.50 34.55 60 x 20 x 10s 
10 30049087 C4067 CEFIX 200 
Cefixime I.P.(Trihydrate Equivalent 
To Anyhydrous Cefixime 200 Mg)  
200 Mg Tablet 
Tablets 10s 109.53 58.15 48 x 20 x10s 
11 30049087 C1404 CEFIX DS 30ML Cefixime 50 Mg Dry Syrup 
(Pineaple Flaver) Syrup 30 ml. 54.76 24.90 8 x 20 x 30 ml. 
12 30049061 C0069 CEPHADEX 125DT Cephalexin Ip Equivalent To 
Anhydrous Cephalexin..125 Mg Dt Tablets 10s 69.85 16.15 45 x 20 x 10s 
13 30049099 C0070 CEPHADEX 250 
CAPS Cephalexin 250 Mg Capsules 10s 78.65 33.25 72 x 20 x 10s 
14 30049061 C0068 CEPHADEX 250 DT Cephalexin Ip Equivalent To 
Anhydrous Cephalexin..250  Mg Dt Tablets 10s 147.62 29.80 36 X 20 X 10s 
15 30049099 C0067 CEPHADEX 500 
CAPS 
Cephalexin Ip Equivalent To 
Anhydrous Cephalexin..500  Mg 
Cap 
Capsules 10s 158.00 57.75 42 x 20 x 10s 
16 30049031 C1024 CEFASYN 250 TABS Cefuroxime Axetil IP equivalent to 
Cefuroxime 250 mg. Tablets 4s 111.10 37.70 72 x 10 x 4s 
17 30049031 C1023 CEFASYN 500 TABS Cefuroxime Axetil IP equivalent to 
Cefuroxime 500 mg. Tablets 4s 228.80 66.90 36 x 10 x 4s  
18 30049031 C0269 CETCIP TAB Cetrizine Hydrochloride Ip 10 Mg Tablets 10s 18.81 4.55 36 x 100 x 10s 
19 30049099 C1373 CETCIP - L TAB Levocetirizine Hydrochloride Ip…. 
5Mg Tablets 10s 67.10 4.55 63 x 50 x 10s 
20 30049031 C0770 CETCIP SYRUP 
30ML 
Cetrizine  Hcl Bp 5 Mg/5 Ml , 
Flavoured Syrup Base .. Q.S. Syrup 30 ml. 19.82 10.30 8 x 36 x 30 ml. 
21 30049069 C5294 CHESTON COLD & 
FLU NF TAB 
Paracetamol 500 Mg 
Phenylephrine Hydrochloride 5 Mg 
Caffeine (Anhydrous) 30 Mg 
Tablets 10s 63.80 18.45 40 x 30 x 10s 

   
 
Diphenhydramine Hydrochloride 
25 Mg Excipients Q .S 
22 30049031 C8315 CHESTON COLD 
SUSPN 60ML 
Paracetamol       ..125 Mg 
Phenylephrine Hydrocloride Ip   
..5Mg 
Ceterizine Dihydrocloride Ip   2Mg 
Suspn. 60 ml. 53.24 21.10 200 x 1 x 60 
ml. 
23 30049031 C4861 CHESTON COLD 
TAB 10'S 
Cetirizine Dihydrochloride Ip  ..5Mg 
Phenylephrine Hydrochloride Ip     ... 
10 Mg, Paracetamol Ip   ...   ..325 Gm 
Tablets 10s 46.75 16.90 36 x 25 x 10s 
24 30049069 C4832 CHESTON COLD 
TOTAL 
Levocetirizine Hydrochloride 5 Mg 
Paracetamol 325 Mg 
Phenylephrine Hydrochloride 5 Mg 
Tablets 10s 70.00 14.65 54 x 20 x 10s 
25 30045090 C2205 CIPCAL XT TAB 
Calcium Carbonate 1250Mg Eq. To 
Elemental Calcium 500Mg 
Cholecalciferol Ip (Vitamin D3) 
2000 Iu Mecobalamin 
Ip(Methylcobaamin) 1500Mcg L-
Methylfolate Calcium 1Mg 
Pyridoxal-5-Phosphate 20Mg 
Tablets 15s 298.65 66.35 45 x 10 x 15s 
26 30041030 C2672 CIPMOX 500 
YELLOW 15'S 
Amoxycillin Trihydrate I.P. 
Equivalent To Amoxycillin 500 Mg - 
Yellow 
Capsules 15s 123.64 53.20 36 X 20 X 15s 
27 30041030 C2690 CIPMOX 250 R/W 
15'S 
Amoxycillin  Trihydrate I.P. 
Equivalent To Amoxycillin 250 Mg Capsules 15s 36.62 28.55 54 x 20 x 15s 
28 30049031 C1009 CIPZEN D TAB Serratiopeptidse Ip.. 10 Mg + 
Diclofenac Sodium Ip.. 50 Mg Tablets 10s 130.00 17.10 60 X 30 X 10s 
29 30049066 C2102 CIPZEN FORTE TAB Serratiopeptidas Ip… 10 Mg Tablets 10s 107.50 12.15 72 x 20 x 10s 
30 30049099 C2703 CLOPICARD AP 75 
15'S 
Clopidogrel Bisulphate IP 
Equivalent To Clopidogrel…75 Mg 
Aspirin  IP  …75 Mg 
Tablets 15s 53.50 29.85 72 x 10 x 15s 
31 30049099 C2702 CLOPICARD 
TABLETS 15'S 
Clopidogrel Bisulphate Ip 
Equivalent To Clopidogrel…………75 
Mg 
Tablets 15s 99.79 25.80 72 x 20 x 15s 
32 30045010 C1111 COFOL - Z 
Carbonyl Iron 50 Mg + Zinc 
Sulphate Monohydrate Ip… 61.8 Mg 
Equivalent To Elemental Zinc 22.5 
Mg + Folic Acid Ip 0.5 Mg 
Capsules 15s 155.65 19.75 30 x 30 x 15s 
33 30045090 F2657 FERICIP XT SUSP 
Each 5 Ml Contains Ferrous 
Ascorbate Elemental Iron 30Mg 
Folic Acid Ip 500Mcg Flavoured 
Syrup Base Q.S 
Suspn. 150 
ml. 137.50 47.00 60 x 1 x 150 ml. 
34 30045090 F2654 FERICIP XT TAB 
Ferrous Ascorbate Eq To Elemental 
Iron 100Mg Folic Acid Ip 1.5Mg 
Excipients Q.S 
Tablets 10s 122.65 36.05 24 x 15 x 10s 
35 30049029 F0060 FLUKA 150 TAB Fluconazole I. P...150 Mg Tablet Tablets  1s 12.05 6.30 30 x 50 x 1s 
36 30049029 F2920 FOURDERM CREAM 
15GM 
Clobetasol Propionate Bp……..0.05 % 
W/W Neomycin Sulphate 
Ip…………0.50 % W/W Miconazole 
Nitrate Ip………….2.00 % W/W 
Chlorhexidine Gluconate Solution 
Ip…0.20 % W/W Chlorocresol Ip (As 
Preservative)…0.10 % W/W In A 
Cream Base……………………Q.S. 
Cream 15 
gms. 122.00 26.85 24 x 25 x 15 
gms. 

   
 
37 30049029 F2918 FOURDERM RF 
CREAM 15 GM 
Beclomethasone Dipropionate 
IP…..0.025% w/w, Clotrimazole IP…..1% 
w/w, Neomycin Sulphate 
IP…..equivalent to Neomycin 0.5% 
w/w, Chlorocresol IP…..0.1% w/w (as 
preservative) Cream base…..q.s. 
cream 15 
gm. 108.90 26.50 30 x 20 x 15 
gms. 
38 30049079 I1102 ISOMIN 20 Isosorbide Mononitrate 20 Mg Tabs Tablets 10s 34.36 14.50 60 X 30 X 10s 
39 33051090 K0218 KETOCIP 100ML - 
2% 
Ketoconazole Ip……………….2% W/V 
Shampoo Base……………….Q.S. Shampoo 100 
ml. 305.80 75.05 20 x 6 x 100 
ml. 
40 30049029 K0207 KETOCIP CREAM 15 
GMS 
Ketoconazole 2.00% W/W 
Preservatives:Methyl Paraben 0.15% 
W/W Propyl Paraben 01.1 W/W 
Cream Base Q,S, 
Cream 15 
gms. 80.00 15.60 30 x 20 x 15 
gms. 
41 34011190 K0209 KETOCIP SOAP Ketoconazole IP…..2.0 % w/w, Soap 
Noodle base…..q.s. Perfume…..q.s. Soap 75 
gms. 120.00 38.95 8 x 12 x 75 gm. 
42 30049029 L6018 LULITEC CREAM 
20GM 
Luliconazole 1.0% W/W 
Preservatives Methylparaben 0.14% 
W/W Benzyl Alcohol 1.0% W/W 
(Each Gram Contains Luliconazole 
10 Mg) 
Cream 20 
gms. 242.00 47.00 20 x 10 x 20 
gm. 
43 30049099 M2481 METFOR 500 TAB Metformin Hydrochloride Ip 500Mg 
Tab Tablets 20s 34.22 10.40 24 x 30 x 20s 
44 30049066 M0172 MOBICAM DT Piroxicam I P 20 Mg Dispersible 
Tablet Tablets 10s 64.73 7.35 36 x 50 x 10s 
45 30049099 M2578 MONTECIP LC TABS 
Montelukast Sodium Ip Equivalent 
To Montelukast 10 Mg Levocetirizine 
Dihydrochloride 5 Mg Excipients 
Q.S. 
Tablets 10s 185.37 23.25 30 x 20 x 10s 
46 30049039 M2579 MONTECIP BL TABS 
Each film coated bilayered tablet 
contains Montelukast Sodium 
IP…..equivalent to Montelukast…..10 
mg. Bilastine 20 mg. Excipients q.s. 
Tablets 10s 160.00 50.45 48 x 10 x 10s 
47 30049099 M2580 
MONTECIP LC 
JUNIOR SYRUP 60 
ml. 
Each 5 ml. contain: Montelukast 
Sodium IP equivalent to 
Montelukast 4 mg.Levocetirizine 
Dihydrochloride IP…..2.5 mg. 
Flavoured syrupy base….q.s. 
Syrup 60 ml. 127.17 26.70 100 x 1 x 60 ml. 
48 30049099 M2582 
MONTECIP LC 
JUNIOR SYRUP 30 
ml.  
Each 5 ml. contains Montelukast 
Sodium IP equivalent to 
Montelukast 4 mg. Levocetirizine 
Dihydrochloride IP…..2.5mg. 
Flavoured Syrupy base….q.s. 
Syrup 30 ml. 69.94 18.90 200 x 1 x 30 
ml. 
49 30049039 M2583 MONTECIP LC 
JUNIOR TABS 
Each uncoated dispersible tablet 
contains Montelukast Sodium IP 
equivalent to Montelukast…..4 
mg.Levocetirizine Hydrochloride 
IP…...2.5 mg. 
Tablets 10s 142.50 12.60 60 x 10 x 10 s 
50 30049039 M2581 MONTECIP-FX 
TABS 
Each Film Coated Tablet Contains 
Montelukast Sodium IP equivalent 
to Montelukast….10 mg. 
Fexofinadine Hydrochloride IP…..120 
mg. Excipients…..q.s. 
Tablets 10s 202.31 39.00 40x 15 x 10s 
51 30049069 M1492 MOVEXX MR TAB 
10'S 
Aceclofenac I.P. 100 Mg + 
Paracetamol I.P. 325 Mg + 
Chlorzoxazone Usp 250 Mg 
Tablets 10s 110.00 22.50 60 x 10 x 10s 
52 30049069 M2815 MOVEXX PLUS 
TAB-AMBER 
Pparacetamol Ip    ..325 Mg 
Aceclofenac Ip     .100 Mg Tablets 10s 61.50 10.15 60 x 20 x 10s 

   
 
53 30049069 M1491 MOVEXX PLUS 
TAB-ORANGE 
Paracetamol Ip………325 Mg 
Aceclofenac Ip………….100 Mg. Tablets 10s 61.60 10.15 60 x 20 x 10s 
54 30049069 M3202 MOVEXX SP 
Aceclofenac Ip     .100 Mg 
Paracetamol Ip     .325 Mg 
Serratiopeptidase Ip   .15 Mg 
Tablets 10s 116.16 26.40 72 x 10 x 10s 
55 30049099 M2644 MUPICIP OINTMENT 
5GM 
Mupirocin 2.0% W/W Ointment 
Base Q.S. Ointment 5 
gms. 113.62 27.95 30 x 20 x 5 
gm. 
56 30041090 N3214 NEW NOVACLOX-
LB CAPS 
Amoxycillin Trihydrate Equivalent 
To Amoxycillin 250 Mg Dicloxacillin 
Sodium Equivalent To Dicloxacillin 
250 Mg Lactic Acid Bacillus 2.5 
Billion Spores Appropriate 
Overages Of Lactic Acid Bacillus 
Spores Added) 
Capsules 10s 98.00 46.35 54 x 10 x 10s 
57 30049039 P3610 PANTOSEC D SR 
CAPS 10'S 
Pantoprazole Sodium Ip Equivalent 
To Pantoprazole 40Mg ( As Gastro-
Resistant Pellets ) Domperidone 
30Mg ( As Prolonged Release 
Pellets ) 
Capsules 10s 137.94 38.50 54 x 20 x 10s 
58 30049067 N0024 NICIP 100MG TAB 
10'S Nimesulide Bp 100 Mg Tablets 10s 43.45 5.80 42 x 50 x 10s 
59 30049067 N3604 NICIP DS TAB Nimesulide B. P. 200 Gm Tablets Tablets 10s 57.00 10.40 72 x 30 x 10s 
60 30049067 N3616 NICIP MD TAB Nimesulide Bp..100 Mg Mouth 
Dissolving Tablet Tablets 10s 60.50 8.15 42 x 50 x 10s 
61 30049067 N4861 NICIP MR TAB 
Nimesulide Bp..100 Mg + 
Chlorzoxazone Usp..375 Mg + 
Paracetamol Ip...325 Mg 
Tablets 10s 97.00 21.20 36 x 20 x 10s 
62 30049061 N1782 NICIP PLUS TAB 10'S 
(GOLDEN) 
Nimesulide Bp 100Mg Paracetamol 
Ip 325Mg Colur Sunset Yellow Fcf Tablets 10s 52.80 11.35 8 x 80 x 10s 
63 30049067 N3609 NICIP PLUS TAB 10'S Nimesulide Bp..100 Mg + 
Paracetamol Ip..325 Mg Tablets 10s 65.10 11.35 8 x 110 x 10s 
64 30041030 N2112 NOVACLAV 625 6'S 
Amoxycillin Trihydrate Ip Eq To 
Amoxycillin 500Mg Pottasium 
Clavulanate Diluted Ip Eq To 
Clavulanic Acid 125Mg 
Tablets 6s 122.97 59.50 18 x 20 x 6s 
65 30041030 N2111 NOVACLAV 625 
10'S 
Amoxycillin Trihydrate Ip Equivalent 
To Amoxycillin 500Mg Potassium 
Clavulanate Diluted Ip Equivalent 
To Clavulanic Acid 125Mg 
Tablets 10s 204.96 99.30 36 x 10 x 10s 
66 30049087 N3203 NOVACLAV DRY 
SYP 
Amoxycillin Trihydrate Ip.. 
Equivalent To Amoxycillin…..200Mg 
Potassium Clavulanate Diluted Ip 
Equivalent To Clavulanic Acid 
28.5Mg 
Syrup 30 ml. 67.87 33.65 240 x 1 x 30 
ml. 
67 30049034 O0735 OMECIP 20 Omeprazole I.P. 20 Mg Capsules 15s 43.00 14.60 30 x 20 x 15s 
68 30049031 O3502 ORTHAL FORTE 
100000 Armour Units Of Enzymatic 
Activity (Supplied By A Purified 
Concentrate Which Has Specific 
Trypsin And Chymotrypsin  Ip 
Activity In A Ratio Of Approximately 
Six To One) 
Tablets 20s 372.35 52.95 30 x 10 x 20s 
69 30049039 P3603 PANTOSEC D TAB 
10'S 
Pantoprazole  40 Mg + 
Domperidone 10 Mg  Tablets Tablets 10s 149.00 23.55 120 x 20 x 10s 
70 30049039 P3601 PANTOSEC TAB 10'S Pantoprazole Sodium Ip Equivalent 
To Pantoprazole . .40 Mg Tablets Tablets 10s 143.56 19.80 120 x 20 x 10s 
71 30049099 P3609 PANTOSEC LS CAPS 
10'S 
Pantoprazole Sodium 
Sesquihydrate Ip Equivalent To Capsules 10s 203.00 48.30 30 x 10 x 10s 

   
 
Pantoprazole 40 Mg Levosulpiride 
75 Mg 
72 30049069 P3105 PARAFAST IV 
Each 100 ml. contains Paracetamol 
IP…..1000mg. Water for Injections 
IP…..q.s. 
Infusion 100 
ml. 510.22 26.50 100 x 1 x 100 
ml. 
73 30049069 P1013 PARAFAST 500 
TABS 
Each uncoated tablet contains 
Paracetamol IP…..500 mg. Tablets 10s 10.08 6.30 28 x 60 x 10s 
74 30049069 P1014 PARAFAST 650 
TABS 
Each uncoated tablet contains 
Paracetamol IP…..650 mg. Tablets 10s 22.51 9.55 20 x 50 x 10s 
75 30049069 P1015 PARAFAST SYRUP 
Each 5 ml. contains Paracetamol 
IP…..125 mg. In a flavoured syrupy 
base…..q.s. 
Syrup 60 ml. 24.86 15.42 8 x 20 x 60 ml. 
76 30049069 P1016 PARAFAST SUSPN. 
Each 5 ml. contains Paracetamol 
IP…..250 mg. In a flavoured syrupy 
base…..q.s. 
Suspn. 60 ml. 45.02 16.34 8 x 25 x 60 ml. 
77 30049069 P1017 PARAFAST DROPS 
Each ml. contains Paracetamol 
IP…..150 mg. In a flavoured syrupy 
base…..q.s. 
Drops 15 ml. 33.80 18.40 8 x 25 x 15 ml. 
78 30049082 P2742 PREGACIP M CAP 
10'S 
Pregabalin Ip...75Mg, 
Methylcobalamin 750Mcg, 
Excipients Qs 
Capsules 10s 148.50 40.15 80 x 10 x10s 
79 30049093 R2221 REXCOF DX 60ML 
Each 5 Ml 
Contains:Dextromethorphan 
Hydrobromide  Ip……10 Mg 
Chlorpheniramine Maleate  
Ip……………..2 Mg Flavoured Syrupy 
Base……………….…….Q.S. 
Syrup 60 ml. 70.00 21.15 160 x 1 x 60 ml. 
80 30049099 R2222 REXCOF T SYRUP 
100 ml. 
Each 5 ml. contains Terbutaline 
Sulphate IP…..1.5 mg. Guaiphenesin  
IP…..50 mg. Ambroxol Hydrochloride 
IP…..15 mg.  In a mentholated 
flavoured syrupy base…..q.s. 
Syrup 100 
ml. 92.95 22.95 120 x 1 x 100 
ml. 
81 30049093 R2225 REXCOF DX PLUS 
SYP.125 ml. 
Each 5 ml contains 
Dextromethorphan Hydrobromide 
IP….15 mg.Phenylephrine 
Hydrochloride IP…..5 
mg.Chlorpheniramine Maleate 
IP…..2 mg. In a flavoured base…q.s. 
Syrup 125 
ml. 120.78 34.00 100 x 1 x 125 
ml. 
82 30049099 T2606 TENEPLA M 1000 
TABS 
Teneligliptin Hydrobromide 
Hydrate Equivalent To Teneligliptin 
20 Mg Metformin Hydrochloride 
1000 Mg (In Sustained Release 
Form ) Excipients Q.S. 
Tablets 10s 159.50 45.80 30 x 10 x 10s 
83 30049099 T2605 TENEPLA M 500 
TABS 
Teneligliptin Hydrobromide 
Hydrate Equivalent To Teneligliptin 
20 Mg Metformin Hydrochloride 
500 Mg (In Sustained Release Form 
) Excipients Q.S. 
Tablets 10s 154.00 43.45 30 x 10 x 10s 
84 30049099 T2601 TENEPLA TAB 
Teneligliptin Hydrobromide 
Hydrate Equivalent To Teneligliptin 
20 Mg 
Tablets 10s 100.00 39.35 60 x 15 x 10s 
85 30049029 T2130 TERCAN 250 TABS 
Each uncoated tablet contains 
Terbinafine Hydrochloride IP 
equvalent to Terbinafine 250 mg. 
Excipients…q.s. 
Tablets 7s 182.00 29.30 36 x 20 x 7s 
86 30049087 T2131 TOCODERM  PLUS 
CREAM 15GM 
Clobetasol Propionate 0.05% W/W 
Neomycin Sulphate Equivalent To Cream 15 
Gms. 88.00 15.25 24 x 20 x 
15gms. 

   
 
Neomycin 0.1% W/W Miconazole 
Nitrate 2.0% W/W Cream Base Q.S 
87 30049031 V1812 VERTIGIL TAB 
Cinnarizine Ip...20 Mg + 
Domperidone Maleate Ip 
Equivalent To Domperidone . .15Mg 
Tablets 6s 49.50 10.75 150 x 10 x 6s 
88 30049031 V1822 VERTIRON Cinnarizine Ip...25 Mg Tablets 25s 96.50 26.90 60 x 20 x 25s 
89 30049069 V1482 VITAFOL TAB Folic Acid Ip...5 Mg Tablets 30s 45.36 15.65 45 x 10 x 30s 
90 30049039 V0047 VOMISTOP TAB 10'S Domperidone Ip...10 Mg Tablets Tablets 10s 25.87 6.40 84 X 50 X 10s 
91 30049069 Z0482 ZOCLAR 250 Clarithromycin Ip ……………250 Mg Tablets 4s 94.25 47.75 40 x 10 x 4s 
92 30049069 Z0483 ZOCLAR 500 Clarithromycin Ip...500 Mg Film 
Coated Tablet Tablets 4s 155.05 88.25 48 x 10 x 4s 
 
 
TERMS & CONDITIONS: 
 
 
  
1.     Cipla Pharma & Life Sciences Limited (CPLS) reserves the right to make any changes at any 
point of time. 
    
 
  
2.     Prices stated above are excluding taxes.  
    
 
  
3.     Goods once sold cannot be returned or exchanged. 
    
 
  
4.     No expiry or breakage will be replaced. 
    
 
  
5.     Disputes, if any, will be subjected to Mumbai jurisdiction only 
    
 
   LEGEND      
 
     New Launches       
            
     Price Increase       
            
     Price Reduction       
           
           
 
 

S. 
No. Brand Name Composition PACK PTS MRP SHIPPER
PACK Tax %
1 BETASONE - N Betamethasone 0.01% w/v + Neomycin 0.5% w/v 10 ml Vial 9.30 54.00 900 12
2 CAL D3 NANO SHOT Cholecalciferol 60000 IU 4X5ML 47.00 263.60 600 12
3 CARISPAS-1 CAP Carisoprodol, Acetaminophen & Dicyclomine 
Hydrochloride Cap. 10X3X8 296.00 2700.00 60 12
4 CASFUR- NF CREAM Ciprofloxacin 1% + Metronidazole 2 % + Terbinafine 
1% + Clobetasol 0.05% 15GM 16.50 100.00 600 12
5 CHYMOLAB FORTE TAB Trypsin-Chymotrypsin 100000 AU 10X20 BLISTER 347.00 3800.00 30 12
6 CLEAR CHEST COLD & FLU TAB Paracetamol 500mg + Phenylephrine Hydrochloride 
10mg + Chlorpheniramine Maleate 2mg 50X10 357.00 3000.00 60 12
7 CLOBETA- GM DUSTING POWDER Clotrimazole 1% w/w 100 g 39.00 140.00 100 12
8 CLOBETA GM Lotion Clobetasol Propionate IP 0.05% W/V + Salicylic Acid 
2.0% W/V 25 ml 19.50 82.50 600 12
9 CLOBETA GM SOAP Chlorhexidine 0.5% + Cetrimide 1% 75 g 28.50 60.00 200 18
10 CLONAC PLUS TAB Aceclofenac 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg 10 x 10 Alu/Blister 89.00 1150.00 60 12
11 CLONAC PLUS TAB Aceclofenac 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg 20 x 10
(Peach PVC Blister) 122.00 1940.00 60 12
12 CLONAC SP TAB Aceclofenac 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg + 
Serratiopeptidase 10mg 20 x 10 Alu/Alu 224.00 3100.00 40 12
13 DEFI-6 TAB Deflazacort 6mg 20X1X10 ALU ALU 405.00 2400.00 60 12
14 DROVILAB- M TAB Drotaverine 80mg + Mefenemic Acid 250mg 20X10 BLISTER 298.00 3800.00 60 12
15 DSP TAB Diclofenac Potassium 50mg + Paracetamol 325mg +  
Serratiopeptidase 10mg 20 x 10 270.00 1740.00 100 12
16 ESOMELAB DSR Esomeprazole (Enteric Coated) 40 mg + Domperidone 
(SR) 30 mg
10 x 1 x 10
Alu/Alu 204.00 810.00 50 12
17 FLUCOLAB - 200 TAB Fluconazole 200mg 20 x 1 x 4 321.00 1560.00 50 12
18 FURAZOLE - D TAB Furazolidone 100mg + Metronidazole 300mg + 
Dicyclomine 10mg 20 x 10 296.00 1340.00 50 12
19 FURAZOLE TAB Furazolidone 100mg + Metronidazole 300mg 20 x 10   286.00 800.00 100 12
20 HEMOLAB FORTE - Z  CAP Carbonyl Iron 50mg + Zinc Sulphate 61.8mg + Folic 
Acid 0.5mg 10 x 2 x 15 235.00 3000.00 50 12
21 HEMOLAB FORTE Injection Iron Sucrose Injection 100 mg 5 ml Amp 21.50 321.00 240 12
22 HUNYKAS SYP Ayurvedic Cough Syrup 100 ML 19.00 115.00 150 12
23 IBUFLAM TABLET Ibuprofen 400 mg + Paracetamol 325 mg 16X60 831.00 4560.00 20 12
24 ITRODERM-OC Cream Itraconazole 1% + Clobetasol 0.05% + Ofloxacin 0.75% 
+ Ornidazole 2% 15 g 14.50 166.25 600 12
25 ITROZOLE 200 CAPSULE Itraconazole 200mg 10X1X10 ALU ALU 525.00 2475.00 50 12
26 JUNIORMOL MF Mefenamic Acid 50 mg + Paracetamol 125mg / 5 ml 60 ml 13.75 62.00 200 12
27 KOZYLAB  TAB
ACECLOFENAC 100MG + PARACETAMOL 325MG + 
PHENYLEPHRINE 5MG + CETIRIZINE 5MG + CAFFEINE 
25MG 
20X10 ALU ALU 286.00 1600.00 60 12
28 KT-5 DERM SOAP Ketoconazole 2% 75 g 34.00 108.00 200 18
29 KT5DERM Cream
Ketoconazole 2% w/w + Tolnaftate 1% w/w + 
Clobetasol 0.05% w/w + Neomycin Sulphate 0.1% 
w/w +  Iodochlohydroxyquinoline 1% w/w
30 g 23.50 165.00 960 12
30 LAB BIOTIC TAB PRE-PRO BIOTIC WITH L-GLUTAMINE 20X10 ALU ALU 316.00 2200.00 50 12
31 LABOCOF DMR TAB Paracetamol 500mg + Loratidine 5mg + 
Phenylepherine 5mg + Dextromethorphan 10mg 30X10 BLISTER 316.00 2850.00 60 12
32 LABOCOF MINT SYP. Cetirizine Hcl 5mg + Dextromethorphan 10mg + 
Phenylephrine 2.5mg 100 ML 19.00 124.00 150 12
33 LABODINE GARGLE Povidone-Iodine Germicide 2% w/v 100 ml 30.50 185.00 200 12
34 LABODINE Lotion Povidone-Iodine 5% w/v 100 ml 25.50 48.00 160 12
35 LABODINE Lotion Povidone-Iodine 5% w/v 500 ml 122.50 240.00 25 12
36 LABODINE Ointment  20g Povidone-Iodine 5% w/w 20 g 14.25 50.15 600 12
37 LABODINE Ointment 10g Povidone-Iodine 5% w/w 10 g 11.25 24.85 600 12
38 LABODINE Ointment 30g Povidone-Iodine 5% w/w 30 g 18.50 75.20 600 12
39 LABODINE Powder Povidone-Iodine 5% w/w 10 g 10.00 67.00 240 12
40 Laborate's PREGATEST Pregnancy Card For HCG Test 40 PC 254.00 2640.00 50 12
41 LINZOLAB - 600 TAB Linezolid 600 mg 10 x 1 x 4 Strip 418.00 1595.00 40 12
42 LIVERGARD SYP. Liver Tonic 225 ml 43.00 138.00 42 12
43 LULI GARD LOTION Lulliconazole 1% Lotion 15ml 28.60 210.00 400 12
44 LULIGARD 10GM CREAM Luliconazole 1% 10GM 23.50 225.00 600 12
45 LULIGARD 20GM CREAM Luliconazole 1% 20 GM 37.75 399.00 600 12
46 LYCOLAB RED  CAP Lycopene with Multivitamins & Multiminerals 10 x 1 x 10 210.00 2300.00 75 12
47 LYCOLAB RED  SYP. Lycopene with Multivitamin & Multiminerals 200 ml 43.00 317.90 40 12
LABORATE PHARMACEUTICALS INDIA LTD.
PRICE LIST  OCT-2024
67° NEW ADDITION
Page 1 of 10

S. 
No. Brand Name Composition PACK PTS MRP SHIPPER
PACK Tax %
48 MECOLAB -PLUS CAP
Methylcobalamin 1500mcg + Alpha Lipoic Acid 100mg 
+ Folic Acid 1.5mg + Thiamine 10mg + Pyridoxine 3mg 
Capsules
10X1X10 ALU ALU 357.00 2300.00 60 12
49 Miracle 3 Cream Hydroquinone 2%w/w + Tretinoin 0.025% w/w + 
Mometasone 0.1% w/w 15 g 20.00 194.00 600 12
50 MODI G 5 CAP
Omega 3 Fatty Acid, Ginseng, Green Tea Extract, 
Ginkgo Biloba, Garlic, Grapes Extract, Curcumin, 
MultiVitamin & Multiminerals 
10 x 1 x 10
BLISTER 291.00 2540.00 50 18
51 MONTBILAS TAB Bilastine 20mg + Montelukast 10mg 10X1X10 ALU ALU 357.00 1600.00 60 12
52 MONTILAB LC TAB Montelukast 10mg + Levocetirizine 5mg 10X1X10 ALU ALU 212.00 2320.00 50 12
53 MOXI - KT Moxifloxacin 0.5% w/v + Ketorolac 0.5% w/v 10 ml Vial 12.30 179.00 900 12
54 MUPBACT CREAM Mupirocin 2% 5GM 19.00 113.50 600 12
55 MY GERMINA ORAL BACILLUS CLAUSII SPORES  2 BILLION 10X5ML 142.00 650.00 600 12
56 NANOFORTE GEL
Diclofenac Diethylamine 1.16% w/w Eq. to Diclofenac 
1 % w/w + Methyl Salicylate 10% w/w + Linseed oil 3% 
w/w + Menthol 5% w/w
30 g 15.50 151.00 600 12
57 NANOFORTE Spray
Diclofenac Diethylamine 1.16% w/w Eq. to Diclofenac 
1 % w/w + Methyl Salicylate 10% w/w + Linseed oil 3% 
w/w + Menthol 5% w/w
55 g 61.00 215.00 180 12
58 NEULAB- 100 TAB Nimesulide 100mg 50X10 240.00 2200.00 60 12
59 NEULAB COLD & FLU TAB Nimesulide 100mg + Phenylepherine 10mg + 
Cetirizine5mg + Caffeine 30mg 30X10 BLISTER 270.00 1800.00 60 12
60 NUMO GOLD  TAB Nimesulide 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg 20 x 15 153.00 2180.00 50 12
61 OFFRATE 200  TAB Ofloxacin 200mg 20 x 10 Alu/Alu 214.00 1660.00 50 12
62 OFFRATE 200  TAB Ofloxacin 200mg 30 x 10 
Peach PVC 280.00 2490.00 60 12
63 OFFRATE 200 GOLD TAB Ofloxacin 200mg 30 x 10 
Yellow PVC 280.00 2490.00 60 12
64 OFFRATE OZ TAB Ofloxacin 200mg + Ornidazole 500mg 10 x 10 194.00 1800.00 80 12
65 OTILAB Ear Drops
Gentamicin 0.3% w/v + Beclomethasone Dipropionate 
0.025% w/v + Clotrimazole 1% w/v + lignocaine 2% 
w/v
10 ml 18.00 101.00 320 12
66 OTILAB -LC Ear Drops
Chloramphenicol 5% w/v + Beclomethasone 
Dipropionate 0.025% w/v + Clotrimazole 1% w/v + 
lignocaine 2% w/v
10 ml 21.50 99.00 320 12
67 PAZOLAB 40 TABLET Pantoprazole 40mg 20X10 ALU ALU 225.00 3200.00 50 12
68 PAZOLAB D TABLET Pantoprazole 40mg + Domperidone 10mg 20X10 ALU ALU 253.00 3300.00 50 12
69 PAZOLAB DSR CAPSULE Pantoprazole 40mg + Domperidone 30mg 20X10 ALU ALU 301.00 2800.00 50 12
70 PROTILAB Powder PROTEIN POWDER 325GM 143.00 780.00 30 18
71 RAZOLAB - LS Rabeprazole 20mg + levosulpiride 75mg 10 x 1 x 10 275.00 2450.00 50 12
72 RAZOLAB DSR CAPSULE Rabeprazole 20mg + Domperidone 30mg 20X10 ALU ALU 275.00 2900.00 50 12
73 RELIEF  MR TAB Diclofenac Sodium 50mg + Paracetamol 325mg +  
Chlorzoxazone 250mg 100X10 944.00 8000.00 50 12
74 TRAXLAB - MF TAB Tranexamic Acid 500 mg + Mefenamic 250 mg 10 x 1 x 10
Alu/Alu 510.00 2400.00 40 12
75 URSOLAB TAB Ursodeoxycholic Acid 300 Mg 10X15 BLISTER 1275.00 6900.00 60 12
76 VIBEL GOLD CAP GINSENG MULTIVITAMIN WITH MINERALS 6X1X10 142.00 642.00 200 12
77 VIGOJOY Spray Lidocaine 10% w/w 20 g 49.00 195.00 200 12
78 VIGOJOY Tablet Sildenafil Citrate 100mg 20 x 1 x 4 143.00 3640.00 40 12
79 VIGOJOY-D CAP SILDENAFIL 50MG + DAPOXETINE 30MG 20X1X4 367.00 3800.00 60 12
80 WETYE EYE DROP Sodium Carboxymethylcellulose 0.5% w/v 10 ml Vial 9.10 137.00 600 12
81 ZOOM Ointment Joint & Muscle Pain Relief (Ayurvedic Formulation) 25 g 21.50 112.00 300 12
1 CEFLOX Ciprofloxacin 0.3% w/v 10 ml Vial 8.75 52.00 900 12
2 CEFLOX-DEE OPTIC Ciprofloxacin 0.3% w/v + Dexamethasone 0.05% w/v 10 ml Vial 9.30 63.00 900 12
3 DECO Chloramphenicol 1%  w/v + Betamethasone 0.01% 
w/v 10 ml Vial 9.30 63.00 900 12
4 DRY TONE Sodium Chloride 5%w/v 10 ml Vial 7.15 88.00 900 12
5 FESTIVE Ofloxacin 0.3% w/v 10 ml Vial 8.75 52.00 900 12
6 FESTIVE-DEE OPTIC Ofloxacin 0.3%  w/v + Dexamethasone 0.05% w/v 10 ml Vial 9.30 63.00 900 12
7 GENTACORT - D Gentamicin 0.3% w/v + Betamethasone 0.01% w/v 10 ml Vial 9.30 63.00 900 12
8 GENTALAB Gentamicin 0.3% w/v 10 ml Vial 8.75 54.00 900 12
9 i 10 Sodium Carboxymethylcellulose 0.5% w/v 10 ml Vial 9.10 89.50 600 12
10 MOXI Moxifloxacin 0.5% w/v 10 ml Vial 11.60 160.00 900 12
11 MOXI - D Moxifloxacin 0.5% w/v + Dexamethasone 0.05% w/v 10 ml Vial 12.50 200.00 900 12
12 TOBRA Tobramycin 0.3% w/v 10 ml Vial 12.85 54.00 900 5
EYE & EAR DROPS
Page 2 of 10

S. 
No. Brand Name Composition PACK PTS MRP SHIPPER
PACK Tax %
13 TOBRA - D Tobramycin 0.3% w/v + Dexamethasone 0.05% w/v 10 ml Vial 13.60 63.00 900 5
1 CANDITOP  Cream Clotrimazole 1% w/w + Beclomethasone 0.025% w/w 
+ Benzyl Alcohol 1% w/w 15 g 11.00 82.00 600 12
2 CEFLOX CF Cream Ciprofloxacin 0.5% w/w + Fluocinolone 0.01% w/w + 
Clotrimazole 1% w/w  + Chlorocresol 0.1% w/w 5 g 7.75 54.00 600 12
3 CEFLOX CF Cream Ciprofloxacin 0.5% w/w + Fluocinolone 0.01% w/w + 
Clotrimazole 1% w/w  + Chlorocresol 0.1% w/w 15 g 12.25 92.00 600 12
4 CEFLOX NF Cream Ciprofloxacin 1% + Clobetasol 0.05% +Terbinafine 1% 
+ Metronidazole  2% 15 g 15.30 166.25 600 12
5 CLIN-CAP Cream Clindamycin 1% w/w 15 g 11.75 95.00 600 12
6 CLOBETA GM Cream
Clobetasol Propionate 0.05% w/w + Neomycin 0.5% 
w/w + Miconazole 2% w/w + Zinc oxide 2.5% w/w + 
Borax 0.05% w/w + Chlorocresol 0.1% w/w
10 g 9.10 81.00 1152 12
7 CLOBETA GM Cream
Clobetasol Propionate 0.05% w/w + Neomycin 0.5% 
w/w + Miconazole 2% w/w + Zinc oxide 2.5% w/w + 
Borax 0.05% w/w + Chlorocresol 0.1% w/w
20 g 17.60 122.00 600 12
8 DICLOLAB GEL Diclofenac Diethylamine 1.16%  w/w 
Eq. to Diclofenac 1 % w/w 10 g 7.75 81.00 600 12
9 DICLOLAB GEL Diclofenac Diethylamine 1.16%  w/w 
Eq. to Diclofenac 1 % w/w 30 g 9.80 125.00 600 12
10 Kold Time Balm Anti-cold Balm 25 g 26.50 60.50 288 12
11 KT5DERM Cream
Ketoconazole 2% w/w + Tolnaftate 1% w/w + 
Clobetasol 0.05% w/w + Neomycin Sulphate 0.1% 
w/w +  Iodochlohydroxyquinoline 1% w/w
15 g 14.50 115.00 960 12
12 Labdic Relief Balm Joint & Muscle Pain Balm 25 g 26.50 92.50 200 12
13 LABDIC RELIEF Gel
Diclofenac Diethylamine 1.16% w/w Eq. to Diclofenac 
1 % w/w + Linseed Oil 3% w/w + Methyl Salicylate 8% 
w/w + Menthol 2% w/w
10 g 9.80 81.00 600 12
14 LABDIC RELIEF Gel
Diclofenac Diethylamine 1.16% w/w Eq. to Diclofenac 
1 % w/w + Linseed Oil 3% w/w + Methyl Salicylate 8% 
w/w + Menthol 2% w/w
30 g 15.00 125.00 600 12
15 LABODERM - OC Cream Ofloxacin 0.5% w/w + Fluocinolone 0.01% w/w + 
Clotrimazole 1% w/w + Chlorocresol  0.1% w/w 15 g 12.75 125.00 960 12
16 MAGVED CREAM Herbal Antibacterial & Antiseptic Soothing Cream 10 g 5.50 35.00 600 12
17 POVIREX - M Ointment Povidone-Iodine 5% w/w + Sucralfate 7% w/w 15 g 13.75 97.00 600 12
18 POVIREX Ointment Povidone-Iodine 5% w/w 10 g 9.10 24.85 600 12
19 POVIREX Ointment Povidone-Iodine 5% w/w 20 g 13.00 50.15 600 12
20 POVIREX PLUS Ointment Povidone-Iodine 5% w/w + Sucralfate 7% w/w 20 g 14.80 112.00 600 12
21 QUARD Cream 15g
Clobetasol propionate 0.05% w/w + Neomycin 0.5% 
w/w + Miconazole 2% w/w + Chlorhexidine Gluconate 
0.2% w/w + Chlorocresol 0.1% w/w
15 g 12.75 131.00 600 12
22 QUARD Cream 5g
Clobetasol propionate 0.05% w/w + Neomycin 0.5% 
w/w + Miconazole 2% w/w + Chlorhexidine Gluconate 
0.2% + Chlorocresol 0.1% w/w
5 g 7.95 79.00 600 12
23 SILVEZ Cream Aminacrine  0.1%  w/w + Cetrimide 0.5% w/w 20 g 12.50 93.00 600 12
24 SILVEZ PLUS Cream
Silver Sulfadiazine 1% w/w + Chlorhexidine Gluconate 
0.2% w/w + Lignocaine 2% w/w + Chlorocresol 0.1% 
w/w
15 g 13.65 93.00 600 12
25 VALERATE - C Cream Clobetasol Propionate 0.05% w/w + Ketoconazole 2% 
w/w + Chlorocresol 0.1% w/w 20 g 14.55 80.00 600 12
26 VALERATE - N Cream Clobetasol Propionate 0.05% w/w + Neomycin 0.5% 
w/w + Chlorocresol 0.1% w/w 20 g 14.55 116.00 600 12
1 CANDITOP DUSTING POWDER Clotrimazole 1% w/w 75 g 28.00 95.00 150 12
2 CANDITOP DUSTING POWDER Clotrimazole 1% w/w 100 g 36.75 140.00 50 12
3 POVIREX Lotion Povidone-Iodine 5% w/v 100 ml 20.65 48.00 160 12
4 SCABLAB Lotion Gamma Benzene Hexachloride + Cetrimide 50 ml 9.00 85.00 200 12
5 SCABLAB Lotion Gamma Benzene Hexachloride + Cetrimide 100 ml 16.80 127.00 160 12
1 ABIDE Albendazole 400mg 10 x 10 
Alu/Alu 153.00 788.00 50 12
2 ABIDE PLUS Albendazole 400mg +  Ivermectin 12mg 50 x 1 x 1 165.00 1175.00 50 12
EXTERNAL PREPARATIONS (CREAMS/ OINTMENTS/ GEL)
EXTERNAL LOTIONS / POWDER / SPRAY/ GARGLE
TABLETS
Page 3 of 10

S. 
No. Brand Name Composition PACK PTS MRP SHIPPER
PACK Tax %
3 ACLOFLEX -TH TAB Aceclofenac 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg + 
Thiocolchicoside 4mg 10X10 ALU ALU 385.00 1940.00 60 12
4 ACLOFLEX-ADVANCE Aceclofenac 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg + Cetirizine 
HCI 5mg + Magnesium Trisilicate 100mg 20 x 10 115.00 1700.00 100 12
5 ACLOFLEX-MR Aceclofenac 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg + 
Chlorzoxazone 250mg
10 x 10
Alu/Blister 90.00 1280.00 40 12
6 ACLOFLEX-P Aceclofenac 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg 20 x 10 92.00 1760.00 60 12
7 ACLOFLEX-P Aceclofenac 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg 50x10 230.00 4400.00 40 12
8 ACLOFLEX-SP TAB Aceclofenac 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg + 
Serratiopeptidase 10mg 20X10 ALU ALU 195.00 3000.00 40 12
9 AMFIVE-AT TAB AMLODIPINE 5MG + ATENOLOL 50MG 20X15 BLISTER 205.00 3260.00 60 12
10 ASTOZYME Effervescent Tablet Papain 60mg + Simethicone 25mg + Fungal Diastase 
(1.2000) 20mg 25x2 Strip 195.00 1250.00 50 12
11 AUGULAB-625 Amoxycillin Trihydrate 500mg + Potassium 
Clavulanate 125mg
10 x 1 x 10
Strip 595.00 2045.00 40 12
12 AZILAB - 250 Azithromycin 250mg 10 x 2 x 6 540.00 780.00 120 12
13 AZILAB - 500 Azithromycin 500mg 20 x 1 x 3 540.00 790.00 120 12
14 CAL D3 Calcium Carbonate 1250mg + Vitamin D3 250 IU 10 x 2 x 15 128.00 2000.00 50 12
15 CEFLOX - 250 Ciprofloxacin 250mg 20 x 10   158.00 490.00 100 12
16 CEFLOX - 250 Hexa Ciprofloxacin 250mg 20 x 10   158.00 490.00 100 12
17 CEFLOX - 500 Ciprofloxacin 500mg 20 x 10 Alu/PVC 292.00 948.00 40 12
18 CEFLOX - 500 Ciprofloxacin 500mg 20 x 10   286.00 948.00 100 12
19 CEFLOX - 500 Hexa Ciprofloxacin 500mg 20 x 10   286.00 948.00 100 12
20 CEFLOX - TZ Ciprofloxacin 500 mg + Ornidazole 500mg 20 x 10   450.00 2780.00 80 12
21 CEFLOX - TZ 1100 Ciprofloxacin 500mg + Tinidazole 600mg 20 x 10   450.00 3500.00 80 12
22 CIP - TZ Ciprofloxacin 500mg + Tinidazole 600mg 20 x 10   450.00 3500.00 80 12
23 CLONAC PLUS  TAB Aceclofenac 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg 20 x 10
(4 Colour PVC Blister) 102.00 2100.00 60 12
24 DICLOLAB PLUS Diclofenac 50mg + Paracetamol 325mg 10 x 2 x 10 71.50 670.00 100 12
25 DICLOLAB PLUS  Red Diclofenac 50mg + Paracetamol 325mg 10 x 2 x 10 71.50 670.00 100 12
26 DICLOLAB PLUS Brown Diclofenac 50mg + Paracetamol 325mg 10 x 2 x 10 71.50 670.00 100 12
27 DICLOLAB PLUS Green Diclofenac 50mg + Paracetamol 325mg 10 x 2 x 10 71.50 670.00 100 12
28 DICLOLAB PLUS Yellow Diclofenac 50mg + Paracetamol 325mg 10 x 2 x 10 71.50 670.00 100 12
29 DOO CLAV 1000 Amoxycillin Trihydrate 875mg + Potassium 
Clavulanate 125mg
10 x 1 x 10
Strip 830.00 9715.00 40 12
30 DOO CLAV 375 Amoxycillin Trihydrate 250mg + Potassium 
Clavulanate 125mg
10 x 1 x 6
Alu/Alu 345.00 3300.00 40 12
31 DOO CLAV 625 Amoxycillin Trihydrate 500mg + Potassium 
Clavulanate 125mg
10 x 1 x 6
Alu/Alu 360.00 1225.00 40 12
32 DOXYLAB Doxycycline 100mg + Ambroxol 7.5mg 10 x 2 x 8 280.00 1310.00 100 12
33 ELSERRA D Diclofenac 50mg + Serratiopeptidase 10mg 10 x 10
Alu/Alu 65.00 1260.00 100 12
34 ESKUF DX DT TABLET Dextromethorphan HBr 10mg +Phenylephrine 5 mg  + 
Chlorpheniramine 2 mg 10x10 Strip 72.00 600.00 100 12
35 ETORILAB-90 Etoricoxib 90mg 20X15 BLISTER 460.00 5500.00 60 12
36 ETORILAB-MR Etoricoxib 60mg + Thiocholchicoside 4mg 10X1X10 BLISTER 385.00 2700.00 60 12
37 ETORILAB-P Etoricoxib 60mg + Paracetamol 325mg 20X15 BLISTER 460.00 4400.00 60 12
38 FESTIVE 200 Ofloxacin 200mg 10 x 10 Alu/Alu 92.00 830.00 100 12
39 FESTIVE 200 Ofloxacin 200mg 30 x 10 
White PVC 245.00 2490.00 60 12
40 FESTIVE 200 Ofloxacin 200mg 30 x 10 
Peach PVC 245.00 2490.00 60 12
41 FESTIVE 200 Ofloxacin 200mg 30 x 10 
Yellow PVC 245.00 2490.00 60 12
42 FESTIVE 400 Ofloxacin 400mg 10 x 10 Alu/Alu 200.00 2022.00 50 12
43 FLUCOLAB - 150 Fluconazole 150mg 50 x 1 x 1 148.00 675.00 40 12
44 HISTOLAB - L Levocetirizine Dihydrochloride 5mg 20 x 10 61.00 1200.00 100 12
45 HISTOLAB - LM Levocetirizine Dihydrochloride 5mg + Monteleukast 
10mg
10 x 1 x 10
Alu/Alu 112.00 2320.00 50 12
46 IBUFLAM TABLET Ibuprofen 400 mg + Paracetamol 325 mg 20 x 10     Clear PVC 132.00 1400.00 80 12
47 IBUFLAM TABLET Ibuprofen 400 mg + Paracetamol 325 mg 20 x 10 Amber 132.00 1400.00 80 12
48 KALM DOWN Flupentixol 0.5mg + Melitracen 10mg 10X10 BLISTER 155.00 750.00 60 12
49 KOLD TIME Paracetamol 325mg + Phenylephrine Hydrochloride 
5mg + Caffeine 30mg + Diphenhydramine HCl 25mg 25 x 10 185.00 1500.00 60 12
50 KOLD TIME TOTAL Paracetamol 325mg + Phenylephrine Hydrochloride 
5mg + Caffeine 30mg + Diphenhydramine HCl 25mg 20 x 10 CAPLET 175.00 2300.00 60 12
Page 4 of 10

S. 
No. Brand Name Composition PACK PTS MRP SHIPPER
PACK Tax %
51 LABDIC KOLD & FLU TAB Paracetamol 500mg + Phenylephrine Hydrochloride 
10mg + Chlorpheniramine Maleate 2mg 5X5X10 165.00 1625.00 60 12
52 LABDIC RELIEF Diclofenac 50mg + Paracetamol 325mg + Cetirizine 5 
mg + Magnesssium Trisilicate 100 mg 50 x 10 385.00 2400.00 40 12
53 LABMOX Kid - 125 Amoxycillin 125mg (Dispersible Tablet) 20 x 10 
Strip 155.00 760.00 75 12
54 LABMOX Kid - 250 Amoxycillin 250mg (Dispersible Tablet) 20 x 10
Strip 255.00 2000.00 75 12
55 LABOCEPH 125 Cephalexin 125mg 20 x 10
Strip 280.00 1200.00 100 12
56 LABOCEPH 250 Cephalexin 250mg 20 x 10
Strip 490.00 3500.00 100 12
57 LABOCOF Paracetamol 325mg + Phenylephrine Hydrochloride 
5mg + Caffeine 30mg + Diphenhydramine HCl 25mg
25 x 10 
Strip 175.00 850.00 80 12
58 LABOCOF-600 Effervescent Tablet Acetylcysteine 600 mg 10x1x10 Strip 675.00 2670.00 20 12
59 Labocof-DX TAB Dextromethorphan HBr 10mg +Phenylephrine 5 mg  + 
Chlorpheniramine 2 mg 25X10 178.50 1500.00 80 12
60 LANTAC - D Ranitidine Hydrochloride 150mg + Domperidone 
10mg
15 x 20
Strip 198.00 855.00 100 12
61 LANTAC 150 Ranitidine Hydrochloride 150mg 20X3X10       Strip 355.00 1200.00 50 12
62 MAFNAC SPAS Mefenamic Acid 500mg + Paracetamol 325mg 20 x 10 140.00 1280.00 50 12
63 METHLAB Tablet Methylergometrine 0.125 mg 5 x 6 x 10 400.00 3000.00 100 12
64 MP-4 Methyl Prednisolone 4mg 20 x 10 Alu/Alu 315.00 2000.00 70 12
65 NDS-N-FLOX TZ Norfloxacin 400mg + Tinidazole 600mg 20 x 10 495.00 2640.00 80 12
66 NEULAB ACTIVE  Nimesulide 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg 20 x 10 Clear PVC 74.00 1340.00 100 12
67 NEULAB ACTIVE Gold Nimesulide 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg 20 x 10 Golden PVC 77.00 1340.00 100 12
68 N-FLOX - B 400 Norfloxacin 400mg + Betacyclodextrin 10mg 25 x 10 412.00 2125.00 60 12
69 N-FLOX TZ Ofloxacin 200mg + Ornidazole 500mg 20 x 10 390.00 2600.00 80 12
70 PARALAB 500 Paracetamol 500mg 10 x 5 x 10 180.00 497.50 60 12
71 PARALAB 650 Paracetamol 650mg 32 x 15 230.00 1075.20 40 12
72 PREDILAB - 10 Prednisolone I.P. 10mg 100x10 740.00 1330.00 100 12
73 PREDILAB - 5 Prednisolone I.P. 5mg 120x15 816.00 1368.00 50 12
74 SPASMCARE Dicyclomine 20mg + Paracetamol 325mg 25 x 10 120.00 1600.00 50 12
75 SUGAPIN M1 GLIMEPIRIDE 1MG + METFORMIN 500MG 20X10 BLISTER 255.00 2400.00 60 12
76 SUGAPIN M2 GLIMEPIRIDE 2MG + METFORMIN 500MG 20X10 BLISTER 255.00 3440.00 60 12
77 SUGAPIN PM1 GLIMEPIRIDE 1MG + METFORMIN 500MG + 
PIOGLITAZONE 15MG 20X10 PRC BLIS 360.00 1900.00 60 12
78 SUGAPIN PM2 GLIMEPIRIDE 2MG + METFORMIN 500MG + 
PIOGLITAZONE 15MG 20X10 PRC BLIS 370.00 1920.00 60 12
79 TELIPID- AM TELMISARTAN 40MG + AMLODIPINE 5MG 20X15 ALU ALU 410.00 2700.00 60 12
80 TELIPID- H TELMISARTAN 40MG + HYDROCHLOROTHIAZIDE 12.5 
mg 20X15 ALU ALU 435.00 4800.00 60 12
81 TELIPID-40 TELMISARTAN 40MG 20X15 ALU ALU 460.00 2265.00 60 12
82 TOX - O 100 Cefixime 100mg 10 x 1 x 10
Alu/Alu 250.00 1300.00 80 12
83 TOX - O 200 Cefixime 200mg 20X10 775.00 2180.00 60 12
84 TOX CV Cefixime 200mg + Potassium Clavulanate 125mg 10 x 1 x 6
Alu/Alu 550.00 2600.00 40 12
85 TOX OF Cefixime 200mg + Ofloxacin 200mg 10 x 1 x 10
Alu/Alu 550.00 4250.00 40 12
86 ULTRA KING Tramadol 37.5mg + Acetaminophen 325mg (film 
coated) 10 x 1 x 15 165.00 2200.00 60 12
87 ULTRA KING - AP Tramadol 37.5mg+Paracetamol 325mg+Aceclofenac 
100 mg
10 x 10
Alu/Alu 155.00 1350.00 60 12
88 ZIN Cetirizine Hydrochloride 10mg 50 x 10 88.00 1050.00 100 12
1 AMPILAB 250 Ampicillin 250mg 30 x 10 460.00 1830.00 60 12
2 AMPILAB 500 Ampicillin 500mg 10 x 10 280.00 930.00 100 12
3 BETAMOX PLUS Amoxycillin 250 mg + Cloxacillin 250 mg + Lactic Acid 
Bacillius   90million Spores
10 x 10 
Strip 255.00 1770.00 60 12
4 DOXYLAB Doxycycline 100mg + Ambroxol 7.5mg 30 x 10 505.00 2100.00 60 12
5 DOXYLAB - LB Doxycycline 100mg + Lactic Acid Bacillius 5 billion 
spore 30 x 10 525.00 2100.00 60 12
6 DOXYLAB ORANGE/BLACK Doxycycline 100mg + Ambroxol 7.5mg 30 x 10 505.00 2100.00 60 12
7 GEL CAL D3 SOFT GELATIN CAP Calcitriol 0.25mcg + Calcium Carbonate 500mg + Zinc 
7.5mg
5 x 2 x 15
BLISTER 153.00 2705.00 40 12
8 LABCHLOR 250 Chloramphenicol 250mg 30 x 10 750.00 2520.00 60 12
CAPSULES
Page 5 of 10

S. 
No. Brand Name Composition PACK PTS MRP SHIPPER
PACK Tax %
9 LABCHLOR 500 Chloramphenicol 500mg 10 x 10 500.00 1500.00 100 12
10 LABMOX 250  (Grey / Yellow) Amoxycillin 250mg 30 x 10 400.00 819.00 60 12
11 LABMOX 250  (Red / White) Amoxycillin 250mg 30 x 10 400.00 819.00 60 12
12 LABMOX 500 (Yellow / Yellow) Amoxycillin 500mg 20 x 10 430.00 1646.00 50 12
13 LABMOX 500  (Orange / Orange) Amoxycillin 500mg 10 x 15 325.00 1230.00 50 12
14 LABOCEPH 250 Cephalexin 250mg 10X3X10 675.00 2370.00 60 12
15 LABOCEPH 500 Cephalexin 500mg 20X10 870.00 3500.00 50 12
16 MEDICLOX Plus Ampicillin 250mg + Cloxacillin 250mg 10 x 10 
Strip 290.00 1620.00 60 12
17 OMECAP Omeprazole 20mg 20x20 295.00 1284.00 60 12
18 OMECAP D Omeprazole 20mg + Domperidon 10mg 20 x 10
Strip 142.00 2800.00 50 12
19 PREGACAP-300 Pregabalin 300mg 20X10 700.00 5400.00 50 12
20 PYEEVON SPAS PLUS Dicyclomine HCl 10mg + Tramadol HCl 50mg + 
Acetaminophen 325mg 30 x 8 618.00 2160.00 80 12
21 PYEEVON SPAS T Tepentadol 25mg 30x8 705.00 2550.00 80 12
22 TETRALAB 250 
(Light Green / Light Green) Tetracycline 250mg 30 x 10 320.00 1380.00 60 5
23 TETRALAB 250 
(Red/Yellow) Tetracycline 250mg 30 x 10 320.00 1380.00 60 5
24 TETRALAB 500 Tetracycline 500mg 10 x 10 290.00 930.00 100 5
25 TRAMADEX Tramadol 50mg 10 x 10 117.00 539.00 100 12
26 VIBEL FORTE SOFT GELATIN CAP Ginseng, Multivitamins & Minerals 10 x 1 x 10
BLISTER 117.30 2898.00 60 18
27 VIBEL SOFT GELATIN CAP Multivitamins, Minerals & Antioxidants 20 x 1 x 10
BLISTER 168.30 5260.00 48 18
1 ADRALAB Adrenaline 1mg/ml 1 ml Amp 3.25 13.70 2000 12
2 AMILAB 100 Amikacin 100mg/2ml 2 ml Vial 9.70 32.00 1200 5
3 AMILAB 100 Amikacin 100mg/2ml 10 ml Vial 21.00 112.00 500 5
4 AMILAB 100 Amikacin 100mg/2ml 30 ml Vial 53.00 130.00 200 5
5 AMILAB 250 Amikacin  250mg/2ml 2 ml Vial 14.00 53.00 1200 5
6 AMILAB 500  INJ. Amikacin 500mg/2ml 2 ml Vial 15.60 113.50 2000 5
7 AMILAB 500 INJ. Amikacin 500mg/2ml 2 ml Vial
Blister Pack 15.60 113.50 2000 5
8 ATRO Atropine Sulphate 0.6mg/ml 1 ml Amp 2.90 4.80 2000 5
9 BEE PLEX M 30ML 16.90 55.90 200 12
10 CAL D3 Vit. D3  60,000 IU / ml 1 ml Amp 8.35 58.00 2000 12
11 CEFTALAB 1g Ceftazidime 1g with WFI Each Vial 42.90 254.00 200 12
12 CEFZONE Cefoperazone 1g with WFI Each Vial 30.40 530.00 400 12
13 CEFZONE FORTE  1g Cefoperazone 500mg + Sulbactam 500mg with WFI Each Vial 28.35 610.00 400 12
14 CEFZONE FORTE 1.5g Cefoperazone 1g + Sulbactam 500mg with WFI Each Vial 37.50 780.00 400 12
15 DECATROLIN 100 Nandrolone Decanoate 100mg/ml 1 ml Amp 23.50 635.00 600 12
16 DECATROLIN 25 Nandrolone Decanoate 25mg/ml 1 ml Amp 10.70 230.00 600 12
17 DECATROLIN 50 Nandrolone Decanoate 50mg/ml 1 ml Amp 13.50 426.00 600 12
18 DEXALAB Dexamethasone 4mg/ml 2 ml Vial 5.00 12.95 2000 12
19 DEXALAB Dexamethasone 4mg/ml 10 ml Vial 9.70 17.40 640 12
20 DEXALAB Dexamethasone 4mg/ml 30 ml Vial 21.70 39.90 200 12
21 DIAZELAB Diazepam 5mg/ml 2 ml Amp 3.60 12.35 2000 12
22 DICLOLAB Diclofenac sodium 75mg/ml 1 ml Amp 2.30 25.25 2000 12
23 DICLOLAB Diclofenac sodium 25mg/ml 3 ml Amp 1.95 5.65 2000 12
24 DOOCLAV 1.2 g Amoxycillin 1000mg + Potassium Clavulanate 200mg 
with WFI Each Vial 38.80 157.50 200 12
25 GENTALAB Gentamicin injection 2 ml Vial 4.95 11.70 2000 12
26 GENTALAB Gentamicin injection 10 ml Vial 12.25 16.90 640 12
27 GENTALAB Gentamicin injection 30 ml Vial 27.50 41.32 200 12
28 HACKET Pentazocin 30mg/ml 1 ml Amp 16.50 46.50 2000 12
29 L.Β.ETHER α - β Arteether 150mg/2ml 2 ml Amp 9.70 194.00 900 5
30 LABCHLOR Chloramphenicol Sodium Succinate 1g with WFI Each Vial 38.75 102.00 400 12
31 LABERGIN Methylergometrine Maleate 0.2mg/ml 1 ml Amp 3.60 16.70 2000 12
32 LABMINE Chlorpheniramine Maleate 10mg/ml 30 ml Vial 8.70 73.50 200 12
33 LABOMET Metoclopramide 5mg/ml 2 ml Amp 2.60 5.90 2000 12
34 LABOMET Metoclopramide 5mg/ml 30ML 11.75 58.50 200 12
35 LABOVIT 12 Vitamin C150mg+ Vitamin B12 2500mcg+ Folic Acid 
0.7mg+Niacinamide 12mg COMBI PACK 6.10 38.50 1440 12
36 LABTOCIN Oxytocin 5 IU/ml 1 ml Amp 3.30 19.95 2000 12
37 LANIDOL Paracetamol 150mg/ml 2 ml Amp 3.15 8.95 2000 12
INJECTIONS
Page 6 of 10

S. 
No. Brand Name Composition PACK PTS MRP SHIPPER
PACK Tax %
38 LANIDOL Paracetamol 150mg/ml 30 ml Vial 16.60 62.50 200 12
39 LANTAC Ranitidine 25mg/ml 2 ml Amp 2.50 10.50 2000 12
40 LANTAC Ranitidine 25mg/ml 30 ml vial 10.45 90.00 200 12
41 L-VIT - MVI Multivitamin Injection 10 ml Amp 7.15 37.95 600 12
42 L-VIT 12 Vitamin B12          500mcg 30 ml Vial 19.50 68.00 200 12
43 MALAGO Chloroquine Phosphate 40mg/ml 30 ml Vial 14.55 53.00 200 5
44 NEUROLAB
Thiamine HCl (B1) 10 mg + Pyridoxine (B6) 2mg + 
Cyanocobalamin (B12) 300mcg + Calcium 
Pantothenate 1000mcg/ml
2 ml Amp 3.85 31.75 2000 12
45 NEUROVITON-M 1000 INJ. Methylcobalamin 1000mcg + Pyridoxine (B6) 100mg 
+ Nicotinamide 100mg + D - penthenol 50mg /2ml
2 ml Amp with 
Dispovain 8.95 120.00 400 12
46 NEXA Meropenem 1g With WFI Each Vial 80.00 1067.00 200 12
47 NEXA-S Meropenem 1g + Sulbactam 500mg With WFI Each Vial 100.00 5100.00 200 12
48 OMINIL Ondansetron 2mg/ml 2 ml Amp 2.55 13.30 2000 12
49 OMINIL Ondansetron 2mg/ml 30 ml Vial 11.75 60.00 200 12
50 OXYLAB Oxytetracycline 50mg/ml 30 ml Vial 23.50 52.00 200 12
51 PAZOLAB - 40 Pantoprazole 40mg With WFI Each Vial 8.30 56.50 400 12
52 PIP - T Piperacillin 4g + Tazobactam 500mg With WFI Each Vial 76.50 447.00 120 12
53 PIROXILAB Piroxicam 20mg/ml 2 ml Amp 2.85 38.50 2000 12
54 PROLAB Promethazine 25mg/ml 2 ml Amp 2.55 9.00 2000 12
55 SPASMCARE Dicyclomine Hydrochloride 10mg/ml 2 ml Amp 2.55 7.40 2000 12
56 SPASMCARE Dicyclomine Hydrochloride 10mg/ml 30 ml Vial 8.70 70.00 200 12
57 TOX - 1g Cefotaxime 1 g With WFI Each Vial 17.10 44.75 400 12
58 TOX - 250 Cefotaxime 250mg With WFI Each Vial 9.70 19.80 400 12
59 TOX - 500 Cefotaxime 500mg With WFI Each Vial 12.85 27.25 400 12
60 TRAMADEX Tramadol 100mg/2ml 2 ml Amp 4.10 26.30 2000 12
61 TRIMALAB Triamcinolone Acetonide 40mg/ml 1 ml vial 12.90 120.00 600 12
62 TROXONE -  T Ceftriaxone 1g + Tazobactum 125mg With WFI Each Vial 36.00 402.00 400 12
63 TROXONE - 1g Ceftriaxone 1g With WFI Each Vial 16.50 69.80 400 12
64 TROXONE - 250 Ceftriaxone 250mg With WFI Each Vial 9.70 31.70 400 12
65 TROXONE - 500 Ceftriaxone 500mg With WFI Each Vial 12.85 56.00 400 12
66 TROXONE S - 1500 Ceftriaxone 1g + Sulbactam 500mg With WFI Each Vial 24.00 156.90 400 12
1
AUGULAB - DS
With 30ml Water for 
reconstitution
Amoxycillin Trihydrate 400mg + Potassium 
Clavulanate 57mg / 5 ml 30 ml Glass Bottle 36.25 175.00 120 12
2
CEFDRYL-100 Oral Suspension
With 30ml Water for 
reconstitution
Cefpodoxime Proxetil 100 mg / 5 ml 30 ml Glass Bottle 32.10 190.00 200 12
3
CEFDRYL-50 Oral Suspension
With 30ml Water for 
reconstitution
Cefpodoxime Proxetil 50 mg / 5 ml 30 ml Glass Bottle 24.00 115.00 200 12
4
CEFDRYL-CV Oral Suspension
With 30ml Water for 
reconstitution
Cefpodoxime Proxetil 50 mg / 5 ml + Clavulanic Acid 
31.25 mg/ 5ml 30 ml Glass Bottle 33.60 135.00 200 12
5 DOO-CLAV Amoxycillin Trihydrate 200mg + Potassium 
Clavulanate 28.5mg / 5 ml 30 ml Glass Bottle 22.50 67.50 200 12
6
DOO-CLAV 
With 30ml Water for 
reconstitution
Amoxycillin Trihydrate 200mg + Potassium 
Clavulanate 28.5mg / 5 ml 30 ml Glass Bottle 25.50 67.50 200 12
7 LABMOX 30ml Amoxycillin 125mg / 5ml 30 ml with Dosecap 11.00 34.20 432 12
8 LABMOX 60ml Amoxycillin 125mg / 5ml 60 ml with Dosecap 17.10 68.40 288 12
9 LABMOX Drop Amoxycillin 100mg / ml 10 ml with Dosecap 14.30 40.00 320 12
10 TOX - CV  Cefixime 50mg + Potassium Clavulanate 31.25mg / 5 
ml 30 ml Glass Bottle 28.10 115.00 200 12
11
TOX - CV
With 30ml Water for 
reconstitution
Cefixime 50mg + Potassium Clavulanate 31.25mg / 5 
ml 30 ml Glass Bottle 30.10 115.00 200 12
12 TOX - O Cefixime 50mg+Lactic Acid Bacillus 30 Million Spores 
/ 5ml 30 ml Glass Bottle 17.85 90.00 200 12
13
TOX - O 
With 30ml Water for 
reconstitution
Cefixime 50mg+Lactic Acid Bacillus 30 Million Spores 
/ 5ml 30 ml Glass Bottle 20.15 99.00 200 12
14 TOX - O 100 With 30ml Water for 
reconstitution
Cefixime 100mg+Lactic Acid Bacillus 60 Million Spores 
/ 5ml 30 ml Glass Bottle 28.05 156.00 120 12
15 TOX OF With 30ml Water for 
reconstitution Cefixime 50mg+Ofloxaon 50mg/5ml 30 ml Glass Bottle 25.00 155.00 200 12
DRY SYRUPS / DROPS
Page 7 of 10

S. 
No. Brand Name Composition PACK PTS MRP SHIPPER
PACK Tax %
1 APPY - FAST Cyproheptadine HCl 2mg + Tricholine Citrate 275mg +  
Sorbitol Solution(70%) / 5ml 200 ml 23.50 160.00 60 12
2 ASTOZYME 
(Mango / Pineapple) Pepsin  10mg + Diastase 50mg / 15ml 100 ml 16.10 110.00 100 12
3 ASTOZYME HAZMA Herbal Enzyme syrup 200 ml 25.50 150.00 60 12
4
ASTOZYME
(Mango / Elachi / Pineapple / 
Orange)
Pepsin  10mg + Diastase 50mg / 15ml 200 ml 32.65 175.00 36 12
5 BECODEX-12
Thiamine HCl 10mg + Pyridoxine HCl 3mg + 
Cyanocobalamin 15mcg + D-Panthenol 5mg + L-Lysine 
HCl 130mg / 5ml
200 ml 23.50 152.00 60 12
6 CAL D3 Calcium Carbonate 625mg Eq. to Elemental Calcium 
250mg  + Vitamin D3 125 IU / 5ml 200 ml 23.50 152.00 60 12
7 HEMOLAB FORTE Iron (III) Hydroxide Polymaltose Eq. to elemental Iron 
50mg + Folic Acid 0.5mg / 15ml 300ml 61.00 280.00 40 12
8 HEMOLAB FORTE Iron (III) Hydroxide Polymaltose Eq. to elemental Iron 
50mg + Folic Acid 0.5mg / 15ml 450ml 84.00 355.00 24 12
9
HUNGREE 
(Orange / Mango / Pineapple / 
Elachi / Strawberry / Mix Fruit)
Cyproheptadine 2mg / 5ml 200 ml 24.50 160.00 60 12
10 HUNGREE 
(Pineapple) Cyproheptadine 2mg / 5ml 100 ml 14.80 100.00 100 12
11 LABOPLEX-L
Lysine HCl 50mg + Niacinamide 25mg + Thiamine HCl 
2mg + Riboflavine 2.5mg + D-Panthenol 2.5mg + 
Pyridoxine HCl 1mg + Cyanocobalamin 1mcg / 15 ml
200 ml 23.50 160.00 60 12
12 LEUCO-RODHAK LEUCO-RODHAK Syrup with Capsules {Combo pack} 
for LEUCORRHEA
200  ml Syrup + 30  
Capsule 76.50 295.00 50 12
13 MEMORY PLUS WITH CAPSULE
Vitamin B1 2mg + Vitamin B2 2.5mg + Vitamin B6 
1mg + Niacinamide 25mg + Cyanocobalamin 1mcg + 
D-Panthenol 3mg + L-Glutamic Acid 50mg / 5ml
200 ml 32.65 160.00 60 12
14 MULTIBERRY 
Vit. A 1600 IU + Vit. D3 200 IU + Thiamine (B1) 1.5mg 
+ Riboflavine (B2) 1.5mg + Pyridoxine HCl (B6) 1mg + 
Cyanocobalamin (B12) 1mcg + Nicotinamide 15mg + 
D-Panthenol 2.5mg / 5ml
200 ml 22.50 175.00 60 12
15 Nari Priya Combo Pack of Syrup & Capsules for Women 200 ml Syrup 
+ 30 Capsules 66.00 230.00 60 12
16 PATHRI NASHAK WITH CAPSULE Kidney Stone remover with Capsule 200 ml 72.00 379.50 50 12
17 SHUDDHI Natural Blood Purifier     200 ml 58.00 160.00 30 12
1 ABIDE 10ml Albendazole 200mg / 5ml 10 ml 7.00 20.00 400 12
2 ABIDE PLUS Albendazole 200mg + Ivermectin 1.5mg / 5ml 10 ml 7.80 65.00 400 12
3 ALKA TONE Disodium Hydrogen Citrate 1.25g / 5ml 100 ml 13.25 105.00 160 12
4 AZILAB - 100 Suspension Azithromycin 100mg / 5 ml 15 ml 14.50 35.50 400 12
5 AZILAB - 200 Suspension Azithromycin 200mg / 5 ml 15 ml 18.90 57.00 400 12
6 BABYMOL Suspension Paracetamol 125mg / 5ml 60 ml 8.10 24.60 240 12
7 CLONAC PLUS Ibuprofen 100mg + Paracetamol 162.5mg / 5ml 60 ml 9.20 70.00 240 12
8 CLONAC PLUS Ibuprofen 100mg + Paracetamol 162.5mg / 5ml 60 ml with Dosecap 
& Unit Carton 10.30 78.00 240 12
9 FESTIVE - MZ Ofloxacin 50mg + Metronidazole 100mg / 5ml 30 ml 15.10 78.00 200 12
10 FESTIVE - MZ Ofloxacin 50mg + Metronidazole 100mg / 5ml 60 ml 18.65 105.00 200 12
11 HISTOLAB - LM Montelukast 4mg + Levocetirizine  2.5mg / 5ml 60 ml 15.30 135.00 200 12
12 KOLD TIME Suspension Paracetamol 250mg + Phenylephrine HCl 5mg +  
Chlorpheniramine 2mg / 5ml 60 ml 13.80 85.00 200 12
13 KREMALEX Liquid Paraffin 3.75ml + Milk of Magnesia 11.25ml / 
15ml 170 ml 24.00 120.00 96 12
14 LABOGEL MPS 
(Elachi / Mix Fruit / Orange)
Magnesium Hydroxide 250mg + Dried Aluminium 
Hydroxide Gel 250mg + Simethicone 25mg / 5ml 170 ml 16.35 155.00 96 12
15 LABOGEL MPS 
(Mint)
Magnesium Hydroxide 250mg + Dried Aluminium 
Hydroxide Gel 250mg + Simethicone 25mg / 5ml 170 ml 17.85 155.00 96 12
16 LEVOLAB - OZ Levofloxacin 125mg + Ornidazole 125mg / 5 ml 30 ml 15.80 78.00 200 12
17 LEVOLAB - OZ Levofloxacin 125mg + Ornidazole 125mg / 5 ml 60 ml 22.50 120.00 200 12
18 MAFLAB -DS Mefenemic Acid 100mg + Paracetamol 250mg 60ml 13.75 105.00 200 12
19 MAFLAB -P Mefenemic Acid 50mg + Paracetamol 125mg 60ml 12.25 63.00 200 12
20 MONTILAB LC KID Montelukast 4mg + Levocetirizine  2.5mg / 5ml 60ml 16.00 135.00 200 12
LIQUID SYRUPS
TONIC AND MULTIVITAMIN RANGE
Page 8 of 10

S. 
No. Brand Name Composition PACK PTS MRP SHIPPER
PACK Tax %
21 MYSTCAINE GEL Oxetacaine 10mg + Aluminium Hydroxide gel 0.291 
gm + Magnesium Hydroxide 98mg/5ml 200ml 22.45 125.00 60 12
22 O-LONG 100 Jelly Sildenafil 100mg / 5g 4 x 5 g 19.90 188.00 400 12
23 OMINIL SYP. Ondansetron 4mg/5ml 30ML 9.25 53.40 200 12
24 PARALAB 250 SUSPENSION Paracetamol 250mg/5ml 60 ml 9.70 45.00 240 12
25 PICOLUX Sodium Picosulfate 5mg / 5ml 100 ml 13.75 115.00 160 12
26 SPASMCARE Drop Dicyclomine 10mg  + Activated Dimethicone 40 mg / 
ml 15ml 10.75 55.00 400 12
27 SUCRALAB O SUSPENSION Sucralfate 1 gm + Oxetacine 20 mg / 10ml 200 ml 42.90 230.00 60 12
28 ZIN Cetirizine  5mg / 5ml 60 ml 9.95 43.80 200 12
1 CHERRY LAB Chlorpheniramine Maleate 2mg + Dextromethorphan 
HBr 10mg + Phenylepherine HCl 5mg / 5ml 100 ml 18.90 125.00 150 12
2 CLEAR CHEST Terbutaline Sulphate 1.25mg + Guaiphenesin 50mg + 
Ambroxol HCl 15mg / 5ml 60 ml 12.50 85.00 200 12
3 CLEAR CHEST Terbutaline Sulphate 1.25mg + Guaiphenesin 50mg + 
Ambroxol HCl 15mg / 5ml 100 ml 16.80 125.00 150 12
4 CLEAR CHEST - BLUE Terbutaline Sulphate 1.5mg + Guaiphenesin 50mg + 
Ambroxol HCl 15mg + Menthol 0.5mg / 5ml 60 ml 12.50 85.00 200 12
5 CLEAR CHEST - BLUE Terbutaline Sulphate 1.5mg + Guaiphenesin 50mg + 
Ambroxol HCl 15mg + Menthol 0.5mg / 5ml 100 ml 16.85 125.00 150 12
6 CLEAR CHEST - GREEN Terbutaline Sulphate 1.25mg + Guaiphenesin 50mg + 
Bromhexine HCl 2mg + Menthol 0.5 mg / 5ml 60 ml 12.50 85.00 200 12
7 CLEAR CHEST - GREEN Terbutaline Sulphate 1.25mg + Guaiphenesin 50mg + 
Bromhexine HCl 2mg + Menthol 0.5 mg / 5ml 100 ml 16.85 125.00 150 12
8 CLEAR CHEST - LS Levosalbutamol Sulphate  1mg + Ambroxol HCl 30mg 
+ Guaiphensin 50mg / 5ml 100 ml 17.85 125.00 150 12
9 CLEAR CHEST - ORANGE Terbutaline Sulphate 1.25mg + Guaiphenesin 50mg + 
Bromhexine HCl 2mg + Menthol 0.5 mg / 5ml 60 ml 12.50 85.00 200 12
10 CLEAR CHEST - ORANGE Terbutaline Sulphate 1.25mg + Guaiphenesin 50mg + 
Bromhexine HCl 2mg + Menthol 0.5 mg / 5ml 100 ml 16.85 125.00 150 12
11 ESKUF Codeine 10mg + Triprolidine 1.25mg/5ml 100 ml 85.00 192.00 160 12
12 ESKUF - DX Dextromethorphan HBr 10mg + Chlorpheniramine 
Maleate 4mg / 5ml 100 ml 18.60 150.00 150 12
13 ESKUF LS Levosalbutamol Sulphate  1mg + Ambroxol HCl 30mg 
+ Guaiphensin 50mg / 5ml 60 ml 15.80 85.00 200 12
14 ESKUF LS Levosalbutamol Sulphate  1mg + Ambroxol HCl 30mg 
+ Guaiphensin 50mg / 5ml 100 ml 22.95 125.00 150 12
15 KUFEREX - BLUE Terbutalin Sulphate 1.5mg + Guaiphensin 50mg + 
Ambroxol HCl 15mg + Menthol 0.5mg / 5ml 100 ml 17.35 125.00 150 12
16 KUFEREX - GREEN Bromhexine HCl 2mg + Terbutaline Sulphate 1.25mg 
+ Guaiphenesin 50mg + Menthol 0.5mg / 5ml 100 ml 16.85 125.00 150 12
17 KUFEREX - ORANGE Bromhexine HCl 2mg + Terbutaline Sulphate 1.25mg 
+ Guaiphenesin 50mg + Menthol 0.5mg / 5ml 100 ml 16.85 125.00 150 12
18 KUFEREX - RED Bromhexine HCl 2mg + Terbutaline Sulphate 1.25mg 
+ Guaiphenesin 50mg + Menthol 0.5mg / 5ml 100 ml 16.85 125.00 150 12
19 LABOCOF Dextromethorphan HCl 10mg + Phenylepherine HCl 
5mg + Chlorpheniramine Maleate 2mg / 5ml 100 ml 19.40 125.00 150 12
20 LABOCOF - AM
Ambroxol HCL 15mg + Guaiphenesin 50mg + 
Chlorpheniramine Maleate 2mg + Phenylepherine 
HCL 2.5mg + Menthol 1mg/5ml
60 ml 12.75 85.00 200 12
21 LABOCOF - AM
Ambroxol HCL 15mg + Guaiphenesin 50mg + 
Chlorpheniramine Maleate 2mg + Phenylepherine 
HCL 2.5mg + Menthol 1mg/5ml
100 ml 15.80 125.00 150 12
22 LABOCOF - DX Chlorpheniramine Maleate 2mg + Dextromethorphan 
HBr 10mg + Phenylepherine HCl 5mg / 5ml 60 ml 12.00 85.00 200 12
23 LABOCOF - DX Chlorpheniramine Maleate 2mg + Dextromethorphan 
HBr 10mg + Phenylepherine HCl 5mg / 5ml 100 ml 17.85 125.00 150 12
COUGH SYRUPS
Page 9 of 10

S. 
No. Brand Name Composition PACK PTS MRP SHIPPER
PACK Tax %
24 LABODRYL - DX COUGH SYP. Dextromethorphan HBr 10mg + Chlorpheniramine 
Maleate 4mg / 5ml 100 ml 18.35 136.30 150 12
25 LOREX - SF Terbutaline Sulphate 1.25mg + Guaiphenesin 50mg + 
Bromhexine HCl 4mg + Menthol 0.5 mg / 5ml 100 ml 17.35 125.00 150 12
26 SOBREX Salbutamol Sulphate 1mg + Guaiphenesin 50mg + 
Menthol 0.5mg / 5ml 60 ml 11.00 85.00 200 12
27 SOBREX Salbutamol Sulphate 1mg + Guaiphenesin 50mg + 
Menthol 0.5mg / 5ml 100 ml 15.80 125.00 150 12
28 TROLIN-BR Bromhexine HCl 4mg + Terbutaline Sulphate 1.25mg 
+ Guaiphenesin 50mg + Menthol 0.5mg / 5ml 60 ml 12.50 85.00 200 12
29 TROLIN-BR Bromhexine HCl 4mg + Terbutaline Sulphate 1.25mg 
+ Guaiphenesin 50mg + Menthol 0.5mg / 5ml 100 ml 16.85 125.00 150 12
30 VENTOLAB Bromhexine HCl 2mg + Terbutaline Sulphate 1.25mg 
+ Guaiphenesin 50mg + Menthol 0.5mg 60 ml 12.50 85.00 200 12
31 VENTOLAB Bromhexine HCl 2mg + Terbutaline Sulphate 1.25mg 
+ Guaiphenesin 50mg + Menthol 0.5mg 100 ml 16.85 125.00 150 12
32 VENTOLAB DX Dextromethorphan HBr 10mg + Chlorpheniramine 
Maleate 2mg + Phenylephrine HCl 5mg / 5ml 60 ml 12.75 85.00 200 12
33 VENTOLAB DX Dextromethorphan HBr 10mg + Chlorpheniramine 
Maleate 2mg + Phenylephrine HCl 5mg / 5ml 100 ml 17.85 125.00 150 12
1 PROTILAB Powder Chocolate / Mango / American Ice-cream 200 g 36.20 430.00 50 18
2 PROTILAB Advance Chocolate / Vanila / Kesar Badam 200 g 40.30 379.00 50 18
3 ORALAB ORS Dextrose13.5 g+ Sodium Chloride 2.6g+Potassium 
Chloride 1.5g+ Sodium Citrate 2.9g 50X21.8GM 145.35 1250.00 16 5
1 ACNELIT SOAP Triclosan 0.2% W/W + Allantoin 0.25% W/W + 
Vitamin E 0.03% W/W + Salicylic Acid 0.01% W/W 75 g 28.00 85.00 200 18
2 KETOLIT CT SOAP Ketoconazole 2% W/W, Cetrimide 0.5% W/W 75 g 30.00 120.00 200 18
3 KETOLIT SOAP Ketoconazole 2% W/W 75 g 30.00 120.00 200 18
4 KETOLIT-Z SOAP Ketoconazole 1% W/W, ZPTO (Zinc Pyrithione) 0.5% 
W/W 75 g 28.00 90.00 200 18
5 SCABLIT 5% SOAP Permethrin 5% W/W, Aloe Vera 1% W/W, Cetrimide 
1% W/W 75 g 28.00 90.00 200 18
All transaction are subject to Panipat(Haryana) jurisdiction.
NEUTRACEUTICALS
SOAP
Terms & Conditions:-
This price list cancelled all our previous price list & bonus offers.
GST will be charged extra.
Prices are subject to change without prior notice.
No claim will be entertained on price revision.
Goods once sold will not be taken back other than manufacturing defect.
No. breakage & expiry will be entertained.
Rates are on F.O.R. Destination.
Page 10 of 10

Price List Dec 2024
Product 
Code Brand Name Product Name & Description Pack Size MRP ₹ 
(In Strip)
PTS ₹
(In Strip)
48000060 Aristo Cetrest 30ml
(Cetirizine 5mg /5ml)
Aristo Cetrest Tab
(Cetirizine 10mg) 10x6x10
30ml
30ml
21.06
22.18
1.8548000058
7.30Aristo Cetrest
Aristo Cetrest
48000110 10x2x15 51.00 20.00*Aristatin Aristatin ASP
(Atorvastatin 10mg + Aspirin 75mg)
Aristo Cetrest 30ml with Outer Carton
(Cetirizine 5mg /5ml) 22.18 9.00*48000116 Aristo Cetrest
48000145 6x5ml     390.00      68.06*Aquagermina Aquagermina Oral Suspension 
(Bacillus Clausii (2 Billion Spores)
Aristo Cetrest Cold Total Tablet
(Paracetamol 500mg + Phenylephrine 10mg 
+ CPM 2mg)
20x15 105.00 9.5048000165 Aristo Cetrest
Aristo Emegon Inj
(Ondansetron 2mg /1ml)
Aristo Febu 40 Tab
(Febuxostat 40mg)
Aristo Febu 80 Tab
(Febuxostat 80mg)
10x5x2 ml
10x1x10
10x1x10
13.35
149.00
220.00
3.00*
16.00*
26.00
48000042
48000069
48000070
Aristo Emegon
Aristo Febu
Aristo Febu
20x10 49.25 22.4048000030 Aristo Doxo-400 Aristo Doxo-400 Tab
(Doxofylline 400mg)
Aristo Nexom 40 Tab
(Esomeprazole 40mg)
Aristo Nexom RD Cap
(Esomeprazole40 mg + Domperidone 30mg)
48000084 Aristo Nexom 10x15
10x10
170.00
149.00
13.95
14.70
Aristo L-Cetrest 60ml
(Levocetirizine 2.5mg /5ml)
Aristo L-Cetrest Tab
(Levocetirizine 5mg)
60ml
30x10
95.00
89.00
12.00
3.89*
48000019
48000059
Aristo L-Cetrest
Aristo L-Cetrest
48000109 Aristo Nexom
Aristo Gesic Suspension 60ml
(Ibuprofen 100mg + Paracetamol 162.5mg)
Aristo Gesic Suspension 100ml
(Ibuprofen 100mg + Paracetamol 162.5mg)
60ml
100ml
      42.00 
      60.00 
     11.50 
     16.75 
48000151
48000152
Aristo Gesic
Aristo Gesic
Aristo L-Cetrest Total Tab
(Paracetamol 500mg + Phenylephrine 5mg + 
Levocetirizine 5mg)
20x10 90.00 8.4048000164 Aristo L-Cetrest
Aristo Cetrest Cold DS Syrup 60ml
(Mono Carton) (Paracetamol 250mg + 
Phenylephrine 5mg + CPM 2mg  per 5ml)
60ml 90.00 13.9048000176 Aristo Cetrest
1
48000016 Aristo Povidon Aristo Povidon 10gm
(Povidone Iodine 5%) 10gm 33.90 10.25
↑ Increase       ↓ Decrease       * Oﬀer   


Product 
Code Brand Name Product Name & Description Pack Size MRP ₹ 
(In Strip)
PTS ₹
(In Strip)
↑ Increase       ↓ Decrease       * Oﬀer   
Aristo Povidon 2ltr 985.60  338.00 Aristo Povidon 5% Solution 2L
(Povidone Iodine 2000ml 5%)48000143
Aristo Povidon 20gm
(Povidone Iodine 5%)48000017 Aristo Povidon 20gm 64.55 13.50
Aristo Povidon 250gm Ointment
(Povidone Iodine 5% Ointment)48000018 Aristo Povidon 250gm 450.00 101.00
Aristo Povidon 5% Solution 100ml
(Povidone Iodine 100ml 5%)
Aristo Zento-400 Tab
(Albendazole 400mg)
48000139
10x10x1 9.11 2.4548000082 Aristo Zento-400
100ml
100ml
Aristo Povidon
Aristo Povidon
 107.52 
 49.28 
 35.00 
 22.25 
Aristo Povidon 10% Solution 100ml
(Povidone Iodine 100ml 10%)48000141
100ml 129.00 11.9548000068 Aristodryl
Aristodryl 100ml
(Amonium Chloride 150mg + Diphenhydramine 
15mg + Sodium Citrate 85mg /5ml)
Aristodryl Plus 100ml
(Diphenhydramine Hydrochloride 14.08mg + 
Ammonium Chloride 138mg + Sodium 
Citrate 57.03mg + Ethanol (95%) 0.265 mg /5ml)
48000079 Aristodryl 100ml 120.00 16.85
1ml
(With SPWFR) 174.05 16.2248000020 Aristocort Aristocort T Inj
(Triamcinolone 40mg /1ml)
Aristoderm GM 20gm
(Clobetasol Propionate 0.05% w/w + 
Neomycin 0.5% w/w + Miconazole 2.0% w/w +
Chlorocresol 0.1% w/w)
48000026 Aristoderm 20gm 115.00 13.05*
Aristoderm GM 10gm
(Clobetasol Propionate 0.05% w/w + 
Neomycin 0.5% w/w + Miconazole 2.0% w/w  
+ Chlorocresol 0.1% w/w)
Aristoderm 10gm 65.00 9.54*48000025
1 Vial 47.03 17.4048000044 Aristocort Aristocort H Inj (SPWFR)
(Hydrocortisone 100mg /vial)
Aristocal CT Cap
(Calcium Carbonate 500mg + 
Calcitriol 0.25mcg + Zinc 7.5mg)
Aristocal 5x2x15 327.30 16.9548000024
20x15 132.45 7.7548000072
Aristocal 500 Tab
(Calcium Carbonate 1250mg (eq. to elemental 
calcium 500mg) + Vitamin D3 250IU)
Aristocal
Aristo Zento-400 10ml 
(Albendazole 200mg/5ml) 10ml       20.05        8.10 48000092 Aristo Zento-400
Aristo Povidon
Aristo Povidon 500ml
500ml     537.60 
246.40
144.00
 89.00
Aristo Povidon 10% Solution 500ml
(Povidone Iodine 500ml 10%)
Aristo Povidon 5% Solution 500ml
(Povidone Iodine 500ml 5%)
48000142
48000140
2
100ml 135.00 19.4548000064 Aristokof
Aristokof DM Plus 100ml
(Dextromethorphan 10mg + CPM 2mg 
+ Phenylephrine 5mg /5ml)
Price List Dec 2024

Product 
Code Brand Name Product Name & Description Pack Size MRP ₹ 
(In Strip)
PTS ₹
(In Strip)
↑ Increase       ↓ Decrease       * Oﬀer   
Aristomox CV DS 30ml (SPWFR)
(Amoxicillin 200mg + Clavulanic acid 28.5mg/5ml)
30ml 
(With SPWFR)
30ml 
(With SPWFR)
48000047 Aristomox CV 67.87
67.87
Aristomox CV 1000mg Tab
(Amoxycillin 875mg + Potassium Clavulanate 125mg)48000135 Aristomox CV 10x1x6     233.05      59.00 
Aristomox CV DS 30ml
(Amoxicillin 200mg + Clavulanic acid 28.5mg/5ml) 30ml48000046 Aristomox CV 23.95
42.30*
Aristomox CV 625 Tab
(Amoxicillin 500mg + Clavulanic acid 125mg)48000045 Aristomox CV 5x2x10 204.96 67.50*
Aristomox CV 375 Tab
(Amoxicillin 250mg + Clavulanic acid 125mg)48000134 Aristomox CV 10x1x10     180.88 60.50
Aristoplex 200ml
(Vitamin B Complex with L-Lysine Syrup) 200ml48000086 Aristoplex 150.00 27.30
Aristoplex 100ml
(Vitamin B Complex with L-Lysine Syrup) 100ml48000087 Aristoplex 99.00 18.25
AristoNeurol Plus Cap
(Methylcobalamin 1500mcg + Alpha Lipoic acid 
100mg + Pyridoxine 3mg + Folic acid 1.5mg)
10x3x1048000039 AristoNeurol 210.00 33.65
AristoNeurol OD Tab 
(Methylcobalmine 1500mcg) 20x1x1048000038 AristoNeurol 139.00 15.25
    133.39 Aristomox CV DDS 30ml (SPWFR)
(Amoxicillin 400 Mg + Clavulanic Acid 57 Mg)48000136 Aristomox CV
29.50*
Aristomox 500 (Yellow Cap)
(Amoxicillin 500mg)48000054 Aristomox 20x15 43.90*
44.50Aristomox CV 1.2 Inj
(Amoxicillin 1000mg + Clavulanic acid 200mg/20ml) 1 Vial 157.53Aristomox CV48000043
Aristomox 500 (Orange Cap)
(Amoxicillin 500mg)48000055 Aristomox 20x15 123.65
123.65
43.90*
Aristopara Spas Tab 
(Paracetamol 325mg + Dicyclomine 20mg)48000122 Aristopara 10x5x10 59.00 6.50*
100ml 129.00 18.4048000065 Aristokof Aristokof DX 100ml
(Dextromethorphan 10mg + CPM 4mg /5ml)
10x15
10x15
190.00 18.2548000032 Aristomet G Aristomet G2 Tab
(Glimepride 2mg + Metformin 500mg)
130.00 16.2548000031 Aristomet G Aristomet G1 Tab
(Glimepride 1mg + Metformin 500mg)
Aristovert 16mg Tab
(Betahistine 16mg) 10x1548000159 Aristovert 195.00 12.90
Azeltra 200 15ml
(Azithromycin 200mg /5ml)48000061 Azeltra 15ml 57.12 22.75
3
Azeltra 200 XL 30ml
(Azithromycin 200mg /5ml)48000062 Azeltra 30ml 114.58 40.00
Price List Dec 2024

Product 
Code Brand Name Product Name & Description Pack Size MRP ₹ 
(In Strip)
PTS ₹
(In Strip)
Candichamp-B 20gm
(Clotrimazole 1% w/v + Beclomethasone 
Dipropanate 0.025% w/v)
20gm48000022 Candichamp 99.00 12.75*
Dandrocheck 2% Shampoo 120ml
(Ketoconazole 2%)48000115 Dandrocheck 120ml 240.00 60.00*
Dynaﬂex 55gm Spray
(Diclofenac diethylamine 1.16 % w/w + Linseed
Oil 3% + Methylsalicylate 10% + Menthol 5%)
48000009 Dynaﬂex 55gm 149.00 60.00
Dynaﬂex 75gm Spray
(Diclofenac diethylamine 1.16 % w/w + Linseed 
Oil 3% + Methylsalicylate 10% + Menthol 5%)
48000010 Dynaﬂex 75gm 199.00 75.00
Clearvas 10 Tab
(Rosuvastatin 10mg)48000113 Clearvas 10x2x15 190.00 15.50
Dynaﬂex gel 30gm
(Diclofenac Diethylamine 1.16% w/w + Linseed 
Oil 3% w/w + Methyl Salicylate 10% w/w + 
Menthol 5% w/w + Benzyl Alcohol 1% w/w)
48000008 Dynaﬂex 30gm 99.00 16.50
Dynaﬂex Hot gel 30gm
(Diclofenac diethylamine 1.16 % w/w + Methyl 
Salicylate 10 % w/w + Menthol 5 % w/w + 
Linceed oil 3.0% + Capsaicin 0.025 % w/w + 
Benzyl Alcohol 1 % w/w)
48000034 Dynaﬂex 30gm 125.90 17.50
Deﬂisto 6 Tab
(Deflazacort 6 mg)48000132 Deﬂisto 10x1x10 149.00 19.95
Cefper 500mg Tab
(Cefuroxime Axetil 500mg tablets) 10x1x1048000156 Cefper 576.02 120.00
Candichamp-B 10gm
(Clotrimazole 1% w/v + Beclomethasone
Dipropanate 0.025% w/v)
10gm48000021 Candichamp 70.00 9.69*
Candichamp Vaginal Gel 
(with Applicator)
(Clotrimazole 2% w/w)
30gm + 
Applicator48000023 Candichamp 136.85 20.50
Cpero 500 Tab
(Ciproﬂoxacin 500mg)48000160 Cpero 20x10 47.60 20.00
↑ Increase       ↓ Decrease       * Oﬀer   
Azeltra 500 Tab
(Azithromycin 500mg) 20x1x348000057 Azeltra 79.20
Candichamp 30gm Powder
(Clotrimazole 1% w/v)
Candichamp 75gm Powder
(Clotrimazole 1% w/v)
48000040
48000041
Candichamp
Candichamp
30gm
75gm
49.25
99.60
14.50
24.25
Azeltra 250 Tab
(Azithromycin 250mg) 20x1x648000056 Azeltra 78.29 28.50
28.50
4
Dynaﬂex MR Tab
(Diclofenac 50mg + Paracetamol 325mg + 
Chlorzoxazone 250mg)
48000006 Dynaﬂex 20x10 112.00 10.28*
Price List Dec 2024

↑ Increase       ↓ Decrease       * Oﬀer   
Product 
Code Brand Name Product Name & Description Pack Size MRP ₹ 
(In Strip)
PTS ₹
(In Strip)
Dynaﬂex Plus Tab (Amber PVC)
(Diclofenac 50mg + Paracetamol 325mg)48000001 Dynaﬂex 10x2x10 35.00 4.30
4.30
4.30
4.30
4.30
Dynaﬂex Plus Tab (Clear PVC)
(Diclofenac 50mg + Paracetamol 325mg)48000003 Dynaﬂex 10x2x10 35.00
Dynaﬂex Plus Tab (Green PVC)
(Diclofenac 50mg + Paracetamol 325mg)48000002 Dynaﬂex 10x2x10 35.00
Dynaﬂex Plus Tab (Green PVC )
(Diclofenac 50mg + Paracetamol 325mg)
25x2x10 
(Box Pack)48000004 Dynaﬂex 35.00
48000099 Etoridol 20x10 180.00 16.50Etoridol 90 Tab
(Etoricoxib 90mg)
48000100
48000105
Etoridol
Flexibon
20x10
10x1x10
150.00
249.00
19.90
44.90
Etoridol-P Tab
(Etoricoxib 60mg + Paracetamol 325mg)
Flexibon Tab
(Glucosamine 750mg + Diacerein 50mg + 
Methylsulfonylmethane 250mg)
48000073 Flumont-LC 60ml 140.00 18.85Flumont-LC Kid Syrup 60ml
(Levocetirizine 2.5mg + Montelukast 4mg /5ml)
Flumont-LC Tab
(Levocetirizine 5mg + Montelukast 10mg) 18.82*270.0048000077 Flumont-LC 10x2x15
Gabaprex-M Tab
(Gabapentin 300mg + Methylcobalamin 500mcg) 24.90149.0048000028 Gabaprex 10x1x10
Flumont-LC Kid Tab 
(Levocetirizine 2.5mg + Montelukast 4mg) 7.65139.0048000083 Flumont-LC 10x10
48000104 Gutbliss 10x1x10 149.00 20.25Gutbliss Cap
(Pre & Probiotic capsules)
Pre-Gabaprex Cap
(Pregabalin 75mg + Mecobalamin 750mcg)48000103 Gabaprex 10x1x10 205.00 19.00
48000126 Etoridol 20x10     165.00 19.90Etoridol-120 Tab
(Etoricoxib 120mg)
Dynaﬂex SP Tab
(Diclofenac 50mg + Paracetamol 325mg + 
Serratiopeptidase 15mg)
48000007 Dynaﬂex
Dynaﬂex
20x10 149.00 11.00*
48000029 Etoridol 20x10 125.00 15.20Etoridol 60 Tab
(Etoricoxib 60mg)
Dynaﬂex Plus Tab (Silver PVC)
(Diclofenac 50mg + Paracetamol 325mg)48000005 Dynaﬂex 10x2x10 35.00
48000154 Flumont-LC 10x1x10 251.00 25.95*Flumont-FX Tab
(Montelukast 10mg + Fexofenadine 120mg)
48000162 20x5x3ml 5.68 2.50Dynaﬂex 75Mg 3Ml Injection
(Diclofenac 75mg (3ml))
5
Haemoprol Forte 300ml
(Elemental Iron 50mg + Folic acid 0.5mg /15ml) 49.00*208.0048000076 Haemoprol 300ml
Price List Dec 2024

Product 
Code Brand Name Product Name & Description Pack Size MRP ₹ 
(In Strip)
PTS ₹
(In Strip)
↑ Increase       ↓ Decrease       * Oﬀer   
Hunger Aid Plus Syrup 200ml
(Cyproheptadine 2mg + Tricholine Citrate (65%) 
275mg+ Sorbitol (70% Solution) 2gm)
     32.18*    135.00 48000144 Hunger Aid 200ml
48000078 Haemoprol XT Tab
(Ferrous ascorbate 100mg + Folic acid 1.5mg) 20.25153.25Haemoprol
Haemoprol
10x1x10
48000089
Haemoprol Z Cap
(Carbonyl Iron 50mg + Zinc 22.5mg 
+ Folic acid 0.5mg)
8.75208.0015x2x15
48000085 Megaceclo Rab Cap
(Aceclofenac 200mg + Rabeprazole 20mg) 17.50199.00Megaceclo 10x10
48000011 Megaceclo P Tab (Blister PVC BOX)
(Aceclofenac 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg) 5.6098.50Megaceclo 20x10
48000013
Megaceclo MR Tab
(Aceclofenac 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg + 
Chlorzoxazone 250mg)
16.50*125.90Megaceclo 20x10
48000012 Megaceclo P Tab (Alu-Alu Silver)
(Aceclofenac 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg) 10.26* 98.50Megaceclo 20x10
48000185 Megaceclo P Tab (Blister PVC Plastic Box)
(Aceclofenac 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg)Megaceclo
48000014
Megaceclo SP Tab
(Aceclofenac 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg + 
Serratiopeptidase 15mg)
17.45*129.00Megaceclo 20x10
48000155 Megaceclo Spas Tab
(Aceclofenac 100Mg + Drotaverine 80Mg) 14.25149.00Megaceclo 10x10
48000131 Megaceclo 200 SR Tab
(Aceclofenac 200Mg Sustained Release)        9.7590.00Megaceclo 20x10
48000130 Megaceclo 100 Tab
(Aceclofenac 100mg) 4.9055.00Megaceclo 20x10
48000149 M Prednacortil 20x10       55.00 10.15M-prednacortil 4 Tab
(Methylprednisolone 4mg)
Liverhelp-DS Syrup 225ml
(Ayurvedic Liver Tonic-Double Strength) 225ml48000118 Liverhelp 225.00 30.50
48000150 M Prednacortil 20x10       80.00 16.15M-prednacortil 8 Tab
(Methylprednisolone 8mg)
Liverhelp Syrup 200ml
(Ayurvedic Liver Tonic) 200ml48000117 Liverhelp 125.00 19.00
Haemoprol Red 225ml
(Elemental iron 32.8mg + Folic acid  0.5mg + 
Vitamin B12 7.5mcg /15ml)
37.65*158.7048000075 Haemoprol 225ml
48000074 Haemoprol XT 150ml
(Ferrous ascorbate 30mg + Folic acid 550mcg /5ml)Haemoprol 150ml 165.30 29.50 
6
Mifty Kit Tab
(Mifepristone 200mg + Misoprostol 200mcg) 45.70478.0248000172 Mifty 10x1 Kit
9.50*147.7532x2x15
Price List Dec 2024

Product 
Code Brand Name Product Name & Description Pack Size MRP ₹ 
(In Strip)
PTS ₹
(In Strip)
↑ Increase         Decrease       * Oﬀer   
Nimodol Plus Tab (Clear PVC)
(Nimesulide 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg) 65.0048000094 Nimodol
Nimodol Plus Tab (Golden PVC Plastic Box)
(Nimesulide 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg) 65.0048000097 Nimodol 40x2x10
Nimodol Plus Tab (Golden PVC)
(Nimesulide 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg) 65.0048000093 Nimodol 10x2x10
10x2x10Nimodol Plus Tab (Silver PVC)
(Nimesulide 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg) 65.0048000096 Nimodol
48000133 Oﬂer 30ml 13.75Oﬂer M Suspension 30ml (Mono Carton)
(Oﬂoxacin 50mg + Metronidazole 100mg / 5ml) 75.25
48000168 Oﬂer 20x10 10.10Oﬂer 200mg Tab (Blister)
(Oﬂoxacin 200mg) 90.30
48000169 Oﬂer 20x10 11.85*Oﬂer 200mg Tab (Alu-Alu)
(Oﬂoxacin 200mg) 90.30
48000170 Oﬂer 20x10 17.50Oﬂer OZ Tab
(Oﬂoxacin 200mg + Ornidazole 500mg) 130.50
48000081 Powerforce 24x1x4 276.00 7.25Powerforce 100 Tab
(Sildenaﬁl 100mg)
Orixime O Tab
(Ceﬁxime 200mg + Oﬂoxacin 200mg)48000137 Orixime 10x1x10     142.69      56.41*
48000048 Orixime 30ml 16.90Orixime-50 30ml
(Ceﬁxime 50mg /5ml)
Orixime-50 30ml (SPWFR)
(Ceﬁxime 50mg /5ml) 22.4554.77
54.77
48000049 Orixime 30ml 
(With SPWFR)
48000138 Orixime 10x1x10 268.80 89.50Orixime CV Tablet 
(Ceﬁxime 200mg + Clavulanic acid 125mg)
Orixime-100 30ml (SPWFR)
(Ceﬁxime 100mg /5ml) 30.5080.3048000050 Orixime 30ml 
(With SPWFR)
Olsmile 40 Tab
(Olmesartan 40mg) 24.50230.0048000112 Olsmile 10x15
Orixime 200 Tab
(Ceﬁxime 200mg) 38.60109.5448000071 Orixime 10x2x10
48000174 Oﬂer 60ml  20.25Oﬂer M Suspension 60ml (Mono Carton)
(Oﬂoxacin 50mg + Metronidazole 100mg / 5ml) 99.00
Nimodol Plus Tab (Amber PVC)
(Nimesulide 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg) 65.0048000095 Nimodol 10x2x10
10x2x10
48000098 Nimodol Plus Tab (Amber PVC Plastic Box)
(Nimesulide 100mg + Paracetamol 325mg) 5.90*65.00Nimodol 20x5x10
Mupitop 2% 5gm
(Mupirocin 2% w/w) 22.50113.6248000037 Mupitop 5gm
7
48000080 Powerforce 24x1x4 140.00 5.25Powerforce 50 Tab
(Sildenaﬁl 50mg)
Price List Dec 2024
5.90*
5.90*
5.90*
5.90*
5.90*

Product 
Code Brand Name Product Name & Description Pack Size MRP ₹ 
(In Strip)
PTS ₹
(In Strip)
↑ Increase       ↓ Decrease       * Oﬀer   
48000121 Rantop 30x10 11.55Rantop 300 Tab (Ranitidine 300mg 
(Golden strip with aluminium foil) 33.00
48000120 Rantop 20x30 60.20↑ 17.90Rantop 150 Tab (Ranitidine 150mg 
(Golden strip with aluminium foil)
48000114 Rabitop 10x1x10 220.00 22.25
48000147 Rabitop 20x10 113.85 12.20*
12.20*
Rabitop DSR Capsules (Alu-Alu)
(Rabeprazole 20mg + Domperidone 30mg SR)
48000148 Rabitop 20x10 113.85Rabitop DSR Capsules (Strip)
(Rabeprazole 20mg + Domperidone 30mg SR)
Rabitop-LS Cap
(Rabeprazole 20mg + Levosulpiride 75mg)
48000146 Rabitop 20x15     115.50 11.15*Rabitop 20 Tab
(Rabeprazole 20mg)
48000128 Pyrimef 20x10      11.95* Aristo Pyrimef Forte Tab
(Mefenamic 500Mg + Paracetamol 325mg)       51.00 
48000127 Pyrimef 20x10        8.50 Aristo Pyrimef 500 Tab
(Mefenamic Acid 500Mg)       31.00 
48000129 Pyrimef 30x10 5.90Aristo Pyrimef Spas Tab
(Mefenemic 250 Mg + Dicyclomine 10mg) 46.00
48000157 Pyrimef 60ml 11.55Aristo Pyrimef P 100mg Suspension
(Mefenamic Acid 100mg) 37.63
48000090 Protein 200gm     369.00      55.50* 
         58.75*
Aristo Protein Powder
(20g Protein/100gm Powder)
48000091 Protein 200gm     399.00 Aristo Protein With Dha Powder
(20g Protein/100gm Powder)
48000101 Promisec 20x20       64.29 14.10Promisec 20 Cap
(Omeprazole 20mg)
48000102 Promisec 20x20 200.00 15.20Promisec D Cap
(Omeprazole 20mg + Domperidone 30mg)
48000171 Qure 10x10 100.69 28.50Qure 500mg Tab
(Levoﬂoxacin 500mg)
48000153 Pregalearn 50x1 60.00 5.80Pregalearn Test Kit
(HCG Test Kit)
8
Price List Dec 2024
48000161 Rantop 10x10x2ml 2.65Rantop 50 Inj 
(Ranitidine 50mg Per 2ml) 20.00
48000036 Super V 10x1x10 110.00 17.50
Super V Gold Capsules
Ginseng 212.50mg, Multivitamin & 
Multimineral Softgel Capsules)
10x1x1048000035 Super V 149.00 12.75
Super V Lyco Capsules
(Antioxidants Lycopene, Vitamin & 
Zinc Soft Gelatin Capsules)
10x3x1048000158 Super V 145.00 10.52*Super V Rich Cap
(Multivitamin and Multimineral Capsules)

Product 
Code Brand Name Product Name & Description Pack Size MRP ₹ 
(In Strip)
PTS ₹
(In Strip)
↑ Increase       ↓ Decrease       * Oﬀer   
Prices are subject to change without prior notice. Prices mentioned are Pre-tax, except MRP. 
No claim will be entertained on price revision.
Goods once sold will not be taken back other than manufacturing defect.
No breakage & expiry will be entertained.
Terms & Conditions:-
48000125 Vildanorm 10x15
10x15
10x15
    170.00      19.00Vildanorm 50 Tab
(Vildagliptin 50mg)
Vildanorm-M 500 Tab
(Metformin 500mg + Vildagliptin 50mg)
Vildanorm-M 1000 Tab
(Metformin 1000mg + Vildagliptin 50mg)
48000123 Vildanorm     195.00      29.40*
48000124 Vildanorm     220.00      31.00*
Ventilex LS 100ml
(Levosalbutamol 1mg + Ambroxol HCL 30mg 
+ Guaiphenesin 50mg /5ml)
48000067 Ventilex 100ml 121.00 24.25
Ventilex 100ml
(Terbutaline 1.25mg + Bromhexine 2mg + 
Guaiphenesin 50mg + Menthol 0.5mg /5ml)
48000063 Ventilex 100ml 124.00 17.40
Ventilex A 100ml
(Terbutaline 1.25mg + Guaiphenesin 50mg + 
Ambroxol 15mg + Menthol 0.5mg /5ml)
48000066 Ventilex 100ml 129.00 18.75
48000108 Terbizol 10x1x7 185.00 20.90Terbizol 250 Tab
(Terbinaﬁne 250mg)
48000107 Terbizol 10gm 58.80 8.95Terbizol 10gm
(Terbinaﬁne 1% w/w)
9
170ml
Visco-MPS Liquid 170ml
(Simethicone 25mg + Magnesium Hydroxide 
200mg + Dried Aluminium Hydroxide 200 mg)
48000177 Visco MPS 120.00 19.00
Price List Dec 2024
10x1x648000163 Surepenam 630.00 199.00Surepenam 200mg Tab
(Faropenem 200mg)

Sr. No. Code Description PACK HSN CODE Category GST 
RATE %
MRP 
(incl 
GST)
PTS  (GST 
Extra)
1 ATEW01 ALCIFLOX 250MG TABLETS (10S) 10's 30042033 Drugs 12% 24.53 12.00
2 ATEW11 ALCIFLOX 500MG TABLETS (10S) 10's 30042033 Drugs 12% 47.49 21.70
3 ATOZ01 ALCIFLOX-TZ TABLETS (10'S) 10's 30042033 Drugs 12% 93.00 29.50
4 AIAI01 ALDIGESIC INJECTION (1ML) 1 ml 30049069 Drugs 12% 23.00 3.10
5 DL00000014ALDREX PLUS DS SUSPENSION (60ML) 60ML 30049093 Drugs 12% 75.00 18.00
6 DT00000075ALDREX PLUS TABLETS (10'S) 10'S 30049099 Drugs 12% 49.50 10.50
7 AL4506 ALDRYL + COUGH SYRUP (100ML) 100 ML 30049099 Drugs 12% 114.0011.25
8 AL4505 ALDRYL + COUGH SYRUP (60ML) 60 ML 30049099 Drugs 12% 72.00 9.00
9 AIGN01 ALKEM'S KETOROLAC INJECTION 1ml 30049067 Drugs 12% 36.00 4.75
10 DL00000049ALKEMS KOFLINCTUS+ COUGH SYRUP (100ML)100ML 30049099 Drugs 12% 125.0024.00
11 AIGH01 ALKEM'S PIROXICAM INJECTION (2ML) 2 ml 30049066 Drugs 12% 31.00 6.25
12 DO00000025 ALKOF - LS KID DROPS 15 ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 63.00 13.75
13 ALJY21 ALKOF - LS+ COUGH SYRUP (100ML) 100 ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 120.0027.00
14 AL2512 ALKOF + COUGH SYRUP (100ML) 100ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 66.00 17.00
15 AL2514 ALKOF + COUGH SYRUP (150ML) 150 ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 132.0020.75
16 AL2511 ALKOF + COUGH SYRUP (60ML) 60ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 40.00 11.50
17 ALJY62 ALKOF DX PLUS COUGH SYRUP (100ML) 100 ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 86.00 24.50
18 ALJY61 ALKOF DX PLUS COUGH SYRUP (60ML) 60 ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 58.00 16.25
19 AL2571 ALKOF JUNIOR COUGH SYRUP (100ML) 100 ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 108.0024.25
20 AL2572 ALKOF JUNIOR COUGH SYRUP (60ML) 60 ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 67.00 16.50
21 ALJY01 ALKOF LS SYRUP (100ML) 100 ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 118.0024.00
22 ALJY51 ALKOF MINT COUGH SYRUP (100ML)  100 ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 120.0018.75
23 AL2521 ALKOF ORANGE COUGH SYRUP (100ML) 100 ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 93.00 19.65
24 AL2522 ALKOF ORANGE COUGH SYRUP (60ML) 60 ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 63.00 12.75
25 ALJY41 ALKOF TOTAL COUGH SYRUP (100ML) 100ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 125.0020.75
26 DL00000059ALKOF-DX SF SYRUP (100ML) 100 ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 118.0022.70
27 AL2531 ALKOF-DX SYRUP (100ML) 100 ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 120.0021.70
28 DL00000058ALKOF-LS  SF SYRUP (100ML) 100 ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 118.0024.20
29 ATDL21 ALMOLET GOLD TABLETS (10'S) 10's 30049069 Drugs 12% 45.00 12.75
30 ATHS01 ALMOLET-NF TABLETS (10'S) 10's 30049069 Drugs 12% 40.00 7.50
31 AT1944 ALMOX-CV 625 TABLETS 10'S 10’s 30041090 Drugs 12% 204.8568.40
32 AT1943 ALMOX-CV 625 TABLETS 6'S 6’s 30041090 Drugs 12% 122.9141.85
33 AD1921 ALMOX-CV DRY SYRUP (30ML) 30 ml 30041090 Drugs 12% 67.54 29.00
34 AD1922 ALMOX-CV DRY SYRUP (WITH WFI) (30ML)30 ml 30041090 Drugs 12% 67.54 35.25
35 AD1981 ALMOX-CV FORTE DRY SYRUP (30ML) 30 ml 30041090 Drugs 12% 162.0046.50
36 AI8401 AMIJECT 100MG INJECTION (VIAL) Vial 30041090 Drugs 5% 31.00 10.75
37 AI8411 AMIJECT 250MG INJECTION (VIAL) Vial 30041090 Drugs 5% 37.00 18.00
38 AI8421 AMIJECT 500MG INJECTION (VIAL) Vial 30041090 Drugs 5% 113.7622.50
39 AT4315 AZIKEM - 500 TABLETS (5'S) 5'S 30042064 Drugs 12% 131.9747.45
40 AL4311 AZIKEM 200MG (15ML) 15ml 30042064 Drugs 12% 57.26 25.75
41 AT4302 AZIKEM 250 TABLETS [ 6'S ] 6's 30042064 Drugs 12% 78.28 29.60
42 AT4312 AZIKEM 500 TABLETS (3S) 3's 30042064 Drugs 12% 79.19 29.60
43 AT4313 AZIKEM 500 TABLETS (3'S) 3's 30042064 Drugs 12% 79.19 29.60
44 AL4302 AZIKEM SUSPENSION (15ML) 15 ml 30042064 Drugs 12% 36.00 17.75
45 AL4303 AZIKEM SUSPENSION 100MG (30ML) 30 ml 30042064 Drugs 12% 72.00 28.75
46 AL4312 AZIKEM SUSPENSION 200MG (30ML) 30 ml 30042064 Drugs 12% 114.5243.50
47 DL00000042AZIKEM XL SUSPENSION 100 MG/5ML (30 ML)30ML 30042064 Drugs 12% 76.00 28.75
48 DL00000041AZIKEM XL SUSPENSION 200 MG/5ML (30ML)30ML 30042064 Drugs 12% 114.5243.50
49 ATRT01 BILAKEM 20 TABLETS (10'S) 15 g 30049069 Drugs 12% 133.0020.00
50 ATRT11 BILAKEM MONT TABLETS (10'S) 10's 30049069 Drugs 12% 180.0024.75
PRICE LIST FUTURA SEPTEMBER 2024
Devashish, Senapati Bapat Marg
ALKEM LABORATORIES LIMITED
FUTURA DIVISION
MUMBAI - 400013

Sr. No. Code Description PACK HSN CODE Category GST 
RATE %
MRP 
(incl 
GST)
PTS  (GST 
Extra)
PRICE LIST FUTURA SEPTEMBER 2024
Devashish, Senapati Bapat Marg
ALKEM LABORATORIES LIMITED
FUTURA DIVISION
MUMBAI - 400013
51 ALCX11 BLUKOF COUGH EXPECTORANT (100ML) 100ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 97.00 23.25
52 ALGU01 BLUKOF JUNIOR SYRUP (60ML) 60 ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 63.00 14.50
53 AI3311 CEFKEM 1.5G INJECTION (VIAL) 20 ml Vial 30042019 Drugs 12% 376.0045.50
54 AI3301 CEFKEM 1G INJECTION 20ML(VIAL) 20 ml Vial 30042019 Drugs 12% 325.0032.50
55 DI00000044CEFOXID 1.5 GM INJECTION (VIAL) 20ML 30033900 Drugs 12% 297.1251.00
56 DI00000046CEFTISURE - 0.5G INJECTION (VIAL) 7.5ML 30042019 Drugs 12% 56.30 16.50
57 DI00000045CEFTISURE - TZ 1.125GM INJECTION (VIAL)10ML 30042019 Drugs 12% 231.0036.00
58 DI00000042CEFTISURE 1GM INJECTION (VIAL) 10ML 30042019 Drugs 12% 69.87 22.50
59 DI00000043CEFTISURE SB 1.5 GM INJECTION (VIAL) 10ML 30042019 Drugs 12% 218.5035.00
60 AT4201 CEPHALKEM 125 DT TABLETS (10S) 10's 30042012 Drugs 12% 58.00 15.50
61 AT4211 CEPHALKEM 250 DT TABLETS (10S) 10's 30042012 Drugs 12% 114.0025.25
62 AC4201 CEPHALKEM 250MG CAPSULES (10S) 10's 30042012 Drugs 12% 77.00 26.00
63 AC4211 CEPHALKEM 500MG CAPSULES (10S) 10's 30042012 Drugs 12% 165.0046.50
64 DT00000076CERIZ COLD TABLETS (10'S) 10'S 30049099 Drugs 12% 46.00 10.50
65 AI9311 CIPROKEM IV INFUSION (100ML) 100 ml 30042033 Drugs 12% 22.40 13.75
66 ATBT22 DICLOKEM TABLETS (10'S) CLEAR PVC 10's 30049069 Drugs 12% 34.00 5.75
67 AI4001 FERCEE INJECTION (5ML) AMPOULE 5 ml 30045010 Drugs 12% 321.4726.00
68 AL4021 FERCEE RED SYRUP (225ML) 225 ml 30045010 Drugs 12% 150.0041.10
69 AL4023 FERCEE RED SYRUP (450ML) 450 ml 30045010 Drugs 12% 245.0065.25
70 AI8503 HYCORT 100MG INJECTION (VIAL) Vial 30043200 Drugs 5% 47.03 18.00
71 ATQL01 KETOROKEM-DT TABLETS (15'S) 15's 30049067 Drugs 12% 130.0011.75
72 ALCC02 L-HIST SYRUP (60ML) 60ml 30049069 Drugs 12% 70.00 23.25
73 ATCC03 L-HIST TABLETS (15'S) 15's 30049039 Drugs 12% 88.00 8.45
74 ATCC51 L-HIST TOTAL+ TABLETS (10'S) 10's 30049099 Drugs 12% 100.0015.50
75 AIGP02 LOVOLKEM IV INFUSION (100ML) 100ml 30042039 Drugs 12% 230.0023.25
76 AIGP01 LOVOLKEM IV INFUSION (100ML) 100ml 30042039 Drugs 12% 192.0023.25
77 AIIT01 METERKEM INJECTION (100ML) 100 ml 30049022 Drugs 12% 23.52 11.25
78 AIIT11 METERKEM IV INFUSION (100ML) 100 ml 30049022 Drugs 12% 21.28 11.25
79 AIJB01 NADICORT INJECTION (VIAL) 1 ml Vial 30043200 Drugs 12% 102.0016.60
80 AIKT11 NDJECT 25 INJECTION (1ML) 1 ML 30043990 Drugs 12% 198.0013.75
81 AIKT01 NDJECT 50 INJECTION (1ML) 1 ML 30043990 Drugs 12% 284.0018.00
82 DL00000010NEW ALKOF AP+ SYRUP  100 ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 120.0024.75
83 DC00000023NEW ALKOF COFGEL CAPSULES (15'S) 15's 30049099 Drugs 12% 79.50 24.75
84 ALJY71 NEW ALKOF DX SYRUP (100ML) 100 ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 110.0021.25
85 AIIA01 NS (100ML) 100 ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 19.61 10.75
86 DI00000032NS IV INFUSION 100ML EUROHEAD 100 ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 42.50 16.00
87 AI9121 OFLOKEM IV INFUSION(100ML) 100 ml 30042034 Drugs 12% 180.0017.00
88 ACAU05 OMEE 20MG CAPSULES (20'S) 20's 30049034 Drugs 12% 64.29 24.00
89 ALAU01 OMEE MPS COLMINT (170ML) 170 ml 30049034 Drugs 12% 100.0021.00
90 ACDM04 OMEPRAZ-D CAPSULES (20'S) 20's 30049034 Drugs 12% 200.0027.00
91 AIAZ01 POWERFLAM INJECTION 3ML 3 ml Amp 30049069 Drugs 12% 5.68 2.50
92 ATEB11 POWERFLAM MR TABLETS (10'S) 10's 30049069 Drugs 12% 105.0014.30
93 ASAZ11 POWERFLAM RED (30GM) 30 g 30049069 Drugs 12% 125.0026.50
94 AI5501 PYRAKEM INJECTION 2ML 2ml 30049069 Drugs 12% 8.89 4.50
95 AI5511 PYRAKEM IV INFUSION (100ML) 100 ml 30049069 Drugs 12% 276.0020.00
96 AT1404 PYRIMIDE (10S) 10's 30049067 Drugs 12% 42.00 4.50
97 ACFS21 RABALKEM - IT CAPSULES (10'S) 10's 30049039 Drugs 12% 220.0035.50
98 ACFS11 RABALKEM - LS CAPSULES (10'S) 10's 30049039 Drugs 12% 240.0038.50
99 ATFS02 RABALKEM 20 TABLETS (15'S) 15'S 30049039 Drugs 12% 165.0016.25
100 ATFS11 RABALKEM-D TABLETS (10'S) 10's 30049039 Drugs 12% 119.0013.25
101 ACFS01 RABALKEM-DSR CAPSULES (10'S) 10's 30049039 Drugs 12% 137.0014.80

Sr. No. Code Description PACK HSN CODE Category GST 
RATE %
MRP 
(incl 
GST)
PTS  (GST 
Extra)
PRICE LIST FUTURA SEPTEMBER 2024
Devashish, Senapati Bapat Marg
ALKEM LABORATORIES LIMITED
FUTURA DIVISION
MUMBAI - 400013
102 ATFS21 RABALKEM-O TABLETS (10'S) 10's 30049039 Drugs 12% 120.0013.00
103 AI3901 RAFILON INJECTION [ 2 ML ] 2ml 30049033 Drugs 12% 6.50 2.75
104 ALEV01 REDKOF COUGH EXPECTORANT (100ML)100 ml 30049099 Drugs 12% 82.00 21.75
105 ASGX11 RILADEX FAST RELIEF GEL (30G) 30 g 30049069 Drugs 12% 150.0020.50
106 AAGX01 RILADEX FAST RELIEF SPRAY (35G) 35 g 30049069 Drugs 12% 125.0057.75
107 AAGX02 RILADEX FAST RELIEF SPRAY (55G) 55 g 30049069 Drugs 12% 195.0069.50
108 ASGX01 RILADEX GEL (30GM) 30 g 30049069 Drugs 12% 110.0022.00
109 AT5802 ROXIKEM 150MG TABLETS (10'S) 10's 30042062 Drugs 12% 125.0026.25
110 AI1701 SPASMOKEM D INJECTION 2ML 2ml 30044990 Drugs 12% 22.00 4.50
111 ADRR11 ULTICEF-100 DRY SYRUP (30ML) 30 ml 30042019 Drugs 12% 190.0038.25
112 ATRR11 ULTICEF-200 DT TABLETS (10'S) 10'S 30042019 Drugs 12% 295.0061.00
113 ADRR01 ULTICEF-50 DRY SYRUP (30ML) 30 ml 30042019 Drugs 12% 115.0030.75
114 ACCD02 ZEEFER CAPSULES (15'S) 15's 30045039 Drugs 12% 69.00 10.75
115 ATAF12 ZENEGRA 100MG TABLETS (4S) 4's 30049099 Drugs 12% 210.00 8.75
116 ATAF03 ZENEGRA 50MG TABLETS (4S) 4's 30049099 Drugs 12% 137.00 7.00

CWH : Khata/Khtauni No.698/818, Khasra No. 18/20 (4-9), (7-7), G,
Godown Area, Bhabat, ZIRAKPUR – 140603        Tal: Dera Bassi, Dist: SAS NAGAR (2), PUNJAB 
Corporate Office: 1681/5, 3rd Main Road, Rammohanpuram, Near Sriramapuram Metro Station, Bangalore-560021. (Karnataka) 
1ST DECEMBER 2024
SAP Code Sr.No Brand Name Composition Packing Shipper HSN IGST % NEW PTS  MRP 
302627 1 ALEXCET Tablets CETRIZINE HYDROCHLORIDE IP 10 MG TABLET
(CLEAR ) 10X6X10 60 30049031 12 2.00 21.06            
302565 2 ALEXCET-L TABS LEVOCETRIZINE DI HYDROCHLORIDE 5 MG 6X5X10 100 30049099 12 3.00 37.00            
302802 3 ALEXCET LM TABS MONTELUKAST SODIUM 10MG & LEVOCETRIZINE HCL 5MG DT 10X1X10'S 80 30049039 12 14.25 227.50          
302803 4 ALEXCET LM KID TABS MONTELUKAST SODIUM 4MG & LEVOCETRIZINE HCL 2.5MG 
DT 10X1X10'S 80 30049039 12 12.00 104.50          
302739 5 ALEXFLU COLD TABS CETRIZINE DIHYDROCHLORIDE IP 5MG + PHENYLEPHEREINE 
HCL 10MG + PARACETAMOL 325 MG TABLETS 25X10'S 900 30049031 12 9.00 41.50            
302672 6 AZIZOOM 250 TABS AZITHROMYCIN TABLET IP 250 MG TABLETS 20X1X6 36 30049099 12 29.00 78.29            
302674 7 AZIZOOM 500 TABS AZITHROMYCIN TABLET IP 500 MG TABLETS 20X1X3 30 30049099 12 29.00 79.20            
303179 8 AZIZOOM 500 TABS (SILVER PVC) AZITHROMYCIN TABLET IP 500 MG TABLETS 20X1X5 30 30049099 12 48.50 131.99          
302708 9 CALBONEX 500 TAB 
EACH FILM COATED TABLET CONTAINS: 
CALCIUM CARBONATE IP 1250 MG EQ TO ELEMENTAL 
CALCIUM 500 MG
VITAMIN D3 IP 250 I.U.
20x15 24 30045039 12 7.40 101.50          
302922 10 CEFATE -100 DT Each Uncoated dispersible tablet contains : Cefixime 
Trihydrate Eq. to Cefixime 100 mg 10X10'S 72 30042019 12 29.00 118.00          
303263 11 CEFATE -200 DT Each Uncoated dispersible tablet contains : Cefixime 
Trihydrate Eq. to Cefixime 200 mg 10X10'S 60 30042019 12 38.00 92.13            
303279 12 CEFATE 200 DT (O)- 10'S
Each Uncoated dispersible tablet contains : Cefixime 
Trihydrate Eq. to Cefixime 200 mg 10X1X10'S 50 30042019 12 40.00 92.13            
303280 13 CEFATE 200 DT (O)- 20X10'S
Each Uncoated dispersible tablet contains : Cefixime 
Trihydrate Eq. to Cefixime 200 mg 20X10'S 50 30042019 12 39.00 92.13            
303278 14 CEFATE-O TABS Each film coated tablet contains : Cefixime IP as Trihydrate Eq. 
to Anhydrous Cefixime 200 mg, Ofloxacin IP 200 mg 10X10'S 60 30042019 12 55.00 162.00          
300563 15 CETIRIZINE 10 MG TABS CETRIZINE HYDROCHLORIDE IP 10 MG TABLET  
(CLEAR ) 10X6X10 60 30049031 12 2.00 21.06            
303295 16 DOLABET 650 TABS PARACETAMOL 650 MG TABLETS 50X15'S 20 30049069 12 9.50 33.52            
302745 17 DROTACLEAR SPAS TABLETS EACH FILM COATED TABLET CONTAINS: DROTAVERINE HCL 
80MG + MEFENAMIC ACID IP  250MG 20X10 32 30049099 12 15.00 105.00          
303095 18 ESOMER 20 TABS Esomeprazole  tabs IP 20mg 10x15's 30 30049099 12 15.00 105.00          
303096 19 ESOMER 40 TABS Esomeprazole  tabs IP 40mg 10x15's 30 30049099 12 25.00 180.50          
302617 20 FLAMOX CV 375 MG AMOXYCILLIN 250 MG + POTASSIUM CLAVULANATE 125 MG 
TABLETS 10X6 60 30041030 12 38.25 163.00          
302512 21 FLAMOX CV 625MG TABS (6'S STRIP) AMOXYCILLIN 500 MG + POTASSIUM CLAVULANATE 125 MG 
TABLETS 10X6 60 30041030 12 41.50 122.98          
302734 22 FLAMOX CV 625MG TABS 10'S AL STRIP 
(MONO)
AMOXYCILLIN 500 MG + POTASSIUM CLAVULANATE 125 MG 
TABLETS 10X1X10 36 30041030 12 69.50 204.96          
303067 23 FLAMOX CV 625MG TABS 10'S ALU ALU 
(MONO)
AMOXYCILLIN 500 MG + POTASSIUM CLAVULANATE 125 MG 
TABLETS 10X1X10 36 30041030 12 69.50 204.96          
303232 24 FLAMOX CV DUO 625MG TABS 10'S AL. 
STRIP
AMOXYCILLIN 500 MG + POTASSIUM CLAVULANATE 125 MG 
TABLETS 5X3X10'S 36 30041030 12 69.50 204.96          
302518 25 GALVAMARK 50 MG  TABLETS VILDAGLIPTIN 50 MG TABLETS 5X2X15 24 30049099 12 22.00 119.00          
302519 26 GALVAMARK MET 50MG/1000MG VILDAGLIPTIN 50 MG + METFORMIN 1000 MG TABLETS 10X15 36 30049099 12 36.00 140.00          
302520 27 GALVAMARK MET 50MG/500MG VILDAGLIPTIN 50 MG + METFORMIN 500 MG TABLETS 10X15 36 30049099 12 30.00 136.00          
302657 28 GLENDAN MD 4 TABS ONDANSETRON IP 4 MG MOUTH DISSOLVING TABLETS 20X10 100 30049035 12 5.10 55.06            
300487 29 GLENFENAC- MR  TABLETS ACECLOFENAC, CHLORZOXAZONE & PARACETAMOL TABLETS) 20X10 50 30049069 12 16.50 85.00            
302882 30 GLENFENAC-SP FORTE ACECLOFENAC, PARACETAMOL & SERRATIOPEPTIDASE TAB 20X10 50 30049069 12 17.50 156.00          
300628 31 GLENFLU TABLETS FLUCONAZOLE 150 MG TABLETS 30X1X1 50 30049021 12 3.80 12.05            
302546 32 GLENOCORT 6 TABS DEFLAZACORT 6MG 10S 120 30049099 12 19.95 109.50          
300566 33 GLENPAR 500 TABS PARACETAMOL 500 MG TABLETS 10X5X10 36 30049069 12 4.50 10.08            
300567 34 GLENPAR 650 TABS PARACETAMOL 650 MG TABLETS 10X5X10 24 30049069 12 6.30 22.35            
302547 / 303306 35 GLENPAR AC TABS (ALU ALU PACK) PARACETAMOL 325 MG + ACECLOFENAC 100 MG TABLETS 
(ALU-ALU) 20X10 50 30049069 12 8.50 66.00            
302548 / 303307 36 GLENPAR AC TABS (BLISTER PACK) PARACETAMOL 325 MG + ACECLOFENAC 100 MG TABLETS 
(BLISTER) 20X10 50 30049069 12 6.00 66.00            
302648 37 GLENTAC- 300 MG TABS RANITIDINE TABS 300 MG 25X30 30 30049033 12 33.50 53.50            
302656 38 GLENTAC- D TABS RANITIDINE TABS 150 MG + DOMPERIDONE 25X30 30 30049033 12 23.00 81.00            
302642 39 GLENTAC-150 TABS RANITIDINE TABS 150 MG 25X30 30 30049033 12 19.50 42.00            
303091 40 GLENURSOLIV 150MG TABS URSODEOXYCHOLIC ACID 150MG 5X2X15'S 30049036 12 90.00 448.00          
303092 41 GLENURSOLIV 300MG TABS URSODEOXYCHOLIC ACID 300MG 5X3X15'S 30049036 12 160.00 835.50          
302968 42 GLENTONA XT TABS FERROUS ASCORBATE100MG + FOLIC ACID 1.5MG + ZINC 
22.5MG 10x1x10's 56 30049099 12 22.00 111.00          
302658 43 MIFER FORTE TABS MEFENAMIC ACID 500 MG + PARACETAMOL 325 MG 20X10 50 30049069 12 11.95 52.00            
302639 44 MIFER SPAS TABS MEFENAMIC ACID 250 MG + DICYCLOMINE HCL IP 10 MG 10X3X10 50 30049069 12 7.00 52.50            
302577 45 NASORYL COLD & FLU TABLETS
PARACETAMOL IP 325 MG + CAFFEINE (ANHYDROUS) IP 30 MG 
+ PHENYLEPHERINE HCL IP 2.5 MG + CHLORPHENIRAMINE 
MALEATE IP 2 MG
20X15 60 30049099 12 9.00 70.50            
302583 46 NOVOGESIC (AMBER) TAB NIMESULIDE 100 MG TABLETS 10X5X10 50 30049069 12 3.50 30.00            
302584 47 NOVOGESIC (GREEN) TAB NIMESULIDE 100 MG TABLETS 10X5X10 50 30049069 12 3.50 27.50            
302580 48 NOVOGESIC P (GOLD) TAB NIMESULIDE 100 MG + PARACETAMOL 325 MG TABLETS 10X2X10 50 30049069 12 5.50 51.50            
302476 49 NOVOGESIC PLUS TABLETS (ROUND) NIMESULIDE 100 MG + PARACETAMOL 325 MG TABLETS 5X5X10 54 30049099 12 5.50 47.00            
300548 50 OFLOFINE 200 MG TAB OFLOXACIN 200 MG TABLETS 20X10 50 30042034 12 10.25 64.50            
303190 51 OFLOFINE OZ TAB  20 X 10'S OFLOXACIN 200 MG TABLETS+ ORNIDAZOLE 500 MG TABLETS 20X10 50 30049069 12 18.90 101.00          
302590 52 PANTOGLEN 40 TABS PANTOPRAZOLE 40 MG 20X10 100 30049039 12 10.00 102.00          
302777 53 PANTOGLEN-D 10'S PANTOPRAZOLE 40 MG + DOMPERIDONE 10 MG  TABLETS 20X10 100 30049099 12 10.50 104.50          
ARHAM MEDISALES LLP
All India Consignee Agents for Glenmark (Access div)
Email : Arham.Medisales@glenmarkpharma.com, finance.arham@gmail.com, ashish.thakker@glenmarkpharma.com Ph. 080 23127733
GLENMARK (ACCESS) PRICE LIST - DEC 2024
TABLETS


302921 54 PODOGLEN 100 DT Each Uncoated dispersible tablet contains : Cefpodoxime 
proxetil 100 mg tablets 10X10'S 72 30042019 12 49.00 142.00          
303266 55 PODOGLEN 200 DT Each Uncoated dispersible tablet contains : Cefpodoxime 
proxetil 200 mg tablets 10X10'S 60 30042019 12 60.00 216.50          
302928/303281 56 PODOGLEN CV TABS
Each film coated tablet contains: Cefpodoxime Proxetil IP 
Equivalent to Cefpodoxime 200mg & Potassium Clavulanate 
Diluted IP equivalent to Clavulanic Acid 125mg
10x1x10's 30042019 12 110.00 381.00          
302460 57 POSTLUT-N TABS NORETHISTERONE 5MG BLISTER 240 30049099 12 11.00 53.87            
302596 58 RABEFINE-20 TABS 10'S RABEPRAZOLE  SODIUM  20  MG TABLETS 20X10 100 30049039 12 8.50 77.50            
302851 59 RABEFINE D TABS RABEPRAZOLE 20MG + DOMPERIDONE 10MG 20X10 70 30049039 12 9.50 83.50            
302602 60 SPASMOGLEN TABS 10'S PARACETAMOL 325 MG + DICYCLOMINE 20 MG TABLETS 10x5x10's 50 30049039 12 5.75 37.50
302606 61 STREPCLEAR LOZENGES (ORANGE)
EACH LONZENGE CONTAINS:
AMYLMETACRESOL BP 0.6 MG
2,4, DICHLOROBENZYL ALCOHOL
SUGAR BASE Q.S.
10X1X10 20 30049087 12 16.50 47.50            
302594 62 TERBICLAIR 250 MG TAB TERBINAFINE 250 MG TABLET 10X1X7 48 30049029 12 25.00 109.00          
302943 63 THYROCRUSH 25 TABS THYROXINE SODIUM 25MCG 120'S 10 30043911 12 35.00 194.88          
302944 64 THYROCRUSH 50 TABS THYROXINE SODIUM 50MCG 120'S 10 30043911 12 40.00 138.43          
302945 65 THYROCRUSH 75 TABS THYROXINE SODIUM 75MCG 120'S 10 30043911 12 43.00 193.54          
302946 66 THYROCRUSH 100 TABS THYROXINE SODIUM 100MCG 120'S 10 30043911 12 45.00 177.41          
302947 67 THYROCRUSH 125 TABS THYROXINE SODIUM 125MCG 120'S 10 30043911 12 50.00 227.14          
302948 68 THYROCRUSH 150 TABS THYROXINE SODIUM 150MCG 120'S 10 30043911 12 55.00 228.48          
300541 69 XMETOR  -500 TABLETS 20X20's METFORMIN HYDROCHLORIDE TAB 500MG 20X20 60 30049099 12 9.40 38.00            
302732 70 ASCODEX COUGH PEARLS 10'S EACH SOFT GELATIN CAPSULE CONTAINS: CPM 2MG; 
DEXTROMETHORPHAN HBR 10MG; PHENYLEPHRINE HCL 5MG 10X3X10 24 30049099 12 14.00 58.50            
302604 71 CALBONEX SOFTGELS 15'S
EACH SOFT GELATIN CAPSULE CONTAINS: ELEMENTAL 
CALCIUM 200 MG + CALCITROL  0.25 MCG + ZINC SULPHATE 
7.5 MG  CAPSULES
10X2X15 20 30045036 12 18.00 237.50          
302699 72 CALBONEX-D3 60K(1X4) EACH SOFT GELATIN CAPSULE CONTAINS:
CHOLECALCIFEROL I.P. 60000 IU 10X1X4 120 30045036 12 14.75 127.09          
303237 73 CALBONEX K2-7 CAPSULES
EACH SOFT GELATIN CAPSULES CONTAINS: CALCIUM 
CARBONATE IP 625MG EQU TO ELEMENTAL CALCIUM 250MG 
+ CALCITRIOL 0.25MCG + VITAMIN K2-7 45MCG)
10X1X15'S 340 30045090 12 55.00 464.00          
302640/303325 74 CANDIPRAZ 100 CAPS ITRACONAZOLE …. 100MG 10X1X10'S 45 30049029 12 44.00 156.97          
302749/303326 75 CANDIPRAZ 200 CAPS ITRACONAZOLE … 200MG 10X1X10'S 18 30049029 12 70.00 247.74          
302693 76 ESOMER D 40 SR CAPS ESOMEPRAZOLE 40MG + DOMPERIDONE 30MG SR 10X10'S 60 30049039 12 20.00 192.00          
301155 77 ESOMER L CAPSULES ESOMEPRAZOLE 40MG + LEVOSULPRIDE 75 MG CAPSULES 10X1X10 36 30049039 12 51.00 309.50          
300446 78 MILIOM - D CAPSULES, 15'S OMEPRAZOLE 20 MG+DOMPERIDONE 10MG CAP 20X15'S 60 30049039 12 10.30 117.50          
303206 79 MILIOM - D CAPSULES, 20'S OMEPRAZOLE 20 MG+DOMPERIDONE 10MG CAP 20X20'S 50 30049039 12 14.00 156.50          
300583 80 MILIOM CAPSULES 20MG OMEPRAZOLE 20 MG CAP. 20X15'S 50 30049034 12 9.25 47.84            
303205 81 MILIOM CAPSULES 20MG (20X20'S) OMEPRAZOLE 20 MG CAP. 20X20'S 50 30049034 12 12.35 63.78            
302591 82 PANTOGLEN-DSR (10x10's) PANTOPRAZOLE 40 MG + DOMPERIDONE 30 MG SR CAPS. 10X10'S 70 30049039 12 15.00 129.50          
303198 83 PANTOGLEN-DSR (20x10's) PANTOPRAZOLE 40 MG + DOMPERIDONE 30 MG SR CAPS. 20X10'S 100 30049039 12 16.50 141.50          
302733 84 PANTOGLEN L CAPS 10'S PANTOPRAZOLE 40MG + LEVOSULIPIRIDE 75MG SR 10X1X10'S 24 30049039 12 28.00 275.50          
302593 85 PREGABACTIN M 75 CAPSULE PREGABALIN IP 75 MG , MECOBALAMIN  CAPSULES 10X1X10 40 30049099 12 25.00 158.50          
302568 86 RABEFINE D SR CAPS (10x10's) RABEPRAZOLE 20 MG + DOMPERIDONE SR 30 MG CAPSULES 10X10 80 30049039 12 12.50 112.50          
303197 87 RABEFINE D SR CAPS (20x10's) RABEPRAZOLE 20 MG + DOMPERIDONE SR 30 MG CAPSULES 20x10's 100 30049039 12 14.00 123.00          
302999 88 RABEFINE L CAPS RABEPRAZOLE 20 MG + LEVOSULPIRIDE SR 75 MG CAPSULES 10X1X10'S 40 30049039 12 27.00 197.00          
300438 89 SAFERON Z CAPSULES CARBONYL IRON 50MG + ZINC SULPHATE 61.8MG + FOLIC 
ACID 0.5 MG CAP. 10X2X15 50 30045090 12 8.50 95.00            
302735 90 ALEXCET SYRUP 30ML (MONO) EACH 5ML CONTAINS CETRIZINE HCL 5MG 30ML 240 30049031 12 10.60 22.18            
302736 91 ALEXCET SYRUP 60ML (MONO) EACH 5ML CONTAINS CETRIZINE HCL 5MG 60ML 160 30049031 12 14.50 44.35            
302562 92 ALEXCET-L SYRUP 30ML EACH 5 ML CONTAINS:
LEVOCETRIZINE DIHYDROCHLORIDE IP 2.5 MG 30ML 240 30049099 12 11.05 45.00            
302563 93 ALEXCET-L SYRUP 60ML EACH 5 ML CONTAINS:
LEVOCETRIZINE DIHYDROCHLORIDE IP 2.5 MG 60ML 160 30049099 12 12.50 71.50            
302742 94 ALEXCET LM KID SYRUP 60 ML
EACH 5 ML CONTAINS:
MONTELUKAST SODIUM IP EQ. TO MONTELUKAST 4 MG
LEVOCETRIZINE DIHYDROCHLORIDE IP 2.5 MG
60ML 200 30049039 12 21.00 128.00          
302494 95 ASCODEX AX SYRUP, 100ML
EACH 5 ML CONTAINS:AMBROXOL 15 MG 
+TERBUTALINE 1.25 MG + GUAIPHENSIN 50 MG + 
MENTHOLATED SYRUP BASE
100ML 100 30049099 12 24.00 111.50          
302495
96 ASCODEX AX SYRUP, 60ML
EACH 5 ML CONTAINS:AMBROXOL 15 MG 
+TERBUTALINE 1.25 MG + GUAIPHENSIN 50 MG + 
MENTHOLATED SYRUP BASE
60ML 160 30049099 12 18.00 60.00            
302498
97 ASCODEX BR SYRUP, 100ML
EACH 5 ML CONTAINS :TERBUTALINE SULPHATE IP : 
1.25 MGBROMHEXINE HYDROCHLORIDE IP  : 4 
MGGUAIPHENESIN IP : 50 MGIN A MENTHOLATED 
SYRUP BASE.
100ML 100 30049099 12 19.50 94.00            
302499
98 ASCODEX BR SYRUP, 60ML
EACH 5 ML CONTAINS :TERBUTALINE SULPHATE IP : 
1.25 MGBROMHEXINE HYDROCHLORIDE IP  : 4 
MGGUAIPHENESIN IP : 50 MGIN A MENTHOLATED 
SYRUP BASE.
100ML 160 30049099 12 14.50 69.00            
302787 99 ASCODEX D COUGH SYRUP 100ML
EACH 5ML CONTAINS:
DEXTROMETHORPHAN HYDROBROMIDE IP 10MG
PHENYLEPHERINE HYDROCHLORIDE IP 5MG
CHLORPENIRAMINE MALEATE IP 2MG
FLAVOURED BASE Q.S.
100ML 120 30049039 12 38.50 141.00          
303204 100 ASCODEX DX PLUS SYRUP EACH 5ML CONTAINS: DEXTROMETHORPHAN HBR 10MG, 
PHENYLEPHRINE HCL 5MG; CPM 2MG 100ML 100 30049099 12 27.95 141.00          
302493 101 ASCODEX JUNIOR 60 ML
EACH 5 ML CONTAINS:
CHLORPHENIRAMINE MALEATE 2MG
DEXTROMETHORPHAN HBR 10MG
PHENYLEPHRINE HCL 5MG
60ML 160 30049039 12 20.95 100.00          
CAPSULES
SYRUPS / LIQUIDS / DROPS

302675 102 ASCODEX JUNIOR LS DROPS 15ML
EACH ML CONTAINS:
LEVOSALBUTAMOL SULPHATE IP EQ. TO LEVOSALBUTAMOL 
0.25 MG
AMBROXOL HCL IP 7.5 MG
GUAIPHENESIN IP 25 MG
FLAVOURED SYRUPY BASE
15ML 240 30049099 12 16.75 71.50            
302785 103 ASCODEX LS 100ML
EACH 5 ML CONTAINS: 
LEVOSALBUTAMOL SULPHATE I.P. 1MG
AMBROXOL HYDROCHLORIDE I.P.  30MG 
GUAIPHENESIN I.P.  50MG
100ML 120 30049099 12 37.95 141.00          
303172 104 ASCODEX LS 60ML
EACH 5 ML CONTAINS: 
LEVOSALBUTAMOL SULPHATE I.P. 1MG
AMBROXOL HYDROCHLORIDE I.P.  30MG 
GUAIPHENESIN I.P.  50MG
60ML 200 30049099 12 25.95 96.00            
302784 105 ASCODEX LS JUNIOR 60 ML
EACH 5 ML CONTAINS:
LEVOSALBUTAMOL SULPHATE IP 0.5 MG
AMBROXOL HCL 15 MG
GUAIPHENSIN IP 50 MG
60ML 200 30049099 12 28.50 97.00            
SIN112807108020037 106 ASCODEX PLUS EXPECTORANT
EACH 5ML CONTAINS:
TERBUTALINE SULPHATE I.P. 1.25MG
BROMHEXINE HYDROCHLORIDE I.P. 2MG 
GUAIPHENESIN I.P. 50MG
MENTHOL I.P. 0.5MG
100ML 60 30049099 12 29.50 141.00          
SIN111397C34020037 107 ASCODEX PLUS EXPECTORANT 
(GINGER LEMON)
EACH 5ML CONTAINS:
TERBUTALINE SULPHATE I.P. 1.25MG
BROMHEXINE HYDROCHLORIDE I.P. 2MG 
GUAIPHENESIN I.P. 50MG
MENTHOL I.P. 0.5MG
100ML 60 30049099 12 28.95 129.00          
SIN111397C35020037 108 ASCODEX PLUS EXPECTORANT 
(HONEY ROSE)
EACH 5ML CONTAINS:
TERBUTALINE SULPHATE I.P. 1.25MG
BROMHEXINE HYDROCHLORIDE I.P. 2MG 
GUAIPHENESIN I.P. 50MG
MENTHOL I.P. 0.5MG
100ML 60 30049099 12 28.95 129.00          
302786 109 ASCODEX SF 100ML
EACH 5ML CONTAINS:
TERBUTALINE SULPHATE I.P. 1.25MG
BROMHEXINE HYDROCHLORIDE I.P. 2MG 
GUAIPHENESIN I.P. 50MG
MENTHOL I.P. 0.5MG
100ML 120 30049099 12 26.95 147.50          
302789 110 ASCODEX EXPECTORANT
EACH 5ML CONTAINS:
TERBUTALINE SULPHATE I.P. 1.25MG
BROMHEXINE HYDROCHLORIDE I.P. 2MG 
GUAIPHENESIN I.P. 50MG
MENTHOL I.P. 0.5MG
100ML 120 30049099 12 26.95 129.00          
303097 111 ASCODEX-CD PLUS SYRUP EACH 5 ML CONTAINS:CODEINE PHOSPHATE 10 MG + 
TRIPROLIDINE HCL 1.25 MG 100ML 100 30044030 12 60.00 153.00          
303209 112 ASCODEX FLU DROPS Each ml contains: Phenylephrine Hydrochloride IP 2.5 mg 
Chlorpheniramine Maleate IP 1mg 15ML 100 30049099 12 18.50 80.00            
303210 113 ALEXFLU COLD DROPS Each ml contains: Phenylephrine Hydrochloride IP 2.5 mg 
Chlorpheniramine Maleate IP 1mg 15ML 100 30049099 12 18.50 80.00            
300431 114 CETRIZINE SYRUP 30ML (MONO) EACH 5ML CONTAINS CETRIZINE HCL 5MG 30ML 240 30049031 12 10.60 21.70            
301441 115 CETRIZINE SYRUP 60ML (MONO) EACH 5ML CONTAINS CETRIZINE HCL 5MG 60ML 160 30049031 12 14.50 44.35            
303158 116 GLENCOFF-C PLUS SYRUP EACH 5 ML CONTAINS:CODEINE PHOSPHATE 10 MG + 
TRIPROLIDINE HCL 1.25 MG 100ML 100 30044030 12 60.00 153.00          
302531 117 GLENCYPER PLUS SYP 200ML PINEAPPLE CYPROHEPTADINE HCL 2.0MG  & TRICHOLINE CITRATE 275MG  200ML 50 30049099 12 25.00 157.50          
302532 118 GLENCYPER PLUS SYP 200ML STRAWBERRY CYPROHEPTADINE HCL 2.0MG  & TRICHOLINE CITRATE 275MG  200ML 50 30049099 12 25.00 131.50          
302533 119 GLENDAN 30 ML
EACH 5 ML CONTAINS:
ONDANSETRON HYDOCHLORIDE IP 
EQ TO ONDANSETRON 2 MG
FLAVOURED  SYRUP BASE
30ML 320 30049039 12 11.00 32.12            
303124 120 GLENMARK GACINO MPS SUSPENSION 
(ORANGE)
Each 10ml contains: Dried Al Hydroxide Gel 250 mg + 
Magnesium Hydroxide 250 mg + Activated Dimethicone 50 mg 170ML 72 30049032 12 19.90 142.00          
303125 121 GLENMARK GACINO MPS SUSPENSION 
(MINT)
Each 10ml contains: Dried Al Hydroxide Gel 250 mg + 
Magnesium Hydroxide 250 mg + Activated Dimethicone 50 mg 170ML 72 30049032 12 19.90 142.00          
303338 122 GLENPAR COLD - DS SUSPENSION 60 ML
EACH 5 ML CONTAINS: CPM 2 MG , PHENYLEPHEREINE HCL 5 
MG
PARACETAMOL 250 MG  ,SODIUM CITRATE 60 MG
(MENTHOLATED SYP. BASE)
60ML 160 30049099 12 16.00 116.50          
302600 123 GLENTONA-XT SUSPENSION
EACH 5 ML SUSPENSION CONTAINS:
FERROUS ASCORBATE 
EQ. TO ELEMENTAL IRON 30 MG
FOLIC ACID 550 MCG
IN A FLAVOURED SYRUPY BASE
150ML 60 30045090 12 31.00 209.50          
302609 124 GLENTONA SYRUP
Each 5 Ml contain: Ferric Ammonium Citrate IP 110mg Eq. 
Elemental Iron 22.55mg Folic Acid IP 1.5mg Cyanocobalamin 
IP 15mcg
200ML 50 30049033 12 31.00 136.00          
303127 125 KANDI-ZYME PLUS SYRUP Each 5ml contains: Diastase IP (1:1200) .. 50mg and Pepsin 
(1:3000) … 10mg 200ML 36 30049084 12 69.00 180.00          
303126 126 KANDI-ZYME SYRUP Each 5ml contains: Alpha Amylase (1:2000) .. 18.75mg and 
Pepsin (1:3000) … 12.5mg 200ML 36 30049084 12 54.00 165.00          
303294 127 LAXAFIN ORAL SOLTUION Each 15ml contains: Lactulose Concentrate USP equivalent to 
Lactulose 66% … 10gm 250ML 30 30049099 12 170.00 344.40          
302623 128 MIFER PLUS DS SUSPENSION 60 ML
EACH 5 ML CONTAINS :
MEFENAMIC ACID 100 IP MG
PACETAMOL IP 250 MG
60ML 240 30049069 12 14.00 86.00            
302622 129 MIFER PLUS SUSPENSION 60 ML
EACH 5 ML CONTAINS :
MEFENAMIC ACID 50 IP MG
PACETAMOL IP 125 MG
60ML 240 30049069 12 11.50 55.50            
302586 130 OFLOFINE-M 30 ML EACH 5 ML CONTAINS:OFLOXACIN 50 MG METRONIDAZOLE 
100 MG 30ML 240 30049039 12 14.00 98.50            

302585 131 OFLOFINE-M 60 ML EACH 5 ML CONTAINS:OFLOXACIN 50 MG METRONIDAZOLE 
100 MG 60ML 160 30049039 12 18.50 129.00          
303141 132 OLFIT B-COMPLEX SYRUP
EACH 5ML CONTAINS: PYRIDOXINE HCL 0.75MG; 
NICOTINAMIDE 15MG; CYANOCOBALAMIN 2MCG; LYSINE HCL 
37.5MG; SORBITOL SOLUTION (70%); NON-CRYSTALLIZING IP 
… Q.S.
200ML 48 30049087 12 33.00 218.00          
303159 133 OLFIT PRO SYRUP
Each 5ml contains: Protein Hydrolysate 20% -0.333 gm + 
Pyridoxine Hydrochloride IP 0.5 mg + Niacinamide IP 15 mg+ 
Iron Choline Citrate 15 mg+ Magnesium Chloride IP 3.333 mg + 
Manganese Chloride USP 0.033 mg + Zinc Sulphate IP 44 mg 
equivalent to Elemental Zinc 10 mg +Lysine Hydrochloride USP 
20 mg Flavoured Syrup
200ML 48 30045090 12 33.00 199.00          
300484 134 RELCER MPS PLUS - MINT FLAVOUR 
(170ML)
ALUMINIUM HYDROXIDE 200 MG/5ML+ SIMETHICONE 
25MG/5ML + MAGNESIUM HYDROXIDE 200MG /5ML 
SUSPENSION
170ML 72 30049032 12 19.00 93.00            
300485 135 RELCER MPS PLUS - ORANGE FLAV(170ML)
ALUMINIUM HYDROXIDE 200 MG/5ML+ SIMETHICONE 
25MG/5ML + MAGNESIUM HYDROXIDE 200MG /5ML 
SUSPENSION
170ML 72 30049032 12 19.00 93.00            
302694 136 SPASCAINE GEL DRIED ALUMINIUM HYDROXIDE 291 MG + MAGNESIUM 
HYDROXIDE 98 MG+ OXETACAINE 10MG SUSPENSION 170ML 60 30049039 12 32.00 174.00          
302632 137 SUCRA RELCER O SUSPENSION 200ML EACH 10 ML CONTAINS: SUCRALFATE IP 1 G & OXETACAINE BP 
20 MG 200ML 60 30049032 12 60.00 295.50          
302631 138 SUCRA RELCER SUSPENSION 200ML EACH 10 ML CONTAINS: SUCRALFATE IP 1 G 200ML 60 30049032 12 55.00 190.50          
303264 139 CEFATE 50 DRY SYRUP (GLASS + SWFI)
Each 5 ml reconstituted suspension contains : Cefixime IP as 
Trihydrate Eq. to Anhydrous Cefixime 50 mg, One ampoule- 
containing 25 ml sterile water for injection IP
30ML 100 30042019 12 22.90 54.30            
303265 140 CEFATE FORTE DRY SYRUP (GLASS + SWFI)
Each 5 ml reconstituted suspension contains : Cefixime IP as 
Trihydrate Eq. to Anhydrous Cefixime 100 mg, One ampoule- 
containing 25 ml sterile water for injection IP
30ML 100 30042019 12 31.90 80.10            
302516 141 FLAMOX CV DRY SYRUP (GLASS) 30ML AMOXYCILLIN 200 MG + POTASSIUM CLAVULANATE 28.5 MG 
PER 5 ML DRY SYRUP 30ML 200 30041030 12 28.00 60.48            
302515 142 FLAMOX CV DRY SYRUP (GLASS+SWFI) 
30ML
AMOXYCILLIN 200 MG + POTASSIUM CLAVULANATE 28.5 MG 
PER 5 ML DRY SYRUP 30ML 120 30041030 12 31.00 67.87            
302614 143 FLAMOX CV DDS DRY SYRUP 30 ML AMOXYCILLIN 400 MG + POTASSIUM CLAVULANATE 57 MG 
PER 5 ML DRY SYRUP + 30 ML STERILE WATER 30ML 120 30041030 12 45.00 161.00          
303267 144 PODOGLEN 50 DRY SYRUP (GLASS + SWFI) Each 5 ml reconstituted suspension contains : Cefpodoxime 50 
mg (with sterile water for injection) 30ML 100 30042019 12 27.00 94.00            
303268 145 PODOGLEN FORTE DRY SYRUP (GLASS + 
SWFI)
Each 5 ml reconstituted suspension contains : Cefpodoxime 
100 mg (with sterile water for injection) 30ML 100 30042019 12 36.00 175.00          
302720 146 CANDIPRAZ OC 15 GM
OFLOXACIN IP 0.75% W/W
ORNIDAZOLE IP 2.0% W/W
ITRACONAZOLE USP 1.0% W/W
CLOBETASOL PROPIONATE IP 0.05% W/W
15GM 600 30049099 12 17.00 105.50
302651 147 CANDIGESIC GEL 10GM (MONO)
DICLOFENAC DIETHYLAMINE IP 1.16% + LINSEED OIL  IP : 3%  
W/W + METHYL SALICYLATE : 10% W/W + MENTHOL : 5% 
W/W + BENZYL ALCOHOL 1% W/W
20X10GM 600 30049069 12 12.50 54.50            
302707 148 CANDIGESIC GEL 35GM (MONO)
DICLOFENAC DIETHYLAMINE IP 1.16% + LINSEED OIL  IP : 3%  
W/W + METHYL SALICYLATE : 10% W/W + MENTHOL : 5% 
W/W + BENZYL ALCOHOL 1% W/W
16X35GM 288 30049069 12 27.50 131.50          
302522 149 GAMSCABOMA LOTION 100 ML GAMMA BENZENE HEXACHLORIDE I.P. 1% W/V 100ML 100 30049029 12 30.00 111.00          
302879 150 GETLITE NEO CREAM 20GM HYDROQUINONE 2% W/W +TRETINOIN 0.025% W/W + 
MOMETASONE 0.1% W/W CREAM 20GM 360 30049099 12 24.00 256.00          
300506 151 GLENSORE GEL 10 GMS CHOLINE SALICYLATE 8.7% & LIGNOCAINE HYDROCHLORIDE 
2.0% GEL 10GM 600 30049099 12 8.50 63.50            
302539 152 GLENTADINE 5% OINTMENT [10g] POVIDONE –IODINE 5% W/W 10GM 360 30049087 12 11.00 24.00            
302540 153 GLENTADINE 5% OINTMENT [20g] POVIDONE –IODINE 5% W/W 20GM 360 30041090 12 14.00 48.00            
303136 154 GLENTADINE 5% OINTMENT [250GM) POVIDONE –IODINE 5% W/W 250GM 50 30049087 12 120.00 450.00          
302541 155 GLENTADINE 5% SOLUTION 100 ML POVIDONE –IODINE 5% SOLUTION IP 100ML 100 30049087 12 21.50 47.38            
302542 156 GLENTADINE 5% SOLUTION 500 ML POVIDONE –IODINE 5% SOLUTION IP 500ML 20 30049087 12 99.00 236.90          
302597 157 MELNOR CREAM 20 GM HYDROQUINONE 2% W/W +TRETINOIN 0.025% W/W + 
MOMETASONE 0.1% W/W CREAM 20GM 360 30049099 12 25.00 220.00          
302634 158 QUDRAFORCE GM 15 GM BECLOMETHASONE 0.025% W/W + CLOTRIMAZOLE 1.00% 
W/W + NEOMYCIN SULPHATE 0.50% W/W 15GM 600 30049029 12 12.95 103.50          
300429 159 SCABOMA PLUS LOTION 50 ML PERMETHRIN LOTION 5% W/V 50ML 144 30049029 12 22.95 56.00            
302668 160 SUPIROBAN OINTMENT 5 GM MUPIROCIN 2% W/W OINTMENT 5GM 1200 30049099 12 23.00 113.62          
302616 161 CALBONEX D3 SACHETS 1 GM CHOLECALCIFEROL GRANULES 60000 UNITS (VITAMIN D3) 20X1G 800 30045036 12 6.35 38.06            
302660 162 CANDIGESIC SPRAY 1% 55GM
Diclofenac Diethylamine -1.16% w/w
Eq to diclofenac sodium IP -1.00% w/w 
Virgin Linseed Oil BP -3.00 % w/w 
Methyl Salicylate -     10.00% w/w
Menthol IP           -       5.00 % w/w 
Excipents and propellants q.s -100.00% w/w
55GM 180 30049069 12 66.00 209.50          
301634 163 CANDIPREG KIT  PREGNANACY TEST KIT 50X1 KITS 1000 38220011 12 6.50 91.50            
303177 164 CANDIPREG KIT (MONO) PREGNANACY TEST KIT 20 X 1 KITS 960 38220011 12 12.00 83.50            
303142 165 Flublast Junior Nasal Spray 10ml-GA
XYLOMETAZOLINE HYDROCHLORIDE   0.05%
BENZALKONIUM CHLORIDE SOLUTION  IP 0.02% W/V
IN AQUEOUS ISOTONIC SOLUTION
10ML 400 30049099 12 13.25 46.07            
303143 166 Flublast Nasal Spray 10ml-GA
XYLOMETAZOLINE HYDROCHLORIDE  0.1% W/V
BENZALKONIUM CHLORIDE SOLUTION IP 0.02% W/V
IN AQUEOUS ISOTONIC SOLUTION
10ML 400 30049099 12 14.25 57.34            
302671 167 GLENMARK ORS (ORANGE) ORS POWDER (ELECTRAL FLAVOUR) 30X21.80G 600 30049046 5 4.50 22.66            
303146 168 NASORYL 0.025% JUNIOR NASAL SPRAY
OXYMETAZOLINE HYDROCHLORIDE   0.025%
BENZALKONIUM CHLORIDE SOLUTION  IP 0.02% W/V
IN AQUEOUS ISOTONIC SOLUTION
10ML 360 30049099 12 14.50 84.50
303147 169 NASORYL 0.05%  NASAL SPRAY
OXYMETAZOLINE HYDROCHLORIDE   0.05%
BENZALKONIUM CHLORIDE SOLUTION  IP 0.02% W/V
IN AQUEOUS ISOTONIC SOLUTION
10ML 360 30049099 12 15.00 105.00          
303235 170 ORS LIQUID – APPLE FLAVOR 200 ML ORAL REHYDRATING SALTS 200ML 60 30049086 5 13.05 31.50            
303236 171 ORS LIQUID – ORANGE FLAVOR 200 ML ORAL REHYDRATING SALTS 200ML 60 30049086 5 13.05 31.50            
303234 172 ORS LIQUID – NIMBU PANI 200 ML ORAL REHYDRATING SALTS 200ML 60 30049086 5 13.05 31.50            
DRY SYRUPS
OINTMENTS / CREAMS / GELS / LOTIONS
OTC

303235 173 OLFIT ORS LIQUID – APPLE FLAVOR 200 ML ORAL REHYDRATING SALTS 200ML 60 30049086 5 13.25 31.50            
303234 174 OLFIT ORS LIQUID – ORANGE FLAVOR 200 
ML ORAL REHYDRATING SALTS 200ML 60 30049086 5 13.25 31.50            
303236 175 OLFIT ORS LIQUID – NIMBU PANI 200 ML ORAL REHYDRATING SALTS 200ML 60 30049086 5 13.25 31.50            
302612 176 WAXACTIN EAR DROPS (MONO)
BENZOCAINE IP 2.7% W/V CHLORBUTOL IP 5%W/V 
TURPENTINE OIL BP 15% W/V PARADICHLOROBENZENE 
2%W/V
10ML 800 30049099 12 19.95 98.00            
1
2
3
4
5
MRP INDICATED IS FOR INFORMATION ONLY
GLENMARK RESERVES THE RIGHT TO REVISE THE PTS WITHOUT ANY NOTICE
GOODS ARE SOLD ON NON RETURNABLE BASIS
TERMS & CONDITIONS:-
THIS PRICE LIST IS APPLICABLE FOR ONLINE PURCHASES FROM AUTHORISED GLENMARK'S CONSIGNEE AGENTS ONLY. 
PTS MEANS PRICE TO STOCKIST. GST EXTRA AS APPLICABLE

Annex - 10 
 
 
  


 
 
  


 
 
 
