i 
 
 
 
 
    STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
           MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
FEBRUARY, 2026/ MAGHA, 1947 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
  
17 
 


ii 
 
CC&F NO. 197 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in the Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10th February, 2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10th February, 2026 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY, 2026/ MAGHA, 1947 (SAKA) 


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26) (iv)  
Introduction (v) 
Chapter-I Report 1 
Chapter-II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
8 
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
22 
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
23 
Chapter-V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
28 
 ANNEXURES   
I Status of implementation and execution of PCPIR projects 29 
II Status of Existing Infrastructure in all PCPIRs 30 
 
APPENDICES  
I Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2024-25) held on 06th January, 2026. 
33 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report  
(18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers on ‘Demands for Grants (2025 -26)’ of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals). 
35 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS 
(2025-2026) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Dr. Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
21. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Subhash Barala 
24. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
25. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
26. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
27. Shri Arun Singh 
28. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
29. Shri Tejveer Singh 
30. Shri G.K. Vasan 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
2.  Ms. Miranda Ingudam - Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Vandana Rawat   -  Assistant Executive Officer  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this  
Seventeenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Seventh Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025 -26)’ pertaining to the Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
2.  The Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 19th March, 2025. The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers furnished their replies on 18  June, 2025 indicating Action 
Taken on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report. The 
Committee considered and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on 06 th January, 
2026. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
 06 January, 2026 CHAIRPERSON, 
 16 Pausa, 1947 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
    CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
 
 

1 
 
 
REPORT 
 
              CHAPTER–I 
This Report deals with action taken by the Government on 
observations/recommendations of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers contained in their Seventh Report (18 th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2025- 26)’ pertaining to the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 
1.2 The Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 19th March, 2025. It contained 14 Observations/Recommendations. The Replies 
of the Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been received and 
are categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Rec. Para No. 1,2 ,4,6,7,8,9,11,12,13 and 14 
 
Chapter-II Total- 11 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
                     Rec.                                                         
Chapter–III Total–‘NIL’ 
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee which require 
reiteration: 
                      Rec. 3, 5, and 10 
Chapter-IV Total– 03 
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited: 
                      Rec. NIL 
 
Chapter–V Total- ‘NIL’ 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I be furnished to them within three months 
of the presentation of this Report. 

2 
 
 
1.4      The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
Setting up of Plastic Parks 
1.5 The Committee note that the Department has stated that it is regularly 
monitoring the implementation of various projects through site visits, review meetings 
as well as regular progress report submitted by the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPVs). 
Further best efforts are being made to ensure timely completion of the projects and to 
populate the parks at the earliest. The Committee do appreciate the efforts being taken 
by the Department. However, a perusal of information submitted to the Committee 
reveals a dismal picture. Out of the total number of 905 plots across 10 Plastic Parks, 
only 244 plots have been allott ed to industrial units which is just 26.96% of the total 
number of plots. What is more disturbing to the Committee is the fact that the Plastic 
Parks would contribute to increasing investment, production and employment only 
after the Plastic Parks are popu lated. The Committee recommend that more serious 
efforts need to be made to populate the Plastic Parks so as to fully tap the benefit of 
the Plastic Parks. 
1.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
Under the Scheme for Setting up of Plastic Parks, the Central Government 
provides financial support upto 50% of the project cost, subject to a ceiling of Rs. 40 
crore per project. However, the implementation of the Plastic Park projects is largely 
in the hands of the Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) set up by the State Government 
or their agencies and progress of the projects is effectively dependent on the State 
Governments. The implementation of some of these projects was delayed due to local 
factors such as elections, local unrest etc. In some cases, significant time was taken 
in the process of land acquisition for the project. The Plastic Park in Tamil Nadu has 
been stayed due to an Order of the NGT. Besides, the work during 2020-22 was also 
impacted to varying degrees due to the pandemic. 

3 
 
 
The Department has been regularly monitoring the implementation of the 
various projects, including through site visits, review meetings as well as regular 
progress reports submitted by the SPVs. While some of the Plastic Park projects are 
nearing completion of their infrastructure creation work, some of the newer projects 
are in the process of infrastructure development. Simultaneously, efforts are being 
made to populate the Parks by incentivising industrial entities to set up units in the 
Plastic Parks. Based on the efforts made, significant progress in terms of infrastructure 
development has been made in all the Plastic Park projects in recent years. There has 
also been improvement in terms of allotment of plots in the Plastic Parks. 
 
There has been an increase in the number of allotted and functional plots in 
many of the Plastic Parks and several units are functional in the Plastic Parks in 
Assam, Odisha and Tamot. The implementing agencies are confident of making the 
requisite allotments in the near future. It is expected that most of the infrastructure 
creation would be completed by 2025 -26 and thereafter, the Plastic Parks would get 
populated at the earliest. Once these Parks are populated, they would contribute to 
increasing investment, production and employment. 
  
1.7 The Committee in their 7 th Report had noted that out of 905 plots across 
10 Plastic parks only 244 plots were allotted and the Plastic  
Parks would contribute to increase investment , production etc only when the 
Plastic Parks are populated.  The Department in their Action Taken Reply has 
inter-alia submitted that there has been an increase in the number of allotted 
and functional plots in many of the Plastic Parks and several units are functional 
in the Plastic Parks in Assam, Odisha and Tamot.  In this regard, the Committee 
desire that they may be apprised of allotment of plots across the 10 Plastic Parks 
as on date and detailed information may please be furnished separately for each 
Plastic Parks. The Department has also submitted that they expect  that the 
infrastructure creation would be completed by 2025-26 and Plastic Parks would 

4 
 
be populated at the earliest. The Committee, therefore, desire that the working 
infrastructure creation in the Plastic Parks must invariably be completed by the 
year 2025-26. The Committee would like to be informed of the steps taken in this 
matter. 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
1.8 The Committee note with concern that none of the 10 Plastic Parks approved 
so far could be made functional for one reason or the other. For instance, plastic park 
at (i) Tamot, Madhya Pradesh, (ii) Paradeep, Odisha, and (iii) Tinsukia, Assam are 
stated to have completed 100 percent civil work, 98 percent civil work and 85 percent 
civil work respectively but due to pace of allotment of plots in these Plastic Parks they 
could not be made functional. Similarly, the Plastic Park at Deoghar, Jharkhand and 
Bilaua, Madhya Pradesh are stated to have completed 85 percent and 82 percent of 
civil work respectively but they also could not be made functional due to delays in 
completion of in frastructure work due to elections and local opposition, pending 
environment feasibility study, delay in land and contractual issues, etc. As such, the 
fate of these Plastic Parks is hanging in fire and there is no certainty as to when these 
issues would b e resolved and the Plastic Parks would be made functional. The 
Committee are perturbed to note these unfortunate events and recommend that the 
Department should initiate steps to resolve these issues urgently else so that the 
investment of crores of rupees  made in Plastic Parks yield the desired results. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this 
regard. 
 
1.9 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The Department has been regularly monitoring the implementation of the 
various projects, including through site visits, review meetings as well as regular 
progress reports submitted by the SPVs. While some of the Plastic Park projects are 
nearing completion of their infrastructure creation work, some of the newer projects 
are in the process of infrastructure development. Simultaneously, efforts are being 
made to populate the Parks by incentivising industrial entities to set up units in the 

5 
 
Plastic Parks. Based on the efforts made, there has been improvement in terms of 
allotment of plots in the Plastic Parks. 
 
In Tamot, a decision has been taken by the State Cabinet to reduce the 
land cost of the plots in the Plastic Park, following which the pace of allotment 
of plots has increased. A similar effort is being made in the case of the Plastic 
Park at Bilaua. Allotment has picked up in Assam where 72 of the total 104 
plots have been allotted so far. In Jharkhand, the process of allotment has not 
yet been initiated as JIIDCO is in the process of finalising a revised Land 
Allotment Policy. Upon finalisation and approv al of the same, the process of 
allotment would be taken up. 
The implementing agencies are confident of making the requisite 
allotments in the near future. It is expected that most of the infrastructure 
creation would be completed by 2025 -26 and thereafter, the Plastic Parks 
would get populated at the earliest”. 
 
 
1.10 The Committee in their 7 th Report had expressed their concern over the 
delay in completion of Plastic Parks.  The Department in its Action Taken replies 
has inter-alia submitted that in case of Tamot, Plastic Park a decision has been 
taken by the State Cabinet to reduce the land cost of the plots in the Plastic 
Parks, following which the pace of allotment of plots has increased.  Similarly, 
in case of the Plastic Park at Bilaua allotment of plots have reporte dly to have 
been picked up and 104 plots have been allocated so far.  The Committee are 
happy to note that reduction in the land cost  in the Plastic Parks is a welcom e 
step by which pace of allotment of plots in Plastic Parks have increased.  
However, the Committee note that allotment of plots have not been initiated in 
Jharkhand.  The Committee desire that the process may be expedited and also 
expect that as indicated by the Department in their Action Taken Replies, the 
required infrastructure will be comple ted by 2025 –26, thereby enabling the 

6 
 
Plastic Parks to become fully populated and functional. The Committee would 
like to be informed of the steps taken in this matter. 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 
CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PETROCHEMICAL ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY 
(CIPET) 
 
1.11 The Committee note that establishment of 11 CIPET centres is stated to 
have been in progress whereas 08 CIPET centres are stated to have been set 
up. The CIPET IPT Bihta is likely to be completed in the near future. However, 
the information on the status o f 02 remaining CIPET centres may be furnished 
to the Committee at the earliest along with constraints faced in timely 
completion of setting up the Centres.  
 
1.12 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“Work on CIPET: IPT at Bihta is currently ongoing and is likely to be completed 
in 2025- 26. The status of the proposed Centres at Nasik, Maharashtra and Jammu & 
Kashmir (J&K) is as follows:  
 
Nasik, Maharashtra 
 
• The Department approved the setting up of a CIPET Vocational Training Centre 
(VTC) at Mumbai. Maharashtra, with a total project cost of Rs. 40.10 crore. to 
be shared by the Government of India and the Government of Maharashtra on 
a 50:50 basis. Subsequentl y, the location of the proposed Centre was shifted 
to Nasik, with the approval of Hon'ble Minister (C&F). Further, the proposal for 
allotment of suitable land and allocation of funds has been taken up with the 
State Government.  
 
Jammu & Kashmir  

7 
 
• The land identified by the State Government was not found suitable for 
establishment of the proposed Centre and further the State Government has 
neither allotted suitable land for the establishment of the CIPET Centre nor 
given approval for contribution of the State share of funds for the establishment 
of the proposed Centre”. 
 
1.13 The Committee, in its recommendation, stated that out of the 11 proposed 
CIPET centres, 8 CIPET centres have been established and are operational. 
Regarding the remaining 3 centres, CIPET  IPT Bihta is nearing completion, 
while the Centres at Nasik and Jammu & Kashmir are still in the planning stages. 
The Committee have been informed that the CIPET Vocational Training Centre 
(VTC), which was originally intended to be established at Mumbai has been 
relocated to Nasik with a total estimated cost of Rs. 40.10 crore. With regard to 
CIPET Centre proposed at Jammu and Kashmir, the Committee have been 
apprised that land allocated for the Centre was not found to be suitable and no 
land have been identified/allocated to the Proposed CIPET Centre till date.  
Further, the State Government has not even given approval for contribution of 
the State share of funds for establishment and development of CIPET Centre at 
Jammu and Kashmir. The Committee reiterate its earlier recommendation that 
the Department should work closely with State Government to ensure land 
allocation at the earliest and inform the Committee accordingly. 
  

8 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
Proposed and approved allocation for the year 2025-26 
 The Committee note that the Department has been allocated an amount of 
Rs.194.05 crore for the financial year 2025 -26. The Committee further note that the 
allocation for almost all the Schemes has increased and the Ministry of Finance has 
allocated the amo unt as sought by the Department. For instance, for other new 
schemes of petrochemicals, the Department projected a BE of Rs. 50.50 crore and 
the same amount has been allocated. Similarly, the Department projected BE of 
Rs.80.00 crore for CIPET but have bee n allocated a marginally reduced BE of Rs. 
78.48 crore and IPFT too got marginally reduced allocation of funds as compared to 
the projected amount. The Committee desire that the Department optimally utilize the 
allocated fund it has received for its schemes/ programmes. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard. 
2.2 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“NSP:- The Department implements the New Scheme of Petrochemicals  
(NSP) with sub -schemes on Setting up of Plastic Parks and Setting up of 
Centres of Excellence (CoEs ). Under the Scheme for Setting up of Plastic 
Parks, funds are to be released in four installments, based on achievement of 
specific milestones. Most of the Plastic Park projects are likely to complete the 
work of infrastructure creation during 2025 -26. Re gular monitoring of these 
projects is being undertaken to ensure expeditious completion of the same. 
Similarly, grants to the CoEs are to be released in three installments. During 
2024-25, the Scheme Guidelines were revised based on feedback received 
from stakeholders and 5 new CoEs have been set up in September, 2024, 
which are now being operationalised. It is also proposed to set up new CoEs 
during 2025-26. From 2022 -23, the Central Nodal Agency (CNA) system has 

9 
 
been implemented for release of funds under the New Scheme of 
Petrochemicals, under which funds are released on a just -in-time basis and to 
avoid parking of funds. Best efforts are being made to ensure full and efficient 
utilisation of the allocated funds. 
 
CPDS:- In FY 2025-26, budget of Rs. 5.50 Cr. has been allocated under 
Chemical Promotion & Development Scheme ( CPDS). It is submitted that  
sufficient number of proposals have been received by the Department and the 
designated funds will be utilized during the financial year. 
 
CIPET:-  The Department  provides grants -in-aid to CIPET for capital 
creation and the Institute has been operating on self -sustaining mode since 
2008-09. From 2024-25, the Treasury Single Account (TSA) system has been 
implemented in CIPET to ensure efficiency in the release and utilization of funds 
and to avoid the issue of parking of funds.  
 
For 2024-25, the BE of Rs. 36.37 crore was increased to Rs. 44.20 crore in RE. 
There was regular monitoring of the ongoing projects, based on which the entire 
RE of Rs. 44.20 crore was utilised during the financial year. Accordingly, an 
amount of Rs. 78.48  crore has been allocated to CIPET in BE of 2025 -26. Of 
this, an amount of Rs. 19.62 crore has already been released to CIPET under 
the TSA system. Best efforts are being made to ensure timely completion of all 
the ongoing projects and to ensure efficient utilisation of the allocated funds. 
 
IPFT:-  During the year 2024-25, the enhanced grant was sought by the 
IPFT for the procurement of laboratory equipment i.e. LC -HRMS at an 
estimated cost of Rs. 6.00 crore.  As there is limited requirement in the financial 
yar 2025-26 for creation of capital assets, therefore BE 2025-26 is reduced”.   
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 Allocation and utilization of funds during the last three years 
2.3 The Committee note that BE (2022-2023) of the Department which stood at Rs. 
209.00 Crore was reduced to Rs. 173.45 Crore in the year 2023-24 and then increased 

10 
 
to Rs. 194.05 Crore in the year 2025-26. The Department has inter-alia submitted that 
the reasons for reduction in BE is due to slow pace of expenditure of NSP Schemes. 
The Committee deplore the same and recommend that concrete steps be taken 
urgently to accelerate the pace of expenditure under NSP Schemes. The Committee 
also recommend that the Department should analyze the reasons for slow pace of 
expenditure of NSP Schemes at the same time. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard. 
2.4 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“In 2022 -23, the Department implemented the revised procedure for flow of 
funds prescribed by the Department of Expenditure and in 2023 -24, the 
Department adopted the single Central Nodal Agency (CNA) system for release 
of funds. The process of getting the requisite bank accounts opened took 
considerable time, due to which there was reduction in the funds allocated for 
the Scheme. 
However, based on the efforts made, the full amount of RE (Rs. 18 crore) 
was utilized in 2023 -24 and the allocation for the Scheme was increased in 
2024-25. In 2024 -25 also, best efforts were made to ensure full utilisation of 
funds and expeditious completion of the projects through regular review and 
monitoring of the implementing agencies of the Plastic Parks as well as the 
CoEs.  Under CPDS, D epartment has also expanded the scope of training 
programs to include a new initiative of Safety Trainings in Che mical sector . 
Based on the efforts made, 99.97% of RE i.e. Rs. 33.49 crore was utilized. 
Based on the same, the allocation for 2025 -26 has been increased further to 
Rs. 50.50 crore in BE of 2025-26”. 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
2.5 The Committee have been apprised that during the last three years 5289 
persons have got employment in the Plastic Parks. The Committee have also been 
apprised that it is not feasible to set uniform targets for generation of employment in 
the Plastic Parks and that once the pace of allotment of plots in Plastic Parks picks up 
and unit becomes functional, the Plastic Parks would lead to generation of more 

11 
 
employment. The Committee therefore desire that the vacant plots in the Plastic Parks 
be allotted to the industrial units at the earliest so as to provide employment to more 
and more persons. 
2.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The Department has been regularly monitoring the implementation of the 
various projects, including through site visits, review meetings as well as regular 
progress reports submitted by the SPVs. It is expected that most of the 
infrastructure creation would  be completed by 2025 -26 and thereafter, the 
Plastic Parks would get populated at the earliest. Once these Parks are 
populated, they would contribute to increasing investment, production and 
employment”. 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
Setting up of Centres of Excellence (CoEs) 
2.7 As regards CoEs, the Committee have been apprised that grant -in-aids to 
Educational and Research Institutions to undertake research to improve existing 
technology and promote development of new applications/ products have been given 
and 18 CoEs have been set up in the Country as on date. The Committee have further 
been apprised that CoEs are set up with an aim to help in development of new 
products, new applications, innovation and improvement in technology, process 
innovation, quality and environmentally s ustainable development etc. Further, the 
scheme was earlier restricted to petrochemicals but now it has been expanded to 
include the chemical sector too and the Department reviews the requirement of the 
sector and accords approval for new CoEs. In view of the fact that the CoEs are 
functioning for the betterment of the Country and their objectives are laudable, the 
Committee recommend that the Department should review the requirement of CoEs 
at frequent intervals to ensure that delays on the part of the Dep artment should not 
act as hindrance in the setting up of and functioning of CoEs. 
2.8 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 

12 
 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The suggestion of the Hon’ble Committee has been duly noted and the 
Department is regularly monitoring the working of the CoEs to ensure that their 
requirements for funds etc. are fulfilled on a timely basis. The Department is 
also making efforts to facili tate interaction of the CoEs with the industry to 
enable transfer of technology”. 
  
(Recommendation No. 7) 
2.9 The Committee note that the Department is implementing an award scheme to 
provide incentive for meritorious innovations and inventions in various fields of 
Petrochemicals and downstream plastic processing industries since the year 2010 -
2011. In order to po pularize the Scheme, advertisements seeking nominations are 
published in leading national news papers as well as regional news papers besides 
advertising on the website of the Department and CIPET. However, the Department 
has apprised the Committee that with a view to further popularize the Scheme the use 
of social media platforms for the purpose is under consideration/ proposal. The 
Committee do appreciate the contention of the Department and desire that guidelines 
in this regard may be finalized at the ea rliest and the Scheme may be made more 
popular with the use of social media platforms. 
2.10 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The Petrochemicals Research & Innovation Commendation (PRIC) is 
implemented by the Department in coordination with a PSU or autonomous 
organisation of the Department. The Department has been taking various steps 
to popularize the Scheme including publishin g of the advertisement seeking 
nominations in leading national newspapers and regional newspapers; 
publishing the same on the websites of the Department and of CIPET; and 
developing a web portal inviting nominations. The recommendation of the 
Hon’ble Committee regarding the use of social media platforms has been duly 
noted and would be suitably implemented for the upcoming editions”. 
  

13 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
Budgetary allocation under New Scheme of Petrochemicals (NSP) 
2.11 The Committee note with concern that the BE for the year 2022-23 of NSP was 
Rs. 48.50 crore which was reduced drastically at revised estimate stage to Rs. 29.00 
crore and the Department could utilize only Rs. 24.22 crore out of the reduced RE. For 
the year 2023-24, the BE of NSP was Rs. 22.00 crore which was again reduced to Rs. 
18.00 crore. However, for the year 2024-25, the Department projected BE of Rs. 25.00 
crore which was enhanced to Rs. 33.50 crore at RE stage. The Committee, however, 
note that only Rs. 15.06 crore could be utilized upto 31.01.2025 and Rs. 18.44 crore 
is still pending with the Department with just a few days left for the end of the current 
financial year. The Committee desire that the reasons for slow pace of expenditure by 
the Department under NSP may be furnished and the Department should analyse the 
reasons and initiate ameliorative steps for optimal utilization of funds. 
2.12 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The Department implements the New Scheme of Petrochemicals with sub -
schemes on Setting up of Plastic Parks and Setting up of Centres of Excellence 
(CoEs).  Under the Scheme for Setting up of Plastic Parks, funds are released 
in four instalments based on achievement of specific milestones. The release 
of subsequent installments is incumbent upon utilization of the previously 
released funds as well as expenditu re from State resources. Similarly, grants 
to the CoEs are to be released in three installments. 
 
Earlier, CPDS was a standalone scheme.  However, in FY 2023-24, CPDS was 
merged with NSP.  
In 2022 -23, the Department implemented the revised procedure for flow of 
funds prescribed by the Department of Expenditure and in 2023 -24, the 
Department adopted the single Central Nodal Agency (CNA) system for release 
of funds. The process of getting the requisite bank accounts opened took 
considerable time, due to which there was reduction in the funds allocated for 
the Scheme. 

14 
 
 
However, based on the efforts made, the full amount of RE (Rs. 18 crore) 
was utilized in 2023 -24 and the allocation for the Scheme was increased in 
2024-25. In 2024 -25 also, best efforts were made to ensure full utilisation of 
funds and expeditious completion of the projects through regular review and 
monitoring of the implementing agencies of the Plastic Parks as well as the 
CoEs.  Under CPDS, D epartment has also expanded the scope of training 
programs to include a new initiative of Safety Trainings in Che mical sector . 
Based on the efforts made, 99.97% of RE i.e. Rs. 33.49 crore was utilized. 
Based on the same, the allocation for 2025 -26 has been increased further to 
Rs. 50.50 crore in BE of 2025-26”. 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
2.13 For the year 2025 -26, the Department projected a BE of Rs. 50.50 crore and 
the Ministry of Finance has allocated the amount as sought by the Department and 
has allocated the full amount of Rs. 50.50 crore. As such, it becomes imperative on 
the part of the Department to initiate steps for optimal utilization of Rs. 50.50 crore 
allotted to it. The Committee would like to be apprised by the steps taken by the 
Department. 
2.14 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The Department implements the New Scheme of Petrochemicals with sub -
schemes on Setting up of Plastic Parks and Setting up of Centres of Excellence 
(CoEs). 
Under the Scheme for Setting up of Plastic Parks, funds are to be released in 
four installments, based on achievement of specific milestones. Most of the 
Plastic Park projects are likely to complete the work of infrastructure creation 
during 2025-26. Regular monitoring of thes e projects is being undertaken to 
ensure expeditious completion of the same. 
Similarly, grants to the CoEs are to be released in three installments. During 
2024-25, the Scheme Guidelines were revised based on feedback received 
from stakeholders and 5 new CoEs have been set up in September, 2024, 

15 
 
which are now being operationalised. It is also proposed to set up new CoEs 
during 2025 -26. Best efforts are being made to ensure full and efficient 
utilisation of the allocated funds. 
Earlier, CPDS was a standalone scheme .  However, i n FY 2023 -24, 
CPDS was merged with NSP.  It is submitted that sufficient number of proposals 
have been received by the Department under CPDS and the designated funds 
will be utilized during the financial year”. 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
2.15 As regards, the present status of creation of residential hostels to augment 
intake capacity of the existing and new academic programmes the Department has 
submitted that the work has been completed and intake capacity is being used in as 
many as 12 CIPET centres. However, in CIPET CSTS, Mysore, 85 percent work is 
stated to have been completed whereas in CIPET CSTC, Imphal 32 percent of the 
work is stated to have been completed and in case of CSTC, Baddi 50 percent work 
is stated to have been completed . The Committee have been further apprised that 
31.03.2025 and 19.09.2025 and 27.07.2025 respectively is the target date for 
completion of residential hostels in these CIPET centres. The Committee recommend 
that the Department should invariably ensure that  the work is completed within the 
target date fixed by the Department.  
 
2.16 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The current status of the hostel projects is as follows:  
a. Imphal - the building work is in progress and 48% of the physical work has 
been completed. The project is likely to be completed by September, 2025. 
b. Baddi - the building work is in progress, with 57% of the physical work having 
been completed. The project is likely to be completed by 31st August, 2025.  
c. Mysuru - about 96% of the physical work has been completed and the project 
is likely to be completed by 30th June. 2025”. 
 
  

16 
 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
2.17 The Committee note that for the year 2022 -23, the BE of the CIPET was Rs. 
100.24 crore which was reduced to Rs. 63.081 crore at RE stage. Further, for the year 
2023-24, the BE was Rs. 92.88 crore which was again reduced to Rs. 7.28 crore and 
the actual expenditure was NIL. For the year 2024-25, the projected BE was Rs. 36.37 
crore which was enhanced to Rs. 44.20 crore and CIPET could utilize Rs. 27.28 crore 
upto 31.01.2025. However, for the year 2025 26, a higher BE of Rs. 80.00 crore was 
projected and a marginally reduced RE of Rs. 78.48 crore have been allocated to 
CIPET. The Committee observes that the budget estimates of the CIPET as well as 
the expenditure are apparently uneven during the previous years and recommend that 
the Department should initiate steps in this regard. 
 
2.18 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“CIPET has been functioning on self -sustaining mode since 2008 -09 and the 
Department provides grants -in-aid for the creation of capital assets. The BE, 
RE and Actual releases to CIPET in recent years is as follows: 
 
Year BE  
(Rs. crore) 
RE  
(Rs. crore) 
Actual  
(Rs. crore) 
2021-22 117.88 102.34 102.34 
2022-23 100.24 63.81 63.81 
2023-24 92.88 7.28 0.00 
2024-25 36.37 44.20 44.20 
2025-26 78.48 - 19.62 
(upto 5th June, 2025) 
The utilization in 2022-23 was less than the RE due to slow progress in various 
projects due to delay in execution of work by CPWD and in procurement of 
alternative equipment.  
 
At the close of 2022 -23, a comprehensive review of the funds released and 
utilized in CIPET was undertaken wherein it was noted that significant funds 
were available with CIPET from releases of previous years. Accordingly. no 
funds were released to CIPET during 2023-24. During the year, CIPET incurred 
expenditure from the releases of previous years and at the close of 2023 -24, 

17 
 
an amount of Rs. 34 ,65,71,478 was deposited into the Consolidated Fund of 
India.  
 
From FY 2024 -25 onwards, the Treasury Single Account (TSA) system has 
been implemented in CIPET to ensure efficiency in the utilization of funds. For 
2024-25. the BE of Rs. 36.37 crore was increased to Rs. 44.20 crore in RE. 
There was regular monitoring of the ongoing projects, based on which the entire 
RE of Rs. 44.20 crore was utilised during the financial year. 
 
Accordingly, an amount of Rs. 78.48 crore has been allocated to CIPET in BE 
of 2025- 26. Many of the approved projects are on the verge of completion. The 
processes of construction and procurement are being undertaken on a timely 
basis due to regular monit oring. Based on the efforts made, the Department 
has already released an amount of Rs. 19.62 crore so far. Best efforts are being 
made to ensure timely completion of all the ongoing projects and to ensure 
efficient utilisation of the allocated funds”. 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 
PETROLEUM, CHEMICAL AND PETROCHEMICALS INVESTMENT REGION 
(PCPIR)  
 
2.19 The Committee note with concern that as on date, 03 PCPIRs are being 
implemented in the states of Andhra Pradesh (Vishakhapatnam), Gujarat (Dahej) and 
Odisha (Paradeep). The Committee further note with concern that the Department has 
not received any proposal from the State Governments for providing viability gap 
funding under the PCPIR policy and the Department has made NIL allocation for 
PCPIR as no ex penditure have been incurred by the Department. An investment of 
Rs. 1,28,509 crore, Rs. 58,918 crore and Rs. 73,518 crore is stated to have been 
made in PCPIRs Dahej, Vishakhapatnam and Paradeep. The cumulative total of this 
investment comes to a whooping  Rs. 2,60,945 crore. The Committee desire a 
clarification from the Department whether this huge investment made by it in the 
PCPIRs would fructify as envisioned. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department should holistically review the PCPIR P olicy, 2007 at the earliest. The 

18 
 
Committee would like to be apprised on the steps taken by the Department in this 
regard.  
 
2.20 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
 “Government of India has notified the PCPIR Policy to attract investment and 
for generation of employment in the Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical 
Investment Regions (PCPIRs). The PCPIRs promotes the Chemical and 
Petrochemical sectors in an integrated and environmentally friendly manner on 
a large scale. PCPIRs are conceptualized with common infrastructure , utilities 
and support services to provide a competitive environment conducive for setting 
up businesses. At present , three Petroleum, Chemical and Pe trochemical 
Investment Regions (PCPIRs) are being implemented in the States of Andhra 
Pradesh (Vishakhapatnam), Gujarat (Dahej) and Odisha (Paradeep) to 
promote investment and industrial development in these sectors under the 
PCPIR Policy, 2007.  The updated status of implementation and execution of 
PCPIR projects is attached at Annexure – I. While the total investment made 
in these three PCPIR regions is  ₹2,60,945 Crores, however, it may please be 
noted that the majority of this investment has come from the private industries 
towards setting up of their respective units in the PCPIR . For instance, in the 
Dahej PCPIR, out of a total investment of ₹1,28,509 crore, ₹1,07,235 crore was 
contributed by manufacturing units (including the anchor tenant), while ₹21,274 
crore was spent on infrastructure projects by the Government. Further, it may 
also be mentioned here that Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
holds regular reviews to ascertain the progress and status of PCPIRs. The 
status of Existing Infrastructure in all PCPIRs is attached at Annexure – II”. 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
HAZARDOUS EFFECTS OF PLASTIC ON HUMAN HEALTH 
 
2.21 The Committee note that during the oral evidence held on 24.02.2025, a video 
clip on hazardous effects of plastic was shown to the representatives of DCPC by the 
Committee wherein it has been claimed that a person using water bottles remains 

19 
 
dehydrated even after drinking the bottled water and the plastic bottles shed micro 
plastic in the water and the individual using bottled water consumes plastics equal to 
a size of credit card on an average every week and the micro plastic were detectable. 
Allegedly plastic has been found in the brain of human beings which may be 
responsible for several diseases like strokes, heart attacks etc. The Committee desire 
to know the action taken by the Department to minimize the hazardous affects of 
plastic. To this end, the Committee recommend that more research may be carried out 
by the Department on the harmful and hazardous effects of micro plastic due to usage 
of bottled water and other low- grade plastic used in food packaging industry. 
 
2.22 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“In this regard, the vario us initiatives by the Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals (DCPC) are as follows:-  
1.   Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering and Technology 
(CIPET) is an autonomous body under Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals (DCPC), Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Govt. of India.The 
institute through its Research & Developmental wing has been developing 
innovative solutions in the area of development of sustainable packaging 
(rigids/flexible) of various perishable & non -perishable food items using 
biopolymers like PLA (polylactic acid), PBAT (polybutylene adipate -co-
terephthalate, and PHB (polyhydroxybutyrate), Seaweed etc. 
2. Studies have also been undertaken for Standardization and Optimization 
of functional properties of the innovative materials which were developed at 
CIPET R&D wing using various National and International Test Protocols to 
mitigate the risks of leaching with respect to heavy metals, trace elements and 
other identified chemicals of concern as well as microplastics. 
3. Certain analytical challenges which are being addressed to adequately 
tackle the research gaps include:   
• Development of analytical methods that enable the detection and 
characterisation of the microplastics;  
• Development of rapid and robust extraction protocols for determination 
of plastic additives;  

20 
 
• Development of reference microplastics, including standardized 
weathering strategies to evaluate its formation in varied Climatic conditions in 
the country;  
• Evaluation methods using spectrometric imaging to assess the effects 
of weathering on microplastics structure (shape, porosity, polymer degradation, 
plastic additive leaching);  
4. Additionally, a dedicated Microplastics Analysis Laboratory has also 
been set up at CIPET R&D wing to analyze the Microplastics in Soil, Sediments, 
Marine environment etc. with internationally available Test Protocols. The 
CIPET officers are also partic ipating in several committees of the BIS to 
establish quality standards in the domains of plastics and petrochemicals. 
5. DCPC has established a Centre of Excellence (CoE) on ‘Bio-engineered 
Sustainable Polymeric Systems at CIPET centre at LARPM Bubaneshwar to 
promote Research and Innovations in the area of Sustainable Packaging. The 
topics on which the CoE is working are as follows:- 
• Development of agro -based biodegradable film formulations with 
improved performance. 
• Innovative process development for preparation of functional additives/ 
nanoscale range fertilizers. 
• Evaluation of soil chemical, physical, and microbial data at six -month 
intervals to understand the drivers of bio-mulch/packaging film degradation. 
• Lifecycle analysis of bio-mulch/packaging in soil. 
6. Further, with the Government’s mandate on Extended Producer 
Responsibility and Circular Economy, CIPET has also been assisting the 
industries in evaluating the performance of re-cyclates for incorporation in virgin 
plastics targeted for use in food pack aging application. With the issue of 
“Guidelines for recycling of post consumer PET for food contact applications” 
by FSSAI, CIPET has also been working on the usage of the r -PET recyclate 
generated from superclean recycling and other methodologies. 
7. In addition to the above, IIT Guwahati and IIT Madras are the existing 
Centres of Excellence (CoE) under the DCPC which are working on promoting 
bio-plastics and their applications. IIT Guwahati is developing the technology 
for the production of Poly La ctic Acid and its product and applications 

21 
 
development. IIT Madras is working on developing packaging from bio -based 
resources. 
8. Further, FSSAI has constituted an expert committee, which is currently 
examining the alternate packaging materials for use by food service 
establishments. Once finalized, the recommendations of the committee along 
with the guideline document and suggest ive list of packaging materials based 
on the nature of the cooked food product will be published for the benefit of the 
general public and for necessary action by Food Service Establishments which 
will include the bio -plastics materials also. The BIS has p ublished following 
Indian Standards on compostable plastics and biodegradable plastics:  
I.  IS/ISO 17088: 2021 Compostable plastics — Specification (Second 
Revision)  
II. IS 17899T: 2024 Assessment of Biodegradability of Plastics in Varied 
Conditions (Revised. 
9. FSSAI has launched the project, titled “Micro - and Nano -Plastics as 
Emerging Food Contaminants: Establishing Validated Methodologies and 
Understanding the Prevalence in Different Food Matrices,” in March 2024. It 
focuses on developing and validating adv anced analytical techniques for 
detecting micro- and nano plastics in various food products. The project is being 
conducted by the following institutions. 
• CSIR – Indian Institute of Toxicology Research (IITR), Lucknow 
• ICAR – Central Institute of Fisheries Technology (CIFT), Kerala 
• Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani, Rajasthan”. 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
Setting up of Plastic Parks 
 The Committee note that the Department has stated that it is regularly 
monitoring the implementation of various projects through site visits, review meetings 
as well as regular progress report submitted by the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPVs). 
Further best efforts are being made to ensure timely completion of the projects and to 
populate the parks at the earliest. The Committee do appreciate the efforts being taken 
by the Department. However, a perusal of information submitted to the Committee 
reveals a dismal picture. Out of the total number of 905 plots across 10 Plastic Parks, 
only 244 plots have been allotted to industrial units which is just 26.96% of the total 
number of plots. What is more disturbing to the Committee is the fact that the Plastic 
Parks would contribute to increasing investment, production and em ployment only 
after the Plastic Parks are populated. The Committee recommend that more serious 
efforts need to be made to populate the Plastic Parks so as to fully tap the benefit of 
the Plastic Parks. 
4.2 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“Under the Scheme for Setting up of Plastic Parks, the Central 
Government provides financial support upto 50% of the project cost, subject to 
a ceiling of Rs. 40 crore per project. However, the implementation of the Plastic 
Park projects is largely in the h ands of the Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) 
set up by the State Government or their agencies and progress of the projects 
is effectively dependent on the State Governments. The implementation of 
some of these projects was delayed due to local factors such as elections, local 
unrest etc. In some cases, significant time was taken in the process of land 

24 
 
acquisition for the project. The Plastic Park in Tamil Nadu has been stayed due 
to an Order of the NGT. Besides, the work during 2020 -22 was also impacted 
to varying degrees due to the pandemic. 
 
The Department has been regularly monitoring the implementation of the 
various projects, including through site visits, review meetings as well as regular 
progress reports submitted by the SPVs. While some of the Plastic Park 
projects are nearing completio n of their infrastructure creation work, some of 
the newer projects are in the process of infrastructure development. 
Simultaneously, efforts are being made to populate the Parks by incentivising 
industrial entities to set up units in the Plastic Parks. Based on the efforts made, 
significant progress in terms of infrastructure development has been made in 
all the Plastic Park projects in recent years. There has also been improvement 
in terms of allotment of plots in the Plastic Parks. 
 
There has been an increase in the number of allotted and functional plots in 
many of the Plastic Parks and several units are functional in the Plastic Parks 
in Assam, Odisha and Tamot. The implementing agencies are confident of 
making the requisite allotmen ts in the near future. It is expected that most of 
the infrastructure creation would be completed by 2025 -26 and thereafter, the 
Plastic Parks would get populated at the earliest. Once these Parks are 
populated, they would contribute to increasing investm ent, production and 
employment”. 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
4.3 The Committee note with concern that none of the 10 Plastic Parks approved 
so far could be made functional for one reason or the other. For instance, plastic park 
at (i)Tamot, Madhya Pradesh, (ii) Paradeep, Odisha, and (iii) Tinsukia, Assam are 
stated to have completed 100 percent civil work, 98 percent civil work and 85 percent 
civil work respectively but due to pace of allotment of plots in these Plastic Parks they 

25 
 
could not be made functional. Similarly, the Plastic Park at Deoghar, Jharkhand and 
Bilaua, Madhya Pradesh are stated to have completed 85 percent and 82 percent of 
civil work respectively but they also could not be made functional due to delays in 
completion of infrastructure work due to elections and local opposition, pending 
environment feasibility study, delay in land and contractual issues, etc. As such, the 
fate of these Plastic Parks is hanging in fire and there is no certainty as to when these 
issues would be resolved and the Plastic Parks would be made functional. The 
Committee are perturbed to note these unfortunate events and recommend that the 
Department should initiate steps to resolve these issues urgently else so that the 
investment of crores of rupees made in Plastic Parks yield the desired results. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this 
regard. 
 
4.4 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The Department has been regularly monitoring the implementation of 
the various projects, including through site visits, review meetings as well as 
regular progress reports submitted by the SPVs. While some of the Plastic Park 
projects are nearing completio n of their infrastructure creation work, some of 
the newer projects are in the process of infrastructure development. 
Simultaneously, efforts are being made to populate the Parks by incentivising 
industrial entities to set up units in the Plastic Parks. Based on the efforts made, 
there has been improvement in terms of allotment of plots in the Plastic Parks. 
 
In Tamot, a decision has been taken by the State Cabinet to reduce the 
land cost of the plots in the Plastic Park, following which the pace of allotment 
of plots has increased. A similar effort is being made in the case of the Plastic 
Park at Bilaua. Allot tment has picked up in Assam where 72 of the total 104 
plots have been allotted so far. In Jharkhand, the process of allotment has not 
yet been initiated as JIIDCO is in the process of finalising a revised Land 
Allottment Policy. Upon finalisation and appr oval of the same, the process of 
allotment would be taken up. 
The implementing agencies are confident of making the requisite 

26 
 
allottments in the near future. It is expected that most of the infrastructure 
creation would be completed by 2025 -26 and thereafter, the Plastic Parks 
would get populated at the earliest”. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 
CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PETROCHEMICAL ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY 
(CIPET) 
 
4.5 The Committee note that establishment of 11 CIPET centres  is stated to have 
been in progress whereas 08 CIPET centres are stated to have been set up. The 
CIPET IPT Bihta is likely to be completed in the near future. However, the information 
on the status of 02 remaining CIPET centres may be furnished to the Comm ittee at 
the earliest along with constraints faced in timely completion of setting up the Centres.  
 
4.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“Work on CIPET: IPT at Bihta is currently ongoing and is likely to be completed 
in 2025- 26. The status of the proposed Centres at Nasik, Maharashtra and 
Jammu & Kashmir (J&K) is as follows:  
 
Nasik, Maharashtra 
 
• The Department approved the setting up of a CIPET Vocational Training 
Centre (VTC) at Mumbai. Maharashtra, with a total project cost of Rs. 40.10 
crore. to be shared by the Government of India and the Government of 
Maharashtra on a 50:50 basis. Subsequentl y, the location of the proposed 
Centre was shifted to Nasik, with the approval of Hon'ble Minister (C&F). 
Further, the proposal for allotment of suitable land and allocation of funds has 
been taken up with the State Government.  
 

27 
 
Jammu & Kashmir  
• The land identified by the State Government was not found suitable for 
establishment of the proposed Centre and further the State Government has 
neither allotted suitable land for the establishment of the CIPET Centre nor 
given approval for contribution of the State share of funds for the establishment 
of the proposed Centre”. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
- Nil – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
06 JANUARY, 2026 CHAIRPERSON, 
16 PAUSA, 1947 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
  

29 
 
Annexure – I 
Status of Implementation and Execution of PCPIR Projects 
 
 
Indicator Gujarat Andhra 
Pradesh 
Odisha Total 
Location/ 
Region 
Dahej, Bharuch Vishakhapatnam– 
Kakinada 
Paradeep - 
Approval Feb, 2009 Feb, 2009 Dec, 2010 - 
Total Area (Sq. 
kms.) 
453.00 640.00 284.15 1377.15 
Anchor Tenant ONGC Petro 
Additions Limited 
(OPaL) 
-- Indian Oil 
Corporation 
Ltd. (IOCL) 
- 
Investments 
made (Rs. 
Crore) 
1,28,509 58,918 73,518 2,60,945 
Employment 
generated (No.) 
2,45,140 86,123 40,000 3,71,263 
No. of Chemical 
Units 2079 154 13 2246 
Major 
Production Unit 
Reliance 
Petrochemical 
Complex,  
Petronet LNG 
Limited, Hindalco 
Industries Ltd , 
ABG Shipyard, 
BASF Styrenics 
Pvt. Limite, 
Gujarat Alkalis 
and Chemicals 
Ltd 
Vijag Steel , 
NTPC, Sanvira 
Industries, Asian 
Paints Hetero 
Pharmaceuticals 
Indian Oil 
Corporation 
Ltd, 
Paradeep 
Phosphate, 
IFFCO 
Fertilizers 
 
 
 
  

30 
 
Annexure – II 
The details of the Existing infrastructure projects at Dahej PCPIR 
 
Infrastructure Details 
Roads & Highways  (i) 50 km long stretch of Dahej - Bharuch State 
Highway 
(ii) Construction of identified stretches of priority roads 
on need basis in Draft T.P. Scheme no.1 and 2A 
under process. Out of 5.3 Km road 2.8 Km road has 
been constructed. More 5.5. Km road possession 
has been taken in Draft T.P. Scheme no. 2A for 
development on road. 
 
Rail Links (i) Delhi - Mumbai Dedicated Freight Corridor (DFC), 
connecting PCPIR at Bharuch, which is 62 km from 
Dahej. 
(ii) A cargo transportation line from Bharuch to Dahej 
 
Air Connectivity (i) International airport at Ahmedabad (distance-250 
km) and 
(ii) Vadodara international Airport (90 Km) and 
(iii) Surat Airport (85 km) 
 
Ports  (i) Adani Petro net Dahej Port Ltd. with the capacity of 
11 ΜΜΤΡΑ 
(ii) Gujarat Chemical Port Ltd. (GCPTCL) Liquid 
Chemicals Terminal with the capacity of 4.9 ΜΜΤΡΑ 
(iii) LNG Petronet (Gas Terminal) with the capacity of 10 
ΜΜΤΡΑ 
(iv) Reliance Jetty with capacity of 2 MMTPΑ  
(v) Birla Copper Bulk Cargo Jetty with the capacity of 5 
ΜΜΤΡΑ  
 
Power Supply (i) Four 220 KV sub -stations are located at Dahej, 
Dahej SEZ, Rahiyad  - Suva and Vilayat within 
PCPIR.  
(ii) Eight 66 KV sub stations are located at Dahej, Luna, 
Bhensali, Vadadala, Genlanda, Sambheti, Jolva and 
Vilayat within PCPIR.  
(iii) Gujarat Energy Transmission Corporation Limited 
(GETCO) has completed construction of 220 KV 
substations at Suva Dehej.  
(iv) 1200 MW gas based power plant set up by Torrent 
Power Ltd. In Dahej SEZ. 
(v) Two 66 KV substations in Saykha has been 
commenced. 

31 
 
Water Supply: (i) GIDC has installed water supply capacity of 555 
MLD based on Narmada river 
(ii) 100 MLD Desalination plant has been 
commissioned by the joint venture of L&T 
Construction and Tecton Engineering & 
Construction LLC, UAE. 
 
Gas Supply (i) Gujarat Gas Company Limited (GGCL) currently owns 
and operates the distribution pipelines, nearly 900 Km 
in length, in Bharuch district. 
 
(ii) All the gas suppliers operating in Gujarat will extend 
their pipeline network to the PCPIR. Tis will ensure 
adequate gas supply for industrial requirement in the 
PCPIR. 
 
Drainage & Effluent 
Treatment & Waste 
Management  
(i) Common Effluent Treatment Plants:  GIDC has 
set up a CETP facility having a capacity of 40 MLD, 
at Dahej GIDC Estate and 40 MLD at sayakha 
(ii) Treatment Storage and Disposal Facility (TSDF): 
Bharuch Envrio Infrastructure Ltd. has developed 
hazardous waste management facility having the 
capacity of 1.4 MMT per annum 
(iii) GIDC has proposed to develop another Common 
Hazardous Waste site at Saykha having capacity of 
3,58,285 MT 
(iv) Incinerators: Incinerators with capacity of 10 
Million Kcal/hour are installed by Detox India Pvt Ltd  
 
Multi Modal Logistic 
Park  
(i) Logistic Park is being developed by GIDC in joint 
venture with Container Corporation of India Ltd 
(CONCOR). First Phase is being developed in 25 ha 
at the cost of 200 Cr (excluding land). Phase-I of the 
project has been completed with cost of Rs. 100 
Crore.  
 
Private Industrial Park  (i) Payal Industrial Park is spread over 1416 hectares 
in Dahej PCPIR. It is a state of art infrastructure with 
adequate water infrastructure, utilities etc. Common 
facilities such as CETP, Common landfill sites, 
Multiple Effective evaporators, common hydrogen  
gas facility, common boiler and steam facilities are 
available in the park. 
  
 
  

32 
 
The details of the Existing infrastructure projects at Odisha PCPIR 
 
Infrastructure  Details  
Road Connectivity  (i) Chandikhol is the junction of NH5A (Paradeep 
Chandikhol) & NH 53 
(ii) State Highway (SH)-12 (Paradeep to Katak) 
(iii) Cuttak-Chandbali 106 Km (2 LANE) Crosses 
NH53 at Duhuria  
 
Railway Connectivity  (i) Paradeep Cuttack BG Line 
(ii) Haridaspur to Cuttack BG  
 
Air port  (i) Biju Patnaik International Airport 
 
Power Supply  (i) 2x40 MVA 220/33 KV substation by OPTCL under 
operation 
 
Water Supply  (i) IOCL has been fed by 34 Cusec water  
(ii) Instream storage of capacity 120 Cusec is under 
implementation near Paradip  
 
Sea Port  (i) Paradeep Port - Deep drought all weather port 
with     a capacity of 277 MTPA 
 
 
The details of the Existing infrastructure projects at Andhra Pradesh PCPIR  
Infrastructure Details 
CETPS  (i) 1 MLD CETP at Atchutapuram SEZ is 
commissioned. 
(ii) CETP at Brandix has been completed. 
(iii) CETP at JNPC-Parawada has been completed. 
(iv) CETP at HETERO SEZ Nakkapalli has been 
completed. 
Power Supply  (i) 220 KV Sub station at Brandix has been completed  
Waste Management  (i) Solid Waste Management Plant work has been 
completed at Parawada  
(ii) Liquid Waste discharge outfall works completed at 
AP SEZ, Brandix, JNPC and HETERO  
Airport (i) International Airport at Visakhapatnam 
(ii) Rajmundary Airport has been established in 2023.  
Ports  There are 3 existing airport at  
(i) Kakinada (ii) Gangavaram and (iii) Vishakhapatnam 
 
 

33 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS BRANCH  
(2025-26) 
Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 06th January, 2026 from 1100 hrs. to 1130 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha– Chairperson 
LOK SABHA MEMBERS 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C.  
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
7. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
8. Shri Praveen Patel 
9. Dr. Sambit Patra 
10. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
11. Shri Sachithannatham R. 
12.  Shri Eatala Rajender 
13. Shri Rajesh Ranjan  
14. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
15. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA MEMBERS 
 
16. Shri Subhash Barala 
17. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
18. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
19. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
20. Shri Tejveer Singh 
21. Shri G.K. Vasan 
 

34 
 
SECRETARIAT 
5. Smt. Maya Lingi   - Joint Secretary 
6. Ms. Miranda Ingudam  - Director 
7. Shri Kulvinder Singh                      -         Deputy Secretary 
8. Shri Abhishek Kumar   - Deputy Director  
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration, the following Draft 
Reports:  
i. XXX      XXX                                    XXX                             XXX 
ii. Seventeenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observation/Recommendation contained in Seventh Report of the 
Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2025-26)’ pertaining to the Department of Che micals and Petrochemicals, 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
iii. XXX      XXX                                    XXX                             XXX 
iv. XXX      XXX                                    XXX                             XXX 
3. Giving an overview of the important Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the draft Reports, the Chairperson solicited the views/suggestions of the Members. 
4.      After some deliberations, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee 
without any amendment. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and 
present/lay the Reports in both the Houses of Parliament in the budget session of 
Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

35 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION  TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED  IN  THE  SEVENTH REPORT 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING  COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (202 5-26) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2025-26)’ PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS ANDPETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total No. of Recommendations 14 
I. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
(Sl. Nos. 1,2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18)  
 
11 
Percentage of Total: 78.5 % 
II. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not like to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
NIL 
 
00 
Percentage of Total:  0% 
III. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies given by 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:  
(Sl. Nos. 3, 5 and 10)  
 
 
03 
Percentage of Total: 21.5%  
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final replies of 
the Government are still awaited:  
NIL 
 
00 
Percentage of Total:  0%  