 
 
i 
 
 
 
 
    STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
           MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
   (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
REVIEW OF THE FUNCTIONING OF INSTITUTE OF PESTICIDE FORMULATION 
TECHNOLOGY (IPFT) 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
FEBRUARY, 2026/ MAGHA, 1947 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
 


 
 
ii 
 
CC&F.No. 199 
 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
REVIEW OF THE FUNCTIONING OF INSTITUTE OF PESTICIDE FORMULATION 
TECHNOLOGY (IPFT) 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10th February, 2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10th February, 2026 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY, 2026/ MAGHA, 1947 (SAKA) 


 
 
iii 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26) (iv)  
INTRODUCTION (v) 
REPORT 
 
PART – I                   
 
I Introduction 1 
II Genesis and Goals of IPFT 1 
III Pesticides New Generation Formulation 3 
IV Laboratories of IPFT 7 
V Development of formulations & their transfer 9 
 ANNEXURE 11 
PART- II OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 13-19 
 
APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2024-25) held on 8th September, 2025.  
20 
II. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2025-26) held on 06th January, 2026.  
23 
 

 
 
iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS 
(2025-2026) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Dr. Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
21. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Subhash Barala 
24. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
25. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
26. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
27. Shri Arun Singh 
28. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
29. Shri Tejveer Singh 
30. Shri G.K. Vasan 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
2.  Ms. Miranda Ingudam - Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh - Deputy Secretary  

 
 
v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2025 -26) 
having been authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf, this Nineteenth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of the functioning of Institute of Pesticide 
Formulation Technology (IPFT)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals).  
2. The Committee had a briefing by the representatives of the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals on 8th September, 2025. 
 
3.  The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on 06th 
January, 2026.  
 
4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers for te ndering 
evidence and placing before the Committee all the requisite information related to 
examination of the subject.  
 
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha  Secretariat attached to 
the Committee.  
 
6. For ease of reference and convenience, the Observations/ Recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
 06 January, 2026 CHAIRPERSON, 
 16 Pausa, 1947 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
    CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
REPORT 
A. INTRODUCTION:- 
 
Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology (IPFT) was established in 1991, 
as an autonomous institution, under the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, 
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers,  Government of India. IPFT is working on 
development of user and environ ment friendly new generation pesticide formulation 
technologies.  
 
The main objectives of IPFT are stated to be as follows:- 
 
 Development and production of user and environment friendly pesticide 
formulation technology. 
 Promotion of efficient application technologies suiting the existing requirements 
of the newer formulations. 
 Information dissemination for safe manufacturing practices, quality assurances, 
raw material specifications and sources. 
 Providing Analytical and consultancy services. 
 Continuing edu cation in research through specialized training for pesticide 
personnel working in agrochemical R&D. 
 
B. GENESIS AND GOALS OF IPFT 
 
2. On being asked about the genesis behind the establishment of IPFT , the 
Department submitted that in the year 1986, the United Nations Industrial 
Development Organization (UNIDO) , in collaboration with the Government of India , 
launched the Pesticide Development Program in India (PDPI)  to introduce new -
generation pesticide formulations through Indian industries. The program was later 
extended and renamed as the Pesticide Development Centre (PDC)  in 1989.The 
Government of India, in May 1991, established IPFT as an Autonomous Institute under 
the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers, as the successor of PDPI/PDC.  
 
3. When asked to state w hether IPFT has been able to achieve its goals and 
objectives in the last 34 years of its functioning , the Department submitted that since 
its inception in 1991, the Institute has developed 86 pesticide formulations , out of 
which 64 technologies (74.41%)  have been transferred to industries, including both 
synthetic and bio -botanical formulations, directly benefiting the Indian agrochemical 
sector. It has also undertaken extensive work in analytical services, residue and 
persistence studies, and bio -efficacy evaluation , thereby supporting industry 
compliance with national and international regulations. In the last six years, IPFT has 
developed 47 new formulations, conducted 31 analytical studies, 115 bio-evaluation 
studies, filed nine patents (two granted) and published 27 research papers in reputed 
journals. Additionally, through Farmer Awareness Programmes, industry interaction 

 
 
2 
 
meets, skill development initiatives, and international training prog rams in 
collaboration with organizations like OPCW , IPFT has contributed significantly to 
knowledge dissemination and capacity building. 
 
4. Though IPFT is an autonomous body but apparently the  Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals gives the grant for  salary, general expen diture and 
Capital expenditure. The Committee desired to know the reason for the same. In reply 
thereto, it was submitted that IPFT has been set up for development of safe and 
environmental friendly pesticide formulations. The Institute generates revenues 
through technology transfer, testing and analytical services, bioefficacy and other 
studies or projects. Part of the expenditure is borne by the Institute from revenue 
generated by it like expenditure on hiring of consultants, office expenses and some 
services while the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC) provides 
grants towards salary, general expenditure, and capital expenditure.  
 
5. The Committee were informed that the main objective of IPFT is stated to be 
the development and production of user and environment friendly pesticides 
formulation technologies and once the technologies are developed, then to promote 
efficient application technologies as per the requirement  of the formulations. To a 
query as to whether pesticides formulation technologies was first developed and then 
put to use or they were developed as per the requirement of the users, it was submitted 
that IPFT does development and/or standardization of advanced pesticide formulation 
technologies based on the specific requirements of different pesticide industries. IPFT 
also undertakes R&D activities on its own to develop new, safe to use and environment 
friendly pesticide formulations for which requirement will arise in future. 
 
6. The Committee were further  informed that IPFT was also supposed to 
disseminate information for safe manufacturing practices, quality control of the 
materials and institutes provides the analytical and consultancy services to various 
industries including MSMEs and also education for specialized training for research in 
pesticides. The Committee therefore desired to know as to how IPFT discharge these 
functions. It was submitted  thereupon that IPFT disseminates information on safe 
manufacturing practices and quality control through technical bulletins, guid elines, 
awareness programs and industry workshops . The Institute provides analytical and 
consultancy services by utilizing its laboratories for testing pesticide formulations, raw 
materials, residues and environmental samples, which helps industries includ ing 
MSMEs comply with regulatory requirements and improve product safety. IPFT also 
organizes specialized training programs, workshops and hands -on courses  for 
scientists, industry professionals and students, thereby building capacity in areas such 
as pesticide formulation, quality assurance, analytical techniques and environmental 
safety. 
  

 
 
3 
 
C. PESTICIDES NEW GENERATION FORMULATION 
 
7. Asked to give details of user and environment friendly new generation 
pesticides formulation technologies which are being developed by the IPFT and also 
asked to explain how they are better than the conventional pesticides formulations, it 
was submitted that conventional pesticide formulations such as Dusts (DP), Wettable 
Powders (WP) and Emulsifiable Concentrates (EC) have been in use for a long time. 
While they provide adequate bio efficacy, they have certain limitations concerning user 
and environmental safety. EC formulations, for example, contain large amounts of 
petroleum-derived organic solvents, which pose flammabilit y risks during production, 
storage, transportation, and application. Additionally, these solvents evaporate, 
contributing to local air pollution. DP and WP formulations, being composed of fine 
dusty powders, present a risk of inhalation during production a nd application. During 
spraying, wind can further disperse these powders, contaminate non-target areas and 
expose the applicator. In comparison, new-generation pesticide formulations are safer 
for both users and the environment. Water -based formulations su ch as Suspension 
Concentrates (SC), Emulsion -in-Water (EW)  and Microemulsions (ME) reduce or 
eliminate the use of organic solvents. Water Dispersible Granules (WDG) are granular 
products that readily disperse in water to prepare spray solutions, minimizing  the risk 
of powder inhalation and off -target contamination. Other advanced formulations, like 
Microcapsule Suspensions (CS), are water -based and provide prolonged activity of 
the active ingredient for effective pest control. Combination formulations conta ining 
two or three active ingredients reduce the number of sprays required while controlling 
multiple pests efficiently.  IPFT has developed and successfully transferred various 
new-generation formulation technologies, including SC, EW, WDG, CS, combination  
products, suspo-emulsions, and adjuvant-based formulations, aimed at improving bio-
efficacy and tank -mix compatibility.  The details of such technologies developed/ 
transferred during 2025-26 were stated to be as follows: 
 
i.Copper Sulphate Pentahydrate 23.9 9% SC formulation is transferred to M/s 
Shyam Chemical Ltd., Mumbai. The developed formulation is a stable, water -
based product with a built-in adjuvant for producing good bio-efficacy; 
 
ii.Developed Benzoyl Sulphonamide Compound Suspension Concentrate (SC) 
insecticide formulation, which is micronized formulation designed for efficient 
pesticide application with enhanced stability and fast dispersion in water for spray 
application. This technology has been transferred to CSIR-IICT, Hyderabad; 
 
iii.Combination ZC f ormulation of weedicides containing first active 
Metsulfuronmethyl in free form and second active Pendimethalin inside 
microcapsules for providing immediate knockdown and slow release of 
weedicides for management of orobanchae weed in mustard crop is developed; 
 

 
 
4 
 
iv.Botanical based citronella and lemongrass microemulsion formulations are being 
developed for nematode control as safer alternative to chemical pesticides. 
 
8.   On being asked to highlight any specific advantage for the users viz farmers, 
hospitals, ordinary citizens etc. through the use of these new generation pesticides 
formulations, the Department submitted the details of various technologies which are 
advantageous for the farmers, hospitals, ordinary citizens etc. along with their specific 
advantages are as follows:- 
 
i.Imidacloprid 2.15 Gel bait formulation developed to minimize the use of organic 
solvent-based sprays for controlling cockroaches; 
 
ii.Neem based Cream, Suspension Concentrate, spreading oil, tablet formulations 
have been developed to minimize use of chemical pesticides for controlling 
mosquitoes in household and public health applications.    
 
iii.The Suspo -Emulsion, WDG of insecticide fungicide combinations have been 
transferred to different industries. Such formulation s are advantageous to 
farmers as combination of 2 -3 pesticides in single application save water and 
labour cost on spray. 
 
9. On a specific query about the price at which the new generation pesticide 
formulation for agriculture management is available in the market, it was submitted 
that the price of new -generation pesticide formulations  for agricultural management 
varies depending on the type of pesticide, formulation technology, concentration and 
brand. Bio-botanical formulations , being newer and develop ed with advanced 
technologies, are generally priced higher than conventional synthetic pesticides  due 
to higher production costs, smaller -scale manufacturing, and ongoing R&D. Prices 
also depend on packaging size, target crop, and market demand. IPFT, whil e 
developing these formulations, provides technology transfer and guidance, but actual 
market pricing is determined by the industry partner, taking into account production 
cost, commercialization strategy and affordability for farmers. 
 
10. Asked about steps IPFT has initiated so far or proposed to make farmers aware 
of its new generation pesticide formulation for agriculture management , the 
Department replied that IPFT has initiated several steps to make farmers aware of its 
new-generation pesticide formulations for agricultural management. These include 
Farmer Awareness Programmes, field demonstrations, and training workshops across 
different regions to educate farmers on the safe and effective use of bio -botanical, 
neem-based, and other advanced for mulations. The Institute also distributes 
brochures, manuals  and translated materials  in local languages to disseminate 
information.  
 
11.  When asked w hether farmers in particular are being benefitted through use of 
the environment friendly pesticides formulations in the Country , the Department 

 
 
5 
 
replied that the farmers are being benefitted through use of these environment friendly 
pesticides formulations in the Country. Water-based formulations such as Suspension 
Concentrates (SC), Emulsion -in-Water (EW ) and Microemulsions (ME) reduce or 
eliminate the use of organic solvents and reduce the hazards like risk of flammability, 
skin contamination by organic solvents. Water Dispersible Granules (WDG) are 
granular products that readily disperse in water to prepare spray solutions, minimizing 
the risk of powder inhalation and convenient spray application. The new generation 
combination formulations offer the advantages of application of two or three pesticides 
in single spray application, thereby minimizing water and labour requirements in crop 
protection.   
 
12. When specifically asked w hether there has been any impact on enhancing 
production of wheat, paddy and other crops through effective pests’ control through 
the use of such pesticides. The Department informed that the technologies developed 
that are useful for wheat and paddy crop are as follows: 
 
i.The Metsufuron methyl 20 WG formulation and Deltamethrin 20 WG formulation 
developed and transferred to industries are used for weed control and insect 
control respectively in wheat crop. 
 
ii.Fipronil 5 SC formulation developed and transfer technology to industry controls 
different insects in paddy and other crops. 
 
13. When asked w hether IPFT was making adequate efforts for 
awareness/sensitisation of the general public of its new generation pesticides 
formulation for agricultural  and house hold pest management , it was submitted that 
IPFT was actively creating awareness about new -generation pesticide formulations 
and safe applications through Farmer Awareness Programmes, field demonstrations, 
training workshops, and exhibitions. It also disseminates information via brochures, 
regional-language materials, social media and its Hindi magazine, Krishira sayan 
Digdarshika and also colla borates with State Agriculture Departments. These efforts 
encourage farmers, households, and the general public understand and adopt safer, 
eco-friendly pesticides for agricultural and household pest management. 
 
14.  Asked to state the mechanism of IPFT to market its new generation pesticides 
formulation for agricultural as well as house hold pe st management and their pricing, 
it was submitted that IPFT is a research and development Institute focused on the 
development of pesticide formulation technologies. The Institute does not engage in 
production or marketing of any formulations.  The Institute after development of 
formulations transfers the technologies to the industries for commercial production and 
marketing. 
 
15. When asked about steps taken by IPFT to make the pesticides safer for human 
beings and also for crops, it was submitted that IPFT has undertaken several steps to 
make pesticides safer for human beings as well as crops. Conventional pesticide 

 
 
6 
 
formulations such as Dusts (DP), Wettable Powders (WP), and Emulsifiable 
Concentrates (EC), though effective, have limitations regarding user and 
environmental safety. For instance, EC formulations contain large amounts of 
petroleum-derived organic solvents, which pose  flammability risks during production, 
storage, transportation, and application, and contribute to local air pollution upon 
evaporation. Similarly, DP and WP formulations, composed of fine dusty powders, 
present inhalation risks during production and appli cation and can be dispersed by 
wind, contaminating non -target areas and exposing applicators.  In contrast, new -
generation pesticide formulations are safer for both users and the environment. Water-
based formulations such as Suspension Concentrates (SC), Emulsion-in-Water (EW), 
and Microemulsions (ME) reduce or eliminate the use of organic solvents. Water 
Dispersible Granules (WDG) are granular products that disperse in water to prepare 
spray solutions, minimizing powder inhalation and off -target contamina tion. Other 
advanced formulations like Microcapsule Suspensions (CS) are also water-based and 
provide prolonged activity of the active ingredient, ensuring effective pest control. 
Additionally, combination formulations containing two or three active ingred ients 
reduce the number of sprays required while controlling multiple pests efficiently. IPFT 
has developed and successfully transferred various new -generation formulation 
technologies—including SC, EW, WDG, CS, combination products, suspo-emulsions, 
and a djuvant-based formulations —all aimed at improving bio -efficacy, tank -mix 
compatibility, and safety for users and the environment. 
 
16. Asked to state as to the farmer awareness programme for promoting the safe use 
of pesticides were initiated by IPFT & wha t is the periodicity of such programmes 
conducted by IPFT it was submitted that t he farmers awareness programmes were 
initiated in the year 2022 -23. A total of 32 programs were conducted during 2022 -23, 
2023-24 and 2024 -25. The list of farmers awareness programs conducted by IPFT 
sponsored by DCPC under CPDS is attached at Annexure. 
 
17. Asked to state as to how many farmers participated in the Farmers Awareness 
Programmes and how the farmers are benefitting from them it was replied that 9223 
farmers have participated in farmer awareness programmes. The detailed list of 
farmers in the programmes is as per Annexure. In these programme farmers are made 
aware to understand the safe and judicious use of pesticides, good agricultural 
practices, integrated pest management and use of locally available botanicals for crop 
protection.  
 
18. When asked about the feedback of farmers towards Farmers Awareness 
Programmes the Department submitted that the Farmers have provided positive 
feedback during the discussion with them regarding IPFT’s Farmers Awareness 
Programmes, which aim to educate them on safe pesticide use, integrated pest 
management (IPM), eco-friendly practices and quality control of agrochemicals.  
 
19. Asked about the reaction o f the farmers towards new generation pesticide 
formulation for agriculture management. It was submitted that the response of farmers 

 
 
7 
 
during discussion in the farmers awareness programs toward new-generation 
pesticide formulations developed by IPFT has been generally positive, particularly to 
bio-botanical, neem-based, and eco-friendly products during field demonstrations and 
awareness programs. Farmers have appreciated the safety, residue-free nature, and 
environmental friendliness  of these formulations, th ough some have noted that the 
effects may be slower compared to conventional chemical pesticides. Overall, farmers 
recognize the long-term benefits for crop safety, soil health, and consumer protection, 
and IPFT continues to engage and educate farmers  to e nhance adoption and 
confidence in these sustainable pest management solutions. 
D. LABORATORIES OF IPFT 
 
20. Asked about laboratories of IPFT functioning at present and whether those 
laboratories are sufficient for the IPFT to achieve its goals and objectives  and what 
are the constraints faced by IPFT in the discharge of its mandate . The Department 
submitted that t he laboratories of the Institute are under three Divisions, viz., 
Formulation Division, Analytical Division and Bioscience Division. The details were 
stated to be as follows: 
 
 Formulation Division:  The division has necessary laboratory setupfor 
development of pesticide formulations for agricultural as well as household pest 
management. It also has pilot plant facilities that can scale up lab scale research 
to a commercial production with optimum budget.  The pilot plant facility of IPFT 
has the capacity to produce the formulations up to 100 kg per shift.   
 
 Analytical Division : The Analytical facility is accredited and equipped for 
chemical testing of pesticides (Technical & Formulations), pesticide residues in 
various food matrices, chemical warfare agents and their precursors and 
degradation products. The Analytical laboratory  has been recognized/certified 
by: 
 
a. BIS for the testing of pesticide formulations as per IS specifications.  
 
b. National GLP compliance monitoring authority (NGCMA) as GLP 
facility for physical-chemical analysis and residue studies of agrochemicals. 
 
c. NABL as per ISO/IEC 17025:2017 for testing of 278 pesticides and 17 
heavy metals in various food commodities, 150 pesticide formulations and 
CWC related chemicals.  
 
d. Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare as laboratory for 
analysis for biostimulant. 
 
 Bioscience Division:  The set up is equipped to evaluate the different 
pesticide formulations developed by this institute or by the industry for their 

 
 
8 
 
commercial viability, through well -equipped bio -assay laboratory, green 
house/glass house and experimental field trials. The laboratory is recognized by 
Central Insecticide Board/Registration Committee (CIB & RC) for generation of 
data on bio-efficacy, phytotoxicity, phytotoxicity, compatibility, effect of pesticides 
on natural enemies of pests and residual aspects of pesticides. 
 
IPFT laboratories are equipped with analytical instruments such as GC, 
HPLC, Preparative HPLC, GC -MS, GC-MS/MS, LC-MS/MS, LC-HRMS (LC/Q-
TOF & LC-Orbitrap-MS), LC-ICP-MS, NMR, CHNSO Analyser, DSC-TGA, FTIR 
and other equipments relate d to physical -chemical analysis of pesticides and 
their formulations.  
 
Scientific posts are vacant at present, out of which for 02 posts offer letter 
to join have already been issued by IPFT. For the remaining posts the recruitment 
is under process. The requirement of technical personnel is being met by Institute 
through project and contractual staff.  The Institute is also making all efforts to 
promote adoption of bio-based pesticides formulations by Industry.        
(LOP Reply Q. No.15) 
  
21.  The Committee were informed that since its inception, IPFT had developed 47 
formulations out of which 16 formulation technologies were transferred to Industry for 
commercial production which amounted to a mere 34 percent.  The Committee 
therefore desired to know  the reasons for th is low percentage and the constraints 
faced as well as initiatives taken to enhance this figure  in future . The Department 
submitted that s ince its inception, IPFT has developed 86 pesticide formulations , of 
which 64 have been successfully transferred to agrochemical industries i.e.74.41% 
technologies have been transferred. Most of the transferred technologies are synthetic 
chemical-based pesticides. Over the past six years, IPFT has primarily focused on the 
development of bio -based pesticide formulations  through in-house R&D as well as 
externally funded projects, due to the need to reduce ecological impacts of pesti cide. 
At present, the market for bio-based formulations is not very robust. Due to the safety 
and sustainability aspects of bio-based formulations, it is expected that in future there 
will be a lot of demand in such formulations. Therefore, even if IPFT is  not able to 
transfer such formulation at present they will be transferred in future once the market 
for bio -based pesticides is developed. The institute is also establishing biofoundry 
under the BioE3 policy under the Govt. of India. The biofoundry will b e exclusively 
working on biopesticides and their formulations and the demonstration at pilot scale.   
  
22. The Committee were also informed that since its inception in 1991, the institute 
has developed 64 formulation technologies that have been transferred to various 
industries. Please give details. How IPFT monitors the technologies transferred by it. 
23. Since its inception in May 1991, IPFT has transferred 64 formulation technologies 
covering synthetic pesticides, bio -botanical products to various industries and 
institutions. Following technology transfer, the recipient industries are responsible for 

 
 
9 
 
generating regulatory data and pursuing commercialization as per the guidelines of the 
Central Insecticide Board & Registration Committee (CIBRC), and other regulators. 
 
E. DEVELOPMENT OF FORMULATIONS & THEIR TRANSFER 
24. IPFT had developed 47 formulations and successfully transferred 16 of these to 
various industries such as Hindustan Insecticide Limited, J.N. Agri Sciences etc. The 
Committee desired to know reasons for huge difference between formulations 
developed and formulations transferred and also Whether the 31 formulations which 
could not be transferred to the industries could not meet their requirements or reasons 
for non-transferring of the formulations to the industry. It was submitted that in the last 
six years, IPFT has developed 47 pesticide formulations, out of which 16 technologies 
have been transferred to various industries such as HIL (India) Limited and J.U. Agri 
Sciences, representing approximately 34 percent of commercialization. After 
development of formulation s, the data generation as per regulatory requirement has 
to be done. Such studies are in progress for 19 formulations.  Post formulation 
development studies were completed for 7 formulations and these were 
published/patented, further work is to be carried o ut regarding efficacy, environment 
impact etc for these formulations. 
25. The Committee specifically desired to know whether  the 
expenditure/efforts/money spent by IPFT on the 31 formulations which could not be 
transferred has gone into  the drain. The Department submitted that f or the 31 
formulations the data generation as per regulatory requirement has to be done. Such 
studies are in progress for 19 formulations. The Institute was making efforts for 
publicizing about these formulations through industry meets. 
 
26. The Committee desired to know w hether IPFT is itself engaged in sale of its 
products particularly house-hold pesticides etc in reply it was replied that  IPFT is not 
engaged in the sale of its products , including household pesticides. The Institute ’s 
mandate was focused on research, development, and technology transfer . After 
developing a formulation, IPFT transfers the technology to industries, which then 
handle manufacturing, marketing and distribution.     
            
   
27. In reply to a specific query of the Committee whether IPFT market its products 
on its own, it was submitted that IPFT was primarily engaged in the development of 
pesticide formulations and does not have large-scale production facilities. The institute 
focuses on R&D technology validation and its transfer of technology to industry . The 
Institute only operates a small pilot plant facility  to establish the semi -commercial 
feasibility of developed technologies. The bulk production and commercialization are 
done by the industry after technology transfer. 
         
 

 
 
10 
 
28. When asked to state that w hether it can be said the size of IPFT is very small 
as compared to its objectives and mandate  and what was the opinion of IPFT , the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals submitted that the main objective of the 
Institute was only in the area of formulations development for the Pesticides Industry. 
IPFT was carrying out the tasks as per the mandate assigned to it.  There was also 
presence of Research facilities in this area in Private sector. However, based on the 
emerging needs of the sector in future if any, the capacity of the Institute can be 
strengthened. 
  

 
 
11 
 
Annexure 
Details furnished by the Department regarding Farmers awareness programmes 
conducted by IPFT during the  last three years and the current year to create 
awareness among the farmers about the use of the pesticides 
Sr. 
No. 
Date Place Title of Workshop 
1 17 February 2023 Nimpith, West Bengal Promotion of the Use 
of Botanical Pesticides 
Based on Locally 
Available 
Resources/Plants in 
Zero Budgeting 
Organic Farming for 
Crop Protection and 
Enhancing Crop 
Productivity (for 
Farmers) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 28 February 2023 Bharatpur, Rajasthan 
3 25 March 2023 Golaghat, Assam 
4 27 March 2023 Morigaon, Assam 
5 28 March 2023 Karoli, Rajasthan 
6 18 November 2023 Rewari, Haryana 
7 19 November 2023 Kosli, Haryana 
8 1 December 2023 Wazirpur, Gangapur City, 
Rajasthan 
9 2 December 2023 Bandhua, Hindaun, 
Rajasthan 
10 10 December 2023 Srikalahasthi, Andhra 
Pradesh 
11 12 December 2023 Guntur, Andhra Pradesh 
12 17 December 2023 Bhograi, Odisha 
13 19 December 2023 Olmara, Odisha 
14 23 January 2024 Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh 
15 5 March 2024 Mandla, Madhya Pradesh 
 
Sr. 
No. 
Date Place Title of Workshop 
1 19 November 2022 Ratnagiri, Maharashtra 
Safe and Judicious 
Use of Pesticides and 
Application of New 
Generation 
Formulation for Crop 
Protection in 
Vegetable Crops (for 
Farmers) 
2 9 December 2022 Varanasi, UP 
3 15 January 2023 Rewari, Haryana 
4 
17 January 2023 
Venkataramannagudem, 
A.P. 
5 21 January 2023 Jaleshwar, Odisha 

 
 
12 
 
6 9 February 2024 Eluru, Andhra Pradesh  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 12 February 2024 Leh, Ladakh 
8 14 February 2024 Kargil, Ladakh 
9 14 February 2024 Humnabad, Karnataka 
10 15 February 2024 
(Morning) 
Aurad (Kamala Nagar), 
Karnataka 
11 15 February 2024 
(Evening) Hulsoor, Karnataka 
12 26 February 2024 Howly, Assam 
13 27 February 2024 KVK Barpeta/Baksa, Assam 
14 20 March 2024 West Garo Hills, Meghalaya 
15 21 March 2024 Aizawl, Mizoram 
16 30 May 2024 IPFT, Gurugram 
17 
18 February 2025 
IPFT, Gurugram (for Ladakh 
farmers) 
 
  

 
 
13 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
1. The Committee note that IPFT was established way back in the year 1991 
as an Autonomous Institute under the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers as the successor of  
Pesticide Development Program in India (PDPI), which was established in the 
year 1986 in collaboration with the Government of India by the United Nations 
Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). As regard s achieving goals and 
objectives by IPFT, the Committee note that since the inception of IPFT, it has 
developed 86 pesticide formulations, out of which 64 technologies have been 
transferred to Industries. The Commit tee also note that IPFT has inter-alia 
developed 47 new formulations besides engaging in  other activities like 
conducting analytical studies, filing of Patents and Research Papers , etc. The 
Committee, however  note with concern that IPFT had not fixed any periodic 
targets for development of pesticide formulation, quantum of new formulations 
for transferring them to Industr ies in the last 34 years of its functioning. The 
Committee further note that  during the huge time period of 34 years of its 
functioning which spans more than three (03) decades  IPFT has developed 86 
pesticide formulations amounting to a meager 2.5 percent pesticides 
formulations per year. The Committee observe with dissatisfaction , the slow 
pace of IPFT and desire that they may be apprised about the precise reasons for 
non-fixation of yearly targets . The Committee recommend that IPFT should 
immediately review its functioning in consultation with the Department  and 
bring forth initiatives for development of pesticide formulations at a faster pace 
as per the needs of the industries as well as farmer communities across the 
Country. 

 
 
14 
 
2.  The Committee note that though IPFT is an autonomous body , the 
Department gives grants for salary, general expenditure and Capital 
expenditure.  As regards reason s for the same  the Committee were apprised 
that IPFT generates revenue through technology transfer, testing and analytical 
services, bio-efficacy etc. but it was dependent on the Department for Grants 
for meeting its expenditure of salary, general expenditure and capital 
expenditure. The Committee are of the considered view that IPFT being 
established way back in the year 1991  should have gained sufficient expertise 
in its field by now and reduce its dependency on the Department for meeting its 
expenditures. The Committee therefore desire that concrete steps should be 
initiated in this regard. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard by the IPFT and by the Department separately. 
3. The Committee were informed that new generation pesticides formulation 
technologies, which  are being developed by the IPFT are better th an the 
conventional pesticides formulations containing large amount petroleum  
derived organic solvents and composed of fine dusty powders. The Committee, 
however note that price of new generation pesticide formulation s depends on 
the type of pesticides, formulation technology, concentration and brand and the 
actual market price was determined by the industry partner, taking into account 
production cost, commercialization strategy and affordability for farmers. The 
Committee observe that the price fixation of new generation pesticide 
formulations, if left totally to the industry partner with IPFT having no say in this 
regard, may leave scope for manipulation by the industry partner. The 
Committee are of the considered view that the new generation pesticides 
formulation which are much better than th e conventional pesticides 
formulations must reach farmers all across the country so that the benefits of 

 
 
15 
 
new generation pesticides formulation developed by IPFT are reaped 
proportionately by one and all across the agriculture sector. The Committee 
desire t hat the IPFT and the Department work together in tandem and 
recommend that appropriate steps be taken for determination of reasonable 
prices for new generation pesticides formulation of IPFT so as to make it 
available to the farmers at affordable prices. The Committee may be apprised of 
the action taken in this regard. 
 4. As regards steps taken by the IPFT to make the farmers aware of its new 
generation pesticides formulation for agriculture management , the Committee 
note that the IPFT has initiated severa l steps which include Farmer Awareness 
Programmes, field demonstrations and training workshops etc. besides 
distribution of brochures, Manuals and translated materials in local languages 
for the purpose. The  Committee, however desire that these steps initi ated by 
IPFT for making farmers aware of its new generation pesticides formulations  be 
further augmented through advertisements in news papers, TV channels, radio 
channels in English as well as regional languages. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the steps taken by IPFT in this regard. 
5. Noting the advantages of new generation pesticides formulations, the 
Committee specifically enquired regarding the impact of these new generation 
pesticides in enhancing production of wheat, paddy and other crop s. The 
Department have, however  merely submitted the names of technologies that 
have been found useful for wheat and paddy crops. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that they be apprised of the specific impact of new generation pesticides 
formulation in enhancing production of wheat, paddy and other crops. 

 
 
16 
 
6. As regards new generation pesticides formulation for agriculture and as 
well as for household pest management and their pricing, the Committee were 
informed that IPFT was a Research and Development Insti tute focused on the 
development of pesticides formulation technologies and it does not engage in 
production or marketing of any of its formulations. The IPFT after development 
of formulations merely transfers the technologies to the industries for 
commercial production and marketing. The Committee are intrigued about the 
reasons restricting the IPFT for production and marketing of its formulations 
despite being in existence for 34 years. The Committee therefore, desired that 
IPFT come up with feasibility st udies towards expanding its ventures for 
production as well as market its formulations in the coming future.  The 
Committee note that as regards the size of IPFT, it is very small as compared to 
its objectives and mandate. IPFT has however submitted that ba sed on the 
emerging needs of the sector, the capacity of IPFT can be strengthened. The 
Committee are of the considered view that it is high time for the IPFT to go for 
deep introspection for further strengthening its functions including mass 
production and  marketing of its own products so that the institute can 
successfully compete with the private players in the market. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.  
7. The Committee are happy to note that for promoting the safe  use of 
pesticides, IPFT had initiated farmer awareness programmes. These 
programmes were statedly initiated in the year 2022 -2023. The Committee 
further note that from the year 2022 -2023 to 2024 -2025, a total of 32 such 
programmes were conducted by IPFT  where a total of just 9223 farmers 
participated in these programmes  who provided positive feedback.  The 
Committee find these figures grossly inadequate keeping in view the fact that 

 
 
17 
 
the farmers across the Country totals to more than 10 crores. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the IPFT and the Department come out with a 
roadmap to conduct such programmes periodically and to encourage more and 
more farmers to participate in them so that the benefits are reaped by all farmers 
across the nation.  
8. The Committee are happy to note that generally positive  response have 
been received from farmers towards new generation pesticides formulations for 
agriculture management. The Committee were apprised that farmers  have 
appreciated safety and other aspects of new generation pesticides formulations 
especially bio -botanical, neem based and eco friendly products during field 
demonstrations and awareness programmes. According to the farmers , the 
effects of new generation pesticides formulations may be slower as co mpared 
to conventional pesticides but they recognize the long term benefit for crops 
and their fields. Against this backdrop , the Committee feel that IPFT becomes 
duty bound to educate the farmers regarding its new generation pesticides 
formulations and to make them popular amongst them. The Committee 
recommend that necessary steps be taken by the IPFT in this regard and utmost 
priority may be accorded to the matter. 
9. The Committee note that IPFT at present has laboratories under its three 
divisions viz (i) Formulation division, (ii) Analytical division and (iii) Bio-Science 
division. The formulation division is stated to have laboratory set up for 
development of pesticides fo rmulations for agricultural as well as household 
pest management and it also have pilot plant facility that can scale up lab scale 
research to a commercial production with optimum budget and it has capacity 
to produce upto 100 kg. per shift. Similarly the analytical division is accredited 

 
 
18 
 
and equipped with chemical testing of pesticides. The bio -science division is 
equipped to evaluate the different pesticides formulations by the IPFT or by the 
industry for their commercial viability through well equipped b io-assay 
laboratory, green house/ glass house and experimental field trials. Admittedly, 
IPFT has pilot plant facilities but was never utilized for commercial production. 
The Committee deplore the same and recommend that the IPFT should initiate 
ameliorative steps for full capacity utilization of its installed capacities in so far 
as plants and laboratories are concerned. To this extant, the Committee desire 
that appropriate monitoring mechanism be put in place to ensure optimum 
capacity utilisation of IPFT infrastructure. 
 10. The Committee note that 05 Scientific Posts are vacant at present in the 
IPFT out of which Offer Letters for 02 posts to join have been issued by the IPFT 
and 03 posts remain vacant for which recruitment process was under progress. 
The Committee desire that the recruitment process be expedited and the vacant 
posts be filled up at the earliest so as to further enhance the efficiency of IPFT. 
11. The Committee note that since inception of the IPFT, it has developed 86 
pesticides formul ations out of which , only 64 technologies have been 
transferred. A total of 22 pesticides formulations could not be transferred 
according to IPFT. Statedly, the market for bio based formulations was not very 
robust at present and even if IPFT was not able to transfer such formulations , 
they will be transferred in future once the market for bio based pesticides picks 
up. The Committee are not satisfied with the submission of the IPFT.  The 
Committee observed that  the reasons for non -transfer of its 22 pestici des 
formulations needs to be analyzed in a professional manner and IPFT need to 
work on the development of further formulations keeping in view the needs of 

 
 
19 
 
the industry and the farmers. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
steps taken in this regard.  
12. The Committee also note that IPFT had developed 47 formulations out of 
which just 16 formulations could  be transferred and 31 formulations could not 
be transferred. The Committee were apprised that for 31 formulations, the data 
generation as per regulatory requirement has to be done and studies are in 
progress for 19 formulations. Further, the IPFT is making efforts for publicizing 
these formulations through industry needs. The Committee desire that 
appropriate steps be taken so that the studies initiated in this regard be 
expedited.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                AZAD KIRTI JHA 
06 JANUARY, 2026                                 CHAIRPERSON, 
16 PAUSA, 1947 (Saka)            STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
      CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
 
  

 
 
20 
 
APPENDIX-I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(2024-25) 
 
Minutes of the Twenty Eighth Sitting of the Committee 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 08 th September, 2025 from 1100 hrs. to  
1300 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA MEMBERS 
 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
7. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
8. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
9. Shri Praveen Patel  
10. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
11. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
12. Shri Eatala Rajender 
13. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
14. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
15. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
16. Shri Nalin Soren 
17. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
18. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
19. Shri Subhash Barala 
20. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
21. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
22 Shri Naresh Bansal 
23 Shri Sanjay Raut 
24 Shri Meda Raghunadah Reddy 
25 Dr. Kalpana Saini 
26 Shri Arun Singh 
27 Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
28 Shri Tejveer Singh 
  
  

 
 
21 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
4. Smt. Maya Lingi   - Joint Secretary 
5. Ms. Miranda Ingudam  - Director 
6. Shri Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
 
WITNESSES 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals: 
1.  Ms. Nivedita Shukla Verma, Secretary (C&PC) 
2.  Shri Deepak Mishra, Joint Secretary, Petrochemical 
3.  Shri Deepankar Aron, Joint Secretary, Chemical  
4.  Ms Divya Parmar, Economic Advisor, DCPC  
5.  Ms. Vandana, Director, DCPC 
6.  Shri Chandan Kumar, Under Secretary, DCPC 
7.  Shri Chitvan Singh Dhillon, Dy Director, DCPC 
Representatives of IPFT  
1.  Dr. Mohana Krishna Reddy Mudiam, Director, IPFT 
2.  Dr. Amrish Agarwal, Specialist (Formulation), IPFT 
3.  Dr. Deepak Kumar Jaiswal, Specialist (Bioscience), IPFT 
4.  Dr. Samsul Alam, Specialist (Analytical), IPFT 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
the representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals to the Sitting of the Committee convened for briefing 
on the subject “Review of the functioning of Institute of Pesticide Formulation 
Technology (IPFT)”. Drawing the attention of the representative to  Direction 55(1) of 
the ‘Directions by the Speaker’ regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the 
Committee, the Chairperson asked the Secretary to apprise the Committee regarding 
IPFT.  The Secretary, DCPC accordingly briefed the Committee through Power point 
presentation about establishment of IPFT in the year 1991; Funds allocated to IPFT 
during the financial years 2022 -23, 2023-24 and 2024-25, objectives, activities and 

 
 
22 
 
achievements of IPFT during the last six year; Publications and Patents filed with and 
other achievements of IPFT; and development of user and environment friendly new 
generation formulations of pesticides as well as d evelopment of bio - botanical 
pesticide formulations which are safer and green alternative to synthetic pesticides.  
The Committee were also apprised that IPFT has been developing formulation and 
also transferring it to various industries viz. UPL Ltd, JU Agri Sciences UNIDO, IFFCO-
MC etc.  In the Biosciences field, IPFT have been carrying out trails on various crops 
like Potato, Sugarcane, Wheat, etc. and a total no. of 115 trials have been completed 
by the IPFT on various crops.  
3. As regards future plans of IPFT, the Committee were apprised that it includes 
inter-alia  Recognition of IPFT as a referral testing laboratory to analyze biostimulants 
as per Fertilizer Control Order guidelines; Development of pesticide formulations and 
bio-botanical pesticide formulations as safer alternative to synthetic pesticides ;  
Development of EcoTox facility at IPFT as per OECD -GLP principles ;Establishment 
of NABL accredited facility for development of Certified Reference Materials (CRMs) 
for Pesticides as per ISO 17034 at IPFT; Initiate  PhD-level  programs  in  collaboration  
with  academic institutions; 
4. The Chairperson thanked the Secretary, DCPC and the accompanying Officers 
for briefing the Committee on the important aspects relating to the subject and asked 
them to furnish written replies to points raised by the members that remained 
unanswered, at the earliest.  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
[A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept on record] 
 
  

 
 
23 
 
APPENDIX-II 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS BRANCH  
(2025-26) 
Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 06th January, 2026 from 1100 hrs. to 1130 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha– Chairperson 
LOK SABHA MEMBERS 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C.  
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
7. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
8. Shri Praveen Patel 
9. Dr. Sambit Patra 
10. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
11. Shri Sachithannatham R. 
12.  Shri Eatala Rajender 
13. Shri Rajesh Ranjan  
14. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
15. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA MEMBERS 
 
16. Shri Subhash Barala 
17. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
18. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
19. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
20. Shri Tejveer Singh 
21. Shri G.K. Vasan 
 
  

 
 
24 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
7. Smt. Maya Lingi   - Joint Secretary 
8. Ms. Miranda Ingudam  - Director 
9. Shri Kulvinder Singh                      -         Deputy Secretary 
10. Shri Abhishek Kumar   - Deputy Director  
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration, the following Draft 
Reports:  
i. XXX      XXX                                    XXX                             XXX 
ii. XXX      XXX                                    XXX                             XXX 
iii. XXX      XXX                                    XXX                             XXX 
iv. Nineteenth Report on the subject ‘Review of the functioning of Institute of 
Pesticide Formulation Technology (IPFT)’ pertaining to the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
3. Giving an overview of the important  Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the draft Reports, the Chairperson solicited the views/suggestions of the 
Members. 
4.      After some deliberations, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee 
without any amendment. 
5.  The Committee then au thorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and 
present/lay the Reports in both the Houses of Parliament in the budget session of 
Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 