i 
 
 
 
 
 
    STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
           MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
   (DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demand for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
  March, 2026/   Phalguna, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
20 
 


ii 
 
CC&F NO. 197 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in the Eighth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demand for 
Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13th March, 2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13th March, 2026 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  MARCH, 2026/   PHALGUNA, 1947 (SAKA) 


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26)  iv 
Introduction v 
Chapter-I Report 1 
Chapter-II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
15 
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
37 
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration 
38 
Chapter-V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
48 
 Annexure  
 Status report outlining specific projects funded, industry 
beneficiaries and measurable improvements that have resulted 
or targeted 
49 
 
APPENDICES  
I Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2024-25) held on 12th March, 2026 
58 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report  
(18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers on ‘Demand for Grants (2025 -26)’ of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
60 
 
  

iv 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-2026) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Dr. Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
21. Vacant* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Subhash Barala 
24. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
25. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
26. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
27. Shri Arun Singh 
28. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
29. Shri Tejveer Singh 
30. Shri G.K. Vasan 
31. Vacant 
 
* Vacant vice Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon, MP(LS), passed away on 19.02.2026 vide LS Table 
Office Notification No.21/4(8)/2026/TO(B) dated 20.02.2026 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. Miranda Ingudam - Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Smt. Preeti Negi  - Committee Officer 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this  
Twentieth Report on Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their Eighth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demand for 
Grants (2025 -26)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers , Department of 
Pharmaceuticals. 
2.  The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya Sabha on 19 th 
March, 2025. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers , Department of Pharmaceuticals, 
furnished their replies on 22 December, 2025 indicating Action Taken on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report. The Committee considered 
and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on 12 March, 2026. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                                  Azad Kirti Jha 
12 March, 2026                                                                                         Chairperson, 
21 Phalguna, 1947(Saka)                                                         Standing Committee on 
                                                                    Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
  

1 
 
REPORT 
  
CHAPTER – I 
  
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the committee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Pharmaceuticals for the year 2025-26. This Report was presented 
to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 19 March, 2025.  
  
1.2        The Eighth Report (18 th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained 23 Observations/ 
Recommendations. The Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in 
respect of all Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report in December, 2025. The 
replies to these Observations/Recommendations have been examined and categorized as 
follows :- 
  
(i)        Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II): 
  
Para Nos. 3,4,6,7,8,9,10, 11,12, 15,16,17, 18, 19, 20, 22 and 23 
  
 (Total - 17) 
  
(ii)        Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
  
Para No.   Nil 
(Total - 0) 
  
(iii)      Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration (Chapter 
IV): 
  
Para Nos. 1, 2, 5, 13, 14 and 21 
(Total - 6) 
  
(iv)      Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
  
            Para No.  Nil 
 (Total - 0) 
   
1.3        The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes in respect of comments of the 
Committee contained in Chapter I of the Report should be furnished to them at the earliest 
and in any case, not later than six months of the presentation of this Report.   
  

2 
 
1.4        The Committee, in the succeeding paragraphs, will now deal with the action taken 
by the Government on some of the Observations/Recommendations made in the Eighth 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) which either require reiteration or merit further comments. 
 
  
Observation/Recommendation Nos. 1 and 2 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION VIS-A-VIS UTILISATION DURING 2022-23, 2023-24 AND 2025-
26    
  
1.5.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
 “The Committee note that the BE of the Department for the financial year 2022-23 was 
₹ 2244.15 crore. The BE was enhanced to ₹3160.06 crore in the year 2023-24 and the 
BE was further enhanced to ₹4089.95 crore and yet further enhanced  to ₹6920.20 
crore. As regard s the reasons for increasing trend in the BE of the  Department, the 
Committee have been apprised that some of the new schemes  launched by the 
Department during the period namely Development of  Pharmaceutical Industry, 
Production Linked Schemes (PLIs) and Strengthening of  Medical Device Industry 
(SMDI) and due to provisions being made in the BE for the respective years resulted in 
enhancement of budgetary allocation for the schemes  under the Department. The 
Committee are of the view that with the enhanced  demand for allocation of funds and 
also enhanced allocation of funds it becomes imperative on the part of the Department 
to optimally utilize the allocated funds. The  Committee desire to know that with the 
introduction/launching of the new schemes, what measures the Department has put in 
place to successfully run those schemes. The Committee may be apprised accordingly. 
 
The Committee note that the BE of the Department for the year 2023-24 was ₹ 3160.06 
crore which was reduced to ₹ 2697.96 crore. Similarly, the BE for the year 2024-25 was 
₹ 4089.95 crore which was again reduced to ₹ 3387.96 crore and BE for the year 2025-
26 was ₹ 6920.20 crore which has again been reduced to ₹5268.7 crore. As regard this 
reduction in the BE of the Department the Committee have been apprised that expected 
release under some schemes could not be made due to lesser demand in infrastructure 
schemes because of issues in tendering  process, environmental clearances etc. non-
fulfilment of targeted achievements to  claim incentives etc. These were the primary 
reasons for which the budget had to  be reduced at RE stage during FY 2023 -24 and 
FY 2024-25. The Committee are of the view that the reasons cited by the Department 
are well within the administrative  control of the Department itself. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should initiate immediate steps to overcome 
issues related to tendering  process, environmental clearances etc. and ensure that 
such issues does not hinder the Department from higher allocation of funds.” 
  
  
 

3 
 
 
1.6        The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
 “As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the Department has taken steps to 
overcome issues related to tendering process, environmental clearances, etc. and to 
run schemes better. The following measures and improvements made as a result are 
submitted in this regard: 
(a) To ensure proper budget utilisation, advance planning and disbursement is 
being done with a view to ensure timely release of funds, quarterly expenditure targets 
are fixed to prevent last minute expenditure rush, monthly/quarterly financial monitoring 
meetings are being held to assess fund utilisation and address bottlenecks if any, fund 
allocation is linked with the actual progress and expenditure trends to avoid over -
estimation. Further, progress on this is monitored on a weekly basis with all programme 
divisions and the Integrated Finance Division. As a result, the Department could release 
and spend 93.6% of the RE Budget in 2024-25, which was higher than in the preceding 
financial years. 
(b) To strengthen outreach for getting more applications under schemes to enable 
utilisation, in addition to publishing notices inviting applications in the newspaper and 
the website of the Department, social media handles of relevant organisations under 
the Department, other relevant Government Ministries, Departments and organisations 
as well as relevant industry associations are now being leveraged. 
(c) Meetings are held regularly with Project Management Agencies (PMA), State 
Implementing Agencies, scheme implementing agencies and scheme beneficiaries 
and, where necessary, site visits are undertaken by officers of the Department / PMA 
to monitor the progress of schemes, expedite implementation and resolve issues.  
(d) To institutionally and sustainably enhance programme management capabilities 
in the Department by avoiding fragmentation of project management across various 
schemes, a dedicated new scheme named “Scheme of Programme Management” for 
the five -year perio d beginning with the financial year 2026 -27 has been approved. 
Under this, a pool of domain -specific experts, technical consultants and Young 
Professionals would be formed to create suitable capacities to support various 
Divisions of the Department, includ ing a Management Team for professional 
management and technical guidance and oversight of the pooled resources. This will 
help ensure efficient resource utilisation, timely implementation and effective 
monitoring under various initiatives and facilitate sectoral expertise, optimise resource 
utilisation by identifying gaps and overlaps or duplication and facilitate review and 
appraisal of schemes. 
(e) Under the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) schemes and the Strengthening of 
Medical Device Industry umbrella scheme, the Department, through the Project 
Development Cell (PDC) mechanism, is handholding applicants to facilitate resolution 
of issues related to commissioning of projects, as a result of which various issues such 
as land allotment, Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organisation (PESO) license, 
approval of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO), environmental 
clearances, etc. have been resolved.  
(f) Under the Promotion of Research and Innovation in Pharma MedTech sector 
(PRIP) scheme, a consulting firm with demonstrated global and domestic experience 

4 
 
in both pharma -medtech and research domains was onboarded in January 2025 as 
PMA to develop the strategy. The Department undertook extensive stakeholder 
consultation to gather feedback, suggestions and potential project pipeline information, 
analyse the same in-depth.  Based on these consultations and feedback, the scheme 
was amend and its guidelines revised, with a view to enhance the impact of the 
scheme. As a result of such initiatives, high number of proposals (710) has been 
received in response to the call for proposals and work is under way with a view to 
ensure that selection of projects, completion of requisite formalities and release of 
funds to industry and startups is done within the current financial year. Further, under 
the component for support to the National Institutes of Pharmaceutical Education and 
Research for setting up Centres of Excellence, the institutes have been asked to 
ensure industry participation before taking up projects, with a view to ensure relevance 
of projects to industry. 
(g) Under the Scheme for Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks, all three State 
Implementing Agencies have drawn up Program Evaluation and Review Technique 
(PERT) charts, with a view to ensure timely implementation. Further, the long-pending 
environment clearance for the proposed bulk drug park in Himachal Pradesh has been 
obtained, enabling progress on this project. 
(h) Under the scheme for Strengthening of Pharmaceutical Industry, extensive 
outreach has been done in partnership with industry and drugs regulators across States 
through webinars to elicit proposals, resulting in approval of 192 projects under the 
Revamped Pharmaceutical Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme. Moreover, 
system of joint inspections by the Central and State drugs regulators has been put in 
place, with a view to ensure timely certification of compliance with WHO-GMP norms.  
(i) Under the Promotion of Medical Device Parks scheme, all required clearances 
have been obtained by State Implementing Agencies (SIAs) and major tenders for 
construction of common infrastructure facility (CIF) buildings have been awarded. This 
has resulted in actual allotment of land to 194 manufacturing units in the approved 
medical device parks and 34 units have commenced construction of their plants. 
Further, tenders for equipment to be installed in CIF buildings are at different stages of 
procurement. Thus, available funds are now being utilised in an unhindered manner to 
ensure their optimal utilisation.” 
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.7        The Committee note that as recommended by them, the Department has initiated 
measures to overcome issues related to tendering process, environmental clearances 
etc. so as to run the Schemes in a better way. Measures include inter -alia strengthening 
outreach programmes and progress under major schemes such as Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) Schemes and the strengthening of Medical Device Industry Umbrella 
Scheme, Promotion of Research and Innovation in Pharma MedTech sector (PRIP), 
Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks, Strengthening of Pharmaceutical Industry and Promotion 
of Medical Device Parks. The Committee observe that though the measures initiated by 

5 
 
the Department appear to be elaborate, these measures should be implemented in letter 
and spirit by the Department. The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcomes 
of these measures. 
Observation/Recommendation No. 5 
 
PRADHAN MANTRI BHARTIYA JANAUSHADHI PARIYOJANA (PMBJP) 
 
Expansion of Janaushadhi Kendras (JAKs) 
 
1.8      The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
 “The Committee note that while the Department has reported the establishment of 
15,000 Jan Aushadhi Kendras (KAKs) as of 31.01.2025, their distribution across the 
country remains uneven, particularly in the Northeastern States and Union Territories.  A 
closer examination of the state-wise data reveals that certain regions have a significantly 
lower number of JAKs, with only 9 in Andaman & Nicobar, 2 in Ladakh, 1 in Lakshadweep, 
56 in Manipur, 25 in Meghalaya, 15 in Mizoram, 22 in Nagaland, 12 in Sikkim and  29 in 
Tripura.  Given the objective of providing affordable medicines to all, the Committee 
believes that this distribution pattern needs urgent attention. 
Furthermore, considering India’s large population of over 1.4 billion people, the current 
total of 15,000 JAKs translates to approximately one Kendra per 93,000 people, which 
may not be sufficient to meet the healthcare needs, especially in rural and remote areas.  
The Committee finds that there is no clear assessmen t of the actual number of JAKs 
required to adequately serve the population, particularly in underserved regions with 
geographical challenges. Additionally, the absence of a comprehensive expansion 
strategy for JAKs in such areas suggests the needs for a more proactive approach by the 
Department. 
In light of these observations, the Committee recommends an immediate and structured 
expansion of the JAK network, with a special focus on States and UTs where their 
presence is minimal. The Department should undertake feasibility studies, demand 
assessments and consultations with stakeholders to determine the optimal number and 
location of additional Kendras. The Committee urges the Department to formulate a time-
bound action plan ensuring that every district has an adequate number of Kendras, taking 
into account population density, healthcare access and regional challenges.” 
 
 
1.9      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
 
 “The Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana scheme has an entrepreneur-driven 
model for opening of JAKs and expansion of the JAK network. Under this, applications are 
invited online through the scheme’s website from individual entrepreneurs, non -
governmental organisations, societies, trusts, firms, private companies, etc. Wi th a view to 

6 
 
proactively expand the network, including in remoter and less developed areas of the country, 
a proactive, timebound expansion strategy is being pursued as under:  
(a) Pursuant to the announcement made by the Hon’ble Prime Minister in his 
Independence Day 2023 speech, a target to increase the number of JAKs opened in 
the country to 25,000 is being pursued in a phased manner, with phase -wise targets 
being 10,000 JAKs by M arch 2024, 15,000 by March 2025, 20,000 by March 2026 
and 25,000 by March 2027. Against these targets, the achievements so far have been 
11,261 by March 2024, 15,403 by March 2025 and 17,610 by November 2025. 
Further, online applications are invited on a s tanding basis from all districts of the 
country through the scheme website (www.janaushadhi.gov.in) and in the processing 
of applications received, districts having less coverage are given special focus.  
(b) Keeping in view population density, healthcare access and regional challenges, the 
following measures have been taken to ensure opening of JAKs in different parts of 
the country: 
(i) One-time incentive of ₹2 lakh is provided to outlets opened in 112 aspirational 
districts, the North-Eastern States, Himalayan areas and Island territories, as 
support towards furniture, computers, refrigerators and other fixtures. This is in 
addition to  the incentive of 20% of the monthly purchases made by JAK 
owners, subject to a monthly ceiling of ₹20,000 and meeting certain conditions 
such as maintaining stock of specified medicines, for which all JAK owners are 
eligible. 
(ii) State Governments have been requested from time to time to provide rent-free 
space for opening JAKs in government hospitals, community health centres 
and primary health centres, and to create awareness about the scheme. So far, 
a total of 2,397 JAKs have b een opened in public health facilities and other 
government centres. 
(iii) To increase the number of JAKs in rural areas, the cooperative sector has been 
partnered with for opening JAKs through Primary Agricultural Credit Societies 
(PACS) and other cooperative societies. Till 30.11.2025, a total of 804 JAKs 
have been opened throu gh PACS and other cooperative societies across the 
country.  
As a result, the number and proportion of rural JAKs has grown to 9,475 and 54% 
respectively. 
(c) Sustainable expansion of JAK network needs to be driven by higher volume of sales 
to increase their viability and attractiveness to entrepreneurs. To this end, the following 
steps have been taken to make citizens aware of the features and benefits of the 
scheme and its products: 
(i) Awareness campaigns: PMBI conducts awareness campaigns in coordination 
with bodies and platforms such as the Central Bureau of Communication, PIB, 
MyGov and MY Bharat, in various modes such as print, television, radio, 
social media platforms, outdoor hoardings, community engagement, etc.  
(ii) Interactive messages/calls : Outreach and citizen engagement are also 
pursued through WhatsApp chatbot and outbound calls to inform citizens 
regarding the quality of Janaushadhi products and the large savings that 
accrue from purchase of the same from nearest JAK.  

7 
 
(iii) Jan Aushadhi Week : Pursuant to the Hon’ble Prime Minister’s directions in 
2019, Jan Aushadhi Week is celebrated every year in the first week of March 
during which special campaigns such as public rallies, health camps, 
seminars in pharmacy colleges, children engagement pro grammes, etc. are 
conducted across the nation to educate citizens, healthcare professionals and 
other stakeholders about the benefits of Janaushadhi generic medicines. The 
7th Janaushadhi Diwas 2025 was observed on a substantially enhanced scale 
this year with participation of nine Union Ministers, two Chief Ministers, 156 
Members of Parliament and 70 other State dignitaries. Events were held 
across 26 States and Union territories, at 231 locations, with a total of 32,431 
participants. Duri ng the week, #JanAushadhi witnessed 996 mentions 
generating around 64,600 views and an estimated reach of 2.3 crore and 
#JanAushadhiDiwas was trending at number 3 in India on X. These 
campaigns aim to counter any incorrect perception about poor quality of 
generic medicines while emphasising the cost benefits of these medicines. 
The efforts taken to maintain the quality of Janaushadhi products are also 
highlighted in these campaigns. 
(iv) Directions for prescribing generic medicines: The Department of Health and 
Family Welfare has issued directions to all Central Government hospitals and 
Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) wellness centres to prescribe 
drugs with generic name. 
(v) Messages from eminent persons : Audio/video messages from well -known 
persons such as public representatives and eminent doctors are disseminated 
on social media platforms to highlight the benefits of Janaushadhi medicines 
and dispel myths associated with respect to their quality.  
(vi) Public engagement programme in rural areas : To educate citizens in local 
languages/dialects, publicity is also done through health camps, nukkad-
natak, audiovisual display at Common Service Centres and public 
engagement workshops in association with local JAKs in rural areas. 
(vii) In order to promote Janaushadhi  products, an app namely Janaushadhi 
Sugam has been developed, which is a convenient tool for the general public 
to obtain information on Janaushadhi generic products and locate nearby 
JAKs to purchase these products.” 
  
Comments of the Committee 
  
1.10 The Committee, in their Eighth Report, had urged the Department to formulate a 
time-bound action plan to ensure that every District of the country has adequate number 
of Jan Aushadhi Kendras, taking into account population density, healthcare access and 
regional challenges. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted that as 
against phase-wise targets of opening of 15,000 Jan Aushadhi Kendras (JAKs) by March 
2025, 17,610 JAKs have been opened by November 2025. As a result, the number and 
proportion of rural JAKs has grown to 9,475 and 54% respectively. However, the reply 

8 
 
does not clearly indicate whether the Department has undertaken feasibility studies, 
demand assessments and consultations with stakeholders to determine the optimal 
number and location of additional Kendras, as recommended by the Committee. The 
Committee are of the view that meaningful success of the Scheme will depend not only 
on numerical expansion but also on ensuring even distribution of JAKs in the entire 
Country, especially in rural and underserved areas. The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their recommendation that the Department should undertake feasibility studies, demand 
assessments and consultations with stakeholders to determine the optimal number and 
location of additional Kendras. The Committee further take note of the steps taken by the 
Department to enhance the viability and attractiveness of JAKs to entrepreneurs and 
citizens through public awareness campaigns, digital outreach, celebration of Jan 
Aushadhi Week, directions for prescribing generic medicines to CGHS wellness centres, 
public engagement programmes in rural areas and development of ‘Janaushadhi Sugam’ 
app. In this regard, the Committee recommend that with a view to achieve expansion of 
the Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana scheme in a sustainable manner, 
the Department  institute additional measures to strengthen coordination with State 
Governments and healthcare providers to further integrate Janaushadhi medicines into 
public healthcare delivery system.   
Observation/Recommendation No. 13 
 
PROMOTION OF BULK DRUG PARKS 
 
1.11      The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
 “ The Committee note that the scheme for Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks was approved 
way back in the year 2020 and the tenure of the Scheme is from the year 2020 -21 to 
2025-26. The objective of the scheme is stated to be to promote Bulk Drug Parks in the 
country for providing easy access to world class common infrastructure facility to Bulk 
Drug Unit located in the Parks to significantly bring down the manufacturing cost of Bulk 
Drugs and to make our Country selfreliant in Bulk Drugs by increasing the 
competitiveness of the domestic Bulk Drug industry. For this purpose 03 States namely 
Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh have been selected and construction 
activities are stated to be in progress in these 03 States. However, the Committee regret 
to note tha t out of the 03 States selected for promotion of Bulk Drug Parks 02 states 
namely Gujarat and Himachal Pradesh are lagging behind and Development of the Bulk 
Drug Parks in these States is behind scheduled owing to delay in environmental 
clearances and chan ge in location of Bulk Drug Parks etc. Under these circumstances 
the 03 States have submitted revised timeline upto March, 2026 for commissioning of 
Bulk Drug Parks. The Committee recommend that the Department should work in close 

9 
 
cooperation with the State Government of Gujarat and Himachal Pradesh to resolve the 
issues which are hindering the development/construction work of Bulk Drug Parks in 
these States. The Committee also recommend that the issues be resolved expeditiously 
and vigorously pursued with the State Governments. The Committee also recommend 
that the Bulk Drug Parks may be given a concrete shape and should be made ready by 
March, 2026 invariably. The Committee would like to be apprised by the steps taken in 
this regard by the Department.” 
 
1.12      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
 
 “As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the Department is working in close 
cooperation with the State Governments concerned, with a view to expeditiously resolve 
issues that hinder progress. Steps taken in this regard are as under: 
(a) Under the Scheme for Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks, all three State Implementing 
Agencies have drawn up PERT charts, with a view to ensure completion by March 
2027. The Department of Expenditure has been requested to extend the scheme 
period by one year beyond March 2026. 
(b) The long-pending environment clearance for the proposed bulk drug park in Himachal 
Pradesh has been obtained, enabling progress on this project.  
(c) A format has been prepared to capture the physical and financial progress of the bulk 
drug park and the same has been shared with State Implementing Agencies (SIA). 
On receipt of the Monthly Progress Report (MPR), the same is reviewed by the 
Department to understand the progress and any bottlenecks.  
(d) The Department has been conducting monthly review meetings with SIAs under the 
chairpersonship of the Joint Secretary concerned for monitoring physical and financial 
progress. During these interactions, the Department has been extending support to 
SIAs in expediting regulatory approvals, in coordination with the Ministries concerned.  
(e) The Department / project management agency undertakes periodic site visits to the 
park sites to review progress with the representatives of the State Government, with 
a view to ensure the following: 
(i) Necessary regulatory approvals and clearances required for the Park;  
(ii) Release and award of tenders of approved CIF projects; 
(iii) Project execution within the Scheme tenure; and 
(iv) Fund utilisation. 
(f) DO letters have been addressed to the Additional Chief Secretaries / Principal 
Secretaries concerned in the State Governments, apprising them of the progress and 
requesting expediting of progress.” 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.13      The Committee, in their Report, had recommended that the Bulk Drug Parks may 
be given a concrete shape and should be made ready by March, 2026 invariably. In its 
Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted that it is working in close cooperation 
with the State Governments concerned, with a view to expeditiously resolve issues that 

10 
 
hinder progress. The Committee have been informed that under the Scheme for 
Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks, all three State Implementing Agencies have drawn up 
Program Evaluation and Review Technique  (PERT) charts, with a view to ensure 
completion by March 2027. However, the Committee are concerned to note that the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has requested the Department of Expenditure to extend 
the Scheme period by one year beyond March 2026. The Committee are of the considered 
view that timely completion of Bulk Drug Parks is critical for achieving the intended 
objectives of strengthening domestic manufacturing capacity and reducing import 
dependence of bulk drugs. The Committee, therefore, desire rigorous action on the part 
of the Department for expeditious resolution of issues hindering progress of the Scheme.   
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 14 
 
1.14      The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
 “ As regard Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks the Committee have noted with deep concern 
that for the State of Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh the Central grant 
and the State fund released is ₹ 437.10 crore, ₹ 260.54 crore and 357.30 crore 
respectively however, the total fund utilized till January, 2025 is ₹ 251.63 crore, ₹ 47.23 
crore and ₹ 46.36 crore whereas, the target utilisation amount for availing second 
instalment is stated to be ₹ 327.83 crore, ₹ 195.40 crore and 267.98 crore. Under these 
circumstances the 03 States would not be able to avail the second instalment of the funds. 
The Committee deplores the same and such clarification from the Department for slow 
pace of expenditure by the 03 States. The Committee recommend that immediate 
attention may be paid for accelerating the pace of funds utilisation by the selected States 
and at the same time analyze the reasons for the same.” 
 
1.15      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
 
 “The pace of expenditure has been slow on account of various factors. The same are 
summarised below: 
(a) Bulk drug manufacturing is categorised as a red category industry under environmental 
regulations, on account of their polluting nature and risk to the environment. Accordingly, 
environmental clearance (EC) is a prerequisite for commencing construction wor k. 
Following receipt of approvals to set up bulk drug parks, the respective State 
Governments applied for EC in FY2022-23. 
(b) In Gujarat, EC was delayed by 16 months owing to the recommendations of the Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC) to relocate the proposed 60 
million litre per day marine discharge pipeline and EC was finally granted to the park only 
in February 2024. 
(c) In Andhra Pradesh, relocation of Bulk Drug Park from Kakinada to Nakkapalli due to 
requirement of partial denotification of Special Economic Zone land delayed the project 

11 
 
by 12 months. Following this, change to the new location was approved by the Scheme 
Steering Committee (SSC) in December 2023. Thereafter, EC for the project was 
received in March 2024. However, the State Government decided to accommodate an 
Integrated Ste el Plant in the neighbourhood of the approved bulk drug park site and 
proposed modification of boundary at Nakkapalli, releasing 706.26 acres of existing land 
while adding 783.74 acres of new land. In -principle approval to the same was accorded 
by SSC on 23.6.2025. 
(d) In Himachal Pradesh, EC was granted on 25.9.2025. The delay is primarily attributable 
to the complex terrain, seismic vulnerability and erosion-prone nature of the site. The draft 
Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) report was submitted to MoEFCC by the St ate 
Government in November 2023. Thereafter, the terms of reference for the EIA report were 
issued by MoEFCC in August 2024. Based on these, public hearing took place in 
November 2024 and final EIA report was submitted to MoEFCC by the State Government 
in January 2025. Following subsequent presentation by the State Government to 
MoEFCC, a site visit was conducted by MoEFCC’s Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) in 
April 2025. EAC recommended phased development, slope restrictions and soil and 
water conservation  plans at the site. Based on these recommendations, the State 
Government, after complying with the suggestions, submitted a revised master plan, 
considering which MoEFCC finally accorded EC in September 2025. 
 
As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the Department has analysed the reasons for the 
pace of fund utilisation and has taken the following steps to accelerate the pace of fund utilisation 
by the selected States: 
(a) Under the Scheme for Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks, all three State Implementing 
Agencies have drawn up PERT charts, with a view to ensure completion by March 2027. 
The Department of Expenditure has been requested to extend the scheme period by one 
year beyond March 2026. 
(b) The long-pending environment clearance for the proposed bulk drug park in Himachal 
Pradesh has been obtained, enabling progress on this project.  
(c) A format has been prepared to capture the physical and financial progress of the bulk 
drug park and the same has been shared with State Implementing Agencies (SIA). On 
receipt of the Monthly Progress Report (MPR), the same is reviewed by the Department 
to understand the progress and any bottlenecks.  
(d) The Department has been conducting monthly review meetings with SIAs under the 
chairpersonship of the Joint Secretary concerned for monitoring physical and financial 
progress. During these interactions, the Department has been extending support to SIAs 
in expediting regulatory approvals, in coordination with the Ministries concerned.  
(e) The Department / project management agency undertakes periodic site visits to the park 
sites to review progress with the representatives of the State Government, with a view to 
ensure the following: 
(v) Necessary regulatory approvals and clearances required for the Park;  
(vi) Release and award of tenders of approved CIF projects; 
(vii) Project execution within the Scheme tenure; and 
(viii) Fund utilisation. 

12 
 
(f) DO letters have been addressed to the Additional Chief Secretaries / Principal Secretaries 
concerned in the State Governments, apprising them of the progress and requesting 
expediting of progress.” 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
1.16      The Committee are happy to note the steps taken by the Department to accelerate 
the pace of fund utilisation by the selected States under the Scheme for Promotion of 
Bulk Drug Parks include preparation of Program Evaluation and Review Technique 
(PERT) char ts, sharing of physical and financial progress of the bulk drug park and 
conducting monthly review meetings with State Implementing Agencies and periodic site 
visits to review progress with the representatives of the State Government.  The 
Committee expect that these measures should ensure effective utilization of funds 
allocated for the Scheme and desire that they be apprised of the tangible improvements 
in the pace of fund utilisation by the Department.  
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 21 
 
PRODUCTION LINKED INCENTIVE SCHEME FOR PROMOTING DOMESTIC 
MANUFACTURING FOR MEDICAL DEVICES (PLIMD) 
 
1.17      The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
 “As regard to PLIMD scheme the Department has submitted that the commencement of 
projects under Category-A of the scheme were delayed due to COVID -19 and pending 
regulatory approvals such as manufacturing licences. The revision in Scheduled 
Commercial Operation Date (SCOD), by the Empowered Committee, in respect of these 
applicants was made bec ause of delays in launching of Greenfield Projects due to 
COVID-19 and pending regulatory approvals such as manufacturing licences. Further, 
thirteen Category -B applicants with 110 products have their approval in the month of 
February and August 2023 and S eptember 2024. The projects of these applicants are 
under implementation with production expected to commence from FY 2024-25 onwards. 
In view of the delay in the commissioning of Category –A applicant projects and on 
account of approvals granted in FY 2023-24 and FY 2024-25 for Category-B applicants, 
the incentive allocated for 2022 -23 could not be fully utilized despite the investments 
being made by the applicants. This unclaimed incentive, as per the existing scheme 
Guidelines, cannot be carried over and could remain unutilized. Due to the delay in the 
scheduled commercial operation of projects owing to COVID -19, and regulatory 
approvals proposal has been submitted to DPIIT for extension of tenure of the scheme 
by one year from FY 2026 -27 to FY 2027 -28. In this regard the Committee are of the 

13 
 
opinion that a considerable time has been elapsed after COVID -19 and the PLIMD 
scheme should not be got effected by the aftermath of COVID-19. The Department should 
initiate steps to overcome the problems posed by the COVID -19. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department.” 
 
1.18      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
 
 “Against the backdrop of delays in commercial operations of projects selected under the 
Production Linked Incentive  Scheme for Promoting Domestic Manufacturing of  Medical 
Devices, on account of the covid pandemic and delays in securing requisite regulatory 
approvals, the Department of Pharmaceuticals had proposed to the D epartment for 
Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) extension of the existing tenure of the 
scheme till the financial year 2026 -27 (the last year for eligible production) by one y ear, 
i.e., till the financial year 2027 -28. However, DPIIT conveyed that the proposal for 
extension of the tenure for the scheme does not appear be consistent with the 
performance-linked construct of PLI schemes and may not be pursued further.” 
  
Comments of the Committee 
  
1.19.      The Committee note that with a view to address challenges in manufacturing of 
medical devices in India vis-à-vis other major manufacturing economies, a Scheme called 
‘Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for promoting domestic manufacturing of 
Medical Devices {PLIMD}’ was approved by the Government of India on 20.3.2020. The 
period of the Scheme was from FY 2020-21 to FY 2027-28 with total financial outlay of Rs. 
3,420 crore. Under this Scheme, financial incentive was given to selected compan ies at 
the rate of 5% of incremental sales of medical devices manufactured in India and covered 
under the target segments of the scheme, for a period of five years. The Committee had 
observed that in view of the delay in the commissioning of Category –A applicant projects 
and on account of approvals granted in FY 2023 -24 and FY 2024 -25 for Category -B 
applicants, the incentive allocated for 2022 -23 could not be fully utilized despite the 
investments being made by the applicants. The Committee further note that the proposal 
of the Department for extension of the Scheme tenure by one year i.e. till FY 2026-27 (last 
year for eligible production) has not been agreed to by the Department for Promotion of 
Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT), on the ground that such  extension would not be 
consistent with the performance -linked construct of PLI Schemes. The Committee are 
constrained to note that the Department has not implemented the Scheme seriously and 
the term of the Scheme has come to an end. The Committee desire to be apprised of the 
financial implications of rejection of proposal of extension of tenure of PLIMD Scheme 
and future of investment made by the applicants under this Scheme. The Committee also 

14 
 
recommend that the Department of Pharmaceuticals should urgently undertake a 
comprehensive project-wise review of all delayed Category-A and Category-B applicants 
and take proactive and concrete steps so that the objectives of the PLIMD Scheme are 
achieved within the existing framework of the Scheme. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the specific steps taken by the Department in this regard along with 
measurable outcomes in the Action Taken Statements. 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 3 
 
2.1 The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
“The Committee note with concern that the Department sought Rs. 6920.20 crore for the 
financial year 2025-26 but have been allocated an amount of Rs. 5268.7 crore.  Thus, the 
Ministry of Finance has drastically reduced the allocation by Rs. 1651.5 crore. In  this 
regard the Committee desire to know how the different schemes/programmes being run 
by the Department would be affected and to what extent the Department would have to 
sacrifice its schemes and programmes. The Department has submitted that if need be 
they would seek funds later to ensure that the schemes/programmes being run by it will 
be suffer due to paucity of funds, however, the Committee recommends that the 
Department should analyse the reasons for drastic reduction in its projected BE and 
initiate steps so as to seek higher allocation of funds in future.  
2.2 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
“The allocation for schemes in the Department is sought based on projections and 
expected progress during a financial year. At the time of Budget discussions for the 
coming financial year, allocations on the demands made by the Department are made by 
the Ministry of Finance based on their assessment for the sector and keeping in view 
available fiscal space. However, during the financial year, if more funds are needed based 
on progress, the s ame are sought at the RE/Supplementary Demands for Grant stage 
with due justifications with a view to ensure that schemes/programmes do not suffer due 
to paucity of funds.” 
 
Observation/Recommendation No.4 
 
2.3       The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“As regards the actual expenditure of the Department the Committee note that the actual 
expenditure of the Department for the year 2022 -23 was Rs. 2050.08 crore against 
allocated amount of Rs. 2268.54 crore. During the year 2023 -24 expenditure was Rs. 
2432.45 crore against allocated amount of Rs. 2697.96 crore.  During the year 2024 -25 
expenditure was Rs. 2432.44 crore against allocated amount of Rs. 3387.96 crore.  Thus, 
the Department has not been able to utilize the allocated funds to it for the three 
consecutive years.  In this regard the Department has submitted their justification for 
under utilisation of funds that the Pharma Industry is a growing industry and the targets 
are based on projections, which at times do not fructify on ground due to various reasons 

16 
 
primarily related to infrastructure development for the projects due to various clearances 
required to be obtained in the time bound manner. Despite, these impediments due to 
constant monitoring of the scheme by the Department at micro level, 90.37% of RE in FY 
2022-23 and 90.15% of RE in FY 2023 -24, was utilized. As regards, FY 2024 -25, the 
actual figures for expenditure would only be known on completion of the FY 2024 -25 on 
31st March, 2025.  The Committee do appreciate the contention of the Department th at 
targets set by it are based on projections, which at times do not fructify on ground due to 
various reasons. However, the Committee recommend that the Department should fix the 
realistic targets after careful analysis of all the aspects.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard.”   
 
2.4 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
“In pursuance of the Committee’s recommendations, the Department has undertaken in-
depth assessment of eight ongoing schemes whose approved period is due to expire at 
the end of the current financial year and in respect of whom continuation of the scheme 
has been sought. This has been done as part of the preparation of the memoranda for 
appraisal by the Expenditure/Standing Finance Committee, taking into account the key 
findings of external evaluations carried out for each of these eight schemes.  
Further, to ensure better match between budgetary allocation and its utilisation, advance 
planning and disbursement is being done with a view to ensure timely release of funds, 
quarterly expenditure targets are fixed to prevent last minute expenditure rush , 
monthly/quarterly financial monitoring meetings are being held to assess fund utilisation 
and address bottlenecks if any, fund allocation is linked with the actual progress and 
expenditure trends to avoid over -estimation. Further, progress on this is mon itored on a 
weekly basis with all programme divisions and the Integrated Finance Division. As a 
result, the Department could release and spend 93.6% of the RE Budget in 2024 -25, 
which was higher than in the preceding financial years.” 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No.6 
Disclosure of Complaints Regarding Quality of Medicines 
 
2.7 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee notes the importance of ensuring transparency and accountability in 
maintaining the quality of medicines supplied through Janaushadhi Kendras (JAKs).  
While the department has stated that all batches of medicines undergo 100% quality 
testing before distribution, it has not provided the exact number of complaints received 
regarding medicines quality through the CPGRAMS portal of the Government of India 
and emails to the Pharmaceuticals & Medical Devices Bureau of India (PMBI).  The 
Committee be lieves that sharing such data is essential for public confidence in the 
Janaushadhi Scheme and for reinforcing the Department’s commitment to quality 

17 
 
assurance.  Instead of a general assurance, the Committee urges the Department to 
provide concrete information on the number of complaints received, the nature of 
concerns raised, and the corrective measures undertaken.  This will help in addressing 
public apprehensions and ensuring that necessary actions are taken to uphold medicines 
quality.  The Committee is particularly interested in understanding whether medicines 
failing quality checks are promptly recalled and whether appropriate measures, including 
penalties, are imposed on defaulting suppliers.”  
2.8 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
“Any person may lodge grievances regarding generic medicines supplied through JAKs 
in the country using the Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
(CPGRAMS) portal of the Government of India or by emailing to 
complaints@janaushadhi.gov.in. As against about 15 lakh consumers served daily 
through JAKs, 81 grievances lodged in the financial year (FY) 2024 -25 related to quality 
issues, which is about 0.000015% of the total sale transactions in the year, i.e., about 1.5 
grievances per crore sale transaction.  
The nature of such grievances pertains to issues like breaking of tablet, capsules 
becoming soft, consumer’s doubt regarding effectiveness of medicine, etc. Immediately 
on receipt of such a grievance in respect of any medicine, prima facie verification of the 
grievance is carried out to verify details and sale of such batch of that medicine is put on 
hold till the anonymised medicine sample is tested and cleared. Such testing is done at 
labs accredited and periodically inspected by the National Accreditation Board for Testing 
and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) and, in addition, assessed by the scheme 
implementing agency (Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Bureau of India) for 
compliance with Good Laboratory Practices. To ensure that the medicine is not sol d by 
any JAK till the sample has been tested and adherence to standards established, such 
sale is technologically barred on the point -of-sale (PoS) application using which 
Janaushadhi products are sold. In case the sample fails, sale of the batches concern ed 
of that medicine is stopped forthwith across the supply chain and any batches available 
in the supply channel are recalled. Further, appropriate contractual action, such as 
forfeiture of security deposit, recovery of cost of entire batch and blacklistin g or 
debarment of the manufacturer/drug supplied, is taken against the manufacturer.” 
 
Observation/Recommendation No.7 
 
Establishment of Price Monitoring and Resource Units (PMRUs) in All States/UTs 
 
2.9 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee notes that the Consumer Awareness Publicity and Price Monitoring 
(CAPPM) Scheme consists of two key components: Assistance to Price Monitoring and 
Resource Units (PMRUs) in States/UTs and Advertisement and Publicity for CAPPM. 
While the Depar tment has informed that PMRUs are operational in 31 States/UTs, the 
Committee observes that five States/UTs —Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Tamil Nadu, 

18 
 
Delhi, Sikkim, and Manipur —are yet to have functional PMRUs. The Committee is 
concerned that this gap in implementation may affect price monitoring efforts in these 
regions, which play a crucial role in preventing overpricing and ensuring price 
transparency in the pharmaceutical sector. 
Since PMRUs are fully funded by the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) 
for both establishment and recurring expenses, financial constraints should not be a 
limiting factor in their setup. The delay in establishing PMRUs in these regions 
underscores the need for more focused efforts to ensure uniform implementation of the 
CAPPM Scheme. The Committee emphasizes the importance of ensuring that 
consumers across all States/UTs have access to a robust price monitoring mechanism 
that safeguards them from overpricing and market exploitation. 
In this regard, the Committee recommends that the Department take expedited measures 
to establish PMRUs in the remaining five States/UTs at the earliest. A clear timeline for 
their operationalization should be provided, along with an explanation for the de lay and 
the corrective measures being undertaken. Ensuring consistent implementation of the 
CAPPM Scheme across all regions will enhance consumer protection and strengthen 
price regulation in the pharmaceutical sector.“ 
2.10 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
 
“PMRUs are operational in 31 States / Union territories (UTs). PMRU are yet to be 
established in five States/UTs, namely, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Tamil Nadu, Delhi, 
Sikkim and Manipur. PMRU is set up as a registered society that functions under the 
direct supervision of the State drug control administration of the State/UT concerned. 
Therefore, PMRU can be set up in a State/UT only with the consent of the Government 
of the State/UT concerned.  
NPPA is making efforts at all levels to set up PMRUs in the remaining States/UTs. In 
addition to letters to State/UT authorities, the matter has also been followed up with them 
on a sustained basis by deputing officers to expedite the process. As a result,  the 
Government of the National Capital Territory (NCT) of Delhi has conveyed its consent for 
the proposed setting up of PMRU in the NCT of Delhi.”  
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 8 
Strengthening and Infrastructure Development of Existing NIPERs 
2.11 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee notes that while the Department had submitted a proposal in 2021 for 
the establishment of new National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research 
(NIPER) centres, the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) recommended prioritizing 
the strengthening and infrastructure development of the existing seven NIPERs instead.  
Consequently, the Department did not receive any budgetary support for setting up a new 
NIPER centre in Tamil Nadu. 

19 
 
The Committee acknowledges the importance of enhancing the infrastructure of existing 
NIPERs before expanding the network. However, it is concerned about the lack of clarity 
regarding the measures taken to upgrade these premier pharmaceutical research 
institutions. The absence of a concrete plan or timeline detailing the improvements, 
financial outlays, and expected outcomes raises concerns about potential delays in 
infrastructure development. Such delays could indefinitely postpone the expansion of 
NIPERs, thereby limiting access to high -quality pharmaceutical education and research 
in other regions. 
Given these concerns, the Committee recommends that the Department address this 
matter with urgency. A comprehensive action plan should be prepared, outlining the 
specific steps taken to enhance infrastructure in the seven existing NIPERs, the timelines 
and financial allocations earmarked for these improvements, the status of faculty 
recruitment, research facilities, and industry collaborations under this initiative, and a 
strategy to secure additional funding to expedite infrastructure strengthening while also 
facilitating the future establishment of new NIPERs, particularly in Tamil Nadu.” 
 
2.12 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
 
“With regard to enhancement of infrastructure in the seven existing NIPERs, including the 
specific steps taken for the same and the timelines and financial allocations earmarked 
therefor, institute-wise status is as under: 
(a) The campus of NIPER, Mohali was completed in May 1995.  
(b) NIPER, Ahmedabad: An amount of ₹ 103.88 crore was approved for construction of 
an area of 12,480 sq. metre in April 2018. The approved campus elements included 
institutional area, administrative area, residential area, hostels, guest house, 
Director’s bungalow, and various campus amenities. The work was assigned to the 
Hindustan Steelworks Construction Limited (HSCL). After tender, work was awarded 
in December 2019 and construction started in June 2021. The work was completed in 
August 2023 and the campus was dedicated to the nation in September 2023.  
(c) NIPER, Guwahati: Outlay for construction of campus was approved in FY2021-22 as 
part of the approval of NIPER scheme that year. An amount of ₹ 174.84 crore was 
approved for construction of an area of 27,688 sq. metre during January 2015 to 
September 2022. The approved camp us elements included administrative block, 
academic blocks, hostels, residential quarters for staff and faculty, Director Bungalow, 
recreation facilities, animal house, central animal facility and various other 
developmental work. The work was assigned to the Engineering Projects (India) Ltd 
(EPIL). After tender, work was awarded in November 2012 and construction started in 
July 2015. The work was completed in October 2023 and the campus was dedicated 
to the nation in January 2024.  
(d) NIPER, Hajipur: Outlay for construction of campus was approved in FY2021 -22 as 
part of the approval of NIPER scheme that year. An amount of ₹ 72.65 crore was 
approved for construction of an area of 10,016 sq. metre in September 2022. The 
approved campus elements included administrative/academic building, hostel 
building and electrical substation. The work was assigned to the Central Public Works 
Department (CPWD). After tender, work was awarded in February 2023 and 

20 
 
construction started in February 2023. So far, 72% of work has been completed. 
Completion is expected by March 2026. 
(e) NIPER, Hyderabad: Outlay for construction of campus was approved in FY2021 -22 
as part of the approval of NIPER scheme that year. Completion of land registration 
and transfer was done in May 2022. An amount of ₹ 103 crore was approved for 
construction of an area of 19,470 sq. metre in September 2022. The approved campus 
elements included R&D block, hostels and electric sub -station. The work was 
assigned to the National Projects Construction Corporation. After tender, work was 
awarded in September 2023 and construction started in January 2024. So far, 62% of 
work has been completed. Completion is expected by January 2026. 
(f) NIPER, Kolkata: Outlay for construction of campus was approved in FY2021 -22 as 
part of the approval of NIPER scheme that year. Completion of land registration and 
transfer was done in March 2022. An amount of ₹ 78.56 crore was approved for 
construction of an area of 10,974 sq. metre in September 2022. The approved campus 
elements included administrative and academic building, hostels,  central animal 
facility / animal house building, boundary wall, and site development . The work was 
assigned to CPWD. After t ender, work was awarded in April 2023 and construction 
started the same month. So far, 73% of work has been completed. Completion is 
expected by April 2026. 
(g) NIPER, Raebareli: Outlay for construction of campus was approved in FY2021-22 as 
part of the approval of NIPER scheme that year. An amount of ₹ 77.92 crore was 
approved for construction of an area of 12,659 sq. metre in September 2022. The 
approved campus elements included administrative building, academic and research 
centre, animal house, Hostels, residential quarters, canteen, powerhouse and other 
utility services. The work was assigned to CPWD. After tender, work was awarded in 
March 2023 and construction started in March 2023. So far, 93% of work has been 
completed. Completion is expected by December 2025. 
With regard to research facilities, faculty recruitment and industry collaborations, the status 
is as under: 
(a) Research facilities:  Under the Promotion of Research and Innovation in Pharma -
MedTech Sector (PRIP) scheme of the Department of Pharmaceuticals, each of the 
seven NIPERs has established a Centre of Excellence with aggregate budget outlay 
of ₹700 crore, with the aim of fosteri ng advanced research and innovation and 
contributing to self -reliance in pharmaceuticals and medical technology. These are 
focussed on medical devices (at NIPER, Ahmedabad), bulk drugs (at NIPER, 
Hyderabad), phytopharmaceuticals (at NIPER, Guwahati), anti-viral and anti-bacterial 
drug discovery and development (at NIPER, Mohali), biological therapeutics (at 
NIPER, Hajipur), novel drug delivery system (at NIPER, Raebareli) and flow chemistry 
and continuous manufacturing (at NIPER, Kolkata).  
Altogether, NIPERs have created capacities for excellence in research and 
development in diverse areas. Collectively, they have established 19 Centres of 
Excellence (CoEs). These include CoEs for National Centre for 
Pharmacoengineering, Centre of Excellenc e for Tribal Health Care, GMP Extraction 
Facility, Value Addition Center for Herbal Industry in the Northeastern States of India, 
GLP-Facilitated Animal Breeding and Husbandry Facility, Advanced Centre for 

21 
 
Computer Aided Drug Design, Adverse Drug reactions Monitoring Centre, National 
Toxicology Center, Natural Products Field Laboratory and Safe Technology 
Development Centre — Pilot Plant, Central Instrumentation  Laboratory -CIL, Dr. 
Chigurupati Centre for Ex cellence in Innovative and Sustainable Pharmaceutical 
Development (CCE -ISPD), TDC -Dosage form (Formulation), Small and Medium 
Pharmaceutical Industry Centre, Central Animal Facility, Centre For Safety 
Pharmacology, Centre For Pharmaceutical Nanotechnology,  National Bioavailability 
Centre. 
(b) Faculty recruitment: As against 140 regular faculty members in position in November 
2024 and total of 217 sanctioned faculty posts, 167 faculty members now are currently 
in position and offer letters have been issued against another 8 faculty posts, while 
recruitment against the remaining posts is in process.  
(c) Industry collaborations:  As part of academia -industry collaboration and exchange, 
NIPERs have signed more than 344 MoU with industries and other academic 
institutions, reflecting a strong commitment to fostering innovation through industry -
academia collaboration.  
(d) In line with the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee, pursuant to a decision of 
the NIPER Council, a NIPER Academia -Industry Coordination Committee has been 
set up under the chairpersonship of the Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals as 
an institutional mechanism to promote strategic coordination between NIPERs and 
pharmaceuticals and medical devices industry by, among other things, facilitating 
greater synergies between NIPERs and industry and supporting research -driven 
growth, innovation, skilling and translation  of academic research into industrial 
applications. 
As a result of infrastructure development, recruitment of quality faculty and research and 
collaborations, the existing NIPERs have emerged as strong, high -quality pharmaceutical 
education and research, as evidenced by the following: 
(a) NIPERs have so far published 8,722 research papers in various reputed journals and 
filed over 470 patents.  
(b) As per the National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) of the Ministry of 
Education, under the ‘Pharmacy’ category, all seven NIPERs are ranked among the 
top 30 pharmacy institutes in the country, with Hyderabad ranked 5 th, Mohali 9 th, 
Guwahati 12th, Raebareli 17th, Ahmedabad 21st, Kolkata 29th and Hajipur 30th in 2025. 
They also rank high in terms of the calibre of their faculty, which includes 40 faculty 
members who figure in the prestigious Stanford Top 2% Scientists list. 
(c) NIPERs are rich in terms of the specialisations that they offer. Collectively they have 
a total of 20 Departments. These include Biological Sciences, Biopharmaceuticals, 
Biotechnology, Clinical Research, Chemical Sciences, Medical Devices, Medicinal 
Chemistry, Natural Products, Pharmaceutical Analysis, Pharmaceutical Management, 
Pharmaceutical Technology (Biotechnology), Pharmaceuti cal Technology 
(Formulations), Pharmaceutical Technology (Process Chemistry), Pharmaceutics, 
Pharmacoinformatics, Pharmacology and Toxicology, Pharmacy Practice, Regulatory 
Affairs, Regulatory Toxicology and Traditional Medicine. 
(d) NIPERs have established number of incubators to support innovation through 
startups. Collectively, NIPERs have established 16 incubators.  

22 
 
(e) So far, 10,974 students have graduated from NIPERs, consisting of 721 doctoral 
students, 8,894 postgraduates and 1,359 MBA degree -holders. These have 
contributed to the availability of professional manpower to both industry and 
academia, which prefer NIPER graduates in recruitment. This is reflected in the high 
placement rates of NIPERs of about 90%.  
With regard to secure additional funding to expedite infrastructure strengthening while also 
facilitating the future establishment of new NIPERs, the status is as under: 
(a) As part of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) proposal for continuation of the 
scheme beyond March 2026, additional funding has been sought for further 
strengthening of infrastructure. In addition, under the PRIP scheme, beneficiary 
industry has been incentivised to collaborate with reputed Government academic and 
research institutions, including NIPERs, to augment research capacities at such 
institutions by way of utilisation of funds for collaborative projects approved under the 
scheme for creation of capital assets at the institution. 
(b) The Department of Pharmaceuticals is in the process of formulating a proposal for a 
budget announcement regarding opening of new NIPERs.” 
(c)   
 
Observation/Recommendation No.9 
PROMOTION OF RESEARCH AND INNOVATION IN PHARMA MED-TECH SECTOR (PRIP) 
2.13 The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
“The Committee note that the cabinet approved PRIP scheme with a budget outlay of 
Rs.5000 crore over a period of 5 years ranging from 2023 -24 to 2027-28. The scheme 
has two components (i) strengthening of research infrastructure by establishment of 07 
Centres of Excellence (CoEs) and (ii) promoting research in pharmaceutical sector by 
encouraging research in 06 priority areas. The Committee further note that the objectives 
of the Scheme are laudable, however, the scheme would end in the year 2027 -28. As 
such only a couple of years have been left for the running of the scheme. The Committee 
desire and recommend that the Department should fully exploit the scheme and make 
optimal utilisation of the ₹ 5000 crore allocated to it. If need be the Department should 
also seek extension of the scheme beyond 2027-28.”    
 
2.14 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
 
“With a view to make optimal utilisation of the amount allocated under PRIP scheme, a s 
recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the Department of Pharmaceuticals has taken the 
following steps: 
(a) Extension of the scheme beyond the financial year (FY) 2027 -28 by two years, till 
FY2029-30 has been sought and secured from the Department of Expenditure.  
(b) Under component A of the scheme, a Centre of Excellence have been established in 
each of the seven NIPERs and they have approved 111 research projects, published 

23 
 
46 research papers and filed six patents. Thus, utilisation of funds under this 
component is well under way. 
(c) For component B of the scheme, extensive stakeholder consultation was undertaken, 
and the feedback, suggestions and information on potential project pipeline gathered 
during the consultations were used to analyse the scheme in -depth, with a view to 
enhance its impact. Based on the analysis, certain amendments to the scheme and 
revised guidelines were notified on 1.10.2025, and applications were invited through 
an online portal. By the final submission date of 19.11.2025, a high number of 
proposals (710) hav e been received from startups and industry and are being 
evaluated by the Technical Committee for submitting its recommendations to the 
Project Appraisal and Approval Committee for consideration and approval, with a view 
to ensure that funds are released t o industry and startups for eligible projects within 
the current financial year.” 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 10 & 11 
Effective Utilization of Funds Under the Strengthening of Pharmaceutical Industry (SPI) 
Scheme 
2.15 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that the Strengthening of Pharmaceutical Industry (SPI) Scheme 
was launched with a total financial outlay of ₹500 crore for the period 2021 -22 to 2025-
26. With just one year remaining before the scheme concludes, the Committee is 
concerned about the effective utilisation of the allocated funds and whether the scheme’s 
objectives are being met. Any inefficiency in fund utilisation could lead to 
underperformance, limiting the intended support for the pharmaceutical sector. Given the 
industry's critical role in ensuring self -reliance and global competitiveness, delays in 
implementation could have long-term implications for industry growth and public health. 
To ensure the full and effective utilisation of the remaining budget in the final financial 
year (2025-26), the Committee emphasizes the need for a robust mechanism to monitor 
progress. The Department must take immediate steps to review the scheme’s 
implementation, ensuring that funds are being utilized as planned and delivering tangible 
outcomes. Identifying and addressing any bottlenecks hindering the scheme’s execution 
is essential. In this regard, the Committee recommends that the Department conduct a 
detailed review of the SPI scheme, including an account of funds allocated and utilized, 
as well as its actual impact on the pharmaceutical sector. A comprehensive status report 
should be prepared, outlining specific projects funded, industry beneficiaries,  and 
measurable improvements resulting from the scheme.  
2.16 The Committee further note that out of the 20 applications received under the 
strengthening of pharmaceutical scheme, 07 applicants have been shortlisted and just 06 
applicants have been given final approval whereas in principal approval granted to one applicant 
has been cancelled and at present the Department has NIL number of applications. The 

24 
 
Committee desire to know whether in principle approval granted to a few applicants is sufficient 
enough to meet the objectives of the scheme.”   
2.17 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
“As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the Department is undertaking regular, 
detailed review of the scheme, including for identification and addressing of any bottlenecks, 
utilisation of funds as well as their impact on the pharmaceutical sector, on an ongoing basis, 
through—  
(a) meetings of the Scheme Steering Committee; 
(b) meetings held by the Joint Secretary concerned in the Department with the applicants 
for the Assistance to Pharmaceutical Industry for Common Facilities  (API-CF) sub-
scheme and the Revamped Pharmaceuticals Technology Upgradation Scheme  
(RPTUAS) of the SPI scheme;  
(c) the project management agency (SIDBI);  
(d) webinars for industry, organised across States in association with industry 
associations and drugs regulators, for extensive outreach to elicit proposals for 
RPTUAS; and 
(e) system of joint inspections by the Central and State drugs regulators, with a view to 
ensure timely certification of compliance with WHO-GMP norms in approved projects 
under RPTUAS.  
Under API-CF sub-scheme, 8 projects with total approved grant-in-aid to the tune of ₹139.33 
crore to pharmaceutical clusters for creation of common facilities and are at various stages 
of execution. Once these common facilities are created, they are expected to provide access 
to common facil ities to around 1,300 existing pharmaceutical units, besides catalysing the 
augmentation of capacities at these clusters through the setting up of new pharmaceutical 
units and expansion of existing units. It is submitted  that the same may be considered as 
substantially meeting the objectives of the scheme. 
RPTUAS sub-scheme, launched in 2024, aims to support upgrade of production facilities of 
small and medium pharmaceutical companies having average turnover of less than ₹500 
crore, to attain the standards specified in the revised Schedule M to the Drugs Rules, 19 45 
and the World Health Organization — Good Manufacturing Practices (WHO-GMP), thereby 
improving their competitiveness, both domestically and globally.  Under RPTUAS, till 
30.11.2025, 192 applications have been approved. Out of this, 86 applicants hav e reported 
completing upgrade of their pharmaceutical manufacturing units to the revised Schedule M 
and WHO -GMP standards. The remaining are at various stages of implementing 
technological upgrade. 
Enabled by the SPI scheme launched in March 2022 and other initiatives, the annual turnover 
of the pharmaceutical sector has grown from ₹3.44 lakh crore in FY2021 -22 to ₹4.72 lakh 
crore in FY2024-25.  
Detailed status report, outlining specific projects funded, industry beneficiaries and 
measurable improvements that have resulted or are targeted, is at Annex.”  
 

25 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 12 
PROMOTION OF MEDICAL DEVICE PARK 
2.18 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“As regards Promotion of Medical Device Parks the Committee have been apprised that 
the first installment of ₹ 30 crore has been released to each of the 03 States selected in 
the year 2021 -22 for Promotion of Medical Device Parks. The Committee have been 
further apprised that till January, 2025 the first installment of ₹ 30 crore each has been 
fully utilized by the 03 States namely Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh. 
The Committee desire that the remaining installments may be released at the earliest and 
the Promotion of Medical Device Parks may be brought to logical conclusion at the 
earliest.”  
2.19 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
“The second instalment of ₹30 crore each has been released to the three States, raising 
the total release to the States to ₹180 crore. Total fund utilisation till 30.11.2025 is ₹184.71 
crore, which also includes Project Management Agency charges.  Civil construction for 
the three parks is at the final stages and a s of September 2025, 194 medical devices 
manufacturers stood allotted land in the three parks with a total area of 298.58 -acre and 
34 units had also commenced construction of their plants.  Progress is being actively 
monitored with a view to ensure due completion of the parks at the earliest.”  
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 15 
 
PRODUCTION LINKED INCENTIVE SCHEME (PLI Scheme) 
2.24 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that the tenure of PLI Scheme is from the year 2020-21 to 2029-30 
with the total financial outlay of Rs. 69.40 crore and the selected applicants have already 
made an actual investment of Rs. 4253.92 crore and have also generated employme nt 
for 4473 individuals. Further, they have commissioned a total of 34 projects for 25 Bulk 
Drugs. The scheme has resulted in capacity creation for Bulk Drugs which were hithereto 
imported in the Country besides strengthening of fermentation technology manufacturing 
capability by commissioning of projects. The Committee are of the view that the objectives 
of the scheme are laudable and the Department has been able to implement the scheme 
successfully. The Committee recommend that the scheme may be strengthe ned further 
and the allocated outlay of Rs. 6940 crore may be optimally utilized till the end of the 
tenure of the scheme in the year 2029-30. The Committee have also been informed that 
a national level workshop was organized by the National Health Authori ty for all the 
States/UTs to check the misuse and irregularities under the PLI Scheme and necessary 
guidelines have also been issued. The Committee recommend that adequate action may 
be initiated so that the guidelines may be implemented in letter and spirit.”      

26 
 
2.25 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
 
“As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, steps have been taken to further strengthen 
the scheme and optimally utilise the allocated outlay. These include the following: 
(a) Projects for 5 more products have been approved recently.  
(b) Proposals have also been invited for 2 more products. 
(c) Legitimate representations of applicants have been considered with a view to resolve 
issues and to enable them to take optimal benefit of the scheme. 
(d) Proactive coordination is being effected with the approved applicants through the 
Project Management Agency with a view to encourage and facilitate raising of claims 
on a quarterly basis, as against annual raising of claims earlier. 
(e) Visa applications of foreign technical experts facilitated. 
As regards the reference to a national level workshop organised by the National Health 
Authority for all States/UTs, it is submitted that to the best of knowledge, no such workshop 
has been organised in connection with the PLI scheme.”  
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 16 & 17 
 
2.26 The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
“The Committee are deeply concerned about the tragic incident in a hospital in 
Ahmedabad, Gujarat, where a patient lost their life due to the insertion of cardiac stents 
without proper consent or adherence to medical procedures. While it is noted that an FIR 
has been lodged against the hospital, legal action has been initiated against the doctors, 
management, and owners, and the concerned me dical professionals have been 
suspended along with their licenses, the Committee emphasizes the need for stricter 
preventive measures. 
The Committee recommend that stringent action continue to be taken in similar cases in 
the future to ensure accountability. More importantly, the Department, in consultation with 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, must urgently formulate clear guid elines and 
protocols to prevent such incidents from recurring. These guidelines should establish 
strict procedural safeguards for informed consent, adherence to medical ethics, and 
monitoring mechanisms to ensure compliance in all healthcare institutions.” 
2.27.  
“The Committee have also been informed that a national level workshop was organized 
by the National Health Authority for all the States/UTs to check the misuse and 
irregularities under the scheme and necessary guidelines have also been issued. The 
Committee strongly recommend that the guidelines may be implemented in letter and 
spirit.      
2.28 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
“Under the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961, all matters relating to 
the medical profession and drugs standards are allocated to the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare. In respect of the matter of death of two patients after all eged performance 

27 
 
of angioplasty by Dr. Khyati Hospital, Ahmedabad, as intimated in the replies to points no. 23 
and 56 of the list of points for written replies sent vide Department of Pharmaceuticals’ OM 
F. no. 23003/2/2025 -IFD, dated 10.3.2025, the said Department had earlier informed as 
under: 
(a) New guidelines were issued for organising medical camps for hospitals listed under 
Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana Mukhyamantri Amritan 
(ABPMJAY-MA), which include mandatory prior information of the camp to the District 
Health Officer, mandatory presence of a medical officer from the government side, and 
no new enrolment of any kind in the camp. 
(b) A national level workshop was organised by the National Health Authority (NHA) for 
all States/UTs implementing AB-PMJAY to check the misuse and irregularities under 
the scheme, and necessary guidelines have also been issued. Also, various steps 
have been t aken by the State Health Agency, Gujarat to prevent such incidents in 
future. 
The Department of Health and Family Welfare has now further informed as follows: 
(a) The National Health Authority under the Department has instituted robust safeguards 
and accountability mechanisms under the Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan 
Arogya Yojana (AB PM -JAY) scheme and has adopted a zero -tolerance approach 
towards any form of misuse or unethical medical practice under it. Dedicated National 
and State Anti-Fraud Units are operational to detect and act on fraudulent activities by 
empanelled hospitals. These units employ both rule -based triggers and advanced 
artificial intelligence / machine language techniques, including image de -duplication, 
fuzzy logic and social network analysis,  to flag suspicious transactions. Based on 
these, desk and field audits are conducted, leading to stringent punitive actions 
wherever necessary. 
(b) To further institutionalise clinical and ethical oversight, the following State -level 
committees have been mandated:   
(i) Medical audit committee; 
(ii) Mortality and morbidity review committee; 
(iii) Claim review committee; and 
(iv) Whistleblower committee. 
(c) Significant efforts have been made to enhance technological safeguards and system 
transparency through the adoption of upgraded platforms — TMS 2.0, BIS 2.0 and 
HEM 2.0 — for real-time fraud detection, improved access control, and transparent 
claims proces sing. Over 23,000 hospitals have been linked to the Health Facility 
Registry and compliance with the Health Professional Registry has been made 
mandatory. 
(d) A national workshop was organised on 17.1.2025 with participation from all States and 
Union territories, focussing on strengthening fraud control mechanisms and digital 
systems. The adoption of the aforesaid upgraded platforms was emphasised for 
improved transparency, real-time fraud detection and access control. 
(e) A user management portal has been deployed to enforce secure access protocols, 
resulting in the removal of over 11 lakh inactive logins and geo -fencing of approvers 
to prevent misuse. States have been directed to immediately disable information 
technology access for hospitals found involved in serious misuse, and to act promptly 

28 
 
on system-generated alerts. An alert mechanism on the TMS platform now prompts 
State Health Agencies to initiate action on suspicious hospitals. 
(f) Guidelines have been revised to mandate that action be taken in such cases within 
seven days, followed by Secretary-level review to ensure follow-through. As of March 
2025, 9,361 hospitals have been flagged, of which 887 have been de-empanelled. 
(g) Fund release is now limited to compliance with the National Anti -Fraud Guidelines, 
including mortality audits, medical audits and monthly fraud reporting. Face 
authentication has been integrated into card creation, empanelment, claims and 
grievance modules. Auto-approved packages are being reviewed. 
(h) States have been asked to form Anti-Fraud Committees and adopt the Whistleblower 
Policy. Capacity-building of State Health Agencies, Third Party Administrators and 
public hospitals is done on an ongoing basis.  
The National Health Authority has stated that the above measures demonstrate that the 
Authority, in coordination with States, is actively enforcing anti-fraud guidelines to uphold the 
integrity of AB PM-JAY and that it remains committed to maintaining the highest standards 
of ethical medical care under the scheme and to further formulate clear and enforceable 
guidelines on informed consent, ethical medical practices, and institutional accountability, in 
line with the committee’s recommendation.”  
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 18 
 
2.29 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that the Department has informed them about the ceiling prices for 
coronary stents fixed and notified by the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
(NPPA), which currently stand at ₹10,509.79 for Bare Metal Stents (BMS) and ₹38,267.18 
for Drug Eluting Stents (DES), including metallic DES and Bioresorbable Vascular 
Scaffold (BVS)/Biodegradable Stents. All manuf acturers and marketers are required to 
adhere to these price caps while selling cardiac stents. 
However, the Committee are concerned about reports indicating that cardiac stents are 
still being sold at significantly higher prices in hospitals and the open market, raising 
serious questions about the enforcement of price controls and potential profitee ring by 
pharmaceutical companies. In light of the recent surge in medicine prices across various 
categories, including essential life-saving drugs, the Committee is particularly troubled by 
the possibility that patients are being burdened with excessive co sts, despite regulatory 
price ceilings. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department, in coordination with 
NPPA, take immediate and effective measures to ensure strict compliance with the 
prescribed ceiling prices for cardiac stents. A transparent and robust monitoring 
mechanism must be put in place to track pricing and prevent any overcharging by 
manufacturers, marketers, and healthcare institutions. Additionally, the Committee urges 
the Department to conduct a comprehensive review of the pricing trends of critical 
medical devices and medicines, including cardiac stents, to curb excessive profiteering 

29 
 
and ensure that patients have access to these life -saving interventions at genuinely 
affordable rates.” 
2.30 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
“NPPA fixed and notified ceiling prices for Bare Metal Stent (BMS) and Drug Eluting Stent 
(DES), including metallic DES and Bioresorbable Vascular Scaffold (BVS) /Biodegradable 
Stents. Effective from 1.4.2025, the ceiling prices are ₹10,692.69 for Bare Metal Stents 
(BMS) and ₹38,933.14 for Drug Eluting Stents (DES) including metallic DES and 
Bioresorbable Vascular Scaffold (BVS )/Biodegradable Stents. All 
manufactures/marketers are required to sell coronary stents within the ceiling price fixed 
by NPPA. 
Vide National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority notification S.O. 412(E), dated 
13.2.2017, institutions such as hospitals, nursing homes and clinics utilising coronary 
stents are required to mention specifically and separately the cost of the coronary stent, 
along with its brand name, name of the manufacturer, importer, batch number and any 
other details, in their billing to the patients or their representatives. 
NPPA has not received any complaint during last five years regarding overcharging for 
coronary stents.” 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 19 
2.31 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee expresses serious concern over the unchecked rise in prices of 
medicines that do not fall under the purview of the National List of Essential Medicines 
(NLEM). While price regulation under the NLEM ensures affordability for essential 
medicines, a significant number of life-saving and widely prescribed drugs remain outside 
this regulatory framework, leading to exorbitant pricing. This creates an undue financial 
burden on the common people, making critical healthcare unaffordable, particularly for 
lower-income households. 
The Committee strongly recommends that the Department of Pharmaceuticals, in 
coordination with the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) and the 
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA), take immediate steps to expand the 
scope of the  NLEM to include more essential and widely used medicines, particularly 
those required for chronic diseases, rare disorders, and critical care. The failure to 
regulate these medicines allows pharmaceutical companies to impose arbitrary pricing, 
making essential treatments unaffordable for vast sections of the population. 
The Committee further urges the Department to undertake a comprehensive review of 
the NLEM at regular intervals and ensure that the list reflects the evolving healthcare 
needs of the country. The arbitrary exclusion of essential medicines from price contro l 
must be addressed immediately. Any delay in expanding the NLEM would result in 
continued financial hardship for patients and compromise access to life -saving 
treatments. The Committee expects urgent action in this regard and seeks a detailed 
response from the Department at the earliest.” 

30 
 
 
2.32 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
 
“NLEM is released by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW ). The 
inclusion/exclusion of the drugs in NLEM is done based on the recommendation of the 
Standing National Committee on Medicines (SNCM) constituted by MoHFW under the 
chairpersonship of the Director General, Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and  
having on it all stakeholders and experts. The process of inclusion or deletion in NLEM is 
done by SNCM so constituted, from time to time, after comprehensive review to address the 
evolving healthcare needs of the country as arrived at through wide stakeholder consultation 
and expert opinion. Based on review by and the recommendations of SNCM as constituted 
by MoHFW, MoHFW issued the revised NLEM in September 2022. As per the NLEM 2022 
report, the criteria adopted for inclusion of medicines are as under: 
(a) The medicine should be approved/licensed in India. 
(b) The efficacy and safety profile of the medicine should be based on robust scientific 
evidence. 
(c) The medicine should be useful in disease which is a public health problem in India. 
(d) All medicines enlisted in National Health Programmes/National Disease Control 
Programmes are as such essential and hence included in the NLEM, 2022. 
(e) The medicine should be affordable to the community in the Indian context. 
(f) The medicine should be readily accessible at Primary, Secondary and Tertiary 
healthcare levels. 
(g) When more than one medicine are available from the same therapeutic class, 
preferably one prototype/ best suited medicine of that class to be included after due 
deliberation and careful evaluation of their relative safety, efficacy, availability and 
affordability. 
(h) Overall cost of therapy was considered and not just the unit cost of the medicine. 
(i) A Fixed Dose Combination (FDC) was generally not included unless the combination 
had unequivocally proven advantage over individual ingredients administered 
separately, in terms  of increasing efficacy, reducing adverse effects and/or 
improving compliance.” 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 20 
PRODUCTION LINKED INCENTIVE SCHEME FOR PROMOTING DOMESTIC 
MANUFACTURING FOR MEDICAL DEVICES (PLIMD) 
2.33. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“As regard the availability of small scanning machine and other Medical Devices in rural 
areas for examination of pregnant women etc. the Department has submitted that the 
National Health Policy, 2017 recommends free drugs and diagnostics in public hospitals 
and aims to improve the quality of diagnosis and treatment. Under the National Health 
Mission (NHM), the Ministry provides financial and technical support to the States/UTs to 
strengthen their healthcare system for the provision of accessible, affordable and quality 
healthcare to all the people. The Ministry focuses on the availability of drugs and 

31 
 
diagnostics at all levels of healthcare as recommended in the National Essential 
Diagnostic List (NEDL) and Free Diagnostic Service Initiative (FDSI). Availability of 
diagnostics leads to a reduction in out-of-pocket expenditure of the patients. The Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare had launched the FDSI programme under the National 
Health Mission in 2015 to provide accessible and affordable pathological and radiological 
diagnostics services closer to the community, which in turn reduces the out -of-pocket 
expenditure. In this regard the Committee desire to know whether the provisions of 
National Health Policy, 2017 are good in paper only and whether practically the benefits 
of the Policy are being delivered to the common man practically also.” 
2.34 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
“The Department of Health and Family Welfare has informed that under the National 
Health Mission, financial support is provided to States and Union territories for provision 
of free essential medicines, based on needs identified in their respective Programm e 
Implementation Plans. To standardise access, the Essential Medicines List (EML) was 
introduced in the year 2012 and revised in the year 2022, outlining the number of essential 
drugs to be made available at each level of public health facility. States ar e expected to 
notify their facility-wise Essential Drug Lists in alignment with the EML issued under the 
Indian Public Health Standards. 
In parallel, the Free Diagnostics Services Initiative (FDSI), launched in the year 2015 and 
revised in the year 2019, has significantly expanded access to free diagnostic services 
across public health facilities. This initiative mandates availability of 14 tests at Ayushman 
Arogya Mandir (AAM) Sub Centres, 63 at AAM Primary Health Centres, 97 at Community 
Health Centres, 111 at Sub Divisional Hospitals and 134 at District Hospitals, thereby 
reducing high out -of-pocket expenditure incurred by patients on dia gnostics. Currently, 
about 60% of the recommended diagnostics under FDSI are available at public health 
facilities. Further, the challenges associated with availability and accessibility of 
diagnostics are being addressed in various forums for improving the diagnostics 
infrastructure in the country. In this connection, a diagnostic module has been developed 
by the Department of Health and Family Welfare in the existing information technology 
platform for the Drugs and Vaccine Distribution Management System,  with a view to 
mitigate supply chain bottlenecks in the availability of diagnostic reagents and 
consumables.  
The National Survey Sample Office data from the 71st round in 2014 and the 75 th round 
in 2017 show increase in utilisation of care at public health facilities from 28.3% to 32.5% 
in rural areas and from 21.2% to 26.2% in urban areas. Further, out-of-pocket expenditure 
as a share of total health expenditure has declined consistently over time, from 62.6% in 
the financial year (FY) 2014-15 to 39.4% in FY2021-22.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 22 
Strict Implementation of Drug Regulations to Curb Spurious and Adulterated Medicines 
2.37 The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
“The Committee notes that the manufacturing, sale, and distribution of drugs in India are 
regulated under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, and the Drugs Rules, 1945. The 
regulatory framework operates through a system of licensing and inspection carried ou t 
by the State Licensing Authorities (SLAs) under the respective State Governments. As 
per recent amendments to the Drugs Rules, 1945, it is now mandatory for a 
manufacturing establishment to be inspected jointly by Drugs Inspectors of the Central 
and Stat e Governments before granting a manufacturing license. Additionally, 
manufacturing premises must adhere to Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) as 
outlined in Schedule 'M' of the Rules. These GMP requirements have recently been 
revised to further strengthen quality control measures. However, it has been noted that 
the deadline for compliance with the revised Schedule ‘M’ has been extended until 
December 31, 2025. The Committee seeks to understand the rationale behind this 
extension and emphasizes the need for  the industry to implement the updated Good 
Manufacturing Practices at the earliest. 
Despite these regulatory provisions, the Committee remains deeply concerned about the 
persistent issue of spurious and adulterated drugs circulating in the market, posing a 
serious threat to public health and safety. The Committee strongly emphasizes that mere 
amendments to regulations are not enough unless their implementation is strict, uniform, 
and effectively monitored across all States and Union Territories. There is an urgent need 
to ensure full compliance with these regulatory provisions, particularly in high-risk regions 
where counterfeit drugs are prevalent. 
In this regard, the Committee strongly recommends that the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 
1940, and the Drugs Rules, 1945, be enforced rigorously across the country to eliminate 
the menace of spurious and adulterated drugs. The Department of Pharmaceuticals must 
work in close coordination with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to ensure strict 
monitoring, timely inspections, and swift punitive action against violators. The Committee 
recommends that the guidelines issued by the Central Drugs Standard Contr ol 
Organization (CDSCO) on Good Distribution Practices (GDP) released on 4 th April 2024 
be made legally enforceable. This will strengthen the quality standards across the 
pharmaceutical industry by ensuring proper handling, storage, and tracking of drugs 
throughout the supply chain. Furthermore, the Committee recommends that the 
Department should conduct a detailed review of the situation taking into account (i) the 
number of inspections conducted, (ii) violations detected, (iii) actions taken against non -
compliant manufacturers, and (iv) additional measures planned to strengthen 
enforcement mechanisms.”  
 
2.38 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
Under the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961, all matters relating 
to drugs standards are allocated to the  Department of Health and Family Welfare. The 

33 
 
said Department has informed that on 28.12.2023, the Government of India notified 
revised Schedule M requirements, whereby the requirements relating to “Good 
Manufacturing Practices” were upgraded to “Good Manufacturing Practices and 
Requirements of Plan and Equipment for Pharmaceutical Products”. For purposes of the 
revised requirements, manufacturers were divided into two categories, namely, large 
manufacturers with annual turnover of over ₹ 250 crore, and small and medium 
manufacturers with annual turnov er of up to ₹ 250 crore, who were given timeframe 
timeframe of six months and 12 months respectively to comply. For the large drug 
manufacturers, the revised Schedule M has come into effect from 29.6.2024. 
Considering representation made by small and medium manufacturers for extending the 
timeframe to enable improvement in infrastructure, training of personnel and arranging of 
financial resources, the Central Government amended the Drugs Rules, 1945 vide its 
notification dated 28.12.2023. Under the amended provisions, vide notification dated 
11.2.2025, small and medium manufacturers have been given a timeframe of three 
months from 11.2.2025 to submit to the Central License Approving Authority, in specified 
form, their plan for upgrade and for such manufacturers who submit the said details, for 
the implementation timeframe to be extended till 31.12.2025. 
For uniformity in the administration of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, the Central 
Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) as the Central drugs regulator  
coordinates activities of State Drug Control Organisations and provides expert advice 
through the Drugs Consultative Committee meetings held with the State Drugs 
Controllers. 
Further, drugs inspectors from CDSCO and State Drugs Controllers are trained from time 
to time to update their knowledge on legal provisions on spurious, adulterated, 
misbranded and Not of Standard Quality (NSQ) drugs and the procedure adopted for 
launch of prosecution and court proceedings. 
The proposal regarding guidelines on Good Distribution Practices for pharmaceutical 
products was deliberated upon in a meeting of the Drug Consultative Committee held on 
19.6.2024. As recommended by the said committee, the draft guidelines on Good 
Distribution Practices for pharmaceutical products have been posted on the website of 
CDSCO for comments from stakeholders. The comments received are under examination 
for further review by the committee.  
In order to assess regulatory compliance of drug manufacturing premises in the country, 
CDSCO, in collaboration with State regulators, initiated risk -based inspections of drug 
manufacturing and testing firms in December 2022. So far , 905 units have been 
inspected, resulting in 694 actions being taken. Depending on the severity of non -
compliance, the actions taken include orders to stop production, orders to stop testing, 
suspension or cancellation of licence and issuance of warning or notice to show cause. 
This initiative has provided valuable insights into the ground reality of manufacturing 
practices and has led to relevant corrective actions, resulting in noticeable improvements 
in the regulatory framework.  
Further, as part of surveillance and monitoring activities, drugs inspectors draw drug 
samples from the supply chain at regular frequency for quality checks. In case the sample 

34 
 
is found to be Not of Standard Quality (NSQ), spurious, adulterated or misbranded, 
actions are initiated as per the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the 
rules made thereunder. 
The list of drugs of various companies that are declared NSQ, spurious, misbranded or 
adulterated by the Central Drugs Testing Laboratories are regularly uploaded on the 
website of CDSCO (www.cdsco.gov.in) under the heading “Drug Alert”.  
DoHFW has further informed that as per information received from the Drugs Controllers 
of various States and Union territories, the number of drug samples reported NSQ, 
spurious or adulterated and the enforcement actions taken by the Drugs Controllers 
during the last three financial years are as under: 
Financial 
year 
Number of 
drugs 
samples 
tested 
Number of 
drugs 
samples 
declared 
NSQ 
Number of 
drugs samples 
declared 
spurious or 
adulterated 
Number of 
prosecutions 
launched for 
manufacturing, sale 
and distribution of 
spurious or 
adulterated drugs 
2021-22 88,844 2,545 379 592 
2022-23 96,713 3,053 424 663 
2023-24 1,06,150 2,988 282 604 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 23 
2.39 The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
“The Committee has been apprised that out of 4,57,910 drug samples tested, as many 
as 13,735 samples were found not of standard quality, and 1,547 samples were declared 
spurious or adulterated. Further, 2,516 prosecutions were initiated for the manufacture,  
sale, and distribution of spurious/adulterated drugs, leading to the arrest of 1,228 persons 
during the period 2019 -20 to 2023 -24.The Committee is deeply perturbed by these 
figures, which expose the alarming prevalence of spurious and substandard drugs in the 
market. While the detection of non -standard and spurious drugs is a serious concern in 
itself, the Committee finds it equally disturbing that the number of prosecutions and 
arrests is disproportionately low compared to the number of substandard and s purious 
drug samples identified. This indicates weak enforcement, inadequate punitive action, 
and possible lapses in regulatory oversight, which ultimately compromise public health 
and safety. 
The Committee is of the firm opinion that mere identification of spurious drugs is not 
enough—strict legal action must follow, including swift prosecutions, stricter penalties, 
and immediate shutdowns of non -compliant manufacturers. The current level of 
enforcement is grossly insufficient, and much stronger efforts are needed by the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to 
eliminate the production and distribution of counterfeit and adulterated drugs. 

35 
 
In this regard, the Committee recommends that the Department and the Ministry take 
urgent and concrete steps to: 1. Enhance surveillance and inspections across all 
manufacturing units, particularly in high -risk regions. 2. Expedite legal proceedings and 
ensure maximum penalties for those involved in the production and distribution of 
spurious drugs. 3. Increase inter -agency coordination, including collaboration with law 
enforcement agencies, to dismantle networks engaged in counterfeit drug production. 4. 
Strengthen penalties under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act to serve as a deterrent against 
the manufacture and sale of substandard drugs. 5. Launch a national awareness 
campaign to educate consumers and healthcare professionals about identifying 
counterfeit medicines and reporting violations. 
The Committee further desires to be apprised of the specific measures taken to 
strengthen enforcement and regulatory oversight in this regard.” 
 
2.40 The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
 
“Under the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961, all matters relating 
to drugs standards are allocated to the Department of Health and Family Welfare. The 
said Department has informed that as quality is the first and foremost priority, t he 
Department and the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) are engaged 
continuously to address challenges and strengthen the drug enforcement system in the 
country. It has further informed that CDSCO and the Department have taken several 
measures to address the quality, safety and efficacy of medicines, as described below: 
(a) In order to assess regulatory compliance of drug manufacturing premises in the 
country, CDSCO, in collaboration with State drugs regulators, initiated risk -based 
inspections of drug manufacturing and testing firms in December 2022. Depending 
on the severit y of non -compliance, the actions taken include orders to stop 
production, orders to stop testing, suspension or cancellation of licence, and 
issuance of warning or notice to show cause.  
(b) The Central Government, vide its notification dated 28.12.2023, amended the 
Drugs Rules, 1945 to revise Schedule M to the said rules, which relates to Good 
Manufacturing Practices and requirements of premises, plant and equipment for 
pharmaceutical products. The revised Schedule came  into effect from 29.6.2024 
for drug manufacturers with annual turnover of over ₹ 250 crore. Vide notification 
dated 11.2.2025, manufacturers with annual turnover of up to ₹ 250 crore have 
been given time till 31.12.2025 to comply. 
(c) To require manufacturers to print or affix on packaging labels of top-300 brands of 
drug formulation products bar code or Quick Response (QR) code that stores data 
or information legible with software application, to facilitate authentication, the 
Drugs Rules, 1945 were amended through notification dated 17.11.2022, which 
came into force on 1.8.2023, to provide for such printing or affixation in respect of 
the drug formulation products specified in Schedule H2 to the said rules. On 
18.1.2022, the Drugs Rule s, 1945 were amended to provide that every active 
pharmaceutical ingredient manufactured or imported in India shall bear QR code 
on its label at each level of packaging that stores data or information, readable 
with software application to facilitate track ing and tracing. Such stored data or 

36 
 
information shall include the minimum particulars, including unique product 
identification code, batch number, manufacturing date, expiry date, etc. 
(d) On 11.2.2020, the Drugs Rules, 1945 were amended to provide that with effect 
from 1.3.2021, along with the manufacturer, any marketer who sells or distributes 
any drug shall be responsible for the quality of that drug as well as other regulatory 
compliances under said rules. 
(e) The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 was amended to provide for stringent 
penalties for manufacture of spurious and adulterated drugs. Certain offences 
were also made cognizable and non-bailable. 
(f) For speedy disposal of cases relating to offences under the Drugs and Cosmetics 
Act, 1940, State and Union Territory Governments have set up special courts.  
(g) To ensure efficacy of drugs, the Drugs Rules, 1945 have been amended to provide 
that applicants for grant of manufacturing license shall submit along with their 
application the result of bioequivalence study of oral dosage form of certain drugs.  
(h) The Drugs Rules, 1945 have been amended to make it mandatory that applicants 
submit to the State Licensing Authority evidence of stability, safety of excipients, 
etc. before such authority grants manufacturing license.  
(i) The number of sanctioned posts in CDSCO has increased significantly over the 
last ten years. 
(j) For uniformity in the administration of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, the 
Central regulator coordinates activities of State Drug Control Organisations and 
provides expert advice through the Drugs Consultative Committee meetings held 
with the State Drugs Controllers. 
(k) The Central Government organises regular residential, regional training and 
workshops on Good Manufacturing Practices for officials of CDSCO and State 
Drug Regulatory Authorities. Over the last two financial years, CDSCO has trained 
43,405 persons.” 
  

37 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

38 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Observation/Recommendation Nos. 1 and 2 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION VIS-A-VIS UTILISATION DURING 2022-23, 2023-24 AND 2025-
26    
  
5.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
 “The Committee note that the BE of the Department for the financial year 2022-23 was 
₹ 2244.15 crore. The BE was enhanced to ₹3160.06 crore in the year 2023-24 and the 
BE was further enhanced to ₹4089.95 crore and yet further enhanced to ₹6920.20 
crore. As regard the reasons for increasing trend in the BE of the Department, the 
Committee have been apprised that some of the new schemes launched by the 
Department during the period namely Development of Pharmaceutical Industry, 
Production Linked Schemes (PLIs ) and Strengthening of Medical Device Industry 
(SMDI) and due to provisions being made in the BE for the respective years resulted in 
enhancement of budgetary allocation for the schemes under the Department. The 
Committee are of the view that with the enha nced demand for allocation of funds and 
also enhanced allocation of funds it becomes imperative on the part of the Department 
to optimally utilize the allocated funds. The Committee desire to know that with the 
introduction/launching of the new schemes, what measures the Department has put in 
place to successfully run those schemes. The Committee may be apprised accordingly. 
 
The Committee note that the BE of the Department for the year 2023-24 was ₹3160.06 
crore which was reduced to 2697.96 crore. Similarly, the BE for the year 2024-25 was 
₹4089.95 crore which was again reduced to ₹3387.96 crore and BE for the year 2025-
26 was ₹6920.20 crore which has again been reduced to ₹5268.7 crore. As regard this 
reduction in the BE of the Department the Committee have been apprised that expected 
release under some schemes could not be made due to lesser demand in infrastructure 
schemes because of issues in tendering process, environmental clearances etc. non -
fulfilment of targeted achievements to claim incentives etc. These were the primary 
reasons for which the budget had to be reduced at RE stage during FY 2023 -24 and 
FY 2024-25. The Committee are of the view that the reasons cited by the Department 
are well within the administrative control of the Department itself. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should initiate immediate steps to overcome 
issues related to tend ering process, environmental clearances etc. and ensure that 
such issues does not hinder the Department from higher allocation of funds.” 
  
  

39 
 
 
 
6.        The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
 “As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the Department has taken steps to 
overcome issues related to tendering process, environmental clearances, etc. and to 
run schemes better. The following measures and improvements made as a result are 
submitted in this regard: 
(a) To ensure proper budget utilisation, advance planning and disbursement is 
being done with a view to ensure timely release of funds, quarterly expenditure targets 
are fixed to prevent last minute expenditure rush, monthly/quarterly financial monitoring 
meetings are being held to assess fund utilisation and address bottlenecks if any, fund 
allocation is linked with the actual progress and expenditure trends to avoid over -
estimation. Further, progress on this is monitored on a weekly basis with all programme 
divisions and the Integrated Finance Division. As a result, the Department could release 
and spend 93.6% of the RE Budget in 2024-25, which was higher than in the preceding 
financial years. 
(b) To strengthen outreach for getting more applications under schemes to enable 
utilisation, in addition to publishing notices inviting applications in the newspaper and 
the website of the Department, social media handles of relevant organisations under 
the Department, other relevant Government Ministries, Departments and organisations 
as well as relevant industry associations are now being leveraged. 
(c) Meetings are held regularly with Project Management Agencies (PMA), State 
Implementing Agencies, scheme implementing agencies and scheme beneficiaries 
and, where necessary, site visits are undertaken by officers of the Department / PMA 
to monitor the progress of schemes, expedite implementation and resolve issues.  
(d) To institutionally and sustainably enhance programme management capabilities 
in the Department by avoiding fragmentation of project management across various 
schemes, a dedicated new scheme named “Scheme of Programme Management” for 
the five -year perio d beginning with the financial year 2026 -27 has been approved. 
Under this, a pool of domain -specific experts, technical consultants and Young 
Professionals would be formed to create suitable capacities to support various 
Divisions of the Department, includ ing a Management Team for professional 
management and technical guidance and oversight of the pooled resources. This will 
help ensure efficient resource utilisation, timely implementation and effective 
monitoring under various initiatives and facilitate sectoral expertise, optimise resource 
utilisation by identifying gaps and overlaps or duplication and facilitate review and 
appraisal of schemes. 
(e) Under the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) schemes and the Strengthening of 
Medical Device Industry umbrella scheme, the Department, through the Project 
Development Cell (PDC) mechanism, is handholding applicants to facilitate resolution 
of issues related to commissioning of projects, as a result of which various issues such 
as land allotment, Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organisation (PESO) license, 
approval of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO), environmental 
clearances, etc. have been resolved.  

40 
 
(f) Under the Promotion of Research and Innovation in Pharma MedTech sector 
(PRIP) scheme, a consulting firm with demonstrated global and domestic experience 
in both pharma -medtech and research domains was onboarded in January 2025 as 
PMA to develop the st rategy. The Department undertook extensive stakeholder 
consultation to gather feedback, suggestions and potential project pipeline information, 
analyse the same in-depth.  Based on these consultations and feedback, the scheme 
was amend and its guidelines r evised, with a view to enhance the impact of the 
scheme. As a result of such initiatives, high number of proposals (710) has been 
received in response to the call for proposals and work is under way with a view to 
ensure that selection of projects, complet ion of requisite formalities and release of 
funds to industry and startups is done within the current financial year. Further, under 
the component for support to the National Institutes of Pharmaceutical Education and 
Research for setting up Centres of Exc ellence, the institutes have been asked to 
ensure industry participation before taking up projects, with a view to ensure relevance 
of projects to industry. 
(g) Under the Scheme for Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks, all three State 
Implementing Agencies have drawn up Program Evaluation and Review Technique 
(PERT) charts, with a view to ensure timely implementation. Further, the long-pending 
environment clearance for the proposed bulk drug park in Himachal Pradesh has been 
obtained, enabling progress on this project. 
(h) Under the scheme for Strengthening of Pharmaceutical Industry, extensive 
outreach has been done in partnership with industry and drugs regulators across States 
through webinars to elicit proposals, resulting in approval of 192 projects under the 
Revamped Pharmaceutical Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme. Moreover, 
system of joint inspections by the Central and State drugs regulators has been put in 
place, with a view to ensure timely certification of compliance with WHO-GMP norms.  
(i) Under the Promotion of Medical Device Parks scheme, all required clearances 
have been obtained by State Implementing Agencies (SIAs) and major tenders for 
construction of common infrastructure facility (CIF) buildings have been awarded. This 
has resulted in actual allotment of land to 194 manufacturing units in the approved 
medical device parks and 34 units have commenced construction of their plants. 
Further, tenders for equipment to be installed in CIF buildings are at different stages of 
procurement. Thus, available funds are now being utilised in an unhindered manner to 
ensure their optimal utilisation.” 
  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 

41 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 5 
 
PRADHAN MANTRI BHARTIYA JANAUSHADHI PARIYOJANA (PMBJP) 
 
Expansion of Janaushadhi Kendras (JAKs) 
 
11.      The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
 “The Committee note that while the Department has reported the establishment of 
15,000 Jan Aushadhi Kendras (KAKs) as of 31.01.2025, their distribution across the 
country remains uneven, particularly in the Northeastern States and Union Territories.  A 
closer examination of the state-wise data reveals that certain regions have a significantly 
lower number of JAKs, with only 9 in Andaman & Nicobar, 2 in Ladakh, 1 in Lakshadweep, 
56 in Manipur, 25 in Meghalaya, 15 in Mizoram, 22 in Nagaland, 12 in Sikkim and 2 9 in 
Tripura.  Given the objective of providing affordable medicines to all, the Committee 
believes that this distribution pattern needs urgent attention. 
Furthermore, considering India’s large population of over 1.4 billion people, the current 
total of 15,000 JAKs translates to approximately one Kendra per 93,000 people, which 
may not be sufficient to meet the healthcare needs, especially in rural and remote areas.  
The Committee finds that there is no clear assessment of the actual number of JAKs 
required to adequately serve the population, particularly in underserved regions with 
geographical challenges. Additionally, the absence of a comprehensive expansi on 
strategy for JAKs in such areas suggests the needs for a more proactive approach by the 
Department. 
In light of these observations, the Committee recommends an immediate and structured 
expansion of the JAK network, with a special focus on States and UTs where their 
presence is minimal. The Department should undertake feasibility studies, demand 
assessments and consultations with stakeholders to determine the optimal number and 
location of additional Kendras. The Committee urges the Department to formulate a time-
bound action plan ensuring that every district has an adequate number of Kendras, taking 
into account population density, healthcare access and regional challenges.” 
 
12.      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
 
 “The Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana scheme has an entrepreneur-driven 
model for opening of JAKs and expansion of the JAK network. Under this, applications are 
invited online through the scheme’s website from individual entrepreneurs, non -
governmental organisations, societies, trusts, firms, private companies, etc. Wi th a view to 
proactively expand the network, including in remoter and less developed areas of the country, 
a proactive, timebound expansion strategy is being pursued as under:  
(d) Pursuant to the announcement made by the Hon’ble Prime Minister in his 
Independence Day 2023 speech, a target to increase the number of JAKs opened in 
the country to 25,000 is being pursued in a phased manner, with phase -wise targets 

42 
 
being 10,000 JAKs by March 2024, 15,000 by March 2025, 20,000 by March 2026 
and 25,000 by March 2027. Against these targets, the achievements so far have been 
11,261 by March 2024, 15,403 by March 2025 and 17,610 by November 2025. 
Further, online applicati ons are invited on a standing basis from all districts of the 
country through the scheme website (www.janaushadhi.gov.in) and in the processing 
of applications received, districts having less coverage are given special focus.  
(e) Keeping in view population density, healthcare access and regional challenges, the 
following measures have been taken to ensure opening of JAKs in different parts of 
the country: 
(iv) One-time incentive of ₹2 lakh is provided to outlets opened in 112 aspirational 
districts, the North-Eastern States, Himalayan areas and Island territories, as 
support towards furniture, computers, refrigerators and other fixtures. This is in 
addition to  the incentive of 20% of the monthly purchases made by JAK 
owners, subject to a monthly ceiling of ₹20,000 and meeting certain conditions 
such as maintaining stock of specified medicines, for which all JAK owners are 
eligible. 
(v) State Governments have been requested from time to time to provide rent-free 
space for opening JAKs in government hospitals, community health centres 
and primary health centres, and to create awareness about the scheme. So far, 
a total of 2,397 JAKs have b een opened in public health facilities and other 
government centres. 
(vi) To increase the number of JAKs in rural areas, the cooperative sector has been 
partnered with for opening JAKs through Primary Agricultural Credit Societies 
(PACS) and other cooperative societies. Till 30.11.2025, a total of 804 JAKs 
have been opened throu gh PACS and other cooperative societies across the 
country.  
As a result, the number and proportion of rural JAKs has grown to 9,475 and 54% 
respectively. 
(f) Sustainable expansion of JAK network needs to be driven by higher volume of sales 
to increase their viability and attractiveness to entrepreneurs. To this end, the following 
steps have been taken to make citizens aware of the features and benefits of the 
scheme and its products: 
(viii) Awareness campaigns: PMBI conducts awareness campaigns in coordination 
with bodies and platforms such as the Central Bureau of Communication, PIB, 
MyGov and MY Bharat, in various modes such as print, television, radio, 
social media platforms, outdoor hoardings, community engagement, etc.  
(ix) Interactive messages/calls : Outreach and citizen engagement are also 
pursued through WhatsApp chatbot and outbound calls to inform citizens 
regarding the quality of Janaushadhi products and the large savings that 
accrue from purchase of the same from nearest JAK.  
(x) Jan Aushadhi Week : Pursuant to the Hon’ble Prime Minister’s directions in 
2019, Jan Aushadhi Week is celebrated every year in the first week of March 
during which special campaigns such as public rallies, health camps, 
seminars in pharmacy colleges, children engagement pro grammes, etc. are 
conducted across the nation to educate citizens, healthcare professionals and 
other stakeholders about the benefits of Janaushadhi generic medicines. The 

43 
 
7th Janaushadhi Diwas 2025 was observed on a substantially enhanced scale 
this year with participation of nine Union Ministers, two Chief Ministers, 156 
Members of Parliament and 70 other State dignitaries. Events were held 
across 26 States and Union territories, at 231 locations, with a total of 32,431 
participants. During the week, #JanAushadhi witnessed 996 mentions 
generating around 64,600 views and an estimated reach of 2.3 crore and 
#JanAushadhiDiwas was trending at number 3 in India on X. These 
campaigns aim to counter any incorrect perception about poor quality of 
generic medicines while emphasising the cost benefits of these medicines. 
The efforts taken to maintain the quality of Janaushadhi products are also 
highlighted in these campaigns. 
(xi) Directions for prescribing generic medicines: The Department of Health and 
Family Welfare has issued directions to all Central Government hospitals and 
Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) wellness centres to prescribe 
drugs with generic name. 
(xii) Messages from eminent persons : Audio/video messages from well -known 
persons such as public representatives and eminent doctors are disseminated 
on social media platforms to highlight the benefits of Janaushadhi medicines 
and dispel myths associated with respect to their quality.  
(xiii) Public engagement programme in rural areas : To educate citizens in local 
languages/dialects, publicity is also done through health camps, nukkad-
natak, audiovisual display at Common Service Centres and public 
engagement workshops in association with local JAKs in rural areas. 
(xiv) In order to promote Janaushadhi products, an app namely Janaushadhi 
Sugam has been developed, which is a convenient tool for the general public 
to obtain information on Janaushadhi generic products and locate nearby 
JAKs to purchase these products.” 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 13 
 
PROMOTION OF BULK DRUG PARKS 
 
14.      The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
 “ The Committee note that the scheme for Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks was approved 
way back in the year 2020 and the tenure of the Scheme is from the year 2020 -21 to 
2025-26. The objective of the scheme is stated to be to promote Bulk Drug Parks in the 
country for providing easy access to world class common infrastructure facility to Bulk 
Drug Unit located in the Parks to significantly bring down the manufacturing cost of Bulk 
Drugs and to make our Country selfreliant in Bulk Drugs by increasing the 

44 
 
competitiveness of the domestic Bulk Drug industry. For this purpose 03 States namely 
Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh have been selected and construction 
activities are stated to be in progress in these 03 States. However, the Committee regret 
to note that out of the 03 States selected for promotion of Bulk Drug Parks 02 states 
namely Gujarat and Himachal Pradesh are lagging behind and Development of the Bulk 
Drug Parks in these States is behind scheduled owing to delay in environmental 
clearances and change in location of Bulk Drug Parks etc. Under these circumstances 
the 03 States have submitted revised timeline upto March, 2026 for commissioning of 
Bulk Drug Parks. The Committee recommend that the Department should work in close 
cooperation with the State Government of Gujarat and Himachal Pradesh to resolve the 
issues which are hindering the development/construction work of Bulk Drug Parks in 
these States. The Committee also recommend that the issues be resolved expeditiously 
and vigorously p ursued with the State Governments. The Committee also recommend 
that the Bulk Drug Parks may be given a concrete shape and should be made ready by 
March, 2026 invariably. The Committee would like to be apprised by the steps taken in 
this regard by the Department.” 
 
15.      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
 
 “As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the Department is working in close 
cooperation with the State Governments concerned, with a view to expeditiously resolve 
issues that hinder progress. Steps taken in this regard are as under: 
(g) Under the Scheme for Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks, all three State Implementing 
Agencies have drawn up PERT charts, with a view to ensure completion by March 
2027. The Department of Expenditure has been requested to extend the scheme 
period by one year beyond March 2026. 
(h) The long-pending environment clearance for the proposed bulk drug park in Himachal 
Pradesh has been obtained, enabling progress on this project.  
(i) A format has been prepared to capture the physical and financial progress of the bulk 
drug park and the same has been shared with State Implementing Agencies (SIA). 
On receipt of the Monthly Progress Report (MPR), the same is reviewed by the 
Department to understand the progress and any bottlenecks.  
(j) The Department has been conducting monthly review meetings with SIAs under the 
chairpersonship of the Joint Secretary concerned for monitoring physical and financial 
progress. During these interactions, the Department has been extending support to 
SIAs in expediting regulatory approvals, in coordination with the Ministries concerned.  
(k) The Department / project management agency undertakes periodic site visits to the 
park sites to review progress with the representatives of the State Government, with 
a view to ensure the following: 
(ix) Necessary regulatory approvals and clearances required for the Park;  
(x) Release and award of tenders of approved CIF projects; 
(xi) Project execution within the Scheme tenure; and 
(xii) Fund utilisation. 

45 
 
(l) DO letters have been addressed to the Additional Chief Secretaries / Principal 
Secretaries concerned in the State Governments, apprising them of the progress and 
requesting expediting of progress.” 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 14 
 
17.      The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
 “ As regard Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks the Committee have noted with deep concern 
that for the State of Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh the Central grant 
and the State fund released is ₹ 437.10 crore, ₹ 260.54 crore and 357.30 crore 
respectively however, the total fund utilized till January, 2025 is ₹ 251.63 crore, ₹ 47.23 
crore and ₹ 46.36 crore whereas, the target utilisation amount for availing second 
instalment is stated to be ₹ 327.83 crore, ₹ 195.40 crore and 267.98 crore. Under these 
circumstances the 03 States would not be able to avail the second instalment of the funds. 
The Committee deplores the same and such clarification from the Department for slow 
pace of expenditure by the 03 States. The Committee recommend that immediate 
attention may be paid for accelerating the pace of funds utilisation by the selected States 
and at the same time analyze the reasons for the same.” 
 
18.      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
 
 “The pace of expenditure has been slow on account of various factors. The same are 
summarised below: 
(e) Bulk drug manufacturing is categorised as a red category industry under environmental 
regulations, on account of their polluting nature and risk to the environment. Accordingly, 
environmental clearance (EC) is a prerequisite for commencing construction wor k. 
Following receipt of approvals to set up bulk drug parks, the respective State 
Governments applied for EC in FY2022-23. 
(f) In Gujarat, EC was delayed by 16 months owing to the recommendations of the Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC) to relocate the proposed 60 
million litre per day marine discharge pipeline and EC was finally granted to the park only 
in February 2024. 
(g) In Andhra Pradesh, relocation of Bulk Drug Park from Kakinada to Nakkapalli due to 
requirement of partial denotification of Special Economic Zone land delayed the project 
by 12 months. Following this, change to the new location was approved by the Scheme 
Steering Committee (SSC) in December 2023. Thereafter, EC for the project was 
received in March 2024. However, the State Government decided to accommodate an 
Integrated Steel Plant in the neighbourhood of the approved bulk drug park site and 
proposed modification of boundary at Nakkapalli, releasing 706.26 acres of existing land 
while adding 783.74 acres of new land. In -principle approval to the same was accorded 
by SSC on 23.6.2025. 

46 
 
(h) In Himachal Pradesh, EC was granted on 25.9.2025. The delay is primarily attributable 
to the complex terrain, seismic vulnerability and erosion-prone nature of the site. The draft 
Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) report was submitted to MoEFCC by the St ate 
Government in November 2023. Thereafter, the terms of reference for the EIA report were 
issued by MoEFCC in August 2024. Based on these, public hearing took place in 
November 2024 and final EIA report was submitted to MoEFCC by the State Government 
in January 2025. Following subsequent presentation by the State Government to 
MoEFCC, a site visit was conducted by MoEFCC’s Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) in 
April 2025. EAC recommended phased development, slope restrictions and soil and 
water conservation  plans at the site. Based on these recommendations, the State 
Government, after complying with the suggestions, submitted a revised master plan, 
considering which MoEFCC finally accorded EC in September 2025. 
 
As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the Department has analysed the reasons for the 
pace of fund utilisation and has taken the following steps to accelerate the pace of fund utilisation 
by the selected States: 
(g) Under the Scheme for Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks, all three State Implementing 
Agencies have drawn up PERT charts, with a view to ensure completion by March 2027. 
The Department of Expenditure has been requested to extend the scheme period by one 
year beyond March 2026. 
(h) The long-pending environment clearance for the proposed bulk drug park in Himachal 
Pradesh has been obtained, enabling progress on this project.  
(i) A format has been prepared to capture the physical and financial progress of the bulk 
drug park and the same has been shared with State Implementing Agencies (SIA). On 
receipt of the Monthly Progress Report (MPR), the same is reviewed by the Department 
to understand the progress and any bottlenecks.  
(j) The Department has been conducting monthly review meetings with SIAs under the 
chairpersonship of the Joint Secretary concerned for monitoring physical and financial 
progress. During these interactions, the Department has been extending support to SIAs 
in expediting regulatory approvals, in coordination with the Ministries concerned.  
(k) The Department / project management agency undertakes periodic site visits to the park 
sites to review progress with the representatives of the State Government, with a view to 
ensure the following: 
(xiii) Necessary regulatory approvals and clearances required for the Park;  
(xiv) Release and award of tenders of approved CIF projects; 
(xv) Project execution within the Scheme tenure; and 
(xvi) Fund utilisation. 
(l) DO letters have been addressed to the Additional Chief Secretaries / Principal Secretaries 
concerned in the State Governments, apprising them of the progress and requesting 
expediting of progress.” 
 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter – I of the Report) 

47 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 21 
 
PRODUCTION LINKED INCENTIVE SCHEME FOR PROMOTING DOMESTIC 
MANUFACTURING FOR MEDICAL DEVICES (PLIMD) 
 
20.      The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
 “As regard to PLIMD scheme the Department has submitted that the commencement of 
projects under Category-A of the scheme were delayed due to COVID -19 and pending 
regulatory approvals such as manufacturing licences. The revision in Scheduled 
Commercial Operation Date (SCOD), by the Empowered Committee, in respect of these 
applicants was made because of delays in launching of Greenfield Projects due to 
COVID-19 and pending regulatory approvals such as manufacturing licences. Further, 
thirteen Category -B appl icants with 110 products have their approval in the month of 
February and August 2023 and September 2024. The projects of these applicants are 
under implementation with production expected to commence from FY 2024-25 onwards. 
In view of the delay in the commissioning of Category –A applicant projects and on 
account of approvals granted in FY 2023-24 and FY 2024-25 for Category-B applicants, 
the incentive allocated for 2022 -23 could not be fully utilized despite the investments 
being made by the applicants. This unclaimed incentive, as per the existing scheme 
Guidelines, cannot be carried over and could remain unutilized. Due to the delay in the 
scheduled commercial operation of projects owing to COVID -19, and regulatory 
approvals proposal has been submitted to DPIIT for extension of tenure of the scheme 
by one year from FY 2026 -27 to FY 2027 -28. In this regard the Committee are of the 
opinion that a considerable time has been elapsed after COVID -19 and the PLIMD 
scheme should not be got effected by the aftermath of COVID-19. The Department should 
initiate steps to overcome the problems posed by the COVID -19. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department.” 
 
21.      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
 
 “Against the backdrop of delays in commercial operations of projects selected under the 
Production Linked Incentive  Scheme for Promoting Domestic Manufacturing of  Medical 
Devices, on account of the covid pandemic and delays in securing requisite regulatory 
approvals, the Department of Pharmaceuticals had proposed to the D epartment for 
Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) extension of the existing tenure of the 
scheme till the financial year 2026 -27 (the last year for eligible production) by one  year, 
i.e., till the financial year 2027 -28. However, DPIIT conveyed that the proposal for 
extension of the tenure for the scheme does not appear be consistent with the 
performance-linked construct of PLI schemes and may not be pursued further.” 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.19 of Chapter – I of the Report)  

48 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
- Nil – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                               Azad Kirti Jha 
 12 March, 2026                                                                                        Chairperson, 
 21 Phalguna, 1947(Saka)                                                         Standing Committee on 
                                                                   Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

49 
 
 
Annexure 
Status report outlining specific projects funded, industry beneficiaries and measurable 
improvements that have resulted or targeted 
I. Assistance to Pharmaceutical Industry for Common Facilities sub-scheme 
S. 
no. Name of applicant State / Union 
territory District 
Amount 
sanctioned 
(crore ₹) 
Amount 
disbursed 
(crore ₹) 
1. Tirupati Research & Development 
Pvt. Ltd. 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Chittoor 20.00 10.00 
2. Welzo Research & Development 
Pvt. Ltd. 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Solan 19.53 17.58 
3. Himachal Pharma Testing Lab Ltd. Solan 17.87 0.00 
4. Inducare Pharmaceuticals & 
Research Foundation 
Maharashtra Pune 7.18 6.46 
5. Tindivanam Pharma Park 
Association 
Tamil Nadu Tindivanam 15.88 6.00 
6. Jeedimetla Effluent Treatment Ltd. Telangana Medchal 
Malkajgiri 
20.00 18.00 
7. Telangana Lifesciences 
Foundation (earlier Hyderabad 
Pharma city Limited) 
Hyderabad 18.87 4.72 
8. Devbhumi Pharmaceutical 
Analytical Testing and Training 
Foundation 
Uttarakhand Haridwar 20.00 18.00 
Status of ongoing projections under API-CF 
1.  Devbhumi Pharmaceuticals Analytical Testing and Training Foundation 
1.1  Final approval was accorded on 22.3.2023 for setting up of chemistry lab testing and 
pharmaceutical microbiology testing at Haridwar, Uttarakhand, with total project cost of ₹23.68 crore 
and approved grant-in-aid of ₹20.00 crore. 
1.2  A total of three instalments, amounting to 18 crores, have been released so far. 
1.3  The project is already implemented during August 2025, SPV has applied for drug license and 
SPV informed that the inspection from Drugs Controller has been conducted during August 2025 and 
issuance of certificate is expected in 2 weeks. After receivin g drug license, SPV will apply for NABL 
certificate. On completion, around 200 pharmaceutical units are expected to benefit from the project. 
Disbursement of final 10% instalment is expected in September 2025. 

50 
 
2.  Welzo Research and Development Pvt. Ltd. 
2.1  Final approval was accorded on 15.3.2023 for setting up of research and development and testing 
laboratory for pharmaceutical raw materials and formulation development at Baddi, Himachal Pradesh, 
with total project cost of ₹29.90 crore and approved grant-in-aid is ₹19.53 crore. 
2.2  A total of three instalments, amounting to ₹17.57 crore, have been released so far. 
2.3  The project is already implemented during August 2025, SPV has already obtained drug license 
and NABL Certification for NIPER, SPV informed that within two weeks SPV will apply for claim 
application. Around 200 pharmaceutical units are expected to benefit from the project. Disbursement of 
final 10% instalment is expected in September 2025. 
3.  Jeedimetla Effluent Treatment Ltd. 
3.1  Final approval was accorded on 13.3.2023 for upgrade of common effluent treatment plant at 
Hyderabad, Telangana with total project cost of ₹29.17 crore and approved grant-in-aid of ₹20.00 crore. 
3.2  A total of three instalments amounting to ₹18.00 crore has been released so far. 
3.3  The project is already implemented during August 2025, SPV has applied Unit has been visited by 
SIDBI official on 12.9.2025, during visit it has been observed the overall operation of the unit were 
satisfactory. SPV has applied for final disbursement of final 10% instalment, same is proposed in present 
meeting. Around 400 pharmaceutical units are expected to benefit from the project. 
4.  Inducare Pharmaceuticals and Research Foundation (Phase-II) 
4.1  Final approval was accorded on 12.9.2024 for upgrade of common testing facility quality control 
laboratory (GLP) process validating laboratory at Pune, Maharashtra, with total project cost of ₹14.38 
crore and approved grant-in-aid of ₹7.l 8 crore. 
4.2  A total of three instalments, amounting to ₹6.46 crore have been released so far. 
4.3  The project is already implemented during August 2025, SPV has applied for NABL certification 
from NIPER, SPV informed that the inspection from NIPER has been conducted and issuance of 
certificate is expected in two weeks. On completion, around 150 ph armaceutical units are expected to 
benefit from the project. Disbursement of final instalment is expected in September 2025. 
5.  Tindivanam Pharma Park Association 
5.1  Final approval was accorded on 17.3.2023 for setting up of common effluent treatment plant at 
Viluppuram, Tamil Nadu, with total project cost of ₹31.76 crore and approved grant -in-aid of ₹15.88 
crore. 
5.2  First instalment of Rs.6.00 crore has been released. 
5.3  The project is under implementation, the construction of the ETP Project under process and 
approx. 60% of the work is completed. All machinery is expected to install at project site before 
30.09.2025. SPV is hopeful of completion of Project by the end of December 2025. SPV would be 
seeking next instalment in September 2025 and last 10% in January 2025. The project is expected to be 
completed by 31.3.2026. On completion, around 40 pharmaceutical units are expected to benefit from 
the project. 
6.  Tirupati Research & Development Pvt. Ltd. 

51 
 
6.1  Final approval was accorded on 2.1.2024 for setting up of common facility centre for the research 
and development and testing and training facility at Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, with total project cost of 
₹29.90 crore and approved grant-in-aid is ₹20.00 crore. 
6.2  First instalment of ₹5.00 crore has been released. 
6.3  The project is under implementation stage, construction of the project site is completed, Machinery 
installation is under process and same will be completed before December 2025. On completion, around 
150 pharmaceutical units are expected to benefit from the project. 
7.  Telangana Life Sciences Foundation (earlier Hyderabad Pharma City Ltd.) 
7.1  Final approval was accorded on 21.9.2023 for setting up of antimicrobial resistance centre of 
excellence at Hyderabad, Telangana with total project cost of Rs.26.02 crore and approved grant-in-aid 
of ₹18.87 crore. 
7.2  First instalment of ₹4.7l crore has been released. The project is expected to be completed by 
31.3.2026. 
7.3  The project is at implementation stage, construction of the project site is completed, order for 
Machinery and installation is under process. SPV has informed that the project is expected to be 
completed in March 2026. On completion, around 50 pharmaceutical units are expected to benefit from 
the project. SPV informed that they will apply for second instalment during September 2025. 
8.  Himachal Pharma Testing Lab Ltd 
8.1  Final approval was accorded on 11.8.2025 for setting up of Contract Research Organisation (CRO) 
comprising of R&D-cum-production sections for the manufacturing of tablets, capsules, liquid dosage 
form, ointment and injection at Jharmajri, Tehsil Baddi District, Solan, Himachal Pradesh under API-CF 
Scheme, with total project cost of ₹19.87 crore and approved grant-in-aid is ₹17.87 crore. 
6.2  First instalment is yet to be released. 
6.3  The project is at initial stage, agreement with State Govt. for leasing of land and order for 
machinery is under process. The project is expected to be completed by 31.8.2027. On completion, 
around 150 pharmaceutical units are expected to benefit from the project. 
II. Revamped Pharmaceuticals Technology Upgradation Scheme 
S. 
no. 
Name of the applicant 
approved/rejected 
State/ Union 
Territory District 
Amount 
sanctioned (in 
lakh ₹) 
1 Alivira Animal Health 
Limited 
Andhra Pradesh Anakapalli 112.54 
2 Sionc Pharmaceutical Private 
Limited 
170.63 
3 Dinakara Life Science Private 
Limited 
NTR 200 
4 Inchem Laboratories Private 
Limited 
33.24 
5 Alapati Pharma Prakasam 50.27 
6 Aparna Pharmaceuticals 
Private Limited 
Srikakulam 200 

52 
 
7 Signova Healthcare Pvt Ltd 
Unit-Ii 
Assam Kamrup 46.87 
8 Ornate Labs Pvt Ltd Bihar Muzaffarpur 3.94 
9 V S International Pvt Ltd Daman Daman 120.94 
10 Navil Laboratories Pvt Ltd Gujarat Ahmedabad 126.51 
11 Kentreck Laboratories Private 
Limited 
76.68 
12 Vasa Pharmachem Private 
Limited 
50.26 
13 Neha Life Science Pvt. Ltd. 52.6 
14 Swati Chemicals 145.24 
15 Manish Pharma Lab 93.8 
16 Rajdip Pharmaceuticals 53.72 
17 Trio Lifescience Pvt. Ltd. 55.04 
18 Trio Remedies Pvt Ltd 90.87 
19 Sg Healthcare Private 
Limited 
48.67 
20 Suchem Laboratories 107.84 
21 Krozex Remedies Private 
Limited 
57.32 
22 Shelat Brothers  16.07 
23 Carewin Pharmaceuticals 
Gujarat Private Limited 
50.04 
24 B. Sharda Pharma Pellets 
Private Limited 
Banaskantha 45.04 
25 Bakul Pharma Private 
Limited 
Bharuch 111.45 
26 Luxica Pharma Inc 67.62 
27 Maruti Industries 11.74 
28 Techno Drugs And 
Intermediates Pvt Ltd 
53.83 
29 Denis Chem Lab Ltd Gandhinagar 66.91 
30 Adrhim Pharmaceuticals Llp 75.71 
31 Sbf Pharma Private Limited 200 
32 Sruzam Labs Private Limited 47.7 
33 Yash Medicare Private 
Limited 
Himmatnagar 20.18 
34 Pulse Pharma Manu Co 54.7 
35 C P M Enterprise 16.4 
36 Rusan Pharma Limited Kutch 200 
37 Sangharsh Lifecare Private 
Limited 
Mehsana 177.98 
38 Arnav Research Laboratories 67.95 
39 Nucare Laboratories India 82.37 
40 Shiva Healthcare 30.25 
41 Shree Pharma (India) 200 

53 
 
42 Lexmark Pharmaceuticals 
Private Limited 
58.1 
43 Hbc Healthcare Private 
Limited 
54.39 
44 Lex-Mark Healthcare Llp 40.3 
45 Seejar Pharmaceuticals 27.9 
46 Exotic Pharma Panchmahal 58.27 
47 Parth Laboratories Private 
Limited 
Rajkot 53.75 
48 Adani Pharmachem Private 
Limited 
21.16 
49 Snj Labs Private Limited 176.33 
50 Altis Finchem Private 
Limited 
Sabarkantha 162.15 
51 Salus Pharmaceuticals 104.5 
52 Sanket Healthcare 19.46 
53 Virdev Intermediates Pvt Ltd Surat 200 
54 Shc Pharmaceuticals 9.46 
55 Sahajanand Life Sciences 
Private Limited 
6.72 
56 Vm Chemicals Surendranagar 16.39 
57 Nira Life Sciences  Private 
Limited 
10.33 
58 Bdr Lifesciences Pvt. Ltd. Vadodara 168.62 
59 Bdr Pharmaceuticals 
International Pvt Ltd 
200 
60 Exemed Pharmaceuticals 163.95 
61 Nebula Healthcare Limited 145.23 
62 Ethicare  Pharmaceuticals  
Pvt  Ltd 
81.18 
63 Padmavati Chemicals Private 
Limited 
Valsad 24 
64 Avik Pharmaceutical Limited 113.12 
65 Mcneil And Argus 
Pharmaceuticals Limited 
Haryana Ambala 128.09 
66 Mitra Industries Private 
Limited 
Faridabad 200 
67 Protech Biosystem Pvt Ltd Gurugram 85.97 
68 M Sea Pharmaceuticals 
Private Limited 
Himachal Pradesh Sirmaur 82 
69 Three B Healthcare Limited 109.4 
70 Pharma Force Lab 200 
71 Sirmour Remedies Pvt Ltd 167.21 
72 Mediforce Healthcare Pvt Ltd 22.76 
73 Brit Lifescience 128.4 
74 Next Wave India 42.39 
75 Varav Biogenesis Private 
Limited 
192.09 

54 
 
76 Gnosis Pharmaceuticals 
Private Limited 
48.65 
77 Algen Healthcare Limited 112.22 
78 Nixi Laboratories Private 
Limited 
200 
79 Caspian Pharmaceuticals 114.54 
80 Saphnix Life Sciences 61.8 
81 Athens Life Sciences 117.08 
82 Park Pharmaceuticals Solan  188.33 
83 Ethix Health Care 97.46 
84 Bennet Pharmaceuticals 
Limited 
112.8 
85 Higgs Healthcare 200 
86 Goish Remedies Limited 107.56 
87 Maxwell Pharma 102.46 
88 Auraya Healthcare Unit-Ii 102.83 
89 Medoz Pharmaceuticals Pvt 
Ltd 
90.39 
90 Unispeed Pharmaceuticals 
Private Limited 
55.7 
91 Alexi Pharmicia Pvt Ltd 65.39 
92 Biodeal Pharmaceuticals 
Limited 
105.3 
93 Unix Biotech 34.6 
94 Medicef Pharma 142.74 
95 Osper Formulation Private 
Limited 
200 
96 Brd Medilabs 35.88 
97 Legen Healthcare 77.47 
98 Purobien Lifesciences 60.6 
99 Healkraft Pharma (India) 
Private Limited 
32.6 
100 Dm Pharma Private Limited 40.21 
101 Smayan Healthcare Private 
Limited 
87.64 
102 Soft Touch Pharmaceuticals 
Private Limited 
31.46 
103 Magbro Health Care Private 
Limited 
58.73 
104 Brooks Laboratories Limited 50.96 
105 Syskem Pharmocrats 200 
106 Auraya Healthcare 200 
107 Lifecare Neuro Products Ltd 200 
108 Hanuchem Laboratories Unit 
Three 
91.03 
109 V owcare Products Jammu & Kashmir Pulwama 11.39 
110 Protech Biopharma Pvt Ltd 89.14 

55 
 
111 Ce Chem Pharmaceuticals 
Private Limited 
Karnataka Bangalore 120.75 
112 Recipharm Pharmaservices 
Pvt Ltd 
200 
113 Kemwell Biopharma Private 
Limited 
93.6 
114 Anglo-French Drugs & 
Industries Limited 
124.58 
115 Nandu Chemical Industries Dharwad  60.93 
116 Nandu Chemicals Pvt. Ltd. Dharwad  133.35 
117 M N Chemicals Limited Uttara- Kannada 79.97 
118 Chethana Formulations Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Kerala Malappuram 157.67 
119 Labinduss Ltd Palakkad 49.47 
120 Megasys Biotek Private 
Limited 
Thrissur 70.4 
121 Hind Pharma Madhya Pradesh Bhopal 103.36 
122 Beryl Drugs Limited Dhar  67.95 
123 Zenith Drugs Limited Indore 113.5 
124 Schon Pharmaceuticals 
Limited 
97.4 
125 Modern Laboratories 200 
126 Nandani Medical 
Laboratories Pvt Ltd 
200 
127 Leben Laboratories Pvt Ltd Maharashtra Akola 200 
128 Nitika Pharmaceutical 
Specialities Private Limited 
Nagpur 200 
129 Arco Life Science (India) 
Private Ltd 
6.31 
130 Scitech Specialities Pvt Ltd Nasik 39.33 
131 Emil Pharmaceutical 
Industries Private Ltd 
Palghar 200 
132 Sunshine Organics Pvt Ltd 200 
133 Aveo Pharmaceuticals Private 
Limited 
92.94 
134 Oceanic Laboratories Private 
Limited 
157.24 
135 Surajlok Chemicals Private 
Limited 
87.06 
136 Korten Pharmaceuticals 
Private Limited 
200 
137 Murli Krishna Pharma Pvt 
Ltd 
Pune 57.77 
138 Aqua Fine Injecta Pvt Ltd 33.79 
139 Hindustan Antibiotics 
Limited 
200 
140 Eisen Pharmaceutical Co Pvt 
Ltd 
111.09 

56 
 
141 Sydler Remedies Pvt Ltd 17.93 
142 Srikem Laboratories Private 
Limited 
Raigad 24.2 
143 Embio Limited 200 
144 Sequent Scientific Limited 170.47 
145 Kores (India) Limited 166.84 
146 Anek Prayog Pvt Ltd 10.01 
147 Vav Lipids Pvt Ltd Ratnagiri 13.18 
148 Great Pacific Export Private 
Limited 
Thane 176.13 
149 Anant Pharmaceuticals Pvt 
Ltd 
17.66 
150 Unilab Chemicals And 
Pharmaceuticals Pvt Ltd 
5.67 
151 Zen Chemicals Pvt Ltd 15.61 
152 Orex Pharma Pvt Ltd 72.22 
153 U S Pharma (India) Private 
Limited 
136.24 
154 Flamingo Pharmaceuticals 
Limited 
94.14 
155 M/S Jagannath Chemical And 
Pharmaceutical Works Private 
Limited 
Odisha Cuttack 66.34 
156 Systacare Remedies Punjab Amritsar 11.07 
157 Velite Pharmaceuticals Ludhiana 35.56 
158 Anuja Healthcare Limited Mohali / Sas Nagar 188.7 
159 Saurav Chemicals Limited 31.86 
160 Torque Pharmaceuticals Pvt 
Ltd 
112.3 
161 Lark Laboratories India Ltd Rajasthan Khairthal - Tijara 63.83 
162 Life Care Formulations Pvt 
Ltd 
Tamil Nadu  Puducherry 5.44 
163 Linux Life Sciences Private 
Limited 
63.74 
164 Saimirra Innopharm Private 
Limited 
Chennai 115.88 
165 Tychos Therapeutics Private 
Limited 
Kancheepuram 73.89 
166 Medibest Pharma Pvt. Ltd Krishnagiri 200 
167 Pharm Products Private 
Limited 
Thanjavur 10.96 
168 Sreepathi Pharmaceuticals 
Limited 
Telangana Hyderabad 105.84 
169 Dano Vaccines & Biologicals 
Pvt Ltd 
Medchal-Malkajgiri 56.2 
170 Magnum Chemi Gran  Pvt 
Ltd 
200 
171 Sanzyme Pvt Limited 69.53 
172 Radicon Laboratories Limited Uttar Pradesh Gautam Buddha Nagar 35.7 

57 
 
173 Daffodills Pharmaceuticals 
Limited 
Meerutt 29.9 
174 Daffohils Laboratories Pvt 
Ltd 
Uttarakhand Dehradun 74.6 
175 Karnani Pharmaceuticals Pvt 
Ltd 
85.8 
176 Pro-Pharma Care Pvt Haridwar 114.68 
177 Sarv Pharmaceuticals 52.5 
178 Talent Healthcare 126.35 
179 Prochem Pharmaceuticals Pvt 
Ltd 
79.65 
180 Evolet Pharmaceuticals 
Private Limited 
170.25 
181 Indian Drug Vision 31.69 
182 Cotec Health Care Private 
Limited 
143.88 
183 Aagya Biotech Private 
Limited 
22.61 
184 Tulbros Formulations Udham Singh Nagar 107.37 
185 Tosc International Pvt Ltd 31.55 
186 Pharma Impex Laboratories 
Private Limited 
West Bengal 24-Parganas 200 
187 Diamond Drugs Private 
Limited 
Howrah 27.32 
188 Vulcan Laboratories Pvt Ltd Kolkata 191 
189 Mendine Pharmaceuticals Pvt 
Ltd 
23.52 
190 Gena Pharmaceuticals 
Limited 
26.52 
191 Hygeia Pharmaceuitcals Mfg 
Pvt Ltd 
30.2 
192 Tetradrip Pharma Private 
Limited 
Purba Bardhaman 70.4 
  

58 
 
 
APPENDIX I  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS BRANCH 
(2025-26) 
Minutes of the Fifteenth Sitting of the Committee 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, The 12 th March, 2026 from 1000 hrs. to 1030 hrs. in 
Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha– Chairperson 
    LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
3. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
4. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
5. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
6. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
7. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
8. Shri Praveen Patel 
9. Shri Balram Naik Porika 
10. Shri Eatala Rajender 
11.  Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
12. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
13. Shri Nalin Soren 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
14. Shri Naresh Bansal 
15. Shri Subhash Barala 
16. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
17. Shri Arun Singh 
18. Shri Tejveer Singh 
 
 
 
 

59 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. Miranda Ingudam  - Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh                -         Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Abhishek Kumar   - Deputy Director  
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following Draft Reports: 
 (i)  Twentieth Report (18 th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing Committee 
on Chemicals and Fertilizers (18 th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demand for Grants (2025 -26)’ pertaining 
to the Department of Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers; 
 (ii) xxxx;  
(iii)  xxxx; and 
 (iv)  xxxx. 
3. After some deliberations, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee without any 
amendment. 
4.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and present/lay 
the Reports in both the Houses of Parliament in the ongoing Session of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
xxxx Matter does not pertain to the Report 

60 
 
APPENDIX II  
ANALYSIS OF ACTION  TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED  IN THE EIGHTH REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2025-
26) ON DEMAND FOR GRANTS (2025-26)’ PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total No. of Recommendations 23 
I. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
(Sl. Nos. 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22 and 
23)  
 
17 
Percentage of Total: 74 % 
II. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not like 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
NIL 
 
00 
Percentage of Total:  0% 
III. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies 
given by the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration:  
(Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 5,13,14 and 21)  
 
 
06 
Percentage of Total: 26 %  
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited:  
NIL 
 
00 
Percentage of Total:  100%  