i  
 
 
22 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
DEMAND FOR GRANTS 
(2026-27) 
 
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
  March, 2026/   Phalguna, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 


ii  
CC&F. NO. 202 
 
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND  PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
DEMAND FOR GRANTS 
(2026-27) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13 March, 2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13 March, 2026 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  MARCH, 2026/   PHALGUNA, 1947 (SAKA) 
  


iii  
CONTENTS 
 PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26) (iv) 
INTRODUCTION (v) 
PART - I NARRATIVES  
  
INTRODUCTORY 
 
i. Proposed and Approved Financial Outlays of The 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC) for 
the financial year 2026-27 
ii. Budget Estimate, Revised Estimate and Actual expenditure 
of the Department 
iii. Scheme-wise Analysis - New Scheme of Petrochemicals 
(NSP) – Setting up of Plastic Parks 
iv. Setting up of Centres of Excellence (CoEs) 
v. Funds sought and allocated during the last three years 
under NSP 
vi. Chemical Promotion and Development Scheme (CPDS) 
vii. Central Institute of Petrochemical Engineering and 
Technology (CIPET) 
viii. Plastics Waste Management Centres (PWMCs)  
ix. Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology (IPFT) 
x. Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) 
xi. Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment 
Region (PCPIR)  
xii. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) 
xiii. Chemicals and Petrochemicals Industry 
xiv. Future initiatives (Budget Highlights) 
1-37 
PART – II OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 38-49  
ANNEXURE  
I Status of 18 CoEs approved under the New Scheme of 
Petrochemicals (NSP) for setting of CoEs 
50-51 
 
APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2025-26) held on 26th February, 2026.  
52-55 
 II. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2025-26) held on 12th March, 2026.  
56 

iv  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS 
(2025-2026) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Dr. Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
21. Vacant* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Subhash Barala 
24. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
25. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
26. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
27. Shri Arun Singh 
28. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
29. Shri Tejveer Singh 
30. Shri G.K. Vasan 
31. Vacant 
* Vacant vice Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon, MP(LS), passed away on 19.02.2026 vide LS 
Table Office Notification No.21/4(8)/2026/TO(B) dated 20.02.2026. 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
2.  Ms. Miranda Ingudam - Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh - Deputy Secretary  
4. Smt. Vandana Rawat - Assistant Executive Officer 
 
 

v  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
  I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers  
 (2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf this 
Twenty-Second Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demand for Grants (2026 -27)’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers,  Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals.  
 
2. The Committee considered the Demand for Grants (2026-27) pertaining to the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals  
for the Financial Year 2026 -27 which were laid on the Table of the House on 13 th 
February, 2026. After obtaining the Budget documents and Explanatory Notes, the 
Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals on 26th February, 2026. The 
Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 12th March, 2026. 
 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Officers of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals for tendering 
evidence and placing before the Committee all the requisite information sought for in 
connection with the examination of the subject.  
4. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 5. For ease of reference and convenience, the Observations/ Recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                Azad Kirti Jha 
12 March, 2026                                                           Chairperson, 
21 Phalguna, 1947 (Saka)                                       Standing Committee on 
                                             Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
 
 

1  
 
 
REPORT 
 
PART – I 
 
[NARRATIVES] 
 
I INTRODUCTORY 
 
1. The aims of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals are to formulate 
and implement policy and programmes  for achieving growth and development of the 
chemical and petrochemical sectors in the country and  to foster the spirit of public -
private partnership for overall development of above - mentioned sectors of the 
industry. 
  
 
2. The Department has the mandate to deal with the following broad subject 
matters: 
 
i. Insecticides (excluding the administration of The Insecticides Act, 
1968 (46 of 1968); 
ii. Dye-stuffs and Dye-Intermediates; 
iii. All organic and inorganic chemicals, not specifically allotted to any 
other Ministry or Department; 
iv. Planning, development and control of, and assistance to, all 
industries dealt with by the Department; 
v. Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster-Special Laws relating thereto; 
vi. Petrochemicals; 
vii. Industries relating to production of non -cellulosic synthetic fibres 
(Nylon Polyesters, Acrylic etc.); 
viii. Synthetic Rubber; and 
ix. Plastics including fabrication of plastic and moulded goods 
 
 
3     The Department has five major divisions viz. Chemicals, Petrochemicals, 
Administration, Statistics & Monitoring and Economic Division. The Integrated Finance 
Division is common to the three Departments in the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers. 
 
4       There are three Central Public Sector Undertakings (CPSUs) in the chemical 
sector namely Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd. (HOCL), HIL (India) Limited and 
Hindustan Fluorocarbons Limited (HFL), which is a subsidiary of HOCL (Note: HFL is 
not currently opera tional). Two autonomous institutes namely Central Institute of 
Petrochemicals Engineering & Technology (CIPET) and Institute of Pesticides 
Formulation Technology (IPFT) function under this Department. 
 
 

2  
 
Vision of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
 
 
5        With the objective of achieving the vision of Viksit Bharat, the Department seeks 
to focus on enhancing the production of chemicals and petrochemicals in the country 
and to reduce India’s dependence on imports. This includes taking steps to promote 
the manufacturing of chemicals and petrochemicals in the country, fostering innovation 
and technological advancement, promoting the adoption of sustainable practices, 
increasing the availability of skilled manpower and taking steps to improve safety 
measures in the sector. 
 
6. The detailed Demands for Grants for FY 2025-26 of the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  were laid on the table 
of Lok Sabha on 13.02.2026 Budget Estimates (BE) for the Demand No. 5 pertaining 
to the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals are as follows: 
   (₹ in crore) 
Expenditure Head Budget Estimate 
Revenue 184.70 
Capital                      1.02 
Total 185.72 
 
I. PROPOSED AND APPROVED FINANCIAL OUTLAYS OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS (DCPC) FOR THE 
FINANCIAL YEAR 2026-27 
 
7. As regards the details with regard to the proposed amount for each scheme of 
the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals for  the year  
2026-27 and the amount actually approved by the Ministry of Finance  (MoF), the 
Department furnished the detailed information in a  tabular form which is given as 
under:- 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme Projected  
BE 2026-27 
Allocated BE 
2026-27 
 
Comments  
I Central Sector Schemes    
 
Other New Schemes of 
Petrochemicals  
61.00 52.50 As decided in the Pre -
budget Meeting 
 of  
Ministry of Finance, 
after the  EFC /SFC 
appraisal and approval 
of competent authority 
for continuation of 
schemes for the next 
five-year period, the 
requirement of 
additional funds, if any, 
II 
Other Central Expenditure 
(Sectt/BGLD/ABs/PSUs)  
  
 
2.1 
 
 
Secretariat/Economic Services 
 
33.04 28.20 
 
2.2 
Central Institute of  
Petrochemicals  Engineering & 
Technology (CIPET) 
70.00 70.00 
2.3 Institute of Pesticides 9.15 8.94 

3  
(Rs.in Crore)  
 
It may be seen that the Department had projected a BE of Rs. 199.76 crore for 
the year 2026 -27 but has been allocated an amount of Rs. 185.72 crore. Thus, an 
amount of Rs. 14.04 has reduced from the BE of Rs. 199.76 crore  for the year  
2026-27.  
 
8. When asked about the reasons for the comparatively lower Budget Estimates 
(BE) of Rs. 185.72 crore for financial year 2026-27 which was Rs. 259.11crore during 
the year 2024 -25 and Rs. 194.05 crore during the year 2025 -26, the Department 
furnished that the allocation during the financial year 2023-24 and 2024-25 was higher 
due to provision of Govt. Loan to HIL(INDIA) ltd. Further, in addition to it, in financial 
year 2026-27 there is less demand for funds from the autonomo us bodies i.e. CIPET 
and IPFT. 
 
II Budget Estimate, Revised Estimate and Actual expenditure of the 
Department 
 
The BE and RE for the years 2023-24, 2024-25, 2025-26 and 2026-27 of the 
Department and the actual utilization of funds thereof is stated to be as follows:- 
                                     (Rs. In crore) 
 
Year BE RE Actuals 
2023-24 173.45 572.63 474.67  
2024-25 259.11 261.99 256.38 
2025-26 194.05 185.57 140.29 (as on 
28.01.2026) 
2026-27 185.72   
 
9. On being asked to furnish the reasons for variation in the BE sought by the 
Department for the year 2023-24, 2024-25 and 2025-26 which was Rs. 173.45 crore, 
Rs. 259.11 crore an d Rs. 194.05 crore respectively, t he Department in its written 
reply submitted that an amount of Rs.173.45 crores was allocated to the Department 
in BE 2023 -24, which was substantially increased to Rs.572.63 crores (net) in RE 
due to budget provision of Govt. loan of Rs.486.74 crores to HIL(INDIA) Ltd.  In 2024-
25 also the BE of Rs.259.11 crore was having a component of Rs.120.06 crore as 
Govt. loan to HIL(India). In 2025-26 the BE does not have component of Govt. loan 
hence appears less than BE of earlier years.  
 
10. When asked that RE of the Department is showing a declining trend for the last 
Formulation Technology (IPFT) may be considered at 
RE stage. 2.4 Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (BGLD) 26.57 26.08 
 Total (II) 138.76 133.22 
 Grand Total (I + II) 199.76 185.72 

4  
years consecutively. In their written submission, the Department have submitted that 
the declining trends in RE for the last three years is mainly due to one time Budget 
provision of Loan to HIL(India) Ltd. in Financial Year (FY) 2023-24 and Financial Year  
2024-25, hence in Financial Year 2025-26 it appears to be lesser.  
 
11. The Committee then desired to know about the  declining trend in the 
Department’s actual expenditure. In their written reply , the Department clarified that 
the actual expenditure for the last three years is in accordance to the RE allocation. 
Since the RE for the FY 2023-24 and 2024-25 were having a onetime budget provision 
of Loan to HIL(India) ltd, hence it appears to be in the higher side in comparison to FY 
2025-26. An amount of Rs.256.38 crores was utilized for the FY 2024 -25 against the 
allocated RE of Rs.261.99 crores which is approx. 97.85 % of  the allocated RE  
2024-25. 
 
12. When asked about the slow pace of fund utilization for the financial year 2025–
26 as the actual expenditure up to 28.01.2026 stands at Rs. 140.29 crore against the 
Revised Estimates (RE) of Rs. 185.57 crore, in a written reply the Department has 
submitted that as on 20.02.2026, the Department has utilized an amount of Rs.149.45 
crores against the allocated RE of Rs.185.57 crores which is approx. 80.53  % of the 
allocated RE 2025-26 and the Department will make its best efforts to fully utilize the 
funds allocated in RE 2025-26. 
 
13. To a specific query of the Committee that the Department has sought an 
amount of Rs. 185.72 crore as Budget Estimates (BE) for FY 2026–27, which is lower 
as compared to the allocations in the preceding two years, the Department in its written 
reply submitted that  t he allocation during the FY 2023 -24 and 2024 -25 was higher 
due to provision of Govt. Loan to HIL(INDIA) ltd. Further, in addition to it, in FY 2026 -
27 there is less demand for funds from the autonomous bodies i.e. CIPET and IPFT. 
 
 
III. Scheme-wise Analysis  - New Scheme of Petrochemicals (NSP) 
 
A. Scheme for Setting up of Plastic Parks 
 
14. The Committee informed that Scheme for Setting up Plastic Parks in a sub 
scheme of New Scheme of Petrochemicals which seeks to provide enabling facilities 
for the setting up of plastic production units using a cluster -based approach. The 
objective is to consolidate and synergise the capacities of the downstream plastic 
processing industry to help increase investment, prod uction and export in the sector  
as well as generate employment and  will contribute to increased investment, 
production, and employment as it facilitates the establishment of need -based Plastic 
Parks with common infrastructure, which can reduce costs and entry barriers for 
plastic processing units and thereby attract private investment.  The establishment of 
Plastic Parks will also generate direct employment in manufacturing units and indirect 
employment in logistics, utilities and support services. 
 

5  
15. When asked about the expected economic benefits for the downstream plastic 
processing industry under the scheme, the Department submitted as under:- 
 
a. Reduction in capital and operating costs through shared infrastructure and 
common facilities. 
b. Improved productivity, quality standards and enhanced employment in the 
plastic sector.  
c. Enhanced competitiveness of Indian plastic products in domestic and 
export markets. 
d. Balanced regional industrial development and sustainable growth of the 
sector 
 
16. The Committee was further informed that the Government of India provides 
grant funding up to 50% of the project cost subject to a ceiling of Rs. 40 crore per 
project.  The Committee then desired to know as to how the 50% grant funding is 
disbursed and what are the project cost components considered ; the Department in 
their written reply  submitted that the Government of India provides a grant -in-aid up 
to  50% of the approved project cost, subject to a maximum ceiling of Rs. 40 crore per 
project, for set ting up Plastic Parks. The grant is released to the Special Purpose 
Vehicle (SPV) in four instalments, linked to achievement of prescribed milestones, as 
follows: 
 
a. 20% of the approved grant as a mobilisation advance after final approval 
of the project, achievement of financial closure and submission of the requisite 
bank guarantee. 
b. 35% as the second instalment upon utilisation of at least 60% of the first 
instalment and proportionate expenditure by the SPV. 
c. 35% as the third instalment upon utilisation of 100% of the first 
instalment and at least 60% of the second instalment, along with allotment of a 
minimum 25% of plots. 
d. 10% as the final instalment after full utilisation of the SPV’s share of 
funds and when at least 50% of the units in the Plastic Park become 
operational. 
 
Release of grant is subject to submission of audited accounts, utilisation 
certificates and compliance with General Financial Rules (GFRs). 
The eligible project cost includes expenditure on common infrastructure and 
enabling facilities such as internal roads, power and water supply, effluent and 
waste management systems, common facility centres for testing, tooling, R&D, 
training, incubation a nd recycling, as well as limited project management 
expenses as per scheme norms. Cost of land and plant & machinery for 
individual units is excluded from the project cost. 
 
17. When asked about the process for monitoring and tracking the progress of 
establishment of Plastic Parks, the Department submitted in affirmative and also 
submitted that the Department has been regularly monitoring the implementation of 

6  
the various projects, including through site visits, review meetings at different levels 
as well as regular progress reports submitted by the SPVs.   Best efforts are being 
made to ensure the timely completion of the projects and to populate the Parks at the 
earliest. Based on the efforts made, significant progress in terms of infrastructure 
development has been made in these Plastic Park projects.  In the last two years, the 
infrastructure development has been completed in 4 Plastic Parks.  There has been a 
marked increase in the number of plots allotted to the units. 
 
18. The Committee desired to be apprised of the s tatus of 10 Plastic parks , the 
Department submitted the same in the following manner:- 
 
S.N
o. 
Location 
of Plastic 
Parks 
Date of 
Commencem
ent  
Target 
date of 
Completi
on 
% of work 
completed 
Overall 
Progress in 
Phsycial 
Infrastruct
ure (Civil 
work) 
% of 
work 
pendin
g 
Likely 
date of 
Completi
on 
Reason for 
non-
completion 
Cost 
overru
n due 
to 
delay 
Corrective 
steps taken if 
any. 
No. 
of 
Plot
s 
No. of 
plots 
allotte
d so 
far 
1. Tamot, 
MP 
Oct., 2013 Oct., 2016 100 NA NA NA Nil* Efforts are 
being made to 
increase the 
pace of 
allotment.  Reg
ular monitoring 
is being 
undertaken by 
the Department. 
172 33 
2. Paradeep, 
Odisha 
Oct., 2013  Oct., 
2016 
100 NA NA NA Nil* Efforts are 
being made to 
increase the 
pace of 
allotment.  Reg
ular monitoring 
is being 
undertaken by 
the Department. 
81 46 
3. Tinsukia, 
Assam 
Feb., 2014 Feb., 
2017 
96 4 June, 
2026 
Delay in 
completion 
of 
infrastructur
e due to local 
unrest and 
the 
unwillingnes
s of 
contractors 
to participate 
in the 
bidding 
process. 
Nil* Regular 
monitoring is 
being 
undertaken to 
get the project 
completed at 
the earliest. 
104 84 
4. Deoghar, 
Jharkhand 
December, 
2018 
December
, 2021 
91 9 June, 
2026 
Delay in the 
completion 
of 
infrastructur
e work by the 
State 
Agency. 
Nil* Regular 
monitoring is 
being 
undertaken to 
get the project 
completed at 
the earliest. 
102 Nil 

7  
*As per the Scheme Guidelines, the contribution of the Central Government would be restricted to the 
amount approved in the DPR. 
 
5. Bilaua, 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
December, 
2018 
December
, 2021 
100 NA NA NA Nil* Regular 
monitoring is 
being 
undertaken to 
get the project 
completed at 
the earliest. 
108 5 
6. Tiruvallur, 
Tamil 
Nadu 
September, 
2019 
Septembe
r, 2022 
84 
(Stayed due 
to NGT) 
16 
(Staye
d due 
to 
NGT) 
NA 
(Stayed 
due to 
NGT) 
As directed 
by the 
Hon’ble 
National 
Green 
Tribunal 
(NGT), the 
project 
implementati
on is kept in 
abeyance 
andthe  
status quo is 
maintained 
since 
20.01.2022. 
TPIPL has 
appealed 
before the 
Hon’ble 
Supreme 
Court, 
praying to 
quash 
the judgment 
of the 
Hon’ble 
NGT. 
Nil* The matter is 
being taken up 
by the State 
Government in 
the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court. 
65 Nil 
7. Sitarganj, 
Uttarakha
nd 
December, 
2020 
December
, 2023 
67 33 October, 
2026 
The 
infrastructur
e work was 
delayed due 
to issues 
with the 
contractor 
and due to 
the 
pandemic. 
Nil* Regular 
monitoring is 
being 
undertaken to 
get the project 
completed at 
the earliest. 
81 41 
8. Raipur, 
Chhattisga
rh 
April, 2021 April, 
2024 
100 NA NA NA Nil* Efforts are 
being made to 
increase the 
pace of 
allotment.  Reg
ular monitoring 
is being 
undertaken by 
the Department. 
48 38 
9. Ganjimutt, 
Karnataka 
January, 2022 January, 
2027 
83 17 January, 
2027 
NA Nil* NA 66 Nil 
10. Gorakhpur
, Uttar 
Pradesh 
July, 2022 July, 2027 62 38 July, 2027 NA Nil* NA 92 62 

8  
19. It may be seen that the no. of plots available in the Plastic Parks have not been 
allotted so far and there is huge difference between the available plots and the plots 
actually allotted. In the Plastic Park at Tamot, Madhy a Pradesh, Paradeep Odisha, 
Tinsukia, Assam 172, 81 and 104 plots are available. Out of which only 33, 46 and 84 
plots have been allotted so far.  Similarly, at Plastic Park Bilaua, Madhya Pradesh, 
Sitarganj, Uttarakhand, Raipur, Chhattisgarh and Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh 108, 81, 
48 and 9 2 plots are available. out of which only 5,  51, 38 and 62 plots have been 
allotted so far whereas in the case of Plastic Park at Deoghar and Ganjimutt, 
Karnataka ‘Nil’ plots could be allotted out of 102 and 66 plots available.  
 
20. When enquired about current status of Plastic Park functional at Sitarganj 
Uttarakhand, the Department in written reply submitted that the Sitarganj Plastic Park, 
Uttarakhand, was approved in December, 2020.  The Park has achieved 67% overall 
progress in physical infrastructure (civil work) and is expected to be completed by 
October, 2026.  Of the central grant share, 90% has been released.  The balance 10% 
will be released as per the scheme guidelines (once 50% of the units in the Plastic 
Park become operational).  There are 81 Plots, of which 41 Plots have been allotted 
with none operational.  Industrial activity is yet to commence in the Plastic Park. 
 
21. Responding to a serious concern over nil allotment of plots in Plastic Park at  
Deogarh, Tiruvallur and Ganjimutt Plastic Parks. The Secretary  apprised the 
Committee as under:- 
 
“सर , प्लास्टिक पार्क्स के तहत अभी 51 यूनिट्स  फ ं क्शिल हैं और  हमारी  कोनिि यही है नक इसमें  
प्लॉट की सेल  और  यूनिट्स  की स्थापिा को हम ज़्यादा से  ज़्यादा बढावा दें। िेट गविसमेंट्स  भी इसमें  
प्रयास  कर  रही  हैं जैसे  मध्य प्रदेि का तो मुझे मालूम है नक वे जहााँ भी जाते हैं, कोई भी उिका इंडस्टि ि यल 
इवेंट होता है तो उसमें  वे इसको  िोक े स करते  हैं। अभी नबलौआ का जो पाक स है, उसका  इंफ्राि ि क्चर 
उन्ोंिे  बहुत तेजी से  पूरा  करक े हर  जगह वे उसकी  माक े नटंग कर  रहे  हैं। सर , िेट्स  कोनिि कर  रहे  
हैं। तनमलिाड ु में िे लगा हुआ है। इसक े  अलावा गोरखपुर  और  किासटक वाला जो गंनज‍िमठ है, ये पार्क्स 
चूंनक 2022 में अप्रूव हुए हैं और  पााँच साल  की इिकी अवनि है, इसनलए  इिका 2027 तक का टाइम 
है, लेनकि हमारी  कोनिि है नक गंनज‍िमठ का इंफ्राि ि क्चर तीि महीिे में पूरा  हो जाएगा और  वे प्लॉट 
की सेल  भी खोलेंगे। गोरखपुर  में क े वल एक नबस्टडंग का निमासण बचा है, बाकी उन्ोंिे  पूरा  कर  नलया 
है। उसमें  लगभग छह महीिे लगेंगे। “ 
 
 
22. To certain querie s of the Committee like no. of operational Plastics Parks,  
procedure to identify the actual end -users, measures taken by the Department to 
expedite the allotment of plots, any procedure to identify the actual end-users of these 
allotted parks and whether any module or mechanism been introduced for the sale of 
plots, the Department in written replies submitted that out of the 309 plots and 15 
sheds allotted across 7 Plastic Parks, 31 units on 48 plots and 11 units in 15 sheds 
are presently operational. The remaining allotted units are at various stages of 
implementation. The pace of allotment and operationalization is influenced by factors 
such as the time required for construction and commissioning by the units. The 
Department has  been emphasizing transparent, time -bound, and industry -friendly 
allotment procedures to ensure optimal utilization of the infrastructure created under 
the scheme. 
 

9  
To accelerate allotment and operationalization, priority is being given to the 
completion of core infrastructure and common facilities to enhance investor 
confidence. State Governments and respective Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) are 
conducting roadshows  and industry interactions, and coordinating with industry 
associations to promote available plots and attract anchor units. Regular review 
meetings are held with State Implementing Agencies to monitor progress and resolve 
bottlenecks. States have also bee n advised to rationalise plot sizes and offer 
competitive pricing to make the parks more attractive to industry. The Ministry 
continues to closely monitor the progress of all approved Plastic Parks in coordination 
with State Governments and SPVs. 
 
23. When Committee desired to know whether any instances of investors getting 
the plots in Plastic Parks have come to the notice and steps taken by the Department 
to ensure that only genuine buyers get the plots allotted, the Department in written 
reply submitted that no instances of investors obtaining plot allotments in Plastic Parks 
in violation of the prescribed norms have come to the notice of the Department. The 
allotment of plots in Plastic Parks is undertaken by the respective State Governments 
and/or the Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) in accordance with their approved land 
allotment policies, guidelines, and eligibility criteria. These policies generally require 
applicants to demonstrate their intent and capacity to establish and operate 
manufacturing units as per their guidelines. 
 
24. On being asked about  the contribution of scheme for employment generation 
in the Plastic sector and whether the Department had fixed any specific targets for the 
employment generation, the Department submitted that the Scheme for Setting up of 
Plastic Parks is expected to contribute to employment generation in the plastics sector 
by promoting investment, expansion of manufacturin g capacity and cluster -based 
industrial development. However, the Scheme does not prescribe specific numerical 
targets for employm ent generation, as employment creation depends on the nature 
and scale of units established in each park. Employment generated under the Scheme 
is primarily industry -driven and includes both direct and indirect employment.   It is 
submitted that there is no  uniformity in the units working in the plastic industry, with 
firms producing different kinds of products, utilizing different technologies and ranging 
from small/ medium to large -scale units. As such, it is not feasible to set targets for 
employment in the Plastic Parks.  
 
25. The Secretary further elaborated on the issue as under:- 
 
“सर , इसमें रोजगार  का  हमारा  कोई  ऐसा  टारगेट  तो नह ीं है, पर  यह बात  जरूर  है कक अगर  
वहाीं इींडस्‍ट ट र  ज़ आए ीं ग  तो उसमें रोजगार  कमलेगा, कट योींकक प्ट लास्टिक इींडस्‍ट ट र   छोट  इींडस्‍ट ट र   होत  
है। इसमें कई  बार  बहुत कम  लोगोीं क , जैसे 5-7 लोगोीं क  भ  यूकनट्स लग जात  है और  कई  
बार  बहुत बड  यूकनट्स लगत  हैं। इसमें हमने  रोजगार  का  टारगेट  किकट स नह ीं ककया  है। हमारा  
िोकस  इस बात  पर  था  कक इींडस्‍ट ट र   को  इींफ्रास्‍ट ट रकट चर  किएट करक े  एक  सट ‍ुकवधा दे द  जाए  कक 
अगर  कोई  इसमें आना  चाहते  हैं तो यहाीं पर  आकर  अपन  इींडस्‍ट ट र   लगा  सकते  हैं”I 
 
26. Park wise employment generation data was stated to be as under:  

10  
 
S.No. Location Employment Generated 
(Persons) 
1. Tamot, Madhya Pradesh 274 
2. Paradeep, Odisha 295 
3. Tinsukia, Assam 626 
4. Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh 270  
Total 1465 
 
IV Scheme for Setting up of Centres of Excellence (CoEs) 
  
27. The Committee were informed that the Department implements the scheme for 
setting up Centres of Excellence  (CoE), under which the Department provides grant -
in-aid to identified research institutes with the objective of improving the existing 
technology and research in the country and to promote the development of new 
applications in the field of Chemicals and Petrochemicals.  
 
28. The CoEs are set up with an aim to help in the development of new products, 
new applications, innovation and improvement of technology, process innovation, 
quality and environmentally sustainable development, etc. Institutions through this 
project are expected to interact and pass on their research findings and expertise to 
the industry for modernization of the industry. So far, the 18 CoEs approved under the 
scheme, in total has filed 80 patents and have developed 96 technologies/products, 
of which 35 have been transferred to the Industry.  
 
29. The Committee then desired to know whether any specific targets have been 
fixed for setting up of more CoEs, the Department submitted that the Scheme seeks to 
provide grant-in-aid to Government educational and research institutions to undertake 
research to improve existing technology and promote the development of new 
applications. The Department reviews the requirements of the Sector a nd accords 
approval for new CoEs based on the needs of the industry and the quality of research 
proposals received. The Standing Finance Committee, in its meeting of October, 2021, 
approved setting  up of 11 new CoEs. Out of these 11 new CoEs, the Department had 
approved 2 CoEs in 2022  and 5 CoEs in 2024. 
 
30. On being asked about financial support which Government of India provide for 
CoE projects, the Department ha d submitted that the financial support from  the 
Government of India is for  50% of the total project cost, subject to an upper limit of 
Rs.5 crore. The balance will have to be met from the resources of the applicant institute 
and its partners. The scheme for setting up Centres of Excellence supports research 
institutes with the o bjective of improving the existing technology and research in the 
country, and to promote the development of new applications in the field of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals. 
 
31. On a specific query  of the Committee  regarding reviewing the functioning of 
CoEs, the Department submitted that the Project Monitoring Committee under the 
chairmanship of Deputy Secretary, DCPC, set up under the scheme, reviews the 

11  
working of the CoE through online or physical visits. The CoEs are also reviewed by 
the Project Sanctioning Committee chaired by Secretary (DCPC), to consider release 
of the 2nd/3rd instalment of grant. The Department also reviews the progress of the 
CoEs through quarterly reports on details of patents filed/technologies/products 
developed. Apart from above, the CoEs are regularly monitored by the Department 
through review meetings under the chairmanship of Secretary/Joint Secretary/Deputy 
Secretary. 
 
32. It was further submitted that t he Scheme seeks to provide grant -in-aid to 
educational and research institutions to undertake research to improve existing 
technology and promote development of new applications. The CoEs are set up with 
an aim to help in development of new products, new a pplications, innovation and 
improvement of technology, process innovation, quality and environmentally 
sustainable development, etc. The Department reviews the requirements of the Sector 
and accords approval for new CoEs based on the needs of the industry and the quality 
of research proposals received. Further, the industry independently undertakes its own 
research and development activities to foster innovation, enhance technological 
capabilities, and improve product quality and process efficiency in line with evolving 
market and regulatory requirements. 
 
33. On being asked about specific queries viz  types of institutions eligible for 
receiving grant‑in‑aid under the scheme; how industries apply for the grant funding of 
up to Rs. 5 crore per project; criteria used to identify research institutes for receiving 
grants and the process for research institute to apply for the 50% grant‑in‑aid funding, 
the Department in its written submissions submitted as under 
 
       “Under the Scheme, funding is given to existing government educational and 
research institutions working in the field of chemicals/ petrochemicals. The 
essential criteria are as follows: 
  
a. Existing Central or State Government University, Government organizations 
with a proven track record of academic excellence or research. 
b. The institution should be currently engaged in research and development 
activities in the chemical/ petrochemical sector, as indicated by publications, 
research projects, consultancy assignments and registered PhD candidates. 
c. It should have adequate infrastructure in terms of land and building, to house 
the Centre of Excellence including, research scholars, equipment, plant/ 
machinery to be purchased from the grant. 
d. The institute should have sufficient/ competent manpower/ research staff who 
could be engaged in the field in which the Centre of Excellence is proposed to 
be set up. 
  
The projects that have an industrial partner for promoting the applied research, 
technology transfer and commercialization would be preferred. 
  
The applications are invited from all eligible institutions, the institutes may fill the 
prescribed proforma and submit research proposals on specific topics/ areas. 

12  
The Team Leader of the proposed centre  prepares the Project Report and 
submits it to the Head of the institution, who, after evaluating it at his/ her level 
for qualitative improvements, submits it to DCPC with his/ her specific 
recommendations. He/ she will make observations on past achievements of the 
identified centre, its position in existing research, availability of infrastructure, 
potential for growth and requirements for additional support.  
  
The project proposals received from the institutes are evaluated by an Expert 
Committee, chaired by the Joint Secretary, DCPC and having members from 
academia and industry. The Expert Committee makes recommendations 
regarding the selection of the Centre based on the relevance of work, current 
research status of the applicant institute, the quality and expert ise of the team, 
depth of collaboration with the industry and the requirements proposed. 
Thereafter, the proposals recommended by the Expert Committee are placed 
before the Project Sanctioning Committee, chaired by the Secretary, DCPC. 
The criteria used for evaluating the research proposals include relevance of the 
topic to the chemical and petrochemical sector; relevance to industry; 
measurable outcome with sustainable impact; differentiated research 
hypothesis; IPR potential; and potential for commercialization”. 
  
34. When asked about the details of 18 C oEs currently functioning in the country, 
the Department submitted the information placed at Annexure I:- 
 
V New Schemes of Petrochemicals (NSP) 
 
Funds sought & allocated during last three years under NSP. 
 
 The  details of funds sought, allocated and utilized during the last three years 
is as follows: 
(Rs. In crore) 
Financial 
Year 
Grants 
Proposed  
Actual allocation Actual 
Utilization  B.E. R.E. 
2023-24* 35.93 22.00 18.00 18.00 
2024-25 42.30 25.00 33.50 33.49 
2025-26 50.50 50.50 45.50 34.78 (upto 
28.01.2026) 
2026-27  52.50   
*From FY 2023-24 onwards CPDS has been merged as a sub-scheme under NSP 
scheme. 
 
35. When asked that the Department could utilize only 34.78 crore upto 28.01.2026 
against RE of Rs. 45.50 crore  for the year 2025-26 which is approx. 76.44, the 
Department replied that so far as New Scheme of Petrochemicals [Scheme for setting 
up of Plastic Parks and Scheme for setting up of Centres of Excellence (CoEs)] is  
concerned, Department’s actual expenditure is Rs.36.07 crore till 20.02.2026 out of 
RE of Rs.40 crore.  The actual expenditure of the scheme (including CPDS 
component) is Rs 39.91 crore till 20.02.2026 out of the RE of Rs. 45.50 crore. 
 
36. When asked that the Department has sought an amount of Rs. 52.50 crore as 

13  
BE 2026-27 under NSP which is on higher side as compared to last two years, the 
Department submitted that so far as New Scheme of Petrochemicals is concerned, 
the allocated budget for 2026-27 is Rs.47.55 crore. Many of the Plastic Park projects 
are likely to complete the work of infrastructure creation. Besides, 5 new CoEs were 
approved in September, 2024. Based on the same, additional funds were sought for 
the Scheme.  The department will make all the necessary efforts to utilize the funds 
allotted optimally in 2026-27. 
 
 
37. The Committee were informed that a comprehensive review of the Guidelines 
was undertaken to ensure effective implementation. During  the review, based on 
feedback received from CoEs and stakeholders, the following points were observed 
and revisions were made in scheme guidelines: 
  
(a)  The Scheme was restricted to Petrochemicals, it should be broadened to 
include chemicals. Accordingly, changes were made in scheme guidelines.  
(b)  The earlier period of the project was insufficient to meet the objectives, 
therefore, the period of the project was increased from 2 years to 5 years, from 
the date of signing of the Agreement. 
(c)  It was observed that maximum amount of grant should be utilized for asset 
creation, therefore, it was stipulated that  minimum 50% of the grant would be 
used for procurement of equipment; 
(d)  In order to prevent blocking of funds, it was mandated that funds under the 
Scheme would be released under the Central Nodal Agency (CNA) Model -II 
Guidelines of the Department of Expenditure, Government of India. 
               Thereafter, the Department circulated the scheme Guidelines to various 
eminent institutes and invited research proposals. After evaluation of received 
proposals based on the scheme guidelines, the Department approved 5 CoEs and first 
instalment has been sanctioned to these CoEs, details of which may be seen at 
Annexure-I. 
 
38. When pointed out by the Committee that no physical targets were set up for the 
year 2025 -26. In response the Department submitted that the 15th Finance 
Commission cycle is concluding on 31.03.2026. The Department has approved 5 new 
CoEs in FY 2024 -25 and FY 2025 -26 is last year of the 15th Finance Commission 
cycle.  The Scheme continuation over next Finance Commission cycle  requires fresh 
appraisal and approval process, therefore no physical targets were set for the year 
2025-26. 
 
39. As regard the completion of 02 CoEs, the Committee were informed as under:- 
 
          In F.Y. 2024-25, the following 5 CoEs have been approved:   
  
i. Coal to Acetylene and Fine Chemicals: IIT, Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad 
ii. Biodegradable Packaging Materials (BioPack): IIT, Madras 

14  
iii. Performance Chemicals and Sustainable Polymers for Industrial Applications: 
CSIR-National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology (CSIR -
NIIST),  Thiruvananthapuram  
iv. Specialty Chemicals: IIT, Kanpur 
v. Transparent and Biocompatible Metal -Polymer Composite Based X - ray, 
Gamma ray and Neutron Shields for Window and Personal Protecting Apparels: 
CSIR-Advanced Materials and Processes Research Institute (CSIR -AMPRI), 
Bhopal 
  
The above approved 5 CoEs have been set up and first instalment has been 
sanctioned to these CoEs, details of which may be seen at Annexure-I 
 
40. In response to a specific query on whether 18 CoE s are adequate for a 
population of over 140 crore, the Department replied that the Scheme seeks to provide 
grant-in-aid to educational and research institutions to undertake research to improve 
existing technology and promote development of new applications. The CoEs are set 
up with an aim to help in development of new products, new a pplications, innovation 
and improvement of technology, process innovation, quality and environmentally 
sustainable development, etc. The Department reviews the requirements of the Sector 
and accords approval for new CoEs based on the needs of the industry and the quality 
of research proposals received. Further, the industry independently undertakes its own 
research and development activities to foster innovation, enhance technological 
capabilities, and improve product quality and process efficiency in line with evolving 
market and regulatory requirements. 
 
41. The Secretary further deposed regarding CoEs before the Committee as 
follows:- 
 
“सर , आपने  स ओई क  सींख्ट या के  बारे  में पूछा  था  कक कट या यह पयााप्ट त है? हम उसक े कलए 
आवेदन  मींगाते हैं। जो सरकार  एकमनेंट इस्टिट्यूट्स हैं, उनक े  ह  लेते हैं। उन  आवेदन  के  कलए 
हमार  कमेट  होत  है, कजसमें हमारे  एकट सपटा होते हैं, उसमें इींडस्‍ट ट र   भ  होत  है, वे लोग उसक  
स्‍ट ि ूटन  करते  हैं। स्‍ट ि ूटनाइज  के  बाद  जो अच्ट छ े होते हैं, हम उनट ह ीं को  ले पाते  हैं। उसमें कजतने 
आते हैं, उतने  को  हम ले लेते हैं। अगर  वॉयबल ररसचा  प्रोजेकट ट्स है तो उस कहसाब से इींडस्‍ट ट र   क  
जो ररकट वॉयरमेंट, उसक े कहसाब से हमारे  पास  ई-ररसचस  प्रोजेकट ट्स के  आवेदन  आते हैं तो हम 
उसक े कहसाब से एलोक े ट करते  हैं”।   
 
VI Chemical Promotion and Development Scheme (CPDS) 
  
42. As regard CPDC the Committee were informed that the d epartment of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals is implementing the Chemical Promotion and 
Development Scheme (CPDS) to facilitate growth and development of chemicals and 
petrochemicals Industry by creation of knowledge products through studies, survey, 
data banks, promotional material etc. and dissemination of knowledge through 
conduct of seminars, conferences, exhibition, awards for excellence etc. to facilitate 
development of these sectors. 
 

15  
43. When asked as to how CPDS scheme facilitate the growth and development of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals industry and its long term vision, the Department in its 
written reply submitted that the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals is 
implementing the Chemical Promotion and Development Scheme (CPDS) to facilitate 
growth and development of chemicals and petrochemicals Industry by dissemination 
of knowledge through conduct of seminars, conferenc es, exhibition, etc. in different 
sub sectors of the industry such as agrochemi cals, Dyes and pigments, chlor -alkali, 
plastics, petrochemical. Based on the requests received from different industry 
associations, academic institutes, Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), Autonomous 
bodies, etc. for extending financial support for organiz ing workshops, training, theme 
based seminars etc., this Department provides soft support in the form of Grants -in-
Aid as per the extant guidelines.  
Various events are organized under the scheme which are useful for the promotion 
of Indian industry, trade and attracting foreign investment, R&D for indigenization of 
technologies & import substitution, scope of technology transfer, skill development, 
sustainability initiatives for comprehensive development of the sector. Training 
programmes focusing on green technology, chemical safety and safe handling of 
pesticides, etc. are also organized which benefit chemical industries and farmers. 
CIPET and IPFT, t he Autonomous Bodies of this Department and Industry 
Associations viz. Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry (FICCI), 
Confederation of Indian Industry, Indian Chemical Council, Dyestuffs Manufacturers 
Association of India, Alkali Manufacturers Association of India etc. organize events 
on the themes which are useful for the development of Indian Chemical & 
Petrochemical Industry.  
In this context, 13th edition of the event “India Chem 2024", one of the biggest event 
supported by the Department, was organized during 17 th-19th October, 2024, in 
Mumbai. The key objectives of India Chem 2024 were to showcase the opportunities 
being offered by rapidly growing Indian Chemicals and Petrochemicals Industry and 
various Government initiatives, for accelerating growth in the sector. The  event saw 
participation from 172 exhibitors, including 49 international exhibitors and attracted 
78 global CEOs, 135 speakers, and 689 foreign participants, 1,115 Indian delegates 
and 8,720 business visitors. 
To minimize the harms associated with excessive or indiscriminate use of pesticides, 
Department is promoting Safe and judicious use of Pesticides in crops through 
Farmers awareness programs under CPDS. Since 2016, the Department is 
organizing farmers training programmes on Safe and Judicious use of Pesticides in 
crops and creating awareness towards the adoption of Integrated Pest Management 
Practices to minimize pesticides residue in food grains, edible oils, fruits, and 
vegetables. So far, more than 250 programs have been organized by the Department, 
training more than 85,000 farmers across the country. 
The Department has also initiated a program to impart training to workforce of Major 
Accident Hazardous (MAH) Units for "Safe handling of hazardous chemicals at work 
place and reducing risk associated with hazardous chemicals" across the country, 
under the scheme. The programs are intended to cover all the 2,393 no of MAH Units 
over a period of 5 years. Each training programme is expected to cover 100 
participants from 50 MAH units, with 2 employees from each of units. Till date, 23 
such training programs have been organized at across the country. These trainings 
programs were attended by 1,499 industrial units. A total of 2,690 personnel have 
been trained through these training programs. 
By supporting such events and programs, the scheme provides a platform for both 

16  
domestic and international industries, to exchange ideas, share best practices, forge 
partnerships including technology transfer and increase trade opportunities and learn 
about safe practices for handling chemicals. 
Department also supports creation of knowledge products which are typically 
developed either directly by the Department or through funded grants-in-aid to eligible 
entities such as industry associations, autonomous bodies, public sector 
undertakings (PSUs), academic institutions, and other organizations. Department in 
partnership with National Institute of Disaster Management has developed a National 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals Disaster Management Plan. The plan serves as a 
comprehensive framework to enhan ce preparedness, prevention, mitigation, 
response, and recovery mechanisms specifically tailored to disasters and 
emergencies arising from chemicals and petrochemicals sectors. Department has 
also developed a Perspective Plan for the Petrochemical industry , in collaboration 
with Engineers India Ltd. The plan highlights the likely demand-supply scenarios over 
the next 10-15 years. Further, the Department has recently initiated a Study as well 
on Micro-plastics and Trace Elements Analysis in Bottled Drinking Water in Indian 
Climatic Conditions. The study which is to be conducted by CIPET, aims to 
investigate the migration of microplastics and additives from packaging materials to 
bottled drinking water in Indian climatic conditions.  
In addition to the above, the Department also supports creation and release of 
knowledge papers while extending financial support to the events like, conference, 
exhibitions, training programs etc. Following knowledge papers have been supported 
by the Department in FY 2024-25: 
a) Catalysing India’s chemicals and petrochemicals : strategies for global integration 
and growth – Launched during India Chem 2024, the report reflects the immense 
growth potential and strategic advantages of India's Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
industry. The government's proactive initiatives to improve the Ease of Doing 
Business (EoDB) are creating a more favourable investment environment, further 
accelerating growth in this vital sector. 
b) Empowering the Process Plant Machinery, Pumps, and valves Industry in India - 
Launched during India Chem 2024, the paper highlights the critical role of Process 
Plant Machinery, Pumps & Valves Industry in driving India's chemicals, 
petrochemicals, and infrastructure growth. 
c) Emerging trends, Challenges, and Opportunities shaping the Chlor-alkali Industry 
in 2025 was launched during Conference on Alkali Industry – Trends, Developments 
& Outlook, which focused on the growth trajectory along with challenges and 
expansion potential of the sector. 
d) "Innovations from Centres of Excellence: Driving Research from Innovation to 
Industry 4.0" – released during Chemcon Innovation Summit 2024, the book 
showcased the innovative products and breakthrough developed by Centres of 
Excellence across the country. 
A list of programmes for which financial support was extended during 2023 -24 and 
2024-25 under CPDS is given below:  
FY 2023-24 
S. No. Organization Subject 
1. NIDM, Delhi Preparation of Disaster Management Plan for Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals sector (payment of 3rd Instalment) 

17  
 
2. 
Green 
ChemisTree 
Foundation 
7th Industrial Green Chemistry World (IGCW -2023) 
Convention & Ecosystem, on 6 - 7 November 2023 in Mumbai. 
 
3. HIL 
28 one-day training programmes for farmers. A compendium 
on safe and judicious use of pesticides in vernacular 
languages is distributed to the trainees. 
4. IPFT 
16 training programmes for farmers on “Promotion of use and 
environment friendly pesticide formulations and practices for 
sustainable agricultural growth”. A compendium on use and 
environment friendly pesticide formulations in vernacular 
languages is distributed to the trainees.  
5. IPFT 
3 programmes on Innovative Technologies in Pesticide 
formulations and Quality Management Systems as per 
ISO/IEC 17025: 2017 – an Interaction with the Industries.  
6. 
Indian 
Chemical 
Council 
5 training programmes on “Safety and Environment 
Management/Practices for MSME Units in Chemical Sector”.  
7. CIPET 1st Petrochemicals Research and Innovation Commendation 
(PRIC) 
8. CIPET International Chemical Engineering Conference on Energy, 
Environment & Sustainability 
9. FICCI 
India: GCPMH 2023. During GCPMH 2023, a knowledge 
paper titled “Harnessing the potential of Sustainable 
Manufacturing and Circular Economy in the Indian Chemical 
Industry.” was released. 
10. HIL 4 one-day training programmes for farmers in NER. 
11. IPFT 
4 training programmes for farmers on “Promotion of user and 
environment friendly pesticide formulations and practices for 
sustainable agricultural growth” in NER. A compendium on use 
and environment friendly pesticide formulations in vernacular 
languages is distributed to the trainees. 
FY 2024-25 
S. No. Organization Subject 
1. CIPET For organizing two-day training programme on chemical safety 
in FY 2024-25.  
2. HIL (India) 
Ltd. 
For organizing 20 training programmes  on ‘Safe and judicious 
use of pesticides and application of new generation formulation 
for crop protection in vegetable crops’. A compendium on safe 
and judicious use of pesticides in vernacular languages is 
distributed to the trainees. 
3. HIL (India) 
Ltd. 
For organizing 10 training programmes on ‘Safe and judicious 
use of pesticides and application of new generation formulation 
for crop protection in vegetable crops’ in NER. A compendium 
on safe and judicious use of pesticides in vernacular languages 
is distributed to the trainees. 
4. FICCI 
India Chem 2024. During India Chem, a knowledge paper titled 
“Catalyzing India’s petrochemicals : strategies for global 
integration and growth.” was released. 
5. CIPET For organizing International  conference on “Advancements in 

18  
the Polymeric” during FY 2024-25 at CIPET: IPT, Lucknow – to 
be conducted in March, 2025. 
6. 
Indian 
Chemical 
Council 
For conducting training programmes on ‘Safety and 
Environment for MSME unit in Chemical Sector’ held at different 
locations during FY 2024-24. 
7. 
Indian 
Chambers of 
Commerce 
For organizing Chemcon Innovation Summit 2024 held on 
22/11/2024 in New Delhi. During the event, a data bank was 
released that showcased the innovative products and 
breakthroughs developed by Centres of Excellence (CoEs) 
8. CIPET 
For organizing two -day National conference on “Opportunities 
and challenges for petrochemical and allied sector in north 
Eastern Region” – to be conducted in March, 2025. 
44. On being asked whether the discontinuation of excellence awards has affected 
the scheme adversely, it was submitted that discontinuation of excellence awards  
has not affected the overall running or effectiveness of the scheme in any manner. 
Different industry associations, such as FICCI and Indian Chemical Council, in 
different sub sectors of Chemicals and Petrochemicals industry recognize the 
outstanding cont ributions of the industry members in various aspects such as 
manufacturing excellence, innovation, sustainability, energy efficiency, safety, and 
circular economy practices, R&D and management of Health & Environment. After 
evaluating and recognizing the contribution of individual members they conduct the 
award functions. The Department supports such en deavours and events suitably 
from time to time. 
 
VII     Central Institute of Petrochemical Engineering and Technology 
(CIPET) 
 
45. As regards CIPET the Committee were informed that CIPET is a  technical 
education institution under the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, engaged 
in skill development, technology support, as well as academic and research activities 
for the promotion of the petrochemical and allied industry in the country. CIPET has 48 
Centres across the country which includes 9 Institutes of Plastics Technology (IPTs), 
32 Centres for Skilling and Technical Support (CSTS), 03 Schools for Advanced 
Research in Polymers (SARP) and 4 sub- centres. It also has 3 functional Plastic Waste 
Management Centres (PWMCs) which has been established as demonstration and 
training centres in the field of Plastic Waste Management.  
 
46. The brief details of funds sought, allocated and utilized during the last three 
years were stated to be as follows:  
 
 (Rs. in crore) 
Financial Year Grants Proposed Actual Allocation Actual Utilization  BE RE 
2023-24 106.20 92.88 7.28 0.00 
2024-25 62.58 36.37 44.20 44.20  
2025-26 80.00 78.48 76.35 58.86 (upto 28.01.2026) 

19  
2026-27     
  70.00   
 
47. When asked that BE for the year 2023-24 was 92.88 crore which was reduced 
drastically to Rs. 7.28 crore and the actual utilization was NIL. The Department in their 
written reply submitted that at the close of 2022 -23, a comprehensive review of the 
funds released and utilized in CIPET was undertaken wherein it was noted that funds 
were available with CIPET from releases of previous years. Accordingly, it was 
decided that no funds would be released to CIPET until the unspent balance from 
previous years is fully utilised or surrendered and hence no funds were released during 
2023-24. During the year, CIPET incurred expenditure from the releases of previous 
years and at the close of 2023-24, an amount of Rs. 34,65,71,478 which included the 
unspent balance and interest accrued,  was deposited into the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 
 
48. The Committee then desired to know  about the reasons for the unspent funds  
from previous years which were available with CIPET in the year 2023 -24, the 
Department submitted that in  earlier system, the grants were released to CIPET HO 
for various projects and these grants were then transferred to the centres by the HO.  
The Centres will then utilize the funds based on the completion of works and payments 
would be made to contractors/ vendors. There was no system in place to check the 
real time utilisation o f the grants by the centers and the Department was dependent 
on the Utilisation Certificate furnished by the HO. At the end of FY 2022 -23, a 
comprehensive review of the utilisation of the grants and physical progress was done 
and it was then found that the  un-utilized funds are available with the centres. 
Subsequently, TSA system was adopted in 2023-24, to release the amount on a real-
time basis as per requirement. The TSA system is now being used for disbursal of 
funds.  
 
49. When asked that for the financial year 2026–27, the Department has proposed 
a Budget Estimate (BE) of Rs. 70 crore, which is lower than the BE of Rs. 78.48 crore 
for the year 2025–26, the Department submitted that the BE was proposed to be Rs. 
70.00 crore as the timeline of the various ongoing projects is till 31.03.2026. 
Considering that the ongoing approved projects are likely to get completed by 
31.03.2026 and the process of approval  for new projects is still ongoing, the BE was 
proposed to be Rs. 70.00 crore. 
 
50. Explaining the role of the Department in promoting CIPET, Secretary submitted 
as under:- 
 
“Sir, we have also tried to streamline their functioning. They ha ve centres 
scattered across different locations. We have consolidated information and 
functioning of these centres. As I mentioned earlier, their funds were distributed 
across centres, and the head office did not have complete information regarding 
expenditure and activities. Now, everything has been brought online. We know 
how much funds are lying with each centre, and we consolidate the expenditure 

20  
and allocate funds for the next year depending on the results. We have also 
prepared a plan to modernise their classrooms, teaching facilities, and 
laboratories. कसपेट के  स्‍ट टॉि में भ  थोड  स  यह समस्‍ट या थ  कक क ‍ु छ स्‍ट टॉि क  सींख्ट या लैप्ट स 
हो गई थ । We have taken up the matter with the Department of Expenditure to 
allow us to fix the required strength and begin recruitment so that there is no 
shortage of teaching staff. We are also constructing new hostels for boys and 
girls to facilitate learning, since many students come from small towns and rural 
areas. If they are provided residential facilities, their response and performance 
are better. प्ट लेसमेंट में भ  कसपेट काि  मेहनत  कर  रहा  है और  हमने  कवकभनट न इींडस्‍ट ट र  ज बॉड ज 
से टाईअप  करक े  इनक े  प्ट लेसमेंट, रोजगार  मेला  लगवाने  श‍ुरू ककए हैं, जहाीं पर  बच्ट चोीं को  एक  
अच्ट छ े प्ट लेसमेंट क  अपॉच‍ुाकनट  कमल रह  है। All these initiatives are ongoing, and 
whatever suggestions emerge during discussions, we are trying to facilitate them”. 
 
  
51.  As regard a suggestion upgradation of  CIPET as a Central University, 
Secretary submitted as under:- 
 
“………… it requires a lot of inter -ministerial consultation also because CIPET 
is not a purely educational institute right now. They are also providing technical 
services. They are also providing technical short -term trainings, refresher 
courses and diploma courses. Their activities are mixed. So, we have to really 
examine and study as to what it entails to convert them into a university. We 
will have to consult the Department of Higher Education. We have to assess 
our own capacity also. Then only will we be able to come to a conclusion and 
comment on it. But as I mentioned earlier, their degree courses, which is 
primarily the function of a university, are undersubscribed. So, we are also 
trying to study whether there is a demand for them or we should convert the 
degree courses into diploma courses or what kind of demand is there. So, we 
are going into all these details. Once we have done this study, we will be able 
to come to a conclusion.  
As far as a modern action plan for future is concerned, we are going to have a 
brainstorming session in the month of April where we could call all our Centre 
heads. We will ask them to recount their experiences and their suggestions 
also. Then we will finalize the plan. Unless we consult them, it would be a one-
sided plan whic h would not be good. So, we plan to hold a two -day seminar 
with them, consult them and then finalize our plan 
 
52. On a pointed query, whether  CIPET centres can be opened at  
Commissionerate level, the Department replied that the CIPET has established centres 
across the country based on the requirement of the local industry and the need for the 
skilling among the local youth. The establishment of these centres is done after 
conducting feasibility studies based on assessing industry  demand, regional 
requirements, and the availability of resources within CIPET. 
 
53. In response to a specific query of the Committee regarding the intake capacity 
of CIPET to train students  and the actual no. of students getting trained at various 
CIPET centres, the representative submitted as under:- 
 

21  
“………. हमारे  स आईप ईट  के  प्रकशक्षण क  जो क्षमता है, वह 71 हजार  प्रकत वर्ा  क  है। इस 
वर्ा  अभ  तक  59 हजार  के  कर ब  प्रकशक्षण ककए गए हैं। औद्योकगक पररवेश  के  बारे  में पूछा  गया  
था।  उसक े सींबींध में मैं बताना  चाहींगा कक उसमें दो प्रकार  के  प्रकशक्षण कायािम  चलते हैं। एक  
स्टिल डेवलपमेंट ट रेकनींग प्रोग्राम  है, जो कक एमएसड ई के  लाइनमेंट पर  त न  मह ने  और  चार  
मह ने  के  कलए चलता  है। जो औद्योकगक पररवेश  के  अन‍ुसार चलता  है, वह स्टिल अपग्रेडेशन  
प्रोग्राम  है, कजसमें कक इींडस्‍ट ट र   के  लोग आते हैं और  त न  कदन से लेकर  10 कदन तक  के  कायािमोीं 
में भाग  लेते हैं। इसकलए जो हमार  क्षमता है, वह हमारे  कट लास रूम्ट स और  प्रकशक्षकोीं पर  कनधााररत  
है। यह क्षमता लगभग 71 हजार  क  है। प्रकतवर्ा  हम लगभग 71 हजार  के  कर ब  प्रकशक्षण करते  
हैं”।  
 
54. On being asked about the details of the students enrolled during the year 2022-
23, 2024-25 and 2025-26 for the various courses and the details of students passed 
out and getting placements for each of the courses separately. The Department 
furnished the details as under:- 
 
Academic  year 
No. of students enrolled in  
various courses (Long 
term) 
No. of students enrolled in 
various Placement linked 
Skill Development Courses 
2023-24 12020 11706 
2024-25 11814 9844 
2025-26 12158 10698 (as on 15.02.2026) 
 
 
55. The placement rate for the students after successfully completion of courses in 
CIPET Centres were stated to be as follows: 
 
56. Regarding the query on adequate number of faculty for each course offered at 
CIPET, the Department replied that CIPET has faculty members on permanent and 
regular employment and on contract with fixed tenure for its academic programmes to 
meet the requirements of the regulatory and statutory authorities. 
 
VIII Plastics Waste Management Centres (PWMCs) 
 57. The Committee was informed that the Plastics Waste Management Centres  
(PWMCs) at Varanasi, Bengaluru & Bhagalpur are operational. The installation of 
Year 
Percentage of 
placement for 
degree and 
diploma courses 
No. of students 
placed, including 
higher studies for 
degree and 
diploma courses 
Placement 
Percentage for 
Skill Development 
Training 
Programmes 
No of students placed for 
Skill development training 
programmes 
2022-23 92% 3952 77.12% 10829 
2023-24 94% 3783 85.34% 9990 
2024-25 90% 3598 84.97% 8364 

22  
machineries is under progress at Sanand and it will be operational in the current FY 
2025-26.  
Currently, Skill training programs and process recycling of plastic waste are 
being undertaken at the three PWMCs at Varanasi, Bengaluru and Bhagalpur. 532 
persons have been trained and 33.7 tonnes plastic waste has been recycled so far in 
these centres. 
58. When asked whether the Department has sought any feedback of the general 
public regarding functioning of PWMCs, the Department submitted that the school and 
college students who have visited the PWMC centres have expressed keen interest 
and appreciation af ter witnessing firsthand that plastic waste can be effectively 
recycled using scientific and technological processes. The industrial representatives 
and participants of seminars and other meetings organized by CIPET have provided 
very positive feedback and have suggested organizing more such interactive sessions 
and specialized courses in the coming years. 
59. Regarding the query regarding steps taken by the department to make the 
general public aware of functioning of PWMCs, the Department replied that during FY 
2025-26, the Department/PWMCs have completed skill training programmes for 532 
no. of persons. Further, PWMCs have promoted awareness regarding of plastic waste 
solutions by organising visits of schools/ college students/ interaction programmes 
with industry, academic institutions, municipal offices and waste collectors and 
processors have been conducted.  
60. When Committee enquired about the proposal to establish PWMCs in other 
states, the Department replied that the proposal for establishing three additional 
Plastics Waste Management Centres at CIPET: CSTS, Dehradun; CIPET: IPT, 
Murthal; and CIPET: IPT, Chennai has been included in the proposals for funds for the 
FY 2026- 27 to 2030-31. The proposals are under consideration for the fund allotment. 
IX Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology (IPFT) 
 
61. The Committee have been informed that the Institute of Pesticide Formulation 
Technology (IPFT), established in 1991, is an autonomous institution, under 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, 
Government of India. IPFT is working on the development of the user and environment 
friendly new generation pesticide formulation technologies.  
 
The main objectives of IPFT are: 
 
i. Development and production of user and environment friendly pesticide 
formulation technology. 
ii. Promotion of efficient application technologies suiting the existing 
requirements of the newer formulations. 

23  
iii. Information dissemination for safe manufacturing practices, quality 
assurances, raw material specifications and sources. 
iv. Providing Analytical and consultancy services. 
v. Continuing education in research through specialized training for pesticide 
personnel working in agrochemical R&D. 
 
62. The institute has three functional verticals, viz., Formulation Development, 
Analytical Characterization and Bioscience activities. The details are as follows: 
 
(i) Formulation Development:  The main objective of this vertical is to 
develop user and environment friendly new generation pesticide formulations for 
agricultural as well as household pest management. The vertical also assists the 
pesticide industry personnel in producing safe and environment friendly pesticide 
formulations by enhancing their knowledge through training and seminars and 
provides consultancy services to the industries in India and abroad on pesticide 
formulations technology development. The institute also has pilot pla nt facilities 
that can scale up lab scale research to a commercial production with optimum 
budget. The pilot plant facility of IPFT has the capacity to produce the 
formulations upto 100 kg per shift.   
 
(ii) Analytical Activities: The Analytical facility is accredited for chemical 
testing of pesticides (Technical & Formulations), pesticide residues in various 
food matrices, chemical warfare agents and their precursors and degradation 
products. In addition to providing various analy tical services such as quality 
assurance, persistence and residue analysis in various matrices, it also 
undertakes R & D projects from various agencies and the pesticide industry.  
 
(iii) Bioscience Activities: The major thrust of the vertical is to evaluate the 
different pesticide formulations developed by this institute or by the industry for 
their bio -efficacy and environmental impacts, through well -equipped bio -assay 
laboratory, green house/glass house and experimental field trials. The division is 
recognized by Central Insecticide Board/Registration Committee (CIB & RC) for 
generation of data on bio -efficacy, phytotoxicity, phytotoxicity, compatibility, 
effect of pesticides on nat ural enemies of pests and residual aspects of 
pesticides. 
 
IPFT laboratories are equipped with analytical instruments such as GC, HPLC, 
Preparative HPLC, GC -MS, GC -MS/MS, LC -MS/MS, LC -HRMS (LC/Q -TOF & 
LC-Orbitrap-MS), LC -ICP-MS, NMR, CHNSO Analyser, DSC -TGA, FTIR and 
other equipments related to physical -chemical analysis of pesticides and their 
formulations.  
 
63. The details of funds sought, allocated and utilized during the last three years 
was as follows:   
 
 

24  
(Rs. in Crore) 
Year Grants proposed  Actual Allocation Actual Utilization in 
IPFT BE RE  
2023-2024 12.62 12.62 14.12 14.12 
2024-2025 21.50 20.65 17.15 17.15  
2025-2026 13.00 12.15 12.15 8.39 (upto 28.01.2026) 
 
64. It may be seen that during the year 2023-24 and 2024-25, the IPFT utilized the 
entire RE of Rs. 14.12 crore and 17.15 crore allocated to it.  However, during the year 
2025-26 out of the allocated RE of 12.15 crore, IPFT could utilize only Rs. 8.39 crore 
up to 28.01.2026. On asking the reason for slow utilization of funds, the Department 
has replied that  out of the 2025 -26 RE of 12.15 crore, Rs.10.79 crore is already 
released to the IPFT till 20.02.2026. The Institute is in the process of purchase of 
equipments to ensure utilization of the funds. 
 
65. When asked that BE (2023 -24) was Rs. 12.62 crore which was enhanced to 
Rs.  20.65 crore in the year 2024-2025 and reduced to Rs. 12.15 crore during the year 
2025-26, the Department replied that  during the year 2024 -25, the enhanced grant 
was sought by the IPFT for the procurement of laboratory equipment i.e. LC-HRMS at 
an estimated cost of Rs. 6.00 crore. As there are limited requirements in the financial 
year 2025-26 for creation of the capital assets, therefore BE 2025 -26 is reduced, as 
per actual requirement of the institute.  
 
66. When pointed out that d uring the year 2023 -24, IPFT developed 07 
formulations out of which only 02 formulation were transferred to industry. Similarly in 
the year 2024 -25, IPFT developed 10 formulations out of which only 01 formulation 
could be transferred and in the year 2025 -26, IPFT developed 10 formulations out of 
which only 02 formulations could be transferred to industry, the Department in written 
reply had submitted that  the Department replied that from 2023 -24 to 2025 -26, 27 
formulations were developed by the Institute, out of which 22 formulations are still not 
transferred to the industry.  After development of formulations, the data has to be 
generated as per regulator y requirement. Further work is to be carried out regarding 
efficacy, environment impact etc for these formulations. 
 
67. Asked to state about the expansion of the functions of IPFT and using their 
production capacity, the Department in its written submission clarified that the IPFT is 
a research and development institute and not involved in the production and marketing 
of any formulations. At IPFT the technologies of pesticide formulations are developed 
and transferred to different industries for commercialization. 
 
68. As regard to the future assessments, it was submitted that IPFT will be working 
in the following areas in the coming years: 
 
• Development of user and environment friendly combination formulations like 
insecticide-insecticide, insecticide -fungicide, herbicide -herbicides. These 

25  
formulations will provide advantages of broad -spectrum bio -efficacy, 
minimizing pesticide residues in crop products and environmental 
contamination; 
• Development of bio -botanical pesticides and their formulations as an efficient 
delivery system for the management of various agricultural, stored grain pests, 
nematodes, ticks parasites and mosquito vectors; 
• Establishing Bio -foundry facility to further augment biopesticide and their 
formulations development with assistance from Department of Biotechnology; 
• Conducting Analytical Skills Development Courses (ASDC) under the 
sponsorship of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 
(OPCW), The Netherlands. The 1st programme was conducted from 22nd 
September to 3rd October 2025 and was attended by 1 5 participants 
representing 13 countries — Burundi, Sri Lanka, Brazil, Lesotho, Tanzania, 
Kenya, Philippines, Uganda, Oman, Barbados, Morocco, Zambia, and Malawi. 
 
69. When asked about the response of farmers towards use of Bio-Pesticides, the 
representative submitted as under:- 
 
“सर , नकसािों  के नवषय पर  मैं आपको बतािा चाहाँगी नक बायो-पेस्टिसाइड इफ े स्टिव तो है, 
लेनकि थोड़ा सा  टाइम लेता है। इसीनलए  िीर े-िीर े इसकी  एर्क्ेप्टेनबनलटी बढ रही  है। हम 
कोनिि यही कर  रहे  हैं नक नकसािों  को इसक े  जो फायद े हैं नक हो सकता  है नक िाटस टमस में 
बहुत इफ े स्टिव ि हो, नजतिा क े नमकल पेस्टिसाइड तुर ं त एि कर  देता है, उतिा ि कर े, लेनकि 
लॉन्ग टमस में सोइल  की क्वानलटी और  इि सब  चीजों के नलए, ह्यूमि हेल्थ के नलए, सभी  चीजों 
के नलए फायद े मंद है, तो इि ट िेनिंग्स के माध्यम से  नकसािों  को हम वही समझािे  की कोनिि 
करते  हैं। 
मतलब, यह मैं एक प्रैस्टिकल बात कह रही  हाँ। आजकल ज़्यादातर नकसाि  तीि फसल  लेिे की 
भी कोनिि करते  हैं तो उिक े पास  गैप कम होता है, नफर  थोड़ी वेदर  की और  बाकी चीजों की 
अिसटेंटीज  होती हैं, तो नकसाि  की कोनिि यही रहती  है नक नजसकी  इफ े स्टिविेस उसको  
पता है, वह उसी  को यूज कर े, क्ोंनक  वह ररस्क  िहीं लेिा चाहता। बार -बार  सभी  जगह जाकर  
और  ट िेनिंग करवाकर  हम नकसािों  को समझािे  की कोनिि कर  रहे  हैं। यह इसी  नदिा में एक 
प्रयास  है नक िीर े-िीर े बायो-पेस्टिसाइड्स  की एर्क्ेप्टेनबनलटी बढ े और  इसको  हम आगे बढा 
सक ें । “ 
 
70. When Committee sought to know the reasons for the IPFT not utilizing its 
production capacity, the representative deposed as under:- 
 
“Sir, we are a R&D institute but we develop the product at market-ready stage 
and transfer it to industry. We can work on mosquito repellents. We have 
transferred neem-based mosquito repellents to HAL. …… They are an R&D 
institute. They are not into production.” 
 
71. The Department has also submitted that IPFT is actively creating awareness 
about new -generation pesticide formulations and safe applications through farmer 
Awareness programmes, field demonstrations, training workshops, and exhibitions. It 
also disseminates information via brochures, regional -language materials, social 
media, and its Hindi magazine, Krishirasayan Digdarshika, and also collaborates with 

26  
state agriculture departments. These efforts encourage farmers, households, and the 
general public to understand and adopt safer, eco -friendly pesticides for agricultural 
and household pest management. 
 
72. As regards the Farmers Training Programmes, the Department submitted that 
the institute ha d conducted 20 Farmers Training programmes during 2023 -24, 02 
programmes during 2024 -25 and 09 programmes during 2025 -26 so far, for the 
farmers awareness. The details of the programmes conducted in the states including 
Haryana were as follows: 
 
Financial 
Year 
State(s) Covered (Other 
than Haryana) 
No. of 
Programmes 
Approx. No. of Farmers 
Participated  
2023–24 
Rajasthan 02 775 
Andhra Pradesh 03 2000 
Odisha 02 2135 
Madhya Pradesh 02 911 
Ladakh 02 603 
Karnataka 03 805 
Assam 02 793 
Meghalaya 01 339 
Mizoram 01 358 
Haryana 02 496 
2024–25 Haryana 02 130 
2025–26 (till 
date) 
Andhra Pradesh 03 1293 
Punjab 02 696 
Uttar Pradesh 01  366 
Telangana 02 924 
Haryana 01 456 
Total 31 13080 
 
 
73. The Committee then desired to know that the sanctioned and actual strength of 
IPFT as on date and no. of post lying vacant in the IPFT, the Department replied that 
IPFT had a total sanctioned strength of 40 and out of which, a total of 13 posts lapsed 
over a period of time. The working strength of the Institute at present is 16, including 
10 scientific posts. 10 posts are vacant for which recruitment is under progress. 
 
X Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) 
74. The Committee have been informed that t he following three PSUs  are under 
the administrative control of the Department: 

27  
  (i) Hindustan Organic Chemical Limited (HOCL) 
(ii) Hindustan Fluorocarbons Limited (HFL) 
(iii) HIL (India) Limited 
 
(i) Hindustan Organic Chemicals Limited : HOCL was incorporated in 
December, 1960. It established two manufacturing units: one in Rasayani 
(Maharashtra) in 1971, and another in Kochi (Kerala) in 1987. Rasayani unit 
manufactured Concentrated Nitric Acid and Di -Nitrogen Tetroxide (N 2O4). The Kochi 
unit is producing Phenol, Acetone, and Hydrogen Peroxide. Due to financial losses, a 
restructuring plan was approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA) on May 17, 2017. Accordingly, the Rasayani unit at Maharashtra was closed 
in 2018, as it  was deemed financially unviable. Subsequently, the plant at Rasayani 
has been completely shut down and employees have been relieved through voluntary 
Retirement Scheme (VRS) / Voluntary Separation Scheme (VSS) and non-VRS opted 
employees were transferred to Kochi unit. Only sale of land is remaining which is under 
process. 
The Profit Before Tax (PBT) of HOCL is (-) Rs.55.32 Cr. in Financial year 2023-24 and 
Rs 394.87 Cr. in Financial year 2024 -25. The difference of numbers is because of 
waiver of Government of India dues of Rs. 1351.37 Crore by the Government on 
21.03.2025. 
(ii) Hindustan Fluorocarbons Limited (HFL): Hindustan Fluorocarbons Ltd. 
(HFL), a subsidiary of Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd. (HOCL), was incorporated 
on 14 July 1983 and is located at Rudraram, Sangareddy District, Telangana. The 
Company manufactured Poly Tetra Fluoro Ethylene (PTFE and Chloro D i Fluoro 
Methane (CFM-22. With CFM-22 being phased out under the  Montreal Protocol due 
to its ozone-depleting and high global warming potential, the company incurred losses 
and consequently, CCEA approved the shutdown and closure of the company on 22 
January 2020. Accordingly, all the closure activities of the Company have been 
completed. Only disposal of land is remaining which is under process.  
(iii) HIL (India) Limited: 
HIL (India) Limited was incorporated in 1954 to supply DDT for the National Malaria 
Eradication Programme. Over time, the company diversified into Agrochemical 
manufacturing, establishing production facilities at Udyogamandal (Kerala) in 1957 for 
technical pesticides, at Rasayani (Maharashtra) in 1977 for DDT production, and at 
Bathinda (Punjab) in 2003 for formulations.  
Following India’s commitment to reduce reliance on DDT, its demand declined, making 
the DDT plant economically unviable. Accordingly, following the approval by the 
Alternative Mechanism (AM) on 25 th September, 2023, Bathinda & Udyogamandal 
units have been closed and relocation of usable plants & equipment to Rasayani 
(Maharashtra) is under progress. Currently, HIL is operating as a single manufacturing 
unit located at Rasayani (Maharashtra) with the facility to manufacture Technical and 
formulation of LLIN,  Malathion, Imidacloprid, Chlorpyriphos & Water -Soluble 

28  
Fertilizers.  
HIL is also executing the following UNIDO supported sustainable projects: 
• Development and Promotion of non -Persistent Organic Pollutant (non -POP) 
alternatives to DDT  
• Financing Agrochemical Reduction  and Management (FARM) by way of 
developing alternatives to conventional pesticides.  
 
75. The Committee were informed that restructuring Plan for closing of two units of 
HOCL Rasayani, Maharashra  1970 and Kochi, Kerala (1987) was approved on 
17.05.2017 and Rasayani Unit ha d already been closed and disposal of land was 
under progress.  The Committee therefore desired to be apprised of  the reasons for 
the delay in disposal of land, the Department submitted that a s per the restructuring 
plan approved by the Govt. of India on 17.05.2017, only Rasayani unit of HOCL was 
to be closed. Rasayani Unit of HOCL has its land parcels at Rasayani and at Panvel 
in Maharashtra. The Govt. of India had approved sale of 684 acres of land at Rasayani 
to BPCL, out of which 408.31 acres for a sum of Rs. 583.55 Crore have already been 
registered by BPCL. In addition to the above 684 acres, HOCL holds approximately 
234.35 acres of additional land at Rasayani. The remaining land of 510.04 acres 
(275.69+234.35) could not be sold due to encroachments. The matter has been taken 
up with Government of Maharashtra for removing the encroachment.  Under Rasayni 
Unit, HOCL also has 7.09 acres of land at Panvel. The matte r of sale is being taken 
up with NBCC for sale of land. Further, 0.25 acres of land at Kharghar was sold to 
National Aluminum Company Limited (NALCO)  in 2019 for Rs. 12.97 Crores. CCEA 
had also approved transfer of CNA/N2O4 plant at Rasayani to ISRO alongwith its 
assets on ‘as is where is basis’. Subsequently, 20 acres of land was transferred to 
ISRO. 
 
XI Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment Region 
(PCPIR)  
 
76. The Committee was informed that At present three Petroleum, Chemical and 
Petrochemical Investment Regions (PCPIRs) are being implemented in the States of 
Andhra Pradesh (Vishakhapatnam), Gujarat (Dahej) and Odisha (Paradeep) to 
promote investment and industrial development in these sectors.  
 
The status of implementation and execution of PCPIR projects is indicated below:- 
 
Indicator Gujarat Andhra Pradesh Odisha Total 
Location/ 
Region 
Dahej, Bharuch Vishakhapatnam– 
Kakinada 
Paradeep - 
Approval Feb, 2009 Feb, 2009 Dec, 2010 - 
Total Area 
(Sq. kms.) 
453.00 640.00 284.15 1377.15 
Anchor 
Tenant 
ONGC Petro 
Additions Limited 
(OPaL) 
-- Indian Oil 
Corporation 
Ltd. (IOCL) 
- 

29  
Indicator Gujarat Andhra Pradesh Odisha Total 
Investments 
made (Rs. 
Crore) 
1,37,163 68,148 1,43,881 3,49,192 
Employment 
generated 
(No.) 
2,45,140 86,123 40,000 3,71,263 
No. of 
Chemical 
Units 
2079 154 13 
2246 
 
As per the PCPIR Policy, 2007, the State Government concerned plays the lead 
role in setting up of the PCPIR. A nodal Department or agency is notified for 
coordinating the linkages. A management body constituted by the State Government 
for each PCPIR, under the relevant legislation, is responsible for the development and 
management of the PCPIR. A developer or a group of co -developers is selected 
through a transparent mechanism to manage the internal infrastructure of the PCPIR.  
 
77. The Committee were further informed about PCPIR that so far, the Department 
has not received any proposal from the State Government for providing Viability Gap 
Funding under this policy. Therefore, no budgetary allocation has been made and no 
expenditure has been incurred by the Department under the PCPIR Policy, 2007.   
 
78. The Committee desired to know whether the Department need any further 
review in PCPIR Policy 2007, the Department in written replies submitted that a t 
present, there is no proposal under consideration in the Department to review the 
PCPIR Policy, 2007. However, the Department regularly monitors the progress of the 
notified PCPIR s through periodic reviews to assess development status of the 
regions. 
 
XII      Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) 
 
79. With regard to Foreign Direct Investment ( FDI), the Department has informed 
that as per FDI Policy 2020, FDI in Chemical Sector of India is permitted 100% under 
the automatic route for manufacturing and trading of Chemicals and Petrochemicals. 
However, the FDI proposals, involving investments from an entity of a country, which 
shares land border with India or where the beneficial owner of an investment into India 
is situated in or is a citizen of any such country [as required in terms of Press Note 3 
of 2020 read with Foreign Exchange Management (N on-debt Instruments) 
Amendment Rules, 2020 dated 22.04.2020], requires approval from Government of 
India.  
 
From April 2000 to September 2025 , cumulative FDI equity inflows into India across 
all sectors stood at INR 50,72,865.65 crore (USD 764,183.09 million). During the same 
period, the Chemicals sector received cumulative FDI equity inflows of INR 
1,47,453.93 crore (USD 23,793.67 million) , accounting for 3.11% of total FDI equity 

30  
inflows into the country. The sector ranked 10th among all sectors in terms of 
cumulative FDI inflows. 
 
During FY 2025-26, (April–September), FDI equity inflows into the Chemicals sector 
amounted to INR 4,598.19 crore (USD 534.12 million), representing 1.5% of total FDI 
inflows in the same duration. 
 
80. To attract and sustain investments in this sector, the Government of India has 
established a liberal and facilitative policy framework. The Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals sector is a deregulated sector. Currently, 100% FDI is permitted under 
the automatic route in the sector for both manufacturing and trading activities to 
facilitate Foreign Direct Investment. Thus, the Foreign Direct Investment in the sector 
is governed purely on economic factors. 
 
Further, the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals organizes various 
events from time to time for the promotion of Indian industry, trade and attracting 
foreign investment, to build partnership within the domestic industry as well as 
between domestic and international industry for synergy, technology transfer, skill 
development, sustainability initiatives, for comprehensive development of the sector. 
The Department conducts such events through various industry bodies such as 
Federation of Indian Chambe rs of Commerce & Industry, Confederation of Indian 
Industry, Indian Chemical Council, Dyestuffs Manufacturers Association of India, 
Alkali Manufacturers Association of India  etc. Such events, though organized on 
sectoral themes have the overall objective of attracting investment in the country.  
 
In this context, a biennial event called India Chem is being organized by the 
Department in collaboration with FICCI over more than last two decades. Last such 
event was organized during 17 th-19th October, 2024, in Mumbai. The key objectives 
are to showcase the opportunities being offered by rapidly growing Indian Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals Industry and various Government initiatives, for accelerating 
growth in the sector. The event saw participa tion from 172 exhibitors, including 49 
international exhibitors and attracted 78 global CEOs, 135 speakers, and 689 foreign 
participants, 1,115 Indian delegates and 8,720 business visitors. 
Apart from above, the Department is implementing initiatives such as, namely the 
establishment of Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment Regions 
(PCPIRs) and Plastic Parks to attract investment in the sector. 
 
81. When asked whether the Department has revised any policy to attract FDI in 
Chemicals and Petrochemical sector, the department in written reply submitted that 
yes, the Government has adopted a liberal Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) policy 
framework for the Chemicals and Petrochemicals sector. At present, 100% FDI is 
permitted under the Automatic Route in the Chemicals and Petrochemicals sector for 
both manufacturing and trading activities. Government approval is required only in 
cases involving investment from entities of countries sharing land borders with India, 
as per the Press Note 3 (2020) issued by the Department for Promotion of Industry 
and Internal Trade and existing policy provisions. Therefore, the current FDI policy 

31  
framework has contributed to sustained foreign investment inflows into the Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals sector. 
In addition to the enabling FDI policy, the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals has undertaken several steps to attract large -scale investments, 
including: 
• Organizing major international investment promotion events such as India Chem 
to showcase India’s manufacturing capabilities and investment opportunities. 
• The Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs) 
policy were established as integrated, large -scale industrial clusters  to boost 
manufacturing, enhance competitiveness, and attract domestic/foreign 
investment. 
These initiatives aim to position India as a preferred global destination for investments 
in Chemicals and Petrochemicals. 
 
82. FDI Received in last 5 years in Chemical Sector 
 
 
 
83. When asked about the reasons for the decline in Foreign Direct Investment 
(FDI) in the Chemicals and Petrochemicals sector in the financial year 2022-23 which 
was Rs. 14632 crore which fell to Rs. 6985 crore in the year 2023 -24 and in the year 
2024-25 it rose marginally to Rs. 8943 crore and finally reduced to Rs. 4,598.19 crore 
in the year 2025-26, the Secretary, DCPC submitted as under:- 
 
 “सर , आपने  एिड आई के  सींबींध में जो प्ट वायींट-आउट ककया  है, वह सह  है। यह इसकलए हुआ 
था , कट योींकक वर्ा  2022-23 में भारत  में सज्ट जन  इींकडया कलकमटेड नाम  से एक  बहुत बड  यूकनट का  
कनवेश आया  था , कजनट होींने  इसमें काि  पैसे कनवेश ककये थे, इसकलए उस साल  यह काि  बढ़ 
गया  था।  वैसे भ  हमलोग इसक े कलए लगातार  कोकशश कर  रहे  हैं। वर्ा  2023-24 क  त‍ुलना में 
वर्ा  2024-25 में हमारा  काि  कनवेश बढ़ा है। इस साल  भ  हम प्रयास  कर  रहे  हैं और  हमें 
उम्ट म द है कक इस साल  से लेकर  अगले साल  तक  इसक े कनवेश में एक -दो बड  यूकनट्स आए ीं ग ।  
 सर , 'ईज़-ऑि-ड ू इींग-कबजनेस' के  प्रयास  तो वैसे सभ  उद्योगोीं के  कलए सभ  सेकट टसा में ककए जा  
रहे  हैं, प्रकियाओीं को  सरल क ृ त  ककया  जा  रहा  है। हमार  इींडस्‍ट ट र   में चूींकक एनवायरनमेंटल  


32  
स्टियरेंस और  एनवायरनमेंटल  इश्ट यूज़ का  बहुत बडा  हाथ  होता  है, इसकलए हमने  उस पर  बहुत 
िोकस  ककया  है। हमने  चार  इींडस्‍ट ट र   स्‍ट टेकहोल्डसा क ीं सल्ट टेशनट स ककए। उनक  समस्‍ट याओीं को  नोट  
करक े  हमने  पयाावरण , वन  और  जलवाय‍ु पररवतान  मींत्रालय के  साथ  इसे टेक -अप ककया  है। इसमें 
दो बैठक  सकचव के  स्‍ट तर  पर  भ  हुई हैं। सरल करण  से सींबींकधत बहुत सार  ऐस  प्रकियाए ीं हैं, जो 
वे कर  रहे  हैं। जैसे कक हमार  इींडस्‍ट ट र   क  ररकट वेस्‍ट ट थ  कक ड प-सी  कडस्‍ट चाजा के  नॉम्ट सा बहुत स्‍ट ट र  ींजेंट 
हैं, तो इसको  थोडा -सा  खोला  जाए  और  इसमें जो स्‍ट टड  बहुत समय ले रह  है, इसको  जल्ट द  पूर  
क  जाए।  इसे हमने  टेक -अप ककया।  वह स्‍ट टड  पूर  हुई है। इस  ब च, इनक े  कलए इन  नॉम्ट सा में 
छ ू ट भ  द  गय  है। इस  प्रकार  से, हमने  उनक े  साथ  जो भ  इश्ट यूज टेक -अप ककया , उसमें 
पयाावरण , वन  और  जलवाय‍ु पररवतान  मींत्रालय का  ररस्‍ट पॉनट स काि  अच्ट छा रहा  है। उनट होींने  कई  
च जोीं को  ककया  है, जैसे हैज़ाडास क े कमकल्ट स को  कह ीं भ  कडस्‍ट पोज़ करने  के  कलए या  उनक े  वेस्‍ट ट 
के  कडस्‍ट पोजल के  कलए एस.ओ.प ज़. क  आवश्ट यकता  होत  है। पहले ये एस.ओ.प ज़. नह ीं थ ीं। 
हमने  उनक े  साथ  इसे टेक -अप ककया  और  आज क  तार ख  में इस काम  को  एकट सपेडाइट  करक े  
वे 125 क े कमकल्ट स क  एस.ओ.प ज़. बना  च‍ुक े हैं और  अब कर ब  15 या  16 क े कमकल्ट स क  ह  
एस.ओ.प ज़. पेंकडींग रह  गय  हैं। इस तर क े  से हमार  इींडस्‍ट ट  क  जो भ  समस्‍ट याएीं होत  हैं, उनट हें 
हम पयाावरण , वन  और  जलवाय‍ु पररवतान  मींत्रालय के  साथ  टेक -अप करक े  इसको  सरल क ृ त  
कराने  क  चेष्ट टा भ  कर  रहे  हैं।“ 
 
XIII Chemicals and Petrochemicals Industry 
 
84         When Committee desired to know about the  steps taken by the Department 
to strengthen the Chemicals and Petrochemicals Industry and measures taken by the 
Department to increase India's share of Chemicals & Petrochemicals exports in the 
global market, the Department in their written reply submitted as under:- 
 
The chemical and petrochemical sector is a critical component of India’s 
industrial ecosystem, providing essential raw materials and intermediates to a 
wide range of downstream sectors including automobiles, textiles, 
pharmaceuticals, nutraceuticals, medic al devices, agriculture, agrochemicals, 
fertilizers, consumer goods, industrial machinery, construction chemicals, and 
electronics and semiconductors. The Chemical sector is an unregulated sector 
and has been growing well over the years, catering not only to the needs of the 
chemical industry but also to several downstream industries, as mentioned 
above. However, in order to meet our aspirational development goals, the 
Government has taken several measures to further boost the sector. 
 
(I) Measures relating to Infrastructure: 
 
• Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIR):   
To attract investments in chemicals & petrochemicals sector, Department had 
notified the Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemical Investment Region 
(PCPIR) Policy. PCPIRs are conceptualized as cluster -based model of 
Development with common infrastructure and support services. Three PCPIRs 
have been set up at Dahej (Gujarat), Vishakhapatnam –Kakinada (Andhra 
Pradesh) and Paradeep (Odisha). Currently, 2,246 chemical units are 
functional in these PCPIRs having a cumulative investment  of Rs. 3,49,192 
crore and these regions have generated employment of 3.7 lakh persons. 

33  
 
• Plastic Parks:  The Department implements the Scheme for Setting up of 
Plastic Parks under the scheme of New Scheme of Petrochemicals. The 
Scheme promotes setting up of need -based Plastic Parks with requisite state -
of-the-art infrastructure and enabling common facilities . The objective is to 
consolidate and synergize the capacities of downstream plastic processing 
industry to help increase investment, production and export in the sector as well 
as generate employment. Under the Scheme, the Government of India provides 
grant funding up to 50% of the project cost to the State Government subject to 
a ceiling of Rs. 40 crore per project. In accordance with the Scheme Guidelines, 
9 Plastic Parks have been approved so far and the same are at different levels 
of implementation. 
 
• Chemical Parks: The Government has announced an initiative to launch a new 
scheme for the establishment of three chemical parks under the challenge 
route, with a budget allocation of Rs 600 crores for 2026–27. The details of the 
proposed Chemical Parks Scheme have been p rovided in response to 
Questions 1-7 of this note. 
 
(II) Integration with Global Value Chains:  
 
In order to increase the integration of the Indian chemical and petrochemical 
sector with global value chains, the Government has entered into various 
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreements and Free Trade 
Agreements with different countries and regional blocs in recent year s. These 
include Oman, the United Kingdom, the UAE, the European Free Trade 
Association, Australia, New Zealand, and, most recently, the EU and the USA. 
 
(III) Research and Development of the Chemical Sector 
 
Centre of Excellence: The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has 
formulated a scheme on setting up of Centres of Excellence. The objective is 
to provide grant -in-aid to educational and research institutions to improve 
existing technology and promote development of new applications of polymers 
and plastics. The emphasis of the Scheme is on modernization and upgradation 
of existing manufacturing processes as well as improving the quality of 
products. Under the scheme, the Government of India provides financial 
support up to 50 per cent of the total project cost subject to an upper limit of Rs. 
5 crores. So far, 18 CoEs have been approved under the Scheme. Earlier, the 
CoE scheme was only available for petrochemical sector. Now, the revised 
scheme includes chemicals sector also. 
 
(IV) Skilling related measures: 
 
In order to address the needs of skilling and human resources in the sector, the 
Department through The Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering & 

34  
Technology (CIPET) has been engaged in skill development, technology 
support, as well as academic and research activities for the promotion of the 
petrochemical and allied industry in the country. CIPET has 48 centers across 
the country. During 2024 -25, CIPET provided training to 75,763 persons and 
during 2025 -26 (till 15.01.2026), 46,381 persons have been imparted skill 
training.  
 
(V) Sustainable Development and related measures: 
 
• Through CIPET and the Centres of Excellence (CoEs), the Department has 
promoted research in the areas of bioplastics and their applications, as well as 
sustainable packaging solutions using biopolymers, etc. 
 
• Further, in order to develop and promote compostable/biodegradable plastic 
materials as a replacement for single -use plastics, the Department, through 
CIPET, has established testing facilities at 11 centres to assess the 
biodegradability of such materials in soil as per the laid-down standards. 
 
• DCPC has also approved 04 Plastic Waste Management Centres (PWMCs), 
out of which 03 are already functional at Varanasi, Bhagalpur and Bengaluru. 
These Centres demonstrate various Plastic recycling techniques and provide 
effective plastic waste management s olutions. They may also facilitate start -
ups/ prospective entrepreneurs in the relevant field of recycling, create 
awareness on good practices of recycling and bridge policy objectives with 
industrial practice, thereby supporting initiatives such as Plasti c Waste 
Management Rules, EPR, and Swachh Bharat Mission. 
 
• CIPET has conducted 39 workshops or conferences on single -use plastics for 
the industry. Further, CIPET is going to organize five one -day seminars under 
CPDS to promote sustainable plastic waste management and circular economy 
practices. The programmes at Chandrapur and Bhagalpur will focus on 
recycling innovations and policy frameworks; Baddi on industry -led practices 
and skill development; Varanasi on advanced recycling technologies; and Bihta 
on emerging trends and resource optimization. 
 
• The Department has also organised Sustainability Conclaves in collaboration 
with the Indian Chemical Council (ICC), focusing on the promotion of a Circular 
Economy in the Chemical and Petrochemical sector. So far, seven editions of 
the conclave have been successfully held. 
 
85. As regard the Indian Chemicals & Petrochemicals Trade Scenario, the following 
information was submitted: - 
 
(i) India’s exports in Chemicals & Petrochemicals sector in FY 2024 -25 was 
Rs. 3.92 lakh crores which was 10.60% of India’s total merchandise exports 
for FY 2024-25. 

35  
(ii) India’s exports in Chemicals & Petrochemicals sector in FY 2025 -26 (till 
November 2025) is Rs. 2.62 lakh crores which is 10.34% of India’s total 
merchandise exports for FY 2025-26. 
 
86. Graphical representation of Current State Vs Target/Aspirational Growth  
in Chemicals and Petrochemicals Sector 
 
 
 
XIV Future initiatives (Budget Highlights) 
 
87. Talking about the new highlights in the in the Union Budget 2026, the Secretary 
DCPC has informed the Committee which is as under:- 
 
“In the Union Budget 2026, a scheme to support States in establishing 
three dedicated chemical parks has been announced, which would help 
enhance domestic chemical production and reduce import dependency. These 
will be established through a challenge route on a cluster-based plug-and-play 
model and a budget outlay of Rs. 600 crore has been earmarked for this 
purpose for the Financial Year 2026-2027.  
Apart from this, the chemical sector has also been identified as one of 
the five priority sectors for promoting CCUS, which is Carbon Capture, 
Utilisation and Storage applications; technologies; and their end -use 
applications. So, these are the two new developments which have taken place 
in this year's Budget. Apart from that, we have also signed FTAs with United 
Kingdom and Oman, and negotiations are going on with New Zealand and EU. 
We have also signed a trade agreement with EFTA. Negotiations are going on 
with USA also. Apart from this, we have prepared 46 HSN codes covering 49 
chemicals and out of them, 26 have been accepted by Department of Revenue 
in this year's Budget and they have been notified. Apart from this, about 38 
Quality Control Orders have b een revoked to facilitate availability of raw 
material, etc., for the downstream industry”. 
 


36  
88. When Committee desired to know about the  details of  key provisions and 
objectives of the new scheme announced in the Union Budget 2026 ‑27 for 
establishing dedicated Chemical Parks, the Department in written submitted as 
under:- 
“In view of the recent Budget announcement, a new scheme is proposed to 
strengthen the domestic chemical and petrochemical manufacturing ecosystem. The 
scheme formulation is currently underway pursuant to the Budget announcement, and 
detailed modalities are being worked out. The scheme proposes development of three 
dedicated Chemical Parks, each with an area of 8 square kilometres.  
The proposed scheme envisages the creation of common infrastructural facilities and 
basic utilities tailored to the needs  of the chemical industry. The following objectives 
are proposed to be addressed through the proposed scheme: 
 
(i)  Empowering India’s Chemical Growth 
The objective of the Chemical Park Scheme is to accelerate the growth of the 
Indian chemical and petrochemical sector. The scheme is to enhance domestic 
production capacity, thereby contributing to overall economic growth towards 
achieving the vision of Viksit Bharat @2047 
(ii)  Development of Integrated Chemical Parks 
Through the establishment of world -class, plug-and-play chemical parks, the 
scheme seeks to create integrated manufacturing ecosystems and improve 
logistics efficiency.  
(iii)  Enhancement of Cost Competitiveness 
The proposed scheme aims to enhance the cost competitiveness of the Indian 
chemical industry.  
(iv)  Promotion of Sustainable Industrial Development 
The scheme aims to promote environmentally sustainable industrial 
development by providing common infrastructure for waste management, 
centralized effluent treatment, and adoption of circular economy principles. 
 
Implementation of the Scheme: 
 
The scheme proposes a minimum area of 8 sq.km for each of the three 
chemical parks. The Central Government shall provide a capital support towards the 
cost of common infrastructural facilities and basic utilities subject to a ceiling of Rs 
1000 Crores per chemical park. The State Government would bear the land cost and 
the remaining project cost. 
As per the budget announcement, an allocation of Rs 600 crores has been made for 
the financial year 2026 –27. While the scheme is currently being formulated, it is 
expected that the total overall financial outlay of the scheme would be close to Rs 
3000 Crores, since the scheme would run for a duration of 5 years. The state that fares 
the best in terms of the proposals submitted pursuant to the commencement of the 
scheme will be selected based on the laid-down evaluation criteria. 
The major interventions/components of the Chemical Parks Scheme are as follows: 
 
(1) Provision of Common Infrastructure and Utilities: Each Chemical Park 

37  
shall be supported with common infrastructure facilities and basic utilities. 
 
• Common Infrastructure Facilities: Each Chemical Park will be equipped with 
essential shared infrastructure, including internal road networks, power supply, 
logistics facilities, liquid and gas storage terminals, interconnected pipeline 
systems, Treatment Storage –Disposal Facilities (TSDF) , deep-sea discharge 
facilities. 
 
• Availability of Basic Utilities:  The parks will have common utility services 
such as Central Effluent Treatment Plants (CETPs), water supply and 
distribution systems, steam generation and distribution networks, solvent 
recovery and distillation units. 
 
(2) Plug-and-Play Industrial Infrastructure: The scheme adopts a plug-and-play 
model, under which pre-developed industrial plots with ready access to basic utilities 
and common infrastructure shall be provided to industrial units.  
 
Further, the ₹20,000 crore allocation for Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage 
(CCUS) and the Chemical Parks initiative are distinct in their objectives, with CCUS 
primarily aimed at reducing industrial carbon emissions and advancing climate 
commitments, while the Chemical Parks initiative seeks to develop world -class 
infrastructure, shared utilities, and cluster -based efficiencies to strengthen domestic 
chemical manufacturing.  
 
89. On asking about the work done in the field of Carbon Capture and Department 
initiatives towards carbon Capture, the Secretary, DCPC replied as under:- 
 
“सर , आपिे काबसि क ै प्‍ि चर  की बात कही। इसमें  अभी हम इनिनियल स्‍ि टेजेज पर  हैं। हम टेक्‍ि िोलॉजी डेवलप 
करिे की कोनिि कर  रहे  हैं। काबसि क ै प्‍ि चर  स्‍ि टोर े ज यूनटलाइजेिि है। इसमें  नमनिस्‍ि ट ि ी ऑफ पावर  लीड 
नमनिस्‍ि ट ि ी है। बाकी जो संबंनित  नवभाग हैं, वे भी उसमें  अपिा-अपिा काम कर  रहे  हैं। बेनसकली , इस  एररया  
में अभी हम टेक्‍ि िोलॉजी डेवलपमेंट की स्‍ि टेज पर  है। आपिे कहा नक इस  एररया  की इम्‍ि पॉटेंस  बहुत है और  
इस  पर  काम करिे की जरुरत  है। इसी  को समझ  कर  इस  बार  की बजट में 20,000 करोड़  रुपये  का प्राविाि 
नकया गया है। यह इसकी  आवश्‍ि यकता को समझ  कर  ही नकया गया है।  
 सर , क े नमकल इंडस्‍ि ट ि ी को एक तरीक े से  पांच प्रायोररटीज सेक्‍ि टर  में रखा  गया है। इसमें  पहले से  चचास चल 
रही  है। हमारी  इंडस्‍ि ट ि ी में अभी बहुत काम िहीं हुआ है। अभी दो-तीि पायलट प्रोजेक्‍ि ट्स प्राइवेट इंडस्‍ि ट ि ी िे 
िुरू  नकए हैं और  एक-दो का कमनिसयलाइजेिि हुआ है। तूतीकोररि में करीब  350 करोड़  रुपये  का एक 
प्रोजेक्‍ि ट चल रहा  है। अभी यह काम काफी इनिनियल स्‍ि टेजेज पर  है। मुझे ऐसा  लगता है नक यह तब था, 
जब तक सरकार  की तरफ  से  कोई अनसस्‍ि टेंस  िहीं घोनषत नकया गया था। अब जब यह आ गया है तो मुझे 
लगता है नक इंडस्‍ि ट ि ी की तरफ  से  बहुत अच्‍ि छा ररस्‍ि पॉन्‍ि स होगा। हमिे इंडस्‍ि ट ि ी से  इस  बार े में बात भी की है। 
अभी उिका ररस्‍ि पॉन्‍ि स बहुत अच्‍ि छा है। मुझे लगता है नक अब हमारी  इंडस्‍ि ट ि ी भी इसमें  आगे सोचेगी  और  इस  
पर  जरूर  काम कर े गी”। 
 
 
  

38  
PART-II 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations 
 
1. Projected and Allocated BE for the year 2026-27 
 
The Committee note that the Department sought  BE  of Rs. 199.76 crore 
for the financial year 2026 -27 but an amount of Rs. 185.72 crore has been 
allocated to it.  The projected BE of the Department has been reduced by an 
amount of Rs. 14.04 crore by the Ministry of Finance. The reduction of allocated 
funds may be seen under various heads/schemes. The Department sought BE 
of Rs. 61.00 crore for New Schemes of Petrochemicals but has been allocated a 
reduced amount of Rs. 52.50 crore. Similarly, for IPFT, the Department sought 
an amount of Rs. 9.15 crore whic h too has been reduced to Rs. 8.94 crore. The 
Committee desire that they may be apprised about the extent to which the New 
Schemes of Petrochemicals and functioning of IPFT would be affected due to 
reduced allocation of funds . At the same time, the Com mittee desire that the 
Department should analyze the reasons for the curtailment of funds sought by 
it for New Scheme for Petrochemicals (NSP) and IPFT .  The Committee would 
like to be apprised by the Department in this regard. 
 
2. The Committee note that the Budget Estimates (BE) of Rs. 185.72 crore 
sought for the financial year 2026-27 is less than the BE sought in the previous 
financial years. As regards reasons for the same, the Department has submitted 
that the allocation during the financial year s 2023-24 and 2024 -25 was higher 
due to provision of Govt. Loan to HIL(INDIA) Ltd. Further, in addition to it, in 
financial year 2026 -27 there was less demand for funds from the autonomous 
bodies i.e. CIPET and IPFT. As such , the Committee would like be apprised of 

39  
the reasons for the lesser requirement of funds by the autonomous bodies like 
CIPET and IPFT.  At the same time, the Committee recommend that as far as 
possible BE sought by the Department should be consistent. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard.   
 
3. The Committee note that BE sought by the Department during the year 
2023-24 was Rs. 173.45 crore which was enhanced to 572.63 crore at RE stage. 
As regards this enhancement, the Department has submitted that it was due to 
budget provision of Govt. loan of Rs. 486.74 crore to HIL India Limited. If, this 
loan amount of Rs. 486.74 is deducted from the RE which is 572.63, the RE of 
the Department comes to just Rs. 85.89 crore only. Similarly, during the financial 
year 2024 -25, the Department sought BE of Rs. 259.11 crore which was 
enhanced to 261.99 crore and as regards this enhancement, the Department has 
again submitted that it contains a loan component of Rs. 120.06 crore as Govt. 
loan to HIL (India) Ltd. And after deducting this loan component the RE of the 
Department for the year 2024-25 comes to Rs. 141.93 crore and for the year 2025-
26, the BE sought by the Department is Rs. 194.05 crore which is reduced to 
Rs.185.57 crore. Thus during the year 2023 -24, the RE of the Department was 
just 85.89 crore which has enhanced subsequently in the year s 2024-25 and 
2025-26 to Rs 141.93 crore & Rs. 185.57 crore  respectively. The Committee 
would like to know the huge dif ference between the RE 2023 -24 and RE for the 
year 2024-25 and 2025-26. 
4. As regards the actual expenditure, the Committee note that it has been 
less than the allocated RE for the last three financial year s consecutively. The 
RE for the year 2023 -24 was 572.63 crore but the actual expenditure stood at 
Rs.474.67 crore and an amount of Rs. 97.96 crore remained unspent. Similarly 
for the year 2024-25, the RE was Rs. 261.99 crore but the actual expenditure was 

40  
Rs. 256.38 crore and an amount of Rs. 5.61 crore remained unspent.  For the 
year 2025-26 too, out of the allocated RE of Rs. 185.57 crore , an amount of Rs. 
149.45 crore could be spent as on 20.02.2026.  In this regard, the Department 
has submitted that the actual expenditure for the last three years is in 
accordance to the RE allocation and since the RE for the FY 2023 -24 and 2024-
25 were having a onetime budget provision of Loan to HIL (India) ltd, hence it 
appears to be in the higher side in comparison  to FY 2025-26. An amount of 
Rs.256.38 crore was utilized for the FY 2024 -25 against the allocated RE of 
Rs.261.99 crore which is approx. 97.85% of the allocated RE 2024 -25.  The 
Department has also submitted that it will make its best efforts to fully utilize the 
funds allocated at RE 2025 -26.  The Committee hope and trust that the 
Department would initiate steps for optimal utilization of the allocated funds in 
future. 
5. Allotment of Plastic Parks 
The Committee note that the scheme of Plastic Park was introduced  way 
back in the year 2013 with the objective to  promote chemical industry. 
However, after a lapse of about 13 years, the Committee note with concern that 
the ten Plastic Parks approved are  still at various stages of implementation.  
Further, the Committee have been apprised that only 309 out of 919 plots 
available in Plastic Parks could be allotted so far.  Moreover, out of the 309 plots 
allotted only 51 plots are stated to be functional in terms of the total number of 
plots, only 6% are currently functional.  It is further noted that no plots have 
been allotted in the Plastic Parks located in Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, and 
Deogarh. The Committee expresses serious concern over the slow progress in 
the establishment and allotment of plots in the Plastic Parks.  The Committee 
therefore recommend that the Department should work in close coordination 

41  
with the respective State Governments to allot the remaining plots across all 
Plastic Parks in a time bound manner.  The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the steps taken in this regard.  
  
6. Allotment of Parks to the Real users 
The Committee had raised apprehensions that several investors purchase 
plots for investment purposes, thereby depriving genuine end users of the 
opportunity to get benefit from the scheme.  However, the Department  has 
clarified that no such instances of investors obtaining plot allotments in Plastic 
Parks in violation of the prescribed norms have come to the notice of the 
Department. The allotment of plots in Plastic Parks is undertaken by the 
respective State Governments and/or the Special P urpose Vehicles (SPVs) in 
accordance with their approved land allotment policies, guidelines, and 
eligibility criteria. These policies generally require applicants to demonstrate 
their intent and capacity to establish and operate manufacturing units as per 
their guidelines.  The Committee desire that  utmost care be taken in allotment 
of plots so that only the genuine users get the allotment of plots in the Plastic 
Parks. 
7. Promoting the use of  Bio Pesticides 
The Committee note that the Bio-pesticides are environment friendly and 
yield long-term benefit but are slow to act whereas Chemical pesticides, act-fast 
but have adverse effects on the soil and human health over prolonged use. The 
Committee, in this regard , had noted during oral evidence that though the 
farmers are ready to use the Bio Pesticides but Bio Pesticides are not readily 
available in the market.  The Committee , therefore, recommend that the 
Department should work towards promoting the use of Bio-Pesticides and they 

42  
must educate farmers about long term benefits and effectiveness  of using Bio-
Pesticides in the fields so as to develop its acceptability towards farmers  
besides ensuring availability of Bio Pesticides.  The Department has submitted 
in this regard that the Central Insecticides Board and Registration Committee 
(CIB&RC) under the Department of Agriculture and Farmer s Welfare grants the 
registration/license for manufacturing, sale, and distribution of all types of 
pesticides/weedicides including biopesticides . The Committee therefore urge 
the Department to take the matter with the Department of Agriculture and Farmer 
Welfare to ensure ample availability of Bio -Pesticides across the country. The 
Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.  The Committee 
recommend that Department should educate farmers about safe use of Bio 
pesticides through farmers awareness programmes. At the same time, they 
should also be encouraged to use bio -pesticides as a safer and eco -friendly 
option. 
 
8. Ensuring Transfer of optimal Formulations to Industry 
The Committee note that the  IPFT have been in existence for the last 36 
years. The Committee note with concern that during this time period of 36 long 
years, IPFT could formulate only 86 formulations. Moreover, out of the 86 
formulations, only 64 could be transferred to the industry.  In this regard, the 
Committee note that the formulations development by the IPFT is undertaken 
after assessment, technical evaluation and consultation with industry and the 
formulations are developed based on  their existing an d emerging need. The 
Committee are astonished to note the fact that even after developing the 
formation after assessing the need of the industry, IPFT is struggling to transfer 
its 22 formulations. In this regard, during oral evidence , the Committee have 
been informed that IPFT is now focusing on Bio pesticides which is a Research 

43  
and Development activity. The Committee outrightly reject this contention of the 
IPFT and are of the view that the IPFT while focusing on Bio Pesticides should 
work equally towards transfer of its formulation. IPFT has also submitted that 
after development  of formulations, it has to undergo laboratory trial for its 
efficacy and safety purpose. The Committee are of the view that the IPFT must 
streamline its functioning and expedite its functions related to transfer of 22 
remaining formulations. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps 
taken by the Department as well as by the IPFT in this regard.  
 
9. Diversifying the role of IPFT/utilizing the full potential of IPFT 
The Committee note that the Institute of Pesticide Formulation 
Technology (IPFT) was established in the year 1991 and engaged in 
development of user and environment friendly new generation pesticide 
formulation technologies, their analysis, efficacy and phytotoxicity studies. The 
Committee further note that the institute has three functional verticals, viz., 
Formulation Development, Analytical Characterization and Bioscience 
activities. And the ‘ Formulation Development’ vertical has pilot plant facilities 
that can scale up lab scale research to a commercial production with optimum 
budget and has the capacity to produce the formulations upto 100 kg per shift.  
In this regard, the Committee were informed during oral evidence that the IPFT 
is a research and development institute and is not involved in the production 
and marketing of any formulations. Further, at IPFT the technologies of 
pesticide formulations are developed and transferred to different industries for 
commercialization activities only.  Intriguingly, though IPFT is a research and 
development institute and not involved in the production and marketing of any 
formulation, its Formulation Development Vertical shows production capacity 

44  
to manufacture the formulation upto 100 kg per shift.  Apparently, the production 
facility at IPFT is lying  idle.  The Committee desire that they  be apprised of 
concrete reasons  in this regard .  Under these circumstances when the 
production facility already exist at IPFT, the Committee may recommend that it 
explore the full potential of the Formulation Development Vertical and consider 
the expansion of its activities from mere formulation development to actual 
production and its sale in the market.  
10. Vacant Posts in IPFT 
The Committee note that IPFT had a total sanctioned strength of 40, out 
of which, 13 posts have elapsed over a period of time and the working strength 
of the Institute at present is only 16, including 10 Scientific posts. Further, 10 
posts are vacant for which recruitment process is stated to be in progress. The 
Committee therefore, recommend that IPFT should fill up the vacant posts at the 
earliest to ensure that the functioning of the institute is not hampered due to 
shortage of officers/staff. The Commit tee also recommend that Department 
should also ensure timely completion of the recruitment process. 
11. Upgradation of CIPET as Central University 
The Committee note that the CIPET is a  technical educational institution 
under the Department, engaged in skill development, technology support, as 
well as academic and research activities for the promotion of the petrochemical 
and allied industry in the country. Further, the CIPET has 48 Centres across the 
country which includes 9 Institutes of Plastics Technology (IPTs), 32 Centres 
for Skilling and Technical Support (CSTS), 03 Schools for Advanced Research 
in Polymers (SARP) and 4 sub - centres. The Committee are of the view that  a 
renewed vision of CIPET is required to cope with the modern day’s requirements 

45  
of Research and Development with regard to the utility of plastics and polymers. 
The Committee are of the  considered view that if CIPET is embossed with the 
status of Specialised Central University with due recognition by AICTE and UGC,  
it has the potential of skilling youth by providing them with quality training and 
placement opportunities.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department 
should explore the feasibility and apprise the Committee accordingly. 
 
12. Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemicals Investment Region  
(PCPIR)  
The Committee was informed that the Government of India notified the 
Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical Investment Region(s) (PCPIR) Policy, 
2007 to attract investment and for generation of employment in the Petroleum, 
Chemical and Petrochemical Investment Region(s).  The objective of PCPIR 
Policy 2007 was to promote the Chemical and Petrochemical sector in an 
integrated and environment friendly manner.  At present , three Petroleum, 
Chemical and Petrochemical Investment Regions (PCPIRs) are being 
implemented in the States of Andhra Pradesh (Vishakhapatnam), Gujarat (Dahej) 
and Odisha (Paradeep) to promote investment and industrial development in 
these sectors. It was further informed that till date , a total investment made in 
all three PCPIRs amount s to Rs. 3,49,192 Crore. Despite this huge investment, 
there are no specific targets fixed for number of units, investments by the 
industry and employment in the PCPIR Policy.  Further, the Department has 
submitted that so far it has not received any proposal from the State 
Governments for providing Viability Gap Funding under this Policy and ‘NIL’ 
budgetary allocation has been made and no expenditure has been incurred by 
the Department und er the PCPIR Policy, 2007.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should seriously go into deeper introspection 

46  
in coordination with the State Governments as well as investors/stakeholder 
involved and come out with a solution.  The Committee would like to be apprised 
on the steps taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
13. Approved and functional Centre of Excellence (CoEs) 
The Committee note that t he Scheme of CoEs  seeks to provide grant -in-
aid to Government educational and research institutions to undertake research 
to improve existing technology and promote the development of new 
applications. The Committee further note that the Standing Finance Committee, 
in its meeting held on October, 2021 had approved setting  up of 11 new CoEs. 
However, out of these 11 new CoEs, the Department had approved 02 CoEs in 
the year 2022  and 05 CoEs in the year 2024. As such 04 CoEs are yet to be 
approved and made functional. The Co mmittee, therefore, recommend that 
remaining CoEs be approved and establish at the earliest. The Committee may 
be apprised about  the present status of 02 CoEs approved in the year 2022 and 
05 CoEs approved in the year 2024. 
14. Filing of Patents and Development technologies by CoEs 
The Committee have been apprised that so far, the 18 CoEs  approved 
under the scheme could file 80 patents only and have developed 96 
technologies/products, of which 35 have been transferred to the Industry. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons for huge difference between 
the number of technolog ies developed and actual transferred to the industry. 
The Committee also recommend that appropriate initiatives may be taken to 
ensure that maximum number of technologies products may be transferred to 
the industry in near future. 
  

47  
15. Review of functioning of CoEs 
As regards review of functioning of CoEs, the Department has submitted 
that  the Project Monitoring Committee under the chairmanship of Deputy 
Secretary, DCPC, set up under the scheme, reviews the working of the CoE 
through online or physical visits. The CoEs are al so reviewed by the Project 
Sanctioning Committee chaired by Secretary (DCPC), to consider release of the 
2nd/3rd instalment of grant. The Department also reviews the progress of the 
CoEs through quarterly reports on details of patents 
filed/technologies/products developed. Further, the CoEs are regularly 
monitored by the Department through review meetings under the chairmanship 
of Secretary/Joint Secretary/Deputy Secretary. While appreciating the extant 
monitoring mechanism put in place, the Committee recommend that the review 
processes of CoEs must be intensified so that funds allocated to them are 
utilized in  a timely manner to achieve the noble objectives of these CoEs. 
16. Promoting Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) 
With regard to FDI in Chemical Sector, the Committee have been apprised 
that the Government has adopted a liberal Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) policy 
framework for the Chemicals and Petrochemicals sector. Currently, 100% FDI is 
permitted under the Automatic Route in the Chemicals and Petrochem icals 
sector for both manufacturing and trading activities. Government approval is 
required only in cases involving investment from entities of countries sharing 
land borders with India. Therefore, the current FDI polic y framework has 

48  
contributed to sustained foreign investment inflows into the Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals sector.  However, a perusal of the actual data of FDI during the 
last five years reveals a dismal picture and does not match with the contention 
of the Department.  The Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in the Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals sector in the financial year  2021-22 was Rs. 7202 crore and in 
the year 2022-23 it rose to Rs. 14662 crore but fell to Rs. 6985 crore in the year 
2023-24 and in the year 2024 -25 it rose marginally to Rs. 8943 crore and finally 
got reduced to Rs. 4,598.19 crore in the year 2025 -26 (Till September 2025 ). 
However, the Committee note with satisfaction that the Department has taken 
initiatives to position India as a preferred global destination for investments in 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals to attract large -scale investments which 
includes (i) organizing major international investment promotion events such as 
India Chem to showcase India’s manufacturing capabilities and investment 
opportunities and (ii) implementing initiatives such as, namely the 
establishment of Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment 
Regions (PCPIRs) and Plastic Parks to attract investment in the sector etc. The 
Committee hope and trust that these initiatives would be implem ented by the 
Department in letter and spirit for attracting higher FDI in future. 
17. Farmers Training programs conducted by IPFT. 
The Committee note that the IPFT had conducted 31 farmers training 
programmes during  the last three years. During the year 2023 -24, 2024-25 and 
2025-26, the number of  programmes conducted by IPFT is 20, 02 and 09 

49  
respectively.   The Committee note with concern that only 11 farmers training 
programmes were conducted by IPFT during the last two years whereas in the 
year 2023 -24, no. of progrmmes conducted by IPFT was 20. Moreover, the 
farmers training programmes were  conducted in Assam, Meghalaya and 
Mizoram only whereas rest of the north east states have been completely left 
out.  Further, during the years 2024-25 and 2025-26, ‘Nil’ no. of farmers training 
programmes were  conducted in the North East States.  The Committee therefore 
recommend that the Department as well as IPFT should conduct training 
programmes across Pan India including the north east States.  The Committee 
may be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                 Azad Kirti Jha 
12 March, 2026                                                                        Chairperson, 
21 Phalguna, 1947(Saka)                                         Standing Committee on 
                                                  Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 
 
 
 
  

50  
Annexure-I 
 
The Status of the 18 CoEs approved under the scheme for setting of CoEs 
(Rs. In crore) 
S.No. 
Title of CoE and Location 
Approval 
Year Total 
Project 
Cost 
DCPC 
Approved 
Grant 
DCPC Grant 
released (as 
on 
20.02.2026) 
i. 
Green Transport Network 
(GREET) at CIPET, Chennai 
2011 18.98 6.00 6.00 
ii. 
Sustainable Polymer Industry to 
research & innovation at CSIR- 
National Chemical Laboratory 
(NCL), Pune 
2011 
12.00 6.00 6.00 
iii. 
Advanced Polymeric Materials at 
IIT, Delhi 
2013 12.00 6.00 6.00 
iv. 
Sustainable Polymers (SusPol) at 
IIT, Guwahati 
2013 14.74 6.00 6.00 
v. 
Sustainable Green Materials at 
CIPET, Bhubaneswar 
2013 15.04 6.00 6.00 
vi. 
Bio-engineered Sustainable 
Polymeric Systems at CIPET, 
Bhubaneswar 
2019 
10.01 5.00 5.00 
vii. 
Process Development, 
Wastewater Management in 
Petrochemical Industries at IIT, 
Roorkee 
2019 
13.16 4.40 
  
  
  
4.40 
viii. 
Manufacturing of Next Generation 
Bio-Medical Devices at CIPET, 
Bhubaneswar 
2020 
10.00 5.00 
  
  
  
4.00 
ix. 
Specialty Polymers for 
Customized Additive 
Manufacturing at CSIR-NCL, 
Pune 
2019 
5.60 2.80 
2.26 
x. 
Polymer Coatings for Decorative, 
Protective and Strategic 
Applications at CSIR- Indian 
Institute of Chemical Technology 
(IICT), Hyderabad 
2020 
9.72 4.86 
  
  
  
  
  
3.00 
xi. 
Polymers, Their Composites and 
Polymeric Membranes for 
Sustainable Development of 
Petroleum Industries at CSIR - 
North East Institute of Science & 
Technology (CSIR-NEIST) 
2020 
24.75     4.99 
  
  
4.99 
xii. 
Sustainable & innovative Design 
and manufacturing of polymer -
TOYS (SUNDAR - TOYS) at IIT, 
Guwahati 
2022 
10.59 5.00 
  
  
1.50 

51  
xiii. 
Design and Development for 
Value added Toys of Rubber and 
Allied Finished Products at Indian 
Rubber manufacturers Research 
Association (IRMRA), Thane 
2022  
9.87 4.93 
  
  
2.50 
xiv. 
Coal to Acetylene and Fine 
Chemicals” at IIT (ISM), Dhanbad 
2024 
5.61 2.61 
  
  
1.75 
xv. 
Biodegradable Packaging 
Materials (BioPack) at IIT, Madras 
2024   
  
9.91 
  
  
4.95 
  
  
1.50 
xvi. 
Performance Chemicals and 
Sustainable Polymers for 
Industrial Applications at CSIR-
NIIST, Thiruvananthapuram 
2024 
15.52 5.00 
  
  
2.50 
xvii. 
Speciality Chemicals at IIT, 
Kanpur 
2024  
11.86 4.99 
  
1.60 
xviii. 
Transparent and Biocompatible 
Metal-Polymer Composite Based 
X-ray, Gamma ray and Neutron 
Shields for Window and Personal 
Protecting Apparels at CSIR-
AMPRI, Bhopal 
2024 
3.90    1.95 
  
  
  
  
  
0.75 
 
 
  

52  
APPENDIX -I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(2026-27) 
 
Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 26th February, 2026 from 1500 hrs. to 
1700 hrs. in Committee Room B, PHA, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
               LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C.  
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
7. Shri Praveen Patel 
8. Dr. Sambit Patra 
9. Shri Sachithannatham R. 
10. Shri Eatala Rajender 
11. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
12.  Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA MEMBERS 
 
  
13. Shri Subhash Barala 
14. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
15. Shri  Arun Singh 
16. Shri Tejveer Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
5. Smt. Maya Lingi   - Joint Secretary (ML) 
6. Ms. Miranda Ingudam            - Director (CF&W) 
7. Shri  Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary(CF&R)  
 

53  
WITNESSES 
 
 Representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
 
1 Ms. Nivedita Shukla Verma, Secretary(C&PC) 
2 Shri Manoj Sethi, JS&FA 
3 Shri Deepankar Aron, Joint Secretary 
4 Shri Deepak Mishra, Joint Secretary 
5 Ms. Divya Parmar, Economic Advisor 
6 Shri Santosh Kumar, CCA 
7 Shri Sangram Kumar Mishra, CMD, HOCL 
8 Shri Kuldeep Singh, CMD, HIL 
9 Dr. Shishir Sinha, DG, CIPET  
10 Dr. Mohana Krishna Reddy Mudian, Director, IPFT 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
the representatives of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC)  to 
the sitting convened to examine the Demands for Grants (2026–27) of the Department. 
Drawing the attention of the witnesses to Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee, 
the Chairperson asked them to apprise the Committee regarding Demands for Grants 
(2026–27).  
 
3. Accordingly, t he Secretary and representatives of the  DCPC, briefed the 
Committee through a detailed Power Point Presentation on various aspects related to 
examination of Demands for Grants 2026-27 viz. the proposed budgetary allocations 
for the year 202 6-27; three years trends of Budget allocation and Expenditure of the 
Department; an  overview of the  budget allocation for Financial year 2025 -26 and 
2026-27; an overview of Chemical Industry; Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) received 
in last 05 years in Chemicals Sector; Current status of approved Plastic Parks; Status 
of  Centre of Excellences (CoEs);  objective of Chemicals Promotion and development 
Scheme (CPDS), functioning of institutes under CIPET, objectives and achievements 
of IPFT during the last year; functioning of Public sector undertaking under the 
Department;  details of compensation disbursed to victims of BGLD; notified BIS 
Quality Control Orders (QCOs); new initiatives undertaken by the Department. The 
Secretary, D CPC also informed the  Committee about new schemes 

54  
announced/proposed in the Union Budget 2026 -27 i.e. (i) establishment of  three 
dedicated chemical parks with a budget outlay of Rs. 600 crore to enhance domestic 
chemical production and reduce import dependency  and (ii) a n proposed allocation 
of Rs 20,000 crore to support the development of  Carbon Capture, Utilisation and 
Storage applications (CCUS). The Secretary, DCPC further apprised the Committee 
about the revocation of 38 Quality Control Orders to facilitate availability of raw 
material, etc., for the downstream industry. 
 
4. Thereafter, Hon’ble Chairperson and Members sought certain clarifications on 
the issues related to examination of Demands for Grants of the DCPC for the year  
2026-27 and posed several queries which inter-alia include the following:-  
  
(i) Nil budgetary allocation made with regard to PCPIRs by the Department; 
(ii) reasons for delay in allotment of plots in the Plastic Parks; 
(iii) budget allocated to schemes and autonomous institutes under the 
Department; 
(iv) key deliverables and milestone under the NPS scheme; 
(v) need to establish additional CoEs to adequately serve the growing 
requirements of our country’s population. 
(vi) challenges faced by CIPET in attracting the desired number of students 
for its various courses; 
(vii) to have CIPET institute at least at Commissionerate level or upgrade it 
as a central University with due recognition by AICTE and UGC; 
(viii) disbursement of compensation to victims of Bhopal gas leak disaster; 
(ix) restructuring plan for the PSUs under the Department viz. HOCL, HFL 
etc; 
(x) Budget allocation to autonomous institute like CIPET and IPFT; 
(xi) steps taken by the department to increase FDI in the chemicals and 
Petrochemical sector; 
(xii) reasons for few transference of pesticides formula to industries by IPFT; 
(xiii) steps taken by the Department to popularize use of Bio Pesticides 
(xiv) outcomes of the studies, survey, seminars, conferences, exhibition, etc. 
conducted by the Department to facilitate development of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals Industry under CPDS scheme and; 

55  
(xv) measures  taken by the Department to reduce its dependency on imports 
in chemical and Petrochemicals sector and to increase India’s share of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals exports in the global market  
 
5. On the points requiring detailed and statistical information which was not readily 
available, the Chairperson asked the Secretary, D CPC to furnish written replies and 
also to the queries raised by the Members which remained unanswered during the 
sitting of the Committee, within 2-3 days. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
[A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record] 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
******* 
 
  

56  
APPENDIX -II 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS BRANCH 
(2025-26) 
Minutes of the Fifteenth Sitting of the Committee 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, The 12th March, 2026 from 1000 hrs. to 1030 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha– Chairperson 
    LOK SABHA MEMBERS 
2. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
3. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
4. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
5. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
6. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
7. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
8. Shri Praveen Patel 
9. Shri Balram Naik Porika 
10. Shri Eatala Rajender 
11.  Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
12. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
13. Shri Nalin Soren 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA MEMBERS 
 
14. Shri Naresh Bansal 
15. Shri Subhash Barala 
16. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
17. Shri Arun Singh 
18. Shri Tejveer Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi   - Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. Miranda Ingudam   - Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh                       -         Deputy Secretary 

57  
4. Shri Abhishek Kumar    - Deputy Director  
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following Draft 
Reports: 
 (i)   XXX      XXX     XXX; 
 (ii)  XXX      XXX     XXX; 
(iii)  Twenty-Second Report on ‘Demand for Grants (2026 -27)’ pertaining to the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers; and 
 (iv)  XXX      XXX             XXX. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee 
without any amendment. 
 
4.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and 
present/lay the Reports in both the Houses of Parliament in the ongoing Session of 
Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
XXX- matter does not pertain to this report. 